CAMILTONS Discovery, OF THE DEVILISH DESIGNS AND KILLING PROJECTS of the
Society of JESUITS of late years, Projected and by them hitherto acted in
GERMANY, Intended, but graciously prevented in England; Translated out of the
Latin Copy;

DEDICATED To the high Court of Parliament, By W. F. X. B. Minister of CHRIST'S
Gospel.

From all Sedition and privy Conspiracy, from all false Doctrine and Heresy.

Good Lord deliver us.

LONDON, Printed by T. FAUCET, dwelling in Grubstreet. 1641.

TO THE HIGH AND HONORABLE The LORDS and House of COMMONS of England in
PARLIAMENT Assembled.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
ABout twelve years ago there came to my hand a little tract written in
Latin by one who styled himself JOHANNES CAMILTONUS, and professed himself
to have been sometimes a Probationer in that College of Jesuits in Germany,
whereof JACOCUS DEL RIO, at that time Provincial was the Visitor: This book,
in the year 1607 was by him written and dedicated to the Protestant Electors
of Germany, as a Discovery beforehand of those most damnable(...) Society then
had in agitation against the people of Germany. The title of this book was, De
studiis Iesuitarum abstrusioribus, concerning the more secret and reserved
practices of the Jesuits: Whereunto had those Princes, to whom this book was
Dedicated, given such timely ^are and belief as they might have done, they had
in all probability prevented the greatest part of those unparalled miseries,
which since the beginning of the wars there (and that was not till eleven
years after the publication of this book) these Jncendiaries of Christendom,
have brought upon the German Nation, to the astonishment of all the world.
But we see what has since been permitted to these fellows to do, and what
the neglect of a timely taking heed to a seasonable warning has brought upon
those then flourishing Princes and States.

That we therefore might learn by other men's harms to re(...)e our own
particular, I have endeavored the publication of this translation under your
honors protection; having taught this Discoverer to speak our language, for
the public benefit of our English Nation, against them, I dare boldly say,
even your selves being my Judges when you shall have read this small tract,
that the same course has been taken by these common Incendiaries for breeding
a disturbance, and bringing all things into a confusion both in our Church and
State, that was then projected, and since then acted upon Germany. Nor do I
think, but it is sufficiently known to your Honors and grave Wisdoms, that
the same wheel of mischief, that wrought all the woes of Germany since the
year 1618. has for some years last past, bin set also at work in England,
Scotland, and Ireland: witness all the factions and fractions in Church and
State, the disturbances and discontents between the Prince and the people, the
fearful divisions betwixt the Clergy and the Clergy, betwixt the Court and
City, and betwixt the King and his Commons, yea, even betwixt the two Crowns
of England and Scotland, all which have received their birth and breeding from
the devilish designs of those sons of division, the Society of Jesuits, and
been fomented almost to a perfect flame by their Agents, and Adherents, their
deluded Disciples of this Nation, and had undoubtedly broken out, and produced
in short time, the like effects among us, that they have done in Germany, had
not Almighty God in mere mercy to this Nation, and in his Divine compassion to
his poor Church in England thus ready to perish, stepped in to our rescue, by
his blessed hand of providence stirring up the spirits of our noble Peers to
represent to his sacred Majesty the eminent danger, and graciously inclining
his Royal heart to hearken thereto, and so that we may say with the Psalmist,
Ps. 118. 23. This was the Lords doing, and it is marvailous in our eyes. And
the same God, if it be his blessed will, in his own time, by his own means,
perfect that good work of mercy, which he has so gracioussy begun for us of
this Land and Nation, by rooting out from amongst us that disloyal brood of
Inigo Loiola, that our eyes may see it, and we may say, the Lord has been
megni^^ed upon the borders of England. For assuredly, though the Romish
Factors, may now justly say, as EDOM did in the Prophecye of Malachy, 1: 4. We
are impovverished, but we will retur^e, and build up our desolate places, (for
they cannot but be sensible of their own (...)ets defeated both by Sea and
Land, by water in the year 1588, by F^^e, 1605, and it is not to be doubted
that they apprehend a fear of the miscarriage of their great and long intended
plot of (...) begun to ^eake out this year 1641, all which notwithstanding,
they still retain a resolution (...) and build up their desola^e places) yet I
desire them, to read and take notice of the words following in the place
before-cited, yet, thus says the Lord of Hosts, They shall build up, but I
will destroy, and men shall call them the border of wickedness, and the people
with whom the Lord is angry for ever: And your eyes shall see it, and men shall
say the Lords name has been magnified upon the borders of England. And to
speak truly what I think, I must confess that I have conceived an hope of a
long time, that this year 1641. which compleateth the Century since that
Society had their Bull from the Pope, under protection whereof they have
wrought so much mischief, would show unto the world an apparent alteration in
the body of that Monster, the Society of Jesuits. A point which I am the
rather induced to believe, because I have been certified as much in effect from
a couple of their own men of eminent note for learning, the one, PAVLUS
FLOR^NIUS an Italian, the other CHRISTIANUS FRANKEN a German, the former
whereof was DIVINITY READER, the other PHILOSOPHY READER in the Imperial
College of Jesuits at Vienna, both which, above threescore years ago, upon
just grounds expressed in a book by them published, forsook that Religion, and
became Protestants. That book also is to be seen, and if it please this
Honorable House to command it, shall be published also in English, for I find
it written in Latin. And, if their prediction fail not more in the conclusion
then it has done in the progress hitherto. I am confident that this mayprove
a very fatal year to that Society But I fear I hold you too long from the
Book it self Humbly therefore commending you all to Almighty God in my due
and daily prayers. I leave this Discovery to your consideration, and rest

Yours in all the duty of a Minister of Christ's Gospel. W. F. X. B.

CAMILTON'S Discovery, OF THE DEVILISH DESIGNS AND KILLING Projects of the
Society of JESVITES of late years.
WHat MARCUS CATO sometimes spoke concerning the Roman^ South-sayers; that he
wondered how they could forbear to smile upon each other, so often as they met,
may not unfitly be applied to the Jesuits: It is a wonder that one Jesuit
when he looks upon another does not straight way burst forth into a laughing
outright, they being amongst themselves privy to such impostures practiced
upon the people. I speak not touching your simpler sort of Jesuits, from whom
these more reserved and closer practices of the Society are altogether
concealed, either in respect they are not held wise enough (for sooth) to be
acquainted with them, or that they are thought too devout to entertain them,
or else in regard of their short continuance in that Society: for all such are
so kept short through severity of Discipline, that not one of them, except he
be wondrous quick of sent, can ever smell out in the least measure what
knavery is therein practiced under a show of Holiness. My discourse only
touches the prime and principal fellows of that Society, their Regents,
Fathers, Provincials, and Generals; all which, are so universally and jointly
tainted with all manner of wickedness, but especially with Whoredom,
Covetousness, and Magic, that indeed any reasonable man may think it little
less then a Miracle, if a Jesuit of this rank meeting such another upon a
sudden, and beholding, as it were, another picture or lively representation of
himself, should have power to abstain from laughing outright.

I therefore thought it not amiss, considering the premises, to lay open unto
the world some particular passages, and practices of that Society, of the
greatest part whereof my self have been an eyewitness, and some part whereof
has been related unto me by Jesuits, whom I am able to name, and will
undoubtedly nominate, if they shall but dare in the least manner to lift up
their tongues against me, or to contradict what I have written. And howsoever
at this time I pass over things briefly, and do only (as it were) give you a
first draught thereof, I do purpose in due time (God assisting me) to do it
more largely and completely, with expression of all and singular circumstances
thereunto appertaining.

First of all then, at your entrance into any College of Jesuits; especially,
if it be situated in or near unto any large, and populous, and rich place.
But alas, why do I say, if it be built there (seeing they have no Colleges in
any poor, mean, or obscure place) At your first entry I say into such a place
or College, take principal notice of the Porter of their Gate, and him you
shall find to look like unto the picture of a very Charon, or rather a
Cerberus; For the most part you shall observe him to be a man of very great
years, or if he be younger, he is a fellow of most approved trust and
secrecy. And this is the man, if any such there be, who is well skilled in all
the mysteries of the Jesuits Caball, or reserved Divinity.

In this fellows keeping is great store of apparel both for Men and Women of
every degree and calling. And with this apparel do the Jesuits habit
themselves according to the quality that every one finds himself ablest to
personate, and so practice wonderful Impostures in the World. For at sometimes
being habited like Soldiers very gallant, they walk in the streets and
highwayes Whoring and Swaggering in the public Stews. At other times in the
civil habites of Citizens, professing themselves to be of the reformed
Religion, they pry up and down and listen in Innes, in Play Houses, in
Tavernes, upon the Exchanges and in all places of public meetings, wheresoever
^here is any frequent resort, what the people speak up and down concerning
them, what consultations are abroad, what matter of Action is set a soot in any
part. Another while, like Doctors of Physic, or of the Civil Law, with great
Rings on their fingers, avowing and purposely professing themselves to be
Papists; wheresoever they know any of the Common sort that is wealthy and has
sons, they devise some cause of business with them, and insinuate themselves
into their acquaintance by strange fetches, and in Conclusion do advise them
to bring up their sons in some School or College of Jesuits, affirming
that themselves have been educated by them, and that they have so profited
under them, that (God be thanked) they never had cause to repent thereof: And
sometimes again apparelled like Noblemen, and completely attended, they cause
Coaches to be provided abroad, and frequent the Courts of Princes, as giving
attendance upon Ambassadors of foreign States, and serve as Intelligencers
to unlock the Cabinets of great Potentates.

Nay further, I have known them to make show of being banished persons, and to
crave collections amongst Protestant Divines, purposely to learn underhand
what such men write against them: yea such were those men for the most part,
who so miserably deluded so many Reverend men in many places by sinister ways
under that habit, furthering the designs of their Society, and breeding
disturbances in the reformed Congregations: of whom, to the end that all
honest-hearted Ministers may be more wary, I shall tell you hereafter, what
projects at this day the Jesuits have a foot to this purpose.

But in the mean while perhaps you will say unto me, whereto, I pray you,
serves so much women's apparel, or what is their end in depositing so much in
the keeping of the Porter of their gate? Attend, and J will tell you: No
Pander, that ever TERENCE or PLAUTUS mentioned in their Comedies, was so nimble
at the trade of winning pretty wenches, as are the Jesuits at this day, but
especially that Porter of their gate, whom I mentioned but now.

For, that which the Confessors themselves are not able to wring out of them by
Auricular Confession in their Churches and Chapels, this fellow knows how to
win from them by flattering speeches, with wonderful pleasing and
delightful toys, especially if he meet with a poor widow, or any such silly
woman which sends her child to the College now and then for an Alms; or
with some Laundresse, or Spinster; for be she Lotrix, or Netrix, he will make
her a Me^etrix. Whom so soon as this base Pander has once but allured to come
to his net, although her apparel be never so old and tattered, yet he has gay
Gowns enough in store, with accoutrements suitable, wherewith he can make her
both trick and trim, which when he has done, he knows how to convey her
through many secret passages and by-waies to his Venerable Masters, the Fathers
of the Society. And yet he never does this in the day time, but near upon the
shutting in of the Evening, and then they make away the whole night in Riot and
Luxury, with Revelling and Dancing, the younger sort and Novices of the Society
being kept far enough from Discovery thereof.

For they have for the purpose certain Vaults framed like Chambers, and rooms
under ground as had those ancient Romans, who first devised their Stews in
Vaults, whose inclination to all carnal lasciviousness was so great, and so
brutish; that the Senate of Rome, fearing the just anger of their Gods for the
same, utterly suppressed those Lupanaria or public Stews.

And thus much for the Jesuits Porter of their Gate: only I must not forget
to tell you this one thing, that if any party who by chance shall come to the
sight of such and so great a Wardrobe, do demand with admiration, what is the
end or use of it, answer is made unto them, that it is the Wardrobe, reserved
purposely for acting of Plays: but that is the least part of their intention
to my knowledge.

Moreover, when thou entrest into any of their Churches, make account that thou
walk under an heaven of Iron: Bloody Mars is over thine head, not that
Prince of peace; below thee is tho very pit of Hell, and a shop of Tormenters.

J now do relate in good earnest, what mine own eyes have seen; At Prague in
Bohemia upon the roof of their Churches are thousands of Iron Bullets, Whips,
and fire-bals, such as the Bohemians use, upon the sides are placed pieces of
Ordnance, with a great number of Muskets and Harquebushes, with Pikes and
Halberts. In the midst, where the Arches meet, are great heaps of huge
Bullets of stone. And the like preparation have they also made at Cracovia. Nor
do I make question, but that upon due search their Colleges in other places,
would appear as well provided.

But some man may perhaps make question. To what end Religious men should make
such preparation, or what need there can be so to do? I confess, the matter
at the first sight astonished me, and my best understanding was exceeding
strange: but thus stands the case.

The Jesuits know well enough, that the courses which they have taken
formerly, and now every day do take, are so indirect and turbulent, as m^keth
them odious, to all such as they live amongst; yea, to very Papists themselves,
at least to the wiser sort of them, in respect of many things which they have
done both tumultuously, and wickedly, wheresoever they have got footing in the
least manner. For they have no regard of any, they spare not to root up the
very Catholics themselves, so that they may pleasure the Popes Holiness
therein, though it were with the betraying of their Countries, and setting the
whole Christian world in a Combustion. And therefore because they are in daily
fear to be massacred by those among whom they live, they make this provident
and timely prevention by Warre-like preparation.

For indeed, they are afraid (as J my self have heard them confess) lest it
might befall unto them as unto the Knights Templers, who notwithstanding they
were forward enough to serve the Pope at all times, and as good Catholics as
could be wished in the matter of Religion; yet, for their too much Ambition and
Covetousness, whereby they became insupportable, they were by consent of all
Christian Princes, and not without approbation from the Pope himself, put to
the Sword all at an instant, and utterly rooted out almost in a moment; as
sometimes were the Pythagorians, those very Jesuits in effect, among the
Heathen, served throughout Italy, and the Provinces adjoining.

Now the reason, wherefore they do make choice to lay up their Arms and
munition in their Churches, is only this: For if when any Insurrection or
rebellious tumult arises in a Province, the Papists come thither to help and
assist them, by this means they have Arms for them in a readiness upon a
sudden: but if any who are of contrary Religion come thither to do them
wrong, or to steal any thing from them, they have munition and stones above
head, to destroy them withal before they be aware. And is not this (I pray
you) the ready way to make the House of Prayer, a Den of Thieves?

And yet by your patience, if you will but attend, J shall relate things more
strange and horrible then these, in respect whereof, the things I have related
hitherto, may well seem tolerable, I may almost say Innocence.

Under the Pavement of their Church at Gratz, and elsewhere, to my knowledge,
are Vaults and buildings under ground; whereunto, there is no way but by
stairs, and steps; Here have they hoorded up (like to that Cacus whom Virgil
speaks of) all their prey and treasure, and do obscurely conceal a world of
wealth: so professing poverty, not only with public consent, but also with
incredible pleasure, suffering the same with admirable patience, and cursing to
the pit of Hell, all such as are poor against their wills, as unworthy of so
blessed a Cross.

But as for this their treasure, for the most part it is so contrived, that it
is buried directly and perpendicularly under their greatest and chiefest or
most eminent and highest Altar, and so they shall be sure that when they Chant
Mass, they shall Sacrifice to MARS above head, and to MAMMON below.

Now furthermore, in their Vaults under ground they maintain a very strange
Library, of Cords, Halters, Rackes, Swords, Axes, Iron-pincers, Stocks,
Torches, Pillories, and several Instruments of Torture, wherewith and
whereunto poor wretches being tied fast, are joint by joint torn a sunder, as
many as fall into the hands of these Tyrants, who are far more cruel in this
kind, then MEZENTIUS or PHALARIS ever were.

Nor are they without a Devils coat, and a long steeple-crown'd hat, with
black feathers, a jagged doublet cut and flashed, breeches puffed out and
bagged like bellows, down to their anckles, such as would even make a man
affrighted to look upon them.

But perhaps, he that reads this Relation, will wonder to what end Religious
persons, who profess themselves the Disciples and followers (as they would
have all men to believe) of our most meek Savior JESUS, should make such
provision. I will resolve you this question also, if you please to attend.

With such instruments as these, does the Society captivate the understanding
of their Disciples, unto Jesuiticall obedience. For if in the least matter,
they get any hint of suspicion, against any of their Novices, that he will not
be constant, or that he desires to escape from them, and that he is likely to
betray the secrets of their Society, they clap up such a fellow, in a fair
pair of Stocks, and having macerated him a long time with hunger, and cold,
and want of all bodily comforts; at the last, they make an end of him, with
some exquisite tortures, and killing torments. I do not belie them. I write
nothing but a truth. There was at Gratz, about three years ago, a young man
named JACOBVS CLVSSEVS, a youth of an excellent and pregnant wit; this man did
they lay hands upon, and miserably tormented him, by whipping and scourging,
for a matter of no moment, and because he told them plainly, that he would
renounce their Society, and complain publicly (if ever he got liberty) for
this and other such wicked dealing toward wards him, they clapped him up into
such a Prison, under ground, as aforesaid, from whence he was never seen to
come out again alive.

Nor did any of us that were Novices, make question, but that he was made an
end of, with most exquisite torments.

Which unparalled piece of tyranny, I purpose in due time to divulge to the
whole World, with relation of all circumstances, being the thing which the
poor wretched Clussaeus, had a purpose to have done himself, if he had not
been hindered and prevented by death.

I shall withal make public unto the World, another such piece of Villainy,
committed by the Jesuits of Fulda in Germany, upon the body of one MARTINUS,
whom they stole away most basely from his Parents, who are yet living at
Miltenberg or Milberg.

And how many women think you, have been devoured and eaten up in the same
Gulf? How many young Children slain? How many young men, that have been sole
Heirs of very large and ample Patrimonies, have been made away by them? I do
not say, J think, but J believe, and am firmly persuaded, so often as
shrikes, and cries, sighings, and most woeful lamentations, were heard in the
night season, the hearing whereof; would put a man into a cold sweat all over,
and make his hair stand on end, though our simpler Novices, believed them to
be the Souls of some lately departed, it was nothing but the shrikes and moan
of children lately murdered, or then a murdering.

Moreover, that the extreme and Divelish malice of Jesuits, may be in nothing
defective, they are accustomed diverse times, in those their Vaults under
ground, to make the Devil very sine sport: putting on terrible disguises, they
cause some of their Novices to be called down to behold their Tragedy, upon
whom they will rush suddenly with an horrible yelling noise, to make trial,
(forsooth) of their courage and constancy.

For if they find any to be timorous and fearful, they admit not such a man
to the secrets of Magic, as accounting them cowardly and degenerate, but
appoint them to some of the inferior Arts: but such as appear to be of bold
and undanted Spirits, they take especial notice of them, and reserve them for
serious employments.

And yet they are not always successful for all this, as appeared by that
which happened at Prague in the year 1602. For whereas there were five
principal Jesuits, who being habited as Devils made sport with their youth.
If so fell out, that there was found to be a sixth in their company, before
they were aware, and he questionless was a Devil indeed, who catching up one
of the personated Devils in his Arms, gave him such a kindly unkind embrace,
that within three days after, he dyed of it. The fact was common talk at
Bake-houses, and Barbershops, and at every table discoursed upon, all over
Prague.

And yet for all that, the rest of them, as nothing amazed with this Tragical
event, dare still in an height of obstinacy, proceed in that most ungodly and
Divelish study of Magic.

Now amongst that whole Society, the prime man for a Magician, is a French
Jesuit, whom the King of France himself, had in so high estimation, that he
admitted him not only to his Princely table, but also to familiar conferences
in private; concerning whom, the Jesuits themselves did make their boast, that
he had a glass made by Art-Magicke, wherein he could plainly represent unto
the King, whatsoever his Majesty desired to see: insomuch, that there was
nothing so secretly done or consulted upon in the most private room of any
Cloister or Nunneric of other Orders, which he could not easily and instantly
discover, and disclose, by help of this his Enchanted, or rather Divelish
glass.

And indeed it was by the Art and means of this Magitian Jesuit, that their
Society was confident, that they should be able to draw on their side, one of
the most potent Princes of the Empire, albeit a Protestant: for as much, as he
was observed to be somewhat delighted in the Study of Magic.

Now, as for those whom they take in as Novices to be instructed in this way,
they expound unto them those nine hundred Propositions, which Picus, Earl of
Mirandula published at Rome: as also the Book of Johannes Tritemius, together
with a Tract or Treatise touching abstruse or hidden Philosophy, written by
Cornelius Agris pa: Likewise Theophrastus, concerning the Constellations and
Seals of the Planets, with the Steganographia of I know not what Abbot, and
the Art of Paul to procure Revelations: meaning Saint Paul, whom they affirm
to have been instructed in the Art Magic, and thereby to have understood
such high Revelations and profound Mysteries.

Yea, they blush not to affirm, that St. John was an excellent Magician: Nor
do they stick to say, that even our blessed Savior CHRIST JESUS himself,
was a most absolute and perfect Magician, as mine own ears have heard it
oftener than once or twice related by some of that Society, and such as I am
able to nominate.

And thus much for the Jesuits Church: only, take this direction along with
you; Those Vaults and Rooms under ground, which I mentioned even now, those
secret Conveyances and Circean Dens, are for the most part contrived to be
under the Quire or Cloister, not where the people do walk or stand.

And now when thou shall pass from their Temple into their Study (for I will
say nothing touching their Parlour, or Chambers, Refectories, or places of
Recreation, instruction of Novices who are newly admitted, and the trayning up
of other Scholars committed to the Jesuits tuition; nor yet touching the
Method and Order of their Studies, but will reserve that for another
Discour^e; seeing those passages are for the most part known abroad^ already,
being discovered by another.) When, I say, thou shall enter into their public
(...) thou shall find a most exquisite choice of Authors of all sorts, all of
them most curiously bound up in Leather or Parchment with fillets of Silver or
Gold: and as for such whereof there is daily use, they are laid in order upon
Deskes, fastened with chains upon a long table.

But as for the inner Library, that is only reserved for the Fathers of the
Society: it is free for none but them to go in thither, and to borrow thence
what books they think good. Those ordinary books, are only free for the
Iuniors of the Society, nor may they take a sentence out of the rest without
special leave obtained from the Regent.

Moreover, in this first Library, are no Heriticall books (as they call them)
but only the Writings of most approved Authors and Catholics all: For they
hold any other unworthy to be placed amongst them, as fearing perhaps they
should infect the rest.

Look therefore upon thy left hand, and there thou shall see the wretched
books of Heretics, (as they term them) standing all in Mourning for the
faults of their Authors, bound up in black Leather, or Parchment blacked over,
with the very leaves thereof dyed in black.

Of these, not one of the Fathers themselves may make choice or use, without
leave obtained from the Regent beforehand: but your inferior, Jesuits and
younger Novices, may not be so bold, as to desire the sight of any one of them,
except he will (...)fore-hand, with all virulencie and bitterness, rail upon,
and disgrace the Author, whom he desires to see, by some infamous Libell, and
scurrilous Satyricall verse, or writing.

In the midst of these several Libraries, is placed a Study, being divided
into many Seats distinct, and separate one from another, with a blew covering:
on the right side whereof, sit the Fathers; on the left, the under-Graduates;
who have already taken some Degrees upon them. The other Novices, or Fresh-men
(as we call them) sit mixed with the fellow-Commoners, that they may take
notice of them, and every man in his turn, beat into them by continual
discourses, the sweetness and excellency of the Order of Jesuits; especially,
into such as are of the richer sort, or wealthy heirs.

I will say no more at this time, as touching their Studies, but I will
describe briefly, the manner of the Visitation, which every Provincial makes;
because it is a point, which as I think, and for any thing that I ever read or
heard, has been never hitherto divulged by any.

Now every Provincial takes his Denomination from the Province, or Kingdom
rather, which is committed to his charge, and oversight. His place is to visit
the several Colleges, to take an account of their Revenues, and over-see
their expenses, exactly and punctually: to take notice, what Noble personages
commit their Sons to the tuition of the Society, and how many they are in
number? Whether there be not yearly an increase of Scholars, as also of their
means and Revenewes? Whether there be any converted from Lutheranisme, and how
many such?

If there be no such thing, or if the Popish Religion have lost ground, or if
there be any decrease of their wealth, he sharply reproves their sloth and
neglect, and charge strictly, that they make an amends for the wrong they
have done, and loss they have received in this case. But if they have
bestirred themselves bravely, and converted (as they call it) or rather
perverted many Souls to Popery, if they have been frugall, and scraped wealth
together, he praises them very highly, and extolleth them to the skies.
Moreover, he demands what is the opinion of the Neighboring Heretics
concerning them? What be the projects of the Nobles? What meetings they have?
How many? And where? What they consult upon? What they resolve to do? Whether
the Heretical Princes (as they term them) delight to live at home or abroad?
To whom they resort most frequently? What is the several disposition of every
one of them? In what things he is observed to take most delight? Whether he
take any care of his people or not? Whether he be a Religious Prince or not? Or
rather, whether he be not a man, who delights to take his pleasure in drinking,
Wenching, or Hunting? Whether he have any Catholics about him, or that are
near unto him? What the people report abroad, concerning their own Princes?
Whether the Churches of the Adversaries, be full of resort, or not? Whether the
Pasters of those Churches, be learned and diligent men in their place and
calling, or otherwife lazy Lubbers, and unlettered? Whether the Profession of
Divinity thrive, in the Neighboring University of Heretics? Whether their
Divines maintain frequent Disputations, and against whom principally? What
books they have published of late, and upon what Subject?

To these, and sundry such questions, if the Regent, and the rest of the
Fathers do answer punctually, he does wonderfully commend their industry and
vigilance.

If he find them defective in answering to these or any such demands, he
reprooveth them sharply, saying: what mean you my Masters, do you purpose,
like lazy companions, to undo the Church of Rome? How do you suppose your
slothfulness in these weighty affairs, can be excused before his Holiness?
How is it, that you presume to take these places upon you, and to manage them
no better? What or whom are you affrayd of? Why do not you buckle up your
selves better to your business, and perform your places like men? These
things (if you had been such men as you ought to be) had not been to do
now. These things should have been done long before this time. Do you observe
the incredible watchfulness of the Heretics, and can you be lazy? And with
these or the like speeches, he whetteth them on to their duty.

At the last, he enquireth as touching the scholars, fellow-Commoners,
Novices, and the rest, how many they are in number? How much every one has
profited? To what study or delight each one is inclineable? Whether there be
any one amongst them that is scrupulous, or untractable, or not a sit subject
to be wrought upon? For he adjudgeth every such an one sitting to be removed
from the study of Divinity; except, he have bin very well exercised in the
Disputations in Schools, and have a very great and good conceit of their
Religion beaten into him. Moreover, he enquireth if they have any one in the
College, who can be contented, for the advantage of the Catholic cause, to
undertake any laudable attempt, and to spend his blood in the cause, if at any
time necessity shall seem to require it.

And at last, he sends away all these informations being sealed up, unto the
Father General at Rome, by whom, they are immediately made known to the Pope
himself and his Conclave of Cardinals: And so by this means, an order is
taken, that there is no matter of Action set on foot, nothing almost consulted
upon, throughout the whole Christian world, which is not forthwith discovered
unto the Pope, by these traitors, that lurk in every state and Kingdom. Also,
it is not to be omitted, that the Jesuits are translated by their Provincial,
from one College to another, and that for the most part once in three years,
that so the Provincial out of their several discoveries, may attain to
unlocke all the secretest Cabinets of the Prince and State, where he does
reside.

In the last place, I will add, in stead of a Corollary, some strange and
wonderful devices of the Jesuits, which being but of late newly hammered in
the forge, they have carnestly endeavored, yea, and at this day do labor,
tooth and nail to put in practice by public consent, for an Jnnovation to be
made both in the Church and State throughout the whole Roman Empire. To this
end, their chief and only aim is, how to set the Princes of the Empire
together by the ears, and by taking off some of the Principal Doctors of the
Church, to bring the tyranny of the Spaniard, and the Primacy of the Pope, into
Germany. Concerning which very project I have heard the Provincial DHL-RIO
himself, discoursing sometimes, whose plots and Machinations, were such as
follow. In the first place (says he) care and pains must be used, to estrange
the affections of the Princes of the Empire, one from another.

Now the means (said he) to effect that, is to work upon their contrariety of
opinions, in matters of Religion: And for this end let the Emperor be incited
to make a Declaration, that he will not grant liberty of Conscience in matters
of Religion, except there shall first be a restitution made of such goods, as
were taken from the Clergy upon the treaty at Passa^: for this is a point
whereat they will stick assuredly, and deny it.

Let the Emperor thereupon send his Princes, and demand the same of the Cities
of the Empire. They will either obey or deny: if they consent and obey, all is
well: if they refuse, let him proclaim them Rebels, and expose them to be
seized upon by the next neighboring Princes, but still let the matter be so
carried, that he be sure to oppose a Lutheran and a Calvinist, the one against
the other.

Moreover, some device must be found out, that the Duke of Bavaria may fall
foul either upon the Elector Palatine, or upon the Duke of Wittemberg, for
then may the Emperor be easily won to proclaim him Traitor whom the Duke of
Bavaria shall distaste, and all means taken away of making pacification either
with Papist or Calvinist for them; besides, thereby will be raised
unreconcileable divisions in the Empire, never to be quenched before an highway
be made for the accomplishment of our desires. For the further ripening of
which Design, the Jesuits unbethought themselves further of this Stratagem.
It will follow (say they) necessarily, when any City of the Empire shall be
proclaimed rebellious, that every several Prince will be more ready and
willing to serve his own turn upon the spoil thereof, then to admit any
other that shall be emulous of the same booty to preveot him. This for the
Generality. More particularly yet, means must be sound out, to set the Princes
of Saxony at difference, that their strength and power may be broken, or at
least weakened.

Now that may be most conveniently effected thus: first, if the Administration
of the Primacy of Magdeburg, which now is vacant, be given to the Bavarian
Elector of Colen, neither the Marquess of Brandenburg, nor the Duke of
Saxony, will easily grant their consents thereto.

Secondly, if that succeed not according to our desires, there must be some
cause pretended, why the Duke of Saxony either does seem worthy, or ought to
seem worthy to be removed from the Electorall dignity. For, if in times past,
the Princes of the Empire cast down Wenceslaus, from the Imperial Throne,
because they had adjudged him a negligent Prince: surely the Emperor may take
as just an occasion, to remove, from the Electorall Dignity, the Duke of
Saxony, who is drunk every day. And in this respect, let his Imperial Majesty
restore and confer that Dignity, upon the house and family of the Dukes of
Weymar. And because these Princes are yet under age, let the Administration of
that Electorship, be committed to Henry of Brunswicke, a learned and vigilant
Prince. This project being once set a foot, cannot choose but beget insinite
distractions, throughout all Saxony, so shall it come to pass, that they shall
wast and weary themselves one against another, and by that means, become
utterly unable to withstand a common foe, when he shall come upon them.

And as for the Marquess of Brandenburg and them of Pomerania, let means be
used to move the King of Poland, who is the Emperors kinsman, to covenant with
his uncle the King of Swethland, that they two shall invade and divide Prussia,
and Canton the same: which thing the Marquess of Brandenburg will oppose with
all his powers. Now as concerning the Landgrave of Hessen he must be urged and
solicited daily to divide the inheritance equally with his uncle Lodowicke, and
to resign the government of Hertsfield to the Bishop of Wirtzburg: if he
refuse to do so, let him be proclaimed Rebel, and let his inheritance be
assigned unto his uncle Lodowicke.

Moreover, as for the Duke of Wittemberge, and the Elector Palatine, they two
may with ease be set together by the ears, if the Duke be commanded to make
restitution of some Religious houses, or otherwise upon his refusal be
proclaimed Rebel, and some neighboring Monasteries be assigned to the Elector
Palatine, and amongst them one especially, which he has bin observed to have
aimed at long ago.

And these be those killing projects of the Jesuits, which I have heard from
their own mouths, not without admiration even to astonishment, and they have
many more of like sort, all which J do not at this present remember.

Moreover, there has been a Consultation among the Jesuits to send abroad
some bold Assassinates, who by Poison or by the Pistol, may cut off the
principal Doctors of the Reformed Churches, fellows who are so absolute
Masters in that trade of Poisoning, that they are able so to infect Platters,
Saltsellers, Basins, Kettles, pots, and Caldrons, and such like vessels of
ordinary use; that albeit they shall be ten times over washed and wiped, yet
shall they retain the power and infection of most deadly and speeding poison.
Wherefore, I humbly advise all godly and Religious Governors and Ministers of
the Church, that hereafter they be wary, and cautelous how they trust any, but
such as of whose fidelity they have had sufficient trial.

And these things could never have fallen within compass of mine
understanding, nor ever did, before such time as I heard them from the
Principals and Heads of the Society of Jesuits, together with many other
particulars, which I held my self bound in Conscience to reveal to the world,
for the good of my Country, and of the Church of CHRIST: which although J have
for the present only given you as in a rude and first draught; yet I purpose
(God willing) in due time, to express the same at large, painting them out in
their Colors, with circumstances of time, place and persons.

A Postscript to the Reader.
COurteous Reader (if so thou art pleased to show thy self by taking an
impartial view of this short but wellintended translation) I doubt not but by
this time thou art able to discern the face of the times, and of thy self to
make a true parallel betwixt Germany and us, and do see evidently the
foot-stops of that mystery of Iniquity, which, by the contrivements of the
pragmaticall Society of Jesuits, has for many years been set at work
amongst us. As there the foundation of their work was laid in working upon
their diversities in opinions, and seconded by advantage taken upon the
several humors of the Princes, propounding to each one some such ends as his
nature most affected: so may I truly say they have done here also. To what
other end was the pestilent Doctrine of Arminius introduced, wherely to make a
party that might prove strong enough in time to oppose the Puritan faction, as
they styled it? Why was so great care and pains taken to leven all
considerable sorts of people of what degree soever, with those erroneous
points, but to the same end? And can we choose but think that Sosinianisme
crept in after Arminianisme purposely to make the breach the wider, that it
might be large enough to (...) in Popery at the full in conclusion? Doubtless,
as our Savior sometimes said to his Disciples, in another case, John 4. 35.
Say not ye, there are yet 4. months, and then comes Harvest? Behold, I say
unto you, Lift up your eyes, and look on the Regions, for they are white
already unto Harvest: so may I say (...); most men thought it might yet be 4.
months, or some good distance of time before the Jesuit could attain to
reap the Harvest of his desire among us. But I say unto you, lift up your
eyes, and look on the Regions, they are white already unto Harvest: Or, if I
may not say they are, because Gods gracious hand of providence has
disappointed their hopes, yet I assure my self that any man of ordinary
understanding will confess, that within the space of this year last past, our
Land was already white to their Harvest, The Kings Majesty was wrought to an
evil opinion of his people, the Commons were grown discontented with the
present Government, two adverse Armies were lodged in our Land, and all this
with a new whole Army of evil consequents brought on by the secret
contrivements of our Adversaries, and on all hands the way was so prepared,
Altars set up and Priests enough in readiness, is that nothing was wanting to
ripen their Harvest for the sickle, but a Proclamation for setting up public
Mass in all our Churches: which things when I seriously considered, and now of
late looking again upon the Regions, I discern what an alteration God has
begun to work amongst us by the pious endeavors of this happy Parliament, I
cannot but take up that saying of the Psalmist, Ps. 124. 1, 2, 3. If the Lord
had not been on our side, may England now say; If the Lord had not been on
our side, when men rose up against us, they had then swallowed us up quick,
when their wrath was kindled against us, Then the water had drowned us, and the
stream had gone over our Soul; If the plots of the pacificant Arminians had
once set up the bridge of reconciliation, whereon the Protestant and Papist
should have met, and the trap door had taken effect, then the swelling waves
had gone over our Souls indeed: But praised be the Lord which has not given
us as a prey unto their teeth; Our Soul is escaped even as a bird out of the
snare of the Fowler, the snare is broken and we are delivered, So that we may
truly say as the Psalmist there concludes, Our help stands in the name of
the Lord which made both Heaven and Earth. And now what remains for us to do
but this? By daily and earnest prayer, to beg a blessing upon our gracious
Sovereign, the Kings Majesty, and upon the high and honorable Court of
Parliament, that God will be graciously pleased to finish, by their happy
consultations and pious endeavors, that good work of mercy which he has so
graciously begun for this Land and Nation, to make a total and entire
reformation in Church and State, and particularly to root out this disloyal
brood of Inigo Loiola from amongst us, preventing their plots, and turning the
wisdom of their Achitophels into foolishness, that the Gospel of Jesus
Christ may have free passage amongst us, until his return to judge the quick
and dead. This is and shall be the daily prayer of

Thy well-wishing friend and servant in the duties of a Minister of Christ's
Gospel W. F. X. B.
FINIS.

