ADDITIONAL DISCOURSES OF Mr. Chillingworth NEVER BEFORE PRINTED.

Imprimatur.

Ex Aedib. Lambeth. Iun. 14. 1686. GUIL. NEEDHAM R R. in Christo P. ac D. D.
Wilhelmo Archiep. Cant. a Sacr. Domesticis.



LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in S. Paul's
Churchyard, 1687.

CONTENTS.
I. A Conference betwixt Mr. Chillingworth and Mr. Lewgar, whether the Roman
Church be the Catholick-Church, and all out of her Communion Heretics or
Schismatics. p. 1. II. A Discourse against the Infallibility of the Roman
Church, with an Answer to all those Texts of Scripture that are alleged to
prove it. p. 26. III. A Conference concerning the Infallibility of the Roman
Church; proving that the present Church of Rome either errs in her worshipping
the Blessed Virgin; or that the Ancient Church did err in condemning the
Collyridians as Heretics. p. 41 IV. An Argument drawn from Communicating of
Infants, as without which they could not be saved against the Churches
Infallibility. p. 68. V. An Argument against Infallibility, drawn from the
Doctrine of the Millenaries. p. 80. VI. A Letter relating to the same subject.
p. 89. VII. An Argument against the Roman Churches Infallibility, taken from
the Contradictions in their Doctrine of Transubstantiation. p. 91. VIII. An
account of what moved the Author to turn a Papist, with his Confutation of the
Arguments that persuaded him thereto. p. 94. IX. A Discourse concerning
Tradition. p. 103.
The Reader is desired to take notice of a great mistake of the Printer and to
Correct it, That he has made this the running Title over most of the Additional
Pieces, viz. A Conference betwixt Mr. Chillingworth and Mr. Lewgar; which
should only have been set over the first; there are also some literal mistakes,
as page 65. (...) twice for (...), and such like, not to be imputed to the
Author.

A CONFERENCE BETWIXT Mr. CHILLINGWORTH AND Mr. LEWGAR.
Thesis. THE Church of Rome (taken diffusively for all Christians communicating
with the Bishop of Rome) was the Judge of Controversies at that time, when the
Church of England made an alteration in her Tenants.

Argu. She was the Judge of Controversies at that time, which had an Authority
of deciding them. But the Church of Rome at that time had the Authority of
deciding them. Ergo.

Answ. A limited Authority to decide Controversies according to the Rule of
Scripture and Universal Tradition, and to oblige her own Members (so long as
she evidently contradicted not that Rule) to obedience I grant she had: but an
unlimited, an infallible Authority, or such as could not but proceed according
to that Rule, and such as should bind all the Churches in the World to
Obedience (as the Greek Church) I say she had not.

Quest. When your Church has decided a Controversy, I desire to know whether
any particular Church or person has Authority to reexamine her decision,
whether she has observed her Rule or no; and free h^mself from the obedience
of it, by his or her particular judgment?

Answ. If you understand by your Church, the Church Catholic, probably I
should answer no: but if you understand by your Church, that only which is in
Subordination to the Sea of Rome, of if you understand a Council of this
Church, I answer, yea.

Arg. That was the Catholic Church, which did abide in the Root of Apostolic
Unity: But the Church of Rome at that time was the only Church that did abide
in the Root of Apostolic Unity. Ergo.

Quest. What mean you by Apostolic Unity?

Answ. I mean the Unity of that Fellowship wherein the Apostles Lived and Died.

Quest. Wherein was this Unity?

Answ. Herein it consisted, that they all professed one Faith, obeyed one
Supreme Tribunal, and communicated together in the same Prayers and Sacraments.

Sclut. Then the Church of Rome continued not in this Apostolic Unity; for it
continued not in the same Faith, wherein the Apostles Lived and Died: for
though it retained so much (in my judgment) as was essential to the being of a
Church, yet it degenerated from the Church of the Apostles times, in many
things which were very profitable; as in Latin Service, and Comm^nion in one
kind.

Argu. Some Church did continue in the same Faith wherein the Apostles lived
and died: But t^ere was no Church at that time which did continue in the
Apostles Faith besides the Roman Church. Ergo.

Answ. That some Church did continue in the Apostles Faith in all things
necessary, I grant it: that any did continue in the Integrity of it, and in a
perfect: conformity with it in all things expedient and profitable, I deny it.

Quest. Is it not necessary to a Churches continuing in the Apostles Faith,
that she continue in a perfect conformi^y with it in all things expedient and
prof^table?

Answ. A perfect conformity in all things is necessary to a perfect continuance
in the Apostles Faith: but to an imperfect continuance, an imperfect conformity
is sufficient; and such I grant the Roman Church had.

Quest. Is not a perfect continuance in the Apostles Faith necessary to a
Churches continuance in Apostolic Unity?

Asw. It is necessary to a perfect continuance in Apostolic Unity.

Argu. There was some one company of Christians at the time of Luthers rising,
which was the Catholic Church; But there was no other company at that time
besides the Roman: Ergo, the Roman at that time was the Catholic Church.

Answ. There was not one company of Christians, whch in opposition to and
Exclusion of all other companies of Christians was the Catholic Church.

Argu. If the Catholic Church be some one company of Christians in opposition
to and exclusion of all other companies, then if there was some one company,
she was one in opposition to and exclusion of all other companies: But the
Catholic Church is one company of Christians in opposition to and exclusion
of, etc. Ergo, There was then some one company which was the Catholic Church
in opposition to and exclusion of all other companies.

The Minor proved by the Testimonies of the Fathers, both Greek and Latin,
testifying that they understood the Church to be one in the sense alleged.

1. If this Unity which cannot be separated at all or divided, is also among
Heretics, what contend we farther? Why call we them Heretics, S. Cypr. Epist.
75.

2. But if there be but one Flock, how can he be accounted of the Flock, which
is not within the number of it? Id: Ibid.

3. When Parmenian commends one Church, he condemns all the rest; for besides
one, which is the true Catholic, other Churches are esteemed to be among
Heretics, but are not. S. Optat. lib. 1.

4. The Church therefore is but one, this cannot be among all Heretics and
Schismatics. Ibid.

5. You say you offer for the Church, which is one; this very thing is part of
a lie to call it on; which you have divided into two: Id: Ibid.

6. The Church is one, which cannot be amongst us and amongst you; it remains
then, that it be in one only place. Id: Ibid.

7. Although there be many Heresies of Christians, and that all would be called
Catholics, yet there is always one Church, etc. S. August. de util. credend.
c. 7.

8. The question between us is, where the Church is, whether with us or with
them, for she is but one. Id. de unitat. c. 2.

9. The proofs of the Catholic prevailed, whereby they evicted the Body of
Christ to be with them and by conseq^ence not to be with the Donatists; for it
is manifest that she is one alone. Id. Collat. Carthag. lib. ^

10. In illud cantic. 6. 7. There are 60 Queens and 80 Concubines and Damsels
without number, but my Dove is one, etc. He said not, my Queens are 60, and my
Concubines, etc. but he said my Dove is but one; because all the Sects of
Philosphers and Heresies of Christians are none of his; his is but one, to wit,
the Cath^lick Church, etc. S. Ep^phan. in sine Panar.

11. A man may not call the Conventicles of Heretics (I mean Marcionites,
Manichees, and the rest) Churhces; therefore the Tradition appoints you to say,
I believe one Holy Catholic Church, etc. S. Cyrill. Catech. 18.

And these Testimonies I think are sufficient to show the judgment of the
Ancient Church, that this Title of the Church one, is directly and properly
exclusive to all companies besides one; to wit, that where there are diverse
professions of Faith, or diverse communions, there is but one of these, which
can be the Catholic Church. Upon this ground I desire some company of
Chr^stians to be named, professing a diverse Faith, and holding a diverse
Communion from the Roman, which was the Catholic Church at the time of Luthers
rising: and if no other in this sense can be named, than was she the Catholic
Church at that time, and therefore her judgment to be rested in, and her
Communion to be embraced upon peril of Schism and Heresy.

Mr. Chillingworths Answer.

Upon the same ground, if you pleased, you might desire a Protestant to name
some Company of Christians, professing a diverse Faith, and holding a diverse
Communion from the Greek Church, which was the Catholic Church at the time of
Luthers rising; and seeing he could name no other in this sense* concludes that
the Greek Church was the Catholic Church at that time. Upon the very same
ground you might have concluded for the Church of the Abyssines, or Armenians,
or any other society of Christians extant before Luthers time. And seeing this
is so, thus I argue against your ground.

1. That ground which concludes indifferently for both parts of a
contradiction, must needs be false and deceitful, and conclude for neither
part: But this ground concludes indi^ferently both parts of a contradiction;
viz. That the Greek Church is the Catholic Church, and not the Roman, as well
as, That the Roman is the Catholic Church, and not the Greek: Therefore the
ground is false and deceitful, seem it never so plausible.

2. I answer Secondly, that you should have taken notice of my Answer, which I
then gave you; which was, that your major, as you then framed your Argument,
but as now, your minor is not always true, if by one you understand one in
external Communion; seeing nothing hindered in my Judgment, but that one Church
excommunicated by another upon an insufficient cause, might yet remain a true
member of the Catholic Church; and that Church, which upon the overvaluing
this cause does excommunicate the other, though in fault, may yet remain a
member of the Catholic Church: which is evident from the difference about
Easter Day between the Church of Rome and the Churches of Asia; for which vain
matter Victor Bishop of Rome excommunicated the Churches of Asia. And yet I
believe you will not say, that either the Church excommunicating, or the Church
excommunicated, ceased to be a true member of the Church Catholic. The case is
the same between the Greek and the Roman Church; for though the difference
between them be greater, yet it is not so great, as to be a sufficient ground
of excommunication: and therefore the excommunication was causeless, and
consequently Brutum fulmen, and not ratified or confirmed by God in Heaven; and
therefore the Church of Greece at Luthers rising might be, and was a true
member of the Catholic Church.

As concerning the places of Fathers, which you allege; I demand, 1. If I can
produce you an equal, or greater number of Fathers, or more ancient than these,
not contradicted by any that lived with them or before them, for some doctrine
condemned by the Roman Church, whether you will subscribe it? If not, with what
face or conscience can you make use of, and build your whole Faith upon the
Authority of Fathers in some things, and reject the same authority in others?

2. Secondly, because you urge S. Cyprians Authority, I desire you to tell me,
whether this Argument in his time would have concluded a necessity of resting
in the Judgment of the Roman Church, or no? If not, how should it come to
pass, that it should serve now, and not then, fit this time and not that? as if
it were like an Almanac, that would not serve for all Meridians? If it would,
why was it not urged by others upon S. Cyprian, or represented by S. Cyprian to
himself for his direction, when he differed from the Roman Church, and all
other that herein conformed unto her, touching the point of Re-baptizing
Heretics; which the Roman Church held unlawful and damnable, S. Cyprian not
only lawful, but necessary; so well did he rest in the Judgment of that Church:
Quid verba audiam, cum facta videam, says he in the Comedy? And Cardinal Perron
tells you in his Epistle to Casaubon, that nothing is more unreasonable, than
to draw consequences from the words of Fathers, against their lively and actual
practice.

The same may be said in refutation of the places out of S. Austin; who was so
far from concluding, from them or any other, a necessity of resting in the
Judgment of the Roman Church, that he himself, as your Authors testify, lived
and died in opposition of it; even in that main fundamental point, upon which
Mr. Lewgar has built the necessity of his departure from the Church of
England, and embracing the Communion of the Roman Church, that is, The Supreme
Authority of that Church over other Churches, and the power of receiving
Appeals from them. Mr. Lewgar, I know, cannot be ignorant of these things; and
therefore I wonder, with what conscience he can produce their words against us,
whose Actions are for us.

If it be said, that S. Cyprian and S. Austin were Schismatics for doing so;
it seems then Schismatics may not only be members of the Church, against Mr.
Lewgars main conclusion, but Canonized Saints of it; or else S. Austin and S.
Cyprian should be rased out of the Roman Calendar.

If it be said, that the point of Re-baptization was not defined in S. Cyprians
time; I say that in the Judgment of the Bishop and Church of Rome and their
adherents, it was: For they urged it as an Original and Apostolic Tradition,
and consequently at least of as great force as any Church definition. They
excommunicated Firmilianus and condemned S. Cyprian, as a false Christ, and a
false Apostle, for holding the contrary; and urged him Tyrannico terrore to
conform his judgment to theirs, as he himself clearly intimates.

If it be said, they differed only from the particular Church of Rome, and not
from the Roman Church, taking it for the universal society of Christians in
Communion with that Church: I Answer,

1. They know no such sense of the word, I am sure never used it in any such;
which whether it had been possible, if the Church of Rome had been in their
judgment to other Churches in spiritual matters, as the City was to other
Cities and Countries in temporals, I leave it to indifferent men to judge.

2. Secondly, that they differed not only from the particular Roman Church, but
also from all other Churches, that agreed with it in those doctrins.

3. Thirdly, I desire you would answer me directly, whether the Roman Church,
taking it for that particular Church, be of necessity to be held Infallible in
Faith by every Roman Catholic, or not. To this Question I instantly desire a
direct answer without tergiversation, that we may at length get out of the
cloud, and you may say, Coram, quem quaeritis, ad^um. If you say, they are not
bound to believe so; then it is no Article of Faith, nor no certain truth upon
which men may safely rest without fluctuation or fear of error: And if so; I
demand

1. Why are all your Clergy bound to swear, and consequently your Laity (if
they have Communion of Faith with them) by your own grounds, bound to believe,
That the Roman Church is the Mistress of all other Churches? where it is evident
from the relation and opposition of the Roman to other Churches, that the Roman
Church is there taken for that particular Church.

2. Secondly, why then do you so often urge that mistaken saying of Iraeneus,
Ad ^anc Ecclesiam necesse est omnem c^nvenire Ecclesiam? falsely translating
it, as Cardinal Perr^n in French, and my ^. F. in English -- All Churches must
agree with this Church; for convenire a^n signifies not to agree with, but to
come unto; whereas it ^s evident for the aforesaid reason, that the Roman is
here taken for that particular Church.

3. Thirdly, if that particular Church be not certainly infallible, but subject
to error in points of faith; I would know, if any division of your Church
should happen, in which the Church of Rome either alone, or with some others
should take one way; the Churches of Spain and France, and many other Churches
another, what direction should an ignorant Catholic have then from the
pretended Guide of Faith? How shall he know of which of these Companies is the
Church? seeing all other Churches distinguished from the Roman may err, and
seeing the Roman Church is now (...) s^bject to error, and consequently not
certain to guard those men, or those Churches that adhere unto it from erring.

4. Fourthly, if that particular Church be not infallible in Faith, let us then
suppose that de facto it does err in faith; shall we not then have an Heretical
head upon a Catholic body? A head of the Church, which were no member of the
Church? which sure were a very strange and heterogeneous Monster! If to avoid
these inconveniences you will say, that Roman Catholics must of necessity hold
that particular Church infallible in faith; I suppose it will evidently follow,
that S. Austin and S. Cyprian (notwithstanding those sentences you pretend out
of them) were no Roman Catholics; seeing they lived and died in the contrary
belief and profession. Let me see these absurdities fairly and clearly avoided,
and I will dispute no more, but follow you whithersoever you shall lead me.

3. Thirdly, I answer, that the places alleged are utterly impertinent to the
conclusion you should have proved; which was, That it was impossible, that two
Societies of Christians divided upon what cause soever in external Communion,
may be in truth and in Gods account, both of them parts of the Catholic
Church: whereas your testimonies, if we grant them all, say no more but this;
That the Societies of Heretics, which are such as overthrow any doctrine
necessary to salvation; and of Schismatics, which are such as separate from
the Churches Communion without any pretense of error in the Church or
unlawfulness in the conditions of her Communion; I say, they prove only this,
that such Societies as these, are no parts of the Church: which I willingly
grant of all such, as are properly and formally Heretics, and Schismatics;
from which number I think (with S. Austin) they are to be exempted, Qui
quaerunt causa sollicitudine veritatem, corrigi parati, cum invenerint. Whereas
I put the case of such two Societies, which not differing indeed in any thing
necessary to salvation, do yet e^oncously believe that the errors wherewith
they charge one another, are damnable, and so by this opinion of mutual error,
are kept on both sides from being Heretics.

Because I desire to bring you and others to the truth, or to be brought to it
by you, I thought good for your direction in your intended Reply, to acquaint
you with these things:

1. That I conceive the -- in your discourse is this. That whenever any two
Societies of Christians differ in external Communion, one of them must be of
necessity Heretical or Schismatical. I conceive there ^ no such necessity; and
that the stories of Vidor and the Bishops of Asia, S. Cypr^on and Pope Steph^n
make it evident; and therefore I desire you to produce some con^incing argument
to the contrary; and that you may the better do it, I thought good to inform
you what I mean b^an Heretic, and what by a Schismatic.

An Herdick therefore I conceive him, tha holds an Error against Faith with
ob^tinacy. Obstinate I conceive (...), who will not change his Opinion, when
his reasons for it are so answered, that he cannot reply; and when the reasons
against it are so convin^ing, that he cannot answer them. By the Faith I
understand all those Doc^^^ne, and no more, which Christ taught his Apostles,
and the Apostles the Church; yet I exclude not from this number the certain and
evident deductions of them.

A Schismatic I account him, (and Facurdus Hermian^ns^ has taught me to do
so) who, witho^t any supposing of error in the conditions of a Churches
Communion, divides himself either from the obedience of that Church to which he
owes obedience; or from the Communion of that Church to which he owes Communion.

2. Another thing, which I thought fit to acquaint you with, is this: That you
go upon another very false and deceitful supposition; viz. that if we will not
be Protestants, presently we must be Pap^sts; if we forsake the Church of
England, we must go presently to the Church of Rome: Whereas if your Arguments
did conc^ude (as they do not) that before L^thers time, there was some Church
of one Denomination, which was the Catholic Church; I should much rather think
it were the Church of Gree^e, ^han the Church of Rome; and I believe others
also would think so as well as I, but for that reason which one gives, why more
men hold the Pope above a Council, than a Council above a Pope, that is,
because Councils give no maintenance or preferment, and the Popes do.

Think not yet, I pray, that I say this, as if I conceived this to be your
reason for preferring the Roman Church before the Greek; (for I protest I do
not) but rather, that conc^iving verily you were to leave the Church of
England, to avoid trouble you took the next Boat, and went to the Church of
Rome, because that bespake you first.

You impute to me (as I hear) that the way I take is destructive only, and that
I build nothing; which first, is not a fault; for Christian Religion is not now
to be built; but only I desire to have the rubbish and impertinent Lumber taken
off, which you have laid upon it, which hides the glorious simplicity of it
from them which otherwise would embrace it. Remember, I pray, Averroes his
saying; Quandoquidem Christiant adorant quod comedunt, sit anima mea cum
Philosophis; and consider the swarms of Atheists in Italy, and then tell me,
whether your unreasonable and contradictious Doctrines, your forged Miracles
and counterfeit Legends have not in all probability produced this effect.
Secondly, if it be a fault, it is certainly your own; for your discourse
intended for the proof of a positive conclusion -- That we must be Papists
proves in deed and in truth nothing; but even in show and appearance no more
but this Negative, that we must not be Protestant; but what we must be, if we
must not be Protestants, God knows; you in this Discourse (I am sure) do not
show it.

Mr. Lewgars Reply.

. 1. The minor of Mr. Chillingworths Argument against my g^o^nd is very we^k,
being (...) upon (...) false ^^pposition, that a Protestant could name no other
Church professing a diverse Faith, etc. from the Greek Ch^^ch, which wa^ the
Catholic Church: for if he could ^ot indeed name any other, the title would
remain to the Greek Church: But he has the Roman to name, and so my ground
cannot conclude, either so, the (...) or any other, besides the Roman, but for
that it does, except he can name some other.

. 2. His second answer is weak likewise; for my Minor is always true; at least
they thought it to be so, whose Authorities I produce in confirmation of it, as
will appear to any one that considers them well; how their force lies in Thesi,
not in Hypothesi; not that the Church was not then divided into more Societies
than one, but that ^he could never be.

. 3. As for his Instance to the contrary, wherein he believes I will not say
the Churches excommunicated by Victor ceased to be a true member of the
Catholic: If I say so, I say no more than the Ancient Fathers said before me.
Iraeneus when he desired Victor (...), not to cut off so many and great
Churches; and Ruffin^, reprehendit came, quod non been fecisset abscindere ab
unitate corporis, etc.

. 4. But howsoever the case of Excommunication may be, the division of external
Communion which I intended, and the Fathers spoke of in the alleged
Au^horities, was that which was made by voluntary separation.

. 5. Whereby the Church (before one Society) is divided into several distinct
Societies, both claiming to be the Church; of which Societies so divided, but
one can be the Catholic; and this is proved by the Authorities alleged; which
Authorities must not be answered by disproving them, as he does (for that is to
change his Adversary, and confute the Fathers sayings, instead of mine) but by
showing their true sense or judgment to be otherwise than I alleged it.

. 6. To his demand upon the places alleged I Answer, that I do not build my
whole faith of this conclusion upon the Authority of those Fathers; for I
produce them, not for the Authority of the thing, but of the Exposition. The
thing it self is an Article of the Creed, Unam Catholicam; grounded in express
Scripture, Columba mea unica: but because there is difference in understanding
this Prophecy, I produce these Authorities, to show the Judgment of the
Ancient Church how they understood it; and the proper answer to this is either
to show, that these words were not there, or at least, not this meaning; and so
to show their meaning out of other places more pregnant.

. 7. And I promise, that whenever an equal consent of Fathers can be showed
for any thing, as I can show for this, I will believe it as firmly as I do this.

. 8. But this is not the Answerers part, to propound doubts and difficulties,
but to satisfy the proof objected.

. 9. And if this course be any more taken, I will save my self all farther
labor in a business so likely to be endless.

. 10. His second Answer to the places is wholly impertinent; for therein would
he disprove them from watching a necessity of resting in the judgment of the
Roman Church; whereas I produced them only to show, that among several
Societies of Christians, only one can be the Catholic; and against this his
second Answer says nothing.

. 11. In his third Answer he makes some show of reply to the Authorities
themselves; but he commits a double Error: One, that he imposes upon me a wrong
conclusion to be proved, as will appear by comparing my conclusion in my Paper,
with the conclusion he would appoint me.

. 12. Another, that he imposes upon the Authorities a wrong Interpretation, no
way grounded in the words themselves, nor in the places whence they were taken,
nor in any other places of the same Fathers, but merely forged out of his own
Brain. For first, the places do not only say, that the Societies of Heretics
and Schismatics are no part of the Church; but that the Church cannot be
divided into more Societies than one; and they account Societies divided, which
are either of a diverse Faith or a diverse Communion. Neither do they define
Heretics or Schismatics in that manner as he does.

. 13. For an Heretic in their Language is he, that opposes partinaciously the
Common Faith of the Church: and a Schismatic, he that separates from the
Catholic Communion; never making any mention at all of the cause.

. 14. And if his definition of a Schismatic may stand, then certainly there
was no Schismatic ever in the World, nor none are at this day: for none did,
none does separate without some pretense of Error, or unlawfulness in the
Conditions of the Churches Communion.

. 15. And so I expect both a fuller and directer answer to my Argument, without
excursions, or diversions into any other matter, till the judgment of Antiquity
be cleared in this point.

Mr. Chillingworths Answer.

Ad, 1. The Minor of my Argument, you say, is very weak, being grounded upon a
false Suppos^tion, That a Protestant could name no other Church professing a
diverse Faith from the Greek, which was the Catholic Church: And your reason
is, because he ^ight name the Roman. But in earnest, Mr. Lewgar, do you think
that a Protestant remaining a Protestant, can esteem the Roman Church to be the
Catholic Church? or do you think to put tricks upon us, with taking your
proposition one while in s^nsu composito, another while in sensu drviso? For if
your meaning was, that a Pr^testant not remaining, but ceasing to be a
Protestant, might name the Roman for the Catholic; so I say also to your
discourse, that a Protestant ceasing to be a Protestant, might name a Greek to
be the Catholic Church; and if there were any necessity to find out one Church
of one denomination, as the Greek, the Roman, the Abyssine, which one must be
the Catholic? I see no reason, but he might pitch upon the Greek Church, as
well as the Roman; I am sure your discourse proves nothing to the contrary. In
short, thus I say, if a Grecian should go about to prove to a Protestant, that
h^s Church is the Catholic, by say^ng (as you do for the Roman) some one was
so before Luther, and you can name no other, therefore ours is so: Whatsoever
may be answered to him, may be answered to you. For as you say, a Protestant,
ceasing to be a Prote^tant, may name to him the Roman; so I say, a Protestant,
ceasing to be a Protestant, may name to you the Grecian. If you say, a
Protestant, remaining a Protestant, can name no other but the Roman, for the
Catholic; I may (very ridiculously I confess, but yet as truly) say, he can
name no other but the Grecian. If you say, he cannot name the Greek Church
neither, remaining a Protestant; I say likewise, neither remaining a
Protestant, can he name the Roman for the Catholic. So the Argument is equal
in all respects on both sides; and therefore either concludes for both parts
(which is impossible, for then contradictions should be both true) or else
(which is certain) it concludes for neither. And therefore I say, your ground
you build on, That before Luther some Church of one denomination was the
Catholic (if it were true, as it is most false) would not prove your intent.
It would destroy perhaps our Church, but it would not build yours. It would
prove peradventure, that we must not be Protestants, but it will be far from
proving that we must be Papists. For after we have l^ft being Protestants (I
tell you again that ^ou may not mistake) there is yet no necessity of being
(...); no mo^^ than if I go out of England, there is a ne^essity of going to
Rome. And thus much to show the (...) of your ground, if it were true. Now in
the (...) place, I say it is false, neither have you proved any thing (...)
contrary.

(...). You say, the Authorities you have produced, show to any that consider
them well, That the Church could never be divided into more Societies than one;
and you mean (I hope) one in external Communion, or else you daily in
ambiguities; and then I say, I have well considered the alleged authorities,
and they appear to me to say no such thing; but only, that the Societies of
Heretics and Schismatics are no true members of the Church: Whereas I put the
case of two such Societies, which were divided in external Communion by reason
of some overvalued difference between them, and yet were neither of them
Heretical or Schismatical. To this I know you could not answer, but only by
saying, That this supposition was impossible; viz. That of two Societies
divided in external Communion, neither should be Heretical nor Schismatical;
and therefore I desired you to prove by one convincing Argument, that this is
impossible. This you have not done, nor I believe can do; and therefore all
your places fall short of your intended conclusion; and if you would put them
into Syllogistical form, you should presently see you conclude from them
Sophistically in that fallacy, which is called A dicto secundura quid, ad
dictum Simpliciter. Thus, -- No two diviced Societies, whereof one is Heretical
or Schisinatical, can be both members of the Catholic Church: therefore simply
no two divided Societies can be so: the Antecedent I grant, which is all that
your places say, as you shall see anon; but the consequence is Sophistical, and
therefore that I deny: It is no better nor worse than if you should argue thus;
No true divided Societies, whereof one is Outlawed and in Rebellion, are both
members of the same Commonwealth; therefore simply no two divided Societies.

But against this you pretend, That the a ledged places say not only, that the
Societies of Heretics and Schismatics are no parts of the Church; but that
the Church cannot be divided into more Societies than one: And they account
Societies divided, which are either of a diverse Faith, or of a diverse
Communion: This is that which I would have proved, but as yet I cannot see it
done. There be Eleven Quotations in all; seven of them speak expressly and
formally of division made by Heretics and Schismatics, viz. 1. 3, 4. 7. 9,
10, 11. Three other of them, ( viz. 5, 6. 8.) though they use not the word, yet
Mr. Lewgar knows they speak of the Donatists, which were Schismatics; and that
by the relative particles you and them are meant the Donatists. And lastly, the
second, Mr. Lewgar know, says nothing but this, That an Heretics cannot be
accounted of that one Flock, which is the Church.

But to make the most of them that can be: The first says, the Unity of the
Church cannot be separated at all, nor divided. This I grant, but then I say,
every difference does not in the sight of God divide this Unity; for then
diversity of Opinions should do it; and so the Jesuits and Dominicans should be
no longer members of the same Church. Or if every difference will not do it,
why must it of necessity be always done by difference in Communion, upon an
insufficient ground, yet mistaken for sufficient? (for such only I speak of.)
Sure I am, this place says no such matter. The next place says, the Flock is
but one; and all the rest, that the Church is but one, and that Heretics and
Schismatics are not of it; which certainly was not the thing to be proved, but
that of this one Flock, of this one Church, two Societies divided without just
cause in Communion, might not be true and lively members; both in one Body
Mystical in the sight of God, though divided in Unity in the sight of men: It
is true indeed, whosoever is shut out from the Chruch on Earth, is likewise cut
off from it before God in Heaven: but you know it must be Clave non errante;
when the cause of abscission is true and sufficient.

Ad. 3. If you say so, you say no more than the Fathers: but what evasions and
tergiversations are these? Why do you put us off with ifs and ands? I beseech
you tell me, or at least him that desires to reap some benefit by our
Conference, directly and Categorically, -- Do you say so, or do you say, it is
not so? Were the Excommunicated Churches of Asia still members of the Catholic
Church (I mean in Gods account) or were they not? but all damned for that
horrible Heresy of celebrating the Feast of Easter upon a diverse day from the
Western Churches? If you mean honestly and fairly, answer directly to this
Question, and then you shall see what will come of it. Assure your self, you
have a Wolf by the Ears: If you say they were, you overthrow your own
conclusions, and say that Churches divided in Communion may both be members of
the Catholic. If they were not; then shall we have Saints and Martyrs in
Heaven, which were no members of the Catholic Roman Church.

As for Irenaeus his (...), and Russinus his -- Abscindere ab unite corporis;
they imply no more but this at the most; That Victor (quantum in ^e ^ut) did
cut them off from the External Communion of the Catholic Church; supposing,
that for their Obstinacy in their Tradition, they had cut themselves off from
the internal Communion of it: but that this sentence of Victors was ratified in
Heaven, and that they were indeed cut off from the mystical Body of Christ, so
far was Irenaeus from thinking, that he, and in a manner all the other Bishops
reprehended Victor for pronouncing this Sentence on them, upon a cause so
insufficient: which how they could say, or possibly think of a Sentence
ratified by God in Heaven, and not reprehend God himself, I desire you to
inform me: and if they did not intend to reprehend the Sentence of God himself,
together with Victors, then I believe it will follow unavoidably, that they did
not conceive, nor believe Victors Sentence to be rati^ied by God; and
consequently did not believe, that these excommunicated Churches were not in
Gods account true members of the Body of Christ.

Ad. 4. And here again, we have another subterfuge, by a Verbal distinction
between Excommunication, and voluntary separation: As if the separation, which
the Church of Rome made in Victors time from the Asian Churches, were not a
voluntary separation; or as if the Churches of Asia, did not voluntarily do
that which was the cause of their separation; or as if (though they sepated not
themselves indeed, conceiving the cause to be insufficient) they did not yet
remain voluntarily separated, rather than conform themselves to the Church of
Rome: Or lastly, as if the Grecians of Old, or the Protestants of Late, might
not pretend as justly as the Asi^n Churches, that their Separation too was not
voluntarily, but of necessity; for that the Church of Rome required of them
under pain of Excommunication such conditions of her Communion, as were neither
necessary nor lawful to be performed.

Ad. 5. And here again the matter is st^eightned by another limitation. Both
sides (say you) must claim to be the Church: but what then, if one of them only
claim (though vainly) to be the Church, and the other content it self with
being a part of it? These then it seems (for any thing you have said to the
contrary) may be both members of the Catholic Church: And certainly this is
the case now, between the Church of England and the Church of Rome: and for
ought I know, was between the Church of Rome and the Church of Greece: For I
believe, it will hardly be proved, that the Excommunication between them was
mutual; nor that the Church of Greece esteems it self the whole Church, and the
Church of Rome no Church but it self a sound member of the Church, and that a
corrupted one.

Again, whereas you say, the Fathers speak of a voluntary separation; certainly
they speak of any Separation by Heretics; and such were (in Victors judgment)
the Churches of Asia, for holding an opinion contrary to the Faith, as he
esteemed: Or if he did not, why did he cut them from the Communion of the
Church? But the true difference is, The Fathers speak of those, which by your
Church are esteemed Heretics, and are so; whereas the Asian Churches were by
Victor esteemed Heretics, but were not so.

Ad. 6. But their Authorities produced show no more, than what I have showed;
that the Church is but one in 4exclusion of Heretics and Schismatics; and not
that two particular Churches divided by mistake upon some overvalued
difference, may not be both parts of the Catholic.

Ad. 7. But I desire you to tell me, whether you will do this, if the Doctrines
produced and confirmed by such a consent of Fathers, happen to be in the
judgment of the Church of Rome, either not Catholic, or absolutely Heretical.
If you will undertake this, you shall hear farther form me: But if, when their
places are produced, you will pretend (as some of your side do) that surely
they are corrupted, having neither reason nor show of reason for it; unless
this may pass for one (as perhaps it may, where reasons are scarce) that they
are against your Doctrine; or if you will say, they are to be interpreted
according to the pleasure of your Church, whether their words will bear it or
no; then I shall but lose my Labor; for this is not to try your Church by the
Fathers, but the Fathers by your Church.

The Doct^ines which I undertake to justify, by a greater consent of Fathers
than here you produce, for instance shall be these.

1. That Gods Election supposes prescience of man's Faith and perseverance.

2. That God does not predetermine men to all their Actions.

3. That the Pope has no power in temporalties over Kings either directly or
indirectly.

4. That the Bishop of Rome may Err in his public determinations of matters of
Faith.

5. That the B. Virgin was guilty of Original sin.

6. That the B. Virgin was guilty of actual sin.

7. That the Communion was to be administered to the Laity in both kinds.

8. That the reading of the Scripture was to be denied to no man.

9. That the Opinion of the Millenaries is true.

10. That the Eucharist is to be administered to Infants.

11. That the substance of Bread and Wine remains in the Eucharist of her
Consecration.

12. That the Souls of the Saints departed enjoy not the Vision of God before
the Last day.

13. That at the day of judgment, all the Saints shall pass through a purging
fire.

All these propositions are held by your Church either Heretical, or at least
not Catholical; and yet ^n this promise of yours you have undertaken to believe
them as firmly, as you now do this, That two diviced Societies cannot be both
members of the Catholic Church.

Ad. 8. It is not then the Answerers part to show, that the proofs pretended
are indeed no proofs? and does not he prove no proofs (at least in your mouth)
who undertakes to show, that an equal or greater number of the very same
witnesses is rejected by your selves in many other things? Either the consent
of the Fathers, in any Age or Ages, is infallible, and then you are to reject
it in nothing; or it is not so, and then you are not to urge it in any thing:
As if the Fathers Testimonies against us were Swords and Spears, and against
you bulrushes.

Ad. 9. In effect as if you should say. If you answer not as I please, I will
dispute no longer. But you remember the proverb, -- will think of it. --
Occasionem quaerit, qui cupit discedere.

Ad. 10. I pray tell me, Is not Therefore a note of an Illation, or a
conclusion? And is not your last therefore this, Therefore her judgment is to
be rested in? which though it be not your first conclusion, yet yours it is,
and you may not declaim it: and it is so near of kin to the former (in your
judgment I am sure) that they must stand or fall together: therefore he that
speaks pertinently for the disproving of the one, cannot speak impertinently
toward the disproving the other: and therefore you cannot so shift it off, but
of necessity you must answer the Argument there urged, or confess it
ingenuously to be unanswerable.

Or if you will not answer any thing, where the contradiction of your first
conclusion is not in terms inferred, then take it thus: If S. Cyprian and S.
Austin did not think it necessary in matter of Faith to rest in the judgment of
the Roman Church and the adherents of it; Then either they thought not the
Catholic Churches judgment necessary to be rested on, or they thought not that
the Catholic Church. But the Antecedent is true, and undeniably proved so by
their Actions, and the consequence Evident: Therefore the consequent must be
true in one or other part: But you will not say the former is true; it remains
therefore, the latter must be, and that is -- That S. Austin and S. Cyprian did
not think the Church of Rome and the adherents of it to be the Catholic Church.

Ad. 11. But I tell you now, and have already told you, that in our discourse
before Mr. Skin^^r and Dr. Sheldon I answered your Major, as then you framed
your Argument, as now your Minor thus -- If you understand by one company of
Christians, one in External Communion, I deny your Major. For I say, that two
several Societies of Christians, which do not externally communicate together,
may be both parts of the same Catholic Church: and what difference there is
between this, and the conclusion I told you, you should have proved, I do not
well unstand.

Ad. 12. And is it possible you should say so, when every one of the places
carry this sense in their forehead, and 7 of the 11 in terms express it -- That
they intended only to exclude Heretics and Schismatics from being parts of
the Church: For if they did not, against whom did they intend them? Pagans lay
no claim to the Church, therefore not against them: Catholic. they did not
intend to exclude: I know not who remains besides, but Heretics and
Schismatics. Besides the frequent opposition in them between -- One Church on
the one side, and Heretics and Schismatics; who sees not, that in these
places they intended to exclude only these pretenders out of the Churches Unity?

Lastly, whereas you say, that the places say -- That the Church cannot be
divided; and that they account those divided who are of a diverse Faith, or a
diverse Communion: I tell you, that I have read them over and over, and unless
my Eyes deceive, they say not one word of a diverse Communion.

Ad. 13. Whereas a Heretic in your Language, is he that opposes
pertinaciously the common Faith of the Church; -- In mine -- He is such a one,
as holds an Error against Faith with Obstinacy: Verily a monstrous difference
between these definitions. To oppose and hold against (I hope) are all one:
Faith and the common Faith of the Church, sure are not very different:
pertinaciously and with Obstinacy, methinks might pass for Synonimous; and
seeing the parts agree so well, methinks the Total should not be at great
hostility. And for the definition of a Schismatic, if you like not mine (which
yet I give you out of a Father) I pray take your own; and then show me, (If you
mean to do any thing) that wheresoever there are two Societies of Christians,
differing in external Communion, one of them most be of necessity either
Heretical, or Schismatical in your own sense of these words. To the contrary, I
have said already, (and say it now again, that you may not forget it) the Roman
and the Asian Churches in Victors time, the Roman and the African in S.
Stephens time differed in external Communion; and yet neither of them was
Heretical; For they did not oppose pertinaciously the common Faith of the
Church: Neither of them was Schismatical; for they did not separate (never
making mention of the cause at all) but were separated by the Roman Church, and
that upon some cause, though it were not sufficient.

Ad. 14. The Donatist did so (as Facundus Hermianensis testifies:) but you are
abused, I believe, with not distinguishing between these two -- They did
pretend, that the Church required of them some unlawful thing among the
conditions of her Communion: and they did pretend, that it was unlawful for
them to communicate with the Church. This I confess they did pretend; but it
was in regard of some Persons in the Church, with whom they thought it unlawful
to communicate: But the former they did not pretend, (I mean while they
continued mere Schismatics,) viz. That there was any Error in the Church, or
impiety in her public service of God: And this was my meaning in saying, -- A
Schismatic is he, which separates from the Church without pretense of Error,
or unlawfulness in the conditions of her Communion: Yet if I had left out the
term unlawfulness, the definition had been better, and not obnoxious to this
Cavillation; and so I did in the second Paper which I sent you for your
direction; which if you had dealt heartily, you should have taken notice of.

Ad. 15. I have replied (as I think) fully to every part and particle of your
Argument. Neither was the History of S. Cyprians and S. Austins opposition to
the Church of Rome an excursion or diversion; but a clear demonstation of the
contradictory of your conclusion: ( viz. That the Roman Church, etc. and
therefore her judgment not to be rested upon) For an answer hereto I shall be
very importunate with you; and therefore, if you desire to avoid trouble, I
pray come out of my debt as soon as may be.

If it be said, that my Argument is not contradictory to your conclusion;
because it shows only, that the Roman Church with her adherents was not in S.
Cyprians or S. Austins time the Catholic Chruch, but was at the time before
Luther; I say, to conclude the one is to conclude the other. For certainly, if
it were then at Luthers time so, it was always so; if it was not always, it was
not then: for if it be of the essence, or necessary to the Church (as is
pretended) to be a Society of Christians joined in Communion with the Church
and Bishop of Rome; then did it always agree to the Church; and therefore in S.
Cyprians and S. Austins time, as well as at Luhers ^ising: if it were not
always, particularly not in S. Cyprians time, of the Essence or necessary to
the Church to be so; then it was impossible the Church should acquire this
Essence, or this property afterward, and therefore impossible it should have
it at the time of Luthers rising. Necessarium est, quod non aliquando inest,
aliquando not inest, alicui inest, alicui non inest; sed quod semper and o^ni.
Arist. Post. Analyt.

Again, every Sophister knows, that of Particulars nothing can be concluded;
and therefore he that will show, that the Church of Rome and the adherents of
it was the Catholic Church at Luthers rising; He must argue thus; -- It was
always so, therefore then ^t was so: Now this Antecedent is overthrown by any
Instance to the contrary; and so the first Antecedent being proved false, the
first consequent cannot but be false; for what Reason can be imagined, that the
Church of Rome and the Adherents of it, was not the whole Catholic Church at
S. Cyprians time, and was at Luthers rising? If you grant (as I think you
cannot deny) that a Church divided from the Communion of the Roman, may be
still in truth and in Gods account a part of the Catholic (which is the thing
we speak of:) then I hope Mr. Lewgars Arg^ment from Unity of Communion is
fallen to the ground; and it will be no good Plea to say,

Some one Church, not consisting of diverse Communions, was the Catholic Church
at Luthers ^ising:

No one Church can be named to be the Catholic Church, but the Roman:

Therefore the Roman Church was the Catholic at Luthers rising.

For Mr. Lewgar has not nor cannot prove the Major of this syllogism certainly
true; but to the contrary I have proved, that it cannot be certainly true, by
showing diverse instances, wherein diverse divided Communions have made up the
Catholic Church: and therefore not the dividing of the Communions, but the
cause and ground of it, is to be regarded, whether it be just and sufficient,
or unjust and insufficient.

Neither is the Bishop or Church of Rome, with the Adherents of it, an
infallible Judge thereof; for it is evident, both he and it have erred herein
diverse times; which I have evinced already by diverse examples, which I will not
repeat; but add to them one confessed by Mr. Lewgar himself in his discourse
upon the Article of the Catholic Church, page 84. S. Athanasius being
excommunicated (though by the How by the whole Church, when himself was part of
it, and communicated still with diverse other parts of it?
whole Church) yet might remain a member of Christ's body, (not visible, for
that is impossible, What not to them who know and believe him to be unjustly
Excommunicated?
that a person cut off from visible Communion, though unjustly, should be a
visible member of the Church, but) by invisible Communion, by reason of the
invalidity of the sentence; which being unjust, is valid enough to visible
excision, but not farther.

II. A Discourse against the Infallibility of the Roman Church, with an Answer
to all those Texts of Scripture that are alleged to prove it.
THE Condition of Communion with the Church of Rome, without the performance
whereof no man can be received into it, is this, That he believe firmly and
without doubting, whatsoever that Church requires him to believe.

It is impossible that any man should certainly believe any thing, unless that
thing be either evident of it self (as that twice two are four; that every
whole is greater than a part of it self) or unless he have some certain reason
(at least some supposed certain reason) and infallible guide for his belief
thereof.

The Doctrins which the Church of Rome requires to be believed are not evident
of themselves; for then every one would grant them at first hearing without any
further proof. He therefore that will believe them, must have some certain and
infallible ground whereupon to ^^^ld his belief of them.

There is no other ground for a man's belief of them, especially in many points,
but only an assurance of the Infallibility of the Church of Rome.

Now this point of that Churches Infallibility, is not evident of it self; for
then no man could choose but in his heart believe it without farther proof.
Secondly, it were in vain to bring any proof of it, as vain as to light a
Candle to show men the Sun. Thirdly, it were impossible to bring any proof of
it, seeing nothing can be more evident, than that which of it self is evident:
and nothing can be brought in proof of any thing which is not more evident than
that matter to be proved: But now experience teaches that millions there are,
which have heard talk of the Infallibitliy of the Roman Church, and yet do not
believe that the defenders of it do not think it either vain or impossible to
go about to prove it; and from hence it follows plainly, that this point is not
evident of it self.

Neither is there any other certain ground for any man's belief of it: or if
there be, I desire it may be produced, as who am ready and most willing to
submit my judgment to it, fully persuaded that none can be produced, that will
endure a severe and impartial examination.

If it be said, The Roman Church is to be believed infallible because the
Scripture says it is so.

1. I demand how shall I be assured of the Texts that be alleged, that they
are indeed Scripture, that is, the Word of God? And the answer to this must be
either because the Church tells me so, or some other: if any other be given,
then all is not finally resolved into, and built upon that Churches Authority;
and this answer then I hope a Protestant may have leave to make use of, when he
is put to that perilous Question; How know you the Scripture to be the
Scripture? If the answer be, because the Church tells me so: my reply is ready;
that to believe that Church is infallible, because the Scriptures say so: and
that the Scripture is the word of God, because the same Church says so, is
nothing else but to believe the Church is infallible, because the Church says
so, which is infallible.

2. I could never yet from the beginning of Genesis, to the end of the
Apocalypse, find it written so much as once in express terms, or equvalently,
that the Church in subordination to the Sea of Rome shall be always infallible.

3. If it be said, that this is drawn from good consequence from Scripture
truly interpreted; I demand, what certain ground have I to warrant me, that
this consequence is good and this interpretation true: and if answer be made,
that reason will tell me so: I reply, 1. That this is to build all upon my own
reason and private interpretation. 2. I have great reason to fear, that reason
assures no man, that the infallibility of the Church of Rome may be deduced
from Scripture, by good and firm consequence.

4. If it be said, that a Consent of Fathers do so interpret the Scripture. I
answer, 1. That this is most false and cannot without impudence be pretended,
as I am ready to justify to any indifferent Hearer. 2. I demand, who shall be
judge whether the Fathers mean as is pretended. If it be said, reason will tell
me so: I say, 1. this is false. 2. This is again to do that which is objected
to Protestants for such a horrid crime, that is, to build all finally upon
reason.

If it be said, they are so interpreted by the Catholic Church; I demand,
whether by the Catholic Church be meant that only that is in subordination to
the Bishop of Rome, or any other with that, or besides that. I^ any other, it
is false and impudent to pretend that they so understand the Fathers or
Scriptures: If that only, then this is to say, that that Church is infallible,
because it may be deduced from Scripture, that it is so; and to prove that it
may be deduced from Scripture, because the Fathers say so; and to prove the
Fathers do say and mean so, because the Church of Rome says they do so. And
then what a stir and trouble was here to no purpose; why was it not rather said
plainly at the beginning; The Church of Rome is certainly infallible, because
she her self says so; and she must say true because she is infallible: and that
is as much to say as unless you grant me the Question, I neither can nor will
dispute with you.

If it is said, indeed the Fathers do not draw this doctrine from Scripture, but
yet they affirm it with a full consent, as a matter of Tradition. I reply. 1.
That this pretense also is false, and that upon trial it will not appear to
have any color of probability to any who remembers, that it is the present
Roman Church, and not the Catholic Church whose infallibility is here
disputed. 2. I demand, who shall be judge, whether the Fathers do indeed affirm
this or no: If reason, then again we are fallen upon that dangerous Rock, that
all must be resolved into private reason: If the Church I ask again, what
Church is meant? If the Church of the Grecians or Abyss^nes or Protestants, or
any other but the Roman, it is evident they deny it. If the Church of Rome,
then we are again very near the head of the Circle. For I ask, how shall I be
assured this Church will not err and deceive me in interpreting the Fathers;
and the Answer must be eithe none, or this, that the Church is infallible.

Obj. If it be said, that the Infallibility of the Roman Church would yield the
Church so many commodities, and that the want of an infallible Church to guide
men in the way to Heaven, would bring so many mischiefs upon the world, that it
cannot be thought but that God out of his love to men, has appointed this
Church as an infallible guide to all other Churches; seeing it is so necessary
there should be some such guide, and so evident there is no other.

Ans. I answer, that this argument would serve the Church of Greece, or
England, or Geneva, to prove it self infallible, and the guide of all other
Churches, would they but take upon them to be so. For every one might say for
it self; It is necessary there should be some Guide; it is evident there is no
other; Ergo I am appointed by God to be that Guide. The same argument any man
might use, to make himself Monarch of any popular State: for first he might
represent unto them the commodities of a Monarchy, and the mischiefs of a
Democracy: then he might say, That God surely out of his Love to them has
appointed some remedy for their inconveniences: And lastly, that he has
ordained no other to redress them but himself, and then conclude, that he alone
must of necessity be the man appointed to rule over them.

I answer Secondly, that here also we must resolve all into Reason and the
private Spirit, or that we are still in the Circle. For I demand, how do you
know that these pretended commodities are to be compassed, and these pretended
mischiefs are to be avoided, only by the Infallibility of the Church of Rome or
some other Church, and not by any other means which God has provided. If you
say, reason tells you so; I say 1. This is to make reason your last and lowest
foundation. 2. I assure you Reason tells me no such matter, and yet I know that
I am as willing to hear it as you are. If you say, the Church tells you so, and
she is infallible; this, I say, is to prove the Church infallible because she
is so.

Thirdly, I demand, How it is possible you should know, that these pretended
commodities might not be gained, and these mischiefs which you fear avoided,
without any assistance of the Church of Rome's infallibility, if all men in the
world did believe the Scripture, and live according to it, and would require no
more of others, but to do so? If you say, that notwithstanding this, there
would be no unity in Doctrine: I answer 1. It is impossible you should know
this; considering that there are many places in Scripture, which do more than
problably import, that the want of piety in living, is the cause of want of
unity in believing. 2. That there would be unity of Opinion in all things
necessary: and that in things not necessary unity of Opinion is not necessary.
But lastly, that notwithstanding differences in these things of lesser
importance, there might and would be unity of Communion, unity of charity and
affection, which is one of the greatest blessings which the world is capable
of; absolute unity of opinion being a matter rather to be desired than hoped
for.

Obj. Against this it has been objected, that the Scripture cannot be the
guide, because many men have used their best endeavors to follow it, and yet
have fallen, some into Arianism, others into Pelagianism, others into other
damnable Heresies, and how can I secure any man, but he may do the like?

Ans. To this I answer, by distinguishing the persons which are pretended to
have made use of this Guide, and yet to have fallen into Heresy, that they
were either such as did love the truth sincerely and above all things, as did
seek it diligently and with all their power, to this intent that they might
conform their belief and life unto it; such as following S. Paul's direction,
did first try all things deliberately, and then chose what in their conscience
they thought was best: or they were such as for want of the love of the truth,
God suffered to fall into strong delusions, to fall to a false Religion,
because they brought not forth the fruits of the true; to make shipwreck of
their faith, because they had cast away a good conscience; to have their Eyes
blinded, and their light taken away, because they made not the right use of it,
but were idle and unprofitable, and set their hearts upon vanity, and had only
a form of Religion, but denied the effect of it in their lives and
conversation; in a word, such as were betrayed to their Error, and kept for
ever in it, either by negligence in seeking the Truth, or unwillingness to find
it, or by some other voluntary sin: And for these I dare not flatter them with
hope of pardon; but let me tell you, it is not the error of the understanding,
but the sin of their will that truly and properly damns them: But for the
former I am confident, that nothing is more contumelious to the goodness of
God, than to think that he will damn any such; for he should damn men that
truly love him, and desire to serve him, for doing that which all things
considered, was impossible for them not to do.

Obj. If it is said, that pride of their own understanding made them not submit
to the Church of Rome, and to her guidance, and that for this, being a
voluntary sin, they may be justly damned.

Ans. I answer, that whether the Church of Rome be the guide of all men is the
Question, and therefore not to be begged but proved: that the man we speak of
is very willing to follow this Guide, could he find any good ground to believe
it is his Guide; and therefore the reason he follows her not, is not pride but
ignorance: that as it is humility to obey those whom God has set over us, so
it is credulity to follow every one that will take upon him to lead us: that if
the blind lead the blind, not only the leader but the follower shall perish:
Lastly, that the present Church of Rome pretends very little and indeed nothing
of moment, to get the office of being Head and Guide of the Church, which
Antichrist when he comes, may not and will not make use of, for the very same
end and purpose; and therefore he had reason, not to be too sudden and
precipitate, in committing himself to the conduct of the Pope, for fear of
mistaking Antichrist for the Vicar of Christ.

Obj. But in all Commonwealths, it is necessary there should be not only a Law
for men to live by, but also a living and speaking Judge to decide their
differences arising about the various Interpretations of the Law, and otherwise
Controversies would be endless: therefore if such a judge be so necessary in
civil affairs, for the procuring and preserving our temporal peace and
happiness; how much more necessary is he, for the deciding of those
Controversies, that concern the saving and damning of our souls for ever.

Ans. Hereunto I answer, 1. That if it were as evident and certain that God
has appointed the Pope or Church of Rome to be the Guide of Faith, and Judge
of Controversies, as that the King has appointed such a one to be Lord Chief
Justice, the having of such a Guide would be very available, for to preserve
the Church in Unity, and to conduct men's souls to Heaven: but a Judge that has
no better title or evidence to his place, than the Pope has to that which he
pretends to, a Judge that is doubtful and justly questionable whether he be the
Judge or no, is in all probability likely to produce clean contrary effects,
and to be himself one of the Apples of strife, one of the greatest subjects of
Controversy, and occasion of di^sentions.

And to avoid this great inconvenience, if God had intended the Pope or Church
of Rome for this great Office, certainly he would have said so very plainly and
very frequently; if not frequently, certainly sometimes, once at least he would
have said so in express terms: but he does not say so, no not so much as once,
nor any thing from whence it may be collected, with any sure or firm
consequence: therefore if it be not certain, certainly it is very probab^le he
never meant so.

Again, in Civil Controversies the case can hardly be so put, that there should
be any necessity that the same man should be Judge and Party: but in matters of
Religion, wherein all have equal interest, every man is a party, and engaged to
judge for temporal respects, this way or that way, and therefore not fit to be
a Judge. But what then if he which was with so much clamor and so little reason
vouched, for the Infallibility of the Roman Church, do tell you plainly, there
is no living Judge on Earth appointed by God, to decide the Controversies
arising amongst Christians; nor no way to determine them but Scripture. His
words are express and formal, and need no other commentary but a true
interpretation.

Optatus Melevit. lib. 5. ad princip.
Vos dicitis, Licet; nos, non Licet: inter Vestrum Licet, and nostrum non
Licet, nutant and remigant animae populorum. Nemo vobis credat, nemo nobis;
omnes contentiosi homines sumus. Quaerendi sunt judices: si Christiani, de
utraque part dari non possunt: de foris quaerendus est Iudex. Si Paganus, non
potest nosse Christiana Secreta: Si Judaeus, inimicus est Christiani
Baptismatis. Ergo in terris de hac re nullum poterit reperiri judicium: de
coelo quaerendus est Iudex. Sed ut quid pulsamus coelum, cum habeamus hic in
Evangelio Testaomentum? Quia hoc loco recte possunt terrenae coelestibus
comparari; tale est, quod quivis botninum habens numerosos filios: His, quamdiu
presens est, ipse imperat singulis; non est adbuc necessarium Testamentum. Sic
and Christus, quamdiu praesens in terris fuit (quanivis nec modo desit) pro
tempore quicquid necessarium erat, Apostolis imperavit. Sed quomodo terrenus
pater cum se in confinio senserit mortis, timens ne post mortem suam rupt^ pace
litigent fratres, adhibitis testibus voluntatem suam de pectore morituro
transfert in tabulas diu duraturas; and si fuerit inter fratres contentio nata,
non itur ad tumulum, sed quaeritur Testamentum, and qui in tumulo quiescit,
tacitis de tabulis loquitur vivus. Is, cujus est testamentum, in coelo est:
Ergo voluntas ejus velut in Testamento sic in Evangelio inquiratur.

That is, You say such a thing is Lawful; we say it is Unlawful: the minds of
the People are do^btful and wavering between your lawful and our unlawful. Let
no man believe either you or us; we are all contentious men. we must seek
therefore for Judges between us. If Christians are to be our Judges; both sides
will not afford such. We must seek for a Judges abroad. If he be a Pagan, he
cannot know the secrets of Christianity: If he be a Jew, he is an Enemy to
Christian Baptism. Therefore there is no judgment of this matter can be found
on Earth. We must seek for a Judge from Heaven. But to what end do we solicit
Heaven, when we have here in the Gospel a Will and Testament? And because here
we may fitly compare Earthly things with Heavenly; The case is just as if a man
had many Sons: while he is present with them, he commands every one what he
will have done; and there is no need as yet of making his last Will. So also
Christ, as long as he was present on Earth (though neither now is he wanting)
for a time commanded his Apostles, whatsoever was necessary. But just as an
Earthly Father; when he ^^ls his Death approaching, fearing lest after his
Death the Brothers should fall out and quarrel, he calls in Witnesses, and
translates his Will from his dying Heart into Writing-Tables that will continue
long after him: Now if any controversy arises among the Brothers; they do not
go to his Tomb, but consult his last W^ll; and thus he whilst he rests in his
Grave, does speak to them in those silent Tables as if he were alive. He w^ose
Testament we have, is in Heaven. Therefore we are to enquire (...) pleasure in
the Gospel, as in his last Will and Testament.

It is plain from hence, that he knew not or any living, speaking, audible
Judge, furnished with Authority and infallibility to decide this controversy:
had he known any such assisted with the Spirit of God for this purpose, it had
been horrible impiety against God and the Churches peace, to say there was none
such: or the Spirit of God was not able by his assistance to keep this Judge
from being hindered with partiality, from seeing the Truth. Had he thought the
Bishop of Romes speaking ex Cathedra to be this Judge, now had been the time to
have said so: but he says directly the contrary, and therefore it is plain, he
knew of no such Authority he had.

Neither is there the like reason for a Judge finally and with Authority to
determine controversy, in Religion and civil disserences: For if the
controversy be about M^ne and Thine, about I and or Money or any other thing,
it is impossible that both I should hold the possession of it and my adversary
too: and one of us must do injury to the other, which is not fit it should be
Eternal: But in matters of Doctrine the case is clean contrary; I may hold my
opinion and do my Adversary no wrong, and my Adversary may hold his and do me
none.

[Texts of Scripture alleged for Infallibility.]
The Texts alleged for it by Cardinal Perron and Mr. Stratford, are partly
Prophecies of the Old Testament, partly promises of the New.

1. Esa. 1. 26. Thou shall be called the City of Justice, the faithful City.

2. Esa. 52. 1. Through thee shall no more pass any that is uncircumcised, or
unclean.

3. Esa. 59. 21. As for me, this is my Covenant with them, says the Lord, my
spirit that is upon thee, and my Words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not
depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth
of thy seeds seed, says the Lord, from henceforth and for ever.

4. Esa. 62. 6. Upon thy Walls Jerusalem I have appointed Watchmen all the day
and all the night for ever, they shall not hold their peace.

5. Jerem. 31. 33. This shall be the Covenant which I will make with the House
of Israel, says the Lord, I will give my Law in their Bowels, and in their
Heart I will write it, and I will be their God, and they shall be my People.

6. Ezekiel. 36. 27. I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
Statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments and do them.

7. Ezekiel. 37. 26. I will give my Sanctification in the midst of them for ever.

8. Ose. 2. 19, 20. I will dispouse thee to me for ever; and I will dispouse
thee to me in Justice and judgment, and in mercy and commiserations; I will
Espouse thee to me in Faith, and thou shall know that I am the Lord.

9. Cant. 4. 7. Thou art all fair my Love, and there is no spot in thee.

Now before we proceed further, let us reflect upon these places, and make the
most of them for the behoof of the Roman Church; and I believe it will then
appear to any one not veiled with prejudice, that not one of them reaches home
to the conclusion intended, which is, That the Roman Church is infallible.

The first place perhaps would do something, but that there are Three main
exceptions against it. 1. That here is no evidence, not so much as that of
probability, that this is here spoken of the Church of R^me. 2. That it is
certain that it is not spoken of the Church of Rome; but of the Nation of the
Jews, after their conversion, as is apparent from that which follows. Zion
shall be redeeme^ with judgment, and her converts with righteousn^ss. 3. That
it is no way certain, that whatsoever Society may be called, the City of
righteousness, the faithful City, m^st be infallible in all her Doctrine: with
a great deal more probability, it might challenge from hence the privi^edg of
being Impeccable; which yet Roman Catholics I believe do not pretend to.

The Second place is liable to the same exceptions; the Church of Rome is not
spoken of in it: but Zion and Jerusalem; and it will serve as well nay better
to prove Impeccability than Infallibility.

The third place is the Achilles for this opinion, wherein every writer
Triumphs; but I wonder they should do so; considering the Covenant here spoken
of is made, not with the Church of Rome, but with Zion and them that turn from
transgression in Jacob, the words are: And the Rede^mer shall come out of Zion,
and unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob says the Lord. As for me,
this is my Covenant with them says the Lord; My Spirit that is in thee and my
Words, etc. Now if the Church of Rome be Zion and they that turn from iniquity
in Jacob, they may have Title to this Covenant; if not they must forbear, and
leave it to the Jews after their Conversion; to whom it is appropriated by a
more Infallible Interpreter than the Pope; I mean S. Paul, Romans 11. 26. And it
seems the Church of Rome also believes as much* for otherwise why does she in
the Margent of her Bible, send us to that place of S. Paul for an exposition.

Read the 4th place, and you shall find nothing can be made of it but this:
that the Watchmen of Jerusalem shall never cease importuning God, for the
sending of the Messiah: To this purpose speaks the Prophet in ver. 1. For Zions
sake I will not hold my peace, and for Hierusalems sake I well not rest, until
the righteousness thereof go forth as brightness: And the Gentiles shall see
thy righteousness. But the words following these that are objected, make it
most evident, which are, ye that make mention of the Lord keep not sil^nce, and
give him no rest, till he establish and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the
Earth.

The 5th place had they set down entirely, for very shame they could not have
urged it for the Infallibility of the Roman Church. The words are, Behold the
days come, says the Lord, that I will make a new Covenant with the House of
Israel, and with the House of Judah; not according to the Covenant which I made
with their Fathers -- But this shall be the Covenant that I will make with the
House of Israel -- After those days, says the Lord, I will put my Law in their
inward parts and write it in their Hearts, and I will be their God and they
shall be my People; and they shall teach no more every man his Neighbor and
every man his Brother, saying, know the Lord; for they shall all know me from
the least of them to the greatest of them, says the Lord. And now I have
transcribed the place, I think it superfluous to make any other answer.

The same Answer and no other will I make also to the 6th place. The words are.
Therefore say unto the House of Israel; thus says the Lord God, I do not this
for your sakes O House of Israel, but for my holy names sake, ver. 22. I will
take you from among the Heathen, and gather you out of all Countries, and will
bring you into your own Land, v. 24. Then will I sprinkle clean Water upon you,
ver. 25. A new heart also will I give you, ver. 26. And I will put my Spirit in
you and cause you to walk in my Statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments and do
them, ver. 27. And ye shall dwell in the Land that I gave to your Fathers: I
will also save you from all your uncleanness, and I will call for the Corn
and will increase it, and lay no Famine upon you. And the desolate Land shall
be tilled, ver. 34. And they shall say, this Land that was desolate, is become
like the Garden of Eden.

The 7th place also carries its answer in its forehead: Thus says the Lord
God, behold I will take the Children of Israel from among the Heathen whether
they be gone; and I will make them one Nation in the Land upon the mountains of
Israel: and one King shall be King to them all, etc. to the end of the Chapter.
In all which place, he that can find a Syllable of the Church of Rome, he must
have better eyes than I have.

The next (8th) place would be very pregnant for the Church of Rome, if of
courtesy we would grant, that whatsoever is promised to Israel, is intended to
them. As you may see in the place at large, from ver. 17. to the end of the
Chapter.

The 9th and last place out of the Canticles, had it been urged by a
Protestant; it would have been thought a sufficient Answer to have said, That
Mystical Texts are not fit to argue upon; but if this will not serve, then we
answer. 1. That there is no mention nor intimation of the Church of Rome. 2.
That it proves either too much or nothing at all: that is, that the Roman
Church is impeccable, as well as infallible; unless we will say that Errors
only are Spots, and impieties are not.

Out of the New Testament they allege these Texts.
Matthew. 16. 18. Upon this Rock I will build my Church, and the Gates of Hell
shall not prevail against it.

But this is said of the Catholic, not of the Roman Church: nor can it ever be
proved that the Church in Communion with the Sea of Rome is the Catholic
Church. Secondly, it says something for the perpetuity of the Church, but not
for the In^allibility of it: unless you will take for granted what can never be
proved, That a Church that teaches any Erroneous Doctrine, is a Church no
longer; which is all one, as if you should say, a man that has the Stone, or
Gout, or any other Disease, is not a man.

They urge, Matthew. 28. 19, 20.
And I am with you all days, even unto the consummation of the World.

And here also if we will grant, 1. That by you, is meant you and only you of
the Church of Rome. 2. That our Savior has here obliged himself to assist, not
only Suffici^nter, but also irresistibiliter, not only to preserve in the
Church a light of sufficient direction, as he provided a Star for the Wise Men,
and a Pillar of Fire and a cloud for the conduct of the Israelites; but also
compel or at least necessitate them to follow it. 3. That he will be with them,
not only to keep them from all damnable and destructive Errors, but absolutely
form all erroneous Doctrines: If these things I say were granted, some good
might be done. But certainly these are (...), too great favors to be looked for
by strangers: And yet if all this be granted, we should run into this
inconvenience on the other side; that if the promise be absolute, not only the
whole Church of Rome; not only a general Council; not the Pope alone; but every
Bishop, every Priest, every one who is sent by Christ to Baptize and Preach the
Gospel, might claim this assistance by virtue of Christ's words, and
consequently Infallibility.

They urge, Matthew. 18. 17.
If he will not hear the Church, let him be to thee as the Heathen and the
Publican. And here again the Church must be the Church of Rome, or we are as
far to seek as ever. But what if by it be meant, which is most evident out of
the place, every particular Church of Christians, whereunto any one Christian
injured by another, may address himself for remedy. Certainly whosoever reads
the place without prejudice, I am confident that he shall not deny, but that
the sense of the Words is. That if any Christian injure another, and being
first admonished of it by him in private; then by him before two or three
Witnesses; Lastly, by the Church he lives in; and yet still proceeds on
obstinately in doing injury to his Brother, he is to be esteemed as a Heathen,
or a Publican: and then if Infallibility may be concluded, what a multitude of
Infallible Churches shall we have?

They urge, Matthew. 18. 20.
Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst
of them.

But this also either shoots short, or over; either proves nothing, or too
much: Either it proves not the Infallibility of the whole Church, or it proves
the Infallibility of every part of it: Either not the Infallibility of General
Councils, or the infallibility of particular Councils; for there two or three
at least are assembled in Christ's name. But then besides these two or three for
ought I can see or gather from the Text, they may as well be of any other
Church as the Roman.

They urge, Luke 10. 16.
He that hears you hears me, and he that despises you despises me.

But this will not do you any service, unles; of favor we grant, that you
here, is you of the Church of Rome; and but very little if that be granted: for
then every Bishop, every Priest must be Infallible. For there is not the
meanest of the Messengers of Christ, bu^ this may be verified of him, That he
that hears him, hears Christ, and he that despises him, despises Christ.

They urge out of John 14. ver. 15, 16.
I will ask my Father, and he will give you another Paraclete, that he may
abide with you for ever, even the Spirit of Truth.

But here also, what warrant have we, by you to understand the Church of Rome:
whereas he that compares v. 26. with this, shall easily perceive, that our
Savior speaks only of the Apostles in their own persons; for there he says
going on in the same discourse. The Holy Ghost whom the Father will send in my
name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance,
whatsoever I have said to you: which cannot agree but to the Apostles
themselves in person; and not to their Successors, who had not yet been taught
and therefore not forgotten any thing, and therefore could not have them
brought to their remembrance. But what if it had been promised to them and
their Successors? had they no Successors but them of the Roman Church? this
indeed is pretended and cried up, but for proofs of it, desiderantur.

Again, I would fain know whether there be any certainty, that every Pope is a
good Christian, or whether he may not be in the sense of the Scripture, of the
World? If not, how was it that Bellarmine should have cause to think, that such
a rank of them went successively to the Devil?

III. A Conference, concerning the Infallibility of the Roman Church: Proving
that the present Church of Rome either errs in her worshipping the Blessed
Virgin Mary, or that the Ancient Church did err in condemning the Collyridians
as Heretics.
1. Demand. WHether the Infallibility of the Roman Church, be not the
foundation of their Faith which are members of that Church?

Answ. The Infallibility of the Church is (not the foundation but) a part of
their Faith who are members of the Church. And the Roman Church is held to be
the Church, by all those who are members of it.

Reply. That which is the last Reason, why you believe the Scripture to be the
written Word of God and unwritten Traditions his unwritten word; and this or
that to be the true sense of Scripture, that is to you the foundation of your
Faith, and such unto you is the Infallible Authority of the Roman Church.
Therefore unto you it is not only a part of your faith, but also such a part as
is the foundation of all other parts. Therefore you are deceived if you think,
there is any more opposition between being a part of the faith and the
foundation of other parts of it; than there is between being a part of a house
and the foundation of it. But whether you will have it the foundation of your
faith, or only a part of it, for the present purpose it is all one.

2. Demand. Whether the Infallibility of the Roman Church be not absolutely
overthrown, by proving the present Roman Church is in error, or that the
Ancient was?

Answ. It is, if the Error be in those things wherein she is affirmed to be
infallible; viz. in points of Faith.

Reply. And this here spoken of, whether it be lawful to offer Tapers and
Incense to the honor of the Blessed Virgin, is I hope a Question concerning a
point of Faith.

3. Demand. Whether offering a Cake to the Virgin Mary, be not as lawful, as to
offer Incense and Tapers and diverse other oblations to the same Virgin?

Answ. It is as lawful to offer a Cake to her honor as Wax-Tapers, but neither
the one, nor the other may be offered to her, or her honor, as the term or
object of the Action. For to speak properly, nothing is offered to her or to
her honor, but to God in the honor of the Blessed Virgin. For Incense, it is
a foul slander that it is offered any way to the Blessed Virgin; for that
incensing which is used in the time of Mass, is ever understoo^ by all sorts of
people to be directed to God only.

Reply. If any thing he offered to her, she is the Object of that oblation; as
if I see water, and through water something else, the water is the object of my
sight, though not the last object. If I honor the Kings Deputy, and by him the
King, the Deputy is the object of my action, though not the final object: And
to say these things may be offered to her, but not as to the object of the
action, is to say they may be offered to her, but not to her. For what else is
meant by the object of an action, but that thing on which the action is
employed, and to which it is directed?

If you say, that by the object of the action, you mean the final object only
wherewith the action is terminated; you should then have spoken more properly
and distinctly, and not have denied her simply to be the object of this action,
when you mean only she is not such a kind of object: no more than you may deny
a man to be a living creature, meaning only that he is not a horse.

Secondly, I say, it is not required of Roman Catholics when they offer Tapers
to the Saints, that by an actual intention they direct their action actually to
God; but it is held sufficient, that they know and believe that the Saints are
in Subordination and near Relation to God, and that they give this honor to
the Saints because of this relation: And to God himself rather habitually and
interpretative, than actually, expressly and formally. As many men honor the
Kings Deputy, without having any present thought of the King, and yet their
action may be interpreted an honor to the King, being given to his Deputy,
only because he is his Deputy, and for his relation to the King.

Thirdly, I say, there is no reason or ground in the world, for any man to
think, that the Collyridians did not choose the Virgin Mary for the object of
their worship, rather than any other Woman or any other Creature, merely for
her relation to Christ; and by consequence there is no ground to imagine, but
that at least habitually and interpretative, they directed their action unto
Christ, if not actually and formally. And Ergo, if that be a sufficient defense
for the Papists, that they make not the Blessed Virgin the final object of
their worship, but worship her not for her own sake, but for her relation unto
Christ: Epiphanius surely did ill to charge the Collyridians with Heresy,
having nothing to impute to them, but only that he was informed, that they
offered a Cake to the honor of the Blessed Virgin, which honor yet they
might, and without question did give unto her for her relation unto Christ, and
so made her not the last object and term of their worship: and from hence it is
evident, that he conceived the very action it self, substantially and
intrinsically malicious, i. e. he believed it a sin that they offered to her at
all: and so by their action put her in the place of God by giving unto her this
worship proper to God; and not that they terminated their action finally in
her, or did i^ very deed think her to be a God, and not a Creature.

But to speak properly, you say, nothing is offered to her or to her honor,
but to God in honor of the Blessed Virgin.

Belike then if through Henly I go from hence to London, I may not be said
properly to go to Henly, but only to London: or if through Water I see the
Sand, I may not be properly said to see the Water, but only the Sa^d. Away with
such shifting Sophistry; either leave your practice of offering to Saints if it
be naught, or color it not over with such empty distinctions if it be good:
Christ says to his Apostles in regard of their relation to him, He that
hears you hears me, and he that despises you despises ^^e: and yet who
doubts, but they that heard the Apostles did properly hear them, and they that
despised them did properly despise them, though their action staid not in them,
but reached up to Heaven and to Christ himself. You pray to Saints and Angels,
though you do not terminate your prayers in them; and yet I doubt not but your
prayers to Saints, may be as properly called prayers, as those you make to God
himself. For though these be of a more excellent nature than they, yet do they
agree in the general nature, that they are both prayers. As though a Man be a
more excellent living creature than a horse, yet he agrees with him in this,
that both are living creatures. But if nothing be properly offered to her or to
her honor, why do you in your sixth Answer say, you may offer any thing to the
Virgin Mary, by way of presents and gif^s by the doctrine of the Roman Church?
Certainly he that offers by way of gift or present, offers as prope^ly as he
that offers ^y way of sacrifice; as a horse is as properly a living creature as
a Man.

But if it were so as ^ou say (which is most false) that you did not properly
offer to the Blessed Virgin, but to God in honor of her; yet in my judgment,
this would not qualify or mend the matter but make it worse. For first, who
taught you, that in the time of the Gospel (after the accomplishment of the
prediction, sacrifice and offering thou would not but a body have thou
prepared me: after this Interpretation of it in the Epistle to the Hebrews, He
takes away the first that he may establish the second) that it is still lawful
to offer Tapers or Incense to God. Secondly, in my understanding, to offer to
God in honor of the Virgin, is more derogatory from Gods honor, than to offer
to her in the honor of God. For this is in my apprehension to subordinate God
to her, to make her the terminating and final object of the action; to make God
the way and her the end, and by and through God to conveigh the worship unto
her.

But for incense, you say, it is a soul slander, that it is offered any way to
the Blessed Virgin.

To this I answer, that your imputing slander to me, is it self a slander:
For^. In your 5th Answer, you have given a clear intimation that you have never
been out of England: so that you cannot certainly know, what is the practice of
your Church in this point beyond Sea. And he that lives amongst you, and has
but half an Eye open and free from prejudice, cannot but see, that the Roman
Religion is much more exorbitant in the general practice of it, than it is in
the Doctrine published in Books of Controversy; where it is delivered with
much caution and moderation, nay cunning and dissimulation that it may be the
fitter to win and engage Proselytes; who being once ensnared, though they be
afterward startled with strange and unlookt-for practices, yet a hundred to
one, but they will rather stif^e their Conscience, and dash all scruples
against the pretended Rock of their Church^s Infallibility, and blindly follow
those guides, to whose Conduct they have unadvisedly committed themselves, than
come off again with the shame of being reputed weak and inconstant: so terrible
an Idol is this vain nothing, the opinion and censure of foolish men.

But to return again to you, I say your ignorance of the practice of the Roman
Church beyond the Seas, does plainly convince that you have rashly and
therefore slanderously charged me with the Crime of slander. As for your reason
you add, consider it again, and you will see it is worth nothing. For what if
incensing in time of Mass, be understood by all sorts of People to be directed
to God alone (which yet you cannot possibly know) yet this I hope hinders not,
but that in Processions, you may Incense the Images of the Saints, and
consequently (according to your Doctrine) do this Honor to the Saints
themselves represented by the Images. I my self (unless I am very much
mistaken) was present when this very thing was done to the Picture of Saint
Benet or Saint Gregory in the Cloister of Saint Vedastus in the Monastery in
Doway.

But indeed what a ridiculous inconsequence is it, to think that Wax Tapers may
lawfully be offered to the Saints and incense may not: or if Incense may not,
which you seem to disclaim as impious, that Wax Tapers may.

4. Demand. Whether the Collyridians were not condemned as Heretics by the
Ancient Church. First, for offering a Cake upon a Anniversary Feast to the
Blessed V^rgin. Secondly for that they did this not being Priests.

Answ. The Collyridians were condemned as Heretics for two things. First, for
employing Women in the place and Office of Priests to offer a Cake (not in the
nature of a gift or present,) but in the nature of a Vt in nomen Virginis
Collyridem quandam Sacrificarent. Epiph. haer. 78. Offerunt panem in nomen
Mariae, omnes autem pane participa^t --
Sacrifice, which was never lawful for any but De^ enim ab aeterno nulla tenus
mulier Sacrisicavit. Idem haeres. 79.
men, and those Diaconissarum ordo est in Ecclesia, sed non ad Sacrificandum,
nam neque Diaconis conc^editum est, ut aliquod m^sterium persiciant. Id. Ibid.
consecrated.

Secondly, for offering this vid. sup. littera (a)
Sacrifice (...) in the name of the Blessed Virgin, i. e. unto her, her self
directly and terminatively, as an act of Mortuis cultum divinum praestantes.
Id. Ibid. And again: Revera virgo erat honorata, sed non adadorationem nobis
data sed ipsa adorans Deum. And again: Non ut adoretur Virgo, nec ut Deum hanc
efficeret, etc. Sit in honor Maria; Pater and Filius and Spiritus S. adoretur,
Mariam nemo adoret. Deo debetur hoc mysterium Id. Ibid.
Divine Worship and adoration, due unto her, as unto a Sovereign Pro Deo hanc
introducere statuerant. Id. Ibid. Revera Sanctum erat Mariae corpus non tamen
Deus. And again. Mulierem eam appellavit Joh. 2. Velut prophetans: and ne
aliqui nimium admirati Sanctum, in hanc haeresin dilabantur. And again. Non
tamen aliter genita est praeter hominis naturam, sed sicut omnes ex semine
(...) and utero Mulieris. Id. Ibid.
Power and Deity.

Reply. It seems then these Women might offer this Cake to the honor and name
of the Virgin Mary, if they had done it as a Gift or Present and not as a
Sacrifice. Epiphanius then surely was too hasty to condemn them, being informed
of nothing, but that they offered a Cake unto her. Methinks before he had put
them in his Catalogue, he should have enquired whether they offered this Cake
as a Gift only, or as a Sacrifice. Certainly had the practice of offering to
Saints by way of gifts, been the practice of the Church in his time, he would
not have been so uncharitable, as to condemn that action as impious and
Heretical, which might have received so lawful and pious a construction. But
he, good man, it seems could not conceive a difference between a Sacrifice, and
the offering a Creature by way of Consumption to the Honor of that to which it
is offered. The subtle Wits of our times I hope have found out another
definition for it, and I shall understand by you what it is. But if you can
find no other, then certainly, though setting up a Picture or hanging up a Leg
or Eye or Ear in memory of some miraculous cure, obtained by a Saints
intercession, would be a Gift or Present only; yet offering of Incense, or
burning a Taper in the honor of a Saint, daub the matter how you will, will be
without Question a Sacrifice. If you say, that there may be such an offering
and yet no Sacrifice; I would know then, how you would prove that the
Collyridians offering was indeed a Sacrifice? All that Epiphanius says of them
is but this -- Panem proponunt and in Mariae nomen offerunt. And though this
offering of theirs was indeed a Sacrifice in the notion of the word which I
have given it, yet does he not any where say expressly, That they did Sacrifice,
or offer it as a Sacrifice, but only and barely that they did ^ffer it: not
using (as good fortune would have it) any word which does of necessity and
properly signify to Sacrifice: and therefore you are fain to help the Dice,
and alter every place for your advantage. Epiphanius says not, as you tr^nslate
him, ut in nomen Virginis Collyridem quendam Sacrifice^t; nor Sacrificantes
osserunt, as Petavius: but (...), which man as well signify, to cons^^^rate or
offer, as to Sacrifice, if there be any difference between them. So the next
place, offerunt panem i^ nomen Mariae, omnes autem pane partic^pant; proves not
I hope offering by way of Sacrifice, unless the Consumption of the oblation
make it a Sacrifice; which if it do, how your Tapers can be kept from being
Sacrifices I cannot im^gine; unless again perhaps Consumption by way of Eating
will make it a Sacrifice, and by Burning will not; which cannot be, because the
whole Burnt-offerings were Sacrifices as well as any other.

Your thi^d place is, Deo autem ab aeterno nullatenus mulier (...). But (...)
signifies not to Sacrifice, but only to (...) the Office of a Priest, and so
Petavius translates the place. Nunquam sacerdotio functa est mulier. And though
Sacrificing be one perhaps, yet will you not say it is the only Office of a
Priest: as your next and last place would have declared, had you set it down
faithfully; but in that also you juggle again, and force it to speak to your
purpose thus. Diaconissarum ordo est in Ecclesia, sed non ad Sacrificandum: but
Petavius has translated it truly thus: Quanquam vero Diaconissarum in Ecclesia
ordo sit, n^n tamen ad sacerdotii functionem, aut ullam administrationem
institutus est. And now though by an usual Synechdoche the name of the Genus be
given to the Species, and therefore had a man fairly and heartily translated
(...) by Sa^rifico, I should not have much condemned him, yet to do it when the
Question is, whether this t^eir offering, confessed to be an offering, were in
propriety of speech a Sacrifice, to do it for Ends, to shift off a convincing
argument, to palliate over a foul matter, by putting a verbal difference where
there is none indeed, and all that you may, Imperitos rerum in fraudem
illicere; that is -- But I forbear you.

But Secondly it is pretended, [ they offered this Sacrifice (...) in the name
of the Blessed Virgin: i. e. unto her, her self, directly and terminately as an
act of Divine Worship and adoration due unto her, as unto a Sovereign Power and
Deity.] And to color and countenance this strange gloss, many places are
quoted out of Epiphanius, which I will examine in order as they lie.

The first place is, mortuis cultum Divinum praestantes, where your meaning is,
I believe, that Epiphanius says the Collyridians did so: but the truth is he
says only, mortuos colentes; as Petavius translates it: and therefore here once
again you help the Dice; yet if he had said so, why should you rather from
cultum divinum collect that, that they thought her God, than from mortuis, that
they thought her Dead, and therefore certainly not a God? Certainly this can be
no warrant to you, that Epiphanius charges them with so thinking: For
Protestants you know impute to Papists that they give to Saints cultum divinum,
and yet they do not impute to them the Heresy of thinking, that the Saints are
Sovereign Powers and Deities: But as S. Paul accuses the Gentiles, for that
knowing God to be God, they did not worship him as God, so on the other side,
Protestants condemn Papists, and Epiphanius for ought we can see hitherto,
might condemn the Collyridians, for that knowing the Blessed Virgin not to be
God, they yet worshipped her as God. That is, gave her that worship which is
Gods own peculiar, which yet they might do, not because they thought her God,
but because this worship, which was indeed proper to God, they might think not
proper, but communicable to such Creatures as were high in his favor.

The next place is -- Revera virgo erat honorata, sed non ad adorationem nobis
data, sed ipsa adorans Deum, etc.

I answer that the etc. perhaps conceals something more pertinent to your
purpose, but in the Words set down there appears to me just nothing; for I can
frame out of them no other Syllogism but this.

Whatsoever Epiphanius in this place says is not to be adored, that the
Collyridians thought to be God.

But Epiphan. here says the Virgin is not to be adored.

Ergo. The Collyridians thought her God.

Of this Syllogism I deny the Major proposition, and I believe shall stay as
long for a proof of it, as I have done for an answer to some other discourses,
which being written in a few days, have waited now with a longing expectation
for a promised answer many ^onths. If you say, you would conclude from these
Words, that they did adore her and therefore thought her God, I have answered
already, that they might do this, not because they thought her God, but because
they thought Creatures high in Gods favor capable of adoration.

The next place -- Non ut adoretur Virgo, nec ut deum hanc efficeret -- tells
us that Christ took Flesh of the Virgin, not that she should be adored, nor to
make her God: And this you think imports, that they conceive her God. Yet if I
should, condemning your Practice of offering Tapers to her, use the same Words
and say, -- Christ took Flesh of the Virgin, not that she should be adored, or
to make her God: You would not yet conceive that I charged you with the Heresy
of believing her God, but only of the impiety of giving to her that worship
which was peculiar to God: and why then might not Epiphanius, having like
occasion, use the same words to the Collyridians upon the same, and no other
ground.

The next place -- Mariam nemo adoret Deo debetur hoc mysterium, -- is so far
from proving your imagination, that it strongly confirms my assertion, that
Epiphanius did not impute to the Collyridians the opinion, that the Virgin Mary
was God. If I should say to a Papist, the Blessed Virgin is not to be worshipped
with the worship of Hyperdaulia, because such worship is due only to the Mother
of God, would they not say I were mad and argued against my self, for that they
believed she was the Mother of God. By like reason, if Epiphanius knew, that
the Collyridians believed the Virgin Mary to be God, he reasoned as wildly
against himself in saying -- Mariam nemo adoret, Deo debetur hoc mysterium --
For it is very true (might they have said) this service is due to God alone,
but you know our Belief and Profession that she is God, and therefore by your
own rule capable of this worship.

The next place is -- Pro Deo hanc introducere studuerunt. And may not this be
justly said to any man, who to any thing besides God, gives that worship which
is proper and peculiar unto God? What if to man that should teach -- The Pope
had power to dispense with men for the keeping of Gods Laws -- I should say,
pro Deo Papam introducis. Must I of necessity mean that that man did verily
believe the Pope not a man but a Sovereign Power and Deity? S. Paul tells us
that Covetousness is Idolatry; he tells us of some, whose God is their Belly;
is it therefore consequent, that every covetous man does indeed believe his
Gold, and every Glutton his Belly, to be indeed a Sovereign Power and Deity?
Away with such fopperies. Whosoever loves, or fears, or trusts in any thing
more than God, may yet be justly said to make that his God, and whosoever
should worship any Creature with that external worship which God has
appropriated to himself, might justly be said to bring in that Creature for
God. S. Paul tells us of some, who in words professed God, yet fact is
negabant, in their deeds deny him: so these on the contrary, may in their words
deny this Creature to be God, and in their Hearts not think it so, yet seeing
their actions to it are as if it were God, they may be justly charged, that
with their deeds they make this Creature God.

Qui fingit Sacros ex auro and marmore vultus,
Non facit ille Deos, qui colit ille facit.
What if upon consideration of the strangely enormous worship which Papists
give to the Virgin Mary (swearing by her name, making Vows unto her, offering
Tapers to her Honor, attributing a kind of Communicated omniscience and almost
omnipotence to her, as I can easily make good they do, partly out of the
Offices of their Church, partly out of private men's Works, but set out with
License and approbation) what I say, if upon this consideration I should
affirm, pro Deo ipsam introducere conantur. Would it therefore be consequent,
that I must impute this Blasphemy to them, that they believed and taught her to
be a Sovereign Power and Deity? I trow not. And therefore Epiphanius might say
the same of the Collyridians considering their Action, without any intent of
imputing to them any such opinion. This Petavius sure saw well enough, and
therefore (as I shall hereafter demonstrate to the Eye) to countenance his
M^rginal Annotation, Quidam Mariam Deum esse credider^nt, he cunningly abuses
and perverts Epiphanius his Text with false Translation. -- Sic pugnat, Sic est
metuendus Ulysses. -- The next place is, revera sanc^um erat Mar^ae corpus non
tamen Deus. (The Body of Mary was truly holy, but not a God.) As much to the
purpose as -- Tityre tu patulae -- for what if Epiphanius say, she is not God,
and therefore not to be adored, does it therefore follow that the Collyridians
believed she was a God? He that knows Logic or sense, cannot but know, that he
that will confute an Adversaries conclusion, must choose such principles to do
it, to which his Adversary consents, and out of that which he grants prove that
which he denies; or if his first propositions be not agreed to by his
Adversary, he must prove them in the end by such as are agreed to; or else he
does nothing. And therefore seeing Epiphanius thinks it sufficient for the
convincing of the Collyridians, of the unlawfulness of the practice, to say,
she was not God: it is evident, that so far was he from imputing to them the
belief that she was God, that he seems rather to take the contrary for a
principle agreed upon between them, which it was sufficient to say and
superfluous to prove. This answer I thought good to make, while I conceived
that here Epiphanius had denied the Person of the Virgin Mary to be God; but
after upon better consideration I sound that Petavius had abused me with adding
to Epiphanius of his own -- Illa fuit -- and that Epiphanius says not here, non
tamen Deus (she was not God) of her Person, but of her Body; and as yet I do
not understand that you impute to the Collyridians the belief, that her Body
was God.

The next place -- Mulierem eam appellavit, etc. -- says no more but this; that
our Savior calls the Blessed Virgin Woman, that no man might think her any
thing more than a Woman, as it were prophetically refuting the Schisms and
Heresies which would be in the World: lest some out of excess of admiration of
her, might fall into the Dotage of this Heresy. Thus far Epiphanius: but then
the Question will be, what was this Heresy. You say the belief that she was
God. I say, not that she was God, but that they might lawfully offer to her.
And as I deny not but it follows, she is a Woman, therefore not a God; so I
think you will grant it follows as justly, she is a Woman, therefore not to be
adored with offerings. And therefore seeing the words lie indifferently between
us, and are not expressly and especially here applied, for the refutation of
that Heresy which you pretend they were guilty of, I see no reason why
Epiphanius might not as well intend them for that purpose which I conceive, as
for that which you conceive.

The last place alleged tells us, that she was begotten and Born as other Men
and Women are. Which if the Collyridians had thought her God, Eternal and
absolutely without beginning, should not have been barely said but proved, as
being in effect the very point in question; and therefore seeing Epiphanius
contents himself with saying so without proof, it is evident he never thought
they would make difficulty to grant it, and consequently that they did not
believe her to be God Eternal.

But then again, if the Rule be good which part of your proofs depend upon,
That whatever Epiphanius denies in this discourse, that the Collyridians held
(for upon that ground from -- Non and Deum hanc efficeret: and non tamen Deus,
you conclude they believed her God) If I say this Rule be good, then you should
be constant to it, and now that he says, -- Non tamen aliter genita est praeter
hominum naturam, (she was not begotten in a different way from other men) you
should infer, that they believed not that she was God, but that she was
otherwise Born and Begotten than the ordinary sort of Men. And so whereas he
says before -- Non tamen corpus de caelo tulit -- (her Body was not from
Heaven) you should infer, that they believed her Body came from Heaven. And
again from those -- Sanctum erat Mariae corpus non tamen Deus -- you should
collect that they though not only her person, but her Body to be God: or if
these be wild and weak deductions, then you must acknowledge that I have done
yours some favor in vouchsafing them a particular answer.

5. Demand. Whether in the Church of Roman, it be not an approved and
perpetually practiced worship of the Blessed Virgin, that Incense (which was
never anciently offered unto any, either by Jews or Gentiles, but to the true,
or to a supposed true God) and Tapers and diverse other oblations, should be
offered to her honor?

Answ. A practice of the Church of Rome, and approved too by those that
practice it, belongs not to her, except it be a practice of the Church and
approved by her. What her practice is abroad I know not; here at home I see no
such practice; nor do I know any approbation of it, in any of her public
declarations: But this I know, that there is nothing in it unlawful or
savouring of the Collyridian Superstition, to offer Wax, Tapers or any other
thing at the Memories of the Blessed Virgin or any other Canonized Saint,
either as means to procure their intercession, by these outward Signs of the
Honor and Devotion which they bear to them (as of Old we find by S. Austin Ad
aquas ^bilotanas, Episcopo offerente Projecte, re^quias martyris gloriosiss^mi
Stephani, ad ejus memoriam veniebat magne multitudinis concursus and cocursus.
Ibi caeca mulier, ut ad episcopum portantem pignora Sacra duceretur, ora^it:
Flores qu^^ ferebat dedit; recepit, oculis admovit, protenus vidit. August. de
Civit. Dei. l. 22. c. 8. abscedens aliquid de Alta^i (S. Stephani) storum quod
^^currit, tu^it. Idem. Ibid. etc.
they did use to adorn their Tombs with Flowers) or as monuments of their
thank^ulness for some benefits received by their Intercession, as Theodoret
Theodoretus de curandis affec^ Graec. l. 8.
tells us of Eyes and Ears and Hands, some of Gold and some of Silver (hung up
in the Chapels of the Saints) that had been presented as oblations by those
that had recovered health in those Members, according to their Vows made to
that purpose in time of Sickness.

Reply. I do not deny, but a practice may be tolerated in a Church, and not
approved. As the Public Stews are in Italy, and Usury in England: But it is
one thing to Tolerate with condemnation, another to Tolerate without
condemnation, nay with condemnation of those that should oppose or condemn it.
And such I doubt not upon examination, you may find is this practice, general
in the Church of Rome, offering Tapers to the Saints and for their honor. I
say, not only to God, at the Memories of the Saints, as you would mince the
matter, which yet were a groundless superstition, (God having appointed no such
Sacrifice to be offered to him under the Gospel) but to the Saints themselves
and to their honor, prove this lawful for either of those purposes you
mention, either to procure their intercession or as Monuments of thankfulness
for benefits obtained by it, and then you shall do something. Otherwise you
will but trifle as now you have done: For instead of telling us what may be
done de jure, you tell us what of Old has been done de facto. As if ab antiquo,
and a principio were all one; or as if the Church (as we pretend) being subject
to corruption, part of this corruption might not possibly have come in S.
Austins or Theodorets time; yet this I say not, as if I would decline the Trial
of this cause by S. Austin or Theodoret; but because I am sure you will not be
Tried by the Fathers, no not the consent of Fathers in all things: and
therefore there is no reason nor equity in the World, that you should serve
your selves with their Authority in any thing.

But now what is it, which was done in S. Austins time, that may justify the
Practice of the Roman Church? was there then any approved offering of Wax,
Tapers and Incense, to the Queen of Heaven or any other Saint? nil horum: you
neither do nor can produce any thing out of S. Austin to this purpose. But what
then is it? Why forsooth, they were used to adorn their Tombs: Egregiam vero
laudem and spolia ampla; of Old in S. Austins time they were used to adorn
their Tombs with Flowers, therefore we may offer Tapers to them. Truly an
excellent Enthymeme, but I fear the concealed proposition which should make it a
Syllogism, hides its head for shame and dares not appear: yet we will for once
make bold to draw it forth into light, that you may look upon it and tell us
how you like it. This therefore it is.

Whose soever Tombs we adorn, to them and to their honor we may offer Wax
Tapers.

Consider it I pray you, and if you approve it, then approve also of offering
Tapers not only to Canonize Saints, but to all Christians that may have
Monuments in Churches. For all their Tombs may be adorned, with more precious
and lasting Ornaments that Flowers; yet if you had proved but this only, that
in S. Austins time, they adorned the Saints Tombs with Flowers by these outward
signs to procure their Intercession; this, though not much to the purpose, had
been not absolutely to delude us. But your quoted places prove not so much as
this; and yet I believe you quoted the best you could find. Nay they prove not
they did adorn their Tombs with Flowers at all, much less that they did it for
your pretended purpose; such fools you think to deal with, that will take any
thing for any thing. Your first place, I say, proves it not, unless out of mere
courtesy we understand by ferebat, she brought to adorn S. Stephens Tomb.

The Second proves it not, unless we give you leave after Altari (without
warrant from S. Austin) to put in, S. Stephani, whereas I am yet to seek for
any place in S. Austin, where he calls any Altar, the Altar of such or such a
Saint, which yet I think they forbore not for the unlawfulness, but for fear of
misconstruction.

Then for Theodoret, he tells us indeed of Vows made, of monuments of
thankfulness dedicated, for benefits obtained by the intercession of the
Martyrs. But here also I fear your Conscience tells you, that you abuse us and
hide your self in ambiguities. For to whom does Theodoret say these Vows were
made? to whom were these monuments of thankfulness dedicated? What, to the
Author? or Procures of the received favors? To God, or to the Martyrs? If to
the Martyrs, that had been something toward, though not home to your purpose:
For there is a a wide difference between offering of a Creature by way of
Consumption (as was never lawfully done but to God alone, as a profession that
he is the Lord of the Creature) and erecting a permanent Monument to a Saints
honor; which I doubt not but it may lawfully be done to a living Saint, much
more to the memory of a Martyr. But Theodoret in the place, has not so much as
this: Nay it is evident that these gifts he speaks of, were both Vowed and
paid to God himself. His words are -- Pie precatos ea consequi, etc. -- that
they which pray piously, obtain the things which they desire, they paying of
their Vowed presents in the sign of their recovered health, does abundantly
testify. For their Lord accepts most graciously these presents how mean so
ever.

6. Demand. Whether according to the Doctrine of the Roman Church, this may not
be done lawfully by Women and Children, and men that are not Priests?

Answ. They may offer any thing by way of gifts and presents, by the Doctrine
of the Roman Church; But it is contrary to the Roman Doctrine, for any other
than Priests, to offer any thing by way of Sacrifice, as the Collyridians did.

Reply. Aristotle says most truly, that true Definitions (he means I think of
the terms of the conclusion to be demonstrated) are the best principles of
Science: and therefore want of them, must needs be a cause of Error and
confusion in any discourse. Let me therefore here request you to set down what
is a Sacrifice, and how distinguished from an oblation by way of gift or
present, and you will quickly see, that if the Collyridians offering a Cake to
the Blessed Virgin were indeed a Sacrifice, your offering a Taper to her, must
likewise be so. For a Sacrifice is nothing else (for ought I know) but the
oblation of any Creature by way of Consumption, to the honor of that,
whatsoever it is, to which it is offered. For if you include in the definition,
that this offering must be intended to the highest Lord of all: So is, as you
pretend, your offering of Tapers to the Blessed Virgin, intended to God
finally, though not immediately. If you say it must be directed immediately to
him; and is, not only no lawful Sacrifice, but simply no Sacrifice unless it be
so: I say you may as well require to the essence of a Sacrifice, that it be
offered by a Priest, and from thence conclude, because the Collyridians were,
you say, no Priests, their offering was no Sacrifice. For the object of the
Action is as extrinsecal to the essence of it, as the efficient; And therefore
if the defect of a due and legitimate Offerer, cannot hinder but that an
offering may be a true Sacrifice, neither will the want of a due and lawful
object be any hindrance but still it may be so. Secondly, I say, this is to
confound the essence of things with the lawful use of them; in effect as if you
should say, that a Knife, if misimployed, were a Knife no longer. Thirdly, it
is to make it not unlawful, to offer Incense (which yet you seem somewhat
scrupulous of) or Burnt-offerings to the Virgin Mary, or the Saints, or even to
living Men, provided you know and believe and profess them to be Men and not
Gods. For this once supposed, these offerings will be no longer Sacrifices, and
to offer to Creatures offerings that are not Sacrifices, you say, by the
Doctrine of the Roman Church is lawful: It is lastly, to deny (which is most
ridiculous) that the Pagans did indeed Sacrifice to any of their inferior Gods.

7. Demand. If it be said, that this worship which they give to the Blessed
Virgin is not that of Latria, but that of Dulia or Hyperdulia, for that they do
not esteem her God: or if it be said, that their worship to her is not finally
terminated neither, but given her for her relation to Christ. I demand, whether
as it is, in S. Paul's judgment, a great crime for him that knows God, not to
worship him as God, so it be not as great a crime, for him that knows her not
to be God, yet to worship her (as if she were God) with the worship which is
proper and has been always appropriated to God alone, such is the worship of
oblations?

Answ. The worship of oblations, as worship is taken largly for honor, and
oblations for a gift or present, was never appropriate to God alone; take
worship and oblations in any higher sense, and so it is not allowed in the
Church of Rome.

Reply. The oblation of things by way of Consumption, is the worship I spoke
of; this is a higher matter, than that of gifts and presents, and this is
allowed in the Church of Rome, to be employed on, and directed into, (though
not terminated in) the Virgin Mary and other Saints.

8. Demand. Whether any thing can be said for the justifying the Doctrine and
practice of the Roman Church in this matter, which might not also have been as
justly pretended, for the justification of the Collyridians in their opinion
and practice; seeing it was never imputed to them, that they accounted the
Blessed Virgin God, or that they believed in more Gods than one. And seeing
their choosing her out, rather than any other Woman or any other Creature for
the object of their Devotion, shows plainly, that they gave it her for her
Relation to Christ?

Answ. The Collyridians could not say this, as appears by what has been said
before: As it is a most shameless slander upon Gods Church, and such as
(without repentance) will lie heavy upon his Soul that uttered it, that the
Collyridians might as justly and truly have said all this for themselves as
Papists for themselves.

Reply. To this I reply four things. 1. That to my last and most convincing
reason, you have answered (as much as you could I believe, but yet you have
answered) nothing; and I am well content you should do so; for where nothing is
to be had, the King himself must lose his right. 2. That if I had thought or
spoke better of the Collyridians than they deserved, yet I cannot see how this
had been to slander the Church of Rome. 3. That I did not positively affirm,
that the Collyridians might do so, but desired only it might be inquired into
and examined, whether for the reasons alleged they might not do so. 4. And
lastly, upon a through examination of the matter, I do now affirm, what before I
did not, that the Collyridians for ought appears to the contrary, might justly
and truly have said for the justification of their practice, as much, nay the
very same things that the Papists do for theirs. For they might have said, we
are Christians and believe the Scripture, and believe there is but one God. We
offer not to the Blessed Virgin, as believing she is God, but the Mother of
God: our worship of her is not absolute but relative, not terminated in her,
but given to her for her Sons sake: And if our practice may be allowed, we are
content to call our Oblation, not a Sacrifice, but a present: neither is there
any reason, why it should be called a Sacrifice, more than the Offering and
Burning a Taper to the honor of the same Virgin. All this the Collyridians
might have said for themselves: and therefore I believe, you will have more
cause to repent you for daubing over impiety with untempered Mortar, than I
shall have for slandering the Roman Church with a matter of truth.

9. Demand. Whether therefore, one of the two must not of necessity follow:
that either the Ancient Church Erred in condemning the Opinion and Practice of
the Collyridians as Heretical, or else that the Church of Rome Errs, in
approving the same opinion, and the same practice in effect, which in them was
condemned. That is, whether the Church of Rome must not be Heretical with the
Collyridians, or else the Collyridians Catholics with the Church of Rome?

Answ. It appears by the former answers, that neither did the Ancient Church
Err, in condemning the opinion and practice of the Collyridians, as Heretical,
nor does the Church of Rome approve the same opinion or the same practice.

Reply. The Substance of the former answer* is but this. That the Papists offer
to the Virgin Mary and other Saints Wax Tapers by way of gift or present, not
of Sacrifice; and to her not as to a God, but as the Mother of God: but that
the Collyridians offered to her by way of Sacrifice, as to a Sovereign Power
and Deity. To this I have replied and proved, that it no way appears, that the
Collyridians did believe the Blessed Virgin to be a Sovereign Power and Deity,
or that she was not subordinate to God. Then that their offering might be
called a gift, as well as the Papists, and the Papists a Sacrifice as well as
theirs; both of them being a Consumption of a Creature in honor of the Blessed
Virgin, and neither of them more than so: and therefore either the Collyridians
must stand with the Church of Rome, or the Church of Rome fall with the
Collyridians. It had been perhaps sufficient for me, thus to have vindicated my
Assertion from contrary objections, without taking on my self the burden of
proving a Negative: yet to free from all doubt the conformity of the Roman
Church with the Collyridians, in this point, I think it will be necessary to
show, and that by many very probable Arguments, that Epiphanius did not impute
to them the pretended Heresy of believing the Virgin Mary God: for then that
other Evasion, that their oblation is a Sacrifice and the Papists is not,
together with this pretense will of it self fall to the ground.

Now an opinion may be imputed to a man two ways: either because he holds and
maintains it expressly and formally and in terms: or because it may by a
rational deduction be collected from some other opinion which he does hold: In
this latter sense I deny not but Epiphanius might impute this opinion we speak
of to the Collyridians, as a consequence upon their practice, which practice
they esteemed lawful. But that they held it and owned it formally and in terms,
this I say Epiphanius does not impute to them, which I think for these seven
reasons.

My first Reason is, because he could not justly do so, and therefore without
evident proof we may not say he did so: for this were to be uncharitable to
him, in making him uncharitable to others. Now I say he could not justly charge
them with this opinion, because he was not informed of nay such opinion that
they held, but only of their practice, and this practice was no sufficient
proof that they held this opinion. That his information reached no further than
their Practice, appears out of his own Words. I have heard (says he. Haeres.
78.) another thing with great astonishment: that some being madly affected to
the Blessed Virgin, endeavor to bring her in in Gods place, being mad and
besides themselves: For they report that certain Women in Arabia have devised
this Vanity, to have meetings, and offer a Cake to the Blessed Virgin: The same
practice he sets down Haeres. 79. But that he was informed of any such opinion
that they held, he has not a Word or Syllable to any such purpose; and yet if
he had been informed of any, here had been the place to set it down: which
certainly writing his Book rather of Heretical opinions than practices, he
would not have omitted to do; if there had been occasion: his silence therefore
is a sufficient Argument, that he was not informed of any such opinion that
they held.

Now that their practice was no assurance that they held this opinion, it is
manifest; because they might ground it not upon this opinion that she was God,
but upon another as false, though not altogether so impious, That the Worship
of Oblations was not proper to God alone. And therefore, though Epiphanius
might think o^ Fear that possibly they might ground their practice upon that
other impious opinion, and therefore out of abundan^ caution confute that also,
as he does obliquely and in a word, and once only in all his long discourse, by
telling them that our Savior called her Woman; yet he had no ground from their
practice to assure himself, that certainly they did hold so. Nay Justice and
Reason and Charity would, that he should incline himself to believe, that they
grounded their practice upon that other opinion, which had less impiety in it,
that is, that this worship of Oblations, was not proper to God, but
communicable to Creatures high in his favor.

My second is, Because if Epiphanius had known, that these Collyridians held
the Blessed Virgin to be a Supreme Power and Deity; this being a far greater
mat^er than offering a Cake to her, should in all probability rather have given
them their denomination: at least when he sets down what their Heresy was, he
would have made this part of it, that they did believe so: But to the contrary,
in his Anacaephaleosis, p. 130. he thus describes them. They that offer to the
name of the Blessed Virgin Cakes, who are called Collyridians. And again, p.
150. They that offer to the Blessed Virgin Cakes who are called Collyridians:
So to the 79th. Heresy he gives this Title, Against the Collyridians who offer
to Mary: So Haeres. 78, and 79. He sets down what he heard of them; but no
where that they held this opinion of her: I conclude therefore, that he never
conceived this opinion to be a part of their Heresy, and they were no further
chargeable with it, than as a probable consequent upon their practice.

My third is, Because had the Collyridians held her God, they would have
worshipped her all the year long, and not only once a year at a Solemn time, as
Epiphanius says they did.

My fourth is, Because if Epiphanius had known that they held her God, he would
questionless have urged them with those Attributes that are given to God in
Scripture, as Eternity, Immortallity, Impossibility, Omnipotence, etc. And
showed them, that if they believed the Scripture, they could not think of her
any of those things; if they did not, they had no reason to think of her any
thing more than of an ordinary Woman.

My fifth is, because had their opinion been, that the Blessed Virgin was God;
a great part of Epiphanius' s discourse were plainly ridiculous; both where he
says only without proof, she was not a God but a Mortal Creature, which to them
that held the contrary should not have been said, but proved: But especially
where he speaks to this purpose (as he does very frequently) that the honor of
Oblations was not to be given to Angels or Men, much less to Women, but only to
God: for what had that been to the Collyridians, if they thought her (as is
pretended) a Sovereign Power and Deity? to what purpose was it for Epiphanius
to ask, Quis prophetam; What prophet ever permitted, that a Man, much less a
Woman should be adored, though he be yet alive. Nor John nor Tecla, nor any
other Saint. For neither shall the Old Superstition have dominion over us, that
leaving the Living God, we should Adore his Creatures. To what end I say was
all this, if they thought her not a Saint no^ Creature, but God himself and the
Lord of all? How did this Argument touch them? Ne Angelos quidem -- He suffers
not the very Angels to be adored, how much less the Daughter of Anna? if they
thought her not the Daughter of Anna, but God Eternal; In vain had it been to
say ^o them -- Not to a Woman, no nor to a Man, but to God alone, is this
mystery (of Oblation) due. So that the Angels themselves are not fit Subjects
for such an honor. Or again, Let the Creature be turned to the Creator: Let
shame at length compel you to worship God alone: Or lastly, tha^ so often
repeated -- Let Mary be honored, but the Lord only adored. For they might have
answered all this in a word, saying, All this discourse sits besides the
Cushion, and concerns us and our offering nothing at all. ^or we believe the
Blessed Virgin to whom we offer neither Man nor Woman, nor Angel, nor Creature,
but a Deity.

A Sixth Reason let it be this, If Epiphanius did indeed say of the
Collyridians as is pretended, That they held the Virgin Mary God, and so
difference their practice from the Papists: Then the Author of this Answer and
Petavius in his Translation, needed not to have dictated to him what he should
say, nor make him say so whether he will or no: But it is evident they do so,
as of the Author of this Answer I have already shown: and for Petavius his
part, I will so present it to your view, that if you will not shut your Eyes,
you shall not choose but see (...).

First then, Haeres. ^8. prope fin. he (Petavius) sets in his Margent, quidam
Deum Mariam esse, crediderum; and to countenance this with a loquuntur of his
own putting in, makes them speak of her like mad Men, i. e. they said she was
God: whereas in Epiphanius's Greek they say just nothing.

Secondly, To fasten the pretended Opinion on them, he translates (...) Novum
dogma: presuming it seem^ (...) would easily be mistaken for (...), and
therefore means nothing by it, but a vanity or folly.

Thirdly, He translates (...), Illud; and so makes it look backward to that
pretended Novum dogma of the Collyridians; whereas it signifies there [And] and
looks forward to their practice.

Fourthly, With the help of a Colon, he stops the sense at Commentas fuisse,
whereas in Epiphanius there is but a Comma, and the sense goes on without
suspension.

Fifthly, With an adeo ut, he brings in their action, as an effect of their
former opinion; whereas Epiphanius lays nothing to their charge but their
Action only: So that whereas Epiphanius his words truly translated run thus:
Another thing I have received with great astonishment, that others being mad
concerning the Blessed Virgin, have and do go about to bring her in, in the
place of God, being mad, I say, and besides themselves: For they report that
certain Women in Arabia have brought this vanity of offering a Cake to her
name. Petavius makes them thus -- Not without admiration we have heard another
thing, that some in these things that concern the most holy Virgin have
proceeded to that degree of madness, that they would obtrude her upon us for a
God, and speak of her as madmen: For they report that certain Women in Arabia,
have invented that new Opinion: so that to the Virgins name and honor, they
offer by way of sacrifice a Cake or wreath of Bread.

Again in the same Haeres. (...), he translates advantageously -- per mulieres
sacrificia facere. Whereas (...) is more general than sacrificia facere, and
signifies sacris operari, or sacros ritus peragere.

Again, in the same place, whereas Epiphanius says simply and absolutely -- Let
no man offer to her name, he makes it, Let no man offer sacrifice to her name;
as if you might lawfully offer any thing provided you do not call it a
sacrifice.

So again Haeres. 79. besides his putting cunningly -- ipsa ^uit -- which
before we took notice of; he makes no scruple to put in Dogma and Sacrificium,
wheresoever it may be for his purpose. Epiphanius his title to this Heresy is,
Against the Collyridians who offer to Mary -- P^tavius puts in -- Sacrifice.

Again in the same page, before D. he puts in his own illo d^gmate, and whereas
Epiphanius says -- in all this, he makes it, in all this Opinion.

Page 1061. (...), he translates, ^^is womanish Opinion, whereas (...) though
perhaps it may signify a th^ught, or act of thinking, yet I believe it never
signifies an Opinion which we hold.

Ibid. at B. (...) -- this -- he renders this Opinion.

Page 1064. at C. Nor that we should offer to her name, simply and absolutely:
he makes it, -- Nor that we should offer sacr^fice to her name. So many times
^s he fain to corrupt, and translate him partially, lest in condemning the
Collyridians, he might seem to have involved the practice of the Roman Church
in the same Condemnation.

My Seventh and last Reason is this. Had Epiphanius known that the Collyridians
held the Virgin Mary to be a Sovereign power and Deity, then he could not have
doubted, whether this their offering was to her or to God for her: whereof yet
he seems doubtful and not fully resolved, as his own words intimate, Haeres.
79. ad fin. Quam multa etc. How many things may be objected against this
Heresy? for idle Women either worshipping the Blessed Virgin, offer unto ^^r a
Cake, or else they take upon them to offer for her this foresaid ridiculous
oblation. Now both are foolish and from the Devil.

These Arguments I suppose do abundantly demonstrate to any man not viel'd with
prejudice, that Epiphanius imputed not to the Collyridians the Heresy of
believing the Virgin Mary God: and if they did not think her God, there is then
no reason imaginable why their oblation of a Cake, should not be thought a
Present, as well as the Papists offering a Taper, or that the Papists offering
a Taper, should not be thought a Sacrifice, as well as their offering a Cake;
and seeing this was the difference pretended between them, this being vanished
there remains none at all; So that my first Conclusion stands yet firm; that
either the Ancient Church erred in condemning the Collyridians, or the present
errs in approving and practicing the same worship.

An ADVERTISEMENT.
The Reader when he meets with the Phrase Catholic Doctrine, in the two
following Discourses, must remember, that it does not signify Articles of
Faith determined in any General Councils, which might be looked upon as the
Faith of the whole Church; but the Current and Common Opinion of the Age, which
obtained in it without any known opposition and contradiction. Neither need
this be wondered at, since they are about matters far removed from the Common
Faith of Christians, and having no necessary influence upon good life and
manners, whatsoever necessity, by mistake of some Scriptures, might be put upon
them.

IV. An Argument drawn from the admitting Infants to the Eucharist, as without
which they could not be saved, against the Churches Infallibility.
THE Condition without the performance whereof no man can be admitted to the
Communion of the Church of Rome, is this; that he believe firmly and without
doubting, whatsoever the Church requires him ^o believe: More distinctly and
particularly thus:

He must believe all that to be divine Revelation which that Church teaches to
be such; as the Doctrine of the T^inity, the Hypostatical union of two natures
in the person of Christ. The procession of the Holy Ghost from the Father and
the Son: the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and such like.

Whatsoever that Church teaches to be necessary, he must believe to be
necessary. As Baptism for Infants; Faith in Christ, for those that are Capable
of Faith; Penance for those that have committed mortal sin after Baptism, etc.

Whatsoever that Church declares expedient and profitable, he must believe to
be expedient and profitable: as Monastical Life: Prayer to Saints: Prayer for
the Dead: going on Pilgrimages: The use of Pardons: Veneration of holy Images
and Relics: Latin Service where the people understand it not: Communicating
the Laity in one kind and such like.

Whatsoever that Church holds lawful, he must believe lawful: As to Marry: to
make distinction of Meats, as if some were clean and others unclean: to fly in
time of Persecution: for them that serve at the Altar, to live by the Altar: to
testify a truth by Oath, when a lawful Magistrate shall require it: to possess
Riches, etc.

Now is it impossible that any man should certainly believe any thing; unless
either it be evident of ^t self, or he have some certain reason (at least some
sup^osed certa^n reason) and infallible ground for his belief. Now the Doctrins
which the Church of Rome teaches, it is evident and undeniable that they are
not evident of themselves, neither evidently true nor evidently credible. He
therefore that will believe them, must of necessity have some certain and
infallible ground whereon to build his belief of them.

There is no other ground for a Man's belief of them, especially in many points,
but only an assurance of the Infallibility of the Church of Rome. No man can be
assured that that Church is infallible and cannot err, whereof he may be
assured that she has erred, unless she had some new promise of divine
assistance, which might for the future secure her from danger of erring; but
the Church of Rome pretends to none such.

Nothing is more certain, than that that Church has erred, which has believed
and taught irreconcilable Contradictions, one whereof must of necessity be an
Error.

That the R^ceiving the Sacrament of the Eucharist is necessary for Infants,
and that the receiving thereof is not necessary for them: That it is the will
of God, that the Church should administer the Sacrament to them; and that it is
not the will of God that the Church should do so; are manifest and
irreconcilable Contradictions: Supposing only, (that which is most evident)
that the Eucharist is the same thing, of the same virtue and efficacy now, as
it was in the primitive Church: That Infants are the same things they were,
have as much need, are capable of as much benefit by the Eucharist, now as
then: As subject to irreverent carriages, then as now. And lastly, that the
present Church is as much bound to provide for the spiritual good of Infants,
as the Ancient Church was: I say these things supposed, the propositions before
set down are plain and irreconcilable Contradictions: whereof the present
Roman Church does hold the Negative, and the Ancient Church of Rome did hold
the Affirmative; and therefore it is evident, that either the present Church
does err, in holding something not necessary, which is so; or that the Ancient
Church did err, in holding something necessary, which was not so.

For the Negative Proposition, viz. That the Eucharist is not necessary for
Infants; that it is the Doctrine of the present Church of Rome it is most
manifest. 1. From the disuse and abolition and prohibition of the contrary
Ancient practice. For if the Church did conceive it necessary for them, either
simply for their salvation, or else for their increase or confirmation in
grace, and advancement to a higher degree of glory (unless she could supply
some other way their damage in this thing, which evidently she cannot) what an
uncharitable sacrilege is it, to debar and defraud them of the necessary means
of their so great spiritual benefit? especially seeing the administration of it
might be so ordered, that irreverent casualties might easily be prevented:
which yet should they fall out against the Churches and Pastors intention,
certainly could not offend God, and in reason should not offend man. Or if the
Church do believe, that upon such a vain fear of irreverence (which we see
moved not the Ancient Church at all) she may lawfully forbid such a general,
perpetual and necessary charity, certainly herein she commits a far greater
error than the former. Secondly, from the Council of Trents Anathema, denounced
on all that hol^ the contrary, in these words. If any man say that the
receiving of the Eucharist, is necessary for little children, before they come
to years of discretion, let him be Anathema. Council. Trid. Sess. 21. de
communione parvulorum, Can. 4.

Now for the Affirmative part of the Contradiction, to make it evident that
that was the Doctrine of the Ancient Church; I will prove it, First, from the
general practice of the Ancient Church for several Ages. Secondly, by the
direct and formal Testimonies of the Fathers of those times. Thirdly, by the
confession of the most learned Antiquaries of the Roman Church. My First
Argument I form thus. If to communicate Infants was the general practice of the
Ancient Church for many Ages; then certainly the Church then believed, that the
Eucharist was necessary for them, and very available for their Spiritual
benefit: But it is certain, that the Communicating of Infants was the general
practice of the Church for many Ages: Therefore the Church of those times
thought it necessary for them. To deny the consequence of the proposition, is
to change the Church with extreme folly, wilful superstition, and perpetual
profanation of the Blessed Sacrament. As for the Assumption, it is fully
confirmed by Clemens Romans Constit. Apost. l. 3. c. 20. Dionysins Areopagita de
Eccles. Hi^rarch. cap. ult. S. Cyprian and a Council of African Bishops with
him, Epist. 59. ad Fidum; and in his Treatise de Lapsis p. 137. Edit. Pamel.
Paulinus Bishop of Nola in Italy, An. 353. in Epist. 12. ad Senem; out of Ordo
Romanus, cited by Alevinus S. Bedes Scholar and Master to Charlemain in his
Book de divinis officiis cap. de Sab. Sancto Pasc. Gennadius Massiliensis de
Eccles. dogmatibus c. 52. Co^ncil. Toletanum 2. Can. 11. It continued in the
Western Church, unto the days of L^wes the Debonair, witness Cardinal Perron
des passages de S. Austin p. 100. Some footsteps of it remained there in the
time of Hugo de S. Victore, as you may see lib. 1. de Sacram. and Coerem. cap.
20. It was the practice of the Church of the Armenians in Waldensis his time,
as he relates out of Guido the Carmelite, Tom. 2. de Sacr. c. 91. de erroribus
Armenorum. It is still in force in the Church of the Abyssines, witness Franc.
Alvarez. Hist. Aethiop. c. 22. and Thomas a Jesus de procuranda salute omnium
gentium. It has continued without any interruption in the Greek Church, unto
this present Age, as may be evidently gathered out of Lyranus in c. 6. John.
Arcudius lib. 1. c. 14. and lib. 3. c. 40. de concord. Eccles. Orient. and
Occident. in Sacram. administratione; Card. Perron des passages de S. Austin.
p. 100. where he also assures us of the Primitive Church in general, that she
gave Infants the Eucharist as soon as they were baptized: and that the custom
of giving this Sacrament to little Infants the Church then observed: and before
p. 21. That in those Ages it was always given to Infants together with Baptism.
The same is likewise acknowledged by Contzen in John 6. ver. 54. and by Thomas
a Jesus de proc. salute omnium gentium. So that this matter of the practice of
the Ancient Church is sufficiently cleared. Seeing therefore the Ancient Church
did use this Custom, and could have no other ground for it, but their belief
that this Sacrament was necessary for Infants, it follows necessarily, that the
Church then did believe it necessary.

But deductions, though never so evident, are superfluous and may be set aside,
where there is such abundance of direct and formal Authentical Testimonies;
whereof some speak in Thesi, of the necessity of the Eucharist for all men,
others in Hypothesi, of the necessity of it for Infants.

My Second Argument, from the Testimonies of the Fathers of those times I form
thus. That Doctrine, in the affirmative whereof the most eminent Fathers of the
ancient Church agree, and which none of their contemporaries have opposed or
condemned, ought to be taken for the Catholic Doctrine of the Church of those
times.

But the most eminent Fathers of the Ancient Church agree in the Affirmation of
this Doctrine, that the Eucharist is necessary for Infants; and none of their
contemporaries have opposed or condemned it. Ergo, it ought to be taken for the
Catholic Doctrine of the Church of their times. The Major of this Syllogism is
delivered and fully proved by Card. Perron, in his Letter to Casaubon 5. obs.
and is indeed so reasonable a postulate, that none but a contentious spirit can
reject it.

For confirmation of the Minor, I will allege, first, their sentences, which
in Thesi affirm the Eucharist to be generally necessary for all, and therefore
for Infants: and then their Suffrages, who in Hypothesi avouch the necessity of
it for Infants.

The most pregnant Testimonies of the first rank are these: Of Iraene^s lib. 4.
cont. Here Is. c. 34. where he makes our Union to Christ by the Eucharist, the
foundation of the hope of our resurrection, in these words. As the bread of
Earth, after the Invocation of God, is now not common bread, but the Eucharist,
consisting of two things an earthly and an heavenly: so our bodies receiving
the Eucharis^, are not now corruptible (for ever) but have hope of
resurrection. The like he has, lib. 5. c. 2. And hence in probabi^ity it is,
that the Nicene C^uncil styled this Sacrament, Symbolum resurrectionis, the
pledge of our Resurrection. And Ignatius Ep. ad Ephesians. Pharmacum Immortalitatis,
the Medicine of Immortality.

Cyril. Alex. lib. 4. in Joan. They shall never partake, nor so much as taste,
the life of holiness and happiness, which receive not the Son in the mystical
Benediction. Cyril. lib. 10. in Joan. c. 13. and lib. 11. c. 27. This
corruptible nature of our body, could not otherwise be brought to life and
immortality, unless this body of natural life were conjoined unto it. The very
same things says Gregory Nyssen. Orat. Catech. c. 37. And that they both speak
of our conjunction with Christ by the Eucharist, the Antecedents and
Consequents do fully manifest, and it is a thing confessed by learned
Catholics.

Cyprian de coena Domini, and Tertullian de resur. carnis, speak to the same
purpose: But I have not their Books by me, and therefore cannot set down their
words. S. Chrysostom, Hom. 47. in Joh* on these words, ^isi manducaveritis, has
many pregnant and plain speeches to our purpose. As, the words here spoken are
very terrible: verily, says he, if a man eat not my flesh, and drink not my
blood, he has no life in him; for whereas they said before, this could not be
done, he shows it not only not impossible, but also very necessary. And a
little after; he often iterates his speech concerning the holy mysteries,
showing the necessity of the thing, and that by all means it must be done. And
again, what means that which he says, my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is
drink indeed; either that this is the true meat that saves the soul; or to
confirm them in the faith of what he had spoken, that they should not think he
spoke Enigmatically, or parabolically, but knew that by all means they must eat
his body.

But most clear and unanswerable is that place lib. 3. de Sacerdotio, where he
says, If a man cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven unless he be born again
of water and the holy spirit; and if he which eats not the flesh of our Lord
and drinks not his blood, is cast out of eternal life: And all these things
cannot be done by any other, but only by those holy hands, the hands, I say of
the Priest, how then without their help can any man, either avoid the fire of
hell, or obtain the Crowns laid up for us.

Theophylact. in 6. Joan. when therefore we ^ear, that unless we eat the flesh
of the Son of man, we cannot have life, we must have faith without doubting in
the receiving of the divine mysteries, and never inquire how: for the natural
man, that is he which follows humane, that is, natural reasons, receives not
the things which are above nature and spiritua^; as al^o he understands not the
spiritual meat of the flesh of our Lord, which they that receive not, shall not
be partakers of ete^nal life, as not receiving Jesus, who is the true li^e. S.
Austin de pec. mer. and Remis. c. 24. Very well do the puny Christians call
Baptism nothing else but salvation; and the Sacrament of Christ's Bo^y n^thing
else but Life; from whence s^^uld this be, but as I believ^ from the Ancient
and Ap^stolical Tradition, by which th^s Doctrine is implanted into the Churches
(...) Christ, that but by Baptism and the participation of the Lord Table, not
any man can attain, neither to the Kingdom of God, nor to salvation and eternal
life.

Now we are taught by the learned Cardinal; that when the Fathers speak, not as
Doctors, but as wit^esses, of the Customs of the Church of their times; and d^
not say, I believe this should be so holden, or so understood, or so observed,
but that the Church from one end of the earth to ^he other believes it so, or
observes it so; then we no longer hold what they say, for a thing said by them,
but as a thing said by the whole Church; and principally when it is in points,
whereof they could not be ignorant, either because of the condition of the
things, as in matters of fact; or because of the sufficiency of the persons:
and in this case, we argue no more upon their words probably, as we do when
they speak in the quality of particular Doctors, but we argue thereupon
demonstratively.

I subsume. But S. Austin the sufficientest person which the Church of his time
had, speaking of a point, wherein he could not be ignorant; says not that I
belie^e the E^charist to be nece^sary to salvation; but the Churches of Christ
believe so, and have received this doctri^ from Apostolical Tra^ition:
Therefore I argue upon his words not probably, but demonstratively, that this
was the Catholi^^^ doctrine of the Church of his time. And thus much for the
Thesis, That the Eucharist was held generally necessary for all. Now for the
Hypothesis; That the Eucharist was held necessary for Infants in particular.
Witnesses hereof are S. Cyprian, Pope Innocentius I. and Eusebius Emissenus,
with S. Austin together with the Author of the Book entitled Hypognostica.

Cyprian indeed does not in terms affirm it, but we have a very clear
intimation of it in his Epistle to Fidus. For whereas he and a Council of
Bishops together with him, had ordered, that Infants might be baptiz^d and
sacrificed, that is, communicated before the eighth day, though that were the
day appointed for Circumcision by the old Law. There he sets down this as the
reason of their Decree, that the mercy and grace of God, was to be denied to no
man.

Pope Innocent the first, (in Ep. ad Epis. Cone. Milev. quae est inter August.
93.) concludes against the Pelagians; that Infants could not attain eternal
life without Baptism; because without Baptism they were incapable of the
Eucharist, and without the Eucharist could not have eternal life. His words
are, but that which your Fraternity affirms them to Preach, that Infants
without the grace of Baptism may have the rewards of eternal life, is certainly
most foolish; for unless they eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink his
blood; they shall have no life in them.

Now that this sense which I have given his words, is indeed the true sense of
them, and that his judgment upon the point was as I have said; it is
acknowledged by Maldonate in Joan. 6. v. 54. by Binius upon the Councils Tom.
1. p. 6. 24. by Sanctesius, Repet. 6. c. 7. and it is affirmed by S. Austin who
was his Contemporary, held correspondence by Letters with him, and therefore in
all probability could not be ignorant of his meaning. I say he affirms it, as a
matter out of Question, Epist. 106. and Cont. Julian. lib. 1. c. 4. where he
tells that Pelagius in denying this, did dispute contra sedis Apostolicae
authoritatem; against the authority of the Sea Apostolic; and after, but if
they yield to the Sea Apostolic, or rather to the Master himself and Lord of
the Apostles, who says, that they shall not have life in them, unless they eat
the flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood, which none may do but those
that are baptized; then at length they will confess, that Infants not baptized
cannot have life.

Now I suppose no man will doubt, but the belief of the Apostolic Sea; was
then (as S. Austin assures us l. 1. cont. Iul. c. 4.) the belief of the Church
of Rome, taking it for a particular Church: and then it will presently follow,
that either other Churches do not think themselves bound in conformity of
belief with the Roman Church* notwithstanding Irenaus his -- necesse est ad
hanc Eccles^iam, omnem convenire Ecclesiam: or that this was then the Doctrine
of the Catholic Church. For Eusebius Emissenus I cannot quote any particular
proof out of him: but his belief in this point is acknowledged by Sanctes.
Repet. 6. c. 7. Likewise for S. Austin, the same Sanctesius and Binius, and
Maldonate, either not mindful or not regardful of the Anathema of the Council
of Trent, acknowledge (^n the places above quoted) that he was also of the same
belief: and indeed he professes it so plainly and so frequently, that he must
be a mere stranger to him that knows it not, and very impudent that denies it.
Eucharistian^ infantibus pute^ necessariam Augustinus, say also the Divines of
Lovaine, in their Index to their Edition of S. Austin: and they refer us in
their Index only to Tom. 2. page 185. that is, to the 106. Epist. (the words
whereof I have already quoted to show the meaning of Innocentius) and to Tom.
7. page 282. that is, lib. 1. de pec. Mer. and remis. c. 20. where his words
are; Let then all doubt be taken away: Let us hear our Lord I say, saying not
of the Sacrament of Holy Baptism, but of the Sacrament of his Table (to which
non^ may lawfully come, but be which has been baptized) unless you eat the
flesh of the Son and drink his blood, you shall have no life in you; what seek
we any further? what can be answered hereunto? What, will any man dare to say,
that this appertains not to little Children, and that without the participation
of his body and blood, they may have Life? etc. with much more to the same
effect. Which places are indeed so plain and pregnant for that purpose, that I
believe they thought it needless to add more: otherwise had they pleased they
night have furnished their Index with many more referrences to this point; as
de Pec. Mer. and Rem. l. 1. c. 24. where of Baptism and the Eucharist he tells
us, that Salus and vita eterna sine his frustra promittitur parvulis. The same
he has Cont. 2. Epist. Pelag, ad Bonifacium l. 1. c. 22. which yet by Gratian
de Consec. D. 3. c. Nulli. and by Tho. Aquinas p. 3. q. 3. art. 9. ad tertiam
is strangely corrupted and made to say the contrary, and l. 4. c. 4. the same
Cont. Julian. l. 1. c. 4. and l. 3. c. 11. and 12. Cont. Pelag. and Celest. l.
2. c. 8. de Praedest. Sanctorum ad Prosp. and Hilar. l. 1. cap. 14. Neither
does he retract or contradict this opinion any where, nor mitigate any one of
his sentences touching this matter, in his Book of Retractations. Sanctesius
indeed tells us, that he seems to have departed from his Opinion, in his works
against the Donatists. But I would he had showed some probable reason to make
it seem so to others; which seeing he does not, we have reason to take time to
believe him. For as touching the place mentioned by Beda in 1. ad Corinth. 10.
as taken out of a Sermon of S. Austins, ad infantes ad Altar. Besides that it
is very strange S. Austin should make a Sermon to Infants; and that there is no
such Sermon extant in his works; nor any memory of any such in Possidius, S.
Austins Scholars Catalogue of his works, nor in his Book of Retractaitons:
setting aside all this, I say First, That it is no way certain that he speaks
there of Infants, seeing in propriety of speech (as S. Austin himself teaches
us Ep. 23) Infants were not Fideles, of whom S. Austin in that supposed Sermon
speaks. Secondly, Admit he does speak of Infants, where he assures us, that in
Baptism every faithful man is made partaker of Christ's body and blood, and that
he shall not be alienated from the benefit of the Bread and Cup, although he
depart this life, before he eat of that Bread and drink of that Cup. All this
concludes no more, but that the actual participation of the Eucharist, is not a
means simply necessary to attain salvation, so that no impossibility shall
exeuse the failing of it: Whereas all that I aim at is but this, that in the
judgment of the Ancient Church, it was believed necessary, in case of
possibility; necessary, not in actu, but in voto Ecclesiae: not necessary to
salvation simply, but necessary for the increase of grace and glory: And
therefore, Lastly, though not necessary by necessity of means, for Infants to
receive it; yet necessary by necessity of precepts for the Church to give it.

The last witness I promised, was the Author of the work against the Pelagians
called Hypognostica, who ( l. 5. c. 5.) ask the Pelagians, Seeing he himself
has said, unless you eat the flesh, etc. How dare you promise eternal life to
little Children, not regenerate of water and the Holy Ghost; not having eaten
his flesh, nor drank his blood. And a little after, Behold then, he that is not
Baptized, and he that is destitute of the Bread and Cup of life, is separated
from the Kingdom of Heaven.

To the same purpose he speaks l. 6. c. 6. But it is superfluous to recite his
words, for either this is enough or nothing.

The third kind of proof, whereby I undertook to show the belief of the ancient
Church in this point, was the Consession of the learnedest Writers and best
verst in the Church of Rome. Who, what the Council of Trent forbids under
Anathema, that any man should say of any ancient Father, are not yet afraid,
nor make no scruple, to say it in plain terms of the whole Church for many Ages
together, viz. That she believed the Eucharist necessary for Infants. So does
Maldonate in Joan. 6. Mitto Augustini and Innocentii sententiam (quae etiam
viguit in Ecclesia per sexcentes annos) Eucharistiam etiam Infantibus
necessariam. I say nothing says he, of Austins and Innocentius his opinion,
that the Eucharist was necessary even for Infants, which doctrine flourished in
the Church for 600. years.

The same almost in terms has Binius, in his Notes on the Councils, page 624.
Hinc constat Innocentii sententia (quae sexcentos circiter annos viguit in
Ecclesia, quam Augustinus sectatus est) Eucharistiam etiam infantibus
necessariam fuisse.

Lastly, That treasury of Antiquity Cardinal Perron, though he speaks not so
home as the rest do, yet he says enough for my purpose: des passages de S.
August. c. 10. p. 101. The Custom of giving the Eucharist to Infants the Church
then observed as profitable. This I say is enough for my purpose. For what more
contradictious, than the Eucharist being the same without alteration to Infants
being the same without alteration, should then be profitable and now
unprofitable: then all things considered expedient to be used, if not
necessary, and therefore commanded: And now, though there be no variety in the
case, all things considered not necessary, nor expedient, and therefore
forbidden.

The Issue of all this Discourse, for ought I can see, must be this: That
either both parts of a Contradiction must be true, and consequently nothing can
be false, seeing that which contradicts truth is not so: or else, that the
Ancient Church did err in believing something expedient which was not so; (and
if so, why may not the present Church err, in thinking Latin Service, and
Communion in one kind expedient:) or that the present Church does err, in
thinking something not expedient, which is so. And if so, why may she not err,
in thinking Communicating the Laity in both kinds, and Service in vulgar
Languages, not expedient.

V. An Argument drawn from the Doctrine of the Millenaries, against
Infallibility.
THE Doctrine of the Millenaries was, That before the worlds end, Christ should
reign upon earth for a thousand years, and that the Saints should live under
him in all holiness and happiness. That this Doctrine is by the present Roman
Church held false and Heretical, I think no man will deny.

That the same Doctrine, was by the Church of the next Age after the Apostles
held true and Catholic I prove by these two Reasons.

The first Reason, Whatsoever doctrine is believed and taught by the most
eminent Fathers of any Age of the Church, and by none of their contemporaries
opposed or condemned, that is to be esteemed the Catholic Doctrine of the
Church of those times.

But the Doctrine of the Millenaries was believed and taught by the eminent
Fathers of the Age next after the Apostles, and by none of that Age opposed or
condemned.

Therefore it was the Catholic Doctrine of the Church of those times. The
Proposition of this Syllogism is Cardinal Perrons rule, (in his Epistle to
Casaubon, 5. observe.) And is indeed one of the main pillars, upon which the
great Fabric of his Answer to King James does s^and, and with which it cannot
but fall; and therefore I will spend no time in the proof of it.

But the Assumption thus I prove.

That Doctrine which was believed and taught by Papias Bishop of Hierap^lis, the
disciple of the Apostles disciples (according to Eusebius) who lived in the
times of the Apostles, says he, by Justin Martyr, Doctor of the Church and
Martyr: by Melito Bishop of Sardis, who had the gift of Prophecy, witness
Tert. and whom Bellarmine acknowledges a Saint. By S. Irenaeus Bishop of Lions
and Martyr; and was not opposed and condemned by any one Doctor of the Church
of those times: That Doctrine was believed and taught by the most Eminent
Fathers of that Age, next to the Apostles, and opposed by none.

But the former part of the Proposition is true, Ergo, the Latter is also true.

The Major of this Syllogism and the latter part of the Minor, I suppose will
need no proof, with them that consider, that these here mentioned were equal in
number to all the other Ecclesiastical Writers of that Age, of whom there is
any memory remaining; and in weight and worth infinitely beyond them: they were
Athenagoras, Theophilus Antiochenus, Egesippus and Hippolitus: of whose
contradiction to this Doctrine there is not extant, neither in their works, nor
in story, any Print or Footstep: which if they or any of them had opposed, it
had been impossible, considering the Ecclesiastical Story of their time is
Written by the professed Enemies of the Millinaries Doctrine; who could they
have found any thing in the monuments of Antiquity to have put in the Balance
against Justin Martyr and Irenaeus, no doubt would not have buried it in
silence: which yet they do, neither vouching for their opinion any one of more
Antiquity than Dionysius Alexandrinus, who lived, says Eusebius, nostra
aetate, [in our Age] but certainly in the latter part of the third Century. For
Tatianus because an Heretic I reckon not in this number. And if any man say
that before his fall he wrote many Books; I say, it is true; but withal would
have it remembered, that he was Justin Martyrs Scholar, and therefore, in all
probability of his Masters Faith, rather than against it, all that is extant of
him one way or other is but this in S. Hierome, de Script. Eccles. Justini
Martyris sectator suit.

Now for the other part of the Minor, that the forementioned Fathers did
believe and teach this Doctrine. And first for Papias that he taught it, it is
confessed by Eusebius the Enemy of this Doctrine ( Lib. 3. I^ist. Eccles. c.
33.) in these words, -- Other things besides the same Author (Papias) declares,
that they came to him as it were by unwritten Tradition, wherein he affirms
that after the Resurrection of all Flesh from the Dead, there shall be a
Kingdom of Christ continued and established for a thousand years upon Earth,
after a humane and corporeal manner. The same is confessed by S. Hierome,
another Enemy to this opinion, ( descript. Eccles. S. ^9.) Papias the Auditor
of John Bishop of Hieropolis is said to have taught the Iudaical Tradition of a
thousand years, whom Irenaeus and Apollinarius followed. And in his preface
upon the Commentaries of Victorinus upon the Apocalypse, thus he writes, --
before him Papias Bishop of Hieropolis and Nepos Bishop in the parts of Egypt
taught as Victorinus does touching the Kingdom of the thousand years.

The same is testified by Irenaeus (lib. 5. cont. Her. c. 33.) where having at
large set forth this Doctrine, he confirms it by the Authority of Papias in
these words. Papias also the Auditor of John, the familiar friend of Policarpus
an Ancient man, has testified by writing these things in the fourth of his
Books, for he has written five. And concerning Papias thus much.

That Justin Martyr was of the same belief, it is confessed by Sixtus Senensis
(Biblioth. Stae. l. 6. An. 347.) by Feverdentius in his premonition before the
five last Chapters of the 5th. Book of Irenaeus. By Pamelius ^n Antidoto ad
Tertul. parad. paradox. 14.

That S. M^lito Bishop of Sardis held the same Doctrine is confessed by
Pamelius in the same place; and thereupon it is that Gennadius Massiliensis in
his Book de Eccles. dogmatibus, calls the followers of this opinion Melitani;
as the same Pamelius testifies in his Notes upon that fragment of Tertullian de
Spe fidelium.

Irenaeus his Faith in this point is likewise confessed by Eusebius, in the
place before quoted in these words. He (Papias) was the Author of the like
Error to most of the Writers of the Church, who alleged the Antiquity of the
Man for a defense of their side, as to Irenaeus and whosoever else seemed to be
of the same opinion with him.

By S. Hierome in the place above cited de script. Eccles. S. 29. Again in Lib.
Ezekiel. 11. in these words. For neither do we expect from Heaven a Golden
Jerusalem ( according to the Jewish tales which they call Duterossis) which
also many of our own have followed: Especially Tertullian in his Book de spe
^idelium; and Lactantius in his seventh Book of Institutions, and the frequent
expositions of Victorinus Pictavionensis: and of late Severus in his Dialogue
which he calls Gallus: and to name the Greeks and to join together the first
and last, Irenaeus and Apollinarius. Where we see he acknowledges Irenaeus to
be of this opinion; but that he was the first that held it, I believe that that
is more a Christian untruth than Irenaeus his opinion a Judaical Fable. For he
himself acknowledges in the place above cited, that Irenaeus followed Papias;
and it is certain and confessed that Justin Martyr believed it long before him:
and Irenaeus himself derives it from -- Presbyteri qui Johannem discipulum
Domini viderunt; from Priests which saw John the Disciple of the Lord. Lastly,
by Pamelius, Sixtus Senensis, and Faverdentius in the places above quoted.

Seeing therefore it is certain, even to the confession of the Adversaries,
that Papias, Justin Martyr, Meleto and Irenaeus, the most considerable and
eminent men of their Age, did believe and teach this Doctrine; and seeing it
has been proved as evidently as a thing of this nature can be, that none of
their contemporaries opposed or condemned it; It remains according to Cardinal
Perrons first rule; that this is to be esteemed the Doctrine of the Church of
that Age.

My second Reason I form thus. Whatsoever Doctrine is taught by the Fathers of
any Age, not as Doctors but as witnesses of the Tradition of the Church, (that
is, not as their own opinion, but as the Doctrine of the Church of their times)
that is undoubtedly to be so esteemed; especially if none contradicted them in
it. But the Fathers above cited teach this Doctrine, not as their own private
opinion, but as the Christian Tradition, and as the Doctrine of the Church,
neither did any contradict them in it. Ergo, it is undoubtedly to be so
esteemed.

The Major of this Syllogism, is Cardinal Perrons second Rule and way of
finding out the Doctrine of the Ancient Church in any Age: and if it be not a
sure Rule, farewell the use of all Antiquity.

And for the Minor, there will be little doub^ of it, to him that considers,
that Papias professes himself to have received this Doctrine by unwritten
Tradition, though not from the Apostles themselves immediately, yet from their
Scholars, as appears by Eusebius in the forecited third Book 33. Chapter.

That Irenaeus grounding it upon evident Scripture, professes that he learnt
it, (whether mediately or immediately I cannot tell) from (a) Presbyteri qui
Johannem Discipulum Domini viderunt. Priests or Elders who saw John the Lords
Disciple, and heard of him what our Lord taught of those times (of the thousand
years) and also, as he says after, from Papias the Auditor of John the
Chamberfellow of Polycarpus, an Ancient man who recorded it in writing.

(a) Faverdentius his Note upon this place is very Notable. Hinc apparet (says
he) from hence it appears that Irenaeus neither first invented this opinion,
nor held it as proper to himself, but got this blot and blemish from certain
Fathers. Papias I suppose and some other inglorious fellows, the familiar
Friends of Irenaeus, are here intended.

I hope then if the Fathers which lived with the Apostles had their blots and
blemishes; it is no such horrid Crime for Calvin and the Century writers to
impute the same to their great Grandchildren. Aetas parent^m pejor avis
progeniem fert vitiosiorem. But yet these inglorious Disciples of the Apostles,
though perhaps not so learned as Faverdentius, were yet certainly so honest, as
not to invent lies and deliver them as Apostolic Tradition; or if they were
not, what confidence can we place in any other unwritten Tradition.

Lastly, that Justin Martyr grounds it upon plan Prophecies of the Old
Testament, and express words of the New: he professes, That he, and all other
Christ^ans of a right belief in all things, believe it; joins them who believe
it not, with them who deny the Resurrection; or else says, that none denied
this, but the same who de^ied the Resurrection; and that indeed they were
called Christians, but in deed and Truth were none.

Whosoever, I say, considers these things will easily grant, that they held it
not as their own opinion, but as the Doctrine of the Church and the Faith of
Christians.

Hereupon I conclude, whatsoever they held, not as their private opinion, but
as the Faith of the Church, that was the Faith of the Church of their time: But
this Doctrine they held, not as their private opinion, but as the Faith of the
Church. Ergo, it was and is to be esteemed the Faith of the Church.

Trypho Do ye confess that before ye expect the coming of Christ, this place
Jerusalem shall be again restored, and that your People shall be congregated,
and rejoice together with Christ, and the Patriarchs and the Prophets, etc.

Justin Martyr. I have confessed to you before, that both I and many others do
believe, as you well know, that this shall be; but that many again, who are
(not) of the pure and holy opinion of Christians, do not acknowledge this, I
have also signified unto you: For I have declared unto you, that some called
Christians, but being indeed Atheists and impious Heretics, do generally teach
blasphemous and Atheistical and foolish things: but that you might know that I
speak not this to you only, I will make a Book as near as I can of these our
disputations, where I will profess in writing that which I say before you; for
I resolve to follow not men, and the Doctrines of men, but God and the Doctrine
of God. For although you chance to meet with some that are called Christians,
which do not confess this, but dar^ to Blaspheme the God of Abraham, the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob, which also say there is no Resurrection of the
Dead, but that as soon as they die their Souls are received into Heaven, do not
ye yet think them Christians: as neither if a man consider rightly will he
account the Sadducees and other Sectaries and Heretics, as the Genistae and
the Meristae and Galileans, and Pharisees and Hellenians and Baptists and other
such to be Jews; but only that they are called Jews, and the Children of
Abraham, and such as with their lips confess God (as God himself cries out) but
have their Hearts far from him. But I and all Christians that in all things
believe aright, both know that there shall be a Resurrection of the Flesh, and
a thousand years in Jerusalem restored and adorned and enlarged; according as
the Prophets, Ezekiel and Esaias and others do testify: for thus says Isaiah of
the time of this thousand years. For there shall be a new Heaven and a new
Earth, and they shall not rem^mber the former, etc. And after. -- A certain man
amongst us whose name was John, one of the Twelve Apostles of Christ, in that
Revelation which was exhibited unto him, has foretold^ That they which believe
ou^ Christ shall live in Jerusalem a thousand years, and that after, the
Universal and everlasting Resurrection and Judgment shall be.

I have presumed in the beginning of Justin Martyrs answer to substitute (not)
instead of (also) because I am confident, that either by chance, or the fraud
of some ill-willers to the Millinaries opinion; the place has been corrupted,
and ((...)) turned into ((...)) (not) into (al^o.) For if we retain the usual
reading -- But that many who are also of the pure and holy opinion of
Christians do not acknowledge this, I have also signified unto you; then must
we conclude, that Justin Martyr himself did believe the opinion of them which
denied the thousand years, to be the pure and holy opinion of Christians: and
if so, why did he not himself believe it? nay how could he but believe it to be
true, professing it (as he does if the place be right) to be the pure and holy
opinion of Christians: for how a false Doctrine can be the pure and holy
opinion of Christians, what Christian can conceive? or if it may be so, how can
the contrary avoid the being untrue, unholy and not the opinion of Christians?

Again, if we read the place thus -- That many who are also of the pure and
holy opinion of Christians, do not acknowledge this, I have also signified:
certainly there will be neither sense nor reason, neither coherence nor
consequence in the words following -- For I have ^old you of many called
Christians, but being indeed Atheists and Heretics, that they altogether teach
blasphemous and impious and foolish things: for how is this a confirmation or
reason of, or any way pertinent unto what went before? if there he speak of
none but such as were, purae piaeque Christianorum sententiae, of the pure and
holy opinion of Christians. And therefore to disguise this inconsequence, the
Translator has thought fit to make use of a false Translation, and instead of
-- for I have told you, to make it, -- besides I have told you of many, etc.
Again, if Justin Martyr had thought this the pure and holy opinion of
Christians, or them good and holy Christians that held it; why does he rank
them with them that denied the Resurrection? Why does he say afterward --
Although you chance to meet with some that are called Christians which do not
confess this, do not ye think them Christians. Lastly, what sense is there in
saying as he does -- I and all Christians that are of a right belief in all
things, believe the Doctrine of the thousand years, and that the Scriptures
both of the Old and New Testament teach it, and yet say -- That many of the
pure and holy opinion of Christians do not believe it? Upon these reasons I
suppose it is evident, that the place has been corrupted, and it is to be
corrected according as I have corrected it, by substituting (...) in the place
of (...) (not) instead of (also.) Neither need any man think strange that this
misfortune of the change of a Syllable should befall this place, who considers
that in this place Justin Martyr tells us that he had said the same things
before, whereas nothing to this purpose appears now in him. And that in
Victorinus comment on the Revelation, wherein, (by S. Hieroms acknowledgment)
this Doctrine was strongly maintained, there now appears nothing at all for it,
but rather against it. And now from the place thus restored, these Observations
offer themselves unto us.

1. That Justin Martyr speaks not as a Doctor, but as a witness of the Doctrine
of the Church of his time. I (says he) and all Christians that are of a right
belief in all things hold this: And therefore from hence according to Cardinal
Perrons Rule, we are to conclude, not probably but demonstratively, that this
was the Doctrine of the Church of that time.

2. That they held it as a necessary matter, so far as to hold them no
Christians that held the Contrary: though you chance to meet with some called
Christians that do not confess this, but dare to Blaspheme the God of Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob, etc. Yet do not ye think them Christians: Now if Bellarmines
Rule be true, that Councils then determine any thing as matters of Faith, when
they pronounce them Heretics that hold the Contra^y; then sure Justin Martyr
held this Doctrine as a matter of Faith, se^ing he pronounces them no
Christians, that contradic^ it.

3. That the Doctrine is grounded upon the Scripture of the Old and New
Testament and the Revelation of S. John, and that by a Doctor and Martyr, of
the Church, and such a one as was converted to Christianity within 30 years
after the Death of S. John, when in all probability there were many alive, that
had heard him expound his own words and teach this Doctrine: and if
probabilities will not be admitted, this is certain out of the most authentical
records of the Church, that Papias the Disciple of the Apostles Disciples
taught it the Church, professing that he had received it from them that learned
it from the Apostles: and if after all this, the Church of those Times might
Err in a Doctrine so clearly derived and authentically delivered, how without
extreme impudence can any Church in after times, pretend to Infallibility.

The Millinaries Doctrine was overborn, by imputing to them that which they
held not: by abrogating the Authority of S. John's Revelation, as some did: or
by derogating from it, as others; ascribing it not to S. John the Apostle, but
to some other John, they know not who: which -- Dionysius the first known
adversary of this doctrine and his followers; against the Tradition of
Irenaeus, Justin Martyr, and all the Fathers their Antecessors: by calling it a
Judaical opinion and yet allowing it as probable by corrupting the Authors for
it, as Justin, Vi^^orinus, Se^erus.

VI. A Letter relating to the same Subject.
SIR,
I Pray remember, that if a consent of Fathers either constitute or declare a
Truth to be necessary, or show the opinion of the Church of their Time; then
that opinion of the Jesuits, concerning Predestination upon prescience (which
had no opposer before S. Austin) must be so, and the contrary Heretical of the
Dominicans; and the present Church differs from the Ancient, in not esteeming
of it as they did.

Secondly, I pray remember, that if the Fathers be infallibl^, (when they speak
as witnesses of Tradition) to show the opinion of the Church of their Time,
then the opinion of the Chiliasts (which now is a Heresy in the Church of
Rome) was once Tradition in the Opinion of the Church.

Thirdly, Since S. Austin had an opinion, that of whatsoever no beginning was
known, that came from the Apostles, many Fathers might say things to be
Tradition upon that ground only; but of this Opinion of the Chiliasts, one of
the ancientest Fathers Irenaeus says not only that it was Tradition, but sets
down Christ's own words when he taught it, and the pedigree of the opinion from
Christ Faverdent^ Edit. Iren. p. 497.
to John his Disciple; from him to several Priest; (whereof Papias was one who
put it in writing) and so downwards; which can be shown from no other Father,
for no other opinion, either controverted, or uncontroverted.

Fourthly, That if Papias either by his own error, or a desire to deceive,
could cozen the Fathers of the purest age in this, why not also in other
things? why not in twenty as well as one, why not twenty others as well as he.

Fi^thly, That if the Fathers could be cozened, how could general Councils
escape? who you say make Tradition one of their Rules, which can only be known
from the Fathers?

S^xthly, If they object, how could errors come in, and no beginning of them
known? I pray remember to ask them the same Question concerning the
Millena^ies, which lasted uncontradicted, until Dionysius Alexan^rinus two
hundred and fifty years after Christ; and if they tell you that Papias was the
first beginner, look in Iren^us, and he will tell you the contrary. ( Loco
citato l. 5. c. 33.)

Seventhly, Remember, that if I ought not to condemn the Church of Rome out of
Scripture, because my interpretation may deceive me; then they ought not to
build their Infallibility upon it (and less upon her own word) because theirs
may deceive them: unless the same thing may be a wall when you lean upon it,
and a bulrus^ when we do.

Eighthly, Remember that they cannot say, they trust not their Interpretation
in this, but a consent of Fathers; because the Fathers are not said to be
infallible, but as they tell the Opinion of the Church of their time, which is
infallible: therefore they must first prove out of Scripture that she is
infallible, or else she (who is her self the subject of the Question) cannot be
allowed till then to give a verdict for her self.

Ninthly, Remember the Roman Church claim; no Notes of the Church, but what
agree with the Grecian too (as Antiquity, Succession, Miracles. etc.) but only
Communion with the Pope and Splendour: both which made for the Arrians in
Liberius his time; and it were a hard Case, that because the Greeks are poor
upon Earth, they should be shut out of Heaven.

Tenthly, Remember that if we have an Infallible way, we have no use (at least
no necessity) of an Infallible Guide; for if we may be saved by following the
Scripture as near as we can (though we err) it is as good as any Interpreter to
keep unity in charity (which is only needful) though not in opinion: and this
cannot be ridiculous, because they say, if any man misinterpret the Council of
Trent, it shall not damn him; and why (without more ado) may not the same be
said of Scripture?

VII. An Argument against the Infallibility of the present Church of Rome,
taken from the Contradictions in your Doctrine of Transubstantiation.
Chillingworth. THat Church is not infallible, which teaches Contradictions:
But the Church of Rome teaches Contradictions. Therefore the Church of Rome is
not infallible.


Mr. Daniel. I deny the Minor.


Chilling. That Church teaches Contradictions, which teaches such a Doctrine
as contains Contradictions: But the Church of Rome teaches such a Doctrine:
Therefore the Church of Rome teaches Contradictions.


Mr. Daniel. I deny the Minor.


Chilling. The Doctrine of Transubstantion contains Contradictions: But the
Church of Rome teaches the Doctrine of Transubstantiation: Therefore the Church
of Rome teaches such a Doctrine as contains Contradictions.


Mr. Dan. I deny the Major.


Chilling. That the same thing at the same time should have the true figure of
a man's body, and should not have the true figure of a man's body, is a
Contradiction: But in the Doctrine of Transubstantiation it is taught, that the
same thing, ( viz. our Savior present in the Sacrament) has the true figure of
a man's body, and has not the true figure of a man's body at the same time;
therefore the Doctrine of Transubstantiation contains Contradictions.


Mr. Dan. The Major, though not having all rules required to a contradiction
(as boys in Logic know) yet let it pass.


Chilling. Boys in Logic know no more conditions required to a Contradiction,
but that the same thing should be affirmed and denied of the same thing at the
same time. For my meaning was, that that should not be accounted the same
thing, which was considered after diverse manners.


Mr. Dan. I deny the Minor of your syllogism.


Chilling. I prove it, according to the several parts of it: And first, for the
first part. He must have the Figure of a man's body in the Eucharist, who is
there wit^out any real alteration or difference from the natural body of a man:
But our Savior, according to the Romish Doctrine of Transubstantiation, is in
the Sacrament without any real alteration or difference from the natural body
of a man: Therefore according to this Doctrine he must there have the figure of
a man's body. To the second part, that he must not have the figure of a man's
body in the Sacrament, according to this Doctrine, thus I prove it. He must not
have the figure of a man's body in the Eucharist, which must not have extension
there: But our Saviors ^ody, according to the Doctrine of Transubstantiation,
must not have extension there; Therefore, according to this doctrine, he must
not have the figure of a man's body there. The Major of this Syllogism I proved,
because the figure of a man's body could not be without extension. The Minor I
proved thus; That must not have extension in the Eucharist, whose every part is
together in one and the same point: But according to this Doctrine, every part
of our Saviors body must be here in one and the same point: therefore here it
must not have extension.


Mr. Dan. Answered, by distinguishing the Major of the first Syllogism, and
said; that he must not have the true figure of a man's body, according to the
reason of a figure taken in its essential consideration, which is to have
positionem partium sic and sic extra parts; but not the accidental
consideration, which is in ordine ad locum. And this answer he applied for the
solution of the Minor, saying thus, Our Savior is there without any real
alteration intrinsecal, but not extrinsecal; for ho is not changed in order to
himself, but in order to place: Or otherwise, he is not altered in his
continual existence, which is only modus essentiae and inseparable even by
divine power, though altered in modo existendi, which is situation and required
to figure taken in order to place.


Chill. Against this it was replied by Chillingworth: That the distinction of a
man's body as considered in it self, and as considered in reference to place, is
vain, and no solution of the Argument: And thus he proved it; If it be
impossible, that any thing should have several parts one out of another in
order, and reference of each to other, without having these parts in several
places; then the distinction is vain: But it is impossible, that any thing
should have several parts one out of another, without having these parts in
several places; Therefore the distinction is vain.

The Major of this Syllogism he took for granted.

The Minor he proved thus: Whatsoever body is in the proper place of another
body, must of necessity be in that very body, by possessing the demensions of
it: therefore, whatsoever has several parts one out of the other, must of
necessity have them one out of the place of the other; and consequently in
several places.

For illustration of this Argument he said; If my head and belly and thighs and
legs be all in the very same place; of necessity my head must be in my belly,
and my belly in my thighs, and my thighs in my legs, and all of them in my
feet, and my feet in all of them; and therefore if my head be out of my belly,
it must be out of the place where my belly is; and if it be not out of the
place where my belly is, it is not out of my belly but in it.

Again, to show that according to the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, our
Saviors body in the Eucharist has not the several parts of it out of one
another, he disputed thus: Wheresoever there is a body having several parts one
out of the other, there must be some middle parts severing the extreme parts:
But here, according to this Doctrine, the extreme parts are not severed, but
altogether in the same point; Therefore here our Saviors Body cannot have
parts one out of other.


Mr. Dan. To all this (for want of a better Answer) gave only this. Let all
Scholars peruse these. After, upon better consideration, he wrote by the side
of the last Syllogism this: Quoad entitatem verum est, non quoad locum, that
is, according to entity it is true, but not according to place. And to ( Let
all Scholars peruse these) he caused this to be added; And weigh whether there
is any new matter, worth a new Answer.


Chillingworth. Replied, That to say the extreme parts of a body are severed by
the middle parts according to their entity, but not according to place, is
ridiculous. His reasons are first, Because severing of things is nothing else,
but putting or keeping them in several places, as every silly woman knows; and
therefore to say, they are severed but not according to place, is as if you
should say, They are heated, but not according to heat; they are cooled, but
not according to cold: Indeed is it to say, they are ^evered, but not severed.


VIII. An account of what moved the Author to turn a Papist, with his own
Confutation of the Arguments that persuaded him thereto.
I Reconciled myself to the Church of Rome, because I thought my self to have
sufficient reason to believe, that there was and must be always in the World
some Church, that could not err: and consequently seeing all other Churches
disclaimed this privilege of not being subject to error; the Church of Rome
must be that Church which cannot err.

I was put into doubt of this way which I had chosen, by D. Stapleton and
others; who limit the Churches freedom from Error to things necessary only, and
such as without which the Church can be a Church no longer, but grantted it
subject to error in things that were not necessary: Hereupon considering that
most of the differences between Protestants and Roman Catholics; were not
touching things necessary, but only profitable or lawful; I concluded, that I
had not sufficient ground to believe the Roman Church either could not or did
not err in any thing, and therefore no ground to be a Roman Catholic.

Against this again I was persuaded, that it was not sufficient to believe the
Church to be an infallible believer of all doctrins necessary; but it must also
be granted an infallible teacher of what is necessary; that is, that we must
believe not only that the Church teaches all things necessary, but that all is
necessary to be believed, which the Church teaches to be so: in effect, that
the Church is our Guide in the way to Heaven.

Now to believe that the Church was an infallible Guide, and to be believed in
all things which she requires us to believe, I was induced: First, because
there was nothing that could reasonably contest with the Church about this
Office, but the Scripture: and that the Scripture was this Guide, I was willing
to believe, but that I saw not how it could be made good, without depending
upon the Churches authority.

1. That Scripture is the Word of God.

2. That the Scripture is a perfect rule of our duty.

3. That the Scripture is so plain in those things that concern our duty, that
whosoever desires and endeavors to find the will of God, there shall either
find it, or at least not dangerously mistake it.

Secondly, I was drawn to this belief, because I conceived that it was evident,
out of the Epistle to the Ephesians, that there must be unto the worlds end a
Succession of Pastors, by adhering to whom, men might be kept from wavering in
matters of faith, and from being carried up and down with every wind of false
doctrine.

That no Succession of Pastors could guard their adherents from danger of
error, if themselves were subject unto error, either in teaching that to be
necessary which is not so, or denying that to be necessary which is so: and
therefore,

That there was and must be some Succession of Pastors, which was an infallible
guide in the way to Heaven; and which should not possibly teach any thing to be
necessary which was not so; nor any thing not necessary which was so: upon this
ground I concluded, that seeing there must be such a Succession of Pastors, as
was an infallible guide; and there was no other (but that of the Church of
Rome) even by the confession of all other Societies of Pastors in the world;
that therefore that Succession of Pastors is that infallible Guide of Faith
which all men must follow.

Upon these grounds I thought it necessary for my salvation, to believe the
Roman Church, in all that she thought to be, and proposed as necessary.

Against these Arguments it has been demonstrated unto me; and First against
the first. That the reason why we are to believe the Scripture to be the word
of God, neither is nor can be the Authority of the present Church of Rome,
which cannot make good her Authority any other way, but by pretense of
Scripture: and therefore stands not unto Scripture (no not in respect of us) in
the relation of a Foundation to a building, but of a b^ilding to a Foundation,
does not support Scripture, but is s^pported by it. But the general consent of
Christians of all Nations and Ages, a far greater company than that of the
Church of Rome, and delivering universally the Scripture for the word of God,
is the ordinary external reason why we believe it: whereunto the Testimonies of
the Jews, enemies of Christ, add no small moment for the Authority of some part
of it.

That whatsoever stood upon the same ground of Universal Tradition with
Scripture, might justly challenge belief, as well as Scripture: but that no
Doctrine not written in Scripture, could justly pretend to as fu^l Tradition as
the Scripture, and therefore we had no reason to believe it with that degree of
faith, wherewith we believe the Scripture.

That it is unreasonable to think, that he that ^eads the Scripture, and uses
all means appointed for this purpose, with an earnest desire and with no other
end, bu^ to find the will of God and obey it, if he mistake the meaning of some
doubtful places, and fall unwillingly into some errors, unto which no vice or
passion betrays him, and is willing to hear reason from any man that will
undertake to show him his error: I say, that it is unreasonable to think, that
a God of goodness will impute such an error to such a man.

Against the second it was demonstrated unto me, that the place I built on so
confidently, was no Argument at all for the Infallibility of the Succession of
Pastors in the Roman Church, but a very strong Argument against it.

First, no Argument for it; because it is not certain, nor can ever be proved,
that S. Paul speaks there of any succession; Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. For let that
be granted which is desired, that in the 13. ver. by [ until we all meet] is
meant, until all the Children of God meet in the Unity of Faith; that is, unto
the Worlds end: yet it is not said there, that he gave Apostles and Prophets,
etc. which should continue, etc. until we all meet, by connecting the 13. ver.
to the 11. But he gave (then upon his Ascension and miraculously endowed)
Apostles and Prophets, etc. for the work of the ministry, for the Consummation
of the Saints, for the Edification of the Body of Christ, until we all meet,
that is, if you will, unto the Worlds end. Neither is there any incongruity,
but that the Apostles and Prophets, etc. which lived then, may in good sense be
said, now at this time and ever hereafter to do those things which they are
said to do: For who can deny but S. Paul the Apostle and Doctor of the
Gentiles, and S. John the Evangelist and Prophet, do at this very time (by
their writings, though not by their persons) do the work of the ministry,
consummate the Saints, and Edify the Body of Christ.

Secondly, it cannot be shown or proved from hence, that there is or was to be
any such succession: because S. Paul here tells us only, that he gave such in
the time past, not that he promised such in the time to come.

Thirdly, it is evident, that God promised no such succession, because it is
not certain that he has made good any such promise; for who is so impudent as
to pretend, that there are now, and have been in all Ages since Christ, some
Apostles and some Prophets and some Evangelists and some Pastors and Teachers:
Especially such as he here speaks of, that is, endowed with such gifts as
Christ gave upon his Ascension; of which he speaks in the 8 ver. saying; He led
Captivity Captive, and gave gifts unto men. And that those gifts were -- Men
endowed with extraordinary Power and Supernatural gifts -- it is apparent,
because these Words, and he gave some Apostles, some Prophets, etc. are added
by way of explication and illustration of that which was said before -- and he
gave gifts unto Men: And if any man except hereunto, that though the Apostles
and Prophets and Evangelists were extraordinary and for the Plantation of the
Gospel, ^et Pastors were ordinary and for continuance: I answer, it is true,
some Pastors are ordinary and for continuance, but not such as are here spoken
of: not such as are endowed with the strange and heavenly gifts, which Christ
gave not only to the Apostles and Prophets and Evangelists, ^ut to the inferior
Pastors and Doctors of his Church, at the first Plantation of it: And therefore
S. Paul in the 1st. to the Corinth. 12. 28. (to which place we are referred by
the Margent of the Vulgar Translation, for the explication of this,) places
this gift of teaching amongs^, and prefers it before many other miraculous
gifts of the Holy Ghost: Pastors there are still in the Church, but not such as
Titus and Timothy and Apollos and Barnabas: not such as can justly pretend to
immediate inspiration and ^llumination of the Holy Ghost: And therefore seeing
there neither are nor have been for many Ages in the Church, such Apostles and
Prophets, etc. as here are spoken of, it is certain he promised none; or
otherwise we must blasphemously charge him with breach of his promise.

Secondly, I answer, that if by dedit he gave, be meant promisit, he promised
for ever; then all were promised and all should have continued. If by dedit be
not meant promisit, then he promised none such, nor may we expect any such by
virtue of, or warrant from this Text that is here alleged: And thus much for
the first Assumpt which was, that the place was no Argument for an inf^llible
succession in the Church of Rome.

Now for the second, That it is a strong Argument against it, thus I make it
good.

The Apostles and Prophets and Evangelists and Pastors, which our Savior gave
upon his Ascension, were given by him that they might Consummate the Saints, do
the work of the Ministry, Edify the Body of Christ, until we all come into the
Unity of Faith, that we be not like Children wavering and carried up and down
with every wind of Doctrine. The Apostles and Prophets, etc. that then were, do
not now in their own persons and by oral instruction do the work of the
Ministry, to the intent we may be kept from wavering and being carried up and
down with every wind of Doctrine: therefore they do this some other way: Now
there is no other way by which they can do it, but by their writings; and
therefore by their writings they do it: therefore by their writings and
believing of them we are to be kept from wavering in matters of Faith:
therefore the Scriptures of the Apostles and Prophets and Evangelists are our
Guides. Therefore not the Church of Rome.

FINIS.

