AN Old APOSTATE Justly Exposed, His Treachery to the Holy God, his Truth and
People MANIFESTED;

His great Wickedness and Uncleanness (which, by False Covers, he has
Endeavored to hide) laid open, to the Shame of him, and all his Abettors.

In a short Answer, or some Brief Remarks, upon a very Scandalous Book lately
Published, Styled, The Spirit of Quakerism, and the Danger of their Divine
Revelation laid open; Subscribed, Henry Winder.

ALSO The Nameless Publisher thereof, as justly Reprehended for his Enmity and
great Malice, in Abusing an Innocent People, by heaps of most Gross Lies,
Slanders, Base Insinuations and Inferences, Frothy and Scurrilous Scoffs and
Taunts; so void of Christianity, that probably no Man, with a Name, would
Undertake.

By THOMAS CAMM.

London, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, next Door to the Meeting House in
White-Hart-Court in Gracious-street. and at the Bible in Leaden-hall-street,
near the Market, School.

The Dog is turned to his own vomit again, and the Sow that was washed to her
wallowing in the Mire, 2. Pet. 2.22. They went out from us, but they were not
of us, etc. John 2.19. Raging Waves of the Sea, foaming out their own Shame,
etc. Jude 13. Behold he Travelleth with Iniquity, and has conceived Mischief,
and brought forth Falsehood; he made a Pit and dug it, and is fallen into the
Ditch which he made: his Mischief shall return upon his own Head, and his
Violent Dealing shall come down upon his own Pate, Psalm. 7.14, 15, 16. THE
PREFACE. TO THE Impartial Reader.
IF thou have Seen or Read a Book lately Published, Styled, The Spirit of
Quakerism, and the Danger of their Divine Revelation laid open, Subscribed,
Hen. Winder, then be pleased to suspend giving Judgment upon the Matter
thereof, until thou have Read, and duly Considered the Contents of what
follows; being a short Answer, or some brief Remarks upon the most material
Passages in that Book, Levelled against the Truth, and those People commonly
called Quakers.

Remember what the Wise Man says, viz. He that is first in his own Cause
seems Just, but his Neighbor comes and searches him. If thou judge that I
have been close upon the Author, and have exposed him to public view, consider
that he has been the occasion: And what is written in Holy Scripture must be
fulfilled, viz. The Wickedness of the Wicked must return upon his own Head; and
he that hides his Sins cannot Prosper.

I confess I was Astonished to see the Subscriber before named grown so
Impudent Hard, since I had some small knowledge of him many Years past, while
he seemed to be of us, and before he fell into such gross Uncleanness: And have
seen, yea, having by me several of his Confessions and Acknowledgments, not
only of his great Sins and Transgressions, but also to the Truth and Way
thereof, and that the Quakers are the People that walk therein: I say, I was
Astonished to see the Man now grown so Seared, as to give himself the Lie, and
appear in Print against the Truth and Innocent People thereof, with that
Inconsiderateness and Fury, which manifests him to be one of them Evil Men, who
grows worse and worse; and to have entertained again that Evil Spirit (that was
in some measure once cast out) and with him seven times worse, which makes his
latter end much worse than his beginning. I shall not take notice of all his
long Narrative, but such as chiefly Reflects upon the Truth, and People of God
called Quakers: My Intent and Aim being to Vndeceive or Inform them who have
believed his False Reports, and Deceitful Slanderous Insinuations against the
Truth and Principle thereof, which we Profess: As also to Detect his false
Pretenses in his going from Truth and Us, and deserting that Profession that
once he made thereof with us, by demonstrating the True Cause thereof; neither
shall I Justify the Three Women in any thing wherein they missed the Line of
Truth; which, to his Conscience is known, we never owned them in; though he
would now (being filled with Enmity) Falsely Insinuate we did, in order to
Prejudice the Minds of People, against that Way of Truth from which he is now
fallen, through Sin and Wickedness: And for a Cover thereto; as also to
gratify such amongst them with whom he is now joined, as Lusts to be Envious,
and whose Fingers Itches to be at their old Work of Persecution, being angry at
the Liberty we now (through God's Great Mercy) enjoy, as to our Religious
Duties, from the present Government; for which we desire ever to be Thankful in
all Grateful Acknowledgments. How aptly what follows does answer to what is
before proposed, I leave to thee, Impartial Reader, to Judge; Recommending thee
to the Guidance of the Unerring Spirit, that gives a good Understanding, and
Leads into all Truth. And that thou and all Men might come under the Guidance
and Government thereof, is the Earnest Desire of him, who wishes Good to all
Men.

Thomas Camm.

AN Old Apostate Justly Exposed, etc.
Hen. Winder.
WILL not thy own Backsliding Correct thee, and is it not a Dreadful Thing,
that thou should so far harden thy Heart against God, and the Convictions of
his Spirit in thy own Conscience, for thy great and manifold Sins, so as to
grow, as Evil Men always do, worse and worse; making Shipwreck of Faith and a
Good Conscience; being Seared as with an Hot Iron, to the fulfilling the
Testimony of Holy Scripture upon thee, viz. Because Judgment from God has not
been speedily Executed, thy heart has been more set to do Evil?

Thy Book, if it be thine, as by thee Subscribed, and as I hear in part owned
to be so; I have seen, read and considered of, and find thy Enmity great, and
thy said Book, chiefly bent against the Truth, and People called Quakers; and
to Expose an Innocent People to the Fury and Scorn of Malicious Men, such as
the nameless Publisher thereof: For if thou had bent thy self only against
those thou names as Injurers of thee, since they missed in their Management, in
that they Charge thee with; whether all true or not, we leave to him who knows
all things, and is the Searcher of all Hearts; yet I should not have concerned
my self on this wise, but finding that through their Sides, thou endeavourest
to strike at Truth (against which thou cannot prevail) and the Principle
thereof born Testimony unto, by those Innocent People called Quakers, I proceed
to take notice of thy Book, as follows.

First, thy Title is, The Spirit of Quakerism; An old Nickname, more beseeming
one that had never born the name of a Quaker, than thee that once did; and to
what follows, viz. The danger of their Divine Revelation, etc.

Divine Revelation the Quakers own, it is Scripture Doctrine, without it none
can come to the True and Saving Knowledge of the Only True God, and his Son
Jesus Christ whom he has sent, whom to know is Life Eternal: For it is the
Testimony of Holy Scripture, That no Man knows the Father but the Son, and he
to whom the Son Reveals him. And this Revelation is the Divine; and the very
same Divine Revelation is what the Quakers own, and are not Ashamed of; and is
great wickedness in thee to count it Dangerous, or inconsistent with
Scripture-Testimony. Thou calls thy Book, A Faithful Narrative of their
(meaning the Quakers) Malicious Persecution of H. W. and his Wife, as
Murderers, at the public Assize at Carlisle.

Answ. The Narrative is neither Faithful nor True, but greatly Malicious, as it
is given in so general Terms against the Quakers, and in part Aggravated as to
the three Women, mentioned by name, as may more fully appear in what follows.

Thou begins thy Preface thus, viz. Being desired by Persons of Worth and
Eminency, to give a Public Account, etc. At last, I assented, say thou, to
their Importunities, etc.

Answ. Persons of either Worth or Eminency (by what follows) I doubt not will
have good cause to detest thy Abominable Wickedness, and conclude, thou have
justly Exposed thy self, and all thy public Abettors to great and public
Infamy.

Thou adds, The wrong they have done me, was a sufficient Incentive to have
bent all my Strength to have made all their Villainy as Notorious as possible;
nevertheless they see, and the World sees, how slow I have been to do it. Then
gives 1st, 2d, and 3d. Reasons therefore.

Answ. The Quakers had done thee no wrong, and it is yet Questionable, whether
the three Women (though wrong in their management against him, and might miss
in some Circumstances) have wronged him in the main; it is known to God, and his
own Conscience, to whom I leave the Judgment thereof, desiring the Readers
Patience, and to suspend his Judging thereof, until he has Read, and Seriously
Considered what the said H. W. and Wife have given under their hands, with what
else is herein after Inserted, relating thereto; and the World has seen, and
under his hand we have an Account of what he has done to the said three Women,
and their Husbands; and also may now see what he has done to the Quakers; and
if the Malice that may yet rest in his, or the Hearts of his Abettors, can do
more, let them do it quickly.

His Reasons pretended for his Slowness are Idle, Impertinent and Fallacious:
For will not Wise Men judge it more seasonable to Detect Persons for wrong,
when Living and Capable either of Defense or making Satisfaction, neither of
which the Dead can do; and his now Trampling upon their Graves is no good sign
of Innocence; but I shall only ask him, if there was not some other Reasons:
1st, Was his Heart before now grown hard enough for such a work? And 2dly,
Whether he presumed that length of time had not buried the Memory of his
Wickedness, and made a prey of what he had written and said, relating to the
Demonstration thereof? 3dly, Whether he was not too far prevailed upon by some
of those People amongst whom he now walks, who are apt enough (I say, some Hot
Heads amongst them) I make that distinction, because I know there are
Sober-minded amongst them, and, as I hear, are not pleased with his Book; and
perhaps will find cause to be more displeased) to catch at any thing, though
never so Dirty, if they can but throw it at the Despised People called Quakers?
And does not his saying, At last I assented to their Importunities; and that
kind of Sorrowful or Lamenting Saying of his Wife, viz. Ah we were put upon it,
or else we had never done it; greatly demonstrate that they have now of late
been too far prevailed upon, and persuaded to what they have done, to the
gratifying of a Wrathful Spirit, in which work they will never be Blessed, but
will undoubtedly meet with Shame?

I shall take notice of some Passages, of what I find given as his second
Reason for his Slowness, yet not because it is either Reasonable or Pertinent
to that matter, viz. But afterward thought it a dignity far surpassing my
deserts, that God should choose me his Instrument, to Fight this Battle, etc.
And when I consider (says he) what Persons our Savior chose for his Great
Apostles, etc.

Answ. O Impudent Man, would he be taken for God's chosen Instrument! no sure,
he must be a cleaner Man first, and our Blessed Savior, Holy Jesus, chose
neither Whoremongers not Adulterers for his Great Apostles; no, their Greatness
stood in Holiness, and Whoremongers and Adulterers have no place in the Kingdom
of Christ; no, the God that chose him (unclean Man) is the God of the World,
who has such Instruments, to Battle with the Lamb and his followers; and the
dignity that he gets by this his Work, will appear by what follows.

I now come to his Narrative, passing by at present what the Publisher adds to
the Preface, Intending in its proper season to take notice of what the Nameless
Publisher adds, there and elsewhere.

In Page the 2d. H. W. on behalf of Himself and Wife, says, But being
Conscious of our perfect Innocence, we made our appeal to the Searcher of
Hearts, etc.

Again in Page the 3d. We know no guilt, you are false Prophetesses, etc.

In Page the 11th. A Burden Intolerable, had I not been supported by a God of
Truth, and a clear Conscience.

In Answer to all which, I offer what follows, taken out of their own Papers,
viz. H. W. and Wife, and owned very late so to be by them, or the one of them,
before several Witnesses, whose Names are after Inserted, which Papers are
Dated from the Year 1674. about the time that our Friends had denied them, for
their Scandalous Wickedness; And Wrath and Judgment from the Lord being upon
them, therefore they Writ, and gave under their Hands two Papers, as follows:

Oh! Dearly Beloved and Chosen of God, ye are the Children of the most High
God, and Church of whom Christ is Head; Hear us we pray you, and we shall
discover our Hearts to you, First, we Acknowledge and Confess that we have
Sinned and Transgressed against the Lord God, and against his People, who have
born grievous Burdens for us, we must needs confess before you. But this know,
Dear Friends, that the Enemy wrought in a Mystery in us, to the persuading of
us that we might do such things, and yet Live; then, through the weakness of
the Flesh, Sin took Occasion and overcame us; then Sin being committed it
brought forth Death to the Innocent Life, which we once Lived in; then the Lord
hid his Presence from us, which we once Enjoyed, and left us to our selves;
then we were as Sheep without a Shepherd, wandering upon the Barren Mountains,
where there was no Food for the Soul; so let us be a Warning to all
Backsliders, and those that turn from the Grace of God into any
Unrighteousness: For there will be a losing of the Presence of the Lord, and of
the Incomes of his Love unto the Soul, which is the greatest Loss of all
Losses, etc. -- For when Lust was conceived in us it brought forth Sin, and
when Sin was finished, it brought forth Death, etc. -- The Lord made known
himself unto us, both by his Inward Working in us, and by his Messenger unto
us, Margaret Bradley, who is a Faithful Servant of God, and a Lover of our
Souls, who has Traveled in pain for us, etc. -- The Lord Reward her for her
Faithfulness between the Lord and us, as no doubt but he has Rewarded her
already: Ah! you Beloved of us, we do this Acknowledge and Confess, that we
have been such a grievous Burden and Shame unto you, in giving so great
Occasion to the Enemy, etc. Besides you were even pricked to the Heart for us:
Now we are unworthy and also ashamed to come into your Congregations, or into
the Assembly of Friends, those which we have so grievously Sinned against, etc.
-- We entreat you, if you can find so much Favor and Love in your Hearts
toward us, as to receive us into your Congregation, if it be but into the
Entry of your Houses, where you meet together to wait upon God, etc. This out
of one of their said Papers; now hear also what follows, taken out of the
Second, beginning thus, viz.

Be it known unto all People, unto whom these Presents shall be read, That I H.
Winder, and Ann my Wife, do acknowledge and confess before the Living God, and
unto all People, That we have Sinned, and done that which we ought not to have
done, in suffering the Temptations of Sin in the Flesh to overcome us, and lead
us out of the strait and narrow Way which leads to Life, etc. -- So this know
all People, that it was not because the Quakers Judgment, or Doctrine, or way
of Worship is False, that it caused us to fall from them; But our fall was of
our selves; and their Judgment, their Doctrine, their way of Worship and Faith
is Acceptable with the Lord, we do Faithfully Believe it, and also Acknowledge
it, etc. -- He has called us to Repentance; For he would not the Death of a
Sinner, but rather that he should Repent and Live, etc. -- I was afraid, and
hid my self five days, but my Covering was too narrow; but the Word of the Lord
came to me again, saying, Hide not thy self, nor be not Rebellious any longer:
For I the Lord fill Heaven and Earth with my Presence; therefore confess thy
Sins and Repent, and forsake them, etc. -- Then I fell down at the Word of the
Lord Trembling, Fasting and Praying, Weeping and Mourning before the Lord three
days, etc. -- Let all People take Warning by me, to call to Remembrance their
former Sins and Transgressions, which they have committed before the Lord God,
for he fills Heaven and Earth with his Presence, and nothing can be hid from
him, etc. -- Let the Wicked forsake his Ways, and the Unrighteous his Thoughts,
and let us turn unto the Lord with penitent Hearts, confessing the Evil of our
Doings, etc. Thus far out of the said two Papers, faithfully taken out; which
if any shall question, I hereby profer such, if they please, to read them at
large. And let it be noted, Reader, that upon the 15th of the 1st Month,
commonly called March last past, those two Papers, out of which I have taken
what is above-written, was then intended to have been showed to both H. W and
his Wife, but he not being met with, the said Ann his Wife did then own them to
be their own Papers, and that she Writ them with her own Hands. And did also
then own the Preface, Narrative and Postscript of that Book, called, The Spirit
of Quakerism, etc. to be her Husband's. And being further queried, why they
should put forth such a Wicked Book, she answered, Ah! we were put upon it by
several, else we had never done it; but would not tell who they were, though
then desired, only confessed that Mr. Gillpin wrote down all things thereof, as
they were Transacted. And the said Ann, H. W's Wife, querying then of our
Friends, whose Names are after Subscribed as Witnesses, whether we intended to
answer their said Book; our Friends answering, Yea, it would be Answered; to
which she replied, And then will you lay us open to the World, etc. Witnesses
hereof

William Grenhope. William Greenhow. John Bowstead. Richard Atkinson.



I shall now add what is so Notoriously known in the face of the Neighborhood,
that though the said H. W. be greatly hardened, yet I presume he cannot have a
face to deny; relating to their great uncleanness, for which they were denied
of us etc.

First, the said H. W. had her that is now his Wife, so great with Child in his
first Wife's days, that there was but about six Weeks betwixt the Death of his
first Wife, and the Birth of that Child.

Now Reader be pleased to compare what is before taken out of their own Papers,
and what is added as a demonstration of their great Wickedness and Uncleanness,
that their Papers have relation to (and for which they were denied of our
Friends) with what I have in short before cited out of their own Book, viz.
that God should choose him, viz. H. W. to be his Instrument, to Fight this
Battle, etc. And when I consider, what Persons our Savior chose for his great
Apostles, etc. But being Conscious of our perfect Innocence, we made our Appeal
to the Searcher of all Hearts, etc. Again, we know no Guilt, etc. Again, a
Burden Intolerable, had I not been Supported by a God of Truth, and a clear
Conscience, etc.

And then Reader, after such comparing the One with the Other, and due
Consideration thereof, I shall leave it to thee, if thou be such an one as has
the Fear of God before thee, to judge, whether this our Adversary H. W. is like
an Instrument chosen of the Pure Holy God, or in any respect like the Apostles
of Holy Jesus, fit to be dignified by appearing on God's behalf: Can be
Conscious of perfect Innocence, or can as such, make his appeal to the Searcher
of all Hearts, can know no guilt: Can be supported by a God of Truth, and a
clear Conscience, or no: And whether it be not great Impiety and Blasphemous in
him so to say, considering his Circumstances as before? And whether it does not
bespeak and declare his Conscience to be Seared, as with an Hot Iron, or no? Ah
surely the Righteous God will Rebuke him for his Abominable Uncleanness and
Impiety, Hypocrisy, and make him, and all his Abettors, Examples in his Wrath,
If they Repent not.

Further, let the Reader observe, that the said H. W. in the first Page of his
Narrative, says, That it was in the Year 1673. and Harvest time, when Margaret
Bradley, one of the three Women, he calls his Accusers, came with a Message to
him, and after the Relation of her then Message to him, he also relates his
Answer, viz. 'The Lord Rebuke thee, thou Impudent Wretch. And in Page 2. he
says, That not long after came M. L. with the same Message. And further in the
same Page, he says, We opposed them, to Convince, if possible, by all the
Arguments we could use, that their pretended Revelations came from the Devil.
And in Page 3. Calls them, Poor Deluded Creatures, False Prophetesses, and that
he thought the Devil had led them so far, that he could not bring them off,
without Confusion and Shame.

Now, Reader, I say again, be pleased to compare what I have above Cited out of
the three first Pages of his Narrative, with what I have before taken out of
their two Papers, relating to Margaret Bradley, and then consider when, and in
what time, we shall believe H. W. and his Wife, whether in what they say in
their Narrative, in the Pages aforesaid, which they pretend was spoken in the
Year 1673. or in their Papers written in 1674. the Year next following; since
they so positively Contradict each other: For in the first Year 1673. She, the
said M. B. is an Impudent Wretch, that her Message or Revelation came from the
Devil; a Deluded Creature, a False Prophetess, one that the Devil had in H. W.
and his Wife's Thoughts led so far, that he could not bring her back without
Shame and Confusion, etc.

But in their Paper under their Hands, and owned, as before said, written in
the Year 1674. next following, fully contradicts what they would now say or
pretend was spoken in the Year before; for in this later Year, she, viz.
Margaret Bradley, is God's Messenger to them, a Faithful Servant of God, a
Lover of their Souls, one who Traveled in Pain for them; desires that the Lord
may Reward her for her Faithfulness between the Lord and them: And concludes
with, that no doubt but the Lord has already Rewarded her, etc.

Now, Considerate Reader, which of the two is to be believed as true, first or
last (or both) which cannot be, being so absolutely Contrary; except they
grant, they wronged her in the first, and that she was still what in the latter
they say; if they had rightly understood her, and her Message; and if the first
be true, and that she was worthy of such Vile Terms in 1673. then how comes she
to deserve such an Honorable Character in 1674. was not her Message still the
same, if they allege she was become a better, yea, a good Woman, will that do?
no, not to reconcile the the Contradiction before, the Message being still the
same; and if the last be true, and to be Believed, as by them Subscribed to,
and since owned, as before said, written in 1674. then how will H. W. justify
his Prosecution of her at Law upon the Score of the said Message. But I observe
the Serpents Way is very Crooked, full of Deceitful Doubles, and he Deceives
all at last, who follow him, by leading them where they cannot return without
Shame and Confusion; where the Reader may see he has led H. W. and his Wife;
the old Proverb is, Liers ought to have a good Memory.

And may it not be reasonably concluded, by what is before said, that it was
the real Sense of H. W. and his Wife, when their Papers were written; they
being then under the Sense of the Righteous Judgments of God, for their great
Sins, viz. in the Year 1674. before they had hardened their Hearts against the
Lord; and that what is pretended to be spoken in the Year 1673. is but only
Stuff, through Enmity and Malice since entered into their Hearts, against the
Truth and God's People; and now Introduced to Amuse and Deceive the Unwary
Reader, and with more color to reflect upon, and asperse an Innocent People,
as also to hide and cover their great Wickedness. And in as much as they are
Witnesses under their own Hands, That she, viz. M. B. was a Servant of God, and
his Messenger to them in 74. What notice is to be taken, or credit to be given,
to what in the Year before, is now pretended to be spoken upon her said
Message, but to be exploded and looked upon as the product of great Enmity
against the Truth, and People from which he is fallen; and to Gratify his
Assistants and Abettors, such as his Wife says, urged or put them upon Writing
and Publishing in Print, else they had never done it; who, together with them,
will justly, for their pains, reap Infamy and Shame; For the Wickedness of the
Wicked will return upon his own Head.

And if she was a Faithful Servant of the Lord, and his Messenger to them, as
they say, under their Hands, in their said Papers; I ask H. W. and his Wife,
what was the Message she brought them? Was it what they have Inserted in their
said Book, which she Charged them with? Then I further query of them, how they
will evade the matter of Fact Charged against them therein, or excuse
themselves from the Guilt thereof, since they say, She was to them God's
Messenger, etc. For I find no other Message or Charge Inserted in the said
Book, Charged against the said M. B. and other two Women, except what he
mentions in Page 11. viz. They (meaning the three Women, or some of them) had
new Revelations, says he, That I was guilty of the Death of some Person,
nearly Related to them and me. But who this Person was, or how Related, either
to them or him, he mentions not, but leaves his Reader in the Dark.

Wherefore I now Query, if it was his first Wife he means; for sure she was, or
at least ought to have been nearly Related to him; but such Dishonest and
Unfaithful Men to their Wives as he who loudly Lusts after others, cannot Love,
or be so nearly Related to their own Wives as they ought to be; and if it be
his first Wife he means, and yet Conceals her, it might be Policy; I will not
say Wisdom, except Devilish; lest the nameing her might revive that Jealousy
of wrong to her, upon her sudden and unexpected Death; and the Circumstances
before Related, That she that was his then -- and his now Wife was then under.
O how Gross things looks; And it is Irksome to me to meddle in such Dirty Stuff,
if it were not to wipe it off the Innocent, and cast it back where it ought to
stick; wherefore I shall take notice of another great Circumstance of more
Wickedness than was clearly Discovered.

That is, that when the Sisters, and near Relations of her that is now Wife to
H. W. was Jealous of her being with Child, about the time of the Death of H.
W's first Wife, and she thereupon being questioned, yet stoutly denied; they
for better Satisfaction did search her; and found Milk in her Breasts, which I
suppose is commonly taken amongst Women for an undoubted Token of being with
Child, except such as give Suck. And their pressing that as a Certain Token of
her being so, yet she, to blind them, and to hide, if she could, her Condition,
replied to them then on this wise, viz. I have been so once before, and you
never knew any thing but well with me. This she confessed she then spoke,
before the four Friends before named, the 15th of the first Month last past,
only with this throw at her Relations, But my Relations has been my great
Enemies in the matter. -- Now if she had been so once before; that is, had Milk
in her Breasts: Which is, as I suppose, a common Token of being with Child; and
if she was before with Child, it must be either by H. W. or some other Man; I
shall only ask, if so, what became of that Child? And shall leave both the
further Search and Judgment thereof to him who knows all things, and cannot be
deceived.

The next thing I shall take notice of, is what he says in his Postscript, if
it be his, however his Name is to it, whoever was the Author, which Intitles
him to it, though most False in the greatest part thereof, as after may more
fully appear, by what follows.

In the second Page of the said Postscript, and 19th of his Book, he says,
That some, after my entrance amongst them (meaning the Quakers) they reposed a
great trust in me, viz. to be Receiver of all their Collections in the County,
etc.

Answ. Had not Judas, the Betrayer of our Blessed Lord, as great a Trust, or
greater Reposed in him; for he was not only the keeper or bearer of the Bag,
for the necessity of the Poor, andt. but was Entrusted in a part of the
Ministry; yet notwithstanding Wickedly Betrayed his Lord and Master, going to
the High Priests to make his Bargain with them; and has not H. W. Imitated him,
in endeavoring (with the assistance of some, at least like the High Priests)
to betray the Innocent into the Hands of the Wicked? Wherefore let H. W.
consider the Dismal End of Judas, and take heed lest his be the like.

The greatest part of the said Postscript is made up of base Reflections
against the Quakers, as that they were changed from what they were, and become
Erroneous in both Doctrine and Practice, that there was much Jarring, Discord,
Secret Envying, and Different Opinions among them; then most Falsely and
Wickedly Insinuating, that thereby he found much Disquietness and Anguish in
his Mind, which put him upon a new Examination of the Grounds of Religion, and
being better Informed, could not with clear Conscience stay amongst the
Quakers, but deserted them, which so offended the Quakers, that ever after they
made him their Butt to Shoot at, etc.

Answ. That what is before pretended, is Wickedly False, will most evidently
appear in what follows: For that they fell from us through great Uncleanness,
is before Demonstrated, and we have their Confession thereof, under their own
Hands, as before taken out of their Papers, viz. Be it known unto all People,
unto whom these Presents shall be read, That I H. Winder and my Wife, do
Acknowledge and Confess before the Living God, and unto all People, That we
have Sinned, and done that which we ought not to have done, in suffering the
Temptations of Sin in the Flesh to overcome us, and lead us out of the strait
and narrow way which leads to Life, etc. So this know all People (let the
Reader Mark) that it was not because the Quakers Judgment, or Doctrine, or way
of Worship is False, that it caused us to fall from them, but our fall was of
our selves: And their Judgment, their Doctrine, their way of Worship and Faith
is acceptable to the Lord, we do Faithfully Believe it, and also Acknowledge
it, etc. Let us be a Warning unto all Backsliders, and those that turn from the
Grace of God into any Unrighteousness, etc.

Now can any thing be more Clear and Plain, than that what H. W. pretends, in
his said Postscript, to be the Reasons of a New Examination of the Grounds of
Religion, and his leaving them is most Horrid and Wickedly False; a very
Hellish Device to Bespatter the Truth and Professers thereof, to gratify the
Avowed Enemies thereof, to Deceive and Beguile his Unwary Reader, and to his
hide great Uncleanness, by which he Fell. Oh False and greatly Hardened Man!
The Lord sees his Deceit and Abominable Wickedness, and will Reward
accordingly, except speedy Repentance prevent.

Is it not a Dreadful thing to see Men so, to make Shipwreck of Faith and good
Conscience, as H. W. has done in so positive a Contradiction of what in the
Year 74. when the Hand of the Lord was upon him for his Sins in Judgment, he so
Faithfully and in so Solemn Words, then declared as in the presence of the
Living God, was the Cause of their falling from the Quakers, as aforesaid. So
that H. W. has Contradicted the False Charges of H. W. against the Quakers,
under his own Hand, the Quakers are still what they were, not changed, in Unity
and Concord; of one Heart and Spirit, their Judgment and Doctrine, Faith and
way of Worship acceptable to God: And the ground of the Sorrow and Anguish he
tells of, are his Sins; under which Sorrow it had been well for him if he had
kept, if it was Godly, till it had wrought true Repentance. Who would then have
had no need of such sordid Shifts and deceitful Covers? But, alas! the Quakers
way was too strait for him, the Quakers Judgment too close upon him for his
notorious vileness, their Religion such as would not admit of his abominable
uncleanness: So fleshly minded Man must have a broader way, where some soft
Pillows must be put under to lean upon a Religion, in which there is more
liberty to the Flesh, and yet be counted a Saint, one of the very Elect; so
from the Quakers to them he went; and let him consider Jer. 2.24, 25. And if
they be better for him, or have got Credit by receiving of him, they may hold
him; for the Quakers can well spare him, till he be a cleaner Man, and hates
Lying, and every evil Way.

The next Remark is, his Endeavors to fasten what he calls the Tragedy, upon
the Quakers in general; or, at least, upon a great Party of them: As in Page 6.
viz. Now these Women, (meaning his now Wifes two Sisters, and M. B. before
named) mightily bestirred themselves, and had quickly got a great Party of
Friends inclining to their Opinion, so far as to declare them true
Prophetesses, as J. S. of How, a great Speaker in Meetings, etc. Again, in Page
12. That many other Quakers, especially their Husbands, were intoxicated, etc.
And in Page 18. With the Assistance of, and Approbation of many other Quakers,
etc. And in Page 21. This did much displease the Quakers, etc. Again, in Page
22. They (meaning the Quakers) began to envy me, and their Love was turned into
Malice, which eats like a Canker; from which at last broke out the aforesaid
Tragedy. If this was not the thing that so incensed them against me, I know not
what was, except what I said before of Mary Dawson.

Answ. I observe how high and strange he charge, but very low and feeble in
Proof; the great Party of Friends ends only in J. S. with an etc. one who is
many Years since in his Grave; as is all or most else whom he dares to charge
by Name on any account in his said Book, who are no ways capable of making
Defense, though never so much wronged and abused. And his many other Quakers
Ends, with, especially their Husbands, meaning the three Women, and for the
many Quakers that approved the said Women, and whose Love turned into Envy and
cankered Malice; From whence, he would most falsely insinuate, sprung the said
Tragedy, and that he was made the Quakers Mark to shoot at; he names not one:
So that it is evident that he fails, and comes off very meanly, in proving that
either the Quakers in general, or a great part of them, or any part of them,
was any ways concerned in what he endeavors through Malice to fasten upon
them. And though the Quakers and others may suppose him guilty of many vile and
gross things, and by him under his own Hand acknowledged and confessed; yet,
notwithstanding, never owned the said three Women in their Complaints to
Magistrates, in order to prosecute him at Law; but I and all other of our
Friends, so far as I know or have heard, disowned them therein from the very
first of their appearance therein; and I challenge H. W. to name any one of our
Friends living, if he can, of whom he can prove the contrary: Besides, we can
make appear, under the Hands of some of those three, in the time of their
Imprisonment, that we had disowned them in their Proceedings aforesaid, they
then complaining how it added to their then Sufferings, because we then could
not own them therein. So that it is evident, it is cankered Malice in H. W. to
charge the Quakers in being concerned in the said Endeavors of Prosecution at
Law; knowing, that though he may prove never so guilty of what the three Women
charges against him, yet they misled the way of Truth in their Complaints and
endeavors of Prosecution aforesaid, for what, as notoriously appeared, ought
to have been by them left to the Censure of that Church or Community he had
some time walked amongst, and made profession to be of, and the rest to him to
whom Secrets belongs, who knows things, and will judge Righteously. And it
has been, and is my present Sense, That the wicked One who had led this H. W.
into such gross Evils, did by the occasion of their endeavoring Prosecution,
in the way aforesaid, harden his Heart, to turn against them, as much as in him
lay, to rend and tear them in Revenge; and not only so, but to calumniate and
asperse the Truth, and those that walk in it: For it is observable, That before
their endeavors of Prosecution, in that way aforesaid, not only those three
Women, but several other of our Friends, found him more soft and tender, making
such Acknowledgments and Confessions, as before inserted, and some more, which,
for good Reasons, I shall not now publish, nor incline thereto, if H. W.
minister not just occasion therefore, as before said. And in as much as these
three Persons missed the way of Truth in their Endeavors of Prosecution, in
the way aforesaid, and was disowned by all our Friends that I know of, Then how
unjust is H. W. notwithstanding, to charge us with what we are so innocent and
clear of? Which declares him the Person guilty of the Malice that eats like a
Canker.

Now, I hope, the honest and unprejudiced Reader will be fully and clearly
satisfied by what is before said, that what H. W. pretends to be the Reasons of
his deserting us, are false and feigned; and that he is very unjust, in
charging the Quakers in the endeavors of Prosecution aforesaid, and that the
Envy of the Quakers was the ground thereof; the contrary being made appear.
Neither can I in Charity conclude, That either Envy or Malice in the said three
Persons, was the ground of their so endeavoring Prosecution as aforesaid; but,
rather, an hot Indignation and ungoverned Zeal, against his abominable and
gross Uncleanness.

I now come to examine what he concludes in his said Postscript, before hinted,
viz. If it was not the Envy and Malice of the Quakers for deserting; That was
the ground of what he calls the Tragedy, he knows not what was, except he what
said before of M. D.

Answ. The Man is hard beset, put to all his shifts, yet when he should
conclude, knows not where, nor upon what: So uncertain is he, That it must be
either this or that, else he knows not what: And though it be neither this,
viz. the Quakers Envy and Malice, nor that relating to M. D. I shall tell him
the true Cause thereof, viz. First, his vile Uncleanness: Secondly, an hot
Indignation, an ungoverned Zeal in the three Persons aforesaid, against that
his shameful and vile Uncleanness: And the Quakers clear of both.

But to proceed, I shall for the Information of the Reader, and clearing Truth,
as also to discover the poor sorry fallacious shifts of this Man, to his shame
and confusion; I say I shall, for the Reasons aforesaid, examine what relates
to M. D. as I find it in the 13th and 14th Pages of his said Book, under a
Note, as some remarkable Passage; which take as follows, viz. Note, That this
Mary Langhorne, was formerly the Wife of John Dawson of Hutton-John; after
whose Death she did at diverse times express to H. W. (then a Widower) her great
affection and desire to have him for her Husband; but his Love was set on her
younger; (I suppose it should be) younger Sister, Ann, his present Wife; so
rejected Mary's Solicitations: Which enraged her to that degree, that ever
after her Anger was implacable, etc.

Answ. It Is before manifested under what Circumstances she that is now his Wife
was at the death of his first Wife, even so big with Child to him, that she was
delivered thereof about six Weeks after, and he married to her before that time
of her delivery; how many Days or Weeks I know not; however, it is evident he
was not a Widower above five or six Weeks, perhaps less; so that M. D. had a
very short time to solicit him, and several times to express her great
Affection and Desire to have him for her Husband, as he faith: But looks as
like a great Lie as may be; which will further appear by what follows.

His first Wife I find to be buried the 24th of the third Month, commonly
called May; and she that is now his Wife was about that time greatly suspected
to be with Child by him; as well she might, being then so far gone therewith;
but, upon the 2d of the 4th Month, called June, next and immediately following,
it was fully discovered and known, unto her Sister Mary and Relations, to be
with Child by the said H. W. So that the time that can in any respect be
supposed for such Solicitations, is reduced within the Compass of about Nine
Days. And that time under strong suspicion of her Sisters being with Child as
aforesaid, which in reason may be admitted as sufficient to prevent such
Solicitation, if there had been inclination thereto; which I believe not: Much
more would the certain knowledge of her Sisters being with Child, to the Man
that basely says, she several times expressed her great Affection and Desire
to have him, etc. For no doubt, but the discovery of that Uncleanness, and that
the said H. W. had so basely abused her Sister, would administer occasion of
being highly offended at him; all Circumstances considered, he having a Wife of
his own, and an honest one too for ought that ever I heard; though she had the
hard hap of having a very dishonest Husband, if not worse: Such an one as that
she that should express her Affection and Desire as aforesaid, considering all
his Circumstances, so close upon the death of his Wife, her death so sudden and
surprising, her Sister then big with Child by him, must needs be concluded Mad,
or greatly Infatuated, and bereaved of common Sense and Reason. Wherefore pray
consider what sort of Man this H. W. is, this very noted Passage highly detects
him to be very base, enough to give the Reader a clearer sight of him and his
whole Book: Wherefore, pray further consider what kind of Readers must his Book
have, that believes him, who so frequently detects himself of great Falsehood? I
know none that believes him, except his nameless as well as shameless
Publisher, who is like one of them who said, Report, and we will report it; yet
may question whether he dare so far express himself as to give us his Name,
with his belief of the Truth of H. W's Book, which he has published; especially
now when H. W. and his Book is exposed, and his false Covers plucked off, and
he proving a very unclean Man, as also very false and malicious. And I would
hope, that such as have abetted him, and put him upon Printing such false,
malicious, slanderous, as well as senseless Stuff, will now repent thereof, with
respect to their Repute and Credit; and to prevent what will be the Reward of
all that are accessory to such an evil Work, viz. Shame and Confusion of Face.
And may it not be expected that he whom H. W. calls Excellent, Learned and
Pious Mr. Gilpin, Minister then of their Church, and who the now Wife of H. W.
confessed the 15th of the first Month now last past, 1696/7, before the four
Friends before named, did write down all Matters relating to H. W's Narrative
as they were transacted, will now see that he has been too officious on the
behalf of such a Man; and will ingenuously confess, that he was greatly
mistaken, or worse, when on his behalf he gave that Testimony related in Page
12 of the said Narrative, That he H. W. was always accounted a very faithful
and just Man; and that he had for a long time experienced him to be so. Oh sad!
that a Man of his Figure and Station should so mistake, to speak modestly, to
give Testimony, and that, as he says, upon long Experience, that he, viz. H.
W. had always been accounted a very faithful and just Man; when notoriously
known, as before related, to be both very unfaithful and unjust, at least to
his Wife: But Prejudice and Enmity has made many, otherways wise, greatly to
befool themselves. Neither will J. N. whom he calls Deacon of their Church, get
Repute either to himself or Church in Abetting or Testifying on behalf of H. W.
if it be such as he who is called Mr. Gilpin has Testified.

Some few Passages more of the said Book of H. W's I shall take notice of, and
so draw to a Conclusion with him, having exceeded what I intended; but that I
find so much Dirt to remove off the Innocent, and cast back whence it came, and
is worthy to stick.

The first is, what I find related about the Search made on Sparkehead-Moore,
in Page 9. Thus, They were slow, and had no great Courage to begin the Search;
but my Wife spurred them on, and bid 'em cheer up, and take Courage, etc. Thus
she upbraided their Faintness and Folly, etc.

Answ. She being examined about this Matter by the four Friends before-named,
the same 15th of the First Month beforementioned, 1697, She, viz. H. W's Wife,
answered, Yes, at the first I did put them on; but, I confess, my Spirit
failed, and I did cry out. It seems from this Confession, that she had neither
Innocence nor Confidence enough to support her, but her Spirit fell and she
cried out: The Reason whereof I leave to God and her own Conscience, in hope
that her Heart is not yet grown so hard as her Husband's, since she confesses
to some Truth.

The next is, what I find in Page 16. viz. Hitherto the Lord of his infinite
free Mercy prel^^g^ my days with my dear and faithful Wife and Children, whom
he has increased, preserved, and abundantly blessed: My whole Family he has
spared, as a Father spares his own Son that serves him: And this I declare, etc.

Answ. Let such as name the Holy Name of the Holy God, depart from Iniquity;
for he will not be holden guiltless, that takes his Name in vain; though he
long spare, and his long-suffering be very great; yet in the end, Tribulation
and Anguish will be the Portion of the Wicked: Wherefore let H. W. hear and
fear, and not bless himself in that he has been spared to this Day; nor boast
of his Posterity; for the Wicked has been seen ere now, to spread forth
Branches like the green Bay Tree, and all things to go well with him, yet
stands in a slippery place, suddenly goes down into the Pit; and Bastard's
Slips has not long nor deep Rooting; neither can Whoremongers, Adulterers, or
Liars, have any part or place in the Kingdom of Heaven; but in Tophet, prepared
of old for the Devil and his Angels.

In Page 21 he says, I fell into a Temptation; wherein I was so cast down,
that I despaired to receive Comfort any way, but in the Ordinances appointed,
etc.

Answ. It Is evident he has not fallen into one only, but many Temptations and
gross Evils, which all his outward Ordinances cannot redeem him out of; for
it is the Blood of Jesus that cleanses from Sin, in which Remission comes to be
known in the Work of Regeneration and Renewings of the Holy Spirit, where
there is unfeigned Repentance, and a walking in the Light: Which this Man
reviles, and slights, and counts deceivable, and would falsely insinuate to be
the ground of his Erring from the way of Truth; which bespeaks him in a
dangerous Condition, blaspheming against that Light in which all must walk, who
comes to be cleansed from all Sin; for if we walk in the Light, as he is in the
Light, we have Fellowship one with another, and the Blood of Jesus his Son
cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1.7. So that till H. W. turn to this Light,
come to walk in it, even that which did not only manifest his Sin, but reproved
and condemned him therefore; and through the Convictions whereof he was made in
time past (before he that led him into Sin had hardened his Heart) to confess
his Sins and Transgressions, that he would now hide and cover. I say, till he
come again to this Light, and incline to walk in it, all his outward Ordinances
will never cleanse him, nor make him a better Man, let him apply himself never
so much thereto.

And I shall now advise him, to look back at his Work, and consider the Effects
thereof, and see what Reproach he has brought upon himself, being fallen into
the foul Pit of Infamy and Shame that he had dug for others; endeavoring to
Criminate the Innocent Quakers, he has exposed his own Crimes; would God that
he and his Wife might yet see their sad and dismal Estate, and consider whence
they are fallen, and repent, and do their first Works, and so find a place of
Repentance; if happily they have not so added Sin to Sin, and Rebellion to
their great Wickedness knowingly; so as to provoke a merciful and
long-suffering God, to make them Examples of his Wrath and fiery Indignation;
the eternal Portion of such wicked and impenitent Sinners, which add Sin to
Sin, till the Measure of their Iniquity be filled up; and it be said, Go ye
cursed into everlasting fire.

One thing more is to be taken notice of, for the Information of the Reader;
that is, part of his Title Page, viz. Their malicious Prosecution of H. W. and
his Wife as Murderers, at the Public Assize at Carlisle.

I Answer; It Is very fallaciously worded; so may deceive the unwary Reader, who
may therefrom conclude, That there was some legal Prosecution, that H. W. had
been Called and Arraigned at the Bar, had had a Trial, and the Issue of a
Jury, and so an Assize Business; when, indeed, there was no such thing; if
there had, we should have it to the full, or more. For in Page 6. They stretch
things to the height: Which amounts to thus much, That H. W. and his Wife was
there, and the three Women also: That the Women drew up their Accusations in
Writing against H. W. and Wife, and cast them in Towns and Streets (that must
be before they came at Carlisle) at Carlisle gave one of their Papers to the
judge; and he only bid them proceed according to Law, and they should have
Justice: That both Parties staid all the time of the Assizes. And all else that
the Women did, was, that they bid H. W. and his Wife fear God. This is the
Prosecution in full, as in the 6th Page before is by H. W. given: A very small
Prosecution; if it may properly be called One: The Woman gave the Judge one of
their Papers, and bid H. W. and his Wife fear God. Who would have thought
reading the Title Page, as it is worded, but that their had been a formal
Prosecution at the Assizes? And if the Man had meant honestly, we doubt not but
he would have qualified the word Prosecution, with Endeavors or Attempts of
Prosecution: For all that was done by the said three Women, at those Assizes,
can in t e greatest strictness amount to no more.

Thus having taken notice of what I thought most material in his Book, which in
any respect reflected upon Us, the People called Quakers, or the Holy Church
which we make profession of; wiping off the Dirt he throws at Us, turns it back
upon himself, stripping off his deceitful Covers, and exposes him to the view
of all to be a very unclean Man, an angry Apostate, demonstrating wherein the
three Women missed the way of Truth, and was disowned therein: All which, as
before inserted, I now freely submit, and leave to the impartial and honest
Reader's Censure and Judgment, and the Issue to the Lord: And shall now begin
to say something to the nameless Publisher.

But first, I shall note unto the Reader, That since I began the foregoing
Answer to H. W. I am informed that there is already something published in
Print by another Hand, by way of Answer thereto, in a Postscript to another
nameless Author; who, like this Publisher, has vilely abused the Quakers.

Now to what the nameless Publisher adds to the same Book, subscribed by H. W.
is such a Piece, as I remember not that I have before read the like from any of
our many envious Opposers and malicious Detracters: Being such a Piece of down
right Railery, stuffed with Lies, gross Slanders, ungodly Perversions, base
insinuations, and most sordid and perverse Inferences; yea, Blasphemy and
Contradictions, idle Stories, frothy and scurrilous Taunts, that to trace
particularly in every thing would be a tedious Work, and more than I think
needful, till he appear to own what he has charged, by giving us his Name; who,
in the concealing of the same, may think himself secure; yet will render him
and his Work very suspicious of great Injustice and Falsehood thereby; and so
s^eakingly to charge that to wise, thinking, and judicious Readers, it might be
sufficient without any Answer; yet, for the sake of the unwary, and too
credulous Readers, and for the better Information of such as by this his Work,
and the like, has entertained Prejudice against the Truth, and the Principle
and Profession thereof, as testified unto by the People commonly called
Quakers; and as a just Rebuke upon him, for his ungodly Work; I shall take
notice of part thereof at present, not fearing his Roll of 13 Else, or what
else he mentions in his Preface, though it prove as bad, and as full of Envy,
as what he has here exposed against us.

The Method I propose, for brevity sake, is first to draw a Catalogue, List, or
Schedule, of some of his downright Lies and false Slanders, as I find them
packed up thick and threefold in his and H. W's Book, and leave them at his
Door as such, with some short Remarks subjoyned; challenging him, if he can or
dare appear as a Man with his Name, to come forth to the Vindication or Proof
thereof; till which, I look upon my self, either on behalf of Truth, or the
People I own and walk amongst, under no farther necessity of Answering: Which
Catalogue, List, or Schedule, take as follows, under the Title of, Gross Lies
and Slanders, of the nameless Publisher of H. W's Book.

At his very Entrance, of what he adds in the Postscript, he begins with a Lie.

1. I find the Quakers in open Discord, etc.

Answ. The Discord is betwixt the Quakers and Apostates, such as H. W. etc. and
their Abettors: And we have Divine Authority, and Primitive Example, in denying
such Fellowship with us.

2. Who cannot Err, etc. Meaning the Quakers.

Answ. We never said so: But that all Men, as well as those called Quakers,
are, as Men, liable to err, if they forsake the Conduct of that Eternal,
Uunchangeable, Uunerring Spirit of Truth, which leads into all Truth, and is
able to preserve out of all Error; which these Men, our Opposers, slights and
reviles.

3. Cursed pretense to Divine Inspiration, the strongest Hold of the Devil.

Answ. Let him keep his cursed Pretense to himself; Divine Inspiration we
experience, the Inspiration of the Almighty, with the Effects thereof, blessed
be God, according to Scripture: To call which, the strongest Hold of the Devil,
is not only a Lie, but Blasphemy.

4. Who knew all this Story 23 Years ago, and should have disclaimed the
Actors, but did not, etc.

Answ. All the Story of H. W's, as in his Book, was never known before written,
nor could be, because many things therein inserted were not true; being Stuff
added to amuse the Reader and abuse the Quakers. It Is evident, before that,
what was to be disclaimed was then done; and in Testimony thereof (though it
discover his Enmity and Contradictions) he has made some Acknowledgment in Page
24. viz. Some Friends, who at the first Assizes persuaded the Women to do him
Right, by Confessing, etc.

Next I shall repeat a whole heap of Lies and Slanders; which, as he says, he
takes out of what he calls, A further Essay, by a learned, peaceable,
compassionate Friend of ours; wherein he says, He proves, etc. But I say, Is
not yet proved, nor can be.

5. From their many Impertinences and Nonsense in their Books; which cannot,
without Blasphemy, be attributed to the Holy Spirit.

6. From the many flat Contradictions of one inspired Pretender unto another,
especially their Women.

7. Their scurrilous Railing at their best Opposers.

8. Their apparent Contradictions to plain Scripture.

9. Miserable Perversions, and gross Misinterpretations of Scripture.

10. Their Noval Opinions, not heard of before in the Church of Christ.

11. The allowed Novelty of their Sect; having no pretense to Succession.

12. Their many Doctrines calculated to serve Popery, instanced in Nine Heads
of Doctrine; wherein they agree with Papists against Scripture.

13. Notorious Possessions and Witchcrafts.

14. Many gross Blasphemies uttered by those so Inspired.

15. VVallowing in gross unnatural Sins.

16. VVild Attempts of long Fasting, and Miracles.

17. Contradiction to all other good Christians.

All which before-said, I take out of less than two Leaves of the Preface to
the Book aforesaid; enough, if there were no more, for this nameless Publisher;
and him he calls our Learned, Peaceable, Compassionate Friend; turning them all
back, as gross Lies and impudent Slanders: For which he that sits in Heaven,
will rebuke them. And though the Publisher have, Rabshacah like, opened his Mouth
wide against the Lord and his innocent People, yet I shall in the Name and on
Behalf of that People tell him, his evil Design will be frustrated, and his
Eyes grow dim, and Heart fail, before he can ever prove what he has wrongfully
charged. And I shall farther Answer them in the Words of Israel's God, through
his Servant Isaiah, Chap. 37. Ver. 22, 23. viz. This is the word which the Lord
has spoken concerning him, The Virgin, the Daughter of Zion, has despised
thee, and laughed thee to scorn, the Daughter of Jerusalem has shaken her head
against thee. Whom have thou reproached and blasphemed? And against whom have
thou exalted thy Voice, and lifted up thine Eyes on high? Even against the Holy
One of Israel.

18. In Page 23. A strange Story this is, Reader, indeed, and beyond the Power,
even of Quakers Impudency, to deny; since it was so long transacting, so many
Friends concerned in it, etc.

Answ. I say it is the Publisher's Impudency, to cast upon the Quakers; and a
great Lie, to say so many Friends were concerned it.

19. In Page 28. What think of you these dear Sisters? true Quakers they were,
and owned as such to the last.

Answ. I say, It Is not only a filthy Taunt, but a shameful Lie.

20. In Page 28. How many Christ's and Saviors will this People at length
produce?

21. In the same Page, mentioning the Terms and Way of his (meaning Christ's)
saving, viz. They must value his Blood, and submit to the Rule of his Word: But
the Quakers, says he, like not such Terms; therefore will have a Second
(meaning) Christ, or a Savior.

22. In same Page he says, Now, shall we marvel, that Quakers offer us a new
Creed, or Christianity, and scorn our old Bible?

23. Again, in the same Page, When their Spirit says we must have a Second
Savior, a Carnal One too; and who is within none but a single Woman.

24. Again, in the same Page, he says, Was a fit Brother for their Christ
within, etc.

25. In the same 28th Page he says, Is this all? No; we have more Christ's
among them, etc.

See now, Reader, what heaps of Lies this obscure railing Man belcheth forth to
his shame! And though he hide himself from Men, by concealing his Name, the
Righteous God will find him out, to Reward him according to his Works. I deny
them all, as impudent Lies. But to proceed.

26. In Page 32 he says, Then your Spirit, Fancy, or Flatus, is your Supreme
Rule, etc.

Answ. I say, A horrid Lie and Slander! That Spirit which leads into all Truth,
is that which we have always owned to be our Supreme Rule; which, if he had
been led by, would not have uttered so many Lies and Slanders; which manifests
him to be of his Father the Devil, who was a Liar from the beginning.

27. In Page 34 he faith, So G. F. had the Humility to receive Adoration and
Worship, etc. Which, I say, is also another of his gross Lies upon the Dead.

28. In Page 35 he faith, Will G. F. deny it? Who declared himself equal with
God, and received Worship, etc.

I say, It Is also another impudent Lie cast upon the Dead: Let him prove what
he charges.

29. Again, in same Page he says, As their (meaning the Quakers) Infallibility
consists with Lies and Self-Contradiction; so can their Perfection stand with
most abominable Wickedness, etc.

Answ. I say, His Slander herein is abominable. The Infallibility of the
Eternal Spirit of Truth admits of no Lie nor Contradiction, neither can
abominable Wickedness stand with the Perfection that is the Product or Work of
the Holy Ghost; or Spirit in all true Believers in the Lord Jesus Christ: And
we cannot but bear Testimony against abominable Wickedness, and all such as
wallow therein; as H. W. and other Apostates, which makes them and this their
obscure Publisher so grievous Angry, to load us with so many Calumnies.

30. In Page 37 he says, That Jesus descibed in Scripture was to seal up
Vision and Prophecy, Dan, 9.24. Or, to give such perfect discovery of God's
Counsel and Will to the World, that the Spirits extraordinary Gifts of
Illumination should be no more necessary, nor continued: But the Quakers, by
pretending constant Prophetical Revelation from him (meaning Christ) deny his
Work aforesaid, and that he has done his Work; deny that he is come, or worse;
nay, that he ever was to come, or needs to come, etc.

Answ. What a Crotchet this Man has in his Head about the word Extraordinary! I
know not, but that, That Jesus described in Scripture was to seal up Vision and
Prophecy, or to give such perfect Discovery of God's Counsel and Will to the
World, by what is writeen in Holy Scripture, That the Spirit's Gifts of
Illumination should be no more necessary nor continued, is denied, as
Erroneous; and that of Dan. 9.24. instanced to prove the same, is no Proof
thereof in the least, without miserable wresting and misconstruing the same: A
thing he falsely charge upon the Quakers; but declares his own Guilt therein.
And there is great necessity for the continued Help and Illumination of the
Holy Spirit; for without the Illumination thereof we can neither know God nor
the things of God: For, as says the Scripture, the things of God know no Man
but by his Spirit; being that which searches into the reveals the deep
things of God; and is given of God, to lead into all Truth; whom the World
cannot receive, because it sees him not, neither knows him: But you know
him, for he dwells with you, and shall be in you: Read John 14, 16, 17. And
it is in and by the Illumination of this Spirit, that Christ reveals himself
unto his Chosen; and through which the true Believers in Christ are enabled to
keep his Words: Such the Father loves, and to such the Father and Son comes
in this Eternal Spirit, and makes their abode with: Read also Verses 22, 23.
And that the Quakers deny the Work of Christ; that he was to come, did come, or
need to come; or, what is worse; his false Insinuation amounts to a fourfold
Lie, and a great Slander: And to make his Slander greater (in what is worse) let
him tell what is worse, if he can, than what he has before falsely charged: It
seems his Mouth is full of bitter Stuff; and such he vents without regard to
Truth or Honesty; being so drunken with Enmity, to vomit out his own Shame and
Filth; yet, perhaps, looks upon himself safe in concealing his Name.

31. And further, in the Page last mentioned, he will needs be either a Reviler
or Deceiver, in telling what the Quakers may be, viz. It Is but, says he, to
consult their Light, it will give Response, like that cum fueris Romae, etc.
Then enter Father Molenos, all is done; they may in a new Sense (as their
Inward Christ will not fail to tell them) become all things to all Men, as
already in Habits and Gestures; so might be Papists and Turks, etc.

Answ. How this Man, who pretends great Reverence to Scripture, and the
Ministers of Christ Jesus, Reflects upon both by his false and ungrounded
Inferences! For, did not the Apostles become all Things to all Men? Namely, for
the gaining of some to the Truth; yet, upon no occasion became either Papists
or Turks. Neither did the Apostles, nor Christ within (the Hope of Glory,
without which all are Reprobates) ever give this Man's Response, who more and
more expresses himself to be altogether regardless of Truth, Honesty, or fair
Dealing. But, to proceed.

32. In Page 38 he says, One most fatally intoxicating Notion, I take to be
that of the Saving Grace of God in all Men: What could Men devise more proud
and provoking, to bring all God's Remedial Provisions into Contempt? I can see
nothing it saves, unless they mean, It saves them all Care and Pains in working
out their Salvation; for no People sleeps so secure as they, without all Fear
or Spiritual Conflict.

Answ. Such a Graceless as well as Blasphemous Aspersion, as none but a
graceless Man, or such an one as has turned from Grace into Wantonness and
great Enmity, having done despite to the Spirit of Grace, with his Name to it,
will or dare to Assert; being so positive a Contradiction to Holy Scripture,
Titus 2.12, 13. For the Grace of God, that brings Salvation, has appeared to
all Men, teaching Us (the Believers and Obeyers thereof) that denying all
ungodliness and worldly Lusts, we should live Soberly, Righteously, and
Godlily, in this present World. Is this Advice proud and provoking, to bring
all God's Remedial Provisions to Contempt? Let him take heed whom he provokes
by such Blasphemies; the Text saying, It Is the Grace of God that brings to
Salvation: Then surely it is Saving, being God's Grace, by which the Saints were
saved, through Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ; for they said, by Grace we are
saved: It taught them, as aforesaid, being that Grace coming by Jesus Christ,
the Savior of all that are saved, and appears within, as it is of God; because
that which may be known of God is manifest in them; for God has showed it unto
them, Romans 1.19. And who are taught, by this Grace that appears unto all Men,
comes to Salvation; being God's Gift, through Jesus Christ the Savior; though
too too many, to whom it appears and is Inwardly revealed, does Despite
thereto, denies to be Taught thereby, turns it into Wantonness, becomes thereby
vain in their Imaginations, and their foolish Hearts come to be darkened,
frustrating on their behalfs the Merciful end of God, on the account of the
appearance of his Grace to them; the same that otherwise is intended for their
Salvation: So that Man's Destruction is of himself; but Help and Salvation,
only of the Lord; who gives the appearance of this Grace unto all Men, and
Wills thereby the Salvation of all, not the Death of any Sinner, but rather
that he should come to be taught by this Grace, and be saved, and live. So that
this Man manifests both his Pride and Provocation against God's Grace, and the
Divine Testimony thereto in the Holy Scripture, as well as slighting the
Teaching thereof, and Ignorance of its blessed Work, in calling it, A fatally
intoxicating Notion; proud and provoking, as aforesaid, etc. That he can see
nothing it saves from, except, etc. It Is not like he should see or know what it
saves from, who Blasphemes against it; neither knows what Spiritual Conflicts
they have who are taught by it; nor the sufficiency thereof to support through
them all; as it was said of God to be, to the Apostle Paul, to wit, My Grace is
sufficient; being thereby strengthened in the time of need. But, to proceed.

In the same Page, last mentioned, he goes on, and calls what before he called
One most fatally intoxicating Notion; Now this one Anti-Scriptural Conceit.

Answ. But how far he is wrong, and abusive in this, and how agreeable the
Testimony we bear on behalf of the Grace of God, is correspondent and agreeing
with Divine Testimony, I leave to the wise in Heart to judge. He is resolved to
abuse us, though it will at last turn upon himself with Shame.

33. He goes on in a frantic Fit of Railing; in which I confess him to be a
very great Artist, excepting that his Heat runs him into Contradiction; but has
made notable provision to keep himself hid, whatever he say, though never so
Wicked and False, by concealing his Name: he says, No Guide so slippery as
that they have chosen, a very Proteus, etc. They can confess or deny Christ's
coming in the Flesh; they can own or disown his Satisfaction and Righteousness;
value, or deride and decry his Benefits, Grace and Word, pro re nata, the
Anti-Christ's in St. John's Days were honest Men to you, etc. Prove. 14.16. A
wise Man fears, and departs from Evil; but the Fool rages, and is
confident.

Answ. Is it not he that decries and disowns the Benefits of God? Does not he
say, He sees nothing that it saves, and has not he chosen the slippery Guide,
the very Proteus? The Quakers, says he, can own or disown, value or decry, his
slippery Guide leads him into Confusion and Self-Contradiction. For if they do
value, as he says they can do, then they cannot deride and decry Christ's
Benefits, Grace and Word; neither do, for all his clamourous Noise against
them; who would render them worse than the Anti-Christ's in St. John's time;
nay, these Antichrists, honest Men, comparing as aforesaid; yet fails in
demonstrating in what their Honesty consisted. I conclude they had none; and,
if he have any, none of it appears. And how aptly that Text in Prove. 14.16. is
applicable to him, sober Reader judge.

In Page the 40th I find another Piece full stuffed with Lies, Slanders, and
perfect Reviling, viz.

Then is Quakerism contrary to the Doctrine that is of God? I know what Respect
they give it, since a good Act of Parliament taught them what to say for Peace:
But how else do they yet honor it? And, till they do, what sort of Christians
can they be? etc.

Christians, I find those called, who received Christ's and his Apostles
Doctrine, about the Person and Office of Christ, etc.

34. But these (meaning the Quakers) do not they hereby confess another Christ?
etc.

Answ. First, let the Reader observe this Man's Confusion and Contradiction;
for in Page 30 he says, viz. We never knew, or shall know, what is the
Doctrine of Quakerism: Yet in Page 40 affirms it to be contrary to the Doctrine
that is of God. Can he or any Man else tell what that is, that he never knew
nor shall know? But such Stuff as is in an unclean Vessel, must out when it
opens; and the nauseous smell thereof declares whence it comes. It Is his great
Abuse of us to say, A good Act of Parliament taught us, etc.

We were taught, we bless the Lord, before that good Act, how to believe in,
and what to say of the Doctrine of God and Holy Scripture. But, no doubt, this
obscure Man is very Angry, that the Parliament should Believe, or take Notice
of our Sincere and Christian Confession and Belief thereof; and vouchsafe unto
us any Liberty, Peace, or Ease; since he endeavors to Unchristian us, and
insinuate, that we do not yet honor the said Doctrine, and at last say we do
not in plain Words, as above. Also insinuating, we confess another Christ;
which is false. And is not all this to expose us to Persecution and the Wrath
of Men? Yea, he farther manifests his Design elsewhere: As Page 35. Thus,
Against G. K. and Christ, without they will bear Testimony; but none against the
late King James and Popery. Again, in Page 39. Thus, But what is the matter that
we so seldom hear of their Messages to Magistrates and Ministers now adays? Why
none to King William and his Parliament, as to Oliver and his? etc. Mark the
peaceable Mind and Innocence of unfighting unswearing Quakers, etc. Again,

Had they not need to assure the Magistrates that now their Minds is changed?
Else how unsure is the State and Church? etc.

By which it is easy to guess what this Man would be at; New England, Halters,
or the like. But the cursed Cow has short Horns, is the old Proverb; and,
blessed be ^od, we have great Confidence in our Appeal to the present
Government; as in former Times to all others; as with Respect to our Innocence
and Peaceable Behavior under every Government, that the Great God and Governor
of all Things has ordered and permitted to be over us; so needs not change our
Minds, having the Mind of our Lord Christ Jesus, who has taught us neither to
Fight nor to Swear; but to live Peaceably, and to put up our Prayers for Kings
and Governors; that we might live a Godly and Peaceable Life, in all Honesty:
And we have great Cause to bless God and be thankful, that we have, through his
Assistance, been so preserved in an Innocent and Peaceable Frame of Spirit
toward the Governments, that the most wrathful of our Enemies or Detracters
cannot justly charge the contrary. We have also cause of Thankfulness, That we
are known to be otherwise to the present Government than this angry Man would
represent us; and that we are vouchsafed Protection thereby, from what this and
such like restless Men would be at, whose Fingers itch to stir up Strife,
Hatred, and Persecution; which, if it be not the worst part, is yet a very bad
piece of Popery.

35. Again in Page 35 he says, Adorn Christian Doctrine, which they profess
not, (meaning the Quakers.)

Answ. It Is another of his Lies, a Shame to, and a Stain upon Christian
Doctrine and Religion, if he pretend or advise thereto; let him stop till he
learn to speak Truth, till he has got a Bridle to his Tongue, that unruly
Member, that is set on fire; he may read by what; For, if the Apostle James's
Doctrine be true, and to be believed, we are not to take Notice of his seemign
to be Religious, while he does not Bridle his Tongue: Which, it is evident, this
Man does not. So concludes with the said Apostle, that this Man's Religion is
but a vain pretense.

36. In Page 36 he says, Beware of the Quakers Spirit and Insinuation; it has
often appeared, that such as have adjoined themselves to them, are prepared for
any Delusions the Devil can suggest, etc.

Answ. A gross Slander! The Divine Spirit which the Quakers Witness and bears
Testimomony to, delivers from and preserves out of Delusions of the Devil; who
it is that has suggested this Lie against the Truth.

37. In Page 47. But these, says he (meaning the Quakers) waxing secure and
wanton in Formal Profession, first cast off all Ordinances, all Outward Duties,
all Prayer, only with this Reserve, when their own Spirits would give them a
Jogg, etc.

Answ. His Charge is false and malicious, and bespeaks him to be given up to
serve the Father of Lies; as what he calls the Reserve is idle and frothy. For
it is by the Eternal Spirit that we are opened and assisted in all our Duties to
God, especially Prayer; not knowing a right Understanding how to Pray, but by
the Assistance and Help thereof; which made the Apostle conclude, he would Pray
with the Spirit, and with Understanding: And so do we; and not a Jogg of our
own Spirit, as he scoffingly says.

38. In Page 48 He has another fling at Revelation, viz. Your Speakers, etc.
Alleging they know not who shall Speak, until the Spirit moves in that very
Hour of the Assembly; nor what shall be spoken. A Conceit, says he (who has
many idle ones in his Head) that has often made me smile, when I have been told
a Week beforehand by your selves, That such a Man will, at such a Day, speak
at such Place.

Answ. Belike he dare not rely upon the Spirit, but must be studying and taking
Thought beforehand: Howbeit, I challenge him to name which of Us, and at what
Time and Place, so told him, as aforesaid: For I deny it, as a Lie (as he lays
it down) invented by him, in order to Abuse Us, and make way for a frothy Scoff.

39. In the same Page, viz. Since so many have (meaning the Quakers) undertaken
to justify that impudent Contradiction to the God of Order, and to baffle
those two plain Texts, 1 Cor. 14.34, 35. 1 Timothy 2.11, 12.

Answ. I deny his Charge, as Impudent, calls on him for his Name and the Proof
he is able to make, as for the two Texts before, and the Matter that relates
thereto, I refer to a small Treatise thereof, printed in the Year 1684, the
10th Month, Entitled, A Testimony to the fulfilling the Promise of God,
relating to such Women, etc. Subscribed by T. C. Also to R. B's Appology; with
several other of our Friends Books.

40. In Page 49 he says, For God's Book has no Place nor Honor in your
Assemblies; nor do your Teachers submit themselves or Doctrine to that Judge,
etc.

Answ. If by God's Book, he means the Holy Scriptures, I deny his Charge: For
our Teachers, as he calls them, whom we own, do Love and Honor Holy
Scriptures; and submit their Doctrine to be proved and tried thereby; as many
Thousands can Witness against this shameless Man.

Thus having gone through his Work, I charge him with 40 most gross Lies and
great Slanders; some of which are double, some triple, others fourfold, folded
up one in another; which may perhaps double the Number; besides what I have
passed by and looked over, as of less moment, or in some degree related to what
I have above taken Notice of; which I leave with him, as a Mark of Infamy upon
him, till he appear like a Man, and quit himself thereof; or else, repent of
his Wickedness therein: and shall proceed to take Notice of some of his
Contradictions, and base Inferences, referring to other Things, and not before
touched, relating to the South, to the Answer beforementioned by B. C. And as
to what he falsely alleges to be the Reason of H. W's Conversion, as he calls
it, I refer to what is before-said to H. W's Book; and shall only take some
Notice of some of his Contradictions.

Contradictions.
1. THE Title of the said Book of H. W's is, The Spirit of Quakerism, etc. And
again, toward the end of the Preface, thus, viz. Such as need to be further
acquainted with the very Heart of Quakerism, compared with Page 31. viz. And
thus it comes to pass that we never know, nor ever shall know, what is the
Doctrine of Quakerism. I say, Can the Spirit and Heart of Quakerism be known,
and yet not the Doctrine? Or, can he tell what that is he knows not?

2. In Page 39 he says, The Scripture and Quakerism are mutual Enemies. What,
Enememies and yet Mutual! Oh strange! What are they Mutual Enemies to the Devil
and such Liars as he? Let him then consider what he is an Enemy to. Yet, in
Page 31. The Doctrine of Quakerism we never know, nor shall know. I say, Then
how knows he, that the Scripture and Quakerism are Mutual Enemies?

3. Again, Page 43. viz. It was a just use of his Reason and Consideration,
guided by Scripture, that represented Quakerism to him, etc. Compared with Page
31, aforesaid; We never know, nor shall know, what the Doctrine of Quakerism is.

4. In Page 23. he says, The Devil himself (who one would think is ordinarily
one of their Friends) seems here to have owed them a Spite. For the Devil to
be a Friend, and yet to owe us Spite, are contraries: We deny the Devil to be
our Friend, let him take him, who is the Father of Lies and Liars. This
Libeller grants the Devil has long owed us a Spite, and still does. Oh! how
familiar he is with him! He knows his Mind! And that makes him thus to traduce
us, and run into gross Contradictions.

5. Again, Page 24. viz. I freely declare, if any of you sincerely value
Scripture Light, and Rule, and do not adhere to the guidance of this mad
Spirit, this Story intends not to accuse you. Now, I say, if he holds here, he
has cleared all the Quakers in general, except such as are guided or adheres to
be guided by a mad Spirit; and all such the Quakers have and do deny to be of
them: But that is not pleasing to him to know or hear of. It Is through their
sides that he would strike at the Quakers, that are clear, and that he seems so
freely to declare the Story intends not to Accuse; yet in the very next Page
contradicts himself; viz. What think you of the three dear Sisters? True
Quakers they were, and owned as such to the last: But what Spirit, what
Wildfire is this, that they and you have chosen for your Guide? etc. Mark
they, and you, they Quakers, here he writes in general, and makes no exception,
as before: So that he is an uncertain Body, will not hold to what he pretends to.

6. But hear him again in the same Page, viz. I will not be so Quaker like, as
to censure a Multitude for ought, whereof I can find tolerable Proof that most
are Innocent, etc.

Answ. To let pass his Scoff of Quaker-like, it is evident through his whole
Work, that he has sencured Thousands, a Multitude, that never heard hereof
before: The which, one would have thought, might have been sufficient Proof as
to their Innocence, if he had been just and honest in what he says; and no
doubt would, especially, inasmuch as he has no Proof; at least, produces none;
that any owned the Three, whom he scoffingly calls, dear Sisters, in their
endeavoring Prosecution of Law against H. W. etc.

Only after several Essays and Onsets, amounts to mention one by Name, to wit,
J. S. long since in his Grave; who, from the knowledge I had of him, and being
charged only by such unjust Persons, that has most notoriously abused both dead
and living, shall not believe it, till proved. And if this one single Person
had been guilty, as charged, which I do not grant; yet who, besides a Man
nameless, or void of Shame, would on one Man's Fault Censure a Multitude? And
also thereby so far contradict himself?

Thus having taken Notice of his Contradictions, viz. Half a Dozen; I shall
proceed to the idle Stories of P. Dalston, and M. Mark, distracted Persons are
pregnant Proofs, that the Man is Mad, Drunk, or greatly Intoxicated, with
bitter Malice against the Quakers: especially, considering what base, frothy,
sordid and malicious Inferences, he draws from the Words and Actions of those
two Persons, so overpowered by Melancholy, besides their Reason, and
distracted, to cast upon the Quakers; yea, and rather than miss, to bespatter
and calumniate the Quakers, he will make them act Rationally while they are
Mad: But Wrath is cruel, and Anger is outrageous; but who is able to stand
before Envy?

His like idle and ridiculous Story he gives of him whom he calls, An older and
more crafty Friend; who by the like Revelation came to P. Hobson 's House.

I ask him, what Revelation (his like) has relation to the two mad distracted
Persons next before taken notice of? For it follows, the one of them, in his
said Book. Well then, will this Man say, That he that is led by the Revelation
of a mad or distracted Man, can properly be called Crafty? What Craft appears
in mad or distracted Men? For he says before, That is was by Revelation, that
P. Dalson attempted to swallow his Bed-Sheet, and was choked in the trial. Was
there any great Craft in that? And yet he says, An older and more craftier
Friend was he that came by the like Revelation. Then, methinks, he should have
the like Ends. This I have said only to show the hasty Man his Contradiction
and Folly. But, to say something to his Story, I have heard of such a Man as P.
Hobson; but neither that he was either reputed or went by the Name of a Quaker;
neither does this Publisher give this crafty Friend of his, the Name of a
Quaker; who rarely is short in any Charge, provided it may but affect the
Quakers; wherefore, may be his Friend, or P. Hobson's. And as he is nameless,
questioning whether there was ever either such a Man or Thing as he relates, I
shall leave it, as a Matter of his own forging; else, as a fit nameless
Brother, to this nameless Publisher.

Next I shall take Notice of what he relates concerning W. Simpson, one that I
am not ashamed to own to be one of Us; who, in the latter end of the time of O.
Cromwell, had an Exercise upon his Spirit, to go through several Towns and
Cities in this Nation, sometimes naked, and with Ashes upon his Head, and
besmeared, as a Sign to that Adulterous Generation of High Professors, calling
them to Repentance, and warning them of an approaching Judgment coming upon
them who then had the Rule in both what was then called State and Church; for
which he was often Imprisoned, Whipped, and evil Entreated, through the
hardness of the Hearts of those High Professors then in Authority, and in their
Pomp and Glory; which, in a little time after, was all laid in the Dust, and
they turned aside, according to the Judgment foretold by W. S. which is worthy
noticing. And what he adds about the Destruction of Carlisle, I deny, as false
and forged, invented to asperse the Dead and calumniate the Quakers; against
whom his Enmity is so great, that he cannot let them alone, though in their
Graves.

But proceeds to revile the People called Quakers, and the Truth that they
profess and bear Testimony unto; especially in that he so warmly and zealously
espouseth the Cause of so vilely unclean a Man, and old Apostate, as H. W. with
other angry Apostates, as G. K. A Combination, somewhat resembling that of the
Highpriests with Judas: Wherefore take heed in time, lest the Reward be like
in the end.

As to his like frivolous Stories, fetched from Bristol, Somersetshire, etc. I
shall refer the Reader to B. C's Answer aforesaid. And,

To what he seems to vent his Spleen in, against W. P. in several Pages of his
Book, I shall tell him that when he gives Us his Name, and appears to prove his
Charge, falsely given against W. P. he may expect to have more: Till then, I
tell him, it is below W. P. to take Notice of such a nameless, sculking, yet
angry Scribler. And till then I shall leave him, and leave upon him the Mark
and Character of one that vilely and maliciously Smites at the Innocent in the
Dark; hating the Light, because his Deeds are Evil.

Thus, Reader, having gone through H. W's Book, and what his nameless Publisher
adds, and taken Notice of what I thought in any respect to be noticed, I shall
(after due Perusal, and deliberate Consideration, having regard to Truth and
good Conscience) leave thee, honest Reader, to judge thereof as thou shall find
occasion; recommending thee to that which will undoubtedly give thee a right
Understanding, as thou comes to be guided and directed thereby; to wit, the
Holy Spirit of Truth, which leads into all Truth: and shall leave the Issue of
this my Labor to the Lord; for whose Sake, his Truth and People, I have
undertaken the same: As also to inform such as may be ignorant of, or
prejudiced against the Truth, through false and slanderous Reports cast
thereupon, through the Instigation of that old, wicked, restless, subtle Enemy
to all Truth and Righteousness. Out of whose Snares, that thou Reader, and all
Men might be rescued, and so preserved, is the earnest Prayer of him who is a
well-wisher to all Mankind,

T. C.
Camsgil, the 20th of the 3d Month, 1697.
FINIS.

