THE MEMORY OF THE Righteous Revived Being A brief Collection of the Books and
written Epistles of John Camm and John Audland, Those two faithful and
honorable Servants of the Lord, who were called to the work of the Ministry in
the morning of Gods blessed day dawned in this Generation; and, with other
Brethren, bore the heat and burden of the day faithfully, to the end and
finishing of their Course, being entered into the joy of their Lord. Together
with several Testimonies relating to those two Faithful Laborers. Published
for the Service of Truth and Friends, By Thomas Camm, and Charles Marshal.

Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth, yea, says the
Spirit, that they may rest from their Labors, and their Works do follow them,
Rev. 14. 13. And they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the
Firmament, and they that turn many to Righteousness as the Stars, forever and
ever, Dan. 12. 3. The memory of the just is blessed, Prove. 10. 7. The Righteous
shall be had in everlasting remembrance, Ps. 112 9. London, Printed and Sold by
Andrew Soul, at the Crooked-Billet in Holloway-Lane in Shoredich, and at the
Three-Keys in Nage-Head-Court in Grace Church Street. 1689.

Thomas Camm's. TESTIMONY CONCERNING John Camm and John Audland.
DEar Friends and Brethren, in the fellowship of the eternal Spirit, who are
born again of the Immortal Seed, my Life greets you all in the Lord, and in his
Love communicates what follows unto you, wishing that all Grace and Peace from
God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, may forever be multiplied upon the
whole Israel, of God.

Several Years it has lived upon my Spirit, to collect and gather (...) the
Books and Writings, toge^^^^ with some of the Labour^ (...) Travels of John
Camm and John Audland, those two eminent, faithful and truly honorable
Servants of the Lord Jesus in the Work of the Ministry, to which they were
called and chosen in the morning and breaking forth of that blessed and
everlasting day, in this our Age and Generation; I say this concern has lived
with me, though hitherto has been obstructed, partly in hope that some other
might have undertaken the same work, whereby I might have been excused; and
partly through the Service and Travels the Lord has measureably concerned me
in, on the behalf of his Truth and People in late years.

But now being it has fallen to my lot in Truths Testimony, to be called to
suffer Imprisonment, and thereby at present freed from some of the aforesaid
Service and Travels; and the said concern hitherto resting upon my Spirit, I
was made willing to set to the Work, being partly helped by others, as to
gather and transcribe their Books and written Epistles, so many whereof as we
could meet with are inserted hereafter in their proper places, so near, as we
could, being several of them without dates.

As for their Labors, unwearied Travels, Exercises, Fastings, Watchings
Buffettings, Scornings and Perils many ways, and upon several occasions, in
full I cannot relate, but shall give the Reader a short hint of some part of
them, as they may be brought to my remembrance in the following Testimony,
which lives upon my Spirit to bear for the Lord, in the behalf of them, as made
Instrumental in his hand, through the strength of his holy and eternal Arm of
Power to and in them revealed, to the exalting of his own Glory, and the
publishing of his everlasting Gospel-glad-tidings to the Poor, and Redemption
to the Poor, and Redemption to the Prisoner of Hope, in which blessed Work his
Strength girded, and his Power supported them in all faithfulness to presevere
to the finishing of their Course here; and having fought the good Fight, they
are entered into his everlasting Joy and Rest, where they are freed from their
many Labors, Trials and Exercises, and their Works follow them, glory to God
for ever.

John Camm, as he was my Father according to the Flesh, so was he also a
spiritual Father, and Instructor of me in the way of Truth and Righteousness,
the which through the operation of the Word of Life, measureably revealed in me
in my Childhood, became effectually to my Confirmation in that blessed Way; for
his tender ear was great for the Education of me, and the rest of his Children
and Family, in the Nurture and Fear of the Lord; and as he was sharp and severe
in reproving every appearance of evil, yet with Wisdom, Gravity and great
Discretion, the which appeared also in his encouraging and strengthing every
appearance of God in his Children, Family, and all People, being an especial
example in his life and conversation.

The place of his outward Birth was at Camsgil, within the Barrony of Kendal in
Westmoreland, which place has been possessed by his Ancestors long before him.

As for his Parentage and Education, I shall not say, much more then that it
was honest, and of good report, as any of that degree in that par of the
Country, as many can testfie; as also that he from his Childhood, was inclined
to be Religious, and sought after the best things; and ever since I can
remember, he was one that joined in society with them that were the most strict
and upright in the performance of religious Duties, and ordered their lives
most according to Holiness and Righteousness.

He having seen beyond the national Priests, and their empty lifeless Forms,
and so separated from them, still pressing forward, toward a further
manifestation and revelation of the Way of Salvation, which his Soul hungered
and thirsted after; and therefore he with many others, who were under the same
sense of hunger, often met together amongst themselves; and some openings from
the Lord several of them had, from which they could have declared excellent
things, having some sight or comprehension thereof, yet wanted the inward
possession of the Virtue, Life and Power of what they declared of, and in this
state continued many days.

But the fullness of time being come, wherein the Lord in his everlasting
loving kindness did cause his day to spring from on high, and his Light to
break out of obscurity, and his glorious eternal Gospel to be preached again
upon the Earth, and particularly in this our Nation, having heard the cries of
the Poor, and the sighings of the Prisoners in the Pit; even then the Lord
called and anointed several for his Work and Service, to publish this blessed
day; to bring Glad-tidings, and proclaim the Year of Jubilee.

And first, and more especially, he called forth and made choice of his dear
Servant and faithful Messenger to the Nations, George Fox, and sent him into
the North Country, and particularly into Westmoreland near Kendal; where there
was a Field white unto the Harvest,* a People ripe to be gathered, who as
abovesaid, were separated in measure from the Worlds Worship, and empty dry
Forms of Religion, in many things, and met together as aforesaid, having
several that were become Teachers amongst them, but the chiefest John Audland
and Francis Howgil, amongst whom the Lord sent this his dear Servant and
Messenger George Fox, with the Message of Life; at the publishing whereof in
the Demonstration of the Spirit and Power of Jesus Christ, the aforesaid John
Camm my dear Father, with John Audland, Francis Howgil, Edward Borough, Richard
Hubberthorn, and many Hundreds more were convinced, and their hearts opened, as
was the Heart of Lydia in former days, and by the Revelation of the day of God,
and the inshining of his Heavenly Light in their Hearts, they came to see, that
they wanted the lively possession of what they had made a great profession of,
which profession several of them had esteemed of, as great riches, of all which
they came to be spoiled; their Wisdom that stood in words only being
confounded, they became as Fools, and at the Revelation of Jesus Christ, they
consulted no more there with; but it became as Dross and Dung in comparison of
the excellent Knowledge of Jesus Christ, revealed by his Spirit, to regenerate
them, and sprinkle their Hearts and Consciences from dead words, to which they
were Stangers, notwithstanding their great profession, under the sense of which
great was the Gry and the Lamentation of many, unspeakable; for the day of the
Lord was dreadful and terrible upon every high and exalted thing, and many
lofty ones, and tall Cedars (high in profession) were bowed down under the
mighty hand of Gods Power, and Judgment begun at the House of God, the Heart
his Temple, and by the Spirit of Judgment and Burning the eternal God entered,
and begun his blessed Work, in order to redeem, purge and make clean Vessels
for his own use and service, through and by whom he might carry on his blessed
design and work in the Nations to the Glory of his Eternal, Name.

And John Camm, amongst many others, was bowed down under the mighty Power of
the Lord, and the operation of the blessed Spirit was effectually known in his
Heart and Soul, whereby he was made willing to take up the Cross, and become a
Fool for Christ's sake, forsaking the World, and all the Glory, Delights,
Pleasures, Wisdoms and Riches of it, of which he had enjoyed a share equal, if
not above many of his degree; for naturally he was a Wise Man in Worldly
matters, having at that time great concerns and dealings therein; and the World
seemed to smile upon him, and the riches and glory of it had exceedingly
increased, and was then likely to increase more; yet notwithstanding all this,
the Lord so prevailed by his Power and Spirit in his Heart, that he was made
willing to part with all, and counted it a blessed exchange, to be made an Heir
in Christ of that durable Riches laid up in Heaven, that his Soul had Traveled
for, so that it was no hard thing for him to forsake all for Christ's sake, and
become a despised Follower of him through many Tribulations.

And after a day of great trouble and inward exercise, through the blessed
operation of that Spirit of Judgment and Burning, wherein he saw the old
Heavens and Earth to pass away as a Scrole, and all things to be made new, even
as a prepared Vessel^, the Lord filled him with his Power and Spirit, and put
his Word in his Mouth, and called him from all his outward concerns and
enjoyments, to publish the same word in the Demonstration of his eternal Power,
unto which he of a ready mind was made obedient; and Traveled into all the
Northren Countries, to the Borders of Scotland, and to London, to declare the
Message of the Lord to Oliver Cromwell, then called Protector, being accompanied
by dear Francis Howgil, who were two of the first that published the Message of
Truth, in that City, as in this our day gloriously revealed and made known.

In a little time after his return from London, he with J. Audland, F. Howgil,
Edward Borough and Richard, Huberthorn; (who have all blessedly finished their
Course and time here, in that blessed Work, which the Lord called them unto,
being entered into the Joy of the Lord; the Labors, together with part of the
Travels of Francis* Howgil, Edward Borough and Richard Huberthorn are already
collected by other Brethren, to which the Reader is referred) these five
Brethren Traveled out Southward, John Camm and Edward Borough through the
middle of the Nation, the others through other parts, as the Lord directed,
them, and after some time they all met together, with several other Brethren,
at London, where the Lord had a great Work; but after some time John Camm and
John Audland were called toward Bristol, (after that time Traveling together)
where, and in the Countries adjacent, was a Door effectually opened unto them,
and many Hundreds were by the Word and Testimony of Truth, by them published,
convinced and turned to God, many of whom have to this day kept their Integrity
to God, and are their living Epistles, and can bless the Lord on their behalfs,
who made them instrumental in his Hand, to beget them again into a lively hope
in Christ the Lord, through whom they have a strong hope, to receive an
Inheritance amongst the Sanctified, being prepared to the Kingdom of glory
everlasting.

How gloriously the Lord appeared in that City, and the Countries adjacent, and
how he prospered his Work in the Hands of these his Servants, how great and
manifold their Labors, Travels, and Perils in those Parts I am not able to
relate, but shall leave, in hope that some one or other of my Brethren in those
Parts, may be engaged to perform some part of that work, who may have a larger
knowledge thereof, as being present with them in many of their exercises, which
were not a few to my knowledge; but such was their zeal for the Lord, and the
prosperity of his work, that their very lives was not dear unto them, for the
Lord, the Gospel, and his Peoples sake, but to spend and be spent they were
freely in the will of the Lord given up, their care and watchings being for the
prosperity of his work continually.

And being that my Father was but naturally of a weak constitution of Body,
inclining to be Consumptive, by the many and daily Travels that he underwent,
his outward Body did waste, and his strength spend exceedingly, having a most
violent Cough, so that for several Years before his death, he was never able to
walk on Foot half a Mile at one time, nay, many times he was not able to go up
one pair of Stairs, into a Meeting Place, without help, yet nevertheless while
the Meeting continued (through the enlivening Power and Spirit of God) would
have been over the sense of his Bodily weakness, but after the Meeting was
over, many times as one ready to be dissolved.

In this outward weakness he Traveled through many Countries and places of the
Nation, to the confirming and strengthening of the Flock of God, for several
Years; sometimes taking me along with him, to wait upon him, his weakness being
grown so great, that he was not able many times to get on or of his Horse,
without help; through all which the Lord brought him, his faith being fixed in
his power; and his life and whole delight was in the prosperity of Truth and
Righteousness in the Earth, amongst the Sons of Men.

He was a Man that was richly furnished with the gifts of the holy Spirit,
always patient in his great exercises and weakness, of a noble Spirit, and
exceeding grave in his carriage and deportment, profound in judgment, and of a
quick discerning, a sharp reprover of the World, and the Wickedness therein, as
also all deceitful Hypocrites, with disorderly walkers, who made profession of
Truth, but walked not according to the Rule thereof. Unity of the Brethren was
his joy and Souls delight, and therefore whatever appeared to break the same,
his Sword was keen upon to Wound, his Ministry was weighty and deep, and very
powerful, not pleasant to the itching Ears that loves smooth words, but reached
to the witness of God, and tended to the refreshment of the Seed of the
Kingdom, where it was growing and springing up in the Hearts of Gods People;
also to the weary, tossed and afflicted; he had often a word in season to their
Consolations, being very tender over the good in all; he had openings and
sights of many things to come; and he would often say, there would come a day
of Famine, and that in that day, many that had made a great show, would but be
like the stony Ground, or the broken Bow in the day of Battle; he would also
often say, that his other Son, my Brother; would be an Esau, a rough Man, and
not love the Truth, but be a Grief and Exercise to his Mother, but she would
have Comfort of her other Children, all which is fulfilled; when he grew near
his end, his weakness increasing, he had great joy as he always had in the
company of Friends that were faithful, of which many came to visit him; and
many times he would have been wonderfully opened with the Power of the Lord,
and overcome with the sense of his Love and Peace, and a fresh Testimony
thereof he would often bear, to the great refreshment of Friends and his
Family, when he lay in great weakness upon his Bed.

His great care in all his Travels was, that the Gospel of Christ which he had
to publish, might be without charge, for all he had or enjoyed of outward
things, was freely given up to the Service of Truth, so that he was willing to
lay out part of the same in his Travels; also his Heart and House was open, to
entertain all Friends that came in Truths Service, having a great Comfort
therein; he was a pattern of faithfulness in suffering for Truth's Testimony,
though never much in Prison, yet his Goods were often spoiled or taken away,
which he suffered joyfully in Truth's Testimony against Tithes, in which
Testimony, and all other relating to Truth, he was ever firm, and never shrunk
in the least, his frequent Exhortations was to all Friends, and his Family, to
be valiant and noble for Truth, and to keep their Faith in God's power, and
never to look out, or consult with the Wisdom of the World.

He did often call his Children and Family together, and exhort them with much
fervency of Spirit, to fear the Lord, and walk in holiness of Life, as becomes
the Gospel that they had believed in; and would often pray to the Lord for us,
and bless us in his Name, some Months before he died; he would often call for
me to be with him, for he loved me entirely, and it was my joy and delight to
serve and obey him in all things; and many times he would wonderfully extol the
Name of the Lord, and praise him for his goodness, and great mercy, counting
his bodily weakness a happiness, being sanctified unto him by that Word
eternal, which had sanctified his Soul, and made him an honorable Vessel, to
the praise of his God, under the sense of which he would say, How great a
benefit do I enjoy beyond many, who have such a large time of preparation for
Death, being dying daily, that I may live for ever with my God, in that Kingdom
that is unspeakably full of glory; my outward Man daily wastes and moulders down,
and draws toward its place and center, but my inward Man revives and mounts
upward toward its Place and Habitation in the Heavens, in the sense whereof
his Soul would often wonderfully magnify the Lord.

That very Morning that he departed this Transitory Life, he called my Mother
the Children and Family unto him, gave us many good and seasonable
Instructions, to fear the Lord, love his Way and Truth, and walk in it with
upright Hearts; charging us to be kind and loving one unto another, telling us
that his Glass was run, the time of his Departure was come, he was to enter
into everlasting Ease, Joy and Rest; charging us all to be patient, and content
with our parting with him, as to the outward, and so presently fainting passed
quietly away into a sweet Sleep; whereupon we were all so overcome with Sorrow
and Weeping, some of us aloud; as one out of Sleep he was again a wakened, and
desired to be a little helped up in his Bed, speaking to this effect, My dear
Hearts, you have wronged me, and disturbed me, for I was at sweet Rest, you
should not so Passionately sorrow for my departure, this House of Earth and
Clay must go to its place; but this Soul and Spirit was to be gathered up to
the Lord, to live with him forever, where we should meet with everlasting Joy;
so again taking his leave of every one of us, and charging us to be content
with his Departure, lay down (and we being troubled, and reflecting upon our
selves for the disturbance we had given him through our Impatience, endeavored
Contentedness) and in a little time he departed, as to the outward, but lives
with us in the Spirit; and being Dead his Life Preaches, and is a sweet savor
to the Lord and his People: His Distemper was a Cough and Consumption: And he
departed this Life in 1665. being the seventh day of the Week, and the next day
was his Body laid in Friends Burying Place at Birk-rigg-Park, he being the
first that was Buried in that Place.

John Audland was Born in the same County, not above a Mile from Camsgil, his
Parents and Kindred of good Repute; who when he was but a Child was of a very
ripe and quick wit of Understanding and Apprehension, though somewhat
inclineable to youthful Play, execept which; never addicted to any Vice; about
the Age of seventeen or eighteen Years, the Lord inclined his Heart to
Sobriety, and reading the holy Scriptures, and to be very Religious in what was
then manifested; so that he chose the Company and Society of the best and most
Religious in that day, and having a large Understanding, and great Memory, he
became able in the Knowledge of the Scriptures; and could largely discourse of
things relating to Religion, and the Duties thereof; in so much, that amongst a
Society then gathered, or separated from the common National way of Worship, he
became an eminent Teacher, and highly esteemed of amongst them; and not only
so, but many times he would have gone to Chapels, or the Parish Steeple*house,
where there was some Idle Sottish Priests, and there would have Preached, and
abundance of People was taken and affected with him; and in great Multitudes
would have flocked after him: Now being grown upward of twenty years of Age, he
took to Wife a Sober, Virtuous, and Religious Maid, of the same Separated
Society, called Ann Newby of Kendal, and the Lord made them a great Comfort and
Blessing each to other, while they both lived together, which was about
thirteen years. Since the Death of her Husband, the Lord by his Providence has
Blessed me with the enjoyment of her being given me to Wife.

But in the fullness of God's appointed time, as aforesaid, the Lord sent his
Messenger and Servant George Fox, and by the Message of Life by him Preached,
in the Demonstration of the Spirit and Power of the Lord Jesus Christ: This
John Audland was reached the first time that ever he heard him; and he received
George Fox into his House, being fully satisfied that he was one that
possessed, what he himself had but a notion and profession of; and then by the
Revelation of Jesus Christ, in the Light of God's eternal day he came to see
the emptiness of his great Profession, and high flown Notion, and that all his
own Righteousness was but as filthy Rags, Dross and Dung; so that he sat down
in silence and astonishment, like Job, for many days; and great and weighty
was the Work of the Lord upon his Spirit, being as a Man stripped of all his
earthly Wisdom, and his Profession being confounded and brought to naught,
under the exercise of the Hand of the Lords Power; he did Mourn and Weep
bitterly, biding adieu, adieu to all the World, and all the empty Professions
therein; a great Hunger and Thirst the Lord having raised in his Heart and
Soul, for a Savior, one of a Thousand that could give a Ransom for his Soul,
and redeem him from the Pit of Corruption, for he saw all his great Profession,
all his Wisdom and Knowledge could not help him; but it was the Lord alone that
his Soul Thirsted for, who heard his Cries and Mourning in a time acceptable,
and in a day of great compassion; and revealed his saving Health, and redeeming
Arm of eternal Power, in alarge measure, by which he raised him, up fitting and
filling him with all Wisdom and Strength, for the performance of that Work and
Service that the Lord had predestined himfor, and to be concerned in, to the
Glory of his eternal Name, in gathering home the outcasts of Israel, and the
dispersed of Jacob, who had been held under a strange King, in great and most
grievous Bondage; to which Work the Lord in a short time called him, anointing
him to Preach and Publish Redemption in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ to
the Poor, and deliverance to the Captive exile, the Year of Jubilee: And the day
of Vengeance upon the Wicked; in which Work he was found faithful, being filled
with power and might from on high, and girded with the strength of the Almighty.

And leaving all outward concerns and enjoyments, he faithfully Traveled
through many parts of the Nation, and the Dread, Wisdom and Majesty of the
eternal God was with him; and the mighty and high exalted ones, bowed before
the Lord and his Power in all places wherever the Lord called him; and many
Hundreds were Convinced and turned to God through him, as a chosen Vessel, and
prepared Instrument in the Hand of the Lord of Hosts; Glory, Glory to God for
ever says my Soul,

The blessed remembrance of this mighty and notable day of the Lord, and the
splendant breaking forth of his Glory in the Morning thereof in this Nation,
often, and at this time breaks my Heart, and makes my Spirit rejoice in the God
of my Salvation; and his eternal Power and Presence, that was with this, and
other of his faithful Servants, in the first Publishing of the Gospel in this
our day, can never be forgotten by many; but the great and blessed Work that
the Lord has wrought by the Arm of his holy Power, revealed in and through his
Servants, is greatly to be admired for ever, for many thousands of his Israel
has the Lord gathered and brought home that were afar of; and has given them
a City with Foundations, whose Walls and Bulwarks is Salvation, in which
Praises waits for him, and is sounded sorth unto the Lord, and the Lamb that
sits upon the Throne, and Reigns for ever more.

As he was diligent and laborious in the Work and Service of the Lord in many
parts of the Nation, so was he furnished for that Service, as the effects and
Fruits thereof has abundantly demonstrated, in many places where the Lord made
him as a Father through the Word of his Power and Spirit, to beget and turn
many to God, but most especially in and about Bristol, and several Counties in
the West of England, where many can speak and bear Testimony, to the effectual
working of that Word of Reconciliation that God had given him to publish, by
which they were turned from Darkness to the blessed Light thereof.

In those Countries and many others his Labors and Travels were great, being
often accompanied by my Father, John Camm; as long as he had strength outwardly
to Travel, their Hearts being firmly knit together, as David and Jonathan, by
the Bond of unspeakable Love, their very Lives being endearedly bound up in
each other, in which Bond of Love their Unity was kept inviolated unto the end;
whereby their Labors and Travels together were-very comfortable and joyous,
being perfectly of one heart and spirit, and minding the same things, the glory
of God, and the gathering of his Israel, in which Service they spent their
days and strength.

After my Father, John Camm, grew weak of Body, and at last was taken away: Oh,
how John Audland would often bemoan the loss of so dear a Companion and
faithful Brother, he being left behind, to bear the Burden of many weighty
Travels and Concerns, yet through and over all the Lord assisted him to the end.

I was from my Childhood very intimately acquainted with him, and loved him
with a Brotherly Love, before we were brought into the blessed Way and Life of
Truth, as now revealed, after which we became more inwardly acquainted, and
endearedly bound up together in a more Heavenly and Spiritual relation, the
Fellowship therein being our Life and Joy; and therefore can give a certain
account of the Gift and Graces of God, by which he was adorned and beautified
inwardly and outwardly.

He was a Man beloved of God and all good Men, and esteemed of by most that
knew him; of a quick Apprehension, and great understanding, of a noble Spirit,
yet in humility condescending to serve the least in Truth; his Company was
exceeding delightful and pleasant, being always cheerful, his discourse good
and tending to Edification, exceeding ripe in the Knowledge of the holy
Scriptures, and of a strong Memory; he was often concerned in Disputations with
Priests and other Opposers of the Way of Truth, that he bore Testimony too, and
walked in; and the Lord had richly furnished him for that Service, to the
stopping the Mouths of Gainsayers to Truths honor; his Declaration and
Testimony exceeding large, free and affecting, almost to all sorts of People,
many with great delight would flock to hear him in many places, which made his
Service very great, in opening the way of Truth unto all; he having a Word in
season to all Conditions, insomuch that he regarded not his outward Body, but
many times went beyond the natural strength thereof, notwithstanding that he
was young and strong, yet in this Service was much spent several Years before
he departed and laid down his Head.

His Life was bound up in the Unity and Fellowship of Friends and Brethren, his
Labor was ever to conserve the same, and prevent whatever would appear to
divide: As he was honorable in the esteem of Thousands that the Lord through
him had called, and brought (many of them) to the Knowledge of the way of Life
and Salvation; so also had he a right honorable esteem of such as were in
Christ before him, and especially dear George Fox, by whom he was Convinced; He
was very tender to the springings of Life in Testimony in the least Babe,
always ready to encourage and give place to the same, for it was his great Joy
to see the Lord's Work to prosper, and the Testimony of Truth to spring in
every Bosom: In Counsel and Advice he was endewed with heavenly Wisdom beyond
many; in reproving the Careless and Rebellious he was sharp and powerful: In
fine, I have this to say, that he was abundantly furnished with spiritual
Gifts, a chosen and honorable Vessel in the Hand of his God, to the Praise and
Glory of his eternal Name.

Many comfortable days and times have I enjoyed with him, whom I loved and
honored in the Lord, and I am not unsensible of his Love to me, our Hearts
being perfectly united and knit together, in that love that is everlasting,
passing the love of Women; I never thought Travel hard or tedious at any time,
so that I might enjoy his Company, in which I was always delighted greatly
satisfied, whatever difficulty soever I under-went to obtain the same.

After he was first called forth into the Work and Service of the Lord, he was
very diligent therein almost in continual Travels, and several times was in
Prison for his Testimonies sake; as at New Castle in the North, and Bristol;
often in great Perils in the beginning, having many rough places to break
through, where many times he Suffered sore Beatings, and many Strokes together,
with cruel Mockings, Revilings and Scornings from the wicked Rabble often; and
sometimes from angry bitter-spirited Professors, through and over all which the
Lord preserved him to his own Glory, to inherit a Kingdom that is everlasting,
for he counted nothing dear unto him for the Gospels sake, but left his dear
Wife and Child (whom he loved entirely) and Trade, and all to follow the Lord
Jesus Christ, the Captain of Salvation, having an eye to the eternal recompense
of Reward, that the Lord has given him fully to enjoy.

His dear Wife was not long after him, called forth into the same Work and
Service, and Traveled into several Parts of the North Country, and after into
the South, where at Banbury in Oxfordshire, she was a Prisoner for one Year
and several Months, the Lord making her instrumental in his Hand, to the
turning many from Darkness to Light in that place, and many other places where
she Traveled.

When J. A. did grow weaker, by his lingering Distemper of a sore Cough, his
Lungs wasting, he would often complain of an inward soreness in his Breast,
though he seemed to look well, being of a Ruddy and fair Complexion, and would
often say; Ah! those great Meetings in the Orchard at Bristol, I may not
forget; I would so gladly have spread my Net over all, and have gathered all,
that I forgot my self, never considering the imability of my Body; but its well
my reward is with me, and I am content to give up, and be with the Lord, for
that my Soul values above all things.

Betwixt two and three weeks before he died, he was taken (as was supposed)
with an hective Fever, and daily it increased upon him; so that his sleep for
many days and nights was taken from him, in which time I was often with him,
being his desire and my delight to serve him; in which time Friends in
abundance flocked to visit him from several parts; for, as I said before, he
was a man greatly beloved of the Lord, and all his People, yea, many of the
World had a good esteem of and loved him, and many times the Lord did
wonderfully open his Mouth in Testimony to Friends (as if he had been without
sense of his Sickness) to their great refreshment and exceeding joy; and often
he would be raised upon his Knecs upon his Bed, and supplicate the Lord in the
behalf of his whole Heritage; and to prosper his Work in the Nation and Nations
round about: he said that there was nothing in all the World, that he desired
to live to enjoy, except the comfortable enjoyment of his Friends and Brethren
in the fellowship of the Life of Truth, and that he might be a comfort to his
dearly beloved Wife; whose desolate condition he often bemoaned; being so big
with Child (as that she was delivered of a Son about ten days after his
decease) but in this he said his will was in true subjection, submitting to the
Will of the Lord, whether life or death; to God he often and again committed
and recommended all the whole Flock, Heritage and Family of God, together with
his dear Wife and Child, to be kept, cared for, and preserved; saying that he
would be a Husband to his desolate Widow, and a tender Father to his fatherless
Children, often entreating his dear Wife freely to give him up to the Will and
disposing of the Almighty, whose he was, being made acceptable in the beloved
Son; often sweetly comforting her in her Sorrow and great Distress, making as
little show of his illness (for her sake) as ever he might: yet we saw that he
was under a great weight of Sickness, and that his strength daily wasted, so
that in less then three weeks time after the Fever took him, he finished here,
and was sweetly taken to rest in the joy of the Lord for ever more, it being
the day of the first Month 1663. and the next day was accompanied to his Grave,
by many Friends and others, and his Body enterred in the aforesaid burying
place at Birkrigge-Park.

And although the departure hence of these two faithful Brethren, and true
Laborers in the Lords Work, (whose presence with, and Labors amongst us was
comfortable and joyous,) may be loss to me and many others; yet in this we are
satisfied that its their gain, being freed from their Labors and their Works
follow them; and that they are entered into the Kingdom of eternal Glory,
where thev shall live to Magnify the Lord World without End. Amen.

And though their outward Bodies be gone to the dust, and therefore their
bodily presence we are deprived of; yet their Spirits are enjoyed, and their
lives are amongst us and Preaches, and their Names and remembrance is, and
shall be a sweet Memorial, and good Savor to Ages and Generations to come,
being numbered amongst the Lord's Worthies, and the Valiants of his Israel, who
never turned their Backs of their Enemies, neither fainted in their greatest
exercises; but their Bows like Joseph's always abode in strength, being helped
by the Mighty God of Jacob, before whom all Nations is but as the drop of a
Bucket, or the small Dust of the Balance, whose Breath does slay the wicked,
and his right hand does crush his Enemies and his blessed Work begun he has
determined to Prosper; since he will finish and put an utter end to
transgression; that he may reveal bring in and establish his everlasting
Righteousness, and cover the Earth with his Truth as with a Garment, and the
Kingdoms of this World must become the Kingdom of the Lord and his Christ,
whose right it is to reign, and will reign, when he has overturned and
overturned, till his Scepter be lifted up over all; and his Government be
extended from Sea to Sea, and from one end of the Earth to the other, and his
Sion be beautified with Salvation and Jerusalem become the praise of the whole
Earth; even thus exalt thy name, O God, says my Soul, from henceforth and for
ever more. That the Righteous may sing of thy Praise, and tell of thy Wondrous
Works, and extol thy Holy Name and Power over all to reign and rule, World
without end, Amen.

From Apleby Goal the place of my present confinement for the Testimony of
Jesus, This 14th of the 12th Month, 1680. Thomas Camm.

The Testimony of Ann Camm concerning John Audland her late Husband deceased.
COncerning my dear Husband John Audland deceased, I am under Obligation to
bear this following Testimony, as one that had the advantage beyond all others
to know, as well his Qualifications, endowments and Gifts given him of God,
whether Spiritual or Temporal; as also his great Labors and Travels in that
blessed work and service of the Lord, his Truth and People, that he was in the
Morning of the day called unto, and preserved in (in all fidelity and
faithfulness to the spending of his natural strength) to the end of his days
and finishing of his Course here, in order to be swallowed up in eternal Joy
for evermore.

The eternal God, who by his Providence joined us together in Marriage in our
young days, in his blessed Counsel also caused his day to spring from on high
upon us, in the marvelous Light, and bright shining whereof he revealed his Son
Christ in us, and gave us Faith to believe in him the eternal Word of Life, by
which our Souls came to be quickened and made alive in him, and also in and by
the quickening Power of his holy Power we were made one, in a Spiritual and
Heavenly relation, our hearts being knit together in the unspeakable love of
Truth, which was our Life, Joy and Delight, and made our days together
exceeding comfortable, as being that whereby all our temporal enjoyments were
sanctified, and made a blessing unto us.

How exceeding dear and kindly affectionate Husband he was to me, I am far
short in ability to declare; but in a word shall say, that I believe few ever
enjoyed a greater blessing in a Husband, then I in him, and notwithstanding
that I loved his company, and the enjoyment of him with me, above all the
World; yet nevertheless in submission to the Will of God (whose chosen Vessel
he was) and also in respect to the honorable Service of Truth, and the
publication thereof which he was called unto; I could freely give him up as to
be separated from in the outward a great part of, our time after we were
convinced of Gods blessed Truth* and made living Witnesses of the virtuous
Life, and powerful Operation thereof, as in this our day gloriously made known
to the everlasting joy of our immortal Souls.

But before this blessed work came to be effected, great was the warfare and
inward exercise, that my dear Husband underwent, under the chastizing Hand of
the Lord, and the Spirit of Judgment and of burning that was at work in his
inward parts, in order to sanctify him for the Lords own use and service; for
when the Lords blessed and honorable day Broke upon him, he was high in Notion
and Profession, imagining that he had been filled with durable Riches and
Wisdom; but in the Light of this day he saw the emptiness of it all, while he
wanted the Substance, Life in the eternal Word, and by the same to be
sanctified throughout. Therefore under the sense of this great want, many and
great were his Sighs and Groans, and his Tears not a few; Days and Nights of
Sorrow many a one he underwent, the Word and Power of the Lord being as a Fire
revealed within him, to burn the great building, that he had been erecting and
setting up of Hay, Wood and Stuubble; and in this exercise I also had a share
with him, and in great Lamentation I have heard him often Sorrowfully say; Ah!
what have we been doing? what have we been laboring for? or what avails our
great Profession? all our building tumbles down; our Profession is high as the
Wind; the Day of the Lord is upon it, and his Word as a Fire consumes it as dry
Stubble; and put's an end unto all empty Professions, and high Notions without
Life or Substance to all the Wisdom of fallen man: we must forsake the World,
and all its glory; its all but Vanity and Vexation of Spirit; it is a Savior
that I long for, it is him that my Soul pants after; Oh! that I may be
comprehended into his Life and over-shadowed with his Glory, sanctified
throughout by his Word, and raised up by his eternal Power. To this effect did
his Soul often Travel before the Lord; and the Lord who had called him for the
purpose of his own Glory, was nor unmindful of him; but had regard to his
blessed work begun, to prosper the same, that so out of the Furnace of
Affliction a pure and clean Vessel might be brought forth; And then the Lord
plentifully poured upon him of his holy Spirit, filling him with all Wisdom and
Power to publish and proclaim his everlasting Gospel, and to bring Glad-tidings
to the poor, the Day of deliverance to the captivated Souls, and to say unto
Sion that her King reigns.

And thus the Eternal God having fitted and furnished his dear Servant, he
called him forth into several parts of the Nation; and the Lord appeared with
him in his glory, and gave him Authority in his Power, even to tread upon
Scorpions, and to put to flight the Armies of the Alians; God having given him
the Tongue of the Learned, to speak a word in season to the Weary and heavy
Laden, and Wisdom to divide that word aright which he had put in his Mouth to
publish in his Name; by which he became eminent in his work and service, a
blessing to Thousands, who can bless the Lord on his behalf.

How great was his Travels in Soul, Body and Spirit? how unwearied in his
Labors? and how manifold his Trials and Sufferings in full, is beyond my
ability to relate, notwithstanding that I knew more thereof then any other
living; but inasmuch as my now dear Husband has in his foregoing Testimony in
part hinted at them, and happily may be added to by some other in or about
Bristol (where his Labors, Travels and Sufferings was exceeding great) I shall
not much endeavor to under take that work, being well satisfied, that whether
any thing had been related thereof or no; its known to the Lord, and lives in
the remembrance of Thousands, who can testify to his faithful and effectual
Labors, in the Word and Gospel in his day, and that he counted not his life
dear, that he might be found in the discharge of a good Conscience, (in that
concern) in the sight of God and men; who are his living witnesses this day, to
the praise of the eternal God, to whom alone belongs all the Glory for ever.

He was a man of an exceeding sweet disposition, unspeakably loving and
tenderly affectionate, always ready to lend a helping hand to the weak and
needy, open-hearted, free and near to his Friends, deep in the understanding of
Heavenly Mysteries, willing and able to give advice and counsel to the
afflicted and bowed down, with whom he always did sympathize in their
sufferings; he was abundantly filled with Love and endeared kindness to all his
Brethren, and fellow Laborers in the Gospel, and had an honorable esteem of
the least that was faithful in that work, and his life was bound up in the
unity and fellowship of the Spirit with them; whatever would in the least
appear to break that bond amongst Friends, he was sharp in the Authority of
Truth against, to judge the same.

He was greatly beloved, and highly esteemed of in the Lord, for his works
sake; notwithstanding, not lifted up thereby, but preserved in great humility
and lamb-like lowliness, never seeking to Lord over Gods Heritage; but to serve
the least for the Gospels sake, always detesting self exaltation in whom soever
it appeared.

His Body and outward Strength was much spent, through his great Labors for
several Years before the Fever took him, of which he dyed, so that he
under-went many wearisome nights, through the exercise of a most violent Cough,
though he bore it with unspeakable patience and contentedness.

In the time of his sickness which was sharp and strong upon him, after the
Fever took him, so that his Sleep was taken from him for several days and
nights; yet he bore it also with wonderful Patience, being always of an
exceeding cheerful Spirit; Friends daily coming to visit him in abundance, from
several parts, he was often drawn forth in a living sweet Testimony, the Lords
Power and Life living with him, to the great refreshment and tendering of the
Hearts of many; he was also exceedingly filled with the high Praises of God,
being as one overcome and ravished in the sense of Gods Love, Joy and Peace
everlasting; When he grew weak he would be helped up upon his Knees, and upon
his bed sweetly supplicate the Lord, in the behalf of Friends present, and all
the Lords Flock and Heritage every where, that they might be preserved in his
powerful Truth, and out of the evil of the World, and that his Truth and Gospel
might be more and more spread and published to the gathering of all that
appertain to Israel.

He was greatly afficted in the sense of my Sorrow, (occasioned by his great
weakness which I saw daily to increase upon him) lamenting my desolate
ondition, to be left so Big with Child, as that I was within a few days after
his Death delivered; and therefore did very wisely and tenderly comfort me,
withal desiring me to give him up freely to the disposing of the Lord whose he
was, and enjoyed his pure peace; And although it was hard to part with so dear,
and beleved a Husband, yet the Lord strengthened me, and I seeing the extremity
of his Distemper to be exceeding heavy upon him, and to increase, I was made
willing to go to him, and freely recommend him into the Hands of the Eternal
Living God, to dispose of him according to his divine Pleasure, and
unsearchable Wisdom and Counsel, whether Life or Death; the which added to his
ease and my peace, in true submission to the Will of the Lord; so his Body
daily weakening, and his Distemper prevailing; he notwithstanding being mostly
kept sensible to the last, continuing in Prayer, and Praising the Lord, often
and again recommending me, and his Daughter then living, (whom he dearly loved)
into the keeping of his God, with Supplication, that he would be an Husband to
his desolate Widow, and a Father to his Fatherless Children, he sweetly fell on
sleep, and finished his Course and the year time by my now Husband before set
down, being passed into the fullness of eternal Joy, which his Eye was only to,
and his Soul breathed for, more then length of days in the enjoyment of the
World, or its Riches: Glory, Glory and eternal Praises to the Lord for ever,
and for evermore, Amen.

How hard it was, and how great a loss to part with so dear and tender an
Husband as he was to me, it being always (I can truly say) his joy and
delight, to add to my ease, good, and content every way (especially my estate
and condition being considered) is far beyond what I can express, the dolor of
my Heart my Tongue or Pen is not able to declare, yet in this I contented my
self, that it was the Will of the Lord, and that he was taken from the evil,
and freed from his manifold exercises, and that my loss though great was not to
be compared to his eternal gain, being entered into that everlasting and
blessed rest with the Lord, prepared in the Heavens for all the faithful
Followers of the Lamb, through the many Tribulations, where being freed from
all Pain and Sorrow, and Tears being wiped away, shall for ever Praise the Lord
upon mount Sion.

Great was his joy in the prosperity of the Work of the Lord, in the Hands of
his Servants called thereto, and who were faithful therein his Soul honored
for their work sake; on the contrary, where any was slack or negligent, or
taught themselves in an exalted mind, it grieved his Spirit exceedingly, I have
known him often to lament and mourn under the exercise thereof.

Some time before he was taken out of the Body he had a clear sight or Vision
upon his Bed (I being at that time with him) concerning two, (I shall not need
to name them, the Vision being fulfilled, has marked them out to all whose
Eyes are open) who were with him in the beginning called to the work and
service of the Gospel, and being in measure together with himself concerned
therein, yet grew slack in that work, and begun to be exalted and gathered to,
and sought themselves; and being that his Spirit was so grieved therewith, and
time has given to see the clear fulfilling thereof; I have had it weightily
upon my Spirit for a long time (as my Husband and some other Friends can bear
me record) to publish the same, for the Glory of that eternal God that reveals
his Secrets to those that fear him, and by his holy Spirit gives to see things
to come; and also for the service of Truth and Friends, and as a reproof upon
the slack and exalted ones who seek themselves, not the Glory of God, nor the
good or unity of his People, upon whom its evidently fulfilled; and in as much
as the Lord has made way for the foregoing Testimony relating to my dear
Husband J. A. deceased; in the discharge of my Conscience, and to ease my
Spirit of its Burden, I am engaged to insert the Substance thereof as
follows, judging it both a proper place and season.

It was on this wise, viz. He saw a very large Mine, where there was very much
precious Ore to be dug out, but with great and hard Labor, and the Lord and
Master had called him, with many more, to Labor in this Mine, in order to work
and digg out this good and precious Ore, and who was most dilligent in Labor
was to be most liberally rewarded, and the command was that they might work in
every part of the Mine, but must all gather to oneplace, and to one heap, and
the work prospered, and became exceeding great, to the glory of the Lord, and
their Joy and comfort who were found diligent; but in process of time he looked
behind him, upon others that were laboring, and amongst them beheld two (who
had been ancient Laborers) to begin to slack, and would but work where it was
most easy, in their own time, and by their own appointment not regarding the
command of their Lord; and not only so, but when they found a piece of Ore more
rich and goodly then some other, whether it was of their own digging or no,
they did gather it to another private heap of their own, for themselves, to
their own benefit, and not the Lords; whereupon he cried out in the grief and
bitterness of his exercise to see such disobey the Lords command, in gathering
to their own heap; Ah! Lord, it was thy command, that we should all work at thy
appointment, and gather to one heap, and for a time it was so, and thy Heap
increased and Work prospered; but now there is two, that is begun to gather to
themselves, to their own heap, and not to thee; And being in a great exercise
of mind and Spirit, he a woke, and the power of the Lord was upon him, and did
make him Tremble very much; and under the sense of what he had seen he did sigh
and mourn greatly; whereupon I asked him, what was the occasion of so great
exercise, and he told me with much Sorrow what he had seen concerning those two
Laborers, that had been called to the work and gathering to the Lord, with him
and many others, and whilst faithful, were loved with a Brotherly love, for
their works sake; and further told me, that the thing would come to pass, and
be fulfilled in a few years; as certainly it is, as many can testify; yet,
notwithstanding Gods gathering goes forward, and his heap daily increases; and
the idle slack unfaithful, and the self-gatherers shall be covered with Rags,
and shall have their Portion with the rebellious in a dry Land.

Before his departure he would often be speaking of his being taken from me,
desiring me to be content therewith, for the Lord would care for me, and by his
heavenly Providence order for the supply of my want of him, as I kept my trust
in the Lord: And truly even so it has come to pass, blessed be the Lord, who
has blessed me with the enjoyment of another faithful Husband according to my
Hearts desire, to my unspeakable comfort; so that I might justly reflect upon
my self for great ingratitude, if I should not both humbly and thankfully
acknowledge the care and blessing of my God to be exceeding large and great,
for which my Soul is under Obligation for ever, to extol and magnify his holy,
living and powerful Name.

And thus having in the foregoing Testimony cleared my Spirit, as it lived
with me in the sight of God, I shall conclude with an humble Address to his
heavenly Majesty, in the behalf of all his gathered ones, that they may be kept
and preserved in all faithfulness and holy Obedience, by the Arm of his
everlasting power, that having run their race and finished their course, they
may with their Brethren that are gone before, be swallowed up in immortallity
for evermore, and that by the same eternal Arm (that hitherto has not only
girded me with strength to undergo many Trials, and deep exercises, but also
has been abundantly stretched forth to double and redouble blessings both
spiritual and temporal upon me) I may be assisted to answer the unspeakable
Mercies of my God, in all Faithfulness and holy Obedience; and having fought
the good fight of faith, and finished my course with joy; in the fullness of
Gods appointed time being made acceptable in the beloved Son, I may enter into
that eternal Kingdom of Glory, that is prepared for the faithful, into which my
late dear Husband, with a Remnant of faithful Brethren are already entered; to
rest with the Lord in the heavenly enjoyment of them, and together with them,
to Laud and Praise his honorable Name in the Highest, World without end, Amen,
Amen.

Camsgil the 4th day of the 2th Month 1681. Ann Camm.

A Testimony to the glorious Morning of the Day of unexpressible Visitation of
the Love of God, (in particular to the City of Bristol, and adjacent Parts) and
to the great and mighty Power of the Lord, appearing in and with his two
precious Servants, Jobn Camm and John Audland, who came to the City in the year
1654.
AFter the long, and tedious Night of Apostasy spread over Nations, and dismal
Darkness over People, it pleased the Lord God of Heaven and Earth to visit this
Northern Island, and first the Northern part thereof; with the Morning of his
ever blessed day; from whence came the aforesaid blessed Servants of the Lord
Jesus; having received the everlasting Gospel, from the Angel of Gods presence,
to Preach in the demonstration of his Mighty Power; with which indeed they were
filled. John Camm was an Ancient man, full of Zeal and Fervency in the Gospel;
endued with the precious Gift of discerning, and sound Judgment; terrible to
the man of Sin, and full of bowels and tenderness to the traveling Souls;
Sharp and terrible to the evil, but sweet and Friendly to the tender; and well
inclined unto the way of Righteousness, not sparing his weak body, which he
offered up, even unto Death, to serve the Lord God in his blessed work of
gathering, which he saw in a plentiful manner to his great satisfaction; a
farther Testimony of him, as to his Country, Life, Travels and Death, is given
by his dear Wife, and Thomas Camm his Son, and his Wife, to which I refer. His
memory is blessed, and his place is among the living Ancients in Jerusalem.

John Audland was a younger man, of a sweet ruddy and amiable Countenance, and
of a cheerful Spirit; one of the Wise in heart, filled with the excellent
bright sparking glorious Power of the Lord God everlasting; in which he
appeared many times so filled, that immortallity shined in his Face, and his
Voice was as Thunder, therein dreadful in the Strengh of the Lord of Hosts
against the man of Sin, and those in Covenant therewith; terrible in the dread
of God against the Workers of iniquity; but livingly tender to the sensible
Travelers, and poor in spirit. Ah! my Soul has a sensible remembrance, how
the Doctrine given him of Christ Jesus dropped as dew, and sweetly descended as
the refreshing Rain: He was a Labourer indeed, Night and Day in the Labor of
the Gospel; in which he extremely spent himself; and his fervent and
unexpressible Travells in and about the City of Bristol, I am well satisfied,
laid a Foundation for the wasting his natural Life; which was spent, and
offered up for the Truth, and in the work of it: and indeed he, with dear
honorable John Camm, was instrumental in the Hand of the Almighty God of our
Gatherings; and the spending their lives and strength was most in their Labors
and Travels amongst us, in the City, and adjacent parts, of which I was an eye
and ear witness, being with them frequently. These two faithful Ministers of
Christ Jesus came to the City of Bristol, in the 5th Month 1654. and first they
came amongst a seeking people, who kept one day in the week in fasting and
praying, waiting for, and breathing in Spirit after the Morning and Visitation
of of God, and Day of Redemption; and amongst us they spoke the powerful Word
of Life, in the dread of his Name that lives forever; and we were seized on,
and smitten even to the Heart; and that Day, and the Visitation of it over took
us, which we had longed and waited for, and from Darkness to the mavelous
Light of the Lord we were turned. Some Meetings we had before the more general
gathering in and about that City, which began on this wise: On a first day in
the morning I went with these two Servants of God, about a mile and half from
the City, to a little spring of Water, where I often had spent many Solitary
hours in my tender years, seeking the Lord; where we sat some time, and drank
of the spring. After some hours of the morning were spent, I saw in them a
great travel in Spirit; Trembling, J. A. said, let us be going into the City;
so we came to the Street called Broadmead, to a house where were several People
met together, enquiring after these two men of God. John Audland was under a
great exercise of Spirit, and said, Is here any one that has any interest in
any Field? An ancient man said, I have in a Field pretty near; notice being
given to the People in the house, they came forth; and as we went along, people
in the Streets went also to the Field, called Earls-mead; so that we came a
pretty number, where some Seats or Stools were brought; Dear John Camm began to
speak renderly, and in great Zeal, directing to the heavenly Grace of God, and
^estifying against Sin and Iniquity fervently; to which some were attentive in
this season; I perceived a great exercise of Spirit on my dear Friend, and
Father in Christ Jesus, J. Audland who very much trembled. After dear John Camm
stood down, he stood up, full of dread and shining brightness on his
countenance, lifted up his Voice as a Trumpet, and said, I proclaim spiritual
War with the Inhabitants of the Earth, who are in the Fall and Separation from
God, and Prophecy to the sour winds of Heaven; and these words dropped amongst
the Seed; and so went on in the mighty Power of God Almighty, opening the way
of Life. But, ah! the seizings of Souls, and prickings at heart, which attended
that season; some fell on the Ground, others crying out under the sense of
opening their States, which indeed gave experimental Knowledge of what is
recorded, acts 2. 37. Indeed it was a notable day, worthy to be left on Record,
that our Children may read, and tell to their Children, and theirs to another
Generation, that the worthy noble Acts of the Arm of Gods Salvation may be
remembered, which have been the way of the Lord, leading his Servants through
Generations, etc.

At this Meeting many were effectually convinced, and from Darkness to Light
turned, after which our Meetings grew larger and larger. They visited the
Meetings of them called Independants, and Baptists, testifying amongst them in
great power the things given them of God, directing the poor and needy in
spirit, that saw their want of the Lord Jesus Christ, no longer to seek the
Living amongst the Dead, but look from the Mountains and Hills dead Ways and
Worships, unto Christ Jesus the Foundation of Life and Salvation; and there was
added unto the gathering daily, and great dread was round about, and in our
Meetings, under the seasonings of the holy Ghost, Oh! the Tears, Sighs, and
Groans, Tremblings, and Mournings, in the sight of the middle will of
partition, that we saw then in our awakened States, that stood between us and
the Lord, and in the sight and sense of our spiritual wants and necessities:
Oh! the hungrings, and thirstings of Soul that attended daily, and great
travels of Spirit, to obtain through the working of the mighty Power of Gods
dominion, and Spiritual Victory over the Enemy of our Souls, who had lead us in
the Paths of Death and Darkness; and indeed as the Visits of Gods holy and ever
blessed Day was signal and unexpressible, as aforesaid; so I Testify in the
fear and dread, and awe of God Almighty, we received the Gospel with a ready
mind, and with broken Hearts, and affected Spirits and gave up to follow the
Lord fully, casting off the weights and burdens, and the Sin that easily
besets, and from the evil ways and vanities of this World departed: Oh! the
strippings of all needless Apparel, and the forsaking of superfluities in
Meats, Drinks, and in the plain self-denying Path we walked; having the fear
and dread of God on our Souls, that we were afraid of offending in word or
deed, our Words were few and savory, our Apparel and Houses plain, being
stripped of superfluities; our Countenances Grave, and Deportments Weighty:
amongst those we had to do with. Indeed we were a plain brokenhearted,
contrite spirited, self-denying people; our Souls being in an unexpressible
Travel, to do all things well-pleasing in the Sight of God; for our great
concern night and day was to obtain through Jesus Christ the Great work of
Salvation, and thereby an assurance of the everlasting Rest, and Sabbath, of
our God; and in those days, Oh! the unexpressible Labor, Travels, and spending
of the Strength of these Servants of the most high God, in great Assemblies in
that City, and Countries round about; our Meetings were so large that we were
forced to meet without doors, and that in Frost and Snow: In which Meetings,
Oh! the extending of Voice of these Servants of God, to reach over these great
multitudes, when several thousands have been assembled together, and as the
Work of the Lord increased, so the Enemy was at work in Priests, and People, in
those days, who stirred up the Youth of the City, into a tumulting, like the
men of Ephesus; and once we had a very great tumult that the Streets were
crowded, and these two Servants of the Lord were seized upon by the multitude,
and were in great hazard.

But the Lord signally delivered them, as in days past he had done his
Servants on such occasions, and all came to be quieted, and our Meetings
peaceable, and many grew in Grace, and in the Knowledge of God, and Christ
Jesus, which is Eternal Life; much more of particulars I might write, but
affecting brevity, for several reasons; I say, in short, such was the effectual
working of the Almighty Power of God, and makings bare of his Arm of Salvation,
that attended those Servants of the most High, and the great work of our
Gospel, meeting with the various Trials and exercises that attended them, and
us that were the fruits of their Labors in the Lord, that my Tongue cannot
express what I was an eye and ear witness of, and a Soul sharer in. Therefore
to the God of this bright Morning of our day of Visitation, arises, springs
up, as in Covenant with himself through Christ Jesus, holy heavenly high
Praises, Might, Majesty and Dominion is ascribed to the Lord God, and the Lamb.
So let it be says my spirit in fear and trembling, through Ages and
Generation, for ever and evermore Ameu.

And now, dear Friends every where, but more particularly in and about the City
of Bristol, who have seen the Morning of the day of God break forth in our Age,
as aforesaid, and by the divine Light thereof, have seen the darkness that has
covered the people expelled, in which darkness people have been Ignorant of the
true and living God, and his precious work of Salvation, in which ignorance
they have performed their worship, even in the same nature that they are
sinning and rebelling, and grieving the Good Spirit of God which all ought to
be subject too; now it pleasing the divine Being, in his infinite love and
tender pity and compassion to look down upon us, whilst in the Land of Egypt;
and House of Bondage spiritually, and to send forth his Light and Truth, to
give us a sense inwardly of the deplorable states of our Souls in the
separation from, and depravation of the enjoyments of the Lord, which sense and
sight begat in us living Breathings, and a holy Cry after the knowledge of him
we saw our selves ignorant of; and he in the fullness of the Dispensation of
time visited us, as before mentioned, of which, dear Friends, we were right
glad, although when the Lord discovered our states, he laid Judgment to the
Line, and Righteousness to the Plummet, and gave to us the Cup of Trembling, in
which was the Wine of Astonishment. which was in mercy to our Poor Souls, that
could not be redeemed but by Judgment poured on the nature that had separated
us from God, and on us as joined thereunto; and here, although Sin revived, we
begun to dye to it. O Good day! and precious season, worthy, worthy both to be
remembered by us, and our Offspring through Generations; for although it was the
season of the Administration of Condemnation, yet was it glorious; and in this
season the Almighty God by his spiritual Trumpet sounded to us that the end of
this his spiritual Appearance, was to root out, lay wait, and utterly destroy
the nature of Sin and Iniquity, that had divided and separated us from God, and
hindered the good things from us of his Heavenly power and Kingdom, and we were
persuaded the set time was come for clensing and sanctifying the Temple, and
fitting it for the pure immortal God; and did not we begin inward, as in the
day of Hezekiah, that the Temple might be cleansed thoroughly in every part? for
in the outward Temple they cleansed first the inward part of the House of the
Lord, and so came along to the Porch, until the Temple was thoroughly cleansed.
Indeed in the Morning of our precious Day of Visitation, the Ax was laid to the
Root of the corrupt Tree, and the Hammer to the hard Rocky Heart, and the
spiritual Fire kindled in the Stubble. Now, dear Friends, in the Word of Truth
I say unto you, search with the holy Light of Christ Jesus, how this work has
prospered in your Souls, see whether you that knew a right beginning first in
the inward part, have come along faithfully in the work of Sanctifying the
Heart and the Temple, from the inward part to the outside; see whether the Root
has not escaped the Ax, the rocky Heart the Hammer, and the Chaff the Fire; for
if it has, the cause is not in the Lord, nor in his Power; but in your
disobedience and negligence, going from the Ax, Hammer and Fire, and so sparing
the best, as disobedient Saul and Israel did, so the Root of bitterness sprang
up against the work of God, and bringings forth of his heavenly wisdom: To the
holy plain speaking Witness of God, I speak, earnestly desiring and entreating
all to have a single regard to that which will duly and rightly apply these
things; and let all see whether that nature be alive that the holy Power of the
Lord did work against in the beginning, and if so, see the cause, which being
seen will deeply humble and seize on the spirits of all concerned. Oh! what a
day have we had, how has the good Husbandman been at work in his Vineyard, how
did he plant in a fruitful Hill, with the choicest Vine? he dug, pruned, and
gathered out the Stones, and Hedged and Walled about, and after all he looked
for good Fruit, but where the unspeakable Mercy and loving Kindness of the Lord
has not been answered, behold sower Grapes, and wild Fruit was brought forth;
and what was the consequence of it, Was it not the taking away the Hedge,
through which it was eaten up; and breaking down the Wall thereof, and it was
trodden down? Read, see, feel and consider; and the Lord God Almighty visit you
in your Habitations, and secret Chambers, in his holy dread, with his searching
Life and piercing Word of Power, who in his tender infinite Love and Mercy,
long-Sufferings, great Bowels to his Seed and Offspring, visited us in his
pure morning, aforementioned, to give all the sense of their inward states, as
they are in his sight; from whom nothing can be hid. And now dear Friends, the
cause of the hindrance of the prosperity of the work of the Lord in the Souls
of any, has not been from any cause in God, or deficiency in his Light, Power
and Wisdom, but from the Creatures going out of a capacity of receiving and
enjoying the working Power of God, in which Salvation is worked out, by all
that wait for it, and join with it, and cleave to it, and not forsake it, for I
have learned of the Lord through many exercises unexpressible, that after the
Visitation of the Almighty to any Soul, the Lord requires an inward worthy
receiving his Love, and spiritual Watch to be kept in his holy Light, in which
all the workings and approaches of the destroying Adversary of the Soul is
discerned, and the enlightened and obedient mind is preserved, and through the
spiritual fence, given in a tender waiting on the Lord in the inward part;
supplicating breathings arises to the living eternal God of Love and
Compassion who beholding the want of the Soul, descends in his Love, and
reaches forth his helping Hand to the broken and contrite Hearted, and lifts up
the bowed down Spirit, with the liftings up of his holy spiritual Standard, so
the Temptation and Assaults of the Enemy is vanquished and overcomse and the
Power of God is felt in thoe, that descend with it in humility; to be working
on the Root as an Ax, and on the Rocky as a Hammer, and Chaffy as a Fire; Now
Friends when there is an abatement of the inward and spiritual care, and a
gradual lessening of the inward watchfulness, then the mind becomes both
unworthy and incapable of the enjoyments of the Power of the Lord, that begun
and carries on the Work of the Lord; so then the Enemy comes as not seen,
through the minds being out of the holy Watch in the Light, the nature that was
wounded comes to be healed again, and ease given to that which should be
destroyed; so the Enemy perceiving where the weakness is, and how, and by what
means he has gotten a little entrance, he endeavors in all subtilty and
vigilency, by presenting matters and subjects, to lead by degrees out of a
watchful state, and according to every degree of digression, he brings over the
once enlightened mind a proportion of darkness and deceiveableness of
Understanding, and insensibility of Spirit, in the in ward feeling part, of the
subtilty of the Enemy of the Soul, who thus works, that with the declining
there may be a proportion of benuming all the inward senses, of Seeing, Hearing
and Feeling; and then again he has Mankind in a state fit to work upon, by
drawing them out by his Power to act and bring forth, that which he sees them
most capable of and which there is the greatest inclination in their natures to
go into; hence Schisms arise in Judgments, which the wrathful part in Man
getting into, he works by the way of a fierce management, with a sort of Zeal,
but not according to Knowledge, in which the power of the Enemy works up at
last into a Schism, and the Enemy is never wanting to present matters to the
mind, as just for the Creature to be blown up with, which ends in dishonouring
the Lord and his precious Truth, and hurting and harming others, until the
Enemy has worked his end, by such Instruments, bringing them into an Alienation
from the Life of God, into a worse state, then the tender day of God's
Visitation found them in; and so if not humbled under the mighty Hand of God,
and returning they are exposed to Shame, and so dies away under the Wrath of
God.

Now, dear Friends, the Enemy of Sions Prosperity works variously, according as
he sees where he may get an entrance, by proportionating his Snares to the
inclinations of every one, as before is hinted, etc. Where he sees an
inclination in any to be taken with the earthly things, there he works subtly
to captivate the mind, and draw it out of the watchful, tender, spiritual
state, into a false Liberty, both to the affections to the things acting and
possessed, and in the conversation amongst Men; others into superfluities in
Meat, Drink and Apparel on themselves and houses; and such their comforts stand
most in outward things, and by degrees are swallowed up of them, and the
Pleasures, Lust and Delights below, and so they dye to an inward Life of
watchfulness and freshness, which is preserved in fear and dread, in keeping
the holy Watch, and in the spiritual Cross, which Crucifies to the World, and
the World to it. -- Now, dear Friends, here is our spiritual Encouragement,
viz. The same that through Death to Sin made us alive to God, as we abide under
the leadings and teachings of it, keeps us alive to him, in a growing,
increasing, fresh flourishing state; for as we delight in his eternal Law of
Life, we grow as Willows by the Watercourse of Immortal refreshings, and
Travel faithfully on in our spiritual Journey, until we come to Sion the City
of God, and then are Enjoyers of the end of all our Trials and Tribulations,
having overcome, we see an entrance administered, and that abundantly into the
eternal Rest and Sabbath of our God.

The Lord Almighty give all to enjoy this blessed Portion and goodly
inheritance and let all see in this Age, and the Ages to come, all that which
lets and hinders them taken out of the Way, that the God of all our Mercies, in
whom is all our fresh Springs may have his Honor and Glory; his Church and
People through Ages the Comfort and Consolation, Amen, Amen.

C. Marshall.

A Testimony concerning the Precious Unity of the Spirit in Christ Jesus.
THe Unity of the Spirit is so precious a virtue, and glorious a Qualification,
in all the Churches of Christ Jesus, that whilst the people of the Lord did
abide therein, in every Age they were in a thriving flourishing, sweet and
glorious station; for as long as they truly held the Head Christ Jesus, and
kept in Unity with him; Unity and Amity was preserved amongst them in their
several stations, and services, as Members of one Body, etc.

Of which Unity, David speaks preciously, and comprehensively; saying,
Behold, how good, and how pleasant it is for Brethren to dwell together in
unity; its like the precious Ointment on the head, that ran down upon the Beard
even Arons Beard, and went down to the Skirts of his Garment: as the Dew of
Hermon, and as the Dew that descended upon the Mountains of Sion; for there
(Mark) the Lord commanded the blessing, even Life everlasting. This was the
state the holy Power of the great God gathered a people into. For concerning
them, it is left upon record they continued daily in fellowship, and that with
one accord.

Now, dear Friends, we clearlysaw felt and understood in the precious Morning
of our tender Visitation, that the same ancient Power of the Lord that wrought
powerfully, first to disunite us from the nature which separated us from God,
and then to bring us up into unity and fellowship with himself, in his dear
love, and therein one with another.

For here (ever was and is) the the Foundation of the true Unity, even that of
the Spirit, in which love the Body edifies it self, and is increasing, and
building up a holy Habitation for God through the Spirit; so then all abiding,
and growing up in the love of God, and walking with him in the divine nature,
Unity increases amongst all the Members, and Branches taken out of the
wild-Olive, and planted into (and abiding in) the Vine of Life Christ Jesus our
Head, and Lawgiver; and here the Church of Christ grew up, into a state of
being clothed with the Sun, and the Moon under her Feet: Ah! precious, blessed,
sweet and glorious station! But did it always thus continue in the Apostles
days? Ah! no, the old Serpent, the Enemy of man's welfare wrought powerfully,
and cunningly, first to draw forth from the R oot of Life, and out of the holy
Love, and spiritual subjection to this glorious Power that had gathered them,
to a daily inward walking with God, and to draw out of a spiritual exercise of
the Spiritual Cross, and holy Watch, as before has been demonstrated, etc. And
then fruit from another Root was brought forth, as the Reader may note in
several Epistles; and in John's Testimony to the seven Churches of Asia: Then
the Power of the Lord that had gathered them, moved to exhort to put away
bitterness, Wrath, Anger and Clamor; Evil-speakings, and Malice, Ephesians 4.

And now, dear Friends, with your Lamps trimmed and burning, look inward,
searching every corner of your Hearts, that clear unto your own understandings,
every one of your states may appear as it is in the sight of the pure al-seeing
God, that so all the Enemies darknings, and vailings, and turnings aside, by
what way or means soever, may be clearly with the Light of the Lamb seen and
discovered.

And tender Friends, those that have seen the sweet, lovely precious stateof
Unity, and Concord, that the excellent Power of the Lord God Almighty gathered
into, and was gathering into, in the blessed morning of our day, and the
spiritual advantages, comforts, joy, refreshments and divine Satisfaction, that
attended the Church of Christ in this true and spiritual Unity, with our the
Lord Jesus Christ and one with another and on the other hand Head the anxious,
exerising consequences of the Enemies prevailing to break unity, and of the
lamentable effects thereof, so that all the true hearted and sincere spirited
to God, cannot but on the on Hand admire, prize, and unexpressibly esteem the
precious Unity. And on the other hand greatly dread the turnings aside and
going out of it; For those who have kept their Habitation, and lived to God as
they have tasted, and enjoyed the sweetness, and beheld the amiableness of this
Unity, and Amity so they have felt the sorrows and anguish of the effects of
the contrary; which have caused them to go many days, and months, with bowed
down Souls, crying to the Almighty God of tender compassion, Night and Day,
under the unexpressible weight thereof; and the tender God of Love bowed his
ear to the cry of the Poor, and sighing of the Needy, and has arisen in the
might of his Power, and the Majesty of his Glorious Presence has relieved, and
his holy Arm has been made bare, through which he has redeemed his Darling
from the Dog, and his dear ones from the Devourer; and still continues working
to bring into this precious unity, in the holy Light of Life, with God in
Christ Jesus, and one with another. And now dear Friends every where, unto you,
and to the Generation coming after, I have this Warning, and tender Advice, to
leave behind me, in the Name of my God, that has been with me in my Travels,
in his Power, Work and Labor of the Gospel of Life, and Salvation. Keep the
Unity of the Spirit, in the Bond of Peace; and let none give way to a
prejudicing Spirit, which leads into secret Whisperings, Back-bitings, and such
like evil, and pernicious Fruits, the working of which Spirit is like a Moth in
a Garment, dividing, destroying, spoiling and eating up; for indeed, as Sion is
a City at Unity with it self, under the seamless Garment of Christ Jesus, and
there all are well, and safe, growing increasing and flourishing; so when the
Spirit abovesaid prevails, to draw out of Sions Gates, and from within her
Walls of Salvation: Oh! what deplorable work and havoc will it make in its
Growth and Progress; working, as I said before, of the Moth gradually and
secretly first; but as it prevails and increases in its growth and strength,
it will appear as a roaring devouring Lion, seeking whom it may devour and
swallow up.

Here comes in Pride, and haughtiness of Spirit, puffed up, with the abundance
of enjoyment of outward things, Emulations, Heartrisings, evil Jelousies,
Bitter-speakings, Detractings, and abundance of evil Fruit arises from this
evil Root of Bitterness which Root and Fruit is to be brought under, and sunk
down, under the eternal Judgment of the holy, glorious, sweet Power of the
Lord. And therefore Friends, I say unto you in the Name of the Lord God
eternal, let none give strength, or any encouragement or nourishment, any way
to this Spirit in any of its murdering workings, in any Heart, but let it be
looked on as a Vagabond, and Fugitive, in the Earth, and so as it is kept out
of the Camp of God, and from Isreal's dwellings, by the sweet, living, bright
Power of the great God of heaven, and earth, it will perish under Truths
Judgment set up in every soul, and so the nature thereof, as well as its evil
rending and dividing fruits will be worn out, and destroyed for ever: And then
all keeping in the first love, pure fear, living awe, and holy dread fearing to
offend our God and tender Father, persevering in an inward keeping the holy
Watch, and abiding in Subjection, and Obedience to the spiritual Cross, in
staidness of Mind, soundness of Judgment, and clearness in Understanding, you
see, Comprehend and Fathom all the Enemies Devices, Temptations and Snares; and
the Lord God beholding you in a steadfast Habitation of Obedience, and spiritual
tenderness before him, his Power will descend wonderfully in an increasing
manner, and his Glory will shine, his River of Life flow; yea, the Spring of
the great deep will be broken up, and the Windows of Heaven will be opened,
that you may be abundantly filled with Joy and Thanksgivings, holy Renown, and
Songs of deliverance, with spiritual high Praises ascending his Throne, which
will be as sweet Incense, and a Sacrifice acceptable to our God. And here you
shall spend the residue of your days in Dominion over both the Snares of the
Enemy attending Prosperity and Liberty, Adversity and Persecution; seeing over
all things that have their rise in Mortality and Time; feeling Mortality
swallowed up of Life immortal, and so gathered to the general Assembly, to the
Church of the first born, to the Spirits of just Men made perfect, yea to the
first and last, God the Judge of all, to whom be immortal high Praises, and
holy Renown, for ever and for evermore But if the wonderful Blessings, tender
Mercies, and following loving Kindnesses that the Lord God Almighty every way
extends unto us in this Age, be not duly, reverently and obediently taken
notice of; but instead thereof, any shall forsake and be unmindful of the Lords
tender Mercies, and thereby embrace lying Vanities, going out of the spiritual
Diligence, into a spiritual Idleness, through which a spiritual Slumber
overtakes, and the Lamp thereby be inwardly neglected, the spiritual Watch and
Cross slighted, and not duly regarded, but the Earth and earthly things take
up the exercise of the Mind and Affections: Then I say, instead of enjoying
what is above expressed. Tribulation and Anguish will seize upon all such, and
the dreadful Judgment of the eternal God that lives for ever and ever, will
overtake all such unfaithfulness. A dreadful Cup ye shall drink of from the
Hand of God, and distress from the rebukes of the Lord shall distress you; and
you shall be numbered amongst the people of his Indignation, in his dreadful
approaching day of signal pleadings with all Flesh that have corrupted its way
before him; and therefore hear, fear, and dread the holy Name of the Lord; and
whilst its called to day bow before him, and speedily return unto him, least
your day pass over, and ye sleep the Sleep of eternal Death and Destruction,
and be separated for ever from his refreshing Presence, (in which is Life) and
from the glory of his divine Power.

Therefore all dear Friends every where, retire inwardly, see, feel and
understand the Counsel of the Lord which unto you springs; all retire inward
(that are not there) in great humility before the Lord, that you may feel the
blessed Work of God blessedly begun, perfecting your inward man, growing in the
Root of Life; and as you have professed the Knowledge of a spiritual Oracle
before the Nations, you may approve your selves in the sight of God, following
its Instructions in all things, and go not without it; lean upon the Lord, and
cry to him to gu de you with his Eye, and lead you by his Arm, and so guide you
in the way everlasting; and this is his promise whilst you keep with him, he
will be with you, never leaving nor forsaking you, if you do not leave and
forsake him, his Presence and glorious Arm of Salvation shall surround you, to
the renown of his Name, and consolation of his People, Amen, Amen.

C. Marshall.

The Several BOOKS and EPISTLES Written By those Two Faithful Servants of the
LORD. John Camm and John Audland.
John Camm to O. Cromwell.
ON the last day of the first Month, called March, about two of the Clock in
the Morning, I was moved of the Lord to write these ensuing Lines; and to lay
before thee the cause of our coming hither to London. Friend, we came not to
thee, to Petition any thing from thee in the outward, but in the tender Bowels
of Love to exhort thee, to mind thy own condition, how thou stand in
relation to the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, who is Powerful, and Pure, and
Holy, who will not acquit the Wicked, but will wound the hairy scalp of him who
goes on in iniquity, before whose Presence all stands naked and bare, who knows
and sees all the secrets of thy Heart, thy outgoings and in-comings, to whom
thou must give account of all things done in the Body whether they be good or
evil: Therefore in love to thy Soul were we moved to come to exhort thee to
stand in the fear of the Lord, and in his Counsel; and to mind the Light in thy
Conscience, which is pu^e and o^ God, to guide thee in the great Affairs of the
Nations; for to keep in his fear is safe, for dreadful and terrible will the
day of the Lord be to all who are found out of his fear, and acting in their
own wills, and bounding and limiting the Spirit of the Lord, and walking
contrary to the pure Law of God, the Light in their Consciences: And we knowing
the Terrors of the Lord, were moved to exhort thee, in love to thy Soul, for
the righteous Seeds sake, which lies in bondage every where, under the
oppressing nature, that thou might be an Instrument in the Lords Hand, to
take off Oppression from of the necks of the people, and to remove their Yoke
which has been promised long; and now the power is in thy Hand, and thou must
give an account to the Lord how thou have Ruled for him; for the mighty day of
the Lord is come, and is coming, wherein all Faces shall gather blackness, it
is a day of Darkness, of bitter Lamentation and Woe, at whose Presence the
Mountains shall melt, and the Hills shall tumble down before him, and all the
tall Cedars shall bow, and the strong Oaks shall be broken down, and the Roofs
rent, and the Earth shall remove out of its place; its a day wherein the Lord
will plead with all Flesh, with his Sword, and with Fire: In which day the
Lofty shall be brought down, and the Lord alone exalted, which day we witness
fulfilled in us in measure; Praises, Praises to the Lord God for evermore: And
therefore Friend, we having this Testimony made manifest in us, by the eternal
Spirit of God, we declare this unto thee, that thou may not be found acting
against the Truth; for they who are guided by the Spirit of God, will do
nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth: By which Spirit we are gathered
out of the World, up to God, and have escaped the Polutions of the World; and
by it we are brought in obedience to the pure Law of God which is written in
our Hearts, and his Spirit within us is our Teacher; and so we deny all the
teachings of Men* who have not this Law and Spirit to guide them; and for so
doing we suffer by them who are not guided by that Spirit; For my Sheep know my
Voice, says Christ, and they follow me, and will not follow a Stranger; and we
know the voice of Christ, and the voice of a Stranger: And by the Spirit of the
living God are we gathered up together, up to God, to worship him in Spirit and
in Truth; and are of one Heart, and of one Mind, and of one Soul; and have all
one Teachers, and peak all one thing: And we being all taught of the Lord, are
far from Oppression, though we be Oppressed; and for the Truths sake was I
moved of the Lord to lay this before thee, that our Conditions may be known,
that the Truth may not suffer under the reproach of the Heathen, who live after
the Flesh, and Persecute them who live after the Spirit.

A word more to clear thy mistake, when we spoke unto thee, that the Lord would
make thee an Instrument in his Hand to establish the Gospel; wherein thou
apprehendest us, that should be established by an outward Law, that was not our
desire, nor we spoke no such thing; but we witness the coming of Christ in his
Kingdom is not by Might nor Power, nor Pomp, nor Glory from without; nor by any
Law which is in the will of Man, but our desires were, that there should be no
Law upon Religion, for it needs no Law to defend it, for pure Religion, and
undefiled is this, to loose the bands of Wickedness, and set the Oppressed
free, and take off every Yoke: And where pure Religion is exercised, this is
the Fruits; and if thou be guided by the pure Light of God, shining in thy
Conscience, and the righteous Law set up in thy Heart, and the Spirit of God
thy Teacher, then there need none ^^ desire thee to take away those Laws that
ensnare tender Consciences; and so they who pretend Conscience, and are not
guided by the pure Law of God, will be seen by those who dwell in the Spirit,
to have erroneous Consciences, and so this Law will take hold of them, and the
righteous Law is upon the Transgressor, and limits the carnal Mind and fleshly
Will, but does not limit the Spirit, but is at Unity with it: And therefore
Friend, to thy Conscience I speak, and witness this to be true in the Presence
of God, that as thou art guided by this pure Light in thy Conscience, and this
Law of the Spirit set up in thy Heart, thou can not deny us; for we are none
of those which despise Government, and defile the Flesh; who pull down others
to set up themselves; but all unfruitful works of darkness we deny, and seek to
advance the Government of Jesus Christ alone, and love all, and have unity with
all who are here, and honor all Men in the Lord, and have fellowship with
those whose Conversation is as becomes the Gospel of Christ; and they who Rule
and Live here, cannot suffer any outward Law to take hold on us, who stand in
obedience to the Commands of Christ; for there is no Condemnation to them who
are in Christ Jesus. who walk not after the Flesh but after the Spirit; and
where the Spirit of the Lord sets free and commands obedience, take heed how
thou suffer any Law to limit that Spirit, for they who are brought into the
obedience of the Spirit, are dear unto him as the Apple of his Eye, and his
care is over them; and the Lord will free them from their Oppressors: And thus
were we pressed in Spirit to lay before thee our conditions, and the conditions
of our Brethren; who are gathered into the eternal Unity, where there is no
Rent nor Schism; that thou might not be ignorant of those things, and to show
thee that our desire is not for any outward thing, or self-advancing; for all
self we deny, for we came contrary to our own will; and we declare this unto
thee contrary to our own will; and if thou stand not in thy own will, thou will
hear us, and own us, in advancing the Lord Jesus Christ upon the holy-Hill of
Sion, that the Law might go out of Sion, and the Word of the Lord from
Jerusalem; and this we wait to see accomplished, and his promise fulfilled in
those who govern the Nations, that the Kingdoms of the World may become the
Kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ. And thus we have laid our selves naked before
thee, in the Presence of God, and cleared our Consciences to thee, and leave it
to that which is pure in thy Conscience to judge: Take heed, for he that is in
high Places, is subject to many Temptations.

This I was moved of the Lord to Write unto thee, who is a Servant of the Lord,
and a lover of thy Soul, called John Camm.

For E. V. and the rest of the Flock of God in and about Banbury.
DEarly beloved Friends and Brethren, in the eternal everlasting Covenant of
Love and Life, does my Soul dearly salute you all, who in your Measures keep in
the same Love and Life, and grows up in your stature which is well pleasing to
God; Oh my dear Hearts, in the Life and Power of God, which casts down Sin, and
slayes the enmity, and gives you Victory and Dominion over the World, which
keeps you and preserves in the hour of Temptation, which shall come upon all
men upon the Earth to try them, but you abiding in the pure Eternal living
Measure of God, dwelling in his Life and Power, which is your Rock and hiding
place, shall be kept out of the same which the Enemy has laid to take your
Souls, and here is your safe dwelling place, so the Lord God of Power in his
Life and Power keep you all in your dwelling place, which is the Lord, that
with the Measure of him, you may be guided, which leads up into the Land of
Righteousness, into the Holy City where the uncircumcised and the careless and
disobedient cannot come; so with Bowels of dear and tender love unto you all,
who are Children of my Father, and kept in his work, I bid you farewell in the
Lord, and in him I am your dear brother for evermore.

John Camm.
My Wife and little Thomas, dearly salutes you, who are faithful in your
places, farewell.

As for my outward health, it is much like as it was, I grow weaker in the
outward man, but in the Lord is my strength, and my support continually, Glory
and pure Praises be unto him for evermore, Amen.

J. C.



John Camm's Letter the 5th day of the 11th Month, 1654. to Friends.
DEarly beloved in our Head and Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ our dear love in
him Salutes you all, yea, truly the same love runs out unto you (all who wait
upon the Lord, and abide in your Measures) that we are loved with all of our
Father; and we are your Epistles written in your Hearts, not with Pen and Ink,
but with the Spirit of the Living God; and then you who are guided by the
Light, which comes from Christ Jesus may read us daily; and truly you are dear
and precious unto us, as you abide and dwell in your Measures; yea, truly ye
are our very Lines and the Seal of our Ministry, begotten into a lively hope in
Christ Jesus, by the immortal Seed of the Word of God; and ye are our
Witnesses, that we seek not our selves, but you, nor our own good, but the
Glory of our God, and the recovery of his own Image, and the freedom of the
Righteous, that the Name of our God may be exalted, and that he may reign over
all, and have Dominion in every one of you, that you may witness your Head
exalted; dwell in the pure eternal Light of Christ Jesus which does discover
and make manifest all the deeds of darkness, and lays open all deceit, and
brings it to the righteous Law of God, and so condemns Sin in the Flesh, and
sets up judgment in the Earth, and the Inhabitants thereof learn righteousness;
and when this is witnessed, the Oppressor is cast out, and the Vail is rent,
and the bonds of Iniquity is broken, and the Serpents Head is bruised, and the
Seed of the Woman raised, (which all the Promises of God are yea and Amen,
unto) yea and he fetches up out of time, into the beginning, before Sin was,
and leads up into eternity, where time shall be no more; and therefore, dear
Hearts, all wait in that which you have received, the Light which comes from
Christ, that by it you may come to enjoy the pure Life, and have Power over all
your Enemies* for as many as receive him, to them he gives power to become the
Sons of God, and gives them victory over the World, to tread and to trample
upon it; and therefore all of you dwell low; and in the pure fear of the Lord
abide, and in his Counsel stand, and be faithful in what you know; and imp ove
it to the glory of the immortal God, that you may be the good Servants, and
enter into the Joy of your Lord; and as you dwell low in meekness, and in the
pure Fear there you will find the Lord present, teaching you, and leading you
gently by the Hand, and open unto you a door of hope, and the fresh springs
will be opened, and the thirsty Land will be refreshed; and so you will come to
witness the spring time after the Winter be past, and the Roses to bud, and the
Flowers to cast a sweet smell upon the Earth; but this is to you, my little
Ones, who is come, and coming through the Sword which cuts down the earthly man
of Sin; it is to you who witness great Tribulation, who knows the Day of the
Lord to be a day of darkness, and not Light; and that it is a day that will and
does burn up all the wicked as Stubble, and scatter them as the Wind scatters
the Chaff, and his is the Figure; and they who are wicked may read their
Portion, for the Childrens Bread must not the Dogs have; but unto you that fear
the Name of the Lord, shall the Son of Righteousness arise with healing under
his Wings; and the Secrets of the Lord will be revealed unto you, and you shall
want no manner of thing that is good, as you abide in his Fear, and stand in
his Will in the daily Cross, which Crucifies the Earthly man, and works out
that nature which has Crucified the Just, and Righteous One; and so as you
dwell, and are faithful to the Light, you come to enjoy the Life, and grow up
in the Life, and the pure Eye will be more opened in you, by which the Enemy,
the Tempter, will be seen; and now you had need to stand upon your watch, for
the Devil like a roaring Lion will seek to devour you, and Pharaoh will pursue
you as you come from under his kingdom, and dominion; and therefore what I say
unto one, I say unto all watch, and be sober, stand with your armor on, the
whole Armor of God, by which you may be able to drive back all the fiery Darts
of the Enemy, and have Oil in your Lamps burning continually; and all who have
desires after the Lord whose minds is convinced of the Eternal Truth, in that
which does convince you, dwell and wait for the Power of the Lord, to shake the
Earth and rent the Rocks, and melt the Mountains, and remove the Earth out of
its place, and the Heart to purge and cleanse, and make a place of holiness of
the Lord of Hosts to dwell in; and when the Lord comes this to do in you, dwell
in, and love judgment, that so Sion may be set free: And so, all dear Hearts,
wait in your Measures which you have received of the Lord, and in them be
faithful, that so you may increase in the increases of God, and have dominion
over all the Beast of the Field, and the Fowls of the Air, and Fishes in the
Sea, and over all unclean Spirits, and be kept pure in your places, that so the
Lord God may dwell amongst you, and delight to do you good.

So the Eternal Everlasting Love of God keep you all, and preserve you pure in
your Measures, that he alone may be glorified and exalted over all to reign in
you, and that all that oppress him, and his Government in you, may be destroyed,
and this is the desire and prayer to God for you, of us who dearly loves you,
who desires nothing but that the Lord may be Glorified in you, and by you, so
fare you all well; and the God of Power keep you now and evermore Amen.

Yours in the Bond of Love which cannot be broken, from its own Image; This is
to all who love the the Lord Jesus Christ in Truth and sincerity at and about
Bristol and Aulston, to be read amongst you all our dear Ones.

John Camm.

John Camm's Letter to Friends in Bristol from Preston Patraick in Westmorland.
LOving Friends of Bristol, and all round about who are faithful in your
Measures, and with the prosperity of Sion, I have writ a Letter to be read
amongst you all; and that you may read it within your selves and witness it,
and with that I have union, which witnesses it in Life, but with that which is
in Knowledge and Comprehension without Life; I have no union; but by that which
I have union with, shall it be judged and condemned; for it shall try all and
condemn all that is not of it self, but acted in the earthly Wisdom, and it
will not stand in the presence of the Lord who is pure, and all shadows shall
fly before him, and therefore in the the substance dwell which comprehends the
shadows; and so I bid you all farewell.

J. C.

DEarly beloved Friends in our Head the Lord Jesus Christ, does my Soul Salute
you all, who are faithful in your Measures, and obedient to the Light of Christ
Jesus, which is made manifest in you, which being faithful in, will lead you up
to Christ your Head to exalt him over all in you all, that he may reign whose
right it is, in you, and that his Scepter of Righteousness maybe swayed in you,
and the strong man armed may be bound and spoilled of all his goods, and the
Ministration of Condemnation, which is Glorious in its time, may be witnessed
by you all, that through it you may see your Enemies destroyed and the powers
of darkness spoilled, and Captivity led Captive, and witness the gift given,
which is Christ in you the hope of Glory; and where he is made manifest, and
comes to reign, he throws down all Principalities and Powers, and spiritual
wickedness which is set up in high places, exalting it self above all that is
called God in you, and he brings down the lofty from their seat, and brings
into meekness, and into the Fear of the Lord, and redeems out of the World, and
makes a separation from it, and so leads up to faith, the Mystery which is held
in a pure Conscience, and this gives Victory over the World, and without this
it is impossible to please God. Now to the Light of Christ Jesus, which he has
lightened you withal, to that I direct you all, that with it you may search and
try your own Hearts, and see your states and conditions, and how you stand, and
what you can witness of the Life of God made manifest in you, for it is the
Life that distinguishes, and out of the Book of Life shall all be judged* and
therefore to the Light of Christ which he has lightened you withal come, that
all may be judged by it, which is contrary to the Life of God in you, that so
nothing may grow in your Gardens, but the Plant of renown, which is of the
Fathers planting, which Plant is pure, and where it grows he delights to water
it, and dress it, that it may bring forth more Fruit to the Praise and Glory of
his Name; and as this Plant grows up in you, the Plants of self and of your own
planting is by it made manifest, and as it is loved and obeyed, all that is of
self is rooted up and destroyed, and turned from, and judged, and condemned by
that Plant of renown which is not of self but of the Lords right Hand planting,
and this is a plant of Righteousness; and all who witness this Plant grow in
their Gardens witnesses a holy Life and a pure Conversation, and Redemption
from the filthy pollutions of the World, and the heathenish Customs and vain
Traditions, and untoward Conversation which the heathenish World lives in which
knows not God: And therefore dear Friends, my desire and Prayers to God is for
you all, yea, my Bowels earns for you, that you may grow up into the Life of
God; yea, God is my witness, I desire nothing more of you, then to hear of your
Welfare in the Lord, and your growing up into the Image of God, that you may
come to witness the Glory of the first Resurrection, that you may know, as you
are known, and that you may know your selves redeemed out of the Curse, and to
know us and others in that which is Eternal, which is not of this World, but
redeems out of the carnal, up into the Eternal, out of the World, and in that
wait to see the corruptible put off, and incorruption put on every one of you
in particular, that the old Man may be put off, and the new Man put on, which
is shapen in Righteousness and true Holiness, and where this isl enjoyed and
fulfilled the Fruits of it will appear, and the Life and conversation will
witness it; and therefore truly my desire and Prayers to the Lord is for you,
that yon may not be deceived with an outward knowledge and comprehension of the
Eternal Truth of God without you, while you are not come into the pure Life,
and so rests in the shadow and in the form, short of the substance and of the
Life; and therefore I exhort you all in the Name of the Lord, and in the Bowels
of tender love unto your Souls, that you all of you live up according to your
Measures, that God over all may reign in you and be Glorified, which is the
desire of your Friend, who is a Servant of God, and of his Truth, witnessed by
you, and known unto the World by the name of John Camm. My Wife Salutes you all
in the Lord, Farewell.

The 20th day of the 2d Month, 1655. From Preston Patrick in Westmoreland to
Friends in Bristol.
An Epistle of John Camm's to Friends.
TO all my dear Friends, Brethren and Sisters, in the eternal Fellowship
begotten again, to a lively hope, by the immortal Word of God, and born of the
immortal Seed, which is but one, in which our Union stands forever; unto you
all I say, whose outward Being and Residence is about Preston, Hutton,
Grayridge, Kendal, Vnderbarrow Powbanke, Swarthmore, and the upper-end of
Lancashire, and to all the reft of the Babes and Lambs, and the Plants of my
heavenly Fathers planting, Grace, Mercy and Peace from God the Father, and from
the Lord Jesus Christ, be multiplied upon you all, who abide faithful, and walk
as becomes the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, according to your own measures,
which you have received from him, that he may be gloryfied by his own. And now
dear Brethren and Sisters, I Exhort you, and Warn you, or rather I Beseech or
Entreat you, that every one of you walk worthy of your Calling whereunto you
are called, for Holy is he that has called you; and he has called you unto
Holiness, without which none shall ever see God, and take heed that none turn
his Grace into wontonness, and trample upon the Blood of his Covenant, and so
despise the day of their Visitation, but prize the time, for it is precious,
and while you have the Light walk in it, and strive to make your Calling and
Election sure, for many shall strive and shall not be able, because they strive
amiss; and take heed that none of you come short of your Crown, in sitting down
by the way, and getting into the comprehension prehension before the Life, and
there you build in the Air without a Foundation, and is gone away from the
corner Stone, and you and your building shall perish together, and therefore
all to take heed to the Measure of Life, received, that in it you may be found
in the day of the Lord, which will be a sure hiding place for you, in the Day
of his fierce Wrath, when he comes with ten Thousands of his Saints, to take
Vengeance upon the wicked, and upon all you that hold the Truth of God in
unrighteousness; but all you who fear the Name of the Lord, and walk up unto
him in a pure Godly Conversation, the Son of righteousness to you is risen with
healling under his Wings, and the day of glad Tidings is come unto you, and the
Winter is past, and the Storms and the Showers is over and gone, and the spring
time is come, and the Flowers appear upon the tender Grass, and the Voice of a
Turtle is heard in our Land, Glory and Praises be to the Name of the Lord for
evermore, who has loved you, and washed you in the Blood of his Son, and made
you a kind of first Fruits unto God, to walk up to the Praise and Glory of his
Name, who has called you, where your strength and rest is forever: And
therefore all dear Brethern and Sisters, in the Eternal Covenant of Life, stand
fast unmovable, unshaken in the Rock of Ages, which never changes, but abides
for evermore, there is your Shield, and there is your Refuge, there is your
Castle where the Enemy cannot storm you, nor the wild Beasts devour you, in the
living Measure of the living God, where the living is refreshed with the fresh
Streams which flows out from the Eternal Fountain of Love, which refreshes the
City of God, which City you are, as you abide in your Measures, for you are the
Temples of the Holy Ghost, but if any Man defile his Temple him will God
destroy, for no unclean thing can dwell with him: And therefore I exhort you
all, that you be faithful to the Measure of Light, which is pure, it being the
guide of your minds, will lead you out of all impurity, and uncleanness; for he
that is the Light is the Messenger of the Covenant, and by his Light shining in
you, he is come into his Temple, to sit as a Refiner, and as a Fuller, to
purify the Sons of Levi. Now the Light which comes from Christ Jesus being the
guide of all your minds, leads you up into Unity with him, from whence the
Light comes, and there we are one for evermore, and cannot be separated: Now
the Light shining in the Conscience, it maks manifest all the dark ways, and
rips up Man, and discovers all deceit and judges it, so that which lies betwixt
the Light, which shines in the Conscience and the Soul, comes to be judged and
cast out, and so the dead comes to hear the Voice, and the Graves comes to be
opened, and the quickening Spirit to be witnessed, and the Light and the Soul
comes to be joined, and here the Lord comes to be praised by the living, for
its the living that praises him, for the dead and they that go down into the
Pit cannot praise him, and all they who are in death, who knows not Redemption
by the Light, to them this is a Mystery, and the sealed Book, that neither the
Learned, nor unlearned can read in the disobedient and dark nature, which is
shut out from God forever; but to you who follow the Lamb, in the Regeneration,
through the Tribulation, this to you is unsealed, and you are made witnesses of
the Sufferings, and Death, and Resurrection of Christ in you, which is the hope
of your Glory, and to you it is given to know the Mysteries, but to others it
is a Parable, and must not be revealed to them, for blessed be the Name of the
Lord, it cannot be known but in the pure Life, as its lived in, and here the
wisdom of the wise is confounded, and the Counsel of the Prudent is brought to
naught, by the Eternal Counsel and Wisdom of our God, Glory to his Name for
evermore. And now my dear Brethren and Sisters, as one with you in the Eternal
Covenant of Life, according to the Measure of Grace received from God, I write
unto you as a Brother, and a Servant of the living God, having received the
like precious faith with you; I say, I write unto you to stir up your pure
minds, or to put you in remembrance of the Grace of God to you, as one who
desires the good of your Souls, as my own, and the recovery of the Image of
God, and am a Sufferer with you for the Seeds sake, but waits in Patience until
the day of deliverance of it from the bondage of Captivity, which the Lord is
bringing to pass in this his day of Power; and now Death and Hell must give up
their Dead, for Death is now come to be swallowed up of Victory, and all who
abide faithful to the end, shall witness the Sting of Death taken away; the
which in measure I witness, and now wait ready to be offered up, being in
weakness of the outward Body, but in much peace and quiet in the inward,
praised be the Lord forever, and not knowing that I shall ever see your Faces
any more in the outward, but steadfastly believes to meet you, and to be joined
to you in the Unity of the Body, whereof Christ Jesus is our Head, where the
Bond of peace and love is kept, and where all Sorrows and Troubles is done
away: and for this cause was I moved to write unto you these few Lines, as an
Epistle to be read and witnessed in the Hearts, where you may read me
continually in the Measure of God, which is but one, in which we own, know, and
read one another, where the World knows us not.

And now, to the Lord God and to the Word of his Grace I commit you, which is
able to keep you and preserve you pure, and spotless, and undefiled, and will
present you blameless unto the Lord, if you abide in it, and will give you an
inheritance amongst them that are Sanctified; and therefore be faithful unto
the end, for he that endures unto the end shall be saved, but he that turns
back, my Soul takes no pleasure in him, says the Lord; and therefore bold and
valient be for the Truth upon Earth following the Captain of our Salvation,
Christ Jesus the high Priest of our Profession, who endured the Cross, and
despised the shame, and sat down at the right Hand of God the Father forever,
and has led Captivity Captive, and has given to us the Comforter, the Spirit
of Truth, which the World cannot receive, but leads us into all Truth who are
giuded by it, and is the Worlds condemnation: This lay upon me to write unto
you being weak upon my Bed, in Compassion and love to all your Souls, who
desires the Growth of every Plant of my Heavenly Fathers planting, that they
may bring forth Fruit to the Glory of his Grace; for herein is he glorified,
that ye bring forth much Fruit: So in the Eternal unchangable, ever living, and
never failing Love of God, in that I bid you all farewell.

And in that am I knit and united unto you, and death cannot be able to
separate us, for in that Love there is Union for evermore, and so I subscribe
yours in that, and known to the World by the Name.

John Camm.
This was given forth at Bristol when he lay in great weakness upon his Bed on
the Year 1665.



John Audlands and John Cam's Letters,
To all dear Friends who love the Light, in about Bristol.
Dear Friends,
YOu whose minds are turned toward God, by the pure Light of God, to wait upon
the Lord in his Fear; Grace, Mercy and Peace from God be multiplied in you and
amongst you; that you may grow and abound in the pure Life of God; growing up
every one of you in particular in your own measure, having your minds stayed
upon the Lord, to wait upon him in singleness of Heart, to be taught by him;
every one of you walking in the Light which leads up to him, there you will see
the Lord present with you; but going out from the pure Light, the Vail is
drawn, and the Enemy lodges upon the Vail, then arises Doubts and Fears,
Questions and Troubles; then you look back to that which is behind, and forget
the Mark which is before; but dwelling in the Light, and in the pure Fear of
the Lord, your minds will be stayed, patiently to wait as the newborn Babes to
be refreshed with the Milk of the Word; and then you will know the gentle
leadings of the Father, and the green Pastures and the still Waters, and the
Dew from above upon the tender Plants, and the watering of the Plants, that you
may grow as Plants of God, planted into the true Vine, growing in the Vine,
sitting under the Vine, and abiding in the Vine, that you may be Trees of
Righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that God alone may be exalted in you.
Oh, dear ones, our Bowels flows out to you, and is poured out to the Lord for
you; we are bound to you, even with the Bond of Love, even the same Love as we
had loved withal, the same runs out freely to you; and as we said to you, the
same we say again, prize the day of your Visitation, that you may know the
things that belong to your eternal Peace; and dwell in the Light, and walk in
the Light, and meet together in the pure Fear of the Lord; and dwell in Love,
and have no Fellowship with the unfruitful works of Darkness, but reprove them,
and thou that reproves must be clear, or else thou judges with that which must
be judged; so judge your selves first every one, let self first be judged and
condemned, and that which judges and condemns self, let that speak and act,
and reprove unfruitful works, and then your Fellowship will be in that which
condemns self; and then you will meet in the fear of the Lord, and discern
between the Righteous and the Wicked, and know the Voice of Christ and follow
him, and be subject to his Yoke, and endure the Cross, and rejoice in the Cross
of Christ, and Minister in the Cross, and have no Unity with that which is out
of the Cross; who mind earthly things, such are Enemies to the Cross, such are
in the Hypocrisy, and in Presumption, speaking high words, but run before the
Light, and lead up into the Air. Therefore all dear Friends, we do Exhort,
Charge and Command you to walk in the Light, and in the Cross, that you may
have Unity in the Life of God; and that you may discern between the Holy and
Profane, and receive not every spirit, nor believe not every spirit: In the
Bowels of Love do we beseech you to walk worthy of your Calling, Holy is he
that has called you, Holiness becomes his House for evermore; let the Holy
guide your minds, and it will lead you into Holiness, into Pureness, into
Meekness, into Love, into Unity, to watch over one another, and to mind the
good of one another, and to be of one Heart, of one Soul, of one Mind, all
guided by one Spirit, and walking in one Light, all pressing on in one way,
which leads to Life; and so all will come to witness one Life, and one Teacher;
and you will see the Word within, and the Law within, and the Fear of the Lord
within, which will keep your Hearts clean, and then Wisdom will be made
manifest in you, and the secrets of the Lord revealed in you, which secrets are
revealed to Babes, not to the Wisdom of the World; so dwell in Wisdom, that you
may know what speaks, and to what you speak, that none cast a Pearl to Swine;
but keep in the Unity, and wait in Patience, waiting for the Promises to be
fulfilled in you; when trouble comes be content, wait low in Patience; when Joy
comes, be low in the pure Fear; and keep low, and dwell in the pure Wisdom of
God, and the Lord God of Light, Life and Power be with you, and go along with
you, that you may grow up in him, and have Dominion over the World, that you
may all dwell within; and mind the Just to guide your minds continually; we are
with you written in your Hearts, you may read us daily, we even Travel with
you, and long after you, that you may all wait to know Christ formed in you,
that we may rejoice together for evermore, over the Heads of our Enemies. Dear
Hearts, in the eternal Love and Life of our God, do we reach to your dwelling;
in the pure Life you will see and feel us present with you, and we have Unity
with as many of you as are faithful in your Measures; so every one in your
Measure wait upon the Lord, that you may know Redemption from the World, and so
be witnesses of the Son of God, by the same Witness as raised up him, by which
he bears witness against the World, by the same Spirit you being raised will
bear witness against the World; so every one dwell in that which Judges the
Earthly, and works out the Earthly, that you may know the Earthly wastes, and
the Earth grow feeble, and the Gods of the Earth famished, and the ground of
Thoughts and Imaginations removed, and the Covering taken off, and the Vail
rent, and the Serpents head bruised, and the Seed of the Woman brought forth,
which all the Promises are unto, Yea and Amen in Christ, which Seed is but one,
which Seed is Christ, which Seed will not Bow and Worship the Devil for all the
glory of the World, but overcomes and gets the Victory: So all be watchful when
Temptions come; keep low and still in patience wating upon the Lord, that he
may be feared and honored, who will provide a way to escape. So dear and
tender ones, in the pure Light of God wait, and there you will grow in
discerning, and in Wisdom, and in pure Fear, and there Love will be increased
in and among you; and the Unity of the Spirit will be known; so all walking in
the Spirit you will not fulfill the Lust of the Flesh. Dear Hearts, we write to
you, to stir up your pure minds by way of Remembrance: Little Children, keep
your selves from Idols: The mighty God of Life keep and preserve you in the
pure Life of God, Farewell; your Friends in the Unchangable Everlasting Bond of
Love and Peace, Brethren and Companions, to all who are in Tribulation, in the
Kingdom of Patience of Jesus Christ.

Read this amongst Friends at the Meeting.

Hereford, the 25th day of the 7th Month, 1654. John Audland and John Camm.

Edward Pyot,
DEar Heart, we are now at Hereford, but we are ready to go this day Ten Miles
to a Meeting at Branyard; we had two Meetings yesterday at Captain Hirings
House; the Governor and his Wife was there the latter part of the day; and the
joy of the Lord is our strength, his ^ower is with us; all was silent there.
This is the day of Isreal's return out of Captivity; joy for evermore will be
your Portions; waiting npon the Lord, you will witness the gathering into the
Fold; so God Almighty keep thee, and all of you in singleness up to him, that
he alone may be Exalted. Salute us dearly to thy Wife, and to all Friends as if
we named them one by one; we are bound to you by the Bond which never can be
broken;

Farewell. Remember us to Captain Beal and his Wife, and to them at the
Red-Lodge. John Audland, John Camm.

Dear and loving Friends,
IN that Unchangable, Eternal Everlasting Love of our Father we Salute you,
even that Love with which I am loved of my Father, that Love flows out unto
that of God in every one of you, without respect of Persons, for you are all of
you dear and near unto us, as you abide in that which does Convince you; but
turning from that by which your Hearts and Minds are knit together, and brought
into the Unity, your minds being turned from that, then the Unity is broken,
and the Bond of Peace and Love is broken, and that does make a Rent, and a
Breach, and Schism amongst you; for turning from the pure Eternal Light of God,
which leads up to the door into the Sheepfold, and so would lead you into the
Kingdom of God, where there is Rest, Joy and Peace for evormore; but your minds
turning form this, you turn into the Carnal and into the Visible, and so self
gets up, and from that nature proceeds self Separation; and here the haughty
nature gets up self-Exaltation, and the Just suffers, and by that nature the
pure is Crucified and Slain; and then Carelessness and Sottishness, and self
Love abounds, which is to be Judged and Condemned by the Light and by the Life;
and from the Life of God do I declare against all that nature in every one,
that by the Light of God which you have all received a Measure of, you may come
to see that nature in every one of your selves, which disappoints and separates
you from your Head, that by the Light that nature may be discerned, and so
judged and condemned by the Light: But first every one come to know Judgment
set up in your selves, and self in the particular judged, that Judgment may be
set up in the Earth, that the Inhabitants thereof may learn Righteousness, and
so Judgment being passed upon the Rebellious and Uncircumcised in your
particulars; and you walking and dwelling in the Life according to your
Measure, then may you boldly reprove others who walk not up according to their
Measure; for the Beam being cast out of your own Eyes, you will see perfectly
to pull out the Mote out of your Brothers Eye, but it must be first out of your
own, or else you are Hypocrites; And so I charge you all in the Presence of the
Lord, every one to keep your own Habitations, and to be faithful to your
Measures which you have received of God; and you will come to grow and increase
in the increase of God; and abiding in the Vine you will become fruitful, and
you will become Beautiful and Comely, Sweet, Precious and Lovely in the Eyes of
him who has loved you with exceeding great Love, and with loving kindness has
he drawn you in Measure out of the filthy Polutions and Heathenish Ways and
Worships of the World, and has opened your Eyes, and letten you see all things
openly under the Sun; and by the pure eternal Light which has shined into you,
by it you see the pure Path and holy Way which leads up to God the Father of
Light. -- Oh, dear Hearts, prize the eternal Love of God unto you, and walk
answerable to that Love which is manifest in every one of you, for it is great
and rich Love; Oh the abundance of his Love and Free Grace, let not his
Benefits slip out of your minds! Oh what manner of Love is this, that we should
be called the Sons and Children of the most high, therefore does not the World
know us. Dear Hearts, walk in the pure eternal Love and Light of God, that so
you may come to the pure Life of God, to follow the Captain of your Salvation,
who was made perfect through Sufferings, that you may endure the Cross, despise
the Shame, and so come to partake of the Immortal Crown of Glory, which never
fades away: Oh, my dear ones, you are written in my Heart, and I cannot forget
you, yea, truly I am often with you in the pure eternal Love and Life, and my
Love runs out to you, and my Life is with you, and our Rejoicing will be to
behold your Faces, and to find you walking up orderly in your measure, that
when we see your Faces in the outward, we may see you Beatiful, Comely, Fresh
and Green, casting a goodly Smell to all that come nigh you, that so you may
Preach to the Heathens by your Pure, Holy and Godly Conversation, letting your
Light shine forth in your lives, that all who see your Conversation who are
Enemies to the Truth, may have their Mouths stopped, and be ashamed and
confounded, and be made to confess the Lord is with you: So my dear Hearts, all
as one, who abides in that which is one, which unites and knits your Hearts
together, and gathers up into its self, in that we are with you present, in
that dwell, and there you will be preserved and kept safe from your Enemies:
And the Eternal Everlasting Love of God over-shadow you, and keep you in the
pure Fear and Power of the Lord over all the World to remain; and so we cease
to Writ, but not to Love you, and Pray for you, and remain your Friends in the
unchangable Love of God.

John Camm, John Audland.

John Aulland's and John Camm's Letter to Friends at Bristol.
Dearly beloved in the Lord Jesus Christ, you whose minds are turned toward
the Lord, upon him to wait, to receive the hidden Treasure, which comes from
above; Grace, Love and Peace be unto you, in you, and among you, that you may
grow in Grace, in Love, in Purity, and in the Fear of the Lord, this Peace is
to you who are waiting upon him, from whence peace comes, to that which is not
of the World, but is contrary to the World, and gives Victory over the World,
and bears Testimony against the World: for woe unto the World, no peace unto the
Earth, but a Sword; and all which is contrary to the Light, is to be cut down
with the Sword, and the Sword is drawn, and all that must be cut off, which is
against the reign of the Lord Jesus; therefore all wait in the true discerning,
and in the true judgment, that you may know the redemption of the Soul: And
prize the Love of God to you in visiting you, and letting you see the ways of
the World, and the worships of the World, and his Love has been and is shed
amongst you; so in the pure Light abide, which is your Eye, by which you will
see the Lords Love to you, and wait in it, that you may know the washing and
the cleansing by the Blood of Jesus, which Purifies the Heart, and Sprinkles
the Conscience, and so the Mystery of Faith you will know; so this is the Word
of the Lord to you, to exhort you and charge you, that you all wait upon him,
from whence strength comes, that your strength may be renewed, that you may
grow daily, and increase in the Riches of the Love of God, and that you meet
often together, and dwell in Love and in the Bond of Peace, and join to nothing
which is contrary to the Pure Life, for thou that joins to that which defiles,
the woe is upon thy Head from the Lord God, and there is the Hypocrite and the
Dissembler, which has the Form but not the Power, whose mind; joined to the
Harlot, and woe is the end of that profession; therefore all dwell in that which
keeps pure in the Measure, that all may be crucified and mortified which is
upon the Earth, and from the Earth, and abide in that which mortifies daily and
crosses the Earthly part, and works it out; and this is the Word of God to
you, whose minds are turned to wait in that which turns the mind, the same
leads up into the endless Life: so the Mighty Power of the Lord God be amongst
you and keep you, that all strong holds may be broken down, and that the Word
of Life ye may all dwell in, which gives Life, and cuts down all that which is
against the Life, so fare you well; The Lord God of Power carry you along on
your Journey to the Eternal Sabbath; we are your Servants for the Truth sake,
and the Seed sake.

Salute us to all Friends, our Love flows freely to you, your growth is our joy
and riches; growing in the Life, you will see the Crown of Life, and reign over
the World; and there we are your dear Brethren, in Joy and in Tribulation.

John Audland, John Camm.

The Testimony of Mabel Benson concerning John Camm, her late Husband deceased.
THis short Testimony I have to bear for and concerning John Camm my dear
Husband deceased; that he was a tender, dear and loving Husband to me, one that
feared the Lord and was freely given up to spend, and be spent in the Service
of Truth, as Hundreds can testify, his life and delight being therein to the
end of his days; a pattern of Holiness he was in his Life and Conversation to
the Flock of God; he was exceeding noble and faithful in the Testimony of
Truth, he never shrunk in the time of his greatest Trials, which were not a
few, the Lord being always with him to the astonishment of his Enemies; after
he had traveled several Years in the work of the Ministry, though in great
Bodily Weakness, the Lord was pleased in his Mercy to bring him home to his
outward being to finish his course in much Peace, to my great satisfaction, the
which in Measure abated my sorrow in the loss of him as to his Bodily presence,
together with my being well satisfied, that he is at rest with the Lord, and
made richly to partake of the joys of Heaven in everlasting Life, therein to
praise the King of everlasting Glory unto all eternity, Amen.

Mabell Benson.

John Audland's Letters and Epistles,
To Friends, soon after he was gone forth in the Ministry.
Dear Hearts,
IN the eternal Truth, every one in your Measures, mind your own condition, and
be Low, Meek and Humble, for such the Lord teaches. Mind the fear of the Lord,
always to dwell in it, that his secrets may be opened, for in the fear the
secrets are made manifest; and the Pure know the secrets, but the Wisdom of God
is hid from the vulterous eye; but that eye which comes out of Death,
comprehends Death and the Grave, and sees God, which no Man can, but the Son
declares him, for he sees him. Now dear Hearts, wait for the Son to be made
manifest in you, every one in particular; keep your Eye single, that your whole
Body may be full of Light. My dear Hearts, be bold in this day of the Lord, and
valiant for the Truth upon Earth, you who are redeemed from the Earth up to
God, to serve him, and are called, let nothing stand between, but keep open
that Eye which comprehends all the Earth; keep out the Earth, lest that the Eye
be veiled; keep clean within, that nothing grow up within, but what is pure,
that so you may discern the impure; and you who are kept pure, be bold to
reprove the Unfruitful works of darkness, and have no Fellowship with them,
neither within, nor without, for if any thing be spared within, it will spare
without; and to be Rebellious, is as the Sin of Witchcraft. Oh, my dear Hearts,
my care is, that you grow in the Truth, and that you may keep single every one
in your Measure; take heed of coldness and dullness in any, but dwell in
Authority, and speak in Authory, that deceit may be confounded and banished
from among you, that so the Pure may be cherished in the Truth; none be
Careless, but be Watchful, and Watch one over another in Love, that you may be
established in Righteousness, that the Land may rejoice, and the Peaceable
flourish, and all the Unrighteous be cut down by the Righteous.

And Friends, dwell in the Power of Truth, and mind the Presence of the Lord
with you always, which keeps bold, and causes you to tread upon all the Worlds
Ways, Words, Worships, Priests and Deceits, that so you may be fed upon the
Mountains in a large Pasture. Dear Friends, mind your daily feeding in that
which is eternal, and feed not the Carnal, nor labor not for the Bread which
perishes, but for that which endures for ever. And all Friends, take heed of
looking back, for if any draws back my Soul has no pleasure in him: But all
dear Friends, press forward in the strait way; my Hearts desire and prayer to
the Lord is, that you may grow and increase in the Increase of God, and that
you may all be Faithful, for there is your Crown. Oh, be Faithful to the end,
that you may inherit all things, and be partakers of that which never shall
have end; and keep in the Cross daily, which will Crucify daily, and Mortify
daily your Affections which be upon Earth; for the day of the Lord is
approaching, the good and happy day, glad-Tydings to the Prisoner, but a day of
Terror to the Wicked, and to all that live in filthiness, who profess much Love
to God with their Mouths, but the Heart going after Covetousness: And a word
to all you who are in that condition, who draw near God with your Mouths, but
your Hearts far from him; to you who are convinced of the Truth of God, and
denies the Priests in words, and come to Meet amongst the Saints, and sits like
them, but do not forsake your Sins, nor own the Cross of Christ, so as to live
in it, and so you give occasion to the World, to speak evil of the Gospel of
Christ; now to such I say, from the Lord, Depart ye Workers of Iniquity,
terrible and dreadful is the day that shall come upon you; woe unto them that
cover with a Covering, but not of the Spirit of the Lord; Fear the Lord and
tremble before him, and prize your time while it is called to day, for the Lord
is near, and if he find you eating and drinking with the Drunken, he will cut
you assunder, and give you your Portion with Hypocrites. But all my dear
Friends, dwell in the Power of the Lord, and let not your minds be stained, but
keep single, and stand uncovered, that so you may discern all those that are
covered, and reign above them in the eternal living Truth of God, to his praise
for evermore; Praises and Honor to our God for ever, who is worthy; for all is
falling before him. My dear Friends, the Harvest here is great, even all the
Fields are white, and all the dumb Dogs, and idle Shepherds, Drones and
Loiterers, runs, quakes, trembles and flies before us; but the Sword of the
Lord is in the hands of the Saints, and this Sword divides, hews and cuts down
Deceit, and so way is made for the pure Seed to arise and reign above all,
which conquers all, Praises be to the Lord for evermore.

Dear Friends, the Work of the Lord is great, and many are Convinced of the
living Truth; and I really see the Lord will raise up to himself a pure and a
large People, to Serve and Worship him in Spirit and in Truth.

Farewell. My dear Brother and fellow Labourer Edward Borough Salutes you all
in the Lord; and the everlasting God of Power keep you all pure to his
everlasting Praise; All ye Saints of the Lord, Praise ye the Lord and Magnify
him for ever. Your dear Brother in the Truth, John Audland.

John Audland his Epistle to Friends, from Chester City the 5th of the 5th
Month.
DEar Friends and Brethren in the Eternal Truth of God, Members of the same
Body, partakers of the unsearchable Riches of the love of God, which love
endures for evermore. Oh! my dear hearts, press on in the strait way,
forgetting those things that are behind: Every one of you in particular, mind
to dwell in the pure fear of the Lord, which will keep you pure and single, to
stand in his counsel, that so you may reign above the Earth, and rejoice over
the heads of all your Enemies, walking in the Light of the Lord; And dwell in
the Light, and with it you will see and know all the wiles of Satan, who would
lay snares Innocent; and in the power of the Lord stand, that you in his power
may have Victory. My dear Friends, what I declared to you when I was present
with you, the same do I now write to you, and in the Spirit I am present with
you; and therefore in the Name of the Lord, and in his fear, put on boldness,
put on courage, put on strength, every one in your measure stand, and be
faithful in the Work of the Lord, as his Witnesses against all the World, for
unto this are you called to cast off every weight and burden, and to run with
patience the race before you, the way is strait and narrow, no unclean thing
must enter, nothing that defiles must enter; unto this are you all called, to
put off the old Man with his Deeds, to die daily, to forsake the World, to deny
all, to lay down your lives, and to take up the Cross of Christ daily, and have
no fellowship with unfruitful works of darkness; God is pure, he calls to
purity. Oh! my dear Hearts, as you abide faithful, you are my joy in the Lord,
my Prayers are for you; God is my Witness I make mention of you daily to the
Lord: my dear and tender Plants of God, as you grow and increase in the
Increase of God, my joy will increase; Oh! stand steadfast as faithful Servants,
every one upon your watch, that you may partake daily of the Joy of the Lord,
and walk worthy of the Love, which the Lord has manifested unto you, watch
over one another in Love, in Bowels, in tenderness, in compassion to that which
is pure; and rule over all deceit, tread upon it, and reign over it, dwell in
discerning every one, and suffer not that to speak which is not of God; but all
wait in Love, and walk in Love, and the Body edifies it self in Love; and the
God of Peace and Love keep you pure to his eternal Praise; to all the honest in
heart, I speak, walking in the pure Light of the Lord, that you may have
Dominion over all the Earth, and earthly minds: And so such I say, who are
convinced by the Light of God, but does not walk in the Light, How will you
escape? The Lord is dreadful, his Terror will surprise all Hypocrites, the
witness of the Lord is against all such, and his Judgments will take hold upon
you, his hand you cannot escape; I say to such, as I have often told you, yea,
I have told you Weeping, such are Enemies to the Cross of Christ, and by him
are you to be Slain, who refuse him, and will not have him to Reign over you;
and therefore by the Dreadfulness of the Lord, I charge you to walk in
Obedience to that which is committed to you, that every one of you may deny
those things which the Light in the Conscience bears witness against: And I
charge you give no evil Example in your Walkings, nor in your Meetings; in your
Meetings be watchful, bear Reproof patiently, examine your selves, let the
Light search you, and you will see Reproof is to you who does not walk in the
Light; and in your walkings be watchful, have no fellowship with the world; for
that which is of the world, and you that have fellowship with the world, cannot
bear witness against the world: And therefore come out, be separate, touch no
unclean thing, and fear the living God who searches all Hearts, and his reward
is with him, to give to every one according to his deeds: But to all you that
are faithful, the Joy of the Lord is your strength, the Arm of the Lord is with
you, the Sickle is in your Hand, thrust in the Sickle, for the Earth is ripe,
the Press is full, the Fats overflow, the Glory of the Lord is appearing to
shake terribly the Earth, Glory to him for evermore: Farewell.

All my dear Hearts, my Bowels run out freely to you, I am with you daily in
that which will never Wither: The Lord God of Power keep you pure, every one in
your Measure, to his eternal Praise: my Love is to you all, and remember me
dearly to all Friends every where.

Your dear Brother, a servant of the Lord, and in him can we never be
separated. John Audland.

DEar, and well-beloved Friends, in the pure Love, Life and Unity of the
Spirit, do I Salute you, and Greet you in the Unity of the Spirit, am I with
you present, and our fellowship does endure forever, walking in the Spirit, and
keeping the Unity of the Spirit, then are we present in the Spirit: But who
walk after the Flesh, and live in the Flesh, and to the Flesh, such are not
present in the Spirit, who lives not in the Spirit, and all such Fruits will
dye and wither and fade away. Now my dear Friends, in love and life wait in
your Measure of the Spirit, that you may profit and grow up in the Spirit which
is pure, and purifies, and leads up into Purity, and Holiness, and
Righteousness in which stands the Kingdom of God; and nothing that is
unrighteous can enter into that Kingdom which stands in Righteousness where the
Lamb dwells, who is the Light of the Holy City which is the Habitation of the
Righteous, where the Throne of the Lamb is exalted, and all Crowns cast down,
and the Lamb alone Reigns, and they who follow him, whose Garments are washed,
who have come through Tribulation, who stands before the Throne, singing the
Song of Moses and the Lamb, who are redeemed from among men; Glory, Glory for
evermore, unto him who Reigns over all, who is the faithful witness, who was
dead, and is alive, and lives for evermore, out of whose Mouth proceeds the two
edged Sword which cuts and divides, which is as a Fire, and as a Hammer, by
which Sword the wicked is slain, and none that defiles can escape it, for it
turns every way to keep the tree of Life, and none have right to eat of the
Tree of Life but they that enter in at the strait Gate, and stands pure before
the Throne of the Lamb: from his Throne proceeds the River of living Waters,
where the Hungry and Thirsty are refreshed and satisfied; and by it the
righteous man is planted, and his fruit shall never wither, nor his leaf shall
never fade, but shall be as a fruitful Branch abiding in the Vine, and growing
in the Vine. Oh, my dear Friends, abide and continue in that which has called
you, and prize the Love of God, never let his Benefits go out of your Minds,
dwell low and single in the Fear of God, that you may be kept open and tender,
in Love and Unity to grow together, and there am I with you in Bowels of love
and tenderness; God is my witness, my heart Burns within me to you, and my Life
reaches to the Life in you, and I have great breathings in my Spirit to the
Lord for you; Oh, let me be refreshed in your growth, my well-beloved Ones in
whom my Soul delights, that we may travel on together, and feed together on
that which lives for evermore, and gives Life for ever more; be not weary,
neither faint in your Journey, my dear and precious Ones but wait upon the Lord
God, and your strength shall be renewed daily, and your Life refreshed daily;
be faithful, and abide in the daily Cross of Christ, endure it, and the Enemies
of God will be cut down by it, and the residue of the Heathen will be
Crucified, and Christ alone Reign, and all those be cut down that would not
have him to Reign, such are Enemies to the Cross, and their end is Destruction;
have no fellowship with such, I exhort and charge you from the Lord, who is
arisen in his Power to redeem Sion, and to take Vengeance upon all his Enemies;
I am melted to melt you, in pure love and tenderness; I am even broken to break
you, the Searcher and Revealer of all Secrets, bears me witness that I lve not;
and I am charged to charge you to abide in the daily Cross of Christ, that the
Just may reign, that the Living God may be exalted amongst you, whose name you
bear: And therefore what manner of Persons ought you to be. Oh, I even beseech
you, that you walk worthy of your calling, in Bowels of love: My dear and
well-beloved Ones, you bear the Name of the Living God, and his Fame through you
is spread abroad, and the Dread of the Lord God takes hold upon the Heathen,
and now is the Lord making known his Wonders, as ever was in any day, his
strange Act is he bringing to pass, and his Work, blessed are your Eyes that
see and your Ears that hear, and who are not offended at his coming, but deny
all to follow him, that you may be found worthy to believe in him, and suffer
with him, that you may Reign with him, for evermore. Let it not be a light
thing, to any amongst you, that you bear the Name of the holy One, but for his
glory by whom you are called, and whose Name you bear, stand single and abide
in the Life, and follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes, that the Heathen may
be confounded, and scattered, who watch against you, that they might say, where
is their God. And now are they gathering together all their Inchanters, if so
be they might prevail; for now the day of their Torment is begun, and the Voice
of him that has roared from his holy Place does pursue them, and their can be
no hiding place found; Terror, Woe and Misery is coming upon all the
Inhabitants of the Earth, let all Flesh bow and tremble before the Lord, his
Fire is kindled, and his Sword is drawn, and his Bow is bent, and his Sword
shall be made fat with Slain, and drunk with the Blood of his Enemies; the
Sword is doubled that no Flesh may escape from the South to the North: Because
of the Tidings, I am Smitten to Smite; the Lion has roared, terror, terror
to all the World, the day of Visitation is come, the day of Redemption is come,
the day of Recompense is come, the Jealousy of the Lord will burn like Fire,
and the Word of the Lord is gone forth, and by his own Power shall it be
fullfiled: And the Vials, Wrath, Judgment, Vengeance, and the mighty Storm of
Hail shall be poured upon the Heathen, and who can stand when God does this?
And this is his day, and by his own Arm shall be performed, the Righteous shall
shine forever, and ever, and shall dwell on high, their Bread shall be sure,
their Waters shall not fail, the Just God will do Righteously, and the
Righteous shall not perish with the wicked; the Lord has said it: The
righteous ones shall be rewarded, and shall Inherit the holy Mountain, and lie
down in the Mountain where the Lion and the Lamb lie down together, and the
Wrath of the Lamb is as the roaring of the Lion, and all who follow the Lamb,
the Lion goes before them; there is your strength, my beloved Ones, stand
steadfast and be faithful, and the Lord is with you, and no Weapon formed
against you shall prevail: The mighty Power of the Lord God go along with you,
to keep you in his pure Power and Life for evermore; in which Power and Life I
am with you bound up and sealed, and continues forever, to be your dear Brother
in the Unity of the Spirit, and in the Bond of Peace. And Grace, Mercy, Peace,
Love and Unity from the Lord Jesus Christ be multiplied in you and amongst you,
and the God of Power Peace and Love keep you pure and single, and preserve you
for evermore. Moved of the Lord; farewell.

Your Dear Brother in that which never changes. John Audland.

John Audland's Letter. etc.
DEarly beloved ones in the Lord Jesus Christ; Grace, Mercy and Peace from God
be multiplied to you, and in you; you my dear ones whom my Life reaches out
unto, with whom I am present in the eternal Spirit of the living God in the
pure eternal Love and Life of God do I Salute you, and greet you as with a holy
Kiss; the Love of God which is shed abroad in my heart runs forth freely to
you; Lambs of God, Babes of God, to you my Life does reach: Little Children who
are begotten to a lively hope by the Resurrection of the Dead, to you I write
from the pure Life, to the stiring up of your pure minds, that in the pure mind
you may abide in the lively hope, quietly to wait for the Revelation of the Son
of God in you* which is ready to be revealed now in the last time, that you may
witness him the s^eond time without Sin unto Salvation, who comes to condemn
Sin in the Flesh who is now making himself manifest to take away Sin, that you
may witness him without Sin, the Lamb without Spot, who takes away Sin, to know
him and be in him, without which there is no knowledge of him, and to abide in
him; who gives an understanding to know him which is eternal Life this to
witness; and to you this is the Word of the Lord little Children, that you may
wait as new born Babes to be fed with the sincere Milk of the Word, that by it
you may grow up into him, and in him, who is the Word which reconcileth to God,
which Hammers down all deceit which burns up all the dross, which treads down
all the wicked under his Feet; whose Vesture is dipped in Blood, who treads the
Wine Press, whose Arm alone brings Salvation to this People, whose Name is
called the Word of God, which Word does divide and separate betwixt the
precious and the vile, which Word is nigh you in your Hearts and in your
Mouths, abide in it and wait upon it, and take counsel at it continually as at
the Oracle of God, by which hearing comes, and faith comes, which gives the
victory over the World, and leads you to deny the World; little Children, Heirs
of another World, so in that continue which has turned your minds from the
World toward God, from the Darkness to the Light; which leads up to Christ
from the World, and guides unto God, and keeps in the way to eternal
Inheritance which never fades; that through many tribulations you may see the
entrance into the Kingdom where the World is overcome, and he raigns who
overcomes the World; so abiding in him you abide in peace out of the World
where there is trouble, and there is your reward; verily my dear ones, all the
sufferings of this present World is not worthy to be named with the Glory that
is revealed at the revelation of the Son of God; so in the Light abide which
leads up to the perfect Day, and walk as Children of the Day, redeeming your
time, and prising your time, the large Love of the Lord and his benefits may
never slip out of your minds; so in the presence of the Lord do I exhort you,
my beloved ones in the Lord, and charge you to abide in him, that you may grow
up in the Unity of the Spirit, and keep the Unity: that which goes out breaks
the Unity; and to you this is the Word of God, little Children.

Your Brother in the unchangable Love in the eternal Unity of the Spirit. John
Audland.
The 28th day of the 8th Month 1654.
A Letter sent unto Charles Marshall by John Audland, 1654.
I am moved to write unto thee, to stand still in the Light which shows thee
thy wretched state; by that Light, thou come to see thy self where thou art,
and how thou have spent thy time: thy knowledge of God and profession of God,
now comes to wither, that which thou have gathered without, perishes and
stands thee in no stead; (Now) in that, that shows thee thy condition, wait,
that the judgment of the Lord may be made manifest in thee upon the head of the
wicked, and through judgment Sion may be set free. Abide in that which is the
condemnation of all that is wicked, both within thee and without thee start not
aside from the judgments of the Lord, for his judgments are righteous, and all
his ways are equal; if thou art brought as low as Hell, yea, if thou come to
say there is no hope, let Patience have her perfect work in thee, and stand
still and see the Salvation of God, and a way will be made beyond thy
understanding, for the deliverance of the oppressed, for the freedom of his
chosen, for the bringing of the Prisoner out of the Prisonhouse: Now, Friend
from the Lord do I speak unto thee, to wait in the Light that shows thee thy
condition, that thou may know one of the Days of the Son of Man, which came
not to send peace on the Earth, but a Sword, and to kindle a Fire, and thou will love to know his judgments: he comes to shut and to open, thy right Eye
must be plucked out, and that Eye opened which the Prince of the Air has
blinded in the Chrildren of disobedience. Abide in that which judges; do not
labor to get peace to that, that is now wounded, that the Judgments of the Lord
may pass through the Earth, and the Serpents head come to be bruised, and the
promise of God be made manifest unto the seed, and through judgment the door of
Mercy comes to be opened. Judgment upon the unjust, is mercy to the just, which
has been oppressed by the unjust; And to thee, this is the Word of the Lord;
he that comes to the Worlds end, comes to his Wits end; before that World be
known, which never shall have end, and that fruitful Field must become a barren
Wilderness, and the pure Plant of Gods own planting, must spring out of a
barren Ground; so in the Light, which is of God, by which thou see thy
condition, stand and wait for the Power of the living God to be made manifest
in thee, that that which has been high might be brought low, and that of low
degree exalted, and to thee, this is the Word of the Lord, to that in thy
Conscience I speak; by which Light thou now stand condemned, by which Light
all that walk in it are justified, and led up to God, and the precious
separated from the vile, and all the wicked cast out, and the elected alone
obtains the Kingdom: So the mighty God of Power direct thee, and open thy
understanding, that in his Light thou may come to see Light, and by the
powerful Word may be stripped of all, and suffer the loss of all, that God
alone may be exalted.

By one who has suffered the loss of all, and through Death is passed unto
Life. J. A.

A Letter sent unto John Audland, by his Wife, 1654.
DEar Brother, dearer to me, then ever; My love flows out to thee, even the
same love that I am loved withal of my Father, in that love Salute me to all my
Friends, for dear you are all unto me, my life is much refreshed, in hearing
from you; I received thy Letters, and all my Soul desires, is, to hear from
thee in the life; dear Heart, in Life dwell, there I am with thee out of all
time, out of all Words, in the pure Power of the Lord, there is my joy and
strength; O! How am I refreshed to hear from thee, to hear of thy faithfulness
and boldness in the Work of the Lord, O! Dear Heart I cannot utter the joy I
have concerning thee; thy presence I have continually in Spirit, therewith am I
filled with joy, all glory and honor be to our God forever. O! blessed be the
Day in which thou waft born, that thou art found worthy to labor in the work
of the Lord, surely the Lord has found thee faithful in a little, therefore he
has committed much unto thee, go on in the Name and Power of the Lord Jesus
Christ, from whence all strength comes, to whom be all glory and honor
forever. O! dear Heart, go on, conquering and to conquer, knowing this, that
thy Crown is sure. So, dear Heart, now is the time of the Lords Work, and few
are willing to go forth into it, all the whole World lies in wickedness doing
their own work; but blessed be the Lord forever who has called us from doing
our own work into his great work, O! Mavelous are his Works, and his Ways
past finding out, O! Dear Heart, thou know my Heart, thou may read daily
how that I rejoice in nothing more than in thy prosperity in the Work of the
Lord: Oh! It is past my utterance to express the joy I have for thee, I am
full, I am full of love toward thee, never such love as this; the Mighty Power
of the Lord go along with thee, and keep thee faithful and valient and bold in
his pure Counsel, to stand single out of all the World. Oh! Dear Heart, all my
love to thee is purer then Gold seven times purified in the Fire: Oh! pure is
he that has loved us, therefore let Purity and Holiness cover us for ever: a
joyful word it was to me to hear that thou wast moved to go for Bristol: Oh! my
own Heart, my own life in that which now stands, act and obey, that thou may
stand upon thy alone Guard; so dear Heart, let thy Prayers be for me, that I
may be kept pure, out of all Temptations, singly to dwell in the Life; So fare
well.

Ann Andland.

John Audlands Letter from Citsester to Friends at Bristol, the 26th of the
10th Month, 1654.
Dear Friends,
LAmbs and Babes of the most high God, who are turned from the ways and
vanities of the World, and who are brought to wait upon the Lord in patience
and singleness; being begotten to a lively Hope, by the Resurrection of the
Dead, Grace, Mercy and Peace from God be multiplied in you, and among you, that
you may grow up in the eternal Unity and fellowship of the Spirit, to walk in
the Spirit, and to worship God in Spirit, and by it you will see and discern
all the ways and vanities of the World, and all the worships of the World to
be without God, in the heathenish nature, strangers from the life of God
without the Covenant of peace, and in the Covenant with Death and Hell, unto
which there is no peace: But the Lord God of life and peace is arising, and
risen to hew down all deceit, and false ways, and to set up Righteousness and
Purity, and to establish his Covenant unto his People; and to bring in
everlasting peace by Jesus Christ, who is come to Preach Peace to the Captives,
to open the Prison Doors, to set free the oppressed; and to visit the desolate,
and to enlarge the Borders of the Barren: and his day is dawning among you, and
the Day Star is appearing in you, which will lead to the man-Child, and to the
Son of righteousness, which is eternal Life to know him, and be in him; and who
are not in him death reigns and rules, and the Bond of Iniquity, and the Chains
of Darkness stands, and Binds and Prisons the Just; which is for condemnation,
when he appears, who will judge the Secrets of all men's Hearts: And this is the
day of the Lord God wherein he is bringing back the Captivity of his People.
And you whose minds are turned to him, wait upon him in patience, having your
minds guided up unto him, growing together in Love and Unity, that the Head and
Husband may be exalted in all* and then the Bed is not defiled, but the
Marriage is honorable; but the Adulterer God will judge and condemn, and such
who wander abroad changes their way, and sets up Idols and strange Gods, and
other Lovers, and joins to strange Flesh, and feeds that which is for Judgment,
and to be fed with Judgment. But dear and precious Ones, and well-beloved in
the Lord Jesus Christ, dwell in Judgment; the Just delights in it, and the
unjust comes to be cut down by it, and through judgment Sion come to be
redeemed, and the filthy is destroyed, and Purity and Holiness comes to be
witnessed; the Light is that which condemns the unjust: and all waiting in the
Light ye have fellowship one with another, and your Unity stands in that which
is the Worlds condemnation: and so against all the World ye stand and bear
witness by that which is not of the World; but is from above, and leads up into
that which is above, and condemns all that which is below, and from below,
which is contrary to the Light of Jesus Christ, which Light shows the Door, and
guides into the entrance of the eternal Inheritance, and shows you the
Inheritance which is incorruptible, which nothing must inherit that is
corruptible; so in the Light abide, which leads up to the perfect Day, that you
may all walk as Children of the Day, growing up in the true Vine, and abiding
in the Vine, that your Fruit may appear, not as the untimely Figs which fall
away; but as that which is founded upon the true Foundation; and will stand and
abide in the Day of Trial; so dear and tender Ones, grow in Love, and let Love
be multiplied among you, and wait upon the Lord in the daily Cross that you may
be crucified to the World, and the mighty Power of the Lord will apear amongst
you, meeting often together; and faint not, neither be weary, the Lord God will
appear amongst you, and terror shall smite your Enemies; so in the Name of the
Lord do we exhort you and charge you, to abide in that which you have received
from the Lord, waiting upon him in meekness and lowliness; and the humble shall
know his way. So keep low and learn, and Grace will be given unto the humble;
my Life reaches to you, my Soul is poured forth to the Lord for you, that you
may grow and increase in the unsearchable Riches of Christ, and the mighty
Power of the Lord God be among you, and in you, to carry you through, that you
may Inherit all things.

I Salute you all in the Bowels of love, and am your Servant for Jesus sake,
and am with you in Joy and in Tribulation.

John Audland.

John Audlands Letter from Kendal, to Friends at Bristol, June, 1655.
DEarly beloved in the Lord Jesus Christ, Grace, Mercy and Peace be multiplied
in you, and among you, that in it you may all be established, and grow as
living Plants, and be fruitful in him that has called you to Grace and Virtue,
that you may live in it, and abound in every good work to the praise of the
Lord, whose love has been manifested amongst you, and you have heard his
Voice, and been Witnesses of his Power, and his eternal Love has been abundant
toward you: Therefore all Friends, of your high calling walk worthy, and press
hard after the Mark, so running that ye may obtain, every one of you in
particular, abiding in the strait way, and in the Cross daily, which is the
delight of the Just, and peace and refreshment to the Just in you all, that in
the Just you may all dwell, and then the earthly comes to dye, and judgment is
executed upon the wicked, and the Famine comes on all the Gods of the Earth,
and the day of separation and sorrow upon all the Lovers, and the Mortification
of the old Man, and as that dies the Spirit is quickened, and waiting on the
Lord every one, your strength comes to be renewed, and your Life refreshed. So,
to you all Friends, Lambs and Babes of God, whose minds are staid upon God,
their Food you will receive from the living God, and grow every one in your
Measure, walking as you have received, and prising the love of God unto you,
which has been and is large and bountiful, who has searched you out, who was
scattered in the cloudy dark day, and found no rest to your Souls, but wandered
from Mountain to Hill, and laid dissolate and barren in a waste howling
Wilderness, and no eye pitied, but he alone who is mighty to save, has visited
you, and your time was the time of love, and he has loved you with an
everlasting love, and drawn you in much tender mercy, and given his Son for a
Light, that you might all walk in it, and have fellowship in it: And now my
dearly beloved ones, stand fast in that which brings eternal Freedom, and makes
free; and be faithful every one in your measure; to you all I speak as to one,
that you may grow in love, and walk in love, and in it be established, for it
will endure for ever; oh! let it be your joy to do the will of God in all
singleness, and to dwell in his fear, and abide in the daily Cross, reason not,
nor consult not, for the mystery is hid from that eye; but dwell low, and learn
there, that subject to the Yoke every one of you may be, and wait upon the
Lord, meeting in his fear, watching one over another, and abiding in the Light,
that your fellowship may stand in that which is the Worlds condemnation; my
Soul is poured out to the Lord for you, and my Bowels runeth freely to you, in
pure love and singleness, that you may all be preserved in the pure fear of the
Lord, out of the snares of the Enemy, that in the eternal Counsel of God you
may abide, and be steadfast in the hour of Temptation: Dear Hearts, keep every
one to your own measure, which from the Lord is given unto you, that you may
witness the presence of the Lord amongst you, and find his Power, and hear his
Voice, that your Hearts may be kept open to receive the living Mercies from the
living God, that in the day of trial you may stand, and in the time of Famine
your Soul's may be kept alive: and when the Lord takes account of you, you may
give it with joy, and be found faithful and fruithful in him; This charge do I
lay upon you from the Lord, that you dwell and abide low in the Fear of the
Lord, in love to God, there walking every one in the living, as examples, that
the Lord alone may be exalted, no Pride, no Strife, but in the Cross abide,
which judges that, and takes away the occasions of Wars; and the eternal
everlasting powerful Presence of the Lord keep you all, and be amongst you, and
go along with you, for evermore.

I am your dear Friend and Companinon in joy and Tribulation.

John Audland.
My dear Brother John Camm, does dearly Salute you all in that which is eternal
and never, changes, he is pretily recovered, and to you his love is exceeding
great.



The Schoolmaster Disciplined: Or, a Reply to a lying Paper, Entitled, the
Gadding Tribe reproved: Put forth under the Name of George Willington,
Schoolmaster in the City of Bristol; in which he is proved to be the gadder
and liar, which with the Light is for condemnation.
Also, an Answer to a Scandalous Paper, put forth by William Prynne, entitled,
The Quaker unmasked, and clearly detected; wherein his Slanders are made to
appear, and he clearly detected, being taken with a lie in his mouth.
Whereunto is added a Reply to an additional Paper, put forth by William
Prynne, in his lying enlarged Edition of his scandalous Paper aforementioned;
in which he is more unmasked, and proved to be spawned from the father of Lies,
whose refuge is sweeping away.
WHereas there is a Paper lateput forth, intitul'd, The gadding Tribe reproved
by the Light of the Scriptures, by one who writes himself George Willington,
Schoolmaster in the City of Bristol, whose Book is very silly and vain; but
that Fools love to be meddling: and in it there is much railing, lying, and
false accusing* against those people, called by the Scorners, Quakers: I shall
say something as to it, for the Truths sake, that the lies may rest upon his
own head, from whence they came: Whereas thou say, A word from the Word to
the Serpent generation, called Quakers, especially to the conniving Seducer,
John Audland, and the rest of his Brethren in iniquity, who have of late set
forth a malicious Pamphlet against our godly Magistrates, and faithful
Ministers, entitled, The innocent delivered out of the snare, and the blind
guide fallen into the Pit.

Reply, The innocent delivered out of the snare, is not malicious; and in this
thou art a false accuser; and in saying I am a Seducer, thou art a Slanderer, I
charge thee to prove it, and in what? which thou have not yet done, though thou
rail upon me; and I did not write maliciously against any, much less against
Godly Magistrates and faithful Ministers; but Godly Magistrates I own, and
honor in the Lord, and faithful Ministers I have unity withal, and brethren in
iniquity are denied; therefore thee I do deny, who a worker of iniquity art
found, and from the presence of the Lord shut among the Serpent Generation, who
in scorn calls us Quakers; and the word is against thee, who art feeding upon
dust, and going upon thy Belly, and the Word of the Lord, even the word of
Truth is against thee, who art an accuser of the Brethren, and rewarded must
thou be according to' thy deeds; and though thou have named that Book, the
Innocent Delivered, yet let all take notice, who reads thy filthy Paper, that
thou have not answered any one thing there demanded, neither confuted any one
answer in that Book; so the snare remains broken, and the Innocent is
delivered, and he that dug a pit, into it himself falls, and the Scripture
is fulfilled, they that help, and he that is helped, both fall together.

And whereas thou sets down many Scriptures, as of blind guides, Serpents;
Scribes, Pharisees, Hypocrites, whited Sepulchers, and writest, Ye Serpents, ye
Vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of Hell? ye are they that justify your
selves before men, but that which is highly esteemed amongst men, is an
abomination to the Lord.

Relpy; In that which is an abomination to the Lord thou art, which is esteemed
amongst men, and these Scriptures were spoken to thy Generation; and upon thy
own Head they are returned; for we seek not the praise of men, neither have we
the praise of men, and therefore it is that the Blind guides, Vipers, Serpents
gather themselves together against the Truth, which by the Power of God is now
spreading a witness against all deceit and deceivers.

Thou say thou writest directly to thee, John Audland, and usest these
words, thou hypocrite, why has Satan filled thy heart to lie against the Holy
Ghost? why boastest thou thy self in mischief? O mighty man! thy Tongue
devises mischief like a sharp Rasor, thou love evil more then good; thou
love all devouring words: O thou deceitful Tongue! God shall destroy thee for
ever: And say, Paul set his eyes on Elimas the Sorcerer, and said (as I may
say to thee John Audland) O full of subtilty and all mischief, thou Child of
the Devil; and say, repent of this thy wickedness, for I perceive thou art
in the gall and bitterness, and in the Bond of iniquity, and many such works
thou writest.

Reply; Take it to thy self who art of the Generation to which it was spoken,
for home to thee do I return it, who art in the bitterness, and in the gall,
loving all devouring words, these things comes not near me, but over thy head
do I rejoice, the misery will fall upon thy self, and thy unclean Spirit the
Lord rebuke, a false accuser thou art, and a Slanderer; I do not love evil more
than good, if I had, I should not have become thine Enemy; neither am I in the
gall of bitterness, or bond of iniquity; thou have uttered that which thou
know not, for if thou had known what this means (I will have Mercy and not
Sacrifice) thou would not have condemned the innocent.

And whereas thou say, judge not, that thou be not judged, and judge nothing
before the time; and with what measure thou meetest, it shall be measured to
thee again, and writest against others for railing and judging.

Reply; Thou art inexcusable, who judge another, and do the same thing; thy
Mouth is full of railing, lying, false accusing, which proceeds out of the
abundance of thy Heart, as in thy Book appears, and out of thy own Mouth thou
art condemned; and this I demand, whether calling others Serpents, Vipers, full
of all mischief, Children of the Devil, be not judging? and if this be not,
then show the difference between this and judging; thou have gone about to
confute that the Saints are not to judge, and that confutes thee, who yet knows
not a Saints Life, and art so blind thou cannot behold that thou allows thy
self in the thing which thou condemns, and with what measure thou measurest,
it shall be measured to thee again: good weight shall thou receive from the
hand of the Lord, who art weighed, and found as Chaff which the Wind drives to
and fro.

In thy 7th page, thou beseeches all who shall read thy Book, upon
consideration of the premises (which is these things before mentioned) to
avoid, and abandon the Meetings, Books, erroneous Doctrines, and hellish
Blasphemies, of this new upstart impious Generation.

Reply; All who knows the Lord, and reads thy Book, will avoid thee and it, and
have no fellowship, with such unfruitful works of Darkness: thou have
forgotten, judge not; and thou Hypocrite, first cast out the beam, thy envious
Spirit which fomes like the Sea, casting up filth, swells beyond its bounds,
but thou art limited, as all thy impious Generation have been; and by the Power
of the Lord are we preserved from thy errors and hellish Blasphemy; and thy
railing and slandering return upon thy self, fruitless Tree, upon which no
Grapes are gathered.

Thou say, what Paul said to the Galatians, the same thou will say to the
giddy-headed People of the Church of England.

Reply; The true Church is in God, builded upon the true Rock, and is not
giddy-headed; here thou manifests the fruits of the Teachers, who so long has
taught, and had so much for teaching, and the Church of England yet
giddy-headed; but the Lord is coming to gather his people into the true Fold,
from the mouths of all Idol Shepherds, and to teach his People himself, that
they may be established in righteousness.

Thou say, Paul taught the Romans, and in them us; first, that it is the
imputed Righteousness of Christ only, that makes us just in the sight of God.
Secondly, that our election is of Gods free Grace. Thirdly, that me are
justified only by faith in the Sight of God, without good works: Fourthly, that
the Scriptures are of divine authority.

Reply; Silence flesh before the Lord, upon the Children of disobeience, shall
the Wrath of God be revealed; own thy Portion what Paul said to such as thee,
thou must witness a change before that which Paul wrote to the Romans be to thy
condition; the Lord is our Righteousness, and our Justification, and by his
Grace we are saved, who has elected us, and chosen us in Christ Jesus, who
has all power and authority committed unto him, and upon whose Shoulders the
Government is laid, but from thy earthly wisdom is the Election and the Faith
hid, who art without good works, and belyes the Apostle, and ignorant art of
the Letter which kills.

Fifthly, Thou say, no man since the fall of Adam can perfectly fulfill the
Law of God in this Life, and therefore cannot merit, except it be wrath.

Reply; For meriting the wrath, its thy own, but Christ Jesus since the fall of
Adam has perfectly fulfilled the Law of God, and there is Salvation in no
other, and the righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us, who walk not after
the flesh, but after the Spirit, but by the works of the Law no flesh shall be
justified, for the Commandment which was ordained unto Life, wrought Death; if
thou can here thou may.

In thy sixth and seventh thou say, that he that has received a Ministry
should wait on his Ministry, and take heed to fulfill it, and that every Soul
must be subject to the higher Power, and yield obedience to every Ordinance of
theirs, if not contrary to Gods Word. Reply; Thou slanders us, and rails upon
us who has received a Ministry from God, and waits to fulfill it, and thou
receives such as come in their own Name, who are made by the will of man, and
against such do we bear witness by the Power of God, unto which our Souls is
subject for Conscience sake, and to every ordinance for the Lords sake, which
is not contrary to Gods Word. Thou say thou art afraid that the Lord has a
controversy with the Church of England.

Reply; Fearfulness surprizeth the heart of the Hypocrite, and a controversy
has the Lord with you, because of your iniquities; misery is coming upon you
fearful ones, and unbelievers, who are no Church of Christ, but a Synagogue of
Satan, who say, they are Jews, and are not, but are a giddy-headed Church, as
thou confessest.

Thou say, Make not the Light within a rule to walk by, and yet says,
follow the Light within, and Teacher within; what else?

Reply; The Light discovers thee to be in confusion, they that walk in the
Light stumbles not, and they who love the Light bring their deeds to it, and
believes in the Light; but their deeds are evil who hate it, and walk not in
it, and there is thy condemnation.

Thou say, He that enters not in by the door, (to wit, a true and lawful
call) but climbeth up some other way, the same is a Thief and a Robber, and
such are the Quakers; but he that enters in by the door is the Shepherd of the
Sheep, and such are your ancient Divines.

Reply; Here thou (as in other places) art a false accuser, and a perverter of
the Scriptures, your Divines are not the Shepherd, there thou are a Blasphemer,
who would set up false Christ's the true Shepherd laid down his Life for the
Sheep, and he is the Door, and them whom thou slanderest, enters in at the Door
where no Thief, nor no Diviner can enter, nor no Hireling, which the true
Shepherd cried against.

And as thou say, Thou will speak something to our Principles; first, for
judging.

Reply; Thou have judged us to be Deceivers and Seducers, and false Accusations
against the Truth thou have brought, and against some in particular, naming,
that John Audland was a Child of the Devil, and yet thou have confessed thou
never saw me, nor heard me, but thou have not proved wherein, which I charge
thee to do publicly, or own thy condemnation for thy slandring, lying, and
backbiting, thy saying that it is so, does not make it to be so, and that which
thou calls confutation confutes thy self but proves nothing against the Saints
judging them whom they saw and discerned to be unlearned; for when an
Unbeliever came in, or one that was unlearned, he was judged of all, and the
thoughts of his heart made manifest, and this honor have all the Saints, to
execute upon the Heathen all the judgments written; and the Scripture we own,
and the Saints Life, by which thou art judged, and with the Light condemned,
who judge and acts against the Saints with that mind that is for judgment.

The Second is, that they are not true Ministers, which are called by man's
Ministers, or by a mediate call from man, and this thou go about to confute,
by saying that Christ ordained Apostles and Disciples: And the Holy Ghost said,
Separate me Barnabas, and Saul, for the work of the Ministry, and that there
was Elders ordained in the Church, and the like.

Reply; These things proves nothing to thy mediate call, or man's Ministry;
Christ is not born by the will of man, and holy men spoke as they were moved by
the Holy Ghost, and no Prophecy came by the will of man; Paul a Minister and
Apostle, not by the, will of man; and that which is highly esteemed amongst men
is abomination in the sight of God: and there is thy mediate call, and man's
Ministry, which the Scriptures speaks not of; what Christ did, and the Saints
did, was by the Power of God, and the Holy Ghost spoke to them, no Voice of
that is heard in thy mediate call* or man's Ministry, therefore denied by them
who are guided by the Spirit of the Lord, who receives not the Ministry of man,
but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ, and that is not man's Ministry.

The Third is, that we are to salute no man.

Reply; this is thy own, and in thy confutatiou thou answerst thy self; for the
Saints Salutation we own, and honor all men in the Lord, which is more than
the Heathen do; but we have learned not to fashion our selves according to the
World, and to deny the customs of the Heathen and their flattering Titles, and
vain fashions, which is without the fear of God, who have men's persons in
admiration because of advantage, and respects men's persons, and commits sin;
and a difference do we put betwixt the Saints Salutation, and the vain fashions
and customs of the Heathen, which Israel was not to observe.

The Fourth is, that the Scripture oughe not to be expounded, and that
expounding of Scripture is an adding to Scripture, and if we add, then God will
add to as all the Plagues that are written therein, and in thy confutation,
says, Christ expounded Scripture.

Reply; He that adds the Plagues is to be added to him, as it is written; but
thy other words is false, and thy own, it is your own Imagination of the
Scripture which we deny, wresting it as thou have done, and adding with thy
Envious Spirit against the Truth; but that Christ expounded the Scriptures was
never denied by us, and that he opened their understandings to understand the
Scriptures, we own and witness, and the Spirit of Christ is one in all his
Saints; and for the lie, let it return upon thy own Head.

Thy Fifth is, That it is not lawful to use the title of Master to any, and in
thy confutation thou says, Christ was called Master; and where it is said, Be
ye not called Masters, for one is your Master even Christ, thou say, the
meaning is not, that it is unlawful to be called Master.

Reply; thou shows thy self to be none of Christ's Servant, who pleads against
his command, and says, he bad them avoid a thing which was not unlawful, if it
be not unlawful, its lawful; thou have forgotten now to make Scripture thy
rule, as for Christ being called Master, he was and is so, and whom he made
Ministers, he made them not Masters, for they had one Master, and him we own to
be Master; and in this thou art a Liar, and of the Devil, who says, we say it
is not lawful to use the title of Master to any; and we likewise say, and
exhort thereto, that Servants should be Obedient to their own Masters, not as
Men-pleasers with Eyeservice, but serving the Lord.

Thy sixth is, That Infant Baptism is no Ordinacne of Christ, and therefore of
no use in the Church of God; and thou saiys, an express command thou grants is
not to be found; but thou says Infants were Circumcised, and Baptisin is
ordained in the room of that.

Reply; We deny it to be an Ordinance of Christ, or that it came in the room of
Circumcision; the Scripture speaks of no such thing as Infant Baptism, and till
thou prove it came in the room of Circumcision, thy saying proves nothing: the
Male-Children were Circumcised, In room of what came in your Female Children to
be Sprinkled? thou speaks thou knows not what, he is a Jew who is one inwardly,
and Baptism is by the Spirit, and Circumcision is that of the Heart, he that is
in Christ is an new Creature, born again of Water, and of the Spirit, such are
Partakers of the Ordinance, and are Members of the Church, and that which is no
Ordinance of Christ is of no use in the Church of God, but is by the Children
of Light denied.

Thy Seventh head is, That we say, that the Lords Supper is of no use in the
Church of God, since the Resurrection of Christ.

Reply; This is an absolute Lie, never spoken or owned by us; I charge thee to
prove it either by our words, or writings, or let shame cover thy Lips, Liar
for the Lake, and own thy Condemnation for thy Slandring, Lying, and false
accusing.

Thou say, It was not thy purpose to have writ a Treatise of this subject
till of late, finding that none answered the Book before mentioned.

Reply; Thy Treatise is Lies and and Railing Language against the Servants of
God, but the Book is yet unanswered; the filthy fily lying Paper, is not taken
for answer to that Book; and of-late thou beginness to vent out thy mischief
and thy ignorance, old rotten dull stuff it is; like the evil treasure it
proceeded from, and they who read thy Paper, whose understanding is opened,
will discern thy ignorance and malice, and deny thy unclean spirit, for among
the Children of Light thy unfruitful works of darkness is denied, and cast out,
and thy formed Weapon cannot prosper; but the Lord will wound the head of the
wicked, he will bruise thee as with a rod of Iron, and dush thee in pieces like
a Potters Vessel: this is answered, not because it was particularly against me,
but for the Truths sake, that the lies which he had raised against it, may
return upon his own Head.

John Audland.

An Answer to a Scandalous Paper, Entitled, The Quakers unmasked, put forth
by* William Prynne, wherein his Slanders are made to appear, and he is found
with a Lie in his Mouth.
I Meeting with a Paper, Entitled, The Quakers unmasked and clearly Detected:
Put forth by William Prynne, wherein he slanders and falsely accuses those
People scornfully called Quakers, and says they are sent from Rome to seduce
the in oxicated, giddy headed English Nation; his ground being an information
(he says) taken upon Oath in the City of Bistol, which he sets down, as
follows; The Information of George Cowlishaw of the City of Bristol
aforesaid, Iron-monger, taken the two and twentieth day of January, 1654. who
informs upon his Oath, that in the Month of September last, this Informant
had some discourse in Bristol, with one he calls Mr Coppinger an Irish man,
formerly a School-fellow of his, that came thither purposely for his passage
into Ireland, who told this Informant, that he had lived in Rome and Italy
eight or nine years, and had taken upon him the order of a Friar of the
Franciscan Company; and he told this Informant that he had been at London
lately, for some Months, and whilst he was there he had been at all the
Churches and meetings public and private that he could here of, and that none
came so near him as the Quakers, and being at a meeting of the Quakers, he
there met with two of his acquaintance in Rome, the which two persons were of
the same Franciscan order and company that were now become chief Speakers
amongst the Quakers; and he himself had spoken amongst the Quakers in London,
about thirty times, and was well approved of amongst them; and this Informant
further says, that the said Coppinger asked him, what kinds of Opinions in
Religion there was in Bristol, and this Informant told him, that there were
several opinions and judgments, and not naming any Opinions of the Quakers;
the said Coppinger asked him whether there had been any Quakers in Bristol; and
the said Informant answered him no; whereupon the said Coppinger told him (the
said Informant) two or three times, that if he did love his Religion and his
Soul, he should not hear them, whereupon this Informant told him, that he
thought none of them would come to Bristol, who expressly replied, that if this
Informant would give him five pound, he would make it five Hundred Pounds if
some Quakers did not come to Bristol within three weeks or a month then
following; and on the morrow following, the said Coppinger departed from this
City for Ireland, his Native place, and about eighteen days after, there came
to this City two Persons, that bare the name of Quakers: This is a true Copy
of the Information taken upon Oath at Bristol.

This Being the ground of that scandalous Paper, put forth by thee William
Prynne, to it I shall answer, and clearly make appear, that these scandals are
false and full of confusion: First, that they are false, it will appear two of
us (whom the World reproachfully calls Quakers, came from the North (being
moved of the Lord to come to the City of Bristol) our birth and being according
to the Flesh, was in Westmoreland, not far from Kendal, and there at this
present; is our outward Habitations and Families: We came from thence in the
Month called June, and we came into the City of Bristol the 12th day of the
Month, called July, and on the morrow (being the 13th day) we were at two
Meetings, the one was with the People called Anabaptists, the other with the
People called Independants, and were moved by the Lord to speak at both their
Meetings, which we did, and this was the thirteenth day of the Month, called
July, which was a little before the Fair at Bristol, called Jame's-Fair, as
several of those People can bear witness. Then further thou says, it being in
September, George Cowlishaw, being asked by the said Coppinger, if there had
been none of those People called Quakers at Bristol, he answered no: now this
is false, some of us (who is so called) was then at Bristol, and here I shall
take many People to witness against thee, for we had Meetings then in Bristol,
the tenth day of the Mouth called September, we had a Meeting at the Fort, the
thireenth day of the same Month, a Meeting at the Red-Lodge in Bristol, and at
both Meetings there were several Hundreds of People: and likewise a Meeting at
Fieltin, the fifteenth day of the same Month, and the seventeenth day we had a
Meeting at Bishford, and Hundreds went out of the City of Bristol to that
Meeting: the nineteenth day we had another Meeting at the Red-Lodge; and
several other Meetings we had in about Bristol in the same Month, called
September, which will all bear witness against thee, that thy slander is false,
and thy Oath false, who says we were at Bristol in September, which he has
said on his Oath we were not; and here I have proved thy information false;
again, it is full of confusion, who says that Coppinger said that none came so
near him as the Quakers, and that he met with two in London of his own order,
and yet he says to the Informant, if that he loved his Religion and his Soul,
he should not hear them, and yet says they came near him, and was of his own
order, which is false, we deny such Liars, and their Order, and here he is
proved to be in confusion, let all that can discern judge.

Again, the man that took the Oath (as thou say) said that Coppinger was one
of the Franciscan company, and had taken upon him the Order at Rome or Italy;
here the Informant has made himself guilty of, and liable to the Law in such
cases provided, who was privy to him, who said he had taken up that Order, and
did not discover him (but let him go) and then accuses those that are
Innocent, which bear the Name of Quakers. Now here thou art made manifest, to
be a false Accuser, and a Slanderer, I have proved that we came to the City of
Bristol in the Month called July, before the Fair, and likewise that we were at
those Meetings beforementioned, and several other Meetings we were at, in and
about Bristol, in the Month, called September, and this Oath beforementioned,
being the ground of a Warrant given forth by the Magistrates of Bristol, and
several of our Names therein expressed, we who had been at Bristol, whose names
were there mentioned, came all forth of Westmoreland, near unto Kendal, none of
us having never been out of the Nation, but we lived and walked in and at our
own Habitations, as that Country can bear witness to our Places, and Beings;
and here your Lies and Slanders are made to appear and utterly denied; and
William Prynne, here thou art clearly detected, who slanderest the Innocent,
living in the Spawn thou speaks of, the Poison of Asps being under thy Tongue,
and spuing out thy Venom against the harmless, and thy Informant is proved to
be guilty, in not discovering the man he speaks of, which he has on his Oath
said that he confessed to him he had been at Rome, and taken upon him the order
of a Friar of the Franciscan company. Now here let all people take notice of
the dealings of the Magistrates, who gave out a Warrant against the Innocent,
whom they cannot justly prove any thing against whereof they do accuse them,
and yet lets him go free, who concealed the said Coppinger, which on his Oath
declared; that the said Coppinger confessed himself to be one of that Order;
and we deny all of his Order, who lives in lyng and confusion, or any such to
speak amongst us, for we know the Voice of Christ from the Voice of the
Stranger* so the Devil being the Father of Lies, and a Lie being thy
Foundation, thou art taken with a Lie in thy Mouth, and so adds Lie unto Lie,
and builds one Lie upon another; and then thou cries against thy own Lies, for
thou can prove no such thing by us, as thou accusest us of, saying* that the
Quakers use enchanted Potion, Bracelets, Ribbands, Sorcery, and Witchcraft,
which is false; and thou like the raging Sea casts up thy mire and dirt; O!
thou full of all mischief, and Enemy to all Righteousness, I charge thee, or
any of thy Companions of the same Order, who lives in lying, to prove any such
thing by us, and make it appear publicly as thou have accused us, or let thy
Mouth be stopped, and own thy condemnation, and confess thy deceit, and call
in thy filthy Paper, and take shame to thy self, for know this, that the Lord
God will plead with thee for all thy hard speeches, and justly by him shall
thou be rewarded; and we utterly deny, and do bear witness against all such
filthy ways and practices of all such Frogs as thou mentions, and against thee
who prints Lies, as I have already proved, and Liars must be cast into the
Lake; and here I have found thee, and proved thee in the intoxicated,
giddy-headed condition thou speaks of, who art already deceived, and need be
deceived no farther, and thou art fallen into the Pit thou dug, and they for
whom thy Net was spread (being Innocent) are escaped, and thy folly is
unmasked, and thou art clearly detected, and proved to be in error in thy very
Foundation, and so all thy building is made void, and if thou cannot begin upon
better evidence, let thy Mouth for ever be stoped, and let shame cover thy
Lips, and repent of the evil of thy ways, lest the Wrath of the Lord break out
against thee, and there be no remedy; to the Light in thy Conscience I speak,
and remember that thou are warned.

Friend, thy Spirit is savoured and tried, and now this is the end of thy zeal,
who art become a Persecutor of the Life which thou have professed in words, and
now thy zeal appears without the knowledge of God, and so there is many
unsavory speeches in thy Paper, put forth by thee William Prynne, which (worth
the mentioning) are not; but thou have manifested the end of thy Profession,
who appears now to be one of those giddy, headed English men thou speaks of:
and as touching leading, silly Women Captive, laden with sin, and led away with
diverse lusts, ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the
Truth, to thee this home shall I return who appears to be in this state,
learning always, and silly, for how many years have thou been learning, and
now do resist the Truth with thy unclean Spirit, as Jannes and Jambers did
the Children of Israel, which was coming out of Egypt, with their corrupt
Spirits? So with what Measure thou measurest, it shall be measured to thee
again, good weight, running over, pressed down: And Friend, in the day of thy
calamity, remember whom thou have despised in the day of thy prosperity, and
what thou have rejected with thy full Stomach, and now loathes the Honny-Comb,
and the precious, and the vile chooses, and so one with the Harlot art become,
the Light does thee comprehend; thou say there was trembling or quaking in
the Host in the field, and among all the People, the Garrisons and the
Spoylers, they also trembled, so it was a very great trembling, or quaking:
this for thy self shall stand, when thou thy self can read a Spoyler, and see
thy self in the field, the strong man that must bow himself, and thy fenced
Cities must be broken down, and thy Garrison, with all thy carnal Weapons, then
the Host shall thee fail, and then trembling and quaking will not be despised,
which stands with a pitiful compassion to all Souls, and quaking and trembling
does not despise, for thou unmasked thy self in this Paper have, to be a
Scorner and Scoffer at Gods righteous Seed, which he upholds with his Arm, for
which thou shall give an account; to the Light in thy Conscience, which changes
not, is it spoken.

And whereas thou, William Prynne, says that Coppinger confessed that he speak
about thirty times at London among them called Quakers; it is false, he did not
speak amongst us who are so called, but them that have spoken amongst us, their
Names we know, and so we (whose Names are subscribed) bear witness against that
untruth thou have published in Print, Amors Toddert, Simon Dring, John Bolton,
William Creake, Gervase Roberts, Henry Clerk, Robert Dring, William Kaymond,
Richard Davies, William West.

A Reply to an Additional Paper, put forth by William Prynne, in his Lying
Enlarged Edition.
FRiend, thou pretending a reply to that which is before printed, in a Paper
put forth by thee, bearing the same title, which thou says is the second
Edition, enlarged; to thee I shall reply, that the things which I proved stands
good, and not detected by thee, but thou art clearly detected; and proved to
make a Lie thy Foundation, and now in thy lying enlarged Edition, thou have
gathered up more Lies, and sent them abroad into the World, and full of Venom
thou art, spawned from the Serpent, crawling in the mire like the Frogs thou
speaks of, casting up thy filth, and foaming like the Sea, and when thou have
gathered up a heap of Lies together, thou would cast them upon the Children
of Light, who in scorn are called Quakers, who denies thee among the rest of
the Vermin, and giddy-headed, brainsick Generation; and were thou not blind
thou would not uttet forth such confusion, Babylon is thy Habitation, the
destruction of thy City is hastening apace, Misery and Lamentation from the Lord
God is coming upon you, the burdensome Stone will Grind you to Pieces.

Thou says the chief exception is against Cawlishaw, his Oath is untrue, for
say thou, though we were in Bristol, and went to two Meetings, yet that was
unknown to Cowlishaw.

Reply; Here thou have confessed that the Oath is untrue, in that he swear the
thing he knew not, which thing proves contrary to what he swear, and this again
proves thy Foundation false, who says we had not been at Bristol, and swear
the thing he knew not, as is before expressed.

Thou say, we spoke to those People then, not under the notion of Quakers,
but only of Anabaptists, and Independants.

Reply; This is false, Lie to Lie thou adds, take them away, and thy refuge is
gone; we did not speak to them as Anabaptists, or as Independants, and this
many of the People will witness for us, and against thee; and there was several
in that City that knew us to be of those People that were called Quakers, which
proves another Lie upon thee.

Thou say, when the Meetings were in September, we began to take upon us the
Name and Title of Quakers, and those Meetings was after Cowlishaw's conference
with Coppinger, who adds that about eighteen days after.

Reply; Thy covering is too narrow, by the Light thou art discovered, for the
Information says it was in September, and then were we in Bristol, and the
words about eighteen days after, which still proves the things false, we being
at Bristol then at those public Meetings beforementioned, and that we began
to take upon us the title of Quakers then, is false; and with such filthy stuff
thou makes up thy enlarged Edition.

Thou says, this convinces Audland of a slander, and double lie: First, in
accusing Cowlishaw for making a false Oath, which his own answer to it
justifies it to be true.

Reply. This is a double lie, for plainness of speech I use, and gives a Lie
the name of a Lie: first, I am not convinced that he is slandered, for the Oath
is proved to be false, in affirming that which he knew not, and that which was
not; and that the answer justifies it to be true, is false again, for the
Answer proves it absolutely untrue. Secondly, thou says in averring, that he
(and his Companions) were moved by the Lord, and his eternal Spirit, to leave
their own Habitations and Callings in the North, to come to seduce the People
of Bristol.

Reply; Let shame cover thy lips (if thy heart be not hardened) thou will blush,
are these my words, or thy own I charge thee to be a Slanderer, and a false
Accuser of the Brethren, these words was never uttered by me, all seducers and
seducing by the Spirit of God is denied, and witnessed against, and thou art
witnessed against by the Spirit of God, that thou art full of Venom, froth, and
filth, which is not worth raking up after thee; thy Heart is overcome with it,
let it return into the Pit from whence it came, where the Frogs lodge, who are
thy companions. Again, that which is spokn, as touching the breach of the Law
in not discovering Coppinger, but concealing him, and letting him depart, is
true, according to the Law, and thy evading it, by seeming to cover it, by
Coppingers hasty departure, and the suspension of the Laws, thou says, to that
purpose, does no whit prove the contrary; and had not your envy transported you
beyond the bounds of equity, you would be ashamed to publish such a thing, but
it is clearly seen whom you shout at, and whom you would devour, though you
pretend the Jesuits, they are so near of kin to you, you can let them go, and
after conference with them (as thou says Cowlishaw had with Coppinger) who
confess themselves to be such, thou concealest them, and bringst in their words
to slander the Innocent; and Truth ever suffered under reproachful Names and
Tongues, in which thou have not a little share, thou fills up thy Measure, and
accordingly shall thou be rewarded.

Thou says, I except against thee for averring that the Quakers are but the
spawn of Romish Frogs, Jesuits, and Franciscan Friars, and to deny this, is
alleged that they came out of the North* and thou says to come out of the
North is a shrewd sign ^f their badness, for the Scriptures speaks, that out
of the North an evil shall break forth.

Reply; To prove that we came out of the North, and had never been out of the
Nation, and of our birth and Habitations, does sufficiently confute thee, who
made that thy ground to have proved by the Information, that we were Coppingers
acquaintance in Rome, for say thou, those two persons which came to Bristol,
was most likely his two fellow Franciscan Friars; and here thy likeness is
another Lie, and the Scripture does not prove thy shrewd sign, neither does it
cover thee, nor hide thee, but upon thee will evil break forth, who the evil
have committed; a grievous Storm and Whirlwind will fall upon the wicked, and
sweep away the refuge of Lies and Liars into the Lake: read thy Portion, and
put it not from thee.

Secondly; Thou say for affirming that the Quakers use enchanted Potions,
Bracelets, Ribbands, Sorcery and Witchcraft, to intoxicate their Disciples; and
thou savst, this is evidenced in the Premises, and apparent in most places
where they ramble; and thou shall prove it no farther, but close up all with
two Scripture exhortations.

Reply; I demanded of thee before to prove any such thing by us, or let thy
Mouth be stopped; and as touching proving any such thing, thy Mouth is stopped, and
thy Premises proves it not by us, but is made up of Lies and Slanders, and
false Reports, which thou have gathered where thou have rambled up and down in
thy Imaginations, sending out a pack of filthy Lies, spawned out from the old
Serpent, the Devil, and Satan, out of whose Mouth proceeds the Frogs, and there
may thou read thy self apparently his Disciple, intoxicated; and thee with
all the rest of the spawn of Romish Frogs, Jesuits, and Franciscan Friars is
denied and cast out from amongst the People of God, scornfully called Quakers;
and if thou can prove no better then to close up as thou do, the Lies will
rest upon thy own head; but will thou turn back a little, and take one
Exhortation where thou art giving two if there be any spark of honesty, in thee
or any remembrance of thy latter end, or any consideration that Liars must be
cast into the Lake, repent of the evil of thy doings, and cease lying and
slandering the Innocent, which thou can not prove to be Offenders, and lay
thy Mouth in the dust, if so be there may be hope; so here in plainness thy
Lies is turned upon thy own Head, and the former answer is just, and stands a
witness against thee, and thou art more unmasked, and clearly detected; and
till thou can begin upon better evidence, silence best becomes thee: Remember
again thou art warned, cease thy gainsaying, lest thou perish in thy
rebellion, and go down alive into the Pit.

By one who is a Witness against the profaneness of Priests and People;
called, John Audland.

Luke 11, 52. Woe unto you Lawyers, for ye have taken away the Key of Knowledge,
ye entered not in your selves, and them that were entering in ye hindered.
John Audland's Epistle to all who love the Truth: Given forth from Oxfordshire
the 12th Month, 1656.
DEarly beloved Friends, unto whom the large Love of God has been made
manifest, in visiting you from on high, with his marvelous Light, which has
clearly shined in the midst of you, by which you have seen your way to the
eternal Rest and Peace, and have tasted of the Power of the Lord, and been
often refreshed with his Love and Life, being shed plentiously amongst you; so
that you have found (in some measure) Redemption from the bondage of
Corruption, and the way is plain before you, which leads to perfect Freedom, in
the pure and precious Truth of the living God, which as you stand in it, and
walk in the undefiled way, in the pure Fear and Counsel of God, you will be
kept in the pure Unity, in the Love unfeigned, to grow together in the Life of
Truth in the Power of God, in which is your beauty, your comeliness, your
strength, your order, and your peace, every one in particular, and one with
another, all glorifying the Lord in your uprightness and obedience in your holy
calling, in the measure of the Grace of Life, in which every one abiding, you
receive power from the Life, which gives Dominion over the World, and the
powers of Darkness and the wickedness in the high places; you dwelling in the
Life and Power of God, are kept in subjection to the higher Power, which is the
Ordinance of God, which throws down the man of Sin, the deceitful works, and
raises up the dead to Life, quickening the slain, and opening the Prison Doors,
which brings Joy and Peace, and the Oil of Gladness and the Garments of Praise,
and the acceptable Year, where the meek come to be beautified with Salvation;
there the Treasures of Life is seen, of Wisdom, and of Love, which reached to
the Poor to raise him up, and there the weary finds rest, and the hungry Soul
comes to be satisfied, with the unsearchable Riches of the Lords Love, of which
there is no End, unto them who wait upon him in faithfulness: Dear Hearts,
other Foundation can no man lay, then that which is laid already, which is
Christ Jesus, the Light of the World, the Way to Life and everlasting Rest, and
those that believe enter into the pure and peaceable Kingdom, which is prepared
for the little Flock, who follow the Voice of the true Shepherd, who leads into
the fresh and pleasant Pasture, where the Lambs feed in peace and lie down in
safety, in the sure Habitation, grounded on the Foundation of God, which stands
firm and unmovable forever, against which the Winds, nor the Storms, nor the
Floods can never prevail; blessed for ever are all you who are on it builded,
and established, for the day will manifest every ones work, and he that is not
rooted in the Life, and stands not in the Power of God, will suffer loss; but
you abiding in the Power of God, which is the Cross of Christ, you receive a
Kingdom which cannot be shaken, and a Crown which does not corrupt, and an
Inheritance which fades not away; and in the Light of God every one walking,
you read your part in the Resurrection unto Life, which is a blessed Condition,
and to seed upon the Life, which makes you grow in the heavenly Image, the new
man, which is after God, in Righteousness and true Holiness, which is perfected
in the Fear of the Lord: All being kept watchful and diligent, your Garments
are kept clean, and you are found covered with the Spirit in the day of the
Lord which comes suddenly upon the Sloathful and Careless, in which day the
Hypocrite can never stand, nor the foolish Virgin cannot enter, but is shut out
of Gods Kingdom, wanting the Garment, which gives an entrance in the
Marriage-Chamber, where the faithful rejoice, and praises the God of their
Salvation: And verily Friends, it is the Gold tried in the Fire, that makes
truly Rich, and everlasting happy, and Truth in the inward parts the Lord
loves; and every one to speak the Truth from his Heart, to his Neighbor and to
his Friend, watching over one another for good in Truth and Uprightness, then
there will be no treacherous dealer in the Assembly, nor none that lies in
wait, to hurt the Poor and Harmless, nor none to Exalt themselves above their
measure, in the knowledge which puffs up (and despises the Lowly, and the
Poor) such will the Lord God throw down; therefore all fear before the Lord,
and none be highminded; if any man boast, he bears not the Root; every one
keep in the Pure life, in the true love, and fellowship of the Gospel of Peace,
and all look to the Author and the Finisher of your Faith, which in Truth
stands in the Power of God, then you all keep your Habitations, your walking is
in steadfastness, and your going comes to be established; Let all be warned and
awaked, for the Lord is at hand, who will bring every man's work to the trial,
and happy for evermore are all they who are found faithful, when they are
weighed in the Balance of Equity and true Judgment: Sow in Patience, press on
in the way of Righteousness, serving the Lord with one consent, calling upon
his Name with one accord, keeping the Unity of the Spirit, in the Bond of
Peace; so will you rejoice in the Lord alone, who is the Succourer of the Poor,
and the Refuge of the Needy, in the Day of distress: Let all that know him
praise him, and fear him, and in singleness of heart wait upon him, whose Mercy
endures for evermore. Let nothing draw you from your holy calling, and
steadfast waiting upon the Lord, nor separate you from the Love of God in Christ
Jesus, our Light, our Life, and our Redeemer: So the Lord God Almighty multiply
his Grace, Mercy and Love, his Life, Light and Power in you, and amongst you,
that you may be grounded, rooted, builded, established, and in the everlasting
Covenant of Life find Peace, where you may rest in the City of God, whose Gates
is Praise, and has Salvation for Walls and Bulwarks, where no Weapon can
prosper that is formed against you; glory and honor, and living Praises be
unto the Lord our God (from all who know him) now and for evermore.

I am your Friend, who truly desires after your Prosperity in the Life that
shall never dye.

John Andland.
To Friends in Westmorland, who Love the Truth, and in Cumberland, Bishopric,
etc.
An Epistle to Friends.
DEarly beloved in the Lord Jesus Christ, Brethren and Sisters in the Eternal
Spirit, Members of the Body of Christ, Grace, Mercy and Peace from our God be
multiplied in you, that every one of you in particular may grow in your
measure, and increase in the unsearchable Riches of our God: Oh! ye Plants of
Gods renown, planted into the true Vine by the true Husbandman; dear and
precious are you to us, as you abide in the Vine, and grow in the Vine, there
you are our joy, and we are refreshed continually in the Unity of the Spirit,
for in it are you present in us, and we in you; in our Hearts are ye written,
by the Spirit of the Living God, and we read you daily, our Life is one, our
Joy is one, our Sufferings are one, and our Victory is one: Oh! Dear Hearts,
our love reaches you, and our Bowels are shed toward you, our Hearts are
broken, when we know of your faithfulness, and stedfastness in the work of the
Lord, waring against all Deceit, and watching every one in your measure, to be
serviceable in the calling whereunto you are called; we speak the Truth in
Christ, we lie not; it is like precious Ointment shed abroad in us, which gives
a sweet smell unto us, that we are much refreshed by it, to know of your
faithfulness and boldness, to know of your labor and carefulness, and
tenderness toward one another in the Lord, it is like Balm upon our Head in
rememberance of you, our hearts are broken, and we rejoice to behold your order
in the Lord, dwelling and abiding in him, who is our Head; and therefore in the
Name of the Lord Jesus do we exhort, charge and command you, every one to
abide, in your measure in the true Vine, and to dwell and walk in the Light
which is Eternal, by which you will judge all double minds, who talk of the
Unity of the Light, but do not walk in the Light, and abide in the Unity, such
are not of the Body, who do not abide in the Vine, but you who do abide in the
Vine, try all such, and have no fellowship with unfaithful Workers, for such
are unfruitful who do not abide in the Vine, such are they who mind earthly
things, who are Enemies to the Cross of Christ, who walk not in the Light, with
the Light of God all such are seen; abiding in it, you will separate the clean
from the unclean, and true Judgment from the Life which is pure will be given
upon the impure, none can judge but he that is pure, thou that judge another
and do the same things, thou art for Judgment; let all Flesh be silent before
the Lord God, and dwell all in the Life of the Son of God, in which you will
comprehend all busy minds, and forward minds, who abide not in the Life, who
are not to judge, but to be judged with the Life; so in the Life dwell every
one, and there you have all one Life; and we are with you in the Life which was
before the World was, in that which was before time, which in time was made
manifest, which brings up out of time, in that have we Unity, and there we
behold you, ye faithful Ones, ye Sons and Daughters of the Lord, unto whom the
Promise is made manifest, which is Yea and Amen to the Seed, which Seed is but
one, unto which shall all Nations bow, and they that set themselves against you
shall surely fall before you, the Lord has blessed you, and you are blessed,
by his own right hand has he planted you, and the shout of a King is heard
amongst you, and his Voice is terrible to the Nations, and dreadful to the
Heathen round about, cursed are they that curse thee; happy art thou, O Israel,
a People saved by the Lord, the Lord of Hosts is with you, and there is no
Enchantment against you, no Weapon formed against you shall prosper, the Mouth
of the Lord has spoken it: Therefore in the Name of the Lord and in his fear
abide every one, for the Voice that is heard amongst you, gives Alarm to the
Inhabitants of the Land, and because of the Man-Child that is born in you, are
the Nations troubled; rejoice for evermore ye Saints of the most high God, for
Power is given you to be avenged of all your Enemies, yea, even to War against
the Beast, and to make the Whore Desolate, the Fire that is kindled amongst you
torments all her Lovers: Praises, Praises Eternal to the Living God who
appears for us, and gives us Victory over our Enemies: Dear ones, the mighty
Power of the Lord is with us, and our Bow abides in strength, and terror takes
hold upon our Enemies; here are multitudes Convinced of the Etornal Truth, and
the Witness of God is raised, and judgment is begun to the terror of many; this
is the Day of Sions deliverance, Glory to our God for ever, for he spreads my
Table, and makes my Cup overflow; the Mighty God of Power keep you, my care is
for you, and God is my Witness, I cease not daily to make mention of you in my
Prayers; O! prize his Love for evermore, you who were sometime afar off, but
now are made nigh by the Blood of Christ, walk in his Fear, Holiness becomes
the House of the Lord for ever; Farewell.

Your Dear Brother in the Eternal Spirit of God. John Audland.

John Audlant's Letter to Friends.
DEarly beloved in the Lord Jesus Christ, Grace, Mercy and Peace, be multiplied
in you, and among you, that in it you may all be Established, and grow as
living Plants, and be fruithful in him, who has called you to Grace and
Virtue, that you might live in it, and abound in every good Work to the praise
of the Lord, whose Love has been manifest amongst you, and you have heard his
Voice, and been Witnesses of his Power, and his Eternal Love has been abundant
toward you; therefore all Friends of your high Calling, walk worthy, and press
hard after the mark, so running, that ye may obtain every one of you in
particular, abiding in the straight Way, and in the Cross daily, which is the
delight of the Just, and Peace and Refreshment to the Just in you all, that in
the Just you may all dwell; and there the Earthly comes to dye, and Judgment is
executed upon the wicked, and the Famine comes upon all the Gods of the Earth,
and the day of Separation and Sorrow upon all the Lovers, and the Mortification
of the old man; and as that dies the Spirit is quickened, and waiting upon the
Lord, every one, your Strength comes to be renewed, and your Life refreshed. So
to you all Friends, Lambs and Babes of God, whose Minds are stayed upon God,
there Food you will receive from the living God, and grow every one in your
Measure, walking as you have received, and prising the Love of God to you,
which has been, and is large and bountiful, who has searched you out, who was
scattered in the cloudy dark day, and found no Rest to your Souls, but wandered
from Mountain to Hill, and laid desolate and barren in a waste howling
Wilderness, and no Eye pitied; but he alone who is mighty to save has you
visited, and your time was the time of Love, and he has loved you with an
Everlasting Love, and drawn you in much tender Mercy, and given his Son for a
Light, that you might all walk in it, and have fellowship in it. And now my
Dearly beloved Ones, stand fast in that which brings Eternal Freedom, and makes
free, and be faithful every one in your Measure; to you all I speak, as to one
that you my grow in Love, and walk in Love, and in it be Established, for it
will endure for ever; Oh, let it be your Joy, to do the Will of God in all
Singleness, and to dwell in his Fear, and abide in the daily Cross: Reason not,
nor consult not, for the mystery is hid from that Eye, but dwell low, and learn
thee that Subject to the Yoke, every one of you may be, and wait upon the Lord,
Meeting in his Fear, watching one over another, and abiding in the Light, that
your Fellowship may stand in it, which is the Worlds Condemnation; my Soul is
pouned out to the Lord for you, and my Bowels run freely to you in pure Love
and Singleness, that you all may be proserved in the pure Fear of the Lord, out
of the Snares of the Enemy, that in the Eternal Counsel of God you may abide,
and be steadfast in the time of Temptation. Dear Hearts, keep every one to your
own Measure, which from the Lord is given unto you, that you may witness the
Presence of the Lord amongst you, and find his Power, and hear his Voice, that
your Hearts may be kept open, to receive the living Mercies from the living
God, that in the Day of Trial you may stand, and in the time of Famine your
Souls may be kept alive, and when the Lord takes account of you, you may give
it with Joy, and be found faithful and fruitful in him; this Charge do I lay
upon you, from the Lord, that you dwell and abide low in the Fear of the Lord,
in Love together, walking every one in the Living, as examples, that the Lord
alone may be exalted; no Pride, nor Strife, but in the Cross abide, which
Judges that, and takes away the occasion of Wars; And the Eternal everlasting
Powerful Presence of the Lord keep you all, and be amongst you, and go along
with you for evermore. I am your Dear Friend and Companion, in Joy, and in
Tribulation.

John Andland.
My Dear Brother, John Camm, does Salute you all in that which is Eternal, and
never changes; he is pretily recovered, and to you his love is exceeding great*



John Audland's Letter to a Priest concerning Tithes.
INstance if thou can, of one out of the Scriptures, that ever came in at the
door, that did ever sue Men at the Law for Tithes, Wages or Easter-Recknings;
if thou can not prove it by the Scriptures, thou art Antichrist that does not
abide in the Doctrine of Christ, and no Minister of Christ, but one of Baal's
Priests; if thou be a Minister of Christ, and come to my House, what I have I
will set before thee, and thou shall freely Eat; but to give my Corn and Hay,
Calves and Foles, Wool and Lambs, Geese, Hens, Piggs, Eggs, and other things,
to be carried to thy House, Christ gave no such Command, that People should
bring such things to his Disciples, but said, Freely you have received, freely
give, Eat and Drink such as they set before you: And so, if you be sent out by
Christ to Preach the Gospel, which Gospel thou can not receive of Man, but by
the Revelation of Jesus Christ, and if thou come to my House, and freely
minister unto me Spiritual things, I will freely minister unto thee Carnal
things; But the Apostles, who were sent into the World to Preach the Gospel,
(which Gospel they received not at Oxford and Cambridge, nor by Studying
Authors, but spoke forth that which they were partakers of, which was contrary
to the Will of Man) they did not enquire out a great Benefice, or a Personage,
and there set themselves, but went up and down, Preaching the Gospel freely,
and did not make it Chargable to any, but said, We have coveted no Man's Silver
nor Gold, God is our Witness, and you your selves know it: But I know thee to
act contrary to them, who would take from me, who have received nothing from
thee: And here let the practice of the Ministers of Christ bear Witness against
thee, that thou art no Minister of Christ, from the Lord God do I charge thee,
that thou art no Minister of Christ, who art out of the Doctrine of Christ, and
does not live the Life as they did who was sent of Christ, for they never Sued
any at the Law for Earthly things whatsoever; show me one Example out of the
Scriptures of any of the Prophets, or Apostles, or any of the Ministers that
ever did any such thing, then take it, and follow their Example, otherwise thou
show thy self openly to walk contrary to all that ever Christ sent, and to
Christ himself and his Commands, and art found in the steps of the false
Prophets and false Shepherds, who sought for their Gain, from their Quarters,
as they do that taught for the Fleece, as thou make it appear thou do, and
held up the filthy horrible thing which thou hold'st up, the Priests bearing
Rule by their Means, which is a filthy thing; and the false Prophets prepared
War against them that did not put into their Mouths, as thou do against me,
because I do not put into thy Mouth; and here be witness against thy self, that
thou art in the steps of the false Porphets, and the false Teachers, which
loved the Wages of Unrighteousness, and followed the Error of Balaam, which
thou followest; and to take Wages from me, for whom thou have done no Work,
neither did I ever hire thee or set thee to work: This cannot but be
Unrighteous Wages, to the Light in thy Conscience I speak; and here let the
Life that they lived in, that gave forth the Scriptures, judge thee, and
condemn thy practice, for the Holy Men of God did not so; therefore give over
calling thy self a Minister, and either make proof of thy Ministry, and walk
according to the Example of them that were sent of God, otherwise I do deny
thee; and I may not put into thy Mouth, although thou prepare War against me,
for I must walk according to the Commands of Christ and his Apostles, though
thou will not. Now blame not me, that I walk according to the Scriptures, and
turn away from proud and Covetous Men, such as thee; for if I should uphold
thee in thy ways, which is contrary to the Way of God, I should be guilty of
thy Sins, and might partake of thy Plagues: Now thou art warned, if thou go
on in thy Deceit, I am clear of thee, thy Blood be upon thy own head. -- And
now Friend, seeing thou professest thy self to be a Minister of Christ, thou
ought to convince me by sound Doctrine; and in plain Words, I desire thee to
show and prove, how I became indebted to thee: For no Man would I hinder of his
Right, neither would I owe any thing to any Man, but love: This I do
acknowledge, that the Labourer is worthy of his Hire, and the Workman is
worthy of his Meat: Now show when I hired thee, or what Work thou have done for
me; no Tradesman in the Nation can force their Wares upon me, contrary to my
mind, much less take my Goods from me, when I have none of their Ware: When
did thou Plow for me? When did thou Thresh for me? When did thou tread
out Corn for me? Art thou the Ox that treads out the Corn, whose mouth must not
be muzled; Or art thou one of the evil Beasts, and slow Bellies, who for fi thy
Lucre subverts whole Hearts, whose Mouth must be stoped. -- Show me by what
Scripture-ground thou claim'st Tithes to be thine; and whether ever the
Ministers of Christ took Tithes of the People? And where ever they took by
force from them for whom they did not work, and whether the Priesthood be not
changed which received Tithes? and whether the Commandment be not disanulled by
which the Priests receied Tithes? and whether Christ be not the end of the Law,
which Law made many Priests? and whether is not the Law changed as well as the
Priesthood? and where did ever Man provide maintenance by a Law for the
Ministers of God? or whether did not the Lord provide for them, and opened the
Hearts of People to receive them? and where did any Minister of God take by
force from them whose Hearts were not opened to receive them?

Give me a reasonable Answer concerning these things; for I would owe nothing
but love to any Man, and that which is right according to Gospel Order, and
maintenance allowed by Christ, thou shall have povirded if thou prove thy self
a Minister of Christ, and abide in his Doctrine; now show thy self whose
Servant thou art; for he that abides not in Christ's Doctrine has not God; and
such I may not follow nor receive into my House.

Read this to the People, which thou profestest to be a Teacher unto; and
either clear thy self from these things, or else stop thy Mouth and confess thy
self to be a Hireling.

John Andland

The Suffering Condition of the Servants of the Lord at this day, Vindicated:
And some Reasons given why the People called Quakers do own the Doctrine of
Christ, to continue in it, and to meet together in the Name and Fear of the
Lord, to wait upon him, and Worship him in Spirit and Truth, notwithstanding
they meet with sufferings in this present time for so doing.
THe good and blessed Day of the Lord is come, and the Heavenly Visitation of
Life, wherein the Light of Righteousness is springing up unto many People, and
many have received the Blessed Visitation of the Lord, and are made partakers
of his Heavenly Power, by which they are quickened and raised up unto newness
of Life, to serve him, and to follow him in Truth and Righteousness; and the
blessed Day wherein the Lord Visited us, and the notable Works which the Lord
has wrought, and his noble Acts which he has done, are not by us to be
forgotten, but are recorded in our Hearts, as things remarkable and
considerable, to be remembered by us while we have a being upon the Earth, and
that with fear and reverence in our Hearts unto the Lord our God, who is great
and mighty, whom we have known to execute Judgment in Righteousness, to the
judging and bringing down of that which was once exalted; for when the
acceptable Year of the Lord came unto us, Judgment was laid to the Line, and
the Lord did arise to shake terribly the Earth, the loftiness of man was bowed
down, and the haughtiness of man was laid low, that the Lord alone might be
exalted; and the Earth reeled to and fro, and was removed like a Shepherd's
Tent, and the Light of Israel was as a Fire, and the Holy One as a Flame, to
burn up the Thorns and the Thickets in a Day; many Faces gathered paleness, and
Hearts grew weak, and Knees feeble, and many had their Hands upon their Loins,
because of the great Travel that was upon them, because of the mighty Power of
the Lord which was made manifest in them, for the bringing down of that which
had been exalted against him, and for the restoration of the oppressed Captive,
that deliverance might be known from the power of Satan, and from the bondage
of Corruption, that we being set free, wherein we were held, might serve the
Lord in Truth and Singleness of Heart, and wait upon him, and follow the
leadings of his Spirit, in the exercise of our Hearts and minds in Serving and
Worshipping the Lord our God; And so the God of Heaven has revealed and made
manifest the Way of Life and Peace, the Way wherein Comfort and Satisfaction to
the Soul is found, the Gate of Mercy, even the entrance to the everlasting
Kingdom of Rest and Joy for evermore; which although it be strait and narrow,
and a cross to the fleshly part, and earthly ground and wisdom, yet it is
easy, pleasent and delightful, living in the Spirit, and becoming little, even
as a Child, for so must he become that enters in at the strait Gate, to eat of
the Tree of Life which is in the midst of the Paradise of God: So we have found
the way of everlasting Peace, (through the rich Mercy, and tender Visitation of
the Lord) walking in the Spirit, and living in that which mortifies the deeds
of the Flesh, being subject to the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. Here is rest
to the Soul; here is the sweet Visitations of the Lord known, which are as the
former and latter Rain, to refresh the lowly in Heart, and Poor in Spirit: Here
waiting upon the Lord, the strength is renewed, and here the Lord speaks Peace
to People, even as they are in Christ the Power of God, growing up in him, who
is the Truth and the Life, they are possessors of lasting Peace (which God
speaks not to the wicked) which is the Portion of the upright in Heart; and as
the Lord has made manifest the way of Peace, Life and everlasting Happiness,
he has also discovered the contrary, even the way of misery, darkness and
destruction, the way which is broad, and many in the lusts of the Flesh take
pleasure in it, following the motions of the Flesh, and the desires of the
carnal mind, resisting the motions of Gods good Spirit, and hating the blessed
Light of the Lord Jesus Christ, and so spend away their precious time; and in
this state, that is to say in the Flesh, resisting the Spirit of the Lord, they
cannot serve God, nor please him, nor worship him in Truth, though they may
profess him in words, and draw near him with their Mouth; yet being in the
Flesh contrary to the Spirit of Truth, the Ear turned away from hearing of
God's Law, their Prayers are Abomination, their plowing is Sin, their sacrifice
is as Cain's, not accepted by the Lord, no Peace from God, no ture Rest, no
Satisfaction, no beholding the Countenance of the Lord, nor no assurance of the
Eternal Inheritance which never fades away, but an earnest of wrath, pain,
misery, anguish and trouble, which will come upon all who live and dye in
Disobedience of the Glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ.

And so we see the Way of Life to all that believe in the Name of the Lord
Jesus, and the way of death to all who live in unrighteousness, and are not
changed by the power of God, and translated from Death to Life, and from the
Kingdom of darkness, into the Kingdom of the dear Son of God.

And these things are of great concernment unto us; and we see it is very
needful to wait upon the Lord, and to follow the motions of his Spirit, that we
may feel his Power to preserve us in his Will, out of the evil of the World,
that so in the Power of the Lord our God we may war a good Warfare, and finish
our Course with joy.

And verily this a matter of great weight unto us, even to have our hearts
exercised toward the Lord in obedience to his Will, in what he requires of
us, that we may have a Conscience void of offense toward him: And so the Day
of the Lord God being come, and his Eternal Power made known in many hearts, by
which many are raised to serve him, and obey him, yea, to worship him according
to his own Will, and the leadings of his good Spirit; We are even constrained
by the Power of the Lord to meet together in his Name and Fear, to wait upon
him, and to worship him, and also to exhort one another in his holy Power, as
the Spirit of the Lord directs; yea, and so much the more as the day appears:
And this we find also to be according to the Scriptures of Truth, and practice
of the Servants of the Lord in former days, who did not forsake the assembling
of themselves together, but met often, and sometime in one place, and sometime
in another, as they were directed in the fear of the Lord: And they that feared
the Lord spoke often one unto another, and the Lord hearkened and heard it, and
a Book of Remembrance was written for them that feared the Lord, and that
thought upon his Name: And they shall be mine, says the Lord, in the day that
I make up my Jewels, and I will spare them as a man spares his own Son that
serves him: And this was in a time when the proud were called happy, and they
that wrought wickedness were set up, and they that tempted God were delivered;
yet even in such a time did they that feared the Lord speak often together, and
also in the time when the Gospel of Christ was published by the Apostles and
Ministers of Jesus, many were brought into the obedience of the Truth, and were
gathered from the Jews Worship and way of service, [and they, to wit, the Jews,
could plead more justly for the Antiquity of their way of Worship, and their
order in their Worship, then many who this day profess themselves to be
Christians, and a reformed Church] and in that time did they meet together,
sometime in a Chamber, sometime in an House, and sometime in an upper Room, as
the Lord directed them, and as they had opportunities; and gathered Churches
which met at Houses, and waited upon the Lord, and exhorted one another, and
might all speak one by one, as the Spirit of the Lord led them, that all might
hear, and all be comfored.

And we do not read that the Jews made a Law, (or the Romans either, who at
that time had the Principality) that they should not meet above four together,
or if they meet five, or above, they should be fined.

Indeed the Jews who believed not, were bad enough, and persecuted the Saints
from City, and haled out of Houses they that professed the Name of Jesus, and
sometimes scourged them; but they are evil examples to be followed, and its
pity that any who profess themselves Christians, should do the like to any
that meet together in the Fear of the Lord, to serve him, and walk peaceably in
Godliness and Fear.

And why may not more than four meet together lawfully to Worship God, in the
account of God and all just men? why may not Ten? Yea, and Why may not a
hundred, and more? Provided still it be to Worship God, and serve him. And why
may not also some come in amongst them who are Unbelievers, that are ignorant
of the way of Truth, that they may come to hear, and learn, and be convinced of
all; and go away, and confess that God is there of a Truth; and if there be
more that come upon the same account, it is also approved.

Sure that was a great Concourse of People, when the Disciples were met in one
place, where three Thousand were pricked to the Heart at one time. Had it been
justifiable in the Jews at that time to hinder such gatherings of People
together, or such Speakers as were, who spoke as the Spirit of the Lord gave
them utterance? The Jews were very angry with them, and commanded them to speak
no more in the Name of Jesus; but they obeyed God rather than man, and spoke
boldly the Word of the Lord, and the Lord was with them, yea, and filled their
Hearts with joy and comfort, though sometime they were put in the Stocks, and
sometime in Prison.

So we do verily find both by the the Testimony of the Spirit of God in our
Hearts, and also by the Testimony of the Scriptures, That our meeting together
to Worship the Lord, and to wait upon him, is according to the mind of God, and
also to the practice of the Saints in former days; and although we be of the
suffering-side, as the Saints were in times past, yet we are content in the
Will of the Lord to give up unto him in all these things: And surely if they
that cause us to suffer, did but diligently mind and consider their way and
Weapons which they go on in, and war with, they may find themselves to be on
the persecuting-side, and see the Saints did not so, neither War with such
Weapons; for the Saints Weapons were not Carnal, but Spiritual, and mighty
through God, to the pulling down of strong holds; for it is the spiritual
Weapons that can and does conquer the man of sin within, and can subdue every
high thought and imagination, and bring under whatsoever is contrary to the
Will of God: It Is the Eternal Word of the everlasting God that is quick and
powerful, sharper than any twoedged Sword, which divides within, where no
carnal Weapon can divide: And if any think we be not in the Way of the Lord,
let them come forth with spiritual Weapons, or with the best they have, laying
aside all carnal Weapons, Club and Staff, Force and Compulsion, for that will
never overcome a spiritual Enemy; it may kill outwardly, but cannot kill
spiritual wickedness; and coming forth with these Weapons, this is like men
that profess Christianity, and would be far more comely amongst the sober and
honest-hearted People, and far more like to the Saints, then haling out of
Houses by force with earnal Weapons, and casting into Prison for no other thing
but owning the Doctrine of Christ, and meeting together to Worship God.

And then this is offered as the prevailing Argument; There is a Law made
lately, that will not allow you, and if you do, we must fine you, or we must
take your Goods, or commit you to Prison, or cause you to forfeit your Estates:
Therefore we charge you give over, if not, we must proceed against you, and
break your Meetings with carnal Weapons.

Oh! where is the Spiritual Weapons, the Power to convince Gainsayers,
Gospel Ministers that went forth without Club or Staff; for say we, convince
our Consciences, or else we dare not do it; for we may not disobey the Lord
because of these things.

Obj. Well, then (say they) you will be ruinated; have you no Wisdom? will you
spoil your selves with these things?

Ans. More is the pity, (say we) that we may not serve the Lord, and Worship
him; but such sufferings will he exercised upon us by a people that profess
themselves Christians, and reformed ones too: Well, we say we must commit our
cause to the Lord, and even give up all to him, who knows how to deliver the
righteous out of all their trouble.

Obj. Ay, but (say they) cannot you meet four, and no more?

Ans. We say, We may not limit the Lord, neither in the things of God must we
order our selves. And again, if some could stoop to that, it would not serve
neither.

Obj. Then (say they) you must be forced, and then you, or some of you will
yield, and then we will boast ever you with those.

Ans. But we say, that force with carnal Weapons, by pains and penalties, as it
was not the way of the Lord, nor the practice of the true Christians, so
neither does it effect the end, for it will never make men truly religious,
neither will it be for the better in the end to them that go about so to
compel; no, nor yet any comfort in the mean time; for there is a Prick that
meets with the Presecutors now and then, which stops their furious driving, and
gives them no ease in their Way; as it was with Saul while he Persecuted the
Saints, and brought them bound, both Men and Women, that believed in the Lord
Jesus; and he is not a good example in that to be followed; for he made havoc
of the Church; entering into every House, and haling men and women, committing
them to Prison, having Authority from the Chief-Priests, and being exceedingly
mad against them. (Acts 8. 3. and Chap. 26. 10, 11*) as he after wards
confessed; and as he went to Damascus with Authority and Commission, he was
struck down, for all his Authority, and heard a voice saying to him, Why
persecutest thou me? it is hard for thee to ki^k against the pricks. And it
will be very hard for all such who persecute the Children of the Lord, the Lord
will smite them one way or another, if they be not smitten to their Conversion:
But if the Lord smite them often, and they still go on to sin more and more, he
will ease him of his Adversaries, and avenge him of his Enemies, and smite with
an irrecoverable stroke.

Obj. And if it be objected That these were Jews that aid not profess Christ,
that thus persecuted the Christians, and it was evil done of them; but we are a
Reformed Church, and we do it in zeal to Christ, that people might be all of
one way and the Law does allow us to it.

Ans. It Is answered thus: The Jews had a zeal for God which was not according
to knowledge; and they had a Law also, by which they judged the Holy One that
he ought to dye; but although they supposed they did God service, and for the
defending of the Law, yet indeed they fought against God, and they had as much
to say for their way of Worship, it being ancient, and they which differed from
them, their way was but new in appearnce: I say, the Jews might plead for their
Way far more groundedly, than many now; especially people who neither Live in
their Way of Worship, according to the Jews under the Law, no not yet according
to the Saints in the Primitive times; And those that profess themselves
Christians, and yet persecute the Innocent, they are far more guilty than the
Jews were, inasmuch as they both profess more Light, and also walk so quite
contrary to their own Profession; yea and to the example of Christ, whom they
profess (and the true Christians) who said, Love your Enemies, pray for them
that persecute you; not persecute them that pray for you: Neither had the
Saints such Weapons to bring people into their Church, as is now used, but
spiritual Ones, mighty through God, and went forth in his Power; this brought
People to be of one Heart, and one way, and to serve the Lord with one mind,
which force, with carnal Weapons, will never accomplish, to bring people to be
of one way.

Obj. And as its said, But some will yield, and then we will rejoice in that.

Ans. It Is answered, That Is a bad Work to force People, and compel them to deny
that which God has made manifest to them to be Truth, and the greater is their
Sin that so do. It Is said, that Saul compelled some to blaspheme against the
Name of Jesus, when he raged so against them; but he afterward confessed it as
a great Sin: And though some did so, or do so, yet that is no confirmation to
the Persecutors, that they are in the Way of God, no, nor yet a true Testimony
against the persecuted, that they are not in the Way of God* neither does it
truly convert men at all: Indeed force and compulsion may make some men conform
to that outwardly, which otherwise they would not do; but that is nothing of
weight, their Hearts are never the better, but are rather worse, and more
Hypocrites than before, for force does but make Hypocrites at the most; for it
is God alone by his Powerful Word of Life operating in the Hearts of People;
that changes them, and renews them in the Spirit of their minds, and brings
them into the true Service and Worship, even to draw near him with their
Hearts, and to Worship him in Spirit and Truth, and it is out of man's power,
and that which God does not require of men at this day, to force by penalties
and carnal Weapons to this or that Worship, and is absolutely against the
Practice of the Saints, and the Spirit of Jesus, as also against Christ's Royal
Law, which is, Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, even so do ye
unto them: Now let every man make it his own case, He says his way is the way
of God, and another is not: Well then, would he be forced to leave his own
way, and to go to the other, which he is not satisfied of to be occording to
the mind of God, especially when nothing is offered to convince his Conscience,
or persuade his mind and understanding but Force and Compulsion: Surely no man
would be so dealt with in his own case.

Obj. But if it be said, We have Power and a Law, and we are wise and learned
men, and we would not be forceed from our Religion, but we would force people
to ours.

Ans. This has no weight in it at all; for you ought to put your selves in the
same capacities as them you deal with are; and to consider your selves in their
condition; they are as strongly (it may be more) persuaded in their Consciences
by the Spirit of God, that their Way is right, than you are of yours. Well
then, (weighing these things) would you be forced? Would you have others to
deal so with you, if you were in their condition, and they in yours? Let God's
Witness answer in all Consciences, and see if these ways of forcing, in matters
of Conscience to God wards, be not quite contrary to the practice of the
Saints, and to the Royal Law of Christ.

Obj. Besides, though it be said, But we judge we are in the right, and our way
is the true way.

Ans. It Is answered. You may be mistaken, many has, that have had thoughts
their way was right; and while you have not the infallible Witness of God's
Spirit with you, to testify to your way, peradventure you may err as the
former Forcers have done; and then you cause people to Sin, if you could force
them to Blaspheme, and to deny, as Saul did; for if he that turns a Sinner
from the error of his way, (who has erred from the Truth) does save a Soul,
and hide a multitude of Sins, then they that force people from the Way of God,
and cause them to err, does bring Souls into death, and so bring Innocent Blood
upon themselves, yea, the Blood of Souls, which will be a great weight in the
Day of God's account.

Obj. But if it be further said, How then? How must we do (there is so many
ways) that People might be brought to one way to serve God?

Ans. Do what God requires of you, and no more, and then we shall never suffer
by you, nor under you; Do justly, love mercy, and walk humbly with your God,
this is better than the f^t of Rams: it is better than all the outward Sounds
and Ceremonies, and bodily exercise, while the heart is far from the Lord* And
if you judge you are in the right, and your way is right, come forth then with
spiritual Weapons, mighty ones; in the power of the Gospel of Jesus Christ; and
let us see you shine forth in his Image; let this be your covering, your white
Robes, even the Righteousness of Christ, which is the Righteousness of the
Saints, and let us see your meekness, patience, gentleness, and good example,
your readiness by word and deed to convince Gainsayers in the Power and Gospel
of Christ; your love to Enemies, your selfdenial, your subjection to the Cross
of our Lord Jesus; Oh, this would reach our hearts, then God's Witness would
answer to you, and this would answer the good part in all; and this is the way
to bring people, to be of one mind in the Truth; this is God's way, this is the
way the Saints walked in; this is the way we love and desire; and this also
would be of good report amongst all good people; but the contrary force and
compulsion, with a hasty, froward, proud, envious Spirit, with Staff and Club,
and carnal Weapons, and Stocks, and Prisoning of People, against whom there is
no occasion, but concerning the Law of their God, and matters which are really
of Conscience to God-wards; We say, this will never be justified by the Lord,
nor effect the end neither, nor be of good report amongst sober People, nor
answer the good part in people: And moreover, the Lord God of Life will turn
his hand and power against them, that so turn their hand and power against his
people for obeying him, and exercising their Consciences toward him, in
waiting upon him, and worshipping him according to that which he has made
manifest to them; and such will be more inexcusable for persecuting now, than
the Jews were in former days; for then the Saints met together, and professed
the Name of Jesus, which the Jews did not say they believed in. Besides, it was
in appearance such a new way, and so different to the Law and manner of Worship
which the Jews had, that they had some seeming color in their way; but now,
for they that profess the Name of Christ, and the Sicrptures of the
New Testament, and the Saints Practice, and Christ's Commands to be obeyed, for
these (all things considered) to persecute people for owning the Commands of
Christ, and for practicing the same things (which they cannot but read) the
Saints practiced, and to hale people, and commit them to Prison for meeting in
the Name of Jesus to Worship God, and to wait upon him; yea, and to be so far
from cherishing such, as to act the very parts of them that made havoc of the
Church, and haled out both Men and Women, and was exceedingly mad, and caused
some to Blaspheme, and committed to Prison for the same things; it does appear
to be great evil, and to be even Sin against knowledge, against their own
Prefession as Christans, and cannot be paralleled with any of the Saints, but
with the Persecutors, who hated and evilly entreated the Servants of the Lord
in former Ages, who never could accomplish their end, though they caused many
to suffer; and now to put all out of doubt, and to give all who opposes the
People of God in the way of God, an absolute answer, that they shall not be
able to accomplish their end, and therefore it would be far better to be quiet,
and to mind the Royal Law of Christ, lest they by acting contrary, do bring
innocent suffering and Blood upon their own Heads, and incur God's heavy Yoke
of displeasure against them, yea, and a Fire be kinded in their own Bowels, and
a Worm which shall not dye, and a dart strike through the Heart and Liver, and
so the end be as bitter as Wormwood, and as sharp as a two*edged Sword; these
are Instruments of War which the Lord has in his Quiver, which is reserved for
the Day of Battle, when God pleads with all Flesh by Fire, and by his Sword,
when the slain of the Lord shall be many, when he will rain Snares upon the
wicked, Fire and Brimstone, and grievous Tempests; this is the Potion of their
Cup: But indeed we do desire the Conversion and Salvation even of our
Persecutors; and therefore to put all out of doubt, as is before said, that
there is no prevailing against the Lord, nor against the Sion of the Holy One,
in whom the Lord is: We say, the living God of Heaven and Earth has made
manifest unto us the Way to Life, and called us to walk in it, and united our
Hearts together, (as many as live in his Power) to serve him, and to wait upon
him, and to meet together to Worship him in Spirit and Truth; and we are
persuaded to obey the Lord, and believe in the Lord, that he will strengthen us
in his Way and Will unto the end: For our strength is in the Lord (and not of
our selves) who has called us to follow him through good report and bad
report, and not to deny his Way because of sufferings, but to endure in
patience, and let the Lord plead our cause in the Hearts of his Enemies.

Obj. And if any say, Why will you not swear? And why will you meet, seeing
there is a Law against you?

Ans. For these two things, we say, We dare not disobey the Lord for fear of
punishment or suffering outwardly; and we meet together in the Name and Fear of
the Lord, Because the Lord God of Life requires it of us, that we should meet
in his Name and Power, and wait upon him, and edify one another in his Love
and Life, and in our Meetings waiting upon the Lord, we have the presence of
the living God of Life with us, and the feeling of the virtue of his Love in
our Hearts; and he lifts up his Countenance upon us, yea, and comfort us by
his free Spirit, whereby we know and are assured, that it is according to the
mind and will of the Lord, and that he speaks Peace unto us: And this being the
real Truth, let all the honest-hearted judge how we can in Conscience leave
that which God requires of us, in obedience to which we have God's presence
with us and do that which Man requires of us, contrary to the Truth, in
observing of which we should fall into Condemnation, and feel God's anger, and
the Testimony of his Spirit against us, to judge us, which would be greater
sufferings in the inward Man, then all the outward sufferings which we may meet
with; for in these being faithful, the Lord comfort our Hearts.

2. Again, We meet together to wait upon the Lord, because we fear the Lord
God, he has placed his Fear in our Hearts, and we know him to be great and
mighty, a great King above all Kings, and a great God above all God s, that is
able to do whatsoever he will in Heaven and in Earth, and in the Kingdoms of
men, and we know he is worthy to be Worshipped, and to have the Heart given up
unto him, for he has Power to change the Heart, (which Men by all their force
cannot do) and to give true and lasting Peace, which the World can never take
away; and his Fear being in our Hearts, we account him Lord and Ruler in our
Consciences, and worthy to be obeved in Heart, Soul and Spirit: And because we
fear him more than Man, we are bound in Duty to obey him, for he has power
over both Soul and Body, which Man has not; for Man can but kill the Body, he
has not power to kill the Soul, neither has he power to redeem the Soul;
neither can Man convert the Soul by any force or penalty outwardly; therefore
Man does but labor in vain, for he can neither kill nor cure the Soul; but the
Lord whom we fear, has Power, and is able to kill and to make alive: And
because we fear him more than Man, therefore we choose to obey him rather than
Man, and to meet in God's Fear. And this being our Condition, let the
sober-hearted judge, How can we deny the Lord who has all Power, and has
quickened us, and redeemed our Souls from Death, and go to obey Man (contrary to
Christ's Doctrine) who has no power over the Soul. Surely as we stand in God's
Fear and Counsel, we may not do this Evil, and Sin against our God.

3. Again, we meet together to wait upon the Lord, because God has made it
manifest to us, and persuaded us, that the Way in which we walk, is according
to his Mind and Will, and we look not for direction in our Religion, by Man's
wisdom or will, how we shall serve and worship God, for we know its God alone
by his Spirit, that leads people in the Exercise of the true Religion, as it is
written, I the Lord teaches thee to profit, and leads thee in the way in
which thou should go; and lo we are content with our Religion which the Lord
has led us into, and in the exercise of it we have Gods Blessing, filling our
Hearts with Love and Joy, Peace and Satisfaction, in which our Souls are
comforted, and we look not for another Religion contrary to that which we are
in; but our hearts are fixed, waiting upon the Lord, and we received it from
the Lord, and not upon any such terms, as to continue in it till Man made a Law
against it, or speak against it, and no longer; but even as the Way of Truth
was made manifest to us, so to press on in it unto the end: And we see the Ways
and Religions of Men to be so changable, sometimes one way, and sometimes
another, that it appears to us, as if Men received their Religion but till
Orders of another sort of Men to the contrary: And we see many people so ready
to part with their Religion, and take up another, that gives us just ground to
believe they found not the Presence of God with them in their Way and Exercise:
And so its but loose with them, and they can leave it upon occasion, rather
than suffer the loss of any thing for it; and this makes us prize that which
God has made manifest to us, the more, because we receive Refreshment from the
Lord, in the Exercise of our Religion; besides, if we had been void of the true
Religion till this day, we should have been as unstable as others, tossed about
with winds of Doctrine, and have known no true Rest to our Souls, but it is
well known that we were of the same mind, that we are now, in the time of the
former powers, and we received not our Religion from them neither, but from the
Lord our God, neither was our Religion or we in the Exercise of it, confirmed
by any Law or Decree of theirs, but on the contrary, did suffer much hardship
under them, and by them, whom they cherished at that time in the Religion which
they allowed, and they then said, Theirs was the right Way, and they Stockt and
Prisoned many who were contrary to them; And now others say they are in Way,
and uses force, and such like, to them that differ from them. One said the Law
is on our side, and we are in the right; the others say. The Law is on our
side, and we are in the right, and you must conform, or suffer deeply. We say,
None of these things can persuade our Consciences; but come forth in the Power
of the Lord, as good Examples, with spiritual Weapons, if you will persuade us;
for we cannot with a safe Conscience leave our Religion, which the Lord has
led us into by his own Power, upon these things, but must rather give up to
suffer in the Will of the Lord; for we know plainly, it is God alone by his
Power, that does bring people into the true Worship: And this is according to
the Scriptures of Truth, and also to the Service which is now allowed; for it is
said in the Collect for that which is called the thirteenth Sunday after
Trinity, Almighty and most merciful God, of whose only Gift it comes, that thy
faithful full People do unto thee true and laudable Service: Now then, if it
come only by the Gift of God that the faithful do true Service unto God, then
they that would force people from serving God according to his Gift given them,
would force them from the true and laudable Service of God, and do make them
act contrary to the Gift of God, and unavoidably lead and force people from the
true Worship of God, into hypocrisy, and a false, feigned, lifeless and
heartless Worship, in which the Lord takes no pleasure. And so this being truly
considered, we can put it to the Consciences of all that fear the Lord, to
judge whether he can with a safe Conscience leave our Religion which God has
led us into, and and the exercise of it, according to the Gift of God, by which
only true Service is done to God, in which also we find acceptance with God
through Jesus Christ, and go to a Religion in the will of Man, contrary to the
Gift of God, by Force and Compulsion, where we could not act affectionately
with our Hearts, nor yet find the Blessing and Presence of God with us, acting
contrary to the Gift of God: Truly it is in our Hearts and Consciences, as the
Truth of the Lord, that we may not falsely do it.

But if any should object and say, Your Religion is but new, or of a late
standing, Ours is a Hundred Years old, or thereabouts, since Popery was brought
from having the upper-hand in this Nation; for they forced, but they were out
of the way; but ours is a Reformed Church.

It Is answered, That though the Name or Denomination by which we are
distinguished from other people, be but of late Years, which was cast upon us
by some that mocked us, because of the Power of the Lord, which caused many to
quake and tremble; yet the Life in which we live, and the Truth which we
profess, is ancient, and the Practice in which we are exercised in the Worship
of God, is according to the Truth and Practice of the Saints of old: And so it
might be said of the Saints, and of Paul when he was converted, and turned from
the Jews Worship, that it was a new Religion; but it was the mighty Power of
God that changed them, though many in that day opposed them. And so we say,
Force now, with Prisons and carnal Weapons, is of the same nature as it was
formerly, in the Papists and others, for they said they had a Law, and they
were the true Church, and they forced about Religion, and killed many; and now
here is but the same Argument, The Law says so and so: Therefore we see the
same Nature forcing now, as formerly, as it is said, He that was born after the
Flesh, persecuted him that was born after the Spirit; even so it is now.

And for being of a Hundred Years standing, this adds no strength to it at all,
for the Jews Religion was far more ancient, and yet being in the Persecuting
nature, and resisting the Holy One and the Just, though they professed God with
their Mouth, yet that would not cover them, nor will it cover people now, to
profess God with their Mouth, while they are found in the Nature, Steps and
Practice of them who Persecuted the Saints and Servants of God in Ages past.

And for that which is said, That we are but of late Years; We say, Men are not
true Christians by Generation, neither by an outward Profession, but by an
inward Change in the Heart, wrought by the Power of God in the Regeneration.
And so if it be but a few Years in comparison, since we, or any of us were
changed and turned to the Lord, yet it was in the time when the Lord was
pleased, and saw good to visit us, and we can truly say it was an acceptable
day and time when we were turned from Darkness to the true Light, and from the
power of Satan to God: And we are glad of it, and can say, Blessed be the Lord
for it, if it had been but yesterday, that any of us were renewed in the Spirit
of our minds to God; for it is matter of Joy to us, that the Lord has gathered
us in our day and time, from off the barren Mountains, into his Fold, to wait
upon him, and to receive teaching and satisfaction from him: This is far more
to us to know the Lord changing us in our day, and bringing us to know the
things that pertain to our everlasting Peace, than to have a large Profession
of the Saints Words, and yet to be out of the Saints Life, and out of the way
where true Peace and Rest is found to the Soul; and so the Lord having
manifested his Truth to us, and brought us into the Religion, in which he
manifests his Presence to us, we are content to wait in the Will of the Lord,
and may not forsake our Religion, nor the Assembling of our selves together,
because Man says to the contrary, but walk according to the Gift of God, by
which only it is that true and faithful Service is performed unto him.

4. Again, we meet together to wait upon the Lord; that our Consciences may be
kept clear toward him, that we may have the answer of a good Conscience
toward God* which if we should walk contrary to that which the Lord has made
manifest, here would be shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience; for so it was
formerly, if any forsook the Lord and his Truth after they had tasted of his
good Word, if they fell away from that which they had once known and professed
of the Truth and Gospel of Jesus, they made shipwreck of Faith and a good
Conscience, and then they could not have the answer of a good Conscience,
neither had they Peace with God, and what remained if they continued so, but a
certain fearful looking for of Judgment and fiery Indignation, which will
devour? And therefore we knowing the preciousness of the answer of a good
Conscience toward God, do prize it, and esteem it as a Jewel of great worth;
and we may not forsake the Way of the Lord, wherein we have the answer of a
good Conscience (because of outward Force) and go into that in which we should
suffer Anguish, and have a certain fearful looking for of Judgment, and a sting
in our own Consciences; therefore we can put it to all who fear the Lord to
judge of, if it be not safe for us to abide in the Way of the Lord, and to be
faithful to him, though we may meet with Sufferings in this World.

5. Again, we meet together in the Fear of the Lord, and own the doctrine of
Christ to live in it, because we are persuaded in the Fear and Power of the
Lord God of Life; who is our strength, that nothing shall be able to separate
us from the Love of God which we have in Christ Jesus our Lord: the Love of God
is so Comfortable, and his Favors is so refreshing to us, and the Testimony of
his Spirit is so satisfactory in our Hearts, that we are persuaded, nothing
will be able to separate us; our Strength is in the Lord, and he is
all-sufficient to keep us through all, by his mighty Power, unto the end;
waiting upon him, and abiding in his Power, he is able to save to the
uttermost; and this were the Saints formerly persuaded off, that nothing should
be able to separate them from the Love of God, and they met with many
hardships, and were oftentimse cruelly entreated, and shamefully handled, as
the Scriptures declare; yet through all the Lord was with his people, and
comforted their hearts in their following of him, and the Love of God abounded
to them and in them, and they were Conquerors through him that loved them. Now
if any at that time denied the Truth for fear of man, or any other thing, they
came to suffer in their hearts, and to feel sorrow in their inward man; for
when iniquity enters into the heart, it darkens the understanding, and also the
creature loses the sense of the Love of God; and if there be not Repentance,
and a returning unto the Lord, Iniquity grows more strong, and love grows cold
in such, and the heart grows worse and worse, and is hardened by degrees against
the Lord and his people, and then there is a separation from the Love of God,
and the feeling, and earnest of sorrow and tribulation upon every one that does
evil; therefore we are persuaded that it is safe for us to wait upon the Lord
in the way which he has made manifest unto us, that so we may receive the
Power to renew our strength, that we may walk on in the Path of Life, and
nothing separate us from the Love of God which we have in Christ Jesus. Shall
tribulation, or affliction, or Principalities, or Powers separate us from the
Love of God? Shall force by carnal weapons, or Prisons cause us to deny that
which God has made manifest unto us; Is there Powers against us, Thrones
against us? well, this is safe for us, to abide in the counsel of God, that we
may always feel his Love in our hearts; and if we suffer, let us suffer here,
because of our faithfulness to the Lord: If we must go to Prison, let us stand
in the Power of God, that his Love and Life, blessing, and heavenly Presence
may be with us: Better to suffer outwardly in Prisons, and Holes, and have the
Love and presence of the Lord with us, then to disobey the Lord, and walk
contrary to his gift, and so suffer inward anguish and sorrow of heart, and
some thing separate us from the Love of God, and then who can speak peace to
us, if the Lord speak trouble? but if the Lord speak peace, it is no matter
though man may speak trouble; though the wrath of man may rise high, yet he
that does whatsoever he will in Heaven and in Earth, he can make it to turn to
his Praise, and the rest of it he will restrain; and blessed are they that have
the Lord with them, on their side; he speaks peace to them in the midst of all,
his love refreshes our Hearts, and so to put all out of doubt, we are
persuaded in the Power of the Lord, that nothing will be able to separate us
from the Love which we have in our Savior; and here it is good to abide, and
not to give one Foot back, to give any ground unto the Enemy, but to continue
where the Love of God is with us, and his blessed Presence with us comforting
our Hearts, which people do not find with them in disobedience, walking and
acting contrary to what the Lord has made manifest to them; and so we can put
it to the Consciences of all People who have any sense of the Love of God in
their Hearts, Whether it can be safe for us to forsake the Way of peace and
rest which God has made manifest unto us, and in which we have the Love of God
with us, and to go into a Way by force, into which the Spirit of the Lord does
not lead us, where we shall find anguish and sorrow, and something separating
us from the Love of God, and where God would not speak peace to us, but
trouble; surely we are persuaded to abide in that which the Lord has made
manifest to us, and our faith is in the Power of God, that nothing will be able
to separate us from the Love of God.

6. Again, we are persuaded to continue in the Way of Truth, meeting together
in the Fear of the Lord, to serve him, because we find the Lord requires of us
to bear a faithful Testimony, and witness to his Name and Truth, which he has
made known to us at this day; and though man require the contrary, and would
force us to yield, yet we may not deny the Lord and his Truth, but must bear
witness to his Name in obedience to his Will: for we are not our own, but the
Lords; neither* must we serve our selves, nor do our own will, nor the wills of
others, whose will is not according to the Will of God, but we must serve the
Lord, and be faithful to him; and we see we cannot serve two Masters, nor
cannot be partakers of the Love of God, if we be in the love of the World, and
f^llow after the lusts of it; and if we love any thing more than Christ, we
should not be true Disciples and Followers of him.

And if it be objected, Why cannot you do as men would have you? What, God
knows your Hearts* and you may keep yuor Hearts to your selves, and conform
outwardly for all that.

It Is answered, Nay, we cannot, because God requires it of us, to bear witness
to his Name and Truth, and we may not deal doubly or deceitfully, in showing
that before men, which we are not in our Hearts to God, for the People that God
has formed to himself, must show forth his praise. And though it be true, that
God knows the Heart of every one, yet lie looks for Fruit also to be brought
forth, that we may be glorified. It is recorded in the Scriptures, that there
were many occasions sought against Daniel, but they could find none against
him, except it were concerning the Law of his God, and they that hated him,
consulted to get a Decree, that none should ask any Petition of God or man for
thirty days, save of the King; if he did, he was to be cast into the Den of
Lions: and the Decree was sealed according to the Law of the Meades and
Persians. Now it cannot be denied but Daniel might have prayed to God in his
heart, and his evil-wishers have known little of it; but he was taught by the
Lord to pray openly, and to confess unto him, that he was great, mighty and
powerful. And so though the Decree was sealed, he (as if he regarded it to not)
went and prayed to his God three times a day upon his knees, with his Window
open, and his face toward Jerusalem, and so held forth his Testimony, and bore
witness to the Lord, that he was worthy to be sought unto, and that he was not
to be limited (by an outward Decree, though a strong one) from praying and
calling upon the Name of the Lord, and the Lord was with him; and though he
suffered the adventure of being cast into the Lions Den, yet the God of Heaven
was his Preserver, and he held forth a precious Testimony, and God was much
glorified; for it was said, yea, and proclaimed through many Nations, that all
should fear and worship the God of Daniel, for there was no other God that
could save in such sort.

And also the three Children that would not bow, though the King had commanded
it, that when the Voice of the Music was heard, all should bow to the Image
which he had set up; yet they would not obey, for it was contrary to the Law of
their God, and great Wrath was against them, and the Furnace was very Hot, yet
the Lord saved them, and they bore a precious Testimony to the Lord in
Obedience to his Law, and the Lord was much Glorified, and was proclaimed
through many Nations to be the only and true God; and the King himself did
praise and honor, and extol the God of Heaven all whose Works are Truth, and
his Ways Judgment, and those who walk in Pride, he is able to abase.

But now if any should say, These were Heathen Kings, and so not to be obeyed.

It Is answered, They are more excusable therefore than those that in words
prosess themselves Christians, and own Scriptures, and the Saints practice, and
yet are found persecutthose who live in the Power of the Lord, and forcing by
pains and penalties, not according to, but quite contrary to the Practice of
the Saints, whose Words they profess, and are found in the very steps of them
who persecuted the Saints and Servants of God, as the Scriptures testify; and
are so far from the Doctrine of Christ, as to forgive Trespasses and to do as
they would be done unto, and to love Enemies, and to pray for them that
Persecute them, that they do absolutely Trespass against them who give them no
just occasion, and do to others as they would not be done unto, were it their
case, (and let God's Witness judge) and does even hate and cruelly handle their
Friends, who wish them well from their Hearts, and presecute them who pray for
them. And surely, for these things will the Lord Visit, and in the mean time we
find that the Lord requires it of us, to be faithful to him in what he has
made manifest unto us, that we may bear a true Testimony, and faithful Witness
to the Truth, and for the Lord, that he may glorify himself by us; for we are
not our own, but his, who has formed us, and called us to follow him.

And therefore let the wise in Heart judge; Can it be safe for us to lose our
Testimony, and to cease following the Lord, and living in that which he has
made known unto us to his mind and will concerning us, in which we have the Arm
and Power of the Lord with us, and him to take our parts, and to go to that
which he has not called us unto, where we could bear no Testimony for him,
(for he that goes from the Truth which God has made manifest, l^seth his
Testimony) where fruits would be brought forth unto Death, and not unto Life,
and the Hand of the Lord will turn against such; for them that honor the Lord,
he will honor; but they that slight his Counsel, and despise his Will, shall
be lightly esteemed; all which duly considered, we cannot (as we live to God)
but bear witness to his Name, and hold forth that Testimony which the Lord has
committed unto us.

7. Again, We are given up to obey and serve the Lord according to that which
he has made known unto us, because no man must give an account unto God for
us, or answer for us in his day, when the secrets of all Hearts shall be
manifest, and he will reward every one according to their deeds: B^t we must
stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ, to receive a Portion from him, and
not others for us: Therefore we may not deny the Lord because of Force, Pains,
Prisons or Penlties, because they that so force us, will not answer for us,
though weight enough may be upon themselves; yet that would not free us if we
should forsake the Way of the Lord made known to us: And let all people in
soberness judge what reason there is that others should force us from that
which we believe, to that which they believe, and yet if we perish by that
means, they can neither help us, nor answer for us: Is it not therefore meet,
that we should live in that Way in which we dare dye, and give up all unto the
Lord in, and not be forced out of that Way in which we have Peace and Love,
and the presence of the Lord with us, into a way where pain and anguish
would fill our hearts, and leanness and emptiness would be upon our souls? and
yet they that forced us from our good Haven and safe Harbor, where we lay at
Anchor safe from the storm, would neither bring us to any sure resting place,
nor yet preserve us from Winds and Storms, and terrible Tempests; but we must
by reason of such a force, unavoidably suffer shipvvrack: We say, We may call
Heaven and Earth, yea, Angels and all just men, to bear vvitness to our Cause;
yea, and the Eternal God of Life, in whose hand is the breath of all living,
to judge between us and our Persecutors in this matter.

Hearken unto me, ye that know righteousness, the People in whose heart is my
Law; fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be ye afraid of their revilings;
for the Moth shall eat them up like a Garment, and the Worm shall eat them like
Wool; but my Righteousness shall be forever: and my Salvation from Generation
to Generation, Isa. 51. 7, 8. J. A.

A Question Answered, which was proposed by the Bishops Official, at several
Places in Westmoreland, to the people called Quakers, in his Visitation (so
called) about the 7 th Month, 1663.
Question, WHY do you not come to your Parish Church, or to the place of
public Worship appointed by the Laws of the Land, to hear Divine Service, and
to join in Prayer with the Congregation; and to perform other Rites and
Ceremonies of according to the Church of England.

Answ. First the ^postle says, Let every Man be fully persuaded in his own
mind. Now we are not persuaded in our minds, either that God requires it of
us, to come to these Places to Worship him, or that it can be proved by the
holy Scriptures, according to the Practice of the Saints, that we ought to come
to these Places. Secondly, because we are not persuaded in our minds, and that
upon good Grounds and Reasons, according to the holy Scriptures, That the
Priests which there serve the Cure (so called) are Ministers of Jesus Christ,
sent of God: But much persuaded in our minds that God never sent them; And that
for these four Reasons,

First, Because their Call to the Ministry, is not the same, as were the Call
of the Ministers of Christ: Theirs was by the Spirit of Christ, not of Man, nor
by Man; Theirs are of Man, and by Man: Time servers, Men pleasers,
Covenanbreakers, having a face to serve every turn and time, not serving the
Lord, but their own Bellies; and they used to say, before they abjured the
Covenant, that they had not the infallible Spirit which the Apostle* had; and
what Spirit is entered into them since, let all that fear the Lord judge.

Secondly, Because we are not persuaded, that their Practice in their Ministry,
is not according to the Practice of the Ministers of Christ, but according to
the practice of the false Prophets, and false Apostles which the Scripture
testifies against.

Thirdly, Because their Maintenance in their Ministry, is not according to the
Maintenance of the Ministers of Christ, but like the false Prophets, and them
that went in Cain's way, and Balaam's way, greedily after Gifts and Rewards;
yea, and preparing War against them that puts not into their Mouths.

Fourthly, Because we are persuaded, that their Doctrine is not according to
the Doctrine of Christ, and his Apostles, but the contrary, for they deny the
Light of Christ, which lights every Man that comes into the World, to be
spiritual and sufficient to guide in the ways of Peace; and this is contrary to
Christ's Doctrine and his Apostles; again they say, all that ever people do, is
Sin, while they are here, (though Saints) and people must never have freedom
nor victory, over Sin while they live upon the Earth; and this is contrary to
the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles: They say all they do is Sin, their
best Actions are Sin, their Prayers are Sin, (to this we consent) therefore
they are not the Prayers of the Upright, which God delights in, nor were they
ever sent of God, whose Prayers and best Actions are Sin, and therefore being
the Hirelings and Strangers which Christ never sent, we are persuaded we ought
not to hear them, nor go after them. Again, Thirdly, we come not to these
places, because we are not fully persuaded in our minds that the people there
met together, are the true Church of Christ, or his Members; And that for these
three Reasons;

First, Because they are a Company of miserable Sinners, that err and stray
like lost Sheep from the ways of God, and are grievous Offenders of Gods holy
Laws, as that themselves confess, therefore say we, unredeemed yet; in the way
of Death, not in the way of Life; yet we do not deny, but confess, that there
is a time when people do so err, and are out of the right way, but this in the
Unconverted state, such are not the Church of Christ, nor Members of his Body,
while they are dead in Sins and Trespasses; for the Saints, who are Members of
the true Church, are quickened by the Power of God, and ate raised up to sit
together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus.

Secondly, The people there met together, do that which they ought not to have
done, and leave undone that which they ought to have done, so are breakers of
their Covenants and Vows made in their Baptism, which promised that they would
forsake the Devil and all his Works, the Pomps and Vanities of this wicked
World, and all the sinful Lusts of the Flesh, etc. And that they would keep
Gods holy Will and Commandments, etc. But now they offend grievously Gods holy
Laws, and leaves that undone which they should do, etc. And their Teachers tell
them, they connot forsake the Devil and all his works, but their best Actions
and their Prayers are Sin, while they live; and all Sin is of the evil One:
Therefore we dare not join with them to commit Sin: But if it be said, these
are but humble Confession to God* laying our selves low, and confessing our
Sins which we ought to do, when we pray to him. Answer, either your Confessions
are true, or a lie: If true, then you are breakers of your Vows, and in the
Unconverted state yet, therefore not the true Church; Know ye not, that the
unrighteous shall: not Inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. 4, 10, 11. Be not
deceived, neither Idolators, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor
Revilars, nor Extortioners can Inherit it (in that state) And said the Apostle
to the Saints; Such were some of you, but you are Washed, but you are
Sanctified but you are Justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of our God, And if your Confession be a lie, then you are also manifest
to be a Company of Dissembling Hypocrites, and to be of him who was a Liar from
the Beginning and not Members of the Church of Christ.

Thirdly, because the People there met together, have no health in them,
therefore we are not persuaded in our Minds that we ought to join with them; no
health in them, Christ is the saving Health of all Nations who believe in him;
therefore Christ is not in them, so Reprobates concerning the Faith, and not
the Church of Christ, nor Congregation of the faithful People, but are
disorderly, out of the order of the Gospel, and we are commanded to withdraw
from all such as walk disorderly. So we meet together in the Fear of God
according to the Practice of the Saints; and come not to these places which
were the old Mass-Houses, to Worship amongst those People which have no health
in them; and these are three Principal things, upon which many more things will
follow, wherefore we do not go to these Places aforenamed.

J. A.

The Copy of a Letter sent unto two or three Persons in a Family.
Dear Hearts,
IN the Light of the Lord, wait upon the Lord in his Fear, to have your Minds
stayed in his Will, that you may walk in Obedience and Uprightness in the
Presence of the Lord, to see him amongst you, and in his Counsel abide every
one faithful, in the Calling and Measure which you have received and are called
unto, that orderly, and in order you may wait and walk every one in particular,
and one toward another in Soberness and Wisdom, that in Love you may be
preserved, and Truth adorned which you profess, that God alone may be exalted:
I warn you and charge you, that in Faithfuluess every one of you walk, and in
Diligence and Love, that there be no Disorder, Sloathfulness nor Carelessness,
but every one mind the Presence of him, whose Eye is over you, before whom all
is naked and bare, that you may walk in the Light and the pure Fear of God,
which will keep you Watchful and Sober in all diligence as unto the Lord,
knowing you must give an account to him: And none be high minded, but fear, and
be Low, and Humble, and take up the Yoke of Christ, and learn there; And take
heed of your own wills, which would lead you into the by-Parths, But stand
single in the Will of God, waiting upon him continually, that you may receive
the living Mercies from him, that your Souls may be nourished with the Food
that is Immortal; and this I lay upon you all that you be faithful and
Diligent, that all may be kept in Order and Love, that the Family may be guided
in Wisdom.

So my Dear Hearts, in Love do I Salute you all, and I remain your Dear Friend,
in that which endures forever.

John Audland.

These following Epistles were found in Manuscript after the foregoing Books
and Epistles were Printed: To which is added George Fox's Testimony concerning
John Camm and John Audland.
Dear Friends,
BRethren and Sisters, Babes and Lambs, Plants of my heavenly Fathers Planting,
my dear Love in that infinite unchangable Love of God does my Soul Salute you
all; yea, truly my Bowels of tender Love and Compassion unto the Seed of God in
you all, that you may be kept pure and blameless unto the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and travel in pain until Christ be formed in you, until the Babe
be born in you, which is Heir of the immortal Inheritance which never fades
away. Dear Hearts, in the pure Light of Christ all dwell and abide, which leads
up into the pure Life, where there is no Death, where we shall all meet
together, and feed together at one Table, and all Eat of one Bread of Life, and
Drink of one Fountain of living Water, which nourishes all up to the
Everlasting Life, where we shall meet together, and sit together in heavenly
Places in Christ Jesus, where all Sorrow and Sighing shall fly away* and there
no Thief can come to rob us of our Crown: Therefore in the Bowels of tender
Love, as a Brother, I beseech you all to walk worthy of your Calling, for holy
is he that has called you, and holy is your Calling unto an holy Life, and
godly Conversation are you called, and to a Separation from the World, and to a
daily dying to it, and to a forgetting of all things which are behind, and to
walk up to those things which are made manifest in you, by the Light which
comes from Christ, which being obedient unto it, it leads up to Christ your
Head and Example in all things; and he was obedient unto the Death of the
Cross; and being faithful to the Light which comes from him, it will lead you
to the Death upon the Cross, and Crucify you unto the World and wordly things,
and raise you up into the pure Life, to follow the Lamb whether soever he
goes; and if you suffer with him, you shall reign with him, for he was perfect
through Sufferings; and through Sufferings and many Tribulations must you
enter: And therefore all come to the Cross and love it, and rejoice in it, that
you are counted worthy for his Name sake; and take heed that none suffer as
Evildoers, for there is no Joy for that, nor no Crown, nor Reward for these
suffers not on the Cross, and these Sufferings do not Crucify; but the
Condemnation upon all such is Just, by the Light which never changes, which
comprehends all such hasty Spirits, which run before they are sent; Therefore
all Friends, I exhort you in the Light to dwell, which comprehends all such
Spirits; and in the savor keep, having Salt in your selves, that you may be
able to savor and try all Spirits; for there are many false Spirits gone out
into the World, but in the Light they are all comprehended, and by it judged
and condemned, and all dwelling in the Light, the Unity will be kept, and among
you there will be no Division, Strife nor Contention, but in it is pure Union.
Strife and Contention is out of the Light, and ye have not so learned Christ;
and take heed that none of you make an Image, and set up a golden Calf of that
which you brought out of Egypt, and fall down and worship it, and so bring the
Wrath of God upon you; I mean, take heed of your Wisdom which is from below,
which are your Jewels while you are in Egypt; but now coming out of Egypt, that
Language and that Wisdom is to be forgotten and left behind, and by the Light
of Christ it is to be condemned, and stamped upon to powder, The Whirlwind of
the Lord's wrath scatters it; and so you grow up into the pure Wisdom which is
from above, to depart from Iniquity, which is Understanding; and here you will
come into the fear of the Lord, which will keep you in awe and out of the Evil,
and preserve you in your Innocence, and keep you in Humility out of
Presumption; and so the eternal love of God shield you, and defend you in the
day of Trial* and in the hour of Temptation, and preserve and keep you in his
eternal Counsel to stand and abide now and evermore; Amen.

This is to be sent from thee to Bristol, to be read amongst Friends at their
Meetings. Sent from the Hand of your Brother,

John Camm.

Dear Friends;
I Can see but little freedom from my Disease* I cannot say I am any better
then I was when Robert Wastfield parted with me at Banbary, and though I have
longing Desires to see your Faces, I know not whether the Lord will afford me
that opportunity or no; but in his Will I stand, desiring that if it be his
Will, I may see your Faces again; but in the Light dwell, and grow up into the
Life, and then I see you, and am present with you, and then we can never be
separated.

My dear love from my very Life, with my Wife's, flows out to you all, who love
the Lord Jesus Christ, and abide in his Light, and grow up in his Life, where
our Union is kept; and truly we cannot express our Love, which flows out to the
Seed of God amongst you; the God of Power give it deliverance, that it may
rejoice over the World in you all, that God over all may be exalted, and his
Name glorified. I desire to hear from you in the Lord.

Your Loving Brother John Camm.

To all (dear Friends) who Love the Light, in and about Bristol.
Dear Friends,
YOu whose minds are turned toward God, by the pure Light of God, to wait upon
the Lord in his Fear, Grace and Mercy, and Peace from God be multiplied in you;
and amongst you, that you may grow and abound in the pure Life of God, growing
up every one of you in the particular, in your own Measure, having your minds
stayed upon the Lord, to wait upon him in singleness of heart, to be taught by
him; every one of you walking in the Light which leads up to him, there you
will see the Lord present with you; but going out from the pure Light, the Vale
is drawn, and the Enemy lodges upon the Vale; Then arises Doubts, Fears,
Questions and Troubles; then you will look back to that which is behind, and
forget the Mark which is before. But dwelling in the Light, and in the pure
Fear of the Lord, your minds will be stayed, patiently to wait as new born
Babes to be refreshed with the Milk of the Word, and there you will know the
gentle leading of the Father, and the green Pasture, and the still Waters, and
the Dew from above upon the tender Plants, and watering of the Plant, that you
may grow as Plants of God, planted into the true Vine, growing in the Vine,
sitting under the Vine, and abiding in the Vine, that you may be Trees of
Righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that God alone may be exalted in you.
Oh, dear ones, our Bowels flow out toyou, and is poured out to the Lord for
you, we are bound unto you, even with the bond of Love, even the same Love as
we are loved withal, the same runs out freely to you; and as we said to you,
the same we say again, prize the day of your Visitation, that you may know the
things that belong to your eternal Peace; and dwell in the Light, and walk in
the Light, and meet together in the pure Fear of the Lord, and dwell in the
Love, and have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but reprove
them; and thou that reprovest must be clear, or else thou judge with that
which must be judged; so judge your selves first, every one, let self first be
judged and condemned, and that which judges and condemns self, that speak,
and act, and reprove unfruitful works, and then your fellowship will be in that
which condemns self, and then you will meet in the fear of the Lord, and
discern between the Righteous and the Wicked, and know the voice of Christ, and
follow him, and be subject to his Yoke, and endure the Cross, rejoice in the
Cross of Christ, and minister in the Cross, and have no unity with that which
is out of the Cross, who mind earthly things, such are Enemies to the Cross,
such are in the Hypocrisy, and in Presumption, speaking high words, but run
before the Light, and leads up into the end.

Therefore (all dear Friends) we exhort charge and command you to walk in the
Light, and in the Cross, that you may have unity in the Life of God, and that
you may discern between the holy and profane, and receive not every Spirit,
nor believe not every Spirit: In the Bowels of Love do we beseech you, to walk
worthy of your Calling, holy is he that has called you, Holiness becomes his
House for evermore; let the Holy guide your mind, and it will lead you into
Holiness, into Pureness, into Meek ess, into Love, into Unity to watch over one
another, and to mind the good of one another, and to be of one Heart, of one
Soul, of one Mind, all guided by one Spirit, and walking in one Light, all
pressing on in one Way which leads to Life, and so all will come to witness one
Life, and one Teacher, and you will see the Word within, and the Law within,
and the Fear of the Lord within, which will keep your hearts clean, and there
Wisdom will be made manifest in you, and the secrets of the Lord revealed in
you, which secrets are revealed to Babes, not to the Wisdom of the World; so
dwell in Wisdom that you may know what speaks, and to what you speak, that you
cast no Pearls before Swine, but keep in the Unity, and dwell in Patience,
waiting for the promises to be fulfilled in you: When Trouble comes, be
content, wait low in patience; when Joy comes, be low in the pure Fear, and
keep low, and dwell in the pure Wisdom of God; and the Lord God of Life, Light
and Power be with you, and go along with you, that you may grow up in him and
have Dominion over all the World, that you may all dwell within, and mind the
just to guide your minds continually. We are with you written in your Hearts,
you may read us daily; we even travel with you, and pant after you, that you
may all wait to know Christ formed in you, that you may rejoice together for
ever over the head of our Enemies. -- Dear hearts, in the eternal Love and Life
of our God do we reach to you; dwelling in the pure Life you will see and feel
us present with you, and we have Unity with you, as many of you as are faithful
in your Measure; so every one in your Measure wait upon the Lord, that you may
know Redemption from the World, and so be witnesses of the Son of God, by the
same witness as raised up him, by which he bears witness against the World; by
the same Spirit you being raised will bear witness against the World; so every
one dwelling in that which judges the Earthly, and works out the Earthly, that
you may know the Earth waste, and the Earth grow feeble, and the Gods of the
Earth famished, and the ground of Thoughts and Imaginations removed, and the
Covering taken off, and the Vale rent, and the Serpents head bruised, and the
Seed of the Woman brought forth, which all the promises are unto, yea and Amen
in Christ, which Seed is but one, which Seed is Christ, which Seed will not bow
and worship the Devil for all the glory of the World that overcome and gets the
Victory; so all be watchful when Temptations come, keep low and still in
patience, waiting upon the Lord, that he may be feared and honored, who will
provide a way to escape: So (dear and tender ones) in the pure Light of God
wait, and there you will grow in Discerning, and in Wisdom, and in the pure
Fear, and there Love will be increased in you, and among you, and the Unity of
the Spirit will be known; so all walking in the Siprit, you will not fulfill the
lusts of the Flesh. Dear hearts, we write to you to stir up your pure minds by
way of Remembrance; little Children, keep your selves from Idols, the mighty
God of Life keep and preserve you in the pure Life of God, Farewell. -- Your
Friends in the Everlasting Unchangable bond of Love and Peace; Brethren and
Companions to all who are in Tribulation in the Kingdom of Patience of Jesus
Christ.

John Audland, John Camm.

Dear and Loving Friends;
IN that Unchangeable, Eternal, Everlasting Love of our Father, we salute you,
even with the Love wherewith we are loved of our Father, that Love flows out
unto that of God in every one of you, without respect of Persons; for you are
all near and dear unto us, as you abide in that which does convince you, but
turning from that by which your Hearts and Minds are knit together, and brought
into the Unity, then your Unity is broken, and the bond of Peace and Love is
broken, and that does make a Rent and Breach amongst you, for turning from the
pure Eternal Light of God, which leads up to the Door into the Sheepfold, and
so would lead you into the Kingdom of God, where there is Rest, Joy and Peace
for evermore; but your Minds turning from this, you turn into the Carnal, and
into the Visible, and so Self gets up, and from that Nature proceeds
Self-separation, and here the haughty Nature gets up, and Self-exaltation, and
then the just suffer, and by that nature the pure is crucified and slain, and
then Carelessness and Sloathfulness, and Self-love abounds, which is to be
judged and condemned by the Light, and by the Life: And from the Life of God do
I declare against all that nature in every one, that by the Light of God, which
you have all received a measure of, you may come to see that nature in every
one of your selves, which disunites and separates you from your head, that by
the Light that Nature may be discerned, and so judged and condemned by the
Light: but every one come to know Judgment set up in your selves, and Self in
the particular judged, that Judgment may be set up in the Earth, that the
Inhabitants thereof may learn Righteousness; and so Judgment being puffed upon
the Rebellious, and the Uncircumcised in your particulars; and you walking and
dwelling in the Life, according to your measure, then may you boldly Reprove
others, who walk not according to their measures; for the Beam being cast out
of your own, you will see perfectly to pull the Mote out of your Brother's Eye;
but it must be first out of your own, or else you are Hypocrites. And so I
charge you all, in the presence of the Lord, every one to keep your own
Habitations, and to be faithful to your measure which you received of God, you
will come to grow and increase in the increase of God, and abiding in the Vine
you will become fruitful, and you will become beautiful, and comely, sweet,
precious and lovely in the Eyes of him who has loved you with exceeding great
Love, and with Loving Kindness has he drawn you in measure out of the Filthy
Polutions, and Heathenish Ways and Worships of the World, and has opened your
Eyes, and let you see all things openly under the Sun; and by the pure eternal
Light which has shined into you, by it you will see the pure Path, and holy
Way which leads up to God, the Father of Lights. Oh, dear Hearts, prize the
Eternal Love of God unto you, and walk answerable to that love which is
manifested in every one of you, for it is great and rich Love; oh the abundance
of his Love and free Grace, let not his Benefits slip out of your Minds: Oh,
what manner of Love is this, that we should be called the Sons and Children of
the Most High! therefore does not the World know us. Dear Hearts, walk in the
pure eternal Love and Light of God, that so you may come to the pure Life of
God, to follow the Captain of your Salvation, who was made perfect through
Sufferings, that you may endure the Cross, despise the Shame, and so come to
partake of the Immortal Crown of Glory which never fades away: Oh, my dear
Ones, you are written in my Heart, and we cannot forget you; yea, truly we are
often with you in the pure eternal Love and Life, and our Love runs out unto
you, and our Life is with you, and our rejoicing will be to behold your Faces,
and to find you walking up orderly in your measure, that when we see your Faces
in the outward, we may see you beautiful, comely, fresh and green, casting a
goodly Smell to all that come nigh you, that so you may preach to the Heathen
by your pure, holy and godly Conversation, letting your Light so shine forth in
your Lives, that all who see your Conversation who are Enemies to the Truth,
may have their Mouths stopped, and be ashamed and confounded, and be made to
confess that the Lord is with you.

So (my dear Hearts) all as one who abide in that which is one, which unites,
and knits your Hearts together, and gathers up into it self, in that we are
with you present, in that dwell, and there you will be preserved, kept safe
from your Enemies, and the eternal everlasting Love of God overshadow you, and
keep you in the pure power of the Lord over all the World to reign.

And so we cease to write, but not to love you, and to pray for you, but remain
your Friends in the unchangeable Love of God,

John Camm, John Audland.

Dear and loving Friends;
IN the Eternal Fountain of Love we Salute you all, even with the same Love,
wherewith our Father has loved us, the same flows out to you all, to that
which is of God in you, to that we spoke, and to that we are made manifest,
even to that of God in all your Conscinces, read in that, and it will witness
our love unto you all: Dear Hearts, dear and precious you are unto us, as you
abide in the pure Light of Jesus Christ which he has enlightened you withal, in
that we have Union with you, and in that you will see our dear love to you all,
even such love as the World knows not, for it far exceeds the Love of Women:
Oh, we cannot forget you, for you are our Epistles, written in our Hearts: for
we see you daily, and our Desires to the Lord are for you, that you may stand
in his Counsel, and in his Will, and in the daily Cross, which will crucify
you to the world, and the world to you, and will make a separation in you, and
separate you from the world, and draw yon out of it: For your Hearts being in
the world, you are Enemies to God, and Strangers to the Covenant of Grace; for
the Promise is not to that which flees the Cross, but to that which stands in
the daily Cross; for all the Promises of God are Yea and Amen, to the Seed; but
there is no Promise to that which turns away from the pure into the carnal
(from the Light by which you may come to witness your Redemption from the
world) into the Earth, where the Curss is, and where the Woe is; for the Woe is
to them that do inhabit the Earth, and so all whose hearts are in the Earth,
and in the Fall, and turned away from the pure Light are under the woes, and
under the curse, and in the invention, and in the witch craft, and sorcery; and
here are all they who have received the Light which is pure, and have turned
from it into the carnal; here is the Dog, and the Swine which was washed which
is turned to the Vomit, and to wallowing in the mire, and they who turn from
the pure may which leads to Life turned into Cain's way, and Balaam's way, and
Judas's way, but we hope better things of you, and such as accompany Salvation,
for we are persuaded that you will not put your hands to the Plow, and look
back, for then you are not fit for the Kingdom, remember Lot's Wife, and hold
fast that which you have received, and walk in that which is made manifest, and
dwell in that which judges and condemns for sin, for that leads out of Sin into
the pure Paths of Righteousness, and so the man of Sin is destroyed, and the
powers of Darkness removed, the Captive redeemed, and the Prisoner set free and
the Cords of iniquity cut, and the Bonds broken, and that which is imprisoned
and lead captive, is brought into Captivity, and judged and condemned by the
Light: so dwelling in the Light the righteous come to flourish, and the pure
come to grow, and the Dead come to live, for the Dead shall hear the Voice of
the Son of God, and he that hears shall Live, and so Life comes to death, and
so the one lives in the death of the other, for there is no reconciling of
them, for the one lives in the death of the other, there is no communion
between Light and Darkness, betwixt Christ and Belial, and therefore read
within, and see who is Head, and who rules, and has Dominion, and let the
Light of God search and try you; that so no Thief nor Enemy to your Souls may
lodge within you, but by the Light you may be judged, and condemned: Dear
Hearts we are with you in the pure Life, and our Bowels are turned within us
for you. Yesterday, we were with you, and broken, and melted in remembrance of
you, it was the first Day of the week when we were at the Meeting in Chester,
our loves run out to you, and the remembrance of you melted us, and we think we
saw it melting and breaking you; Oh! the powerful God of Life throw down all
his Enemies in you, that he himself may rule and reign in you, that
Righteousness may run down as a stream, and Eqnity as a mighty River, that that
we might see the fruit of our Labors, and the disires of our Souls answered,
which is the Freedom of the Righteous Seed in every one of you, that so the
Eternal God of Power my be honored, and he alone glorified, and your Souls
edified and nourished, which is the defire of us who truly love you in the
Eternal Love of God. Dear Friends, we hope we need not exhort you to meet
together, we think you do meet often in the Fear of the Lord, and there to wait
upon him in the Light, and there you will find the Power of the Lord manifested
to you, and in you, to the throwing down of strong holds of Sin and Iniquity,
and to Kill and Crucify the old nature, and to raise up the pure Eternal Life
in you, for by the Power of the Lord the dead are raised to Life; and so
waiting every one in your Measure, in Faithfulness, and Patience, and in the
Godly Fear, you will come to sees e fresh Springs opened, and the pure Eternal
Life made manifest in you, and so you will see the Rocks rent, and the Earth
removed out of its place, and the Mountains melted, and the tall Cedars bowed
down, and all that is exalted laid low, and the Lord alone exalted in you in
that Day: (Dear Hearts) let us hear from you with what speed you can, and the
Eternal and everlasting rich Love of our Father overshadow you, and keep you in
the hour of Temptation, that you may stand steadfast and unmovable in the
Eternal Strength, and Power of the Lord, and in his Light to keep, that you may
see the Tempter and his Temptations, and so you may escape them: So that the
mighty Power of the Eternal only Wise God, keep and preserve you all, and give
you Dominion of, and over all the Beasts of the Field, and Fowls of the Air,
that you may reign above the World, and tread upon it, to his own everlasting
Praise and Glory, Amen.

Farewell, (Dear Hearts) our Life is with you, and as you grow into the Life you
are near and dear unto us, for the Life is but one; so we cease to writ, but
still we are with you, (our Dear Ones) our Love is great unto you, you may read
it in the Light, and feel it in the Life: Farewell, yours in the unchangeable
Love. Salute us to all our Friends.

John Camm, John Audland.

FRiends of God and Brethren, a Warning to you all, from the Lord God and Jesus
Christ, that all what you speak, it may be plain, in plainness of speech,
according to that of God in you, the Light, Christ, that all your words be
words of Life, to the Life, and death to the death, where it reigns above the
Light; and that all the words which are spoken may be in plainness of speech,
and with the Light, and in it, that the Light of Christ in all Consciences,
which he has enlightened every one withal, may witness the Words to be Words of
Life; so that dwelling in the Light, to that which shall condemn all the World,
you may be made manifest, the Light in all Consciences, which shall be their
Condemnation; you that dwell in the Light, walk in the Light, as Children of
the Light, use plainness of Speech and plain Words, single Words in the single
Life, pure Words from the pure Life, seasoned Words, seasoned with Grace and
Savoury, seasoned with the Grace of God, which t^acheth to deny all Ungodliness
and worldly Lusts; who live in Ungodliness and worldly Lusts turn this Grace of
God into Wantonness, which are light and vain, whose Words are not savoury, and
seasoned with Grace, whose Words edify not, upon whom God will render Vengence
in Flames of Fire, which shall be separated from his Presence and his Angels:
Therefore Friends, plainness of Speech all dwell in, which dwelling in the
Light, it will bring you into Plainness, and few Words, to live in the Life
that gave forth the Scriptures, and to grow up in the Life which gave forth the
Scriptures, before the Scriptures were given forth, and in it you will see
their Conditions that dwelt in the Life, and gave forth the Scriptures; and
with this Light you will see their conditions which was testified, who was out
of the Life with them, who was out of the Life with them, who dwelt in the
Light; and with it all comes to be seen, and read, and understood, which was
given forth with the Life, and from the Life, and all come to be known in
plainness, and with Plainness it is spoken forth again, which came not by the
will of man; for no Prophecy of the Scriptures came by the will of man, all
the Prophesies of it were out of the will of man, and they witnessed and
Prophesied of Christ, who was born not by the will man, which was supposed to
be the Son of Joseph, which was the Son of God; and all the Apostles were made
Ministers by the Will of God, and not by man, nor of man, but by the Will of
God; and so then they witnessed Christ, who were not born by the will of man,
which were made Ministers not by the will of man, and they witnessed that no
Prophecy of the Scripture in old time came by the will of man, neither was it
of any private Interpretation, but holy men of God did speak as they were moved
by the Holy Ghost; the Holy moved, which is but one; and all who be in their
own will, and have the Scriptures, and make a Profession of it, which came not
by the will of man, are in the Blasphemy and Persumption, the Unpardonable Sin,
and with the Light of Christ, which has enlightened every one that comes into
the World, with that Light shall they be condemned, that hate it, and live in
your own wills; and so the Unity is in that which condemns the World, and all
that live in their own wills, which come not by the will of man; for they who
live in their own wills, and make a Profession of the Scriptures, there are the
Sects and Opinions, and there is no Unity, and they have not Unity among the
Sects, but only in nature a Oneness, but in their meaning they have not Unity,
in their meaning in the Letter, yet one in Nature that which comes not by the
will of man, but is contrary to his will, and contrary to all the World, and
overturns them, which is according to that of God in all Consciences, in that
we have Unity, which shall Testify against every man's Face, when he acts
contrary to it, and with it he shall be judged and condemned in his own
Knowledge and Understanding; And you all walking in the Light it will bring you
all to Plainness, and Pureness, and Singleness of Speech, which will make the
deceit to tumble, and the mystery of iniquity to shake, which lodges in the
Temple of God, and sits there where it ought not, and is exalted above that
which is called God; now with the Brightness of his coming, he is discovered,
and with the Breath of his Mouth he is consumed: so dwelling all in the eternal
Power of God, and the pure Light of God, that you may be a terror to all
Evildoers, and to all Ungodliness, and to all who act in unrighteousness, and
live in Uncleanness, and so you will come to use plain Words, and plainness of
Speech to them all, no Flattering shall dwell, no Inchanter, no Witch shall
live, no Hypocrisy shall stand before the Judgment of God, but shall be as the
Chaff, and shall be driven to and fro, that the Scriptures may be fulfilled
upon them; and all that are out of the plainness, with the Light that Christ
has enlightened them withal, with that eternal Light shall they be condemned
and confounded in time; for this Light is out of time, though it be as in time,
which lets Men and Women see all their actings done in time, and hating this
Light is their condemnation, and all loving this Light, and walking in it, you
come to walk in that which is the World's Condemnation, and shall condemn the
World from God, from Christ, and all who are of God; To you all this is the
Word of God, which is against all men's wills, that in that which is contrary to
the wills, you may all wait and walk, for that will lead you from all your
thoughts and desires, and with it you shall have them all judged, there wait
and you will witness the Birth born, not by the will of man, and this is Heir
of another World, and Heir of the certain Riches, which is manifest to that of
God in all Consciences; so to you all to use plain words, and plainness of
Speech; so to you all this is a Warning from the Lord, who are in the Light,
and love the Light which Christ has enlightened you withal, which is contrary
to your wills, and to all men's wills, that with it you may use plainness of
Speech to all, to be made manifest to that which they hate, which is their
condemnation, and shall condemn the World from God, from Christ, and all who
are of God: To you all this the Word of God, which is against all men's wills,
that in that which is contrary to your wills, you may all wait and walk, for
that will lead you from all your thoughts and desires.

And you all in the Light which Christ has enlightened you withal abide, so in
him you will abide in Christ, who is the Vine, and every one will come to
witness the Branch abiding in the Vine, and sitting under the Vine. So to you
all this is the Word of the Lord, which is not no go among the World, which
hate the Light, but to Friends, that you may come to use plainness of Speech;
this was I moved of the Lord to send out amongst you, as a Message, to all
Plants of the Lord; if you spoke any thing contrary to the Light which Christ
has enlightened you withal, with the Light you are to be condemned; and if you
do not speak when you are moved, and live in the Light, and walk in the Light,
with the Light you are to be condemned, and if you do speak Experiences, and
not dwell in the Light, but in Hypocrisy, and Presumption, and Envy, without
the Fear of God, thou art to be thrown down, and with the Light condemned from
God, and woe upon thy Head from God and Christ proceeds, thou Hypocrite, art
to be thrust out with the Light, and judged with the Light, and all who are in
the Life, and with the Life. Therefore in the Light dwell, and walk every one
in particular, then you will all have Unity one with another, and grow up to be
Trees of Righteousness the Planting of the Lord.

We are not of many Religions which is no true Religion; but of one Religion,
which is the true Religion, which has not been by us taken on by Imitation,
but gathered into it by the Eternal Spirit, and it planted in us by the same
Spirit; And we are not known, nor can be by any thing, but by that which we
live in, which was in the beginning, which is not subject unto time, but which
comprehends all time, and that which has its rize in Time. So if any would us
know, and our Principles, they must come to live in the same, for none knows us
but who are with us in the Unity, in that which was before Time, which neither
had Beginning, nor shall have End, in that we comprehend all Sects and
Opinions, and see their Rice and Foundation; And from the Life which was before
they were, we declare against them all, for by it, out of them all, we are come
into that which was before their Foundation, and by it we judge their
Foundation, and their Actions, acted by the Principles which with God has not
unity, which the Principle of God has victory and dominion over. So he that
would us know, and our Religion, must come out of many things into one, to
abide in it, and walk in it only; and as he knows God, he will know us, who are
of him; and as the man of Sin is cast out in him, which makes a separation, so
will he have Unity and Fellowship with God, and with us, in that unto which the
will of man is contrary, and does oppose (which Will) must be cast out, for it
cannot inherit or enter, but keeps in the Enmity against the Seed of God, which
is opposed, where the Head of the Serpent is not bruised, but where the
Serpents Head is bruised by the Seed of the Woman, the Enmity is slain, and the
Seed raised, and the Seed is the Head, and the Head is exalted; and he that
witnesses this has Unity with us, and in it we rejoice together, and our Joy
no man can take from us, for he reigns which has overcome the world, and gives
the Victory over the World, by which Spirit we bear witness against the World,
that the Deeds thereof are Evil; Therefore are we hated and reproached by the
World, but this is our Riches.

John Audland, John Camm.

Some Particulars concerning the Law, sent to Oliver Cromwell,
Who is Chief Ruler in these Nations, according to man: And to the Counselors
who sit in Counsel with him; wherein is plainly laid down the difference
betwixt the righteous Law of God, and those Laws which are made and acted in
the will of man; and how they who make and act those Laws, which are according
to the will of man, and contrary to the Law of God, are found opposing the
righteous Law of God, and so are Transgressors of that Law which is according
to that in the Conscience.
With a Word of Discovery of the cruel Oppression of the Priests, who call
themselves Ministers of Christ, and the Gospel, which gives freedom; but they
are found to be Opposers, and out of the Life that gave forth the Scriptures,
so with it judged, which is according to the Law of God, which gives freedom to
the Righteous Seed, but have cleared themselves from Christ, who disobey his
Doctrine, and sue men at the Law, and take treble damages, contrary to the
Scriptures.
With a Word of Exhortation to the Rulers and Magistrates, to own the Righteous
Law of God, which will cut down Sin, and cleanse the Land of Evildoers, and
discover the Deceivers of the People.
FRiend, thou say, That in thy Conscience tells thee, that there is no Law
that is extant bywhich the People of God are kept in bondage: To thee I did
allege the Act of Mary, which (I say) is contrary to that in the Conscience,
which is of God; for her Law did cause the Righteous to suffer, which guarded
the Jesuits, which guard the Priests now; which thou with it would limit the
holy One, and cast the Saints into Holes, and Prisons, and Dungeons, and
countest it just; and some are beat and stockt, and cruelly persecuted, and
then after sent to Prison; see if thy Law here do keep peace or break it, and
give liberty to all the Peace-breakers, and Fighters, and Strikers, for them to
beat, to stock, and after send them to prison, and there the Wicked, the
Fighters, and Strikers rejoice over them, and they can scarce walk in the
Streets; and this Law thou countest just, which prisons the Righteous, and
encourages the Evildoers, which is contrary to the Law of God, which is
according to that in the Conscience, and which is contrary to Paul the Minister
of Christ, who said, If any thing be revealed to him that stanas by, let the
first hold his peace; And if Paul were here again to go up and down the
Synagogues, and dispute with them to bring them off the figures and shadows, to
bring them up to the substance, Queen Mary's Act would take hold of him; and he
was made manifest to the Consciences of all; and here thy Act is contrary to
that in the Conscience, which would limit the Spirit of the Lord.

And thy Act (as Queen Mary's) would take hold upon Amos, and the rest of the
Prophets, and Christ, who was supposed to be the Carpenter's Son, who went up
and down in the Synagogues, and was hated of the Priests, and when he spoke in
the Synagogues, they were full of fury; and there again thy Law is contrary to
that of God in the Conscience, and except thou do repent, God will remove thy
Kingdom; and if thy Laws were upon them that act contrary to that in the
Conscience, Fighters, Envious, Quarrellers, Drunkards, Murderers, and all
Unrighteous, such Laws we own, this is wholesome and good, but that which would
limit the holy One, and the Just we cannot own.

Secondly; There is another Law which is acted contrary to that in the
Conscience, to put men to death for Cattle or Money, when they were (according
to the Law of God) to make restitution, if not, they were to be sold for their
Theft, and there they had space to repent, for that in the Conscience will let
them see what they have done.

Thirdly; And another thing is acted in the Nation, contrary to the Light of
Christ in the Conscience; men that cannot Swear, but abide in the Doctrine of
Christ, who says, Swear not at all, for what is more then Yea and Nay is evil:
And the Apostle said, My Brethren, Swear not at all, lest you fall into
Condemnation; And some that cannot Swear, such are Fined and Prisoned, and many
suffer now, because they cannot Swear, and so you would bring them into
condemnation, and into the evil, contrary to the Doctrine of Christ*

Fourthly; another Law is acted contrary to that of God in the Conscience, that
men are forced to pay Priests Tithes, and so deny Christ come in the Flesh- and
if they will not pay Priests Tithes, they sue them at the Law, or Imprison
them, and that Law requires treble damages, and this Law, is Oppression,
contrary to that of God in the Conscience, neither is there honesty in it; I
charge it upon you, for Moses, which had the Law, and gave it forth to the
Priests and People, and the Priests that should receive Tithes, they were to
have a Storehouse to put it in, and it was to be filled with Tithes, but it is
not so with you: and all the Strangers, and the Widows, and the Fatherless were
to come to be filled within the Priests Gates: and this the Priest was to
Minister out of the Storehouse; a Figure of the Everlasting Priest, who
ministers out of the Everlasting Treasury: The Apostle who preached him, said,
the Presthood that received Tithes was changed, and the Law was changed also;
and yet you have a law that if any one do not pay the Priests Tithes, he must
pay treble damages, or lie in Goal, as many lie in Goal now, because they
cannot deny Christ come in the Flesh, pay the Priests Tithes; but they witness
him, and deny the changeable Priesthood which you give Tithes to, but no
Storehouse; who deny Christ come in the Flesh, though you talk of him in
words, but no Storehouse to Fill all the Widows, the Fatherless, and Strangers
in England, that there might be no beggar in England, as there was no beggar to
be in Israel, but be sed within the Priests Gates which receive Tithes: but by
this Law, by which your Priests receive Tithes, you help the Priests to make
many Beggars, which is contrary to the Scriptures, and that of God in the
Conscience both, and by that Law many Righteous ones suffer; all who own Christ
in Life, suffer by your Law, and are oppressed; and all your Laws acted contrary
to that of God in the Conscience; that of God in the Conscience will testify,
and witness against you, and your Laws, and witness the Law of God, which is
according to that in the Conscience, which is perfect, and endures for ever.

You that Swear, deny the Lord Jesus Christ that bought you, and his Doctrine;
and you that compel men to give Tithes, and you that take them, are men that
deny the Lord Jesus Christ come in the Flesh, the substance; you that sue men
at the Law, deny the Lord Jesus Christ, for he says, In all your
communications, let your yea, be yea, and your nay be nay.

And if you had a Law given forth to keep peace upon them that act contrary to
the Light of Christ in their Conscience, and put in just men's Hands, to be
executed; but such are turned forth that art faithful, that are just, and so
here you encourage Evil doers, Fighters, Quarrellers, and Drunkards, that they
that Fear the Lord can scarce pass; to that in all your Consciences I speak,
that with it you may see your selves, and what is acted in the Nation.

There is another thing in the Nation, acted by them in authority, which is
contrary to that of God in the Conscience; with such many have been Fined and
Imprisoned, because they could not respect Persons, for if they did, they were
convinced by that in the Conscience, to be Transgressors of the Righteous Law
of God; and their Judges, Justices and Mayors would force them to Sin against,
and contrary to that of God in the Conscience, in bowing to them with that, and
respect the Persons, which that in the Conscience, which is according to the
Righteous Law of God, says, Thou shall not bow down to any, nor Worship any
but God: and he that respects Persons and would have others to respect Persons,
is convinced by that in the Conscience, to be a Transgressor of the Righteous
Law of God: to that of God in all your Consciences I speak, which lets you see
you should not do so, and yet you do so, and would have others to do so; and
them that do not, ye Persecute, Prison or Fine with great Sums of Money: to the
Light of Christ in all your Consciences I speak, which shall condemn all you
that act contrary to it, and witness me eternally; to that in the conscience I
speak, which respects to man's person: He that receives the Law from God, dwells
in the Light of God, and he does not respect any man's person, nor the Law which
is received from God; and he that does respect persons, this Law goes upon him,
and that in his Conscience, which is according to the Law of God, does convince
him to be a Transgressor of this Law.

And whereas the Priests should have Storehouses, that the Fatherless
Children, and Widows might thither come and be refreshed, that there might be
no Beggar in England, as there was to be no Beggar in Israel; but the Priests
and their Agents in taking treble damages, by virtue of your Law, have made
both Widows and Fatherless to beg by reason of their cruel Oppression, for they
took of one Widow in lieu of her Tithes, 11 s. 4 d. when all her whole Estate,
after her Debts were paid, would not yield to so much, and so left Widow and
Fatherless both to beg or starve; and this is their charity to the poor; and
many more in Westmoreland, Lancashire and Cumberland, who stand in obedience to
the righteous Law made manifest, and witness the substance, and deny Types, and
so cannot put into the Priests Mouths, they make them pay some double damages,
and some treble damages, to the making many poor; for they that depart from
Iniquity are a prey to this Generation; for the Law that is made by the will of
man is made a snare, and a trap to take hold of them, who stand in obedience to
the righteous Law of God, which is according to that of God in the Conscience,
and this other is contrary to the Law of God in the Conscience.

And this was I moved to write to the Heads and Rulers of the Natitions, who
sit in Counsel together, to exhort and charge them to stand in the Counsel of
God, and to mind the righteous Law of God, which is according to that in the
Conscience; and that this Law of yours may be put in Execution, to be executed
by righteous men, who respect no man's person, and then it will take hold upon
the Transgressors: and they who live up in obedience to this Law of God, which
is pure, which endures forever, will own and witness you and your Law, if you
be obedient to this Law of God which is pure, and according to that of God in
every man's Conscience, for this Law is not made for the Righteous, but for the
Transgressor: and if these be owned by you in your lives, you will put it in
execution, and it will take hold upon all Liars, Swearers, Drunkards,
Whore-mongers, Dissemblers, Cheaers, Hypocrites, and Persecutors of those who
obey this Righteous Law of God; and it will take hold upon all Fighters,
Quarrellers, and vain-Contenders, and upon all false Teachers, who pretend
themselves Ministers of Christ, but abide not in the Doctrine of Christ, which
respect men's Persons, but are Antichrists, and deny the Scriptures, in their
lives, but take them to trade withal, and so deceive the people, telling them
they are gifted, and sell them the Letter, and so kill them, for the Letter
kills, and so devour Souls for dishonest gain: the Lord has a Controversy
with them, hold them not up: For if you partake with them in their Sin, you
will partake with them in their Plagues, for their Fruits make them manifest;
for if any in obedience to this Righteous Law, put not into their Mouths, they
prepare War against them, and sue them at Law, or Agents for them, and take
treble damages, as many can witness in these four Northern Countries and so
they oppress the righteous, and none resist them; and now it is come to you who
are over the Nations, and it stands at your door, and if you suffer those
things to be, and count it just, I will visit you for these things says the
Lord: For I bear testimony against them, and my witness is true, that they are
cruel oppressors, greedy devourers, Caterpillars, who have done no good at all,
but kept the People in blindness and ignorance, making them light and vain,
strenghning their hands in iniquity, and shut the Kingdom of Heaven against
men, that if any would return from their evil ways, they would pull them back:
all the Scriptures witness against them, if you will own Scriptures, and that in
your Consciences witnesses against them; for you had experience of them: and
if you hold up that which is contrary to your Conscience, God is greater, and
will condemn you, and cut you down; were not your Promises and Covenants to take
oppression from off the People of God? have you forgotten the days of your
calamity and hardship, when you vowed unto the Lord, and prayed unto him, and
he has preserved you? and were not all your pretenses to take off Oppression?
and now the Power is in your hand, and the Lord has left you without excuse;
for now you have time to pay your Vows unto the Lord, and to take off
oppression, and to take away all those Laws which are contrary to the Law of
God, which is pure; and if ye will not own the Lord in his own work, he will do
it another way, and you shall be cast by, as not worthy, with the rest that
were cast out before you, who were not worthy, and therefore if you will own
the righteous Law of God, which is pure, he will own you, and preserve you; but
if you uphold those Laws which are according to the will of man, and contrary
to the will of God, you shall be as dust before the Wind, the mouth of the Lord
has spoken it: And thus I have cleared my conscience unto you, and that of God
in your consciences shall eternally witness me to be a Lover of your Souls, and
of the righteous Seed of God a well-wisher of the peace of Sion; called by the
World.

J. C.

I Will arise now, says the Lord* and Thresh, and Scatter, and beat to pieces;
now will I arise, says the Lord, and all bonds must be broken asunder, which
are made with the earthly will, and all Churches gathered with the earthly
will, with the Letter, who have not the Life, will be scattered and broken
asunder, that the pure it self may arise which suffers those by bonds, which
the carnal mind makes Laws and Acts; but now will I raise says the Lord, who
is the King, the Lawgiver, and all who have not received the Law from him, but
make Laws with their inventions, must fall, and all their counsel come to
nothing in the end; though they may stand, and have their time a while: and
therefore to that in every one of your Consciences I speak, which is the Light
of Christ, in it wait to guide your minds to God, and it is but one, and it
will call you out of your reasonings, and turn your minds toward God, and deny
all that which does protect and preserve that which is not of God, and condemn
it: and where God is made manifest to reign, for that does protect the just,
and is a terror to the unjust, in your selves and without; so wait all in your
measure on the Light of God within, to guide your minds to God, that ye may
grow as plants to receive the living Water, to nourish you to eternal Life, to
that which is pure in every one of you do I speak, which shall witness me, and
condemn all you that hate it, which if you take heed to it, it will call your
minds out of the World, to forsake the lusts and pleasures of it, and turn your
minds toward God, and let you see that God is near and present, who is
terrible and dreadful to the wicked, in him the Righteous rejoice and are glad,
so wait all for Counsel from God, and God Almighty direct your minds; for all
your Laws which have been made, and acted in that nature from the Light, and
contrary to it, and the Law of God, which is according to the Light of Christ
in your Consciences, all those Laws that have been acted from it, and contrary
to the Light of Christ, have been made with the murderous nature; and with the
Light which Christ has enlightened every one that comes into the World withal,
with this Light they are all to be condemned, and with the perfect Law of God
to be judged, which is according to the Light of Christ in the Conscience,
which Light of Christ owns the Law of God, and which Law of God owns the Light
of Christ in every man's Conscience; and the Light of Christ in every man's
Conscience which is perfect, witnesses the Law of God to be perfect, and
witnesses against all Laws which is contrary to the Light of Christ in every
man's Conscience, and which is contrary to the Law of God, which is according to
that in the Conscience: So to the Light of Christ in all your Consciences I do
speak, that you with it may wait upon God, to receive your Law from God, which
is perfect, and endures for ever; else your Laws which you make in your own
wills, which is not perfect, and does not endure for ever, which the Law of God
does, and that in the Conscience: So with the Light of Christ, all such Laws,
Lawgivers and Lawmakers, are to be condemned with the Light of Christ, which
does endure for ever: and the Law of God, which is perfect and does endure for
ever, all such are judged with it, which are contrary to it: So this is the
Word of God to you, and Warning to you all.

They that be in the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, do not respect Persons,
they that be out of the Faith of our Lord Jesus, do respect Persons, though
they may profess him. and then the Life makes the difference, as it is manifest
now in England, who be in the Faith, who be out of the Faith; and they that be
in the perfect Law of God, according to the Light of Christ in the Conscience
do not respect Persons; for he that does respect Persons is convinced by the
Light of Christ in the Conscience, to be a Trasgressor of the Law of God; so
that they that do respect Persons, do walk contrary to that in the Conscience,
and the Law of God, and are convinced by the Light of Christ in the Conscience,
and to be Transgressors: and this is for all the Powers on Earth; take Warning,
that with the Light of Christ you may see what you act, and what you acted
from, contrary to this Light, you are to be condemned by it: all ye that
^espect Persons, walk contrary to the Law of God, and to the Faith: There is
the difference, the one lives in the Light of Christ, which witnesses the Law
of God, which is perfect, and the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, which none of
these that do live here do respect Persons: now all those that do profess the
Law of God, and Faith, and respect Persons, are out of it; and here it is the
Life that makes the difference, and in it is the Unity.

J. C.

TO the Heads and General of this Land, to stand in the Counsel of God that you
may be directed by his Wisdom which orders all things, for by it all things
were made, and if you make a Law* with your own wills, over that in the
Consciences of men, that God will throw down you and your Laws: For that which
exercises the Conscience, is the pure Light of God, which leads up to God, out
of all Filthiness, and Uncleanness, and Corruption, which the Law of God takes
hold upon; he, or them that act contrary to a pure Conscience: let every Soul
be subject to the higher Powers, for there is no Power but of God, and the
Powers that be are ordained of God, for Conscience sake; now if a Law be made
over the Conscience that is pure, that Law is against God, and many for keeping
their Conscience clean, did suffer death: as God has given to every one a
Light, and a measure to profit withal, mind every one that which is of God in
you, to teach you to walk to God before him: and as it teaches you, and
enlightens your understandings, it will teach how to direct others, and so to
judge of things eternal, so far as that is born up in your understandings,
which is eternal, and as every one has a measure, so every one to improve his
Talent, and not limit God to learned men, as has long been, which have learned
but their natural Languages, so their original grounds are external, their
Word and Light is external, and their Preaching and Gift is external, and they
go to you Magistrates who have an external Law, to uphold them in their
external Ministry, for your Law does alter and change, which is external: now
that which is external, with it to judge things eternal, that cannot be but to
limit God, for he that has the first gift of God, has that which is perfect,
and that which is perfect is eternal, and such have a descerning to know the
gift of God, from the gift of man; and who are sent to Preach the Everlasting
Gospel, has that which is eternal, that which is everlasting has no end: and
he that judges of these things is eternal, that can discern the everlasting
Gospel from words; and the promise was, that the Seed of the Woman should
bruise the Serpents head: now thou that can witness the head of the Serpent
bruised in thee, and the Seed of the Woman Head in thee, which is Christ,
witnesses the Promises of God fulfilled in thee, which is the glad Tidings to
the Soul, and the Soul come out of death: and here is Christ Jesus revealed
within, and this Ministry is not of man, nor by man, but by the Will of God,
which the Will of man knows not; For the natural man knows not the things of
God: Now every man in his first birth and state may see himself but natural,
and not able to judge of the things of God which are eternal, but the Spiritual
man judges all things, yea, the deep things of God, but this is the Second
birth the new man* therefore all Friends take heed of judging with evil
thoughts, that mind that respects Persons judges with evil thoughts; and it is
the carnal part within, who is not of the Faith; but who is of the Faith of our
Lord Jesus Christ, is without respect of Persons; and therefore as God has
given you a measure of a Light within, let that guide your minds, and keep you
in the Fear of the Lord, and if you love that Light and walk in it, there is no
occasion of stumbling; and if you hate that Light, then you stumble at noonday,
and there is your condemnation; but loving this Light, and bringing your works
to this Light; so far as this Light has judged you in particular, so far you
may judge in general; for that Judge is but one, and waiting in that Light
which keeps you in the Fear of the Lord, waiting upon the Lord, to be made
partakers of the precious Faith, for the Mystery of Faith is held in a pure
Conscience, and walking in this Light* it enlightens your Consciences and
Understandings, walking in it you have Union one with another, for the Light is
but one, which will discover all imagined Lights, fall Worships, Ways and
Churches, and draw you to the Church in God, the Fountain of Light: and their
Faith is but one, which purifieth the Heart, which stands in God, which is a
Mystery held in a pure Conscience, and all who are in it, are one, if they be
ten thousand. God Almighty bless, direct and keep all you that fear him, how to
wait upon and walk before him, and be low, and stand in the Counsel of God,
that whatsoever you do may prosper: but if you go out of the Counsel of God,
Pride, High-mindedness and Oppression, and grinding the Faces of the Poor gets
up: now your minds being guided by that which is pure, it is cross to the
carnal, which oppresses the Poor in particular, if it be not crossed; and out of
it arises Pride, if the pure Spirit of the Lord be not your guide and head:
and if there be no oppression within, then there is none without; for woe is
unto him that is covered but not with the Spirit of the Lord -- Therefore mind
every one what you are covered withal.

John Camm.
In the Year 1655.
The Testimony of George Fox, Concerning our Dear Friends and Brethren John
Audland, and John Camm, who were Convinced of Gods Eternal Truth in 1652. and
Received it, and walked in it, and Preached it.
WHen George Fox came to Furbanck Chapel in Westmoreland, John Audland and
Francis Howgil was preaching there in the morning, but they Preached freely; and
there came Major Boosfield and Col. Benson, and they were free Preachers in
Yorkshire also; And in the Afternoon there was a great gathering of People more
than in the Morning, and so the House would not hold them, and so I was moved
to go upon a Mountain hard by, and the People gathered to the Mountain, and sat
down; though it was then a strange thing to have Meetings any where but in the
Church, so called* because it was holy Ground, they thought People were so
ignorant then: so after Sometime I stood up, and said unto them, That that
Ground was as holy as any other, and that Christ did meet upon a Mountain, and
by the Sea side, and in Houses, and so did his Apostles and Disciples; and
though the Jews had a Temple called holy, in the old Testament and a Worship,
there, yet Christ had ended that Temple and Worship and set up a Worship in
Spirit and Truth, and all the true Believers in Christ, that received him and
his Gospel of Life and Salvation were the true Christians, and their Bodies
were the Temples of God, and Christ, and of the holy Ghost; and many other*
weighty things were opened in that great Assembly, and Many Hundreds were
turned from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan to God, and received
the Grace and Truth that comes by Jesus, and by it received Christ in their
Hearts; and many others precious Truths were opened to them that Day: And
though the Apostles went into the Jews Synagogues and Temple, it was not to
hold them up, but to bring People off the Jews Ways, Traditions and
Ceremonies, to Christ the Substance, for he was come, and is come, the same to
Day, as he was Yeasterday, and so forever, a Leader, a Governor, a Prophet, a
Bishop, a Shepherd, and a Priest, to exercise his Heavenly Offices in his
People, his living Members, his Church which he is the holy Head of, and a King
to Rule in their Hearts, by Faith; and as I said before, many Hundreds received
Gods Truth that Day; and Immediately after that Christ the Son of God was
revealed in them, John Audland and John Camm, and several others, went forth
and Preached Christ, and his Everlasting Gospel; and John Audland went to
New Castle, and there was cast into Prison for Preaching the Lord Jesus Christ
and his Everlasting Gospel, by the Priests and Magistrates there, and hazarded
his Life amongst them; and after sometime he and John Camm went up and down the
North, and at last they went into the South, and to London, and Bristol, and
other parts; and John Audland as far as Plymouth, Preaching Christ and his
Gospel, and Mightily the Lords Power and Spirit did uphold them, and carry them
on over the persecuting Spirit, both of the Priests and Magistrates, who were
in a great Rage against them, that sometimes they were in hazard of their
Lives, but they being supported by the Lords Power that is over all, especially
one time when I came Prisoner out of Cornwall to Bristol, there was one Paul
Gwin, a Baptist, got into some of the Magistrates and Professors about the
Year, 1656. which raised the rude People and the Rabble of the City against the
Meeting; and John Audland, their envy was so great against him, that it was the
Lords Hand and Power that he escaped with his Life; and I coming out of Prison
in Cornwall that Year to Bristol, I came to the Meeting in the afternoon, in an
Orchard, where was a Multitude of People; and this Paul Gwin being there, the
Lords Power did mightily confound him and his Company, that he came there no
more; and John Audland stood up and Declared Gods Truth after I had done; and
so in the Lords Power came over him, and them that would have destroyed him;
and these two Servants and Sons of God spent themselves in the Gospel and
Service of our Lord Jesus Christ, who had received Christ, and he had given
them Power to become the Sons of God, etc. And through their great Services and
Labors in the Lord, they spent themselves, who had their Trials and their
Sufferings by Professors and Profane, and some that proved false Brethren, and
false Apostles; But the Lord gave them Dominion in his eternal Power to the
last, in which they finished their Testimony, and dyed in the Lord, and rest
from their Labors, and are Blessed, and their Works follow them; and as Christ
says, He that Believes, though he were Dead, yet shall he Live; and he that
lives and Believes shall never Dye. Joh. 11. 26. In this Life do they Live,
and are alive in the Spirit, they that come to the Innumerable company of
Angels, and to the Spirits of Just men made perfect know it.

Kingston upon Thames, the 7th of the 4th Month, 1689. George Fox.

The TABLE.
THomas Camm 's Testimony concerning John Camm and John Audland. Ann Camm's
Testimony concerning John Audland and John Camm. Charles Marshall's Testimony
concerning John Camm and John Audland. Charles Marshall's Testimony concerning
the Unity of the Spirit.
J. Camm 's Letter to O. Cromwell, page 1. J. C 's Letter to E. V. etc. p. 11.
John Camm 's Letter to Friends, p. 14. J. C 's Letter to Friends in Bristol, p.
22. John Camm 's Epistle to Friends, p. 29.
To all dear Friends in about Bristol, p. 40. J. C 's and J. A 's Letter to E.
Pyot, p. 49. Dear and loving Friends, etc. p. 50. J. A 's and J. C 's Letter to
Friends, p. 57. Mabel Benson 's Testimony concerning John Camm, her Husband, p.
61.
J. Audland 's Letter to Friends, etc. p. 63. J. Audland 's Epistle to Friends,
p. 70. Dear and well-beloved Friends, p. 76. John Audland 's Letter, etc. p.
84. J. Audland 's Letter to C. Marshall, p. 88. A Letter to J. A. by his Wife,
p. 92. J. A 's Letter to Friends at Bristol, p. 95. J. Auland 's Letter to
Bristol, p. 101. The Schoolmaster Disciplined, etc. p. 107. An Answer to
William Prynne, p. 129. A Reply to W. Prynne, p. 144. John Audland 's Epistle,
etc. p. 155. An Epistle to Friends, p. 163. J. A 's Letter to Friends, p. 170.
J. A 's Letter to a Priest, p. 176. The Suffering Condition of the Servants of
the Lord, etc. p. 184. A Question answered, etc. p. 244. To two or three
Persons in a Family, p. 252.
J. C's to Friends and Brethren, etc. p. 255.
J. A 's and J. C 's to Friends, etc. p. 262. Dear and Loving Friends, etc. p.
271. Dear and Loving Friends, in the, etc. p. 277. Friends of God and Brethren,
etc. p. 285.
Some Particulars concerning the Law, sent to Oliver Cromwell, etc. p. 297.
George Fox 's Testimony concerning John Audland and John Camm. p. 326.
THE END.

