A Practical Treatise CONCERNING Evil THOUGHTS.

Wherein are some things more especially useful for Melancholy Persons.

By WILLIAM CHILCOT, M. A.

Ecce coram tot millibus populorum nudabuntur omnes iniquitates meae, tot
agminibus Angelorum patebunt universa scelera mea; non solum actuum sed etiam
Cogitationum, simulque locutionum! August. Lib. 4. Medit. EXON, Printed by
Samuel Darker, for Charles Yeo, John Pe^rce, and Philip Bishop. School.

To the Inhabitants of the Parishes of St. John, St. George the Martyr, and
Allhollows on the Walls, in the City of Exon.
BRETHREN,
THE following Treatise contains the substance of several Discourses delivered
to you from the Pulpit. The subject of it is undeniably most useful, and of the
greatest importance to our eternal welfare. And the more I consider of it, the
more I am persuaded of its moment. And because it is a matter of difficulty
too, and requires more lasting attention of the Mind, than any Person (how well
soever disposed) can give to Sermons when spoken: I thought fit to publish it,
that so you might have these Directions always before you, which I hope may
somewhat assist you in the performance of so great a Work. And as a testimony
of my great Respect; and an Acknowledgment of the many Obligations I have
received from you, I have dedicated them to you: The rather hoping that you
will the more attentively peruse them, and more seriously and earnestly apply
them. Whatever defects there are in this Treatise; I hope my sincerity will be
a sufficient Protection to the meanness of my Endeavors. All my Aim being to
contribute to your Spiritual, and eternal Advantage: Which is, and shall be
always part of the constant, and earnest Prayer of

Your daily Orator at the Throne of Grace, WILLIAM CHILCOT.
Exon, May 2. School.
A Practical Treatise Concerning Evil Thoughts.
Matthew. 15. 19. For out of the heart proceed evil thoughts --
I Am now entered upon a subject which demands more than ordinary attention of
the Reader. The Government of the Thoughts is what I intend to discourse on
from these words* Which, as it is a matter of the greatest importance, so it is
a thing of no small difficulty. Few Medicines can reach internal wounds, and he
is an Artist indeed that can cure them. But notwithstanding the difficulty, I
have attempted it; and shall lay before you the best method that I can, in
order to the well-governing of the thoughts. Which when attained, is an
Achievement above those of the Greatest Conquerors, and deserves Trophies
beyond the most famous Exploits of Victory that ever were made. The wisest of
men telling us, Prove. 16. 32.
that he that rules his Spirit, is better than he that takes a City. And our
own experience confirms this sentence of the wise man. For there is nothing a
more common Observation than that Great Generals and Captains, who have carried
their Arms through distant Nations, and have done wonders, and even brought the
world into subjection; have yet been slaves to their own selves; tamely yielded
to their own corrupt and wicked hearts, and have not obtained a Conquest over
their own thoughts. They have not avoided soiling their Triumphs with their
Vices, and aspersing their glorious Actions with a wicked life. As if the
Reward of their best Actions were to be their worst, and as if it were a Crown
to their Arms to be dissolved in Lust, and all manner of Impieties: As if the
blessing of success were Riot and Intemperance, and the greatest of sins to be
their Heralds. What can be a greater and truer Reflection than this? which as
it takes off from the Credit and Applause of the Noblest Actions, so it serves
to show us, that it is a more difficult task to conquer our own thoughts than
the most potent Adversaries; to subdue our Hearts and Souls than whole
Battalions; and that man is the greatest enemy to himself: For out of the Heart
proceed evil thoughts -- He that searches the heart, and knows the thoughts,
spoke these words.

The Occasion on which he spoke them shall be the First thing which I shall
consider.

Secondly, I shall show the vast advantage of well-governing our thoughts, in
order to the purposes of Religion in general.

Thirdly, That evil thoughts arise out of the heart, and proceed from thence;
which lays an Obligation on us of restraining them, and how far we are able so
to do.

Fourthly, I shall lay down some General Rules and Directions for our easier
and better performing of this great, and difficult, and absolutely necessary
work, of well-governing the thoughts. And,

Fifthly, I shall select some special kinds of evil thoughts, and shall
discourse more particularly and distinctly of them, and what are the proper
Remedies against them.

CHAP. I.
THE Occasion on which our blessed Lord and Savior spoke these words: For out
of the heart proceed evil thoughts -- was this:

The Scribes and Pharisees, who were the Teachers and Expounders of the Jewish
Law, and whose business it was to give the true meaning of it: Instead of that
did grossly pervert the real design, sense and meaning of it; put erroneous and
false Glosses upon it, and many times imposed their own Traditions upon the
people in the place of it. And yet none pretended a more strict Observance of
the Law than they. Insomuch that we find them in the beginning of this Chapter
with an usual arrogance, demanding of our Savior, V. 2.
Why do thy Disciples transgress the tradition of the Elders? For they wash not
their hands when they eat bread. To which our Savior gives this answer; (viz.)
That they of all men had the least reason to tax his Disciples with the neglect
of such a Ceremony as washing before meat; as if that were such an Invasion
upon Tradition, and a crying sin; when they themselves were guilty of a much
greater, in endeavoring to vacate the Obligation of the fifth Commandment by
falsely supposing a case which would discharge them from honoring and relieving
their Parents; and so making void the Commandment of God by their own
Tradition, with a witness. Mark 7. 11, 12.
Their Corban was an effectual way to cover their Avarice, and they could not
have invented a more colorable pretense to varnish over their most sordid and
unnatural Temper than that was.

And indeed this was their common Method, when they had any Wicked design in
hand, then to seem most Religious: And when they made long Prayers 'twas but
too sure a sign of their devouring Widows Houses. And for this reason our
Blessed Lord does so often and so severely rebuke them; particularly here,
where after he had given them such an Answer as he did; he exposes and lays
them open to the People, and Censures the Vanity and Hypocrisy of all their
Religious pretentions. And directing His Discourse to the People, He assures
them that true Religion Consists not in such outward Washings and Cleansings
and Ceremonious Purgations; but in the Spiritual and inward purification of the
Mind and Soul, the Fountain of all our Thoughts and Imaginations, and of our
Actions the Product of them. That if the Heart be pure and Holy, the Thoughts
and then the Actions will be so too: But if the Heart be foul and wicked, the
issues of it will be Correspondent. When the Spirit of a Man is truly seasoned
with Religion, it will show it self in all the Beauteous and Lovely Fruits of
Righteousness. But when the Principle is vicious and Debauched, the effects
must and will be filthy and abominable. That a Man is not defiled by any
material thing that he either Eats or Drinks, but by his own imaginations,
desires and affections, the things which come out of him. For out of the Heart
proceed evil Thoughts, Murders, Adulteries, Fornications, Thefts,
False-witnesses, Blasphemies, these are the things which defile a Man: But to
eat with unwashen Hands defiles not a Man.

All the Ceremonious part of the Jewish Law aimed at, and terminated in this.
Their Ceremonies were Significations and Types of matters under the Gospel. And
their frequent Washings and Cleansings, were to denote the Spiritual Purifying
of the Heart and Soul.

It Is true, God enjoined them to be observed for a time, the Ignorance and
Nonage of the Jews requiring such a material and gross way of Instruction: But
these were all Abolished and done away, at the coming of the Messiah. When the
Son of God himself became our Divine Instructor and Teacher, and informed
Mankind of the Nature of that Rational and Spiritual Worship, which God did
expect from us, and would be acceptable to him. That it was the Devotion of the
Soul, the Purity of the Heart, the Spirituality of the Thoughts, that Living
Sacrifice alone, that would please God who is an Infinite Spirit, and prepare
us for the Refined joys of Heaven, and the Exalted pleasures of Seraphims: And
Consequently, that the greatest and most Important Duty incumbent on Mankind,
was to Govern the Heart and subdue* the Thoughts. This then, in short, was the
occasion of our Saviors speaking these Words; which did effectually humble
these proud Pharisees, whose whole Religion was mere Pomp and outward Show; and
Consisted merely in broad Phylacteries, an affected Garb, and demure Looks;
while these Gaudy and Painted Sepulchers, were within full of all manner of
rottenness and uncleaness: And at the same time lets us see a Description of
true Religion, and how excellent and noble an Institution that is, which
extends to the inmost recesses of the Soul, and so tends to Refine the very
thoughts of the Heart, and to fit Men for the pure State of Angels. And
therefore, is far above all other Institutions that ever were in the World
before.

CHAP. II.
THE next thing proposed to be Handled is the vast advantage of well governing
of our Thoughts, in order to the purposes of Religion* in General. Now this
advantage is very great and obvious: Every Person must be Convinced that the
most proper and only way for a Man to live well, is to begin at his Heart; to
put his thoughts into a true order and government. For otherwise* there can be
no Uniformity in his Piety. The good Actions that he does are broken and
imperfect; and he is apt every now and then to make fresh Work for Repentance,
by returning to his old sins. But this advantage of the well governing our
Thoughts will be the better seen by some Particulars.

First then, a care of our ever was accomplished, had no greater a beginning.
Of such a quick growth, and spreading Nature is sin, that it Rivals even the
Kingdom of Heaven, which our Lord teleth us, Mat. 13. 31.
is like to a Grain of Mustard Seed, which a Man took and Sowed in his Field.
Which indeed, is the least of all seeds; but when it is grown up [in these
Countries] it is the greatest among Herbs, and becomes a Tree, so that tbe
Birds of the Air come and Lodge in the Branches of it. But the Apostle St.
James, Jam. 1. 13, 14, 15.
Represents it by a Simile of another Nature, comparing the Original and growth
of it to the Formation of an Embryo in the Womb. Let no Man say when he is
tempted, I am tempted of God: For God cannot be tempted with evil, neither
tempts he any Man. But every Man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own
Lust and enticed. Then when his Lust has Conceived, it brings forth sin, and
sin when it is finished brings forth Death. It is Conceived, Bred, Lives, and
Grows in a Man, till at last it domineers in him, and Reigns in his Mortal
Body. Romans 6. 12.
And therefore it is absolutely necessary, that we govern and manage our
Thoughts, without which it will be impossible that we should avoid falling into
actual sins, even the greatest. That we resist the beginings, the very first
Emergencies of Evil, if we hope to avoid the last Degrees of it.

It is manifest folly to Imagine that we can indulge evil Thoughts, without
being in danger of commtting actual sins, or that speculation and practice are
things so vastly distant from each other. This is so far from being true, that
there can be nothing more certain than the contrary. If we would preserve our
selves from falling into actual sins, we muft govern and suppress our Thoughts.
And if we would have our Life pure and unspotted, the Heart must be kept in
entire subjection. If we would not be plunged into the guilt of presumptuous
sins, we must be sure to resist the first motions of evil, all unlawful
Thoughts. For no man is always in the same temper, his Resolution is not ever
the same as it may be now, or at another time. His Passions are Fluctuating;
sometimes there is (as it may be called) a Springtide of them. And a Man at
some seasons is more receptive of evil impressions, more yielding and easy to
be tempted, than at others. And though an evil Thought may not so strongly move
him at one time, yet it may at another. And every encouragement of it, adds to
the falseness and treachery of his own deceitful and wicked heart, which will
betray him whenever an opportunity offers. And therefore he is necessitated to
be nicely careful over his thoughts, if he would not fall into actual sins.

Let us think as boldly and confidently of our selves as we please; let us rest
never so much upon our own strength; it is our weakness. It Is not our presuming
thoughts of our selves that will make us invincible. Nay, there are none sooner
overcome and thrown down than such as conceit great and mighty things of
themselves. The shameful denial of the warm and boasting Apostle, Mat. 26. 70,
72, 74.
should be sufficient to convince us that the best of men are not above that
advice, (1 Cor. 10. 12.) Wherefore let him that thinks he stands, take heed
lest he fall. If we do not keep a strict watch, and a careful hand over our
thoughts, they will inevitably betray us when an opportunity serves, and make
most furious assaults upon us, when we are least aware of it. We can no more
restrain them when we please (whatever we think) we can no more stop them from
breaking out, than we can smother a raging Flame, or chain a foaming Billow.
And therefore whosoever he be that allows his thoughts an extravagant liberty,
he is much mistaken if he thinks that he is sure to stop there.

make Religion degenerate into the service of brute beasts. For wherein does
man differ from them but in his Reason and Thought? and that he is capable of
knowing God; of being ravished with his Excellencies and Perfections, and
encouraged by his suitable Rewards, and taking delight in the glorious
Communications of himself to his Soul, and serving him with his whole heart,
and being united to him by a life of thought? Upon which consideration it must
needs follow, that the Great God is so far from disregarding our thoughts, that
he has a principal respect to them. And tho it should chance that they should
never break out into Actions, and Gross Practices, yet God looks to the inward
parts; is a narrow observer, and searcher of the thoughts: is pleased when his
Throne is established in the Soul, and his Dominion and Empire over all its
Thoughts and imaginations; and abhors and abandons an unclean, wicked, or
Rebellious Heart. To him all the Pomp of Religion and splendour of outward
Performances is without it detestable. Isa. 1. 11.
The Soul is the Seat of Religion; As for the Parts and Members of our Bodies,
they are entirely at the Command of the Mind. The Understanding and Will are
their Despotick Rulers. And as the Heart and the Thoughts are disposed, so is
the Practice and Conversation; and therefore, them the Almighty principally
regards. As a Man can never testify the truth of his Love to God, or evidence
the Sincerity of his Soul, without having a special regard to the well
Governing of his Thoughts: So without it, Damnation may justly be his Portion,
tho the Plague break not out in the Botches and Ulcers of a profligate
Conversation, tho the Pollution be concealed and hidden. Indeed if we are so
profane as to think of God as a Man, and esteem Him to be such an one as our
selves: If His Eye could not penetrate any deeper than ours, but were fallible
and weak; If he could not see into our Breasts, and discover the Secrets of our
Hearts: Then there might be some reason for us to imagine that He did not
regard our Thoughts, so our visible behavior were smooth and untainted. But
since He is an All-seeing and an All-knowing God, and professedly declares
himself such in the Sacred Scriptures: Psalm. 139.
The reason of Man cannot submit to such an idle fancy as this, viz. that He
has no respect to a Man's Thoughts; but on the contrary, must believe, that He
has an especial Eye to them, and will assuredly call us to an Account for them
at the Day of Judgment.

For tho our Savior's Discourse, (Mat. 12. 36.) extends only to every idle
word, yet in the very Verse before he shows that the Heart is principally
regarded, and therefore to be observed by our selves. And more fully and
clearly in his divine Sermon on the Mount, (Mat. 5. 20.) For I say unto you,
that except your Righteousness shall exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes
and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Ye have
heard that it was said by them of old time, thou shall not kill; and whosoever
shall kill shall be in danger of the Judgment: But I say unto you, that
whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause, shall be in danger of the
Judgment. And v. 27. Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, thou
shall not commit Adultery; but I say unto you, that whosoever looks on a
woman to lust after her, has committed Adultery already with her in his heart.
From all which it plainly appears, that if a man could indulge himself in all
manner of Licentious thoughts without any further danger, yet that (God knows)
is evil sufficient, because the thoughts of the Heart are principally regarded
by Almighty God. But indeed it is hardly possible to imagine how any person
that is careless of his heart, should be otherwise of his Life* or how he that
is vain, filthy, or any way Vicious in his Imaginations, can be pure and holy,
sober and Religious in his Conversation and Practice. Upon both which accounts
we see the vast Advantage that we shall iufallibly reap by being diligent and
careful in the well-governing of our thoughts. But,

Thirdly, That which will great advantage of well-governing our thoughts, is
this, Viz. That we shall ever be in a preparation for the best and most weighty
Duties by this means. We shall not only be able to resist and repel the fury of
temptations, but be ready for the performance of every Duty. These men that
have not inured themselves to an habit of Thought, and constantly exercised a
strict regimen over the motions of their own Hearts, will require a great deal
of time to recollect and order their Thoughts, and reduce them into a proper
Frame and Posture. These that carelessly give their Minds a loose, as soon as
any solemn and weighty Duty is over, and suffer their Thoughts to return to the
old Subject of the World, or any other of their Vanities. The same difficulty
will attend them to bring their Thoughts into a due Frame again which did at
first. So that they will thereby be mightily hindered in their advances in
Religion. Their progress in Holiness will be much retarded. They labor in a
Circle. Or at best they will move but slowly on, in the way to Heaven, in
comparison of these that keep a constant and strict Government over their
Thoughts. These latter will be able always to say with the Psalmist O God my
Heart is ready, Psalm. 108. 1.
my Heart is ready. And what an happy and desirable temper of Soul is this?
What Spiritual comforts and benefits do these enjoy, which others for want of a
due care, and watchfulness deprive themselves of? These only want an
opportunity of serving God and performing Holy Duties: Others want a due Temper
and Disposition when they have an opportunity. While the Thoughts of others are
just fluttering above the Ground, theirs are in the Third Heaven. While they
are tuning their Souls and putting them in Frame, these are joining in
Hallelujahs with the Angels. In a Word, these who have attained to this happy
Government of their Thoughts may be resembled to the Wise Virgins who had Mat.
25. 1.
their Lamps burning, and entered in with the Bridegroom to the Marriage,
whilst the Foolish Virgins were but trimming of theirs; so great is the
advantage which they have above other Christians.

Fourthly, The advantage of viz. Because nothing so much conduces to quiet the
Thoughts, and Compose the Mind, as this does. The greatest part of our trouble
and perturbation proceeds from want of a due care of, and Watchfulness over our
Thoughts. And many times our troubles are so great that they convince us of the
absolute necessity of this Duty; because then we find that nothing else can
give us ease under them, or quiet our Spirits. Now Peace and tranquillity of
mind is a very considerable help to Religion. When a man's Soul and Thoughts
are quiet, he goes smoothly on, Romans 8. 21.
seems to enjoy that glorious liberty of the Sons of God, which the Apostle
speaks of. He has a true relish of the Sweets of Religion; his Soul is dilated
and enlarged, and he is able to run the ways of God's Commandments. Whereas
there is but a slender furtherance in good, but small improvements, when the
thoughts are hurried, the imaginations tumultuary, and the Soul in an unhappy
disorder, by any domineering and contrary Lusts, or any other cause. The Soul
of any Wicked Man is mere (...), disorder and confusion, and all the Powers and
Faculties of his Mind are as it were up in Arms against each other. Isa. 48. ^.
There is no Peace, there cannot be, but all is mis-rule and uproar. And could
we but behold it with our Corporeal Eyes, never such a confused Scene as that
is represented it self to our View. It Is an Emblem of Hell it self. He can
scarcely enjoy the benefit of one Calm and Sedate Thought. Lust, Anger,
Revenge, Ambition, and a thousand more, would every one of them be Kings, and
Usurp Supremacy; and therefore, 1 Pet. 2. 11.
War in, and against the Soul. Reason, who is the Rightful Sovereign, has the
least share in this Polity. Rebellious Slaves Aspire to the Throne, and boldly
prescribe to their Prince, the Fundamental Laws of Nature, are Subverted, and
all become most deplorably Ruinous and Confused. Whereas the Soul of a good
Man, and one that is diligent in the well Governing of his Thoughts, is most
quiet, peaceable, and Composed. All his Thoughts and Faculties are in good
order, and then he is fit for any thing, and can do his Duty with far more ease
than others can. The present Harmony and Peace of his Mind, renders him capable
of effectually minding the things which belong to his everlasting Peace. In a
Word, the Advantage of this happy governing our Thoughts is so great, that we
can hardly perform any thing that is acceptable to God without it; in some
measures. We cannot be easy to our selves, or serviceable to others, we can
neither mind the business of our General, nor Particular Callings as we ought
without it. But he that is so happy as to have attained a Command and dominion
over his Thoughts, does and suffers every thing well. He Acts with Conscience,
suffers with Patience. He Acts with Vigor, suffers with Courage. He does his
Duty with half that difficulty, and endures Afflictions with less disorder than
others do, or can. And having approved himself to God, by an Internal and
Spiritual obedience; by truth in his inward parts; Psalm. 51. 6.
by the Subjection of his very thoughts, to his most pure and holy Law: He
shall at the last and dreadful day of Judgment be able to look up with joy and
comfort to the eternal Judge and Searcher of all hearts. And when the Secrets
of all Mankind shall be disclosed, all the hidden things of darkness, all the
Mysteries of ungodliness: when all the clandestine Impurities of the Hearts and
Souls of the whole World shall be revealed and published; then shall he glory
in his Sincerity, and the purity of his thoughts, and the honesty of his
Intentions. Then shall he avoid that everlasting shame, which shall confound
the Minds, and cover the faces of the wicked and ungodly, the Pharisaical
professors, and the crafty Hypocrites; when all the secret filth of their
hearts, thoughts, and imaginations shall be exposed to the view of Angels and
Men, and thrown back in their Faces. When the gaudy disguise shall be taken
off, and Sinners appear to be what they really are. Which is a most astonishing
consideration, and such as should awaken us all to the utmost diligence and
watchfulness in the well-governing our thoughts.

Having thus briefly shown you the great benefit and advantage of
well-governing our thoughts (which deserved to be much more largely handled;
but that I would not burden your thoughts while I am attempting to instruct you
how to govern them:) I proceed to discourse on the third thing laid down.

CHAP. III.
I Come now in the next place to show, That evil thoughts arise out of the
heart, and proceed from thence; which lays an Obligation on us of restraining
and governing them; and how far we are able so to do. Our Savior here assures
us, that Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts. The heart (i. e. the Soul, of
man is a sink of Corruption and Uncleanness. It Is desperately wicked. It Is
Pandora's box, which lets fly innumerable Plagues and Mischiefs. It Is naturally
the Source of wickedness. And let a Man but look into himself, and survey his
own Heart, he will see the greatest cause to bewail his corruptions and find
that there is nothing more deserves his complaints, and tears, than his own
heart. What a pest? what an Enemy does he always carry about with him? It Is not
an open enemy, but a familiar friend that does him the greatest hurt, and
dishonor. The snake is lurking in his own breast; and while he is looking and
gazing abroad; this most perfidious and deadly foe is a domestic one. His own
heart is the worst of traitors to him, and the most implacable enemy that he
has, cannot do him half that mischief which he receives from himself. It Is
upon this account Saint Paul exclaims, O wretched man that I am! Romans 7. 24.
-- And David, Psalm. 51. 10.
Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me! Create
in me -- It Is a work of omnipotence; and that God alone who made the Worlds,
and raised all things out of nothing, can renew the heart, and purify the Soul
from its natural filth and corruption. It Is the holy Spirit is that Fire that
must purge and refine the drossy mass. Acts 2. 3.
The divine Grace alone can restore health and vigor to the corrupt, depraved,
degenerous heart of Man. And that will never be wanting to our sincere
endeavors. It will operate with our Endeavors, but not without them.
Something is in our power, in order to it; and let us do that, and the rest the
Grace of God will supply. And one of the greatest incentives to make us use our
utmost endeavors, is, the serious consideration of the sinfulness and
corruption of our own heart. It Is necessary therefore that we do not take a
slight and transient view only; but be engaged in a deep and accurate
investigation of our selves. Search every corner of that cell, every recess of
that Labyrinth, with as much earnestness as the Jews did for leven. Exodus 12.
And upon an impartial view, we shall find our Lord's words verified; Out of
the heart proceed all evil thoughts. No good, properly so called, proceeds from
thence, but what is the Effect of the Operations of the Blessed Spirit of God.
It Is not the Natural issue of the Soul, but the Product of His Heavenly
Inspirations, who is continually striving with Man, and endeavoring to
Consecrate and Hallow all his Thoughts and Affections, that so he may be
acceptable to God. Every good Thought, every Religious Flight or Sacred Desire
is stirred up by Him; is His immediate Suggestion, who is Wrestling with the
stubborn and rebellious Powers of our souls, and with our impure imaginations,
to reduce them into their proper order and condition. Or else it is the whisper
of some good Angel commissioned by him, who is willing to perform a Godlike act
of charity to us, that we may raise up our minds to their proper object; and
lends us wings to mount up to the highest Heaven withal. For the heart of Man
naturally is full of evil, and out of it proceed all kind of wicked thoughts,
and vain imaginations. It disembogues such impure steams and contagious
exhalations, as blast and infect the whole World. It Is an Asphalites, a dead
sea, which sends up most noxious vapors. It Is from the heart that all the evil
in the world originally proceeds: and therefore it is a most natural piece of
Advice, that whenever we behold any evil in any part, or instance of the whole
Creation, we presently lay our hand upon our breast, look into our selves, and
examine our own heart. It Is folly to lay the blame upon this and that, and
the other thing, when we should trace the evil to its Fountainhead. It Is most
true that all the vile and sinful thoughts; the basest, and most abominable
lusts proceed from the heart: But when they are bred out of the corruption, and
putrefaction of the heart it self, and when cast into it by the Devil, it is not
so easy to determine. The accursed Enemy of our souls does (no doubt) lay hold
on all opportunities to cast into our minds wicked thoughts; and is very
watchful of the times and seasons, when to corrupt and debauch our souls, and
make them yet more vile than naturally they are. And therefore these wicked
thoughts which many timorous souls imagine to be their own, may be rationally
presumed to be his. There are indeed some marks which probably may serve to
distinguish the Devil's injections, from our own cogitations. As when they are
monstrously profane and blasphemous: when they assault us all of a sudden with
a tempestuous vehemence, filling us with terror and amazement. Or else when
they are such thoughts as contradict all the interests of Humane Nature; as
when a Man thinks of murdering and destroying himself. Such a thought cannot
well be supposed to be the issue of the heart it self, tho very corrupt, but
rather thrown in by the Devil, Who was a murderer from the beginning. But (I
say) as to the greater part of evil thoughts, it is no easy matter to know
which are our own, or which are the Devil's. As for those that are the
immediate result of the heart, the Devil is very quick and ready to improve
them. And for these, which are the Devil's injections, our corrupt hearts are
too willing to comply with them: so that we must think our selves equally
obliged to guard our selves against the one, and the other. And there is
something unquestionably in our power in order to it. We can do something
toward it; unless we will look upon our selves as Machines, and so* destroy
both Reason and Religion at once. I will agree that by an hypochondriack, or
some other disease; or by a long series and habit of sinning, which is a
disease more inveterate, and harder to be cured, that the Economy of the Soul
and Spirits may be so broken and shattered, that the power of thinking, is
become very weak and impaired; and that the lassitudes of the Soul are as great
almost as those of the Body. But yet I think there are few cases, but a man can
do something in order to a regular thinking. Few men are arrived to so great a
degree of either, as to be able to do nothing toward it: tho it must be
granted some can do much more than others. Our blessed Lord, when he was upon
Earth, did not give useless Descriptions of things, and deal with Men otherwise
than rational Creatures. And therefore I cannot but suppose that when he shows
them that out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, 'twas to this end that they
should endeavor to govern and subdue them.

Now we may lay down this as a certain Truth, (viz.) that evil Thoughts
whatsoever they be, do not endanger our Eternal Salvation further than we
comply with them. They are not our Sins further than we indulge them. But
totally to hinder them I think is a thing Impracticable. It is impossible but
that such offenses will come. And I believe the Holiest Men find it so, so long
as they are in a World where there are so many Objects; and in a State where
there are so many Imperfections. But yet when wicked Thoughts arise in our
Minds, we may certainly choose whether we will harbor and embrace them or not.
This we may do, as long as we have any Liberty of Will left: so much is
unquestionably in our power. Though it is confessed they will make frequent
returns upon us, and every now and then with great importunity, present
themselves to us, tho but the last Moment we thrust them out. Like an
importunate Creditor, or an Impertinent Guest, they will obtrude themselves
upon us, do what we can, and if we tell them we have never so great and weighty
business, they will still be troublesome and haunt us, while we are actually
engaged in it. Nay, will pursue us even to the Sanctuary; and assault us at the
Altar of God. Yet if we as often trust them out as they return, they will never
be charged upon us. For it is a giving them encouragement, and a compliance with
them, that makes us Criminal. Then alone Thoughts will be imputed to us as our
Sins, when we are pleased with them, or when we do not ^^ominate and cast them
out as soon as they come into our Minds; as soon as we have Power to discover
that they are sinful. It Is true the Devil may continue to disquiet and disturb
the Peace and Tranquillity of our Consciences, by his wicked injections, and
putting into our Minds evil Thoughts: But tho they are our grief and
molestation, yet they (being resisted) are his Sins; and God will judge him for
them, and spare and pity us. God knows whereof we are made, and Remembers
that we are but dust. The Blessed Jesus Assumed our Nature, and therefore, well
knows how to compassionate us in such circumstances. He was Himself Solicited
by the accursed Tempter; Mat. 4.
but he did not yield to him, but resisted him; and if we follow our Lord's
Example, and do so too; if he does not presently flee from us, yet it is not our
sin, but unhappiness to be infested with him. And this certainly we are able to
do: We may undoubtedly choose whether we will consent to wicked thoughts, and
aprove them, or not. If they do indeed meet with a kind entertainment at our
hands, no wonder that they grow bold, and familiar: but if we deny them
admittance, and shut them out, we shall at length be rid of them, or at least
they will not be charged upon us. Even the Devil is put to flight by
resistance, James 4. 7.
St. James tells us. He remembers his Apostasy; he trembles at the Name of
Jesus; and when a Christian behaves himself bravely against him, he does not
care to abide the combat. If we give the same reply to all his suggestions as
our Blessed Lord did: our trouble is greater than our danger. If we would but
be watchful over our selves, and have as much care as we can of our thoughts, I
am apt to think, we should not complain so much of them, as we often do. It Is
much for want of a due observation of our selves, and keeping our hearts with
all diligence, that so many evil thoughts proceed from thence. The malignity,
or folly of our Imaginations is much owing to our selves; to our own sloth, and
carelessness; to idleness, or to an habit of sin, or some such cause; and when
it is so, we ought to repent of them, and look on them as our sins. Tho the
corruption of our Nature, and the malice of the Devil, be many times the cause
of them, yet we our selves are often more chargeable with them, than either of
these; and if we narrowly and truly examine our selves, we shall find it so.

Upon the whole, it is sufficiently plain, that out of the heart proceed evil
thoughts; the Soul is the Soil where this Hemlock is sown. There wicked
thoughts are conceived; they owe their original either to the corruption of the
Soul it self, or are thrown in by the instigations of the Devil. From thence
they proceed; and therefore it must be acknowledged that there does lie an
obligation on us of well governing them. That we are not altogether unable to
do any thing in order to it, but something is in our power. We can choose
whether we will cherish them or not; we can either bid them welcome, or bid
them be gone.

And besides we can use other helps and assistances, and follow these Rules and
Directions, which are necessary to the well-governing our thoughts. And what
they are, is the subject of the following Chapter.

CHAP. IV.
THe Rules and Directions which we are to follow, in order to the better
performance of this great work (viz.) the virtuous and religious government of
our thoughts, are divided into General, and Particular.

The General will have relation to all kinds of evil thoughts, whatsoever they
be. The latter will concern chiefly these sorts of them hereafter mentioned.

The General Rules and Directions then are these following.

First Prayer. Constant and Catholicon, a sovereign Remedy for every Ail, and
Indisposition of the Soul. Genesis 32. 24.
It is very powerful with God, James 5. 16.
and avails much. It Is a preservative from the violence of Temptations, and a
defense against all kinds of evil thoughts. Prayer, as it engages the Divine
Favor, and the Protection of Almighty God in all cases: so it naturally
cleanses and purifieth the heart; keeps it in a due frame, and religious
temper. The Soul is thereby prompted and disposed to that which is good, and
ponderates toward God. It gives a relish of Divine and Spiritual things, and
makes the Soul more and more averse to all evil, vain, or silly thoughts and
imaginations. And therefore if we desire to be preserved from wicked thoughts,
to keep our hearts in due temper, and government; we should be constant and
earnest in our approaches to the Throne of Grace daily; and fervent in our
Prayers to God for his Grace, to assist us in conquering the stubbornness, and
irregularity of our thoughts and imaginations. That he would be pleased to take
possession of our Souls by his holy Spirit; and by him to govern, subdue, and
sanctify all the motions, powers, and faculties of our Souls. That no unclean
Spirit may inhabit there; but that they may be swept and garnished in the best
sense, and ever prepared to receive the visits of Heaven, and the benign
influences of the holy Ghost.

Be sure then that you omit not the observance of this first Rule, in order to
the well-governing your thoughts; for without this, all the rest will signify
nothing.

the field of the sluggard, Prove. 24. 30, 30.
all overgrown with thorns and briars: full of all manner of wanton desires,
evil motions, and impure thoughts. When a Man is idle and loytering, a thousand
ill things come into his mind, which an honest industry would prevent. And the
most desirable opportunity the Devil has for injecting wicked thoughts, or
temptations successfully, is when a Man has nothing to do. It is absolutely
necessary therefore that we avoid being idle; and so practice both parts of our
Blessed Savior's Advice: Mat. 26. 41.
Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation. Idleness is the nurse of
wickedness, Sin's procurer; a vice most odious in its self, and leading into
all others. It lays a Man open to all assaults, and temptations; and exposes
him to the dangerous solicitations of a legion of the Infernal Spirits at
once. Whereas an industrious Man puts Satan to the toil of a long siege, as it
were: the negligent and idle Person makes a present, and voluntary surrender of
himself to him. Thus much is signified by that Parable of our Blessed Lord's
(Mat. 12. 43.) When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walks through
dry places, seeking rest; and finding none, he says, I will return into my
house, from whence I came out: and when he is come, he finds it empty, swept
and garnished. Then goes he, and takes with himself seven other spirits more
wicked than himself, and they enter in, and dwell there; and the last state of
that man is worse than the first. It Is not so easy to root up filthy weeds that
have once taken root in any ground, as it is to prevent their being sown.
Neither is it so easy to eradicate wicked thoughts, as it is to prevent them.
Upon which account it is very necessary that we avoid this sin of Idleness,
which is a soil barren in every thing, but the noisome weeds of evil thoughts,
and unclean imaginations. 'Twas for want of better imploymenr that David's
heart was polluted with impure thoughts, and wanton desires of Bathsheba; which
cost him so much woe, such sorrowful cries, and bitter lamentations; and caused
that remarkable tragedy of Vriah, which we find (2 Samuel 12. 9, 10, etc.) A
sluggard is not only infamous among Men; but God, and Angels look on him, as an
useless and unprofitable wretch. He seems as if he were heterogenous to the
whole Creation; every part of which (that ought) is active and in motion: The
Sun, Moon, and Stars, in their rapid course, and all the moving Heavens declare
the glory of God, Psalm. 19. 1.
and even the firmament shows his handy work. They are all useful, and answer
the end of their Beings, even things that are immovable. But the idle and
slothful Person, does not answer the end of his Being, but is continually
upbraided by them. And while almost every Being is busy, and in action, he
alone lies stretched along the ground, and sleeping away his golden days; or
else tugging under the weight of studying and contriving how to spend them.
When I see the Picture of Atlas, with every muscle extended, and laboring
under the ponderous Globe of Heaven upon his shoulders; I cannot forbear to
think upon an idle Person, whose greatest burden is Time, and succeeding Hours,
Days, and Years, are a continuation of his Slavery. Or else I represent him to
my self, as a Man encompassed with a crowd of Devils, who make him the sport,
and pastime of all their accursed assaults, and temptations; and do with him as
they please. It Is certain that there is no Man safe that is idle: he is not
only exposed to every evil thought, but to the worst actions; and he had better
be in the midst of a Battle, surrounded with his Enemies, than to be so
extravagantly at leisure, and unimploy'd.

or profane Discourse, or see any base or indecent Actions, we are too apt to
repeat the evil in our Thoughts; and it is well if it proceed no further. The
holy Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 11. 33.
That evil communications corrupt good manners: Vice is strangely recommended,
and insensibly insinuates it self, in wicked Conversation. And the same Apostle
exhorts, Ephesians. 4. 29.
Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good
to the use of edifying, that it may minister Grace unto the hearers. Religious
Conversation, good Discourse, greatly enlivens the Soul, raises the Thoughts,
and animates a Man against the force, and influence of bad Examples. But ill
Company is a dangerous and bewitching thing, and strangely lessens our Idea's
of God, and Notions of Virtue; and tends to pollute and harden the Heart. Who
can use to be in such company, where the holy Name of God is blasphemed, his
Being questioned, and disputed against: His Ministers, his Word, his Law,
reproached and abused? Who can accustom himself to the society of these Men,
whose ungoverned Tongues talk of nothing but lewdness, and obscenity; whose
words, actions, and whole behavior is scandalous, and immoral; or vain,
frothy, and foolish; without being tainted therewith, and retaining the
ungrateful savor of their ungodly conversation? Humane Nature is too corrupt,
and prone to ill to come off unhurt. Nothing indeed so much conduces to make
the thoughts loose and wicked, as bad Company, which must therefore be
diligently avoided, if we would preserve our Minds pure, and govern our
Thoughts aright. Always therefore endeavor to keep such Company, as you may
rise by, and not fall with. Such as may advance you in Holiness, enrich your
Soul with Virtue; and not such as will debauch your Thoughts, and instill
naughty cogitations into your Minds.

Education, will tell you, that few Persons are competent readers of them, or
ought to be allowed the liberty of meddling with them. The Advocates of the
Theater plead, that abundance of good Morality, and Virtuous Instruction, may
be got by seeing, or reading a Play, or a Romance. But our own Experience does
evidently confute that Plea; and demonstrate, That the Minds of many have been
debauched by them; and no doubt many Souls ruined; but few or none the better
for them, in any particular. They are most contrary to the Christian
Profession, and the main scope and design of them, is visibly such, as most
tends to please the Fancies of lewd, or Atheistical Men; and instead of
discouraging, recommending Vice to the utmost advantage; and improving all
kinds of evil Thoughts, as much as any thing that can be mentioned.

No Man can be at a loss in this Learned Age, for select Entertainments of his
mind in reading. The nauseous strains of a lewd, or Atheistical Poet, are not
forced upon us by necessity, or a scarcity of Wit: But upon inquiry, I believe
it will (at least generally) be found that the most lovely, and charming style,
the most lofty and affecting Language goes along with the most useful and
beneficial subjects.

The Book of God, the holy Scriptures, affords greater variety of Elegance,
Delight, and Advantage, than all the Writings in the World. And there is no man
that rightly understands the Scriptures, but must esteem it a most blessed, and
perfective thing, Psalm. 119.
To delight in the law of the Lord, and in that law to exercise himself day and
night. What sublime and lofty Theorems! what useful things, and absolutely
necessary to the eternal Happiness, and Salvation of our Souls, do we meet with
in the Sacred Volume! There we are entertained with the History of the Creation
of Man, and the beginning of this visible World. There we are informed of the
Methods and Dispensations of the Almighty toward Mankind; and by what Steps,
and Advances his Church through all Ages, grew to be what it is now. There God
has been pleased more clearly to reveal Himself, than any where besides. There
we have the great Mystery of Divine Love, in the Redemption of the World by
Christ Jesus, our Lord, made known to us. The excellencies of Piety, and Virtue
described in the most affecting Language. The truest Perfection, and the
extremest Misery of Man; explained. Rules for obtaining eternal Life, and
Blessedness laid down, and most gracious Promises, and unspeakable Rewards to
encourage us in our Endeavors after it. All which things, Even the Angels
desire to look into, and admire the Divine Goodness, which impregnates all. And
if we would but make this Word of God our Study, and be diligently conversant
in reading the Scriptures, we should more and more be sensible, that there is
no Book like this: and that an excellent Expedient to keep wicked Thoughts out
of our Hearts, would be to read the Scriptures much, and often, with meekness,
Prayer, and attention: instead of these vain, foolish, and unprofitable, or
else profane, wicked, or obscene Writings of such as call themselves the Wits
of the Age.

The Mind of Man is combustible; the Thoughts of his Heart are mere tinder to
the sparks of an obscene Saying, a lewd fancy, or but so much as an impure
hint. And therefore I am apt to think that few Men in the World (how strong
soever their prejudices may be, or how much soever they may presume upon their
own strength) are able to govern their Thoughts well, without they have a
special regard to this Rule, and Admonition also.

Self-examination. Without often looking into our selves, and examining our own
propensions, and inclinations; and what is that Sin which does so easily beset
us; it is hardly to be imagined how we should be able to govern our Thoughts
aright. There is nothing which a man is more a stranger to, than himself, though
there is nothing in which he ought to be more skilled: and that is one great
reason of the irregularity of his Thoughts. For without we well consult our own
temper and constitution, and what the laedentia and juvantia are; and narrowly
observe the tendency of our Passions, and the frame and disposition of our
Souls, we cannot conquer our Thoughts. It Is impossible, unless we know our
selves, that we should govern our selves. Sometimes a man's evil Thoughts may
run chiefly upon lust, and uncleanness; and sometimes covetousness may be his
darling sin. Sometimes ambition may be his dotage; and at other other times
revenge his favorite. Now how can it be imagined that a person can govern, and
subdue his Thoughts, as to any of these, without a frequent inquiring into his
own Soul, and accurate knowledge of himself? Nay, which way can a man be
convinced, and persuaded of the great evil and sinfulness of wicked Thoughts,
without Self-examination? How can he be made truly sensible of their pernicious
and polluting nature, and that they are so highly displeasing to God, as they
are, without a diligent search into himself? or how can he be possessed that it
is his duty to restrain, and exercise a government over his Thoughts; and that
much is in his own power, in order to it? I say, how can a person be rightly
sensible of any of these necessary things, without he frequenly, and skilfully
practice this duty of Self-examination? which as it is of absolute use, in
order to Religion in general, so it is to this part of it, especially (viz.)
the well-governing our Thoughts. Besides,

How many men are too apt to imagine, that as for Thoughts, they shall never be
laid to our charge, so long as they don't break out into actions? That the
Theory of sin shall pass, without the least notice of the Almighty Judge; and
that only the Practice of it shall be observed, and censured. That as for
Thoughts, they are either in the Nature of these (...), Impossibilities, which
cannot be brought under any good Order, or Government, in regard of their
infiniteness, and variety; and so they claim a privilege of invincible Liberty,
because they cannot be subdued: or else that they are such slight and small
escapes, as that they carry their pasport, and pardon with them; that they
shall never be punished, and that therefore they are no sins. And that also
because the Law of man takes no hold of them; and because likewise it is
impossible altogether to avoid these thoughts, as was said before. Certainly
(say they) we shall never be called to account for our thoughts, because they
come oftentimes so suddenly, and unexpectedly, that no reason can be given of
them: And they do no body any hurt; what evil therefore should there be in
them? why should we be accountable for them? This is indeed the common strain
of the civil, honest, moral Man; (as he calls himself) and the formal
Hypocrite, to draw near unto God with his lips, when his heart is far from him;
to be under no concern for his Thoughts, but only to take care with the Harlot,
to wipe his mouth clean: And with Pontius Pilate, to wash his hands; and with
the Scribes and Pharisees to cleanse only the outside of the cup, or the
platter. This is all the Religion of too many, who make it to consist in Sense,
and not in the Heart, as if the design of it were to be not the Reformation of
the inward, but an Accomplishment of the outward Man. As if indeed Christianity
were no more than a mere Complement. And now what is the true cause of this?
what is the reason of such dangerous errors, and mistakes about our Thoughts;
as that they are free, sinless, and unpunishable? I say, what is the cause of
all this, but ignorance of our own selves; ignorance of the sad and prevailing
Corruptions of our Nature, and their greedy propensities, and inclinations to
evil? and ignorance of the Law of God too; which if we would look into, it
would plainly show us the detestable sinfulness of Thoughts: and that the main
end of Religion is an internal change, and purification of the Heart and Soul;
of all the Thoughts and Imaginations. And now an excellent means to dispel this
Ignorance, is this Rule which I am pressing you to the observance of (viz.)
Self-examination. Without which it will be an impossible thing to attain a
right government of our Thoughts in general.

them dwell upon them. This will be a very proper means in order to that great
end, which is the scope of this Treatise.

There is no preserving a Castle or Fortress from being taken by the enemy, but
by having a special care of the Avenues, and Breaches. Now the Senses are, as
it were, the Avenues of the Soul, the Inlets of all evil into the Mind: and
therefore there is a necessity that we keep a strict watch over our Senses, if
we would have our Thoughts pure and unpolluted. For there is not a Sense that
we have, but may betray and ruin us. An Eye, an Hand, etc. may prove our utter
destruction. As that Advice of our Blessed Lord implies, Mat. 18. 8.
Wherefore if thy hand or thy foot offend thee, cut them off, and cast them
from thee: It is better for thee to enter into Life, halt and maimed, rather
than having two hands, or two feet, to be cast into everlasting fire. And if
thine eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee; it is better for
thee to enter into Life with one Eye, rather than having two Eyes to be cast
into hell fire. Our own Eyes may ruin us, as sure as these of a Basilisk; and
it is Our own Eye, which puts witchcraft into that of others, and conveys back
certain hurt, and mischief into our Thoughts and Souls. There are a great
variety of ensnaring objects in the World, that present themselves to us. The
World, the Flesh, and the Devil, conspire how to entrap us. Which way soever we
turn, we find some object or other to entice us. As the Hermit saw in his
Vision, the whole World is hung all over with Nets. The Devil well knows that
the best way to subdue the Spirit, is by the Flesh; and that there is no such
effectual way of conquering the Soul, as by first making his attacks upon the
outworks, the Senses. And therefore he first endeavors to take them. It Is of
absolute necessity therefore that we keep a close guard upon every one of our
senses, if we would not be invaded by wicked thoughts. For any one of them left
unguarded, may prove our ruin. And we must acknowledge that it is giving too
great a liberty to our senses, which is the occasion of so many vile and wicked
Thoughts filling our Minds.

not vain thoughts lodge in us, Jer. 4. 14.
though they may glance upon us. It Is dwelling upon a wicked Thought, that makes
it prevailing, and domineering over us. If we habitually indulge it, it will
get ground of us; and at length grow obstinate, and unruly; and much more
difficult to be conquered. Whereas an immediate resistance of it, would by
degrees so weaken it, as it is probable we should at length be quite rid of it.
Though this may be thought a very troublesome, yet it is as likely a way as any,
of avoiding evil thoughts. When any wicked imagination therefore presents it
self, the best way to repel it, would not be to argue, and dispute long with
it; but to catch away our Minds from it presently: and like a Man that
accidentally treads upon an Adder, starts back immediately, and strives to make
no more approaches to it again. It is possible, nay likely, that it will return
upon you often in a little time; but do you labor as often as it does so, to
thrust it out, and be not weary of so doing. And because this is not so easy a
matter neither, (tho this or nothing must be granted to be in our power) it
would be expedient, in order to the diverting our Minds effectually, that we
propose to our Minds some one or other of the most awful subjects; and such as
is apt more than ordinarily to take up, and fix our Thoughts. As for Instance:
The Crucifixion of our Savior Christ: imagining that we saw his tortured Body
bleeding upon the Cross; and heard the doleful cries which he uttered, when he
made the great Atonement, and Satisfaction for the sins of the World; and
beheld the portentous Eclipse, the Praeternatural Darkness, the Renting of the
Rocks, the opening of the Graves, and the rest of the Tremendous Circumstances
which attended the death of the Son of God. Or else, let it be the last
Judgment, and the Miscellaneous horror and exultation of that dreadful day:
Wherein the heavens being on fire, 2 Pet. 3. 12.
shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat: Acts 2. 20.
The sun be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood; Mat. 24. 29.
the powers of heaven be shaken, and the stars fall from their orbs: all this
visible World be consumed and ingulph'd, in an inconceivable eternity of
happiness to the righteous, but of torment to the wicked. Any one of such
subjects as these would be very proper to fix our Minds upon, in order to keep
them from returning to ill things. There is nothing can more awe the Soul,
collect the Thoughts, and compose the Spirits, than thinking on such subjects.
They are things so very considerable, that while we are employing our Minds
about them, it is an hard matter to think of any thing else, or soon to be
drawn aside, to any other object. And therefore it is very advisable, that we
make use of this expedient, in order to the well-governing our Thoughts. To
which end also,

Let us be careful to watch Lord's Day; then more especially than at other
times. The Lord's Day is (I know not by what means) extremely slighted, and
disregarded. And under a pretense of Christian Liberty, profaneness has very
greatly advanced it self. So that God's own Day, is become almost as one of
ours, and but a very small difference observed betwixt them. Men are generally
so far from being most careful of their thoughts on that Holy Day, that they
suffer them to be most profuse and extravagant then; and not only their
Thoughts, but their Actions too are for a great part worse than at other times.
Which, as it is a very great sin in it self, and such as shall be severely
accounted for; so it is a great means of making our Thoughts loose,
ungovernable, and wicked at other times. For that, as it is a day peculiarly to
be dedicated to God, so it is a day wherein God designs in a more eminent
manner to communicate himself, and his Grace to our Souls. And therefore if we
do sanctify it as we ought, by having a strict watch over our thoughts, and by
the delightful exercises of Prayer, Praises, and Mediditations, and a devout
Reading, and Hearing the Word of God, etc. It will (by God's Blessing) leave
such an happy tincture on us, and so piously, and lastingly incline the Mind to
good, that it will be an excellent means to order our thoughts the better, when
we have more liberty for the World. How inconsiderable soever this Rule may
seem to any; yet I doubt not but a great part of the vanity, and evil of our
Thoughts and Imaginations, is owing to a careless, and remiss observation of
the Lord's Day. Neither can I think, that that glorious Promise (any more than
the Morality of the fourth Commandment) is stinted to the Jewish economy
alone, though it may primarily concern that (Isa. 58. 13, 14.) If thou turn away
thy foot from the sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my holy day, and call the
sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord honorable, and shall honor him, not
doing thine own ways, nor finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking thine own
words: Then shall thou delight thy self in the Lord; and I will cause thee to
ride upon the high places of the earth, and feed thee with the heritage of
Jacob thy Father, for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

Being watchful over our alone, is another Rule, which we are to observe in
order to the well governing of our Thoughts in general. Solitude is a season
when our Thoughts are very apt to rove, and then to light upon ill objects.
When a Man is by himself, he is not secure from his spiritual enemies; and with
respect to the multitude of vain, and evil Thoughts, that Then are apt to come
into his Mind, it may be truly said of him, Nunquam minus solus quam cum solus.
Upon which account it was that the Devil chose that opportunity, Mat. 4. ^
to tempt our Savior, when he was in the wilderness, alone. Because he well
knew that at such a time as that, the Mind of Man being at leisure, his
Thoughts will be more relaxed and wandering, and so more easy to be won by his
suggestions; and to comply with his Temptations. A Monastic Life does not
secure a Man from evil Thoughts; but in some sort makes him the more obnoxious
to them. The Devil will pay his unwelcome visits to us in our Privacy, as well
as in Conversation. And the Hermit in his Cell, has as much reason to look
well to his thoughts, as he that is in the Crowd of this World. And Therefore I
take it to be very advisable, that at any time, when we are alone, we suffer
not our thoughts to scatter and fly at random: for unhappy conjunctions
oftentimes prove the consequence of such erratical motions; but to confine them
to some certain bounds, and determinate subjects. Such as the Power or Goodness
of Almighty God, or the like; which will sweetly employ our thoughts, and
refresh our minds. And the more profitably to think on any such subject, we may
when we are alone likewise think on our own sinfulness; be judging our selves,
confessing our sins, and laying open our hearts before God, which will make the
goodness of God more illustrious, and admirable; and also keep us from being
assaulted with any dreadful, and terrifying thoughts, with any filthy and
profligate thoughts; and our hearts from being deadn'd and stupify'd with
Mopishness, and drowsiness, etc. which at such a time we are more especially
prone to.

Holy Spirit, to obey his Heavenly Inspirations; to bow to his sacred
suggestions, when at any time we are blessed therewith. Every good thought
should be made well-come, and cherished, and improved by us; and by that means
we shall not only avoid evil thoughts; but in time arrive at an happy temper
and habit of good thoughts, which is one of the most desirable things in the
world; and most of all prepares the Soul for the purity, and ravishment of the
Contemplation, of God, and the Joys of Heaven. Let us therefore always improve
every good thought or motion that comes into our Minds; and entertain it as an
Embassy from God, as a spark of the Celestial fire. And let us diligently
attend, and listen to the counsels and monitions of our own Consciences; by no
means resist their checks, or stifle their Advertisments. To draw to a
Conclusion of this Chapter; If we would attain to this great Thing, (viz.) the
due government of our Thoughts, let us be careful to preserve our selves
innocent and harmless; to do no hurt, or evil at any time, willingly. Let us
make Religion, and the Fear of God our Business. Let us make use of God's
wonderful Works, both of Mercy and Judgment, which at any time occur in the
World, seasoning our Hearts with an Holy Meditation of them.

There are a great many more excellent Rules, in order to the Well-governing
our Thoughts: As applying our selves to our proper Teachers, and Spiritual
Guides, for comfort and Assistance, when our Hearts are oppressed with wicked
Thoughts, or prevailing corruptions.

Avoiding unwarrantable Curiosities, and prying into hidden Mysteries, and
unnecessary Speculations.

Contentment, Temperance, Humility; Trust and Affiance in God: and abundance
more, which are in that large field of Discourse, which such a subject as this
affords: and which if I should enlarge upon, as I have done on the former
Heads, would swell this Treatise into a much bigger Book than I designed it.

I shall therefore content my self and the Reader with these Principal Rules
and Directions, for the well-governing of the Thoughts in general, which have
been treated of in the foregoing Pages. Which well put in practice, will, I
doubt not (by the blessing of Almighty God) prove in a great measure effectual
to the end designed. And that, if we (not slightly and indifferently but)
closely, and in earnest apply our selves to them, we shall thereby prevent Evil
Thoughts; and attain that happy and desirable Government over our selves, which
either sloth, or ignorance makes some Men think to be Eutopian and impossible:
Only adding this one particular more, which must by no means be passed over,
and that is,

The deep and serious consideration Dreadful Judgment.

Consider seriously with your selves then, That there is a day a coming, when
not only all the Actions, and more known passages of our Lives; but even our
most Private and Retired Thoughts shall be accounted for. When God shall judge
the Secrets of Men by Christ Jesus. Romans 2. 16.
Though Men cannot see our Thoughts; yet an All-knowing God can, and does; and
will assuredly judge us for them. In that day, when these that have labored to
approve themselves unto God, by an Internal purity, and sincere Obedience; not
regarding the eye of the World, or the silly applauses of mortal Men; but the
favor of God, and Conscience of their duty; shall be crowned with eternal
honors; and all their secret Piety be rewarded openly: And these that have
hypocritically carried a fair outside, and passed for civil, honest, moral Men,
whilst their inward parts were very wickedness, and their Hearts full of all
uncleanness shall be laid open, and exposed to the shame of all the World, and
they banished from the presence of God, into the flames of Hell for ever.

Man indeed judges of the Heart by the Works; but God judges of the Works by
the Heart. Since therefore we must be called to an account for our Thoughts
hereafter, let us carefully remember it: and so reckon with our selves for them
in this, that we may not be judged for them in the World to come.

CHAP. V.
THE accursed Tempter and Enemy of our Souls, is no doubt always busy in
suggesting ill things to us, and casting into our minds wicked thoughts. He is
continually pursuing us into all places and companys, and presenting before us
alluring and enticing objects. He is too well experienced in this Black Art;
too skilful an Engineer in laying his train. He very well knows the tempers and
constitutions of Mankind; is acquainted with their Predominant inclinations and
propensities, and so can suit his objects, and proportionate his Devices. His
name is Legion too: For there are a multitude of them to carry on their hellish
designs, in ruining Souls, and corrupting Minds. Like the Plagues of Egypt,
they even fill the Atmosphere. Their numbers are like these of the Locusts,
Flies, and Lice, and Frogs, croaking even in Kings Chambers. And could we but
see these Swarms of Devils that assault us, and are darting their Temptations
at us, and continually injecting evil Thoughts into our Hearts; we should be
astonished, and tremble at our danger: we should ever be crying to God to help
us; and having a quick Eye upon all their assaults. Could we but behold these
Infernal Enemies that encompass us; our concern for our selves could not be so
small, as to suffer us to be careless and negligent. The Devils are working,
and contriving, and restless in their motions to destroy our Souls; and yet,
alas! we are as secure as if we were embraced, and caressed by our dearest
Friends; as if we had no Enemy at all to fear. We have had some Historical
accounts of Persons that have been such exquisite villains, in the Art of
Poisoning, that they could convey the deadly Venom to the Vitals, and kill in a
moment; or else bring on a lingering, but yet as certain death; and place the
period of Life some Years off. As the Javians, and Sumatrians, by their
poisoned A Crest is a Dagger.
Crests, and the Chinese by their Nails.

The woeful experience of several of our own Nation, as well as the common
suffrage of all who have traveled into those parts, put the truth of this
beyond the necessity of any particular authorities; though many such might be
produced, were it not foreign to the present design.

But the Devil is an Artist more subtle even than these; he can convey a
Spiritual Venom and Contagion to the Soul, and poison all the Thoughts and
Powers of it. His injections are as quick, and as keen as Lightning. And he
has undiscernable ways of defiling and corrupting our Minds. That Satan can
throw wicked Thoughts into our Minds, is (I suppose) a matter not questioned:
But whether he does this by working on the humors of the Body, or stirring up
the animal Spirits; or by an immediate applying his Suggestions to the Soul, is
not so easy to be determined. There being a necessary Dependence of the
Operations of the Soul, upon the Texture of the Body and Spirits; it is not
improbable that he frequently injects wicked Thoughts that way. But why may he
not also cast in wicked Thoughts into our Hearts, by an immediate
communication? The truth is, we cannot well find out which Method he takes in
his Temptations. We are not able to tell how h^ c^sts in wicked Thoughts. We
know little or nothing of the intercourse between Beings purely Spiritual: But
too plain and true it is, that we are infested with a multitude of evil
Thoughts, and that they do proceed out of the Heart, however they came there.
And therefore it will be a more material enquiry how we shall be able
effectually to resist, or prevent them. And this cannot be fully done neither
in a Treatise of this nature; because their kinds are infinite, and their
numbers endless. I shall therefore, according to my proposed Method.

Consider in this Chapter, some special kinds of evil Thoughts, and endeavor
to apply remedies against them, to the satisfaction and benefit (I hope) of the
serious Reader.

first kind of them which I shall consider is, Profane and Blasphemous
Thoughts. And of this sort there is a dismal variety. I have known some (and
these I Am persuaded very religious) People, who have been extremely disturbed
with such Thoughts concerning GOD, as have been most unaccountable, and as
absurd, as they are profane.

If I thought fit, I could mention some of them, which have been so
extravagant, that I should think to be rid of them, it were better to contemn
and despise them, than anxiously to be concerned about them. Though with others
of them, we ought to deal after a different manner. To think aright of Almighty
God, and to have such Ideas of him in our Minds as are worthy, and becoming so
great and so pure a Majesty; is not only a very considerable part of Religion,
but a very comfortable thing. And I cannot but pity such Christians as are much
afflicted with profane thoughts. Of this kind of Evil thoughts there are some
more hideous than others; but yet every thought of him, which is contrary or
unsuitable to that representation, which by such and such glorious Attributes
he has made to us of Himself in his holy Word, that I call a profane Thought:
or when we conceive of Almighty God under some gross form, or material shape;
or entertain any vile, mean, or indeed any but the Highest conceptions, that we
are able of him. God is in himself an Infinite, Almighty, and Incomprehensible
Spirit. And though he has sometimes in the Scriptures described, and represented
himself to us by material figures, or sensible objects; yet we are not to think
that he is really such as he is described, but that he condescends to our
capacity by such a Style and Language. And any other Method of instructing us
in the nature of himself, would not be so Intelligible to us. God uses this,
as an easy and familiar way of teaching us to know him: without which our
Notions of him would be very obscure, and we could know but little of him. And
therefore I cannot but wonder at the imprudence and Luciferian pride of such
Men, who deny all Mysteries, and pretend to know GOD so, as perfectly to
comprehend him, by the dim light of Natural Reason, alone.

Thus is GOD represented to us sometimes as having Hands, Feet, Eyes, and such
like organical parts. Not that he has truly such; (as the old Heretics, the
Anthropomorphites held, and the Romanists now depict him) but we are to
understand them in a figurative sense. His Hands and his Feet, betoken his
Power; his Eyes his Knowledge, and Favor, etc. And therefore to think of him
under any material figure, is a profane thought, and must by no means be
encouraged. So also to think that God is a Liar, or Unmerciful, or Vunjust,
etc. is a blasphemous thought. And indeed, (as I said) every thought that is
formed in our Minds, which is unsuitable to his Eternity, Authority, Purity,
and Holiness, or any other of his glorious Attributes, is reducible to this
first kind of evil thoughts. Now though these are very dreadful thoughts; yet
they may sometimes come into our Minds through the Devil's subtilty, and our own
carelessness. Nay, it is possible that they may infest the Minds of good Men,
and that too, when they are about the Highest Employments; which may for the
present serve to satisfy these poor Souls, who are at any time terrified, and
affrighted with a Sense of them, and take off from that horror that they are
apt to conceive in their Minds upon the account of them.

Now the Directions which I would recommend in order to our avoiding any
profane and blaspemous thoughts, are these following.

habit of any known sin, than which there is nothing more ministers to profane
and blasphemous thoughts. For an habit of any known sin, will strangely degrade
our thoughts, and lessen our Ideas of GOD. It being an impossible thing for any
Man to arrive at an habit of wilful and deliberate sinning, without frequent
grapplings with his own Conscience, and iterated resistances of its checks, and
convictions; without thinking falsely or meanly of GOD; or else putting him
quite out of his thoughts, And his judgments far above out of his sight: No
wonder that by continuing so to do, he comes at last to have profane or
blasphemous thoughts of him.

GOD is an infinite and eternal Spirit, and the most absolute Being, and
transcendency above the highest of our thoughts. And if ever we would think
rightly and worthily of him, we must habituate our selves to think much upon
him, and let our thoughts of him be according to these representations and
discoveries, which he has been pleased to make of himself in the Scriptures.
Our Natural Reason, though it will yield us some knowledge of a God, yet it is
not a sufficient guide to direct our thoughts concerning him; for it will many
times lead us into false notions of him; as appears beyond all dispute from the
Worship of the Gentile World, and also the Heterodox opinions of these who rely
thereon. And how is it possible for any habitual sinner, who must, and does,
thrust God out of his thoughts on purpose, that he may sin with the greater
liberty and delight, ever do this? He cannot grow to an Habitual Sinner,
without he quite banisheth the thoughts of a God from his Heart; and that such
an one should be able to think of him after a due manner, what is it less than
a contradiction? And then no wonder if by so frequently slighting God in his
own mind, he comes at length to think profanely and blasphemously of him.
Irreverent Thoughts of God grow still more and more wicked; and a continual
disrespect of him, ends at length in Atheism it self. He then that is haunted,
and pestered with such Thoughts as these, we are speaking of, may perhaps upon
a deep enquiry, find cause to condemn himself, of some Habit of sin; and if so,
he must labor to mortify it, and become a New Man, if ever he would avoid this
kind of evil Thoughts.

Too curious and bold Speculations, into matters Mysterious, prove frequently
an occasion of profane and blasphemous Thoughts; and therefore they must be
carefully declined. He that has an honest and conscientious regard to his
Duty, as it is plainly set down, and humbly desires to know, and serve God
above all, is seldom so much troubled with this kind of Thoughts, as those are,
who aspire to things vastly above them; and place more of their Duty in
Speculation, than in Practice. When Men will forsake the plain way, and wander
into unbeaten Paths; no wonder that they fall into mischief. When Men will
instead of endeavoring to understand GOD's Commandments, and do his Will,
aspire to comprehend his Essence, his Decrees, etc. and find out the Almighty
to perfection. When they will not be contented to know the Saving Truths of the
Gospel, and practice their plain and legible Duty; but nicely pry into the
Secret things, which belong neither to us, nor our children. When they will
grasp at all, and think to understand all Mysteries, and all Knowledge, and
remove Mountains. Then they naturally, as well as justly, fall into profane
imaginations, and blasphemous Thoughts; and sometimes into Errors, and
damnable Heresies. This is the true case of the present Age; and the main
occasion of these blasphemous opinions concerning the Blessed Trinity, which
are now so daringly broached amongst us: and indeed it is that to which most of
Men's profane and enormous Thoughts of God are owing. And since it is so, truly
if they would avoid them, they must learn to be more modest and humble, and to
have a more conscientious regard to their duty.

They must content themselves with these plain Discoveries, which God has made
of his Mind and Will; and labor to follow them: and adore his unsearchable
Wisdom in the rest. An humble Obedience will much more promote the eternal
Salvation of our Souls, than such bold Speculations: and the Love of God is far
better than all such impious and fruitless Attempts to comprehend him. For all
such Attempts will in the end confound, but never advantage the Minds of Men.
These highflyers, when they are in their altitudes, suddenly their waxen wings
melt, and down they fall headlong, like Lucifer, from Heaven. When we
reverently submit our Reason to Divine Revelation, and the conduct and guidance
of the Word of God; when we make that (with the Psalmist) A lantern unto our
feet, Psalm. 119. 105.
and a light unto our paths: then we are safe, as well as free from these
horrid Thoughts we are speaking of; at least they are not occasioned by our
selves, if they should chance to come into our Minds. But (I say) when Reason
will be its own Guide, and Men will walk in the light of their own fire, and
the sparks which themselves have kindled; they must needs err, they must needs
stumble, as in the dark. Or like a Ship without ballast, be tossed up and down,
and made the sport of every wind of Doctrine. They will hereby be liable to the
worst Cogitations concerning the infinite Being.

Thirdly, A Customary, Formal, Indevout Worshipping of GOD, is that which at
length usually grows into profane and blasphemous Thoughts of him: Which
therefore must diligently be avoided, if we desire to be without such Thoughts.
For if in our most Solemn Address to Almighty God, we be not careful that our
thoughts of him be reverent and composed; our conceptions high and holy: it is
easy to imagine, that at other times we shall be apt to have mean and low, or
profane Thoughts of him. And why may we not think that this is a too common
occasion of profane and blasphemous Thoughts? If I am not sollicitous to form
my heart aright, and bring my Thoughts of the Great GOD into a due frame and
temper of Devotion, while I am worshipping him, and in his more solemn and
immediate presence: It naturally leads me (as well provokes GOD to leave me) to
gross, profane and impious Thought of him. When a Man therefore is about to
perform his Duty of Devotion to God, either in public or private, let him
endeavor to fix in his Heart such Thoughts of him, as may exceedingly awe and
compose him, and not be indevout and formal in his addresses to Heaven: and I
verily think this may be a very proper means to preserve him from profane or
blasphemous Thoughts; which, otherwise, it is reasonable to expect will grow
upon him.

Fourthly, Discontent, and a anxiety, is that which (how far soever it may at
first seem from it) very much conduces to profane and blasphemous Thoughts of
God. And there is a great deal in that expression of the Apostle, 1 John 2. 15.
If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. There are no
persons more apt to arraign the Wisdom and Goodness of God, in the
distributions of his Providence, than such; to conceive not only indecent,
angry, and false, but profane and blasphemous Notions of him. None more apt to
follow the desperate advice of Job's Wife; Job 2. 9.
Curse God, and die, than such wordly, repining, discontented wretches, as
place all their Heaven here. And that this is true, I think is a matter
sufficiently plain by our own experience; and it is easy to produce instances
not a few. And therefore to be humble, contented, and blessing God; not
charging him foolishly, or thinking of him unworthily in every state and
condition, I look upon to be part of the means in order to the avoiding profane
and blasphemous thoughts.

Another Rule which may immediately with a Sacred fear, cast them out of our
Minds. For profane or blasphemous Thoughts are especially such as we should not
stay to argue, or dispute with. And therefore we find that though our Blessed
Lord thought fit to argue with the Devil in other Temptations; yet when he
suggesteth profane Thoughts of God to him; Mat. 4. 10.
our Savior seems to vary in his defense, and immediately bids him be gone;
Ver. 11.
(...), Get thee hence, Satan, etc. And then ('it is said) The Devil left him,
and behold Angels came and ministered unto him.

Whenever therefore this happens to be your case; that you are troubled with
such horrid, profane, or blasphemous Thoughts of God, immediately cast them
out; do not let your Mind dwell upon them one moment. But do with this kind of
evil Thoughts in particular, as you were taught to do in the VII. Direction for
the Well-governing our Thoughts in general.

In the next place, it is advisable, Ejaculation to Heaven, and lift up our
Hearts to God in a short Prayer, that he would be pleased to cleanse our Hearts
of them, and preserve us from them. When any such abominable Thought presents
it self to thee; cry out, O Lord, keep me! O Lord, save me! O Lord, let not the
Devil have advantage over me! Lord, I desire to love, and adore thee with all
my heart, with all my soul, and with all my might. O Lord, thou know that I
am grieved at such Thoughts as these; and earnestly desire to have my Thoughts
of thee to be such, as these Blessed Spirits entertain, who are continually in
thy blissful presence, etc. And not only in ejaculatory; but in our set
Prayers, and constant Devotions should we offer them up to God; purge and
acquit our selves of them in his sight, and lay open the sincere and vehement
desires of our Souls, to be rid of them. And by this means it is hoped that we
shall at length be freed from them. Though they may not presently depart from
us, but continue to molest us, even in our very Prayers, and most Solemn
Duties, as they often will: Though Almighty God may suffer them to be injected
into our Mind, for wise and beneficial ends, which are unseen, as (no doubt) he
frequently does; yet I think this is what very well becomes one that is
afflicted with profane or blasphemous Thoughts, and a proper way to ease his
Mind of them.

Again: In order to the remedying Name of GOD. Never hear it mentioned without
a Sacred Veneration, and Awe upon thy Soul: Let thy Heart bow down at the
mention of him. Never let his Name be in thy mouth but with Devotion; nor ever
hear others pronounce it rashly or profanely, in common swearing, or cursing,
without an holy dread; and (if it may be done effectually) a sober Reproof. A
customary and heedless naming the Name of GOD, leads to profaneness, and
encourages blasphemous Thoughts of him.

And therefore it is a dangerous evil to have the Name of GOD, or CHRIST in our
mouths slightly, or jestingly; or upon any frivolous occasion, or in the
repetition of a Story, etc. The Apostle says, Phil. 2. 10.
That at the name of JESUS every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and
things in earth, and things under the earth. All the Heavenly Host pay a most
profound Reverence to that Name, which Men prostitute, and make so vile. And
until we endeavor to imitate their adorations, we shall not easily be
preserved from such Thoughts as are horridly profane. It is hard to imagine how
that Person can be kept from thinking unworthily of God, who makes nothing of
using his Name in his common Discourse, or upon the most petty occasions.

One Rule more which I know GOD, if thou would think highly, and worthily of
him. The Knowledge of God is a proper Remedy against profane Thoughts. Now
there is a Knowledge of God which we may not seek after, as to know his
Essence, his Decrees, etc. To endeavor so to know him, is a vain, as well as a
presumptuous thing; as was hinted before in this Chapter. But there is a
Knowledge of God, which we may and ought to make our Search and Study; viz. The
Knowledge of his glorious Attributes, his Will, and Commandments; and these
things that in his Word he has revealed on purpose to be known, in order to
Man's present happiness, and future perfection. Such a Knowledge of him as this
every good Man will earnestly endeavor after, and use all means of attaining;
and the rather because it is indeed an expedient of avoiding such profane
Thoughts of God as many are grievously troubled with. Ignorance is here so far
from being the mother of Devotion, that nothing more tends to make our Thoughts
of God vile, and blasphemous. The truth of this abundantly appears from the
various and monstrous Idolatries of the Gentile World, and the gross and horrid
Conceptions they had of their Deities. And also from the Idolatries of the
Church of Rome, and that gross and Carnal way of Worship amongst them used;
especially in the darkest Ages of Popery. When it is almost incredible to tell
what absurdities and profanenesses, were the consequences of their Ignorance.
Nay, it must be acknowledged that even amongst our selves, some have not the
knowledge of God. I speak this to your shame. And until they have, until they
do attain to know him in some measure. It cannot be imagined that their
Thoughts of him should be rectified. The more we know God, the more we come to
love him; to be transported with him; and to have the most high and noble
Thoughts of him.

Now this excellent and useful, and desirable knowledge of God, is to be
obtained these two ways, By his Works,

First, From our own Observation Creation, and the mighty acts of his
Providence. The admirable Order of all Beings; their usefulness and
subserviency to Man: The establishment of Kingdoms, and Empires. The
preservation and government of his Church: both his Judgments and his Mercies,
etc. These things, if seriously observed, and considered, are a great means to
make us to know God, and consequently to excite in us high, and holy thoughts
of him; and so to preserve us from all profane, or blasphemous, or unworthy
Thoughts of him.

Attentive observation of the great Works of his Creation, and Providence; so
we may by his most Holy Word. And indeed thence alone we can fetch our truest
Ideas, and most proper Thoughts of God. The Scriptures are the best helps to
our attaining the knowledge of him; wherein in a Majestic style, his glorious
Attributes are represented to us. His Goodness, Purity, Power, Justice, Truth,
are wonderfully displayed in a various manner; by descriptions, historical
Relations, amazing Acts, Prophecies, and Predictions, Precepts, and
Admonitions, and surprising Revelations; which no Man can consider as he ought,
but he must needs be inspired with holy and awful Thoughts of the Great God;
and admirably preserved from all vain, wicked, or profane Thoughts, which prove
a great terror and affliction to many.

To draw to a Conclusion of this Chapter: A careful and humble Reading, and
Hearing the holy Word of God, together, with a Conscientious attendance upon
his Sacraments and other Ordinances, is a very excellent way to be rid of all
profane, or blasphemous thoughts. For our Hearts by this means are happily
seasoned with good things; and God's holy Spirit conveyed to our Souls, and
lasting inclinations to Holiness, are apt to remain in us.

But because I would not leave these poor Souls, who are apt to be disquieted,
and terrified with such thoughts as these, without some further security,
comfort and satisfaction, in this matter.

Be pleased further to consider, that though it be our Duty to hate and abhor,
and tremble at the very first motion of such profane, impious, or blasphemous
Thoughts; yet we have no reason to be so terribly affrighted at them, or
confounded with them, as many (and these good Christians) are. For the All-wise
God does frequently suffer us to be tempted with such profane Thoughts for ends
excellent, and beneficial to our own immortal Souls. As to humble us, and make
us more strict in the Examination of our own Hearts; more sensible of the
Deceitfulness of them, which is in nothing more discernable, than in an
extravagant Liberty of Thoughts.

Or else it may be to make us more sober in our Understandings, to avoid nice
inquiries into cases Mysterious; and shun all Enthusiastic expectations: or to
rouse up the dull and decayed Powers of our Souls. Or it may be to try our
Faith, and other Graces; and to see whether we will love him, when he thinks
fit to withold his Divine, and Spiritual Comforts from our Souls, as well as
when he bestows them upon us. Or else to cause us perhaps to make the Glory of
God our highest end in all our Performances, that our hearts run not upon any
mean and low designs; but the Pleasing the Almighty be, as it is, the end of
our Being. Or else it may be to stir us up to the greater Diligence in making
our calling and election sure; and not to let our eternal happiness rest upon
such uncertainties, as the generality of Men do theirs. But strive to get as
much assurance of our endless welfare as possibly we are able, and consistent
with Faith, Hope, and other Christian Virtues. These then being, doubtless,
some of the gracious ends for which God is pleased to suffer us to labor under
such Thoughts as I have been speaking of; and it being oftentimes the case of
good Christians to be afflicted with them. These poor Souls, who happen at any
time to be disquieted with them, have great reason to take courage, and to be
comforted under them.

And let them be assured of this, That that which is a man's Burden, Mat. 11.
28.
will not be reckoned as his Sin. And that if they hate these thoughts more,
because they are dishonorable to God, than because they are grievous, and
troublesome to themselves; and are by means of them made more watchful,
circumspect, and devout, than they before were; then Satan shall answer for
them, and not they: The Devil shall be judged for all these profane and
blasphemous thoughts which they, dejected Souls, were so much afflicted with
the apprehension of, as their own.

And so I have dispatched this first Species of evil Thoughts, viz. profane,
and blasphemous Thoughts.

CHAP. VI.
THe next kind of evil Thoughts, which deserves our distinct Consideration, is
that of Unclean Thoughts. And there seems to be more danger in these, than the
former; because there is something in corrupt Nature more agreeable to them,
than to the other: And therefore it is apt more to be pleased with them. But to
a Good Man; to a True Christian, these Thoughts are no less disquieting and
hateful, than the former. And therefore I shall endeavor to prescribe some
proper Remedies against them.

Prayer: Which though it must be acknowledged to be an Universal Remedy, and must
in no case of trial be pretermitted; for if any Man lack Wisdom, or Grace (of
any particular kind whatsoever) Let him ask it of God (says St. James) who
gives to all men liberally, James 1. 5.
and upbraideth not: Yet I take it to be more especially needful here. And
therefore we must be much in Prayer. If we find our selves to be assaulted with
this kind of Thoughts; we must make it a part of our constant Petitions, that
God would be pleased to cleanse, and purify the thoughts of our hearts by the
inspiration of his holy Spirit: That he would mortify our lustful desires, and
quench the fire of concupiscence in us, that our Souls and Bodies may be the
Temple of God. We must imitate the poor Leper in the Gospel, Mat. 8. 2.
Who fell down at Jesus's feet, and worshipped him, saying, Lord, if thou will,
thou can make me clean! It Is no easy matter to subdue this kind of evil
thoughts in some Complexions: But the difficulty of so doing, is greatest to
such as have lived in an habit of lust, and uncleanness; and therefore we must
call in the assistance of Heaven, by constant and devout Prayer.

Temperance, and Fasting, is a proper Remedy for the suppressing of this kind
of Evil Thoughts. While the Soul and the Body are so united, and make up one
Compositum; the operations of the Soul will be greatly inclined, and biased by
the Complexion, and Constitution of the Body; and therefore that must be kept
in due order, and subjection.

A pampering and indulging the Flesh, is a great promoter of Lust; and when the
Animal Spirits are intoxicated, the Soul can but feebly exert it self. A Man
can hardly preserve himself then from the grossest acts of uncleanness, much
less from impure Thoughts. And therefore Temperance, and Self-denial, are
always necessary, in order to avoiding unclean Thoughts: which, as our Savior
said of the unclean Devil, Mat. 17. 21.
Go not out but by Fasting, and Prayer.

The Mind is calm, and serene, when the Body is in a regular temper. A Man is
fit to meditate, and think on God and Heaven, and holy things, when he is sober
and moderate. And the reason of Fasting's being made a Duty, is in order to
tame the insolences of the Flesh; to keep the Thoughts pure, the Reason clear;
and to make us more fit for Religious Duties. Upon which account the Duties of
Selfdenial, and Mortification, are not so severe, as they may sometimes seem to
us, but highly reasonable. Since the denial of the gratifications of our
sensual and low desires, does bring satisfaction to the higher appetites of the
Soul; since while the Body is kept in due subjection, the Soul's liberty, and
activity is much the greater. And besides, Heaven is worth striving, and
denying our selves for; if it were a work much more harsh and unpleasant than
it is. If this will denominate us of the number of Christ's true Disciples,
certainly we should not stick at it: And that it will do so, our Blessed Lord
has assured us. Mat. 16. 24.
If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross,
and follow me. Men will restrain their appetites, and deny themselves in a
great measure for some temporal and worldly ends; why should they not do it
then to gain eternal Happiness?

St. Paul tells us, that in the ancient Grecian Games, called the Olympic
Games, these that were the Strivers, or Combatants for the Prize, would be sure
to mortify themselves, and keep to a strict and sparing Diet, thereby to bring
down their Flesh, and make their Bodies pliant and Athletick. And all that they
could hope to get by it, was only a Garland of flowers, and a little frivolous
honor. And therefore if they would be at the pains to do so much for a Reward
not worth a naming; how much more should we do it in order to the avoiding
unclean thoughts, and impure desires; which will not only hinder us in our
Striving for Heaven, but unqualify us for it. Thus the Apostle argues, Every
one that striveth for the Mastery is temperate in all things. 1 Cor. 9. 25* etc.
Now they do it to obtain a corruptible Crown, but we an incorruptible. I
therefore so run not as uncertainly, so fight I not as one that beats the
air: But I keep under my Body, and bring it into subjection, least that by any
means when I have preached to others, I may not my self be a castaway.

The Third Remedy against defiling nature. They leave a strange pollution, and
filth behind them; and (if indulged) very strongly incline to actual
uncleanness. It is a dangerous thing to cherish thoughts of this kind, to
delight in them, and dwell upon them.

For there are none more apt to grow usurping and ungovernable by
entertainment, than these. They do moreover mightily unfit us for holy Duties.
They weaken the Powers of the Soul to a great degree; and therefore as we value
our Souls, as we esteem Heaven, into which no unclean thing shall enter; let us
labor to avoid them: and this Consideration is proper in order thereunto.

strict guard over all our Senses, is here particularly necessary. For it is by
the Senses that lust invades the Soul. And therefore unless we have a special
regard to them, we cannot preserve our Souls from being polluted.

Our Eyes therefore should be turned away from all forbidden objects; our Ears
be deaf to all obscene discourses, and the rest of our Senses shun every thing
that may have the least tendency to this kind of evil Thoughts. A vain
curiosity to be a spectator, has sometimes proved fatal, especially in two
Instances in the Scriptures. Genesis 34. 1, 2.
And one unguarded Sense has e're now proved a Man's destruction. 1 Samuel 11. 2.
Therefore if we will approve our selves to God in sincerity, and are desirous
to attain a right Government of our Thoughts, and avoid this kind of them
especially, we must be sure to keep a strict watch over all our Senses.

Cum me pulsat aliqua turpis cogitatio, statim recurro ad vulnera Christi, and
sanabor; i.e. When I am assaulted by any impure thoughts, I have immediate
recourse to the Wounds of Christ, and I shall be healed.

Therefore when any filthy imagination comes into thy Heart, let thy Mind,
presently divert from it, to Christ Jesus hanging on the Cross. Imagine that
thou saw his precious Blood streaming fourth, and pray to God that thy Soul
ma be cleans'd therein.

Especially fly to the Bethesda of his Blood in the Sacrament, for all the
diseases of thy Soul; but this of Unclean Thoughts in particular.

The Sacrament is a Purifying, and strengthening ordinance, if we come to it
rightly prepared. And it is most commonly for want of a devout Preparation, that
we find not the happy effects of it. The Sacrament is our Spiritual Armor
against all the Darts of the Devil; against all his impure suggestions, and
temptations. And if we come to it with a truly penitent, sincere, and humble
Heart; though this kind of wicked Thoughts, or any other should infest us even
while we are at the Lord's Table: yet our merciful and gracious God, will
accept our sincere, though mean endeavors; and at length grant us that purity,
which we are so sensible we want, and so earnestly pray for; that we may be
able to serve him without distraction, and worship him with our whole Souls,
and unmixed affections.

Impure Thoughts, and Lustful Imaginations, which I shall recommend to you, is,
the serious consideration of the Purity of GOD. The Almighty is a God of
infinite Purity and Holiness. He hates all uncleanness, and cannot look upon
the least sin, or pollution, even of our thoughts, with approbation. And it
will be a means of avoiding such unclean Thoughts, to have this Consideration
frequently in our Minds; (viz.) That God is infinitely pure and holy, and hates
all kinds and degrees of filthiness and uncleanness. This questionless was that
which made good Joseph resist the solicitations of his wanton Mistress with,
Genesis 39. 9.
how can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God? The Lord will dwell
in a clean Habitation, or none. And if even the wicked Spirits will have their
house swept and garnished, Mat. 12. 44.
before they will enter in; surely God will not dwell in a worse then they.

To the Pure heart alone he makes discoveries and communications of himself. To
the Clean Soul he affords his Grace and Comforts. These alone he blesses with
his presence here, and admits into his beatifick presence hereafter. These only
can enjoy God; for these alone are qualified to enjoy him. Hell is the stinking
Lake of all uncleanness, where impure Spirits and ugly fiends wallow in the
steam of their horrid pollutions. But Heaven is the habitation, of pure,
chaste, and Virgin Souls: The Region of Innocence; the Kingdom of the Lamb;
Where there is no manner of thing that defiles. And he that hopes to come
thither, and to dwell with God everlastingly; 1 John 3. 3.
He (I say) that has this hope, purifieth himself even as he is pure. Psalm.
24. 4.
Who (says the Psalmist) shall ascend into the hill of the Lord, and who shall
stand in his holy place? He that has clean hands, and a pure heart, and has
not lift up his mind unto vanity. And to this internal purity of the Soul and
Thoughts, is that glorious Beatitude of the vision of God annexed: Mat. 5. 8.
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.

Now besides these, there are several other Rules to be observed, for the
avoiding this kind of evil Thoughts; which cannot conveniently be enlarged on
in this Treatise; as the shunning Idleness, and vain and lascivious
conversation; loose Sports, and Theatrical Shows, etc. which I leave to your
own care, and observation to discover.

CHAP. VII.
REvengeful and malicious, or uncharitable Thoughts, are another kind of Evil
Thoughts, which deserve our distinct consideration. For they do many times
domineer and tyranize in the Souls of Men, to the effectual hindrance of their
Duty. Whatever favorable opinion Men may have of; or whatever excuses they may
pretend for them, It Is undeniable that the Christian Religion makes it to be
our duty to be kind, and charitable, loving and forgiving to all the world,
even our worst Enemies. Mat. 5. 44.
But (speaks our Lord) I say unto you, love your enemies; bless them that curse
you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that despitefully use
you, and persecute you. And (Math. 5. 21.) Ye have heard that it was said by
them of old time, Thou shall not kill; and whosoever shall kill, shall be in
danger of the judgment: But I say unto you, that whosoever is angry with his
Brother, without a cause, shall be in danger of the judgment; and whosoever
shall say to his Brother Racha, (i.e. Thou empty, or despicable fellow, or the
like) shall be in danger of the council: But whosoever shall say, thou fool,
shall be in danger of Hellfire. From which it is plain, That the Christian Law
does forbid all Malice and Revenge: not only actually doing hurt to any; but
all contumelious language, and cherishing even the least Revengeful Thought.

But yet how apt is Humane Nature to retain the memory of a supposed Injury?
How prone is a Man to have a Grudge in his Heart against his Brother? Perhaps
he will carry a fair show of charity: But yet his Conscience tells him there
lurks Rancour, or at least a Grudging in his Heart: And it is a difficult matter
to bring him into a better mind. But he must be of a better mind, if he will be
a Christian indeed; and he must not only forgive an Enemy, but forget him too.

This (as is very probable) has been the true cause of keeping many Persons
from the Lord's Table; who rather than they will lay aside some little
Punctilio or other, and be clothed with that Humility, 1 Pet. 5. 5.
which becomes Christians, in order to a Reconciliation; they will obstinately
deprive their Souls of that inestimable Benefit. This now being diametrically
opposite to the Spirit of Christianity; I shall lay down Rules for the
suppressing this kind of Evil thoughts. And they are briefly these following.

Christ Jesus our Master, (who has forbidden all uncharitable thoughts) has
done for us.

How can any one think of Revenge, who has received such favors, and
immunities (as every Christian has) at the hands of his Redeemer? How unlike a
Christian is it to cherish so much as an envious Desire? How different from the
mind of Christ, and the charity of a Forgiving Jesus? who has done and
suffered more for Us (his Enemies) than it is possible to express. Truly
therefore, to consider this seriously, is a sufficient check to all such
Thoughts as these; and a proper means to eject them. It Is an hard matter for a
Man to be so profligate, as to take pleasure in the misfortunes, or lapses of
others, who considers how much he himself is indebted to the Goodness of GOD.
To devise a Revenge, or Calumny upon his Bed against any Person; to seek
occasions to discover a mote in his Brother's eye; to proclaim his errors, as
upon the housetop, and to represent his mistakes to be his Vices: To slander,
back-bite, and defame his Neighbor; and to support his own Reputation, or
Estate on the ruin of another's: When any of these things are the Buisiness of
any Man's Thoughts; he is so far from being a true Disciple of our Lord Jesus,
that he is in the very gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity.

Besides the great uneasiness that such Thoughts are to the Mind that harbors
them, and the effectual hindrance that they are to holy Duties; they carry in
them a very great dissimilitude to the temper of the meek, the kind, and the
charitable Jesus, shown to our selves. Which to one that makes conscience of
his Profession, is a very heinous and detestable thing. Behold thy Savior
hanging upon his Cross, and praying for thee, and the rest of his murderers;
and I should think, that Sight would quickly banish all Revengeful, Grudging,
or Uncharitable Thoughts out of thy Mind; and make thee more easy and pleasant
to thy self, and more fitted for thy Duty.

Secondly, The Consideration Demerit is; and what indignities, and affronts our
sins have been to God, is another Expedient for the avoiding this kind of Evil
Thoughts.

Fear. or some Temporal consideration, may keep a Man from executing his
revenge: but in order to the preserving himself from wicked, uncharitable
Thoughts, which are hateful in the sight of God, and highly punishable, the
consideration of our own Demerit, is a proper expedient.

And here we cannot but fall down in adoration of the forbearance, and
longanimity of a provoked God, toward us miserable offenders. We cannot but
with the deepest convictions acknowledge that we have offended GOD infinitely
more, than any have offended us. The dignity of His Person, is a transcendent
aggravation of every sin, be it what it will. And this is a very persuasive
motive for us to overlook all Injuries and Affronts; which how great soever
they may be in themselves, are yet comparatively petty and inconsiderable ones.
It Is a piece of great presumption for any Person, to have Forgive us our
trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us in his Mouth, while he
harbors envious, malicious or uncharitable thoughts in his Heart. And
whosoever duly considers himself, and what a sinful, unworthy Creature he is,
[And he would do well here to call to mind some of his greatest sins] will not
easily cherish any rancorous, or invidious Thoughts long: nay, not suffer the
sun to go down upon his wrath.

like them. One Heart, and one Soul animates all the Inhabitants of Glory.
There is not the least opposition or variation in their desires, or affections.
Every one of the Blessed is unspeakably dear to all the rest. God is love, 1 John 8. and v. 16.
(St. John tells us) and his radiant likeness is stamped upon every glorified
Soul, which makes it surpassingly fair and beautiful. Love! it is the Epitome of
happiness! And as it is the cement of this Creation, which keeps all the parts
of it in an harmonious order; so it is the glory and beauty of Heaven. And
whosoever he be that retains the least Grudge, or uncharitable Suspicion, or
revengeful Thought, is unfit to live among these affectionate Spirits; and to
receive the transporting Illapses of the Divine and infinite Love.

Which consideration should effectually banish every malicious or uncharitable
thought out of our Hearts. And indeed this kind of evil thoughts is such, as we
must by no means esteem slight and inconsiderable. They often produce very sad
effects, when encouraged: they run Men into horrible extremes. Besides that,
they greatly hinder us in doing our Duty acceptably; and are so displeasing to
God, that they render all pretenses to Religion vain, and insignicant; and
blast the best of our Sacrifices, and the choicest gift that we bring to the
altar. Mat. 5. 23.


And therefore we cannot but think our selves obliged to mortify, and subdue
them: and never suffer our selves to be at rest, until we find in us a real and
universal Reconciliation; and an undissembled Love and Charity to all the
World: In order to which, there are some other Rules to be observed. As
divesting our selves of an immoderate Self-love, which is apt to stick to most
Men; avoiding Pride, and Partiality. Constant Prayer, etc. But I hope these
that I have mentioned, may put you upon enquiring after the rest.

CHAP. VIII.
THere is hardly any thing that is a greater occasion of affliction to us, and
that more deprives us of that Spiritual Comfort which we hope for from the
Service of God; than the Inconstancy, and Wandering of our Thoughts, while we
are employed about Holy things. And therefore I shall in this Chapter endeavor
to lay before you such Remedies against Wandering Thoughts, as I hope may not be
in vain.

This kind of evil thoughts does in its compass take in all other kinds of
them. For sometimes our Wandering Thoughts are profane and blasphemous,
sometimes wanton and obscene; and sometimes idle, and foolish, etc.

Now these Wandering Thoughts when we are employed about Holy things, are in a
great measure owing to our selves, and there is much in our power, in order to
their cure. We will consider what are the principal occasions of them, and that
will direct us to the Remedies against them.

First then, Wandering thoughts Preparation to Holy duties. We carelessly and
temerariously rush on to the performance of them. We think indeed that they
must be done; but yet consider not (as we ought) the manner of doing them. We
go to our Prayers as to our Secular affairs; and make but little difference
between the most solemn and ordinary actions of our Life. Which is oftentimes
the cause why our Thoughts wander, and scatter: and so we reap but little
comfort, or advantage from our best performances.

It Is expedient then, and our duty before ever we engage in any set performance
of the Worship of God, that we prepare our selves by some previous Thoughts,
and pious Dispositions, that so we may come to our duty in a right manner: That
our Souls may be prepossessed, and fitted for the service of God.

We think it too bold and presuming, to thrust our selves into the presence of
an Earthly Prince, without due consideration. And therefore surely it cannot be
thought less to approach the face of the Infinite GOD, without a solemn
composure of Spirit, and a preparation of Thought. But besides the evil of so
doing; the Natural consequence of it, is to make our Thoughts loose and
wandering. And unless we set about holy Duties, with a due preparation of Mind,
it can hardly be conceived how it should be otherwise. When therefore we draw
nigh unto God in the way of his worship, either in our Closets, or Families, or
in the Public Assemblies of the Church, and especially in the last of these;
it is our Duty to dispose our hearts beforehand, and to settle them in a due
frame of Devotion: because our deportment, when we are actually engaged in it,
does m^ghtily depend thereon. Thus the Preacher.; Eccles. 5. 1, 2.
Keep thy foot when thou go to the house of God, and be more ready to hear,
than to offer the sacrifice of fools; for they consider not that they do evil.
Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty to utter any thing
before God; for God is in heaven, and thou upon earth, therefore let thy words
be few. This Rule, in order to the avoiding wandering Thoughts, may be but
little minded, but it is nevertheless useful.

Secondly, Want of Intention, settling the Mind on God in the actual
performance of holy Duties, is another great occasion of the wandering of our
Thoughts therein. What is the reason of our complaints, that we do not hear the
Word of God to our Spiritual comfort and advantage; pray with that fervor of
Devotion; praise him with that enlargement of Soul; and have that relish of
Divine things, which we would or ought? Why it is for want of a due care of our
Thoughts, in the actual performance of holy Duties; which naturally follows
from the former, viz. the want of a due Preparation beforehand. Why are our
Minds in the ends of the Earth going a Pilgrimage to strange Countries, and
traveling after Foreign Objects? Why it is for want of a due intention of the
Soul upon God? It Is because we do not possess our Souls with an awe and fear of
that God we worship; and consider not the importance of that duty we are
employed in. When we come into the presence of God, or into his Courts to pay
our homage to him; we should seriously consider into what an Infinite Presence
we come: what, who, that glorious God is we worship: meditate on his wonderful
Attributes; and form such an Idea of him, as conduces to our utmost Devotion.
We should consider not only the dignity and infiniteness of that God, whom we
worship; but also that it is our highest, our eternal Interest to serve, and
worship, and obey him. That it is our truest advantage and high honor to
approach to him: And that we consult the everlasting good of our own Souls, 1 Samuel 2. 30.
in honoring Him: That he will be adored and worshipped in sincerity, and true
Devotion: That he will not dispense with an hypocritical and formal Devotion,
and a show of Godliness: But as He is a rewarder of them that diligently seek
him; so he is an avenger of all Hypocrisy and insincerity.

If we come to Church only as a common and ordinary place, and set about holy
Duties, without the most serious application of Mind, and an entire surrender
of our Souls; it will be impossible to avoid wandering Thoughts.

When thou art therefore employed in any part of thy Devotions, labor to fix
thy Thoughts steadily on God. Beware of an unattentive, heedless, or
indifferent temper. Sequestre thy self from every thing that may withdraw thy
Thoughts: As Moses, by the Almighty's command, Exodus 3. 5.
Pulled off the shoes from his feet when he went up into the Mount of Sinai; so
do thou fulfill the Mystery of that Action: And when thou come at any time
into the House of God to worship him; bow down before the Lord who is more
especially present there. And say as the devout Patriarch did, when in his
sleep he saw that surprising Vision. Surely the Lord is in this place. Genesis 28.
12, 16.
How dreadful is this place? This is none other, but the House of God; and this
is the gate of Heaven! Labor to have the Eye of thy Soul intent upon God; and
thou will see such excellent and wonderful things in him, as will effectually
charm thy Sight, and not suffer thee to look off, and thy foolish Thoughts to
be vain, and wandering, as they will inevitably be without such an Intention.

Dissolute, and Unconstant Practice of holy Duties, mightily conduces to
weaken and scatter our thoughts in them. When we do not observe Constancy, and
Assiduity in our Devotions, we lose much of that holy Fervor, and sacred
Temper, which otherwise we should be happy in.

To omit our Prayers, or other holy Duties twice perhaps for having performed
them once; or to be devout, and worship God by starts and fits, and not in a
regular and constant course, has a very ill influence upon our thoughts. It Is
true we may have Avocations; so that sometimes we shall not be able to observe
our usual hours of Devotion. But alas! we often make that an hindrance, which
should be none: and by not being constant in keeping our Times and Seasons for
holy Duties; but being drawn aside by every vanity, visit, or trifle, our
Thoughts become vain, idle, and wandering, when we come to do our Duty. The
Sacred temper is worn off; the Mind is out of that Frame of Devotion in which
it was left by the last performance; and God is provoked to withdraw his aids
from such inconstant Devoto's. This is a matter very well worth our Notice, and
Observation; and lets us see the inconvenience and danger of missing Prayers,
or other holy Duties but once, without a reasonable cause.

Liberty given our Senses is of very evil influence: And therefore we must be
very watchful over them, if we would prevent the aberrations of our Minds, when
we are employed about holy Duties.

What is the reason that our Devotion, is no more than Lip-service? That our
Hearts are so far from God, when we are in his more immediate presence: That
instead of being influenced with the Love of God, humbled to the dust with a
sense of his Greatness, raised up with admiration of his Excellencies and
Perfections; our Thoughts are engaged either in foolish and silly, or wanton
and impure speculations? why it is because we do not carefully guard our senses;
but give them an offensive Liberty, by which means the Church of God is many
times made a Theater, or Exchange. What is it that Men come into the presence
of God for? Is it not the greatest Honor, and Privilege of a Poor Creature,
to come into the Presence of his Creator? Is it not for most weighty and
important ends that he comes there? Is it not in order to reconciliation with
God, pardon of his sins; the Divine Assistance; and in the end the eternal
Salvation of his Precious Soul? Are these little, and trifling things? Are they
not the greatest concerns that can be? Surely they are. And therefore those who
walk, whisper, talk, gaze, laugh, etc. when they are employed about Holy
things, do much betray their stupidity and folly, and their mean and
irreligious sense of the greatest things in the World.

And besides, they can never think to please God by such a Sacrifice of fools;
but do indeed greatly provoke him thereby. There cannot be a clearer argument
of the Vanity and profaneness of a Man's Mind, than an unserious and loose
deportment in the Worship of God; to which nothing administers more than a
careless Liberty given our senses. For it is certain if we would have our
Thoughts kept steady and intent, we must diligently keep our Senses. And he
that would preserve his Soul from Wandering, must never be so oddly at leisure
in his Devotions, as to gaze on this or the other thing, or Person that has fine
Clothes, or a strange Face, or suffer any of his Senses to be triflingly
employed.

This then is also a Rule necessary to be observed, in order to the avoiding
this kind of evil Thoughts, (viz.) Wandering Thoughts in the Worship of God;
which are often very troublesome, and uneasy to our Souls; and many times render
our Sacred performances fruitless too.

Worship of God, does very much conduce a pompous multitude of Ceremonies, such
as there is in the Church of Rome, which is quite beyond the bounds of Gravity,
and Decency.

But, thanks be to God, we of the Church of England are in no danger of having
our Thoughts thus drawn aside. Because these few Ceremonies which are observed
in it, are appointed in great Wisdom and Discretion: And there is not the least
thing in all our Liturgy, that is apt to excite one vain, or wandering Thought
in any Man's Mind: but all is so uniformly ordered and disposed, as greatly
tends to the increase of Piety, and advancement of true Devotion. This must be
acknowledged by all sober and impartial Men, so that I need only mention this
particular.

But yet there is one thing, which I think to be here worth our Notice, and
which very much conduces to the prevention of wandering Thoughts in the Worship
of God. And that is an Uniformity of Action in the Divine Service. My meaning
is, that we should kneel, when others kneel, and stand, when they stand, (as
the Church in the Rubricks appoints) and observe an Harmony in our outward
deportments, as well as inward Devotions: and this will be a means of
preserving our Thoughts from flying off. Whereas when this Person kneels, and
another stands up, a third sits down, a fourth leans, etc. this is apt to beget
in us an improper variety of Thoughts, and to make our Minds wandering.

Covetousness, and Worldly-mindedness No man can serve God and Mammon. We can
no more have our Thoughts Heavenly and Earthly, Spiritual and Carnal at the
same time, than we can look upward and downward at once. Covetousness
therefore, and worldly-mindedness must needs be avoideed, if we would escape
Wandering Thoughts. For how can such a Man pray, or serve God in any tolerable
manner, who has all the while his Heart and affections set upon the World? How
can he attend upon the Ordinances of GOD, without interruption, whose Mind is
at home, about his Riches, Farms, or his Merchandise? These things steal away
his Thoughts, and for that reason Covetousness is (by St. Paul) termed
Idolatry. Col. 3. 5.
Here therefore especially must we practice that Advice of our Blessed Savior:
Matthew. 6. 31* etc.
Take no thought, saying, What shall we eat, or what shall we drink, or
wherewithal shall we be clothed: (For after all these things do the Gentiles
seek; for your heavenly Father knows that ye have need of all these things:)
But seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these
things shall be added unto you.

Whenever therefore thou set about the duty of Prayer, Meditation, or any
other holy Duty, either in private or public; be sure to shut out all
covetous, sensual, and worldly Thoughts. Let not thy Mind hanker after those
Fleshpots, when thou art going into Canaan, and to have some prospect, though
not to take possession of the promised Land. This is the way to have thy Mind
fixed and intent, and by that means bettered and edified. This is the Mystical
meaning of that Action of our Savior: viz. Matt. 21. 12, 13 etc.
His whipping the buyers and sellers out of the Temple, saying, My house shall
be called the house of prayer, but ye have made it a den of thieves. 'Twas to
show that when we come into the House of GOD, to worship the Eternal Majesty,
and in all other holy Duties; we should abhor all such profane mixtures, as
Covetousness, and Worldly-mindedness, which are the Tables of the
Money Changers, and the Seats of them that sold Doves: and altogether
unsuitable to these holy Performances we are about. We must therefore take our
leave of all worldly, covetous or anxious Thoughts: otherwise our Minds must
unavoidably wander, when like that of Martha, Luke* 10. 40.
They are cumbred about many things. All the cares of the world must be
banished from our Hearts. Even prudent and honest care is unseasonable here,
and nothing but this one thing necessary must be minded. As for all worldly
Thoughts, or terrestrial Imaginations, we must shake off the very dust of them
from our feet. We must in our Devotions soar so high, as to be out of reach of
the fatal Magnetism of Earth. This must we endeavor to do, if we would avoid
this kind of evil Thoughts, viz. wandering Thoughts in holy Duties.

Ambition, or Vainglory in any of our Performances; for that will carry away
our Thoughts and Imaginations after a thousand vain, and foolish objects. The
approving our selves to an Omniscient GOD, must be our sole end in all holy
Duties. And the only reason of our being pleased with our best, and most
excelling Performances, (if such sinful ones can any of them be called so)
should be that they the more tend to the Glory of God; least we lose all the
reward of them, and incur that just opprobrium of our Savior's woe on the
Scribes and Pharisees: Matthew. 6. 5.
When thou prayest thou shall not be as the hypocrites are: for they love to
pray standing in the synagogues, and in the corners of the streets, that they
may be seen of men; verily I say unto you, they have their reward.

To these Rules and Directions, in order to the avoiding wandering Thoughts, may
be added. A careful observance of all the Duties of the Lord's Day: A minding
the things of this World (when they ought to be minded) with indifference and a
trust in the overruling Providence of God. That we be more and more humble and
repenting.

That there remain no sin unmortified in us.

A devout and earnest Praying to be delivered from them, that so we may serve
GOD without distraction, in imitation of the Blessed in Heaven, etc.

These are the Principal Rules that I could discover, in order to the avoiding
vain and wandering Thoughts in the worship of God: Which are oftentimes an
unspeakable affliction to Good Christians, and which it is no small difficulty
to prevent.

But if after the use of these Directions, which I have laid down, and all that
we can do, we cannot be rid of them; but they will still haunt and disturb us;
yet we must persist in our Duty. Though they should come very thick upon us, yet
we must not be discouraged from our Duty: For leaving that undone is (I am
sure) far from being a Remedy against them; and gives the Devil a greater
advantages over us, than we are aware. We must therefore continue in our duty,
though it be with an heavy heart: And then we shall retain the Virtue, though we
lose the present satisfaction of our Obedience. GOD sees the sincerity of our
hearts, and will assuredly reward us at the last. Although the Devil (who has a
great hand in these Thoughts also, as we find in the Parable of the Sower) does
continually vex, Matt. 13.
and trouble us with them; yet let us wait upon GOD with patience, and an
humble observance of these Rules laid down, as far as we are able: and then we
shall be in no danger by reason of such Thoughts, though we should be grappling,
and fighting with them, as long as we live. It Is impossible (I think) that we
should be totally freed from them in this fluid Medium; in this state of
frailty and corruption: that the Mind should be quite cleansed of these
annoyances. But yet we are to consider that our Life is a continual warfare;
and our condition here a state of imperfection: and that therefore we are not
to despair, as if we had done no good, because we have not attained to what
this Life cannot afford.

But to comfort our selves with this viz. that if in Obedience to God's
Commands, we maintain the Combat, and fight against them, and use such Remedies
as are prescribed; God will accept of our Endeavors; pass by our Infirmities,
and grant us at last a Complete Victory in Heaven above, which alone is
CONSVMMATION: Where we shall be free from bodily weaknesses (which many times
greatly administer to such, and indeed I think to most other Evil thoughts) and
from all the feeblenesses and impotencies of the Mind. From all vain and
enticing Objects from without; and from all the treachery of Corruption from
within. From every wanton Glance, every vain Imagination, and every idle
Thought.

CHAP. IX.
WE are now come to the last kind of evil Thoughts, which I shall more
particularly handle in this Treatise: viz. Sad, melancholy, or despairing
Thoughts. And in order to our taking a true observation of these, and applying
proper Remedies against them: we are to take notice, That the occasion of these
Thoughts is partly in the habit and constitution of the Body. This is
undeniable to any Person that has made but the least Observation in things of
this nature.: For these Persons, who are most of all troubled with this kind of
Evil Thoughts (for such they are to be reckoned) are hypochondriacal and
hysterical People, and whose Constitution is impaired by some bodily Disease:
and therefore the Remedies against them, must be partly Natural, and partly
Spiritual. But yet I hope I shall not be thought to trespass, if I happen to
speak a word or two of the former.

Dea bona valetudo -- Health, is the greatest of Temporal Mercies; and that
without which we can but weakly prosecute our Spiritual concerns. It Is the Soul
of Life; and as we can never be too thankful to God for it; so every act of
Excess, whereby it is impaired, is a greater sin, than Men are aware. Because
it is the great advantage of Health and Vigor of Body, that it renders us
capable of serving God, and of duly preparing our selves for the eternal
enjoyment of him. Every Disease has an influence upon the Soul; and the
indispositions of the Body, do and will affect the Mind, notwithstanding all
the Dreams of the Stoics. But of all the diseases incident to Humane Bodies,
that of Melancholy deserves most to be pitied. It should not be slighted with
the reproachful names of Whimsey, and mere Fancy. It Is a great injury done to
Persons who are affected with it, to disregard their complaints, and laugh at
their Miferies. Though they should not indulge them, yet some pity is due to
them. Did they but know the woe and anguish; the terror and amazement, that
they endure, could they but be sensible of half their misery; they could not
choose but pity them. An Hypochondriacal or Hysterical Person, that is deeply
affected with the disease, is an Object that as well deserves compassion, as
any other whatsoever. And if I should endeavor to give you an adequate
description of that Malady, 'twould fill a Volume. What an infinite variety of
evil Thoughts of all kinds, are the effects of it? which being in a great
measure owing to the Disease, the hurry of the Imaginations following that of
the Animal Spirits: There are some Natural Remedies to be made use of: For
which I must leave you to the Learned in Nature, who will tell you, that very
much depends upon Observation and Exercise. That to be morigerous and moderate
in eating and drinking; and to be much in bodily exercise, but not violent, is
most proper advice. If a Person has but the virtue to be regular in his way of
Living, and the patience to continue bodily exercise, he does a great deal
toward making his Life more easy, and his thoughts more comfortable. For every
thing that tends to make the Blood and Spirits lively, regular, and vigorous,
tends to dispel the blackness and heaviness of the Thoughts. Which therefore
whoever is so unhappy as to be afflicted with Melancholy, must study; he must
(I say) apply himself to the use of such things as tend to cherish his Blood,
and exalt his Spirits. To which all vicious extremes are directly contrary. The
Learned Physicians will also tell you, That none are more voracious of
Medicines, than melancholy Persons; but that their desire in that is no more to
be indulged, than in many other things; and that there may be too much, as well
as too little -- But I am gone too far this way. I would only have it observed,
That sad, melancholy, and even despairing Thoughts, are sometimes the
consequences of this disease: for such it is, as much as a Fever, or any other.
And therefore the Pysician must be consulted.

But although the Infirmities of the Body do very much conduce to such Thoughts
as these; yet we should be mindful, that there is the hand of GOD in them too.
And not so to lay the blame upon Natural Indisposition, as to have no other
Thoughts about it. We may not think that this case is purely Physical, and that
therefore there is no need of any Spiritual Remedies: For there is.

Ezamination of our own selves. We must call Our-selves to an account, search
into our own Hearts and Lives; and-see what we have been, and done. And perhaps
we may find some great and wilful Sin, that we have been guilty of; or some
wrong, or injustice, that we continue in: which happens to be the cause of all
our blackness, and sadness. And these dismal Thoughts which so affright us,
are no other than the checks of our own Conscience, which is a faithful
Monitor, and Adviser, and impartially censures and judges all our Actions. The
Good that we do it approves of, commends and applauds in us: But no wilful sin
can escape its lashes, and bitter reproaches. Its authority is an Emblem of the
Almighty's Power, and Omniscience; and its Sentence Praejudicium ultimi
judicii. It will in spite of the Sinner, set his sins in order before him: and
fill him with horror and trembling and fearful Thoughts: which if they arise
from hence, there is no remedy but Repentance. Nothing but the Tears of a Godly
Sorrow can ease his heavy Heart: And renewed resolutions of watchfulness, and a
more diligent Obedience for the time to come, are the best expedient to remove
the blackness and sadness that is upon his Soul. And when the Sinner has truly
repented, and there is an entire change wrought upon him; then he may hope for
the light of GOD's countenance to shine upon him: and that he will comfort him
now after the time that he has plagued him, and for the years wherein he has
suffered adversity. But if upon a serious and deep Examination of himself, he
cannot find that these sad and frightful Thoughts, which infest him, proceed
from any such cause, as some wilful and notorious sin; but that the sincere and
earnest desire of his Soul is always to please God, and to keep a true
conformity to all his Laws, and Commands: Then

Secondly, The next Remedy transcendent goodness of GOD. This is a proper means
to fortify our Minds against them. Why shall I think that I am cast off of GOD,
and forsaken of him? what argument can there be for desperation? why is my
Heart so dismal? my Thoughts so troubled? my Fears so tempestuous? Is it
because I am a great Sinner? Truly that is a sufficient cause for me to be
sorrowful, and humbled to the very dust; and floods of tears are not enough to
bewail the guilt of my sin. But yet, O consider the goodness of GOD! He is the
most loving and merciful Being; a compassionate and* forgiving Father. He is
more our Father than our Earthly Parents can be. He is essentially good in
Himself, and good and gracious to his Creatures. He is ready, and willing to
receive every penitent S^nner, Luke 15.
be his sins never so great; nay, he lovingly invites him to come to him. Matt.
11. 28.
And this is a Consideration, which should be a means to make thee grieve with
such a Sorrow, as will bring thee to him, and not drive thee from him: such a
Sorrow as may prompt thee to the performance of all that thou know to be thy
duty: and not such a Sorrow as totally incapacitates thee for it; and so is
both a dishonor to GOD, and a very great injury to thy own Soul. And therefore
thou have all imaginable reason to thrust out all black, dismal, or despairing
Thoughts.

Cast thine Eyes abroad into the World. See! This noble Structure was the
effect of God's goodness; and all the Beauties and Riches of it, bespeak his
Kindness, and Benignity. Behold this ample Theater of Praise! wherein every
thing shows forth his goodness! And then look in upon thy self, and thou will
find thy own self another World of the Divine Goodness! What instances of God's
Goodness can thou discover in thy self? what particulars of his Patience, and
numerous Acts of his loving Kindness?

This therefore in the third place, is also another Consideration, which would
be a proper Remedy against this kind of evil thoughts before us.

Consider then your own Experiences of God's Goodness. When thou art at any
time haunted with any dreadful, killing, despairing Thoughts, as if thou were
reprobated of God, and consigned to eternal Damnation: call to mind how much of
the forbearance, and Bounty, and goodness of God thou have experimented; and
then thou will see how little reason thou have to yield to such Confounding
Thoughts. Nay, he does not only spare thee, and extend his Patience toward
thee; but is multiplying his other Mercies upon thee; and so gives thee all the
convincing proofs that can be, that he desires not the death of any Sinner;
but is the great lover of Souls, 1* Tim. 2. 4.
and Would have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth.

How many dangers and evils has he delivered thee from? nay, has he not
delivered thee from hurting thy own self? and by some strange Providence or
other baffled thy wicked Intentions? In a word, what large Experience have thou
had of the Goodness of God, both to thy Soul and Body? How then can thou be
tempted to think that God has rejected thee, when thou feel irrefragable
arguments to the contrary in thy self; when thou tastest and see and have
Demonstration how good, and how gracious the Lord is. No, it is the Devil's
Suggestion, to torment and disquiet thee. For he will not fail to persecute
these whom he cannot kill; and terrify those whom he is not able to destroy.
It Is the Stratagem of the accursed Enemy of our peace, who takes advantage
(perhaps) of the weakness, and tenderness of thy Spirits, caused by some Bodily
Indisposition or other, to inject dreadful Thoughts; representing Almighty GOD
as an implacable Judge, endeavoring to make him seem the same to us, that he
is to himself. We are not ignorant of his Devices, 2 Cor. 2. 11.
and of his restless malice. If those poor Creatures, who are afflicted with
this kind of evil Thoughts, could but be brought to entertain this
Consideration, viz. what Experience they have had of the Goodness of the Lord,
and argue as this particular teaches them: they would ('it is hoped) find much
ease and relief; and be convinced, that their desponding Thoughts are very
absurd, and unreasonable; and moreover, a Dishonor, and a Reflection upon the
Divine goodness.

melancholy, dismal or despairing Thoughts? As a Remedy against them, consider
on the Mystery of Man's Redemption by Christ JESUS. And there thou will find
such arguments against Thoughts of this Nature, as should (one would think) be
able entirely to subdue and conquer them. How great, how incomprehensible is
that Goodness, that not only gave a being to the World, and enriched all
Creatures with his Beneficence; but sent down the Eternal Son of God, to redeem
undone Man? who can form a Thought worthy of such Goodness? O Christians, think
with your utmost Intention, how great the Dignity of that Person is, who was
our Savior. And then think seriously on what he did to redeem us! What Tongue
can express, or Mind conceive, the agonies that he endured, when he became the
Propitiation and Atonement? The wrath that lay upon him, when he interposed
between an angry God, and sinful Man? H^s sufferings were vastly above the
reach of our Thoughts; and our Ideas of his Sorrow, are all faint and
imperfect. Good God! How can we choose but stand amazed at the great Mystery of
Man's Salvation! admire the contrivance of the infinite Wisdom therein, and
adore the Divine Philanthropy? Who can despair of Mercy from him, who has
given us his Own Son? How can we think he will reject us for ever, when he
spared not his Own Son for us? In the circumstances that we are under the
Gospel, Presumption is an evil to which (methinks) we should be more probably
tempted, than despair (though both of them are most unreasonable and abominable:)
Because such Illustrious Goodness; such unparalleled Mercy is displayed in this
Evangelical economy; Luke 2. 14.
such Peace on Earth, and good will toward Men, as is enough for ever to
silence all the sad Complaints of desponding Sinners; and to comfort, and
encourage the most guilty Soul to true and unfeigned Repentance.

When the Devil therefore at any time tempts thee to despair of GOD's Mercy,
and to think that thou art eternally wretched, or have committed the
unpardonable Sin: show him the Gospel, oppose to his Temptations the Glorious
Mystery of Man's Redemption by Jesus Christ. Set before him the Noble Design,
and the most generous overture of the Gospel. And that will be a means to
aggravate his Despair; but to comfort and support thee, who art within that
Covenant which He is not. Christ came into the World to save thee: He died to
satisfy the Justice of GOD for thee. Romans 4. 25.
He rose again for our justification. He is gone into Heaven, to intercede with
God continually in thy behalf; and to procure all manner of good for thee. He
is God all powerful, all-sufficient and most merciful. What an affront then is
it to such a Redeemer, to yield to black and despairing Thoughts? What a
Reproach cast upon his Merit and Satisfaction? and a cowardly, and
pusillanimous disowning of his power and goodness, and a diffidence in his
Veracity, and the authentickness of his gracious Promises?

The Application of the Sweet and precious Promises contain^d in the word of
God, is also a proper expedient against this kind of evil Thoughts. As the
Scripture contains terrible and severe Threatenings, to deter secure and
stubborn Sinners: so it is a Treasure of most comfortable Promises, for the
support and stay of Mournful, and Timorous Souls. Without which (indeed) it
would be sometimes an hard matter for poor Christians to bear up under the
Thoughts of an approaching Eternity; and to resist the furious assaults, and
the fiery darts of the Devil. Almighty God has therefore engaged his Veracity;
that if we fear him, and keep his Commandments; live according to the plain
Rules of the Gospel, and believe; we shall be assuredly happy and blessed. In
order to which, he has also liberally promised all such supplies of Grace and
Assistance as we shall at any time need. These Promises therefore we should
firmly believe, and lay hold on, and apply to our selves, when we are at any
time haunted with such desperate injections, as we are speaking of. In vain
have Christians this Spiritual Armory, and Magazine, if they let these Weapons
of war lie unused.

Ah! but says the Disconsolate and Drooping Soul, I am satisfied of the
Goodness of God; of the Infinite Merit of Jesus Christ; that He was an
Inestimable Oblation for Sin, and a Sacrifice of transcendent value: but oh! I
fear that the virtue of that great Sacrifice belongs not to me. But hear what
comfortable words our Savior Christ says, unto all them that truly turn to
him: Come unto me all ye that are weary, Matt. 11.
and heavy laden with the burden of your sins, and I will refresh you. John 3.
16.
So God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, to the end that
all that believe in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.

I believe also (says the Desponding Soul) the exceeding great and precious
Promises: I am fully persuaded that in Christ all the promises of God are Yea,
and Amen. And that Heaven and Earth shall pass away; but not one tittle of God'
s word shall pass away: But these Promises do not appertain to me. I have
forfeited all Title and Claim to them; and therefore oh! am certainly lost and
undone for ever. -- But let me beseech thee (whoever thou art, that art
depressed with such Thoughts as these) to beware, and consider, That this is a
bold and a peremptory Sentence, which thou passest on thy self. Such a Sentence
as none of all the created Beings can affirm. It Is the suggestion of the most
desperate Being, the Enemy of our Souls; and what finite Being, can without the
height of Presumption, pass such a Sentence upon any Person? which (too) is so
far from being true, that it is utterly false.

For the gracious Promises of the Gospel are offered to all whatsoever; none
are excepted. And every one that will lay hold of them, has a title to them:
provided he comes up to the conditions on which they are established. And
therefore, in God's Name, hearken no longer to such terrifying Thoughts; but
let this still the boistrous and troubled sea; spread a calm over thy Mind; and
stir thee up to a devout Application of the Blessed Promises of God, to thy own
sinful Soul.

Constant and devout Prayer here also absolutely necessary. Pray we therefore
that God would quiet, and still our hurried and affrighted Spirits: That he
would (in mercy) be pleased to give us a right Understanding of our selves, his
Promises, and Threatenings; that we may not cast away our Confidence in him; nor
place it any where, but in him. That God would vouchsafe to deliver us* from
the terrors of Satan; who is by St. Peter styled A roaring Lion, 1 Pet. 5. 8.
walking about, seeking whom he may devour. That he would scatter these black
Clouds and Mists, which overspread our Souls with the light of his countenance,
and shine in upon our drooping, sorrowful and sick Souls. That the Sun of
Righteousness may arise upon us, with healing in his wings; and that the Lord
would grant us that inward joy, and peace of Conscience, which the World cannot
give, and which passes all understanding. That he would no longer hide his
face from us; but show us some glimpse of his favor, which is better than the
life it self: That he would heal all the diseases and infirmities both of our
Souls and Bodies; that the bones which he has broken may rejoice. Is any among
you afflicted (says St. James) let him pray. James 5. 13.
Then especially is a proper time to seek God's face. Psalm. 50. 15.
Call upon me (says God) in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou
shall glorify me.

Ah! but I cannot pray! I cannot perform any holy Duty; or fix to any one part
of Religion. I no sooner retire into my Closet, or kneel down upon my knees,
but a thousand terrors infest me; so that I think 'twere better to let
Devotion alone, then to perform it no better. (Ah! Lord!) But let me ask thee;
Do thou do thy utmost? do thou sincerely desire to do thy duty, and to
please God; and do thou put a force upon thy self, sometimes, to perform the
Duty of Prayer, or any other holy Duty; though it be with many interruptions, and
distractions? Continue to do so; for by so doing, thou will approve thy self
unto GOD, who sees thy Heart; and, in all probability, thy fears and terrors
will by degrees vanish; these sad and dismal Thoughts will lessen, and at
length quite leave thee.

GOD is a God hearing Prayers. He will be sought to in our distresses, and
implored in our afflictions. Say then (with the Psalmist) Why art thou cast
down, Psalm. 42. ult.
O my Soul? and why art thou so disquieted within me? hope thou in God, (pray
to him) for I shall yet praise him, who is the help of my countenance, and my
God.

Again: To prevent these sad, dejected, or despairing Thoughts we are speaking
of: we must be careful that we do not love the World immoderately. For how
remote soever Covetousness may seem from Despair, the former does frequently
conduce to the latter. He that sets too great a value upon the things of this
World, and a Temporal Prosperity, will not only be greatly hindered from doing
his Spiritual Duty; but when it pleases God to deprive him of his prosperity:
he is very apt to be extremely disquieted, and repining; and sometimes to look
upon himself as utterly forsaken of God, because he is stripped of these outward
things. He mistakenly looks upon Temporal good things to be certain marks of
God's favor: whereas in truth they are not, but he sometimes deals them
promiscuously, Psalm. 73.
as the rain descends both upon the just and the unjust.

And what is the likely consequence of such an enormous love of the World? [if
I say, it should please God to bring such an one into adversity] but that he
should have dismal, and even despairing Thoughts of his own condition. There
have been frequent examples of this nature in the World: And thus far have
these words of the Apostle been verified: But they that will be rich fall into
temptation, 1 Timothy 6. 9, 10.
and a snare, and into many foolish and hurt-sinful lusts, which drown men in
perdition. For the love of money is the root of all evil; which while some have
coveted after, they have erred from the Faith, and pierced themselves through
with many sorrows.

Let us not therefore set our affections too much upon these fleeting things:
Let us enjoy every good thing with submission to, and dependence upon, God's
Providence. Let us beware that we do not fix our Hearts on any thing here
below; neither Riches, Possessions, Friends, Children, nor any of these
sublunary things. For so doing has oftentimes proved very fatal to many; and
at last has thrown them into Melancholy; nay, even into Desperation.

Religiuus and Cheerful Conversation. It Is not jolly, vain Company; that will
be of no use, but hurt: but godly and cheerful Society, will very much
contribute to their cure. To be always poreing, aggravates the Malady, and
rivets the Despair, and sometimes proves fatal indeed: And therefore a little
good Conversation is very necessary. Religious Discourses and Conferences, will
keep out worse Thoughts; and conduce very much to make us rejoice with them
that do rejoice. There is a kind of Melody in them which (like that of David's
Harp, 1 Samuel 16. 23.
when he played to Saul) will drive away the evil Spirit. It Is a common thing
for such persons as are troubled with this kind of thoughts, to affect
solitude, and desire to be always alone, and immured in their own sad
contemplations. But notwithstanding the strongest aversions to Company, which
they may have; it is advisable that against their Inclinations, they be brought
in to good and cheerful Conversation; and that not once, or twice; but with
Continuance. And this is a proper way (in time) to be rid of such evil
Thoughts. For, the Devil's Temptations and Injections, especially of this kind,
are usually more prevalent, and come with greater force, when people are alone,
than when they are in Society. And then too, they are apt to dote upon their
own Notions of things, hug their mistakes, and think them true, however false
and erroneous they may be.

A Religious and Cheerful Friend therefore I take in this case, to be of great
advantage, to comfort, advise, divert, and improve them in better things. And
more especially do I recommend the frequent Conversation of their Spiritual
Guide. For it is not to be imagined what efficacy a seasonable Word has
sometimes: and what a sweet alteration it causes in disconsolate People. It
goes like oil into their bones: Eccles. 12. 11.
or else (to use the Preacher's comparison) The words of the wise are as goads,
and as nails fastened by the Masters of assemblies. Good conversation,
strengthens and exhilarates the Spirits to a great degree; and is a very proper
means against all sad and melancholy, or despairing Thoughts.

And indeed, I think, Religion is that which goes a great way toward the cure
of Melancholy. And without it, it is hardly ever to be cured. It Is Religion must
give a Man a rational, and a well-grounded hope of the security of his eternal
condition hereafter; without which it is difficult to imagine how his heart
should ever be easy, and his Thoughts serene, quiet, and composed. And
therefore he that would avoid this kind of evil Thoughts; I exhort and advise
him first to fix the grand Point of Religion in himself; and then to cherish,
and improve it by cheerful and Religious Conversation.

But in doing this, we must not think that we can be always employed in
Religion; that we can have our Thoughts stretched up always to such a pitch; to
be continually engaged in the duties of Devotion; and be thinking that we
cannot please God without it. For we have Bodies as well as Souls: We are Men,
and not Angels. And therefore though we should do our utmost, and with all
imaginable sincecerity; yet we should not lay too great a load upon our
Spirits; for that may be the way instead of preventing, to bring on sad and
melancholy Thoughts. And it is what Almighty God no where requires of us, Hos.
6. 6.
Who will have mercy, and not sacrifice: and intended his Service for perfect
freedom; and Religion for a Law of liberty. Jam. 1. 25.


I have now done with this last kind of evil thoughts, (viz.) sad, melancholy,
or despairing Thoughts. And the Rules which have been laid down for the
well-governing the Thoughts in general; and for the avoiding this sort, and
these other kinds of evil Thoughts, discoursed of in this Treatise, duly
observed, will (by God's Blessing) have some good effect.

But as an Appendix to this Chapter, I shall endeavor to explain to you, what
is the sin against the Holy Ghost. Because the fear that they have committed
this Unpardonable Sin, has horribly perplexed and terrified the Thoughts of
many dejected Christians, even almost to Desperation.

Now every Sin is indeed a Sin against the Holy Ghost; and some are grievances
of him. And therefore we are exhorted not to Grieve the holy Spirit of God.
Ephesians. 4. 30.
But THE SIN against the Holy Ghost, which is pronounced by our Lord Jesus
himself to be unpardonable in this World, and in the World to come; is called
also Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost by the Evangelists. In Matthew. 12. 31, 32.
the words are these: Wherefore I say unto you, that all manner of sin and
blasphemy shall be forgiven; i. e. is capable of being forgiven: but the
Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men. And whosoever
speaks a word against the son of Man, it shall be forgiven him; but whosoever
speaks against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven; neither in this
world, nor in the world to come. In Mark 3. 28. etc. it is thus expressed:
Verily I say ununto you, All fins shall be forgiven unto the sons of men, and
blasphemies wherewith soever they shall blaspheme; but he that blasphemeth
against the Holy Ghost, has never forgiveness, but is in danger of eternal
damnation. And in Luke 12. 10* there is but little variation: Whosoever shall
speak a word against the son of man, it shall be forgiven him; but unto him
that blasphemeth against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven.

Now for the clearer understanding of these places which speak of the GREAT
SIN, You are to observe, That the two former of these Evangelists, St. Matthew,
and St. Mark, in the Context, give us an account of our Savior's having healed
a Demoniak; and when he had expelled the Devil by the power of the Holy Ghost,
(which he had without measure) to the great amazement of all the People: The
Scribes and Pharisees, whose hearts were sowr'd with the leven of Pride and
Envy; notwithstanding their own Convictions, and in spite of the irresistible
Evidence of that and other Miracles, which our Savior did; they blasphemously
ascribed the doing of them to the Devil; representing our Lord as a Wizard, or
a Conjurer. And as absurdly, as impiously said, He casts out devils by
Beelzebub, the Prince of the devils. The Obstinacy and Malice of this
imputation, our Savior severely reflects upon, and publicly declares, That
these that out of an invenomed Spirit, and wilful spite, and against the
strongest Convictions thus blaspheme the Holy and Eternal Spirit, by the
economy of whose Almighty Power these things were done; and thus endeavor to
subvert the whole structure of the Christian Religion, and wilfully disown
Christ the Savior. These have no other means of salvation left them: no other
Name under Heaven, by which they can be saved. There is no other Christ, no
other Gospel: And therefore nothing shall be the portion of such Men, but
eternal damnation.

From all which it is sufficiently plain, That the sin against the Holy Ghost
consists in Words; it is Blasphemy.

And not every Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost neither. Not every one that
speaks against the Holy Ghost (as some Heretics have done, and now do) is
guilty of this unpardonable sin: which is a Blasphemy against the visible
glorious operations; the immediate effects and office of the Holy Ghost; and
such too as is uttered not out of Fear, Infirmity, or Cowardice; but out of an
hateful and malicious Heart; not of rashness, but of set-purpose, to do
despite unto Christ his known Doctrine and Works: being accompanied with an
universal defection, or falling away from the whole truth of God. So that (if
this sin in its formality could be committed now) from this short explanation
of the nature of it, I hope it does appear, that none of these who are scared,
and terrified with the apprehensions of it, can have committed it. And that
therefore their fears, and dismal Thoughts about it, are groundless and
unreasonable; and stirred up by the common Enemy of our peace, in order to
disquiet and hinder them from doing their Duty, or to bring them into
Melancholy, or Despair.

It Is most certain, that all Persons that wilfully run on in sin, and persist
in impenitency, shall finally perish for ever, as surely as if they had
committed the the great Sin we are speaking of. But it is also certain that
thousands do out of ignorance, or inadvertence, mistake the nature of this
unpardonable Sin, and are horribly afraid that they have committed it, though
they know not what it is. The vilest action, the greatest sin of Practice that
can be committed, does not extend to the sin against the Holy Ghost. And
therefore such a sin calls indeed for the deepest sorrow, and humiliation, and
most unfeigned repentance: But the sin against the Holy Ghost, and Repentance,
are things very inconsisistent. And this arises not from any defect of Mercy
in God, or want of Merit in the Blood of Christ; but from an incapacity in the
Offender. Upon the whole then you see what this Concluding sin is; and
consequently how little reason many poor dejected Souls have to be affrighted,
with the thoughts of having committed it; and to sink, and despond upon mere
Doubts, Conjectures and Suspicions.

CHAP. X.
NO Man can be a good Christian indeed, that has not a special regard to his
Thoughts, and does not endeavor to have them pure, holy, and conformable to
the Laws of the Gospel. And the government of the Thoughts, is an happiness
never to be attained, without the most deep and serious consideration, and a
ready and willing application of Our selves to proper means: The which I have
in the preceding Chapters endeavored to lay before you. And we may not think
that it is altogether impossible to put them in practice. There is
unquestionably a great deal in our own power, in order to it, as plainly
appears from the whole series of this Treatise. And it is no more than what is
the evident Design of the Christian Religion. By which the great excellency of
it, not only above all other Arts and Sciences, which (in their perfection) are
only the riches and ornaments of the outward Man, but beyond all other
Religions whatsoever, is manifest.

Christianity soars above all the tempting gayeties, and little noisy vanities
of this World. It is not its business to seek after the silly applauses of the
Age, or popular admiration: It Is not be seen of Men, or to inherit this Bubble.
It Is not only to appear outwardly great, or good; but the design of it is an
internal Purity and Holiness; a conformity of our Thoughts to the Rules of the
Gospel.

The Philosophy of the Gentile World though it went far, yet came vastly short of
it. And all the excellent Rules delivered by the ancient Moralists, for the
government of Life, are much below the Divine Oracles. As for the Jewish
Religion, it consisted of mere Elements, Gal. 4. 9.
and first Rudiments. The Law being (as the Apostle tells us) but as the
Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ. Gal. 3. 24.
The Law was delivered in blackness and thick darkness on Mount Sinai; Deuteronomy. 4.
11.
and indeed 'twas but Darkness in comparison of the more Bright discoveries of
the Evangelical State, which consists not in Types, Figures, and shadows, and
Parabolical, and Mystical Rites; but in plain, and perfective Precepts: In such
admirable Rules, and Directions, as duly observed, will wonderfully enrich and
beautify the Soul, and bring it near to perfection, by a resemblance of GOD
himself; and dispose, and prepare it for the Blissful enjoyment of Heaven, and
the Beatifick Vision.

The Rites of the Pagan Religions did consist in the vilest impurities. And as
for Mahomet; as Ambition and Lust were the first Motives to his Imposture; so
Lewdness and Obscenity is his Heaven too. And indeed other Religions too have
taken care to propagate uncleanness under the specious pretenses of a Recluse
Life, and the severest purity.

But true Religion indeed, such as our Lord Jesus always preached, and urged
upon Men, and is built upon the genuine design of the holy Scriptures; refines
and purifies the Soul to the utmost: will not allow Men in a loose or an Evil
Thought, much less grant them Indulgences, for all manner of Lewdness, and
dispense with such things, as are not fit to be named among Christians. But
it is only Design and Intention is to make Men like Angels, and the pure
Celestial Spirits; and qualify them for their Society and Happiness to
everlasting Ages.

This plainly shows us the excellency of the Christian Religion above any other
Institution in the World: powerfully recommends it to our choice, and
convinces us of the necessity of being good and holy, if we would be eternally
happy: and of the great importance of our serious and Religious Application and
Improvement of these words of the eternal Son of GOD: -- For out of the Heart
proceed Evil Thoughts.

I conclude with that apposite Advice of the holy Apostle St. Paul: Phil. 4. 8.
etc.
Finally, Brethren; whatsoever things are true; whatsoever things are honest;
whatsoever things are just; whatsoever things are pure; whatsoever things are
lovely; whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any virtue, and if
there be any praise, think on these things.

FINIS.
THE PRAYER FOR A Melancholy Person.
O Eternal, most gracious, and most holy Lord God! Thou Father of Lights, and
Fountain of Good! Thou art infinitely and essentially happy and blessed in thy
self, and diffusest the beams of thy Favor and Goodness throughout the whole
World. I am a Monument of thy Mercy and Forbearance: and when I consider what I
have been, and done, I cannot but wonder at thy loving Kindness! O Lord, I lie
prostrate at the Throne of Grace in an humble sense and acknowledgment of my
own vileness, and in a sorrowful confession of my Sins, which have been
exceeding many, and grievously provoking. I have deserved Eternal punishment
and horror, and therefore do not repine at my present Affliction. Why should a
living man complain, a Man for the punishment of his sin? But, O Lord! thou art
our FATHER, and to whom should we lay open our wants, but to a Father? Look
therefore upon my affliction and misery, and forgive me all my sins. -- Thy
hand is heavy upon me day and night, and my moisture is like the drought in
summer. -- My heart also in the midst of my Body is even like melting wax. I am
cast down, O Lord! I am beset with fears and terrors; encompassed about with
thick clouds of sadness! -- But yet I hope to see the goodness of the Lord in
the land of the living. -- Lord, sanctify this great affliction to me! And let
not any of the Devil's temptations prevail with me, to let go my hope in
Christ. Grant me, I beseech thee, trust and affiance in thy Mercy; and let me
not make Sin my refuge, or seek comfort and redress from any indirect means:
But patiently wait on thee, O GOD, who alone bring down, and raisest up, who
killest, and make alive. O Lord, be pleased to pardon, and forgive me all my
sins; and to heal all my Bodily weaknesses and infirmities, and to quiet and
compose my Spirits. O Lord, speak peace unto me thy servant; give thy servant
the Blessing of peace. -- Thou searchest me out, and know me: Thou
understandest my thoughts long before. Thou art about my path, and about my
bed; and see in what sadness I pass the day and the night. O Lord, send down
the Holy Ghost the Comforter, to enlighten and comfort my poor Soul, and to
sanctify and hallow all the faculties and powers thereof. Cleanse it of all
profane, impure, revengeful, wandering or desponding Thoughts, and all other
evil Imaginations; and let not my Heart be inclined to any evil thine.
Vouchsafe, I beseech thee, O Lord, to direct, sanctify and govern both my Heart
and Body in the ways of thy Laws, and in the Works of thy Commandments, that
among all the changes and chances of this mortal Life, I may ever be defended
by thy most gracious and ready help. And, O Lord God Almighty, unto whom all
Hearts be open, all desires known, and from whom no secrets are hid, cleanse
the Thoughts of my Heart, by the Inspiration of the Holy Spirit, that I may
perfectly love thee, and worthily magnify thy holy Name. Thou see, O Lord,
that I have no power of my self to help my self keep me therefore both
outwardly in my body, and inwardly in my Soul; that I may be defended from all
adversities, which may happen to the Body, and from all Evil Thoughts, which
may assault and hurt the Soul: And at last bring me to that blessed state,
where I shall serve, love, and worship thee without fear or distraction; and be
out of the reach of all my Spiritual Enemies, and enjoy consummate
tranquillity, and bliss. And all I most humbly and earnestly beg, in and
through the meritorious Agonies and Death of Jesus Christ, our only Lord and
Savior. Amen.

Our Father, etc.
Books printed for, and sold by Charles Yeo, John Pearce, and Philip Bishop,
Booksellers in Exon.
A Sermon preached in the Cathedral Church of St. Peter in Exon, April 4. 1697.
being Easter Day, and Assize Sunday: By William Chilcot, M. A.

Select Hymns, each fitted to two Tunes, to be sung in Churches.

The Beauty of Holiness: or, A short Defense and Vindication of the pious
Decency, Regularity, and Order of Reading the Communion-Service, at the
Communion Table; offered to a dissatify'd Neighbor, from his Minister.

A Form of Prayer for Married Persons, for the most part taken out of the
Liturgy.

In the PRESS.
DAnmonii Orientales Illustres: or, The Worthies of Devon; Printed by way of
Subscription, price in Sheets Sixteen Shillings and Six pence; the first
Payment eight Shillings. All Gentlemen that are willing to take the Advantage
by Subscribing, are desired to send in their first payment with all speed to
the Undertakers, Charles Yeo, John Pearce, and Philip Bishop.


