Church-Lur^^^^ UNKENNELLED Or, the true Stating of the CASE BETWIXT Sequestered
Ministers, AND Those that dispossessed them*

Proverbs 14. 34. Righteousness (...) Nation, (...) injus^^^^ is (...) reproach
to any People.

Prove. 18. 17. He that is first in his (...) C^^se s^^^^th just, b^^ (...)
Neig^^^^^ comes and s(...) (...)*

LONDON, Printed (...) 16^^

THE Church-Lurcher Unkennelled.
WHere men are confident, that, through the partiallity or prejudice of the
Hearers or Readers, their Adversaries are condemned already; they study not so
much how to argue, as to reproach; nor how to prove a guilt, as how to
aggravate a guilt presumed. Such has been the fair dealing we Sufferers have
had from our Oppressors in these late days. The question never being put,
Whether according to the Rule of the Scripture we were capacitated for the
Ministry? or according to the Rule of the Law of the Land rightly invested in
our Livings?

But they thought it enough to run us down with a full cry' that we were Baalls
Pri^sts, Ceremony-mongers, Popishly-affected, Malignants, Formalists, etc. and
to exalt themselves for the only Soul-saving sin-swinging, Church-reforming,
Ordinances purifying Ministers, etc.

But (we hope) it is not an affected and ill-joynted Cant, that will charm
those just and rightful Judges, before whom our Cause is now depending; And to
them: and all the world in the name of our selves and our suffering Brethren,
we are confident to offer these things;

First, That if any of us, who were ejected, were ever proved either Ignorant,
Scandalous, or Superstitious, we are contented to be again turned out of our
Livings, the very next day, after the Law has re-settled us therein.

Only this we hope, that we shall not be judged (as of late we were) by Tailors
and Shoe-makers, Joyners and Pewterers, or (which is worse) Anabaptists,
Socinians, Quakers, Athiests, King-killers, with two or three dull Temporizers,
shuffled in for Assistants; nor that we shall have our using the Lords Prayer,
or kneeling at our prayers or being uncovered at the worship of God, to go for
Superstition; or our Loyalty to our Sovereign, and Obedience to lawful
Constitutions, both Ecclesiastical and Civil to be reckoned for scandal.

Let th^se judge us, that by the Rule of the Scriptures, and the Law of the
Land are to judge us, and let them judge us by those two ^ules, and we are
contented to stand, or fall, as such a Judgment shall conclude of us. We are
most of us as ready to confess, as our Adversaries are to charge it, that there
were many who deserved censure.

But that it was not their demerits and guilt, (but either the value of their
Benefices, or the considerableness of their Parts and reputation) that laid
most of us under the censure of the usurped Powers, we could easily evince, if
the world had not already, the proof of it so clear, that they have brought it
to a Proverb, Such a man's Living o^ his Learning made him a Malignant. And if
our Adversaries will call for further proof, they must pardon us, if we come to
names, in telling the Story, that when one of their own gang in the University
begged That his Tutor might not be ejected, pleading, that he was a very
honest, godly and learned man* some replied, Oh! but your Tutor, being not for
our cause he must be the rather ejected; for such a one will do our Cause more
harm, then if he were either Ignorant, or Scanddalous. And it is no hard
matter, to gather up a Jury of such abominable transactions, that will
evidence, the design not to have been for real reformation, but the setting up
of their own faction.

Secondly, This we offer to prove (every man of us) against his own Church
Pyrate, that he is, or has been ignorant, or scandalous, or in default of our
proof, we will discharge them, for all the profits of our livings, and places,
except the fifth^; And that they may see we can make good this offer in a great
measure, let them but call for one, that ran through sequestered Living after
Living, and in one dropped a Son, in another a Son in Law, in a third a Kinsman,
and we can tell how to spell his name.

Let them inquire for another that had Preached against self (till as the Mayor
of the Town told him) he had preached self into above a 1000l. per annum -- and
we suppose we shall be able easily to answer the question: Or if they send hue
and cry after Convict Drunkards, Extortioners, Revilers, Suborners of their
very Fathers to forswear themselves, or those who promoted the first Petition
to bring the King to his Trial and Condemnation; and men of the like brand* we
are sure we can name some such possessed at present (or very lately) of some of
our livings.

But we confess the very writing of these Blanks is that which we could hardly
have brought our selves to, had we not seen it necessary to stop the mouths of
our Slanderers by just recriminations; Not that we accuse all: For here we
f^eely profess to believe (and we are sure we can have the suffrages of
multitudes of our suffering Brethren in this matter,) that many who have entered
upon living that were vac^nted by sequestration, yet were men very learned,
truly Godly, Charitable, Humble, and Just and eminently labourious in the work
of their Ministry, and took up the places they entered on, for the works sake,
not for the wages.

And we our selves know many of them so well qualified, that we could readily
have set down under their Ministry, and Communicated in all Ordinances with
them, during the violent suspension of our selves from the exercise of our
Ministry.

But we deny again, this last Character to be due to any, who contrived and
promoted the ejecting of a Minister, and entered ( Ahab like) on condemned
Naboths Vineyard, or that has den^ed the payment of the fifth part, or a
greater proportion of the profits to the sequestered Minister, as equity might
require, or that resolves to sit fast to his possession of a sequestered Living,
till the Leavor of the Law shall heave him out. Such we are sure are justly
stigmatized with injustice, and uncharitableness, and we can name not a few of
such.

But w^ abhor to imitate the practice of our Adversaries, in setting abroad
their black Centurys, wherein they gratified not only the Devil but the Pope
also; Nay, will not themselves now grant, that their Sc^ibe was designed to d^
a cour^esie for the Pope, (under a Presbyterian Vizor,) ^n throw^ng dirt on
that Ministry of England, who had by their Pens and preaching, so long
maintained the b^each against his Emissaries; Will not they grant this, (I say)
when they shall hear it confirmed, That he with others of the fraternity is
fled, to hide himself from Justice under the elbow of a Cardinal?

In short then, the question about our re-investing with our Rights, is not,
Whether clear Lights shall be put out, and dark Lanthorns set up? (We are
troubled to hear, That such an envious comparison should be fathered on so
reverend and worthy a person as Mr. Baxter).

We appeal to him and others Learned and godly of the Presbyterian Brethren,
Whether they do not know many sequestered Ministers no less learned and godly
then their Ejectors? Nay, let them say, if they do not know where Learned and
godly men have been put out, and boys, and self-seeking Temporizers have been
put in.

But this is the Question, Whether those Lights which the Law of the Land set
up in the Candlesticks, or those Williams-with thewispe, that violence and
usurpation conjured up, have the best claim to the Candlesticks?

The Question is not, Whether or no an hopeful Reformation shall be made blank
and voided? But, Whether Oppression shall prevail under the name of
Reformation? For many of us can profess in the presence of God, That our
prayers to him and our endeavors with men, have been frequent and sincere, to
this effect; That the Nation might be reformed from ignorance and profaneness,
and Sectarianisme, and be made a Body of intelligent, serious and united
Christians. And if any amongst us strive to hinder that work, we will join in
reading from Mount Ebal that curse against such Let the great Master lay them
aside as vessess, in which he has no pleasure.

Here therefore we adjure our Brethren (who own the knowledge and conscience of
what is just and equal; not to labor further by clamor, and importunity, and
false imputations to hinder his Sacred Majesty, and this his happy Parliament,
from hearkening to our just Suits, and the cries of our impoverished Wives and
Children, and the groans and desires of our scattered slocks, whose eyes and
hearts are generally toward us their lawful Pastors.

Our Desires are not to obstruct the way of any that have been in our Livings,
(if deserving men) from such preferments, or employments as they may lawfully
pursue.

And we confess, there are many of them of such eminency, for Parts, and Piety,
and Moderation, that they are much likelyer to be exalted to the highest
Spheres in the Church, then most of us a^^; And we see it (and rejoice in it,
blessing God from the bottom of our hearts for so prudent and pious a Prince)
that his Majesty's favors lie in common for Brethren both of the Presbyterian
and Episcopal Judgment.

But this we ask (not only for our own sakes, but that the Ministry be not
blamed, and that a stumbled block may not be laid in the way of worldlings,
(who plead Ministers leaping upon other men's thresholds) to the hardening of
themselves, and that the mouths of our common Adversarys may be stopped) give
us up our Rights, show that you did but take the charge of the slocks, till the
rightful Shepherds were again free to look to them, and stop the further
progress of that jealousy, that is already entered into the heads of some (both
your and our betters:) That the Presbyterian Ministers manifest such
discontents, and spirit their prayers and preaching with the former pretenses
of fears and jealousies, not because of their distances from the Episcopal in
point of Church Order, but for fear they should (by Law) be compelled to forgo
the sweet Morsels of sequestered Living.

We are sure many of you abhor from any thing that may give rise to this
Suspiicion, and for those that do otherwise, the Lord will judge them.

POST SCRIPT.
Whereas the late Saturday Petition of some in sequest^ed Livings to the
Parliament, has suggested their sufferings for his Majesty at Worcester and in
the Loyal attempts of Sir George Booth, and request [ That in the general ^oy
of the King^om, they may n^^ be sa^ed, by being left to be procee^ed against by
a course of Law], We hereafter to make it goo^ that for one whom the^ can
produce who suffered for his Majesty, there were twenty of them in sequest^ed
Livings, who sent horse and men to Cromwell at Worcester, and to Lambert in
Cheshire: Nay amongst those that subscribed that Petition (may we but know
their Names) we question not but to find many offenders of that foot mark: And
it is evident enough both to his Majesty and the Parliament, that they are the
men, who by their preaching at present have conjured up the old Devil of fea^s
and Jealousies, and would choose rather to imbroil us again in a Civil War, than
part with their-not-their Livings.

And we wonder they can plead fo pity to themselves, who would know no pity
to their poor Brethren. We can instance where some of them have run down two,
or three, or four Ministers into beggary, by procuring one sequestered Living,
and passing from that to another of better value, and so onwards, reckoning no
more of undoing their ejected Brethren and their Familys, then Boys would do to
pluck down Birds-nests one after another: and some of them have caused us to be
sequestered and ejected without Summons, and all we had to be ceased on, (even
to our Boo^^, and wearing Apparel, much of which they bought of (...)ators at
a low and inconsiderable value; and have to this day refused to relieve our
Families with one penny of fifths.

And we no less wonder, that they are not ashamed to own, that they have been
so far from being a Law to themselves, that they are afraid to stand to the
Judgment of the Law of the Land.

But we hope our just and noble Patriots, will not lay before their ^osterity
the stumbling block of such an evil example* That men should be continued in
what they had unjustly gotten, le^st they should be sadned, when all others
(who have walked according to Rule) are rejoiced that Justice (as well as our
King) is (...) from exile.

FINIS.

