AN ANSWER To a late Treasonable Pamphlet', ENTITLED, Treason in Grain, etc.
For which Pamphlet Edward Fitz-Harris lies Condemned.
SIR,
I Received yours, wherein you desire to know my Sentiments about that Horrible
Infamous Libel composed by Fitz-Harris. The thing it self contains nothing but
a mass of Traiterous Expressions, Horrid Invectives and Lying Detractions to
blast His Sacred Majesty; insomuch that the repetition of those Villainies
within it are enough to infect the ears of any true Loyal hearted Subject; And
should I handle that Treason^us Paper according to its desert, my Letter would
have much exceeded the limits I design: But I suppose you may easily guess at
the Rogn^ry of the Piece, by the persons concerned in it. Can any man, without
Horror and Amazement, see His Majesty calumniated at that rate? Was there ever
King more merciful and just than ours? Was ever Prince more injured than ours?
His Royal Father inhumanely Murdered, and Himself (after infinite hazards of
His Sacred Person) Exiled from His Kingdoms: Did ever Prince show greater
Clemency at his. Return than he did? With what Candor and Integrity did he
pardon His greatest Enemies and known Opposers, even to the depriving Justice
of her due Tribute, and hazard of his future Tranquillity? With what invincible
Patience has he born those unworthy detractions which have of late been thrown
upon him? Can he not, with Samuel, say, Whose Ox or A^^ have I taken; or whom
have I defrauded? Whom have I oppressed, etc? And ought not the People to
answer His Sacred Majesty, as the Jews did the Prophet, Thou have not defrauded
us, nor oppressed us, nor taken ought from us? Nor has he, on all occasions,
demonstrated less Zeal and Fervor for the Protestant Religion, than he has
Charity and Love for His Subjects* With what invincible Fortitude and Piety has
he rescued her from Foreign and Domestic Opposers? And the Preservation of the
Protestant Church in its merited Luster, (which was so fatal to his Royal
Father) has in a great measure contributed to all those Disturbances and
Inquietudes he has received since his happy* Restoration, and has proved the
sharpest Thorn in His Majesty's Crown; And, would he let the Protestant Church
stoop to the Non-Conformists bent, he might not only avoid those unseasonable
Clamours which so frequently disturb him, but have Money, Applause, and indeed
what not? Thus you may see, that never any Prince could more justly apply to
himself this saying of the Prophet David; The zeal of thy house has eaten me
up, O Lord.

This Libel is in it self so infamous, that all Parties disown it; The Papists
say, This Brat was engendered by the Presbyterians; these lay it to the Papists
door. In fine, to satisfy your desires, I shall, in few words, tell you the
Harlot which is Mother to this Hellish Monster* The Libeller begins with the
thanks for the Character of a Popish Successor; which he pursues with a
Distrust of the present Possessor; presently after villifying the King, for
endeavoring to introduce Popery; persuading the People to Rebel, rather than
suffer it: From thence he goes back to King James, bringing it lineally to our
King, falsely to create a belief in the People, that he is Popishly affected,
and for the most part employed none but such in Places of Honor and Trust; and
then he upbraids him with Correspondence with Rome, blaming His Majesty for
putting Sh. and E. etc. (those truly Protestant Lords) out of his Council; then
rails at his Prince for discountenancing the Discoverers of the PLOT: From
thence his burning zeal carries him to prefer a Mohammedan Successor before a
Popish, aspersing. His Majesty for not tolerating Non-Conformists; from whence
he falls to railing against Church Papists, Betraying Bishops, Tantivy
Abhorrers; and Popish Scriblers, because they endeavor to confirm the Duke's
Title: Then after a world of Damnable and Abominable lying Invectives against
His Sacred Majesty and his Government, (which are unfit to be named, much less
to be written by any Christian) he ends his Libel with this Diabolical
Expression to all the English, to Rebel against his Sovereign.

Thus, Sir, by this Epitome of the whole, you may easily conjecture to which of
the two Parties that Infernal Product belongs: For, Can there be any thing in
Nature more absurd and extravagant, more contrary to sense and reason, than to
imagine that Papists (so zealous in promoting their Religion, so eager in
gaining of Proselytes, and so fervent in enlarging the Pale of the Church, even
to the loss of Lives and Fortunes) should so highly resent His Majesty's
entertaining Popish Servants, so strenuously oppose a Popish Successor, and so
villifie all that favors them, as this unparalleled Pamphlet does?

Thus I have given you an unpolished Description of this Infamous Libel, which,
if it does not answer your expectation, I hope you will be so kind, as to
impute it to my want of time; for, had I more leisure, you should have received
it in a more compact method, and fewer words.

Sir, I am, Your Servant to command, A. C.

London: Printed by. N. T. next the Cross-Keys in Fetter-lane. 1681.


