THE FEMALE ADVOCATE; OR, A Plea for the just Liberty of the Tender Sex, and
particularly of Married Women. BEING REFLECTIONS On a late Rude and
Disingenuous DISCOURSE, Delivered by Mr. JOHN SPRINT, in a Sermon at a Wedding,
May 11th, at Sherburn in Dorsetshire, 1699. By a Lady of Quality.

-- Hanc etiam Moecenas aspice partem. LONDON, Printed for Andrew Bell at the
Cross-keys and Bible in Cornhil, near Stocksmarket. 1700.

To the Honorable The Lady W -- ley.
Madam;
ALL the World will agree with me, when I tell You that it is not because You
have any occasion of a Discourse of this kind that I lay these Reflections at
Your Ladyship's feet; but because You are a perfect Example how little need
there is of an unsociable Majesty on the one hand, or a vile Submission on the
other, where Virtue and Goodness, Noble and Generous Souls, Tender and Sublime
Affections are mutually contemplated and enjoyed, and do for ever banish every
Thought that might begin the least uneasiness. For if the Beauties of Your
Mind, and the perfect Agreeableness of Your Humor, and the mighty Charms of
Your Conversation are enough to melt the Heart of the most barbarous Man, and
soften him into a Generous Tenderness; how great is the Happiness of You both,
when the noble Partner of Your Joys seems made for You, and has those Great and
Endearing Qualities which do sufficiently justify the exalted Passion You have
for Him, and the Opinion every one has of Your Choice!

Madam,

May You thus go on, Live, Love and be Happy, till by just degrees You pass
through all the Joys of this Life to those Above.

Your Ladiship's most obliged and most humble Servant, Eugenia.

PREFACE To the Female Sex.
Ladies;
IF you inquire who I am, I shall only tell you in general, that I am one that
never yet came within the Clutches of a Husband; and therefore what I write may
be the more favorably interpreted as not coming from a Party concerned. Nor
really do I hope to make my Condition the easier if ever I resign my self into
the Arms of one of the other Sex. No, I am very well satisfied that there are a
great many Brave Men, whose Generous Principles make 'em scorn the Methods that
very Reason condemns. Not that I can boast of any great Beauty, or a vast
Fortune, two things (especially the latter) which are able to make us
Conquerors through the World. But I have endeavored to furnish my self with
something more valuable: I shall not brag that I understand a little Greek and
Latin (Languages being only the effects of Confusion) having made some attempt
to look into the more solid parts of Learning, and having adventured a little
abroad into the World, and endeavored to understand Men and Manners. And
having seen something of the Italian and Spanish Humors, I solemnly profess I
never observed in Italy, nor Spain it self, a Slavery so abject as this Author
would fain persuade us to.

As for those of you that are already in the House of Bondage, and have found
all the Charms of Innocence and good Humor, and the most exact Prudence
ineffectual long to recommend you to the Smiles of your new Lords and Masters;
I think indeed 'twill be very well if you can, as he advises you, bring down
the very Desires of your Hearts to their Will and Pleasure, and fancy your
selves happy in the midst of all.

And as for those of you that are happily married, your Life and Actions are a
sufficient Contradiction to this Gentleman; while you let the World see that
you can please your Husbands without that extraordinaay way which he recommends
in his Sermon, that was thought so unmanly and scandalous, that (as I am
informed) Mr. L -- the Minister who is resident at Sherborn, looked on himself
as obliged to tell the World in the public News, that he was not the Author of
that Discourse, lest, it being preached where he lives, they who knew not his
Name might impute it to him.

In a word, Ladies, I would recommend to your Thoughts something that is great
and noble, viz. to furnish your Minds with true Knowledge, that (as an Ingenious
Lady tells us) you may know something more than a well-chosen Petticoat, or a
fashionable Commode. Learning becomes us as well as the Men. Several of the
French Ladies, and with us the late incomparable Mrs. Baynard, and the Lady
that is Mr. Norris's Correspondent, and many more, are Witnesses of this.
Hereby we shall be far enough from being charmed with a great Estate, or moved
with the flowing Nonsense and Romantic Bombast of every Foppish Beau; and shall
learn (if we choose Companions for our Lives) to select the Great, the
Generous, the Brave and Deserving Souls, Men who will as much hate to see us
uneasy, as this Gentleman is afraid of coming under the Discipline of the Apron.

Yours, Eugenia.

REFLECTIONS ON A late Rude and Disingenuous DISCOURSE, etc.
BEing presented with the Book I am now going to consider, by a Gentleman who I
am sure was very far in it from the design of the Author, I took the liberty to
pass a few Remarks on so singular and extraordinary a Piece; tho some think it
beyond the bounds of Female Patience to peruse it. But (like a jealous Husband)
I was willing to know all against our selves, especially that so celebrated an
Author can produce. And indeed, when I had followed him to the end of the
Chapter, I could not but wonder to find a Sex attacked from the Pulpit with
more confident Impudence than ever they were on the Stage, tho with far less
Wit and Ingenuity.

When I had in as little Time as Patience turned over all those bitter Leaves,
tho I easily found his Design, yet for my heart I could never once find the
strength of the Arguments by which he endeavors to drive it; so that after all
I think a resolute and headstrong Yea or Nay would have done as well
altogether. Hereupon I laid aside the Book as a most self-confuting Piece, till
I found that Miracles were not ceased, and that some People were so charmed
with it, that they thought it worth their while to teeze every poor Woman they
met with it. Upon this I began to have some design of taking Arms, and alarming
the whole Power of Females against him. But upon second thoughts I resolved to
save 'em the trouble, and enter into a single Combat with this great Goliath,
this man of mighty Fame.

As humble thoughts as I have of my self, I began to be afraid that he would
think himself honored by an Antagonist, and conclude for certain that there
must needs be some mighty Force in his Arguments if any Resistance was made.
But at last considering his haughty Temper, and knowing 'twas impossible he
should have greater thoughts of his last Piece than he has already; I began to
lay aside that fear, and only expected that he would fancy himself the Emperor
of the Moon, and whoever writes against him to be one of the little snarling
Animals that are angry at its Light and Glory. It Is not the first time a Woman
has appeared in Public, and 'twill be hard for any to accuse us for taking up
Weapons since they are only defensive, and we are provoked into the Field by so
great and honorable a Champion. Besides, the itch of being in Print which the
Men have infected us with, and the Glory of having but lifted up a Pen against
so great a Man, must needs be a sufficient Excuse beyond all Reply.

But you may easily imagine, notwithstanding all these Thoughts and strong
Resolutions, how I began to tremble when I came within sight of the Enemy, and
perceived with what a Front he appeared. Not Don Quixot was more scared at the
first sight of the Giant Caraculiambro. However the greater Danger, the greater
Honor: So on I went with a mighty Courage till I came within reach of him, and
began the Battle, which if it be not orderly and well pitched, it is owing to
the motions of the Enemy, whom I must follow up hill and down hill till he
comes to the same place again.

To begin therefore with his forlorn Hope; he tells the World in his Preface
that we may easily see cause enough to believe 'twas designed for the Pulpit,
not for the Press. No, certainly, he meant no such thing at all as to affront
the Ladies in public: and indeed he must be possessed of very strange Thoughts,
and exceeding vain in his Imagination, that could hope to do the least good by
such a Discourse from the Pulpit, and yet much vainer to hope it from the
Press. And yet that very Reason which should have detered him for ever from the
least thought of preaching, at this rate is made an excuse why he should print
it. It has, he says, so fallen out (and that one half blind might have seen
beforehand) that the Doctrine therein contained is unhappily represented to
the World by some ill-natured Females. Now, by the way, this is a very pleasant
Invention for any well-dispos'd Person to get into the World by: It Is but to
utter some Doctrine or other that a Man may be sure beforehand will be justly
spoken against; and because it is unhappily represented by some illnatur'd
People, away to W. B -- y's of Bristol with it, or any other Printer that has
no other Business but Mountebanks Bills, Wedding-Sermons, and Ballads, with
such other honorable things; and so immediately set up for an Author, and
expect that every one should complement him on the occasion. Ay, and this is a
most clever excuse too for a second and third Edition with Additions, etc. So
that if this Reverend Gentleman should have the Mortification to find at
Christmas that some ill-natured Females had been so spiteful and profane as to
have put his excellent Discourse at the bottom of minced Pies; he may hereupon
tell the World, that they have found out a wicked way to obscure the Glory of
so dread an Author; and therefore for this and many other reasons him thereunto
moving, he resolves to reprint it, and it is no hard matter to prophesy with
what Success. But that it may not be thought that I suppose the Author has not
purchased that Reputation which he deserves, and which he seems to be so very
apprehensive of, when he talks so prophetically of purchasing the Character of
a dull Blockhead, I think it will without much dispute be granted that his
words were ominous; only this I must add, that Dullness and Malice are commonly
very near Companions, and help out one another at a dead lift: And yet he hopes
he says (good Gentleman!) that he shall avoid the imputation of Impudence, yes,
tho it be by one of the grossest Instances of it that a Person of his Character
is capable of. As a proof of which in the next words, he makes Proclamation, Be
it known unto all Men that I have not met with one Woman among all my Accusers,
whose Husband is able to give her the Character of a dutiful and obedient Wife.
And this also is a most infallible way of defending any thing in the World.
Just so, when the Doctrine of Passive Obedience and Non-resistance was cried up
and down with a mighty Confidence, 'twas but to say that all that spoke against
this Doctrine were disloyal and rebellious, and the business was completely
done and ended, and needed no further Confirmation. So, because the Ladies
cannot bear so harsh and imperious a Doctrine as his is, therefore it shall be a
Justification of his Doctrine that they cannot, and proved to be reasonable
because it is intolerable. Strong Thoughts! a mighty Argument! especially if we
consider that the Husbands he speaks of, it is likely, measure the Duties of
their Wives by the boundless Limits which this Gentleman has laid out for them;
and if so, no wonder if they are not able to give them the Character of dutiful
and obedient Wives. Then he tells us that good Wives are not offended with his
Discourse; now by good Wives he certainly means such as he describes, and then
no wonder they say not much against him, since a word against his Doctrine is
enough to purchase them a very rough and unwelcome Salutation from their Lords
and Masters. But I believe it would be no hard task to make a Catalogue of very
good Wives who have censured him as an Instrument of Oppression and Tyranny to
others, tho they themselves are not under it. However he is in a good humor
for once, and tells us he will promise to say as much to the Men (I Will forgive
him if he does) when this Discourse of his has reformed imperious Wives. Now
this is a most dexterous turn, and has very much in it; and supposing his
Notions to be ever so just and reasonable, yet hereby he will excuse himself from
ever publishing any thing for the instruction of Mankind how to behave
themselves toward us, for doubtless there are and will be still some imprudent
and unreasonable Creatures on both sides. Now as he makes this a Reason why he
will not speak to the Men, so if he had begun with them, he might have made it
a Reason why he would never have vouchsafed to dictate to the Women. In the
Conclusion of his Preface he begins a Triumph, tho it may not seem a very
proper place for it, especially considering the Foundation on which he grounds
it. He finds, he says, upon the whole that it is Women's Guilt that puts 'em to
so much Pain which they feel in their Consciences, for which he knows no better
an Antidote (you must know he has an insight into Physic) than a speedy
Repentance and Reformation: very well, but I wonder how he came to know that
the Women feel such Pain in their Consciences, for I suppose very few will make
him their Father-Confessor. This Gentleman has a most absolute way to
discipline his Consort; if she ever is uneasy at any of his Impositions, it is
but for him to tell her, this is a Pain in her Conscience, and then the
spiritual Antidote is whatever he shall command her to repent of or reform. But
the Conclusion is bolder than all; he is not contented to make them bear the
Cross, and suffer Persecution in this Life, but he tells them, these things
shall pursue them to Judgment. But under favor, he must first of all persuade
us that what he says is Jure Divino, before he can fright any of us with a
Purgatory hereafter, for not being willing to endure a Hell upon Earth while we
are here.

I shall make but one Remark more on his Preface, and the strength of the
Arguments he makes use of. As to his Sermon, he has this to say for it, that
'twas not designed for the Press; so that it is to be expected that the Preface,
which certainly was designed for it, should be much more strong and labored
than his careless Discourse, which he delivered from the Pulpit. I have
considered it, I think, with abundance of Patience and Fairness; so that we may
judge by the strength of the Arguments in the one what we are to expect in the
other, which he has attempted to force from these words,

1 Cor. vii. 34. But she that is married, cares for the things of the World,
how she may please her Husband. This the Author makes the bottom of his
Harangue; and to give us a taste of his Learning, he tells us (p. 1.) the
original meaning of the hard and obscure word [careth] and by a most deep and
doughty Criticism neatly contrives his Doctrine, which he makes so very much
haste to be at, that he seems to leap quite over the Connection between the Text
and the Argument. The Criticism is this, that the word [careth] (take notice
Ladies) signifies more than ordinary Care, and implies a dividing of the Mind
into diverse thoughts, casting this way, and that way, and every way, how to
give best Content: that is to say, Fetch and bring, Go, and she goes, Come,
and she comes; To the Right, to the Left, as you were, and so on. Now to use a
hard word, this is a most Etymological Argument, and worthy of Consideration.
Thus some Divines tell us the word signifies a dividing, distracting Care;
whence at this way of arguing, we might be told that Marriage was a divided
distracted Condition, etc. which would not be a Doctrine calculated to increase
the number of this Gentleman's Female Proselytes. I could by the same method
prove a Doctrine not very pleasing to him: for in the words before, ver. 33. He
that is married cares for the things of the World, how he may please his Wife;
the original word is the very (...).
same: therefore I say that a Man ought to divide his Mind, to cast this way,
and that way, and every way, how to please and content his Wife, since he tells
us this is the true and proper signification of the word, and if it be not,
it is his own fault. But however, he thinks this one Criticism so great a thing,
and has so much in it, that he tells us he can meet with no other verbal
Difficulties.

[Careth for the things of the World, how she may please her Husband]
intimating, according to our Reverend Author's way of arguing, that without the
things of the World, a Husband will not be pleased. But it seems he was
resolved that this Point should most clearly spring from his Text,

It is d Duty ineumbent on all married Women, to be extraordinary careful to
content and please their Husbands. And if they are all such as this Gentleman,
how can they choose! From this Doctrine he says he will faithfully represent the
Woman's Duty, and a very faithful Representer he is: and by the way, may not
this be the reason, why the celebrated Author of the Irish Scuffle gives him
the renowned name of Fido in that unparalled Book?

Our Author finding that 'twould be looked upon as a very rude and barbarous
thing to treat the weak and defenseless Sex with such a Discourse as he had
prepared for 'em, without saying any thing almost to the other side, and how
little it would become the Honor of a Gentleman, the Gravity of a Minister, or
the Charity of a Christian to aggravate the Faults of some and impute them to
the Sex, and say every thing imaginable to exasperate the Government (for so
let the Husbands be called) against them, and never once touch the notorious
and visible Faults and Barbarities of a great many He-Brutes; he doubtless
foresaw this, and therefore before he advanced his precious Matter, he thought
it necessary to answer an Objection, which he brings in the Women making, and
offers at some Reasons why he thought it not all convenient for his purpose (as
to be sure it was not) to rip up his own and other Men's Faults, and so condemn
himself out of his own mouth.

The first Reason he gives for the leaving out the Masculine part of his
Sermon, is because the Woman's Duty is harder and more difficult than that of
the Man. But I always thought that it was sometimes as difficult for Governors
to carry themselves well as for the Governed, and that in some Tempers to avoid
Tyranny and unreasonable Commands was as great a Virtue as a vile Submission in
a Woman; and therefore I think that Reason vanishes. However I shall take
notice by the way, that the Subjection which he thinks belongs to a Woman is a
very hard and difficult thing, and therefore the Women are the more excusable
if they are not always so very much under the Hatches, since he owns they are
but of very weak Abilities to learn. You Women, says he, will acknowledge that
Men can learn to command and rule fast enough. Insolent Man! To preach us
gravely into Slavery and Chains, and then deride and banter us, as the
Babylonians did the Captive Jews when they had 'em fast in their power. And not
contented with this, he makes the Word of God come in for a share, while he is
insulting over us: Women, says he, have need of Line upon Line, Precept upon
Precept, here a little and there a little, and all little enough to make them
perfect in their Lesson. Now here is for certain a touch of Antiquity, and some
of the true Veteran Jingle in little and little and little enough.

The second Reason he brings, is, Because Women are of weaker Capacities to
learn than Men. P. 5. This is exceeding pleasant indeed; I suppose, if Men were
to learn the same Lesson, their Capacities would be as weak. This brings to my
mind the Story of the General, who when he had condemned the Soldiers of a
conquered Garrison to leap down from a vast high Tower, one of them going to
leap after his dead Companions made three or four Recoils; and being threatened
with a more cruel Death by the General, replied, I Will give you twice as many
times to do it. The Application is easy. According to this rule, what strange
Inferences do naturally follow. Suppose a Master and his Servants, a Lawyer and
his Clients, a Physician and his Patients; it is you will say the duty of these
Servants, Clients, and Patients to be governed and submit: But a Servant may be
abused by his Master, a Client cheated and impoverished by his Lawyer, and the
Patient genteely dispatched by his Doctor. Now certainly any Man would be of a
weak Capacity to endure these things, and therefore the Duties of Servants,
Clients, and Patients must be always rung in their Ears, and the Duties of
Masters, Lawyers, and Physicians, never. Who sees not the mighty force, and
feels not the close girds of so sinewy an Argument?

His third Reason is, because according to the Observation that he has made,
most of the Distractions and Disturbances of a married Life are owing to the
Indiscretion and Folly of disobedient Wives.

Now if this Gentleman has spent the time past of his Life in making these
Observations, he may have made a great many in his time, and deserves the name
of the New Observator: and then no wonder, having been otherwise employed, that
his Lucubrations produce such Sermons as this on so solemn an occasion. I
suppose in his Observations he always happened to have the Women on that side
he could see clearest, and either knew not or winked at the Men's
Mismanagements. But suppose it were true that his Observations had furnished
him with few or none of the Men's Faults, it dos not follow that no ones
Observation else has.

However he has an unquestionable Argument in store, which is this: I shall not
scruple to affirm (says he) that the number of bad Husbands, which their Wives
have made so, is greater by far than the number of those whom their Wives have
found so. Under which Head he is to be placed I need not determine. I had heard
indeed before of a very short way of proving things, and that is by strong
Affirmation: And this is an Argument so ready at hand, that it has been his
inaccessible Refuge in several places throughout the Book. Yet I think here he
has passed an Act of Oblivion upon himself, and has forgot that he uses this
very Argument of strong Affirmation in a thing quite contrary to this, when he
says of Eve's Daughters, or Women in general, that if they will have Husbands,
and have them good, they must take a great deal of Care and Pains to make 'em
so. P. 18. Therefore certainly they find them very bad if they must take so much
pains to make them good: And yet here he says, the number of bad Husbands whom
their Wives have found so is little or nothing compared with those they make
so. But the Pages lying at a convenient distance from one another, and hoping
it is like what sort of Readers he was like to have, he might think no notice
would be taken of it, or that none would peruse the Book but those that wanted
sense to discover the Mistake. But I am willing to be more merciful to him than
he is to us, and shall no further insist on his Failings than to manifest that
they are such, and for our own Defense against a Man whose Arguments are like a
twoedg'd Sword, and cut at once two contrary ways.

And therefore I pass on to the fourth Reason, which is, Because the Love of a
Husband does very much depend upon the Obedience of a Wife. P. 6. If by
Obedience he means a servile Subjection, it is a very clear Argument, and will
be very persuasive no doubt. But if he means only reasonable and generous
Compliance, such as is produced by the noble and resistless Charms of mutual
Love, I grant him it is true, viz. that the Love of a Husband very much depends
on the Love of a Wife. But my Understanding is not so far enlightened, as to
see any reason in this why the Women should be teez'd, and the Men for ever
escape. And here again he has another Paradox, and tells us that if the Wife
becomes pliant and yielding (that is, becomes a good easy tractable Slave) to
her Husbands Desire, she then may do even what she pleases with him: Which is
as much as to say, If she be a perfect Slave, she may have her Liberty. I shall
never be persuaded that such Gentlemen who desire the subjection of their
Wives, and are willing to confine them to the treatment of Servants, have any
great opinion of their Persons or their Liberty. And yet after all, this
well-bred Gentleman, this Learned Doctor tells us, we are more afraid than
hurt; and if we are, I am sure it is not owing to his Temper, his Wishes, nor
his Discourse.

The 5 th and the last Reason he names is this: Because that all he pretends to
is to lay our Duty before us. Very well! But where the consequence is
(supposing this be his true and upright Intention) I cannot tell. It Is true, I
grant him, 'twould prove that we ought to hearken to it; but however, it does
not offer any Reason why the other part should not be insisted on: for the
selfsame Argument would bring the Men upon the stage. If he had but said, You
Gentlemen Husbands, I design to say nothing but what is your Duty; this would
have been thought a very strange Argument why nothing should be said to us. But
so it is, and away he goes with it, and tells us, as for good Wives, The
knowledge and practice of their Duty is so comfortable and pleasant to them,
that they are not listed in the number of these Objectors. And hereby he
affirms, that it is impossible to be a good Wife, and yet object against the
omission of the Men's part; which is a Mistake so gross that it may be felt. And
in the midst of all this Goodness and Charity which this Gentleman here
professes, he cannot forbear, but breaks out, and says that he wishes where
there is one good Wife, there were a thousand; whereby he most uncharitably
insinuates, that there is but one among a thousand good. So that if it be as he
thinks and says, he has a very strong opinion of himself, to imagine that one
single Sermon, with its poor Endeavors (as he expresses it) can make so many
bad Women good, when the number of the Bad, according to his Computation, is a
thousand to one. These five Reasons he imagins to be so gross, solid, and
thick, that he resolves to venture under their shelter in the face of his
Female Adversaries: mighty Courage, and an Heroic Attempt! But whether I have
not shot this massy fivefold Shield through and through, let the World judge, I
mean the just and generous part of it, who have at least common sense, and a
moderate portion of Ingenuity.

Having thus, like a Man of Valor, and one of the seven Champions, cleared his
way through all manner of Reasons, Arguments, Objections, Remonstrances, etc.
he now again sets up his Standard with this Inscription: That it is a Duty
incumbent on all married Women to be extraordinary careful to please their
Husbands. I suppose the Phrase here is something extraordinary and significant;
that Expression, incumbent on married Women, has something in it, and he
thought it perhaps very suitable to a Nuptial Occasion; and any one that
considers with what an Emphasis he pronounced the word [Incumbent] will easily
judge what sort of Metaphor he intended, and to what he made the Allusion. But
however, for once, I shall think it a Duty incumbent on me to consider what he
says to us, and follow him through the whole set of Arguments that he has ranged
in order; and I promise to consider the force and strength of them, and not to
conceal any part of it that I can discover. And here in the first place he says
he shall prove it by Reason and Argument, which really are two excellent things
when they are well managed. 2 dly. He promises to show how and which way
married Women must endeavor to please their Husbands ( how and which way, two
excellent Heads well explained.) 3 dly, To make some Improvement of the whole,
i. e. to make the best of a bad matter.

In the first place he comes to his Reason and Argument, the first of which is,
That Woman was made for the Comfort and Benefit of Man. And if so, then it is to
be granted that Woman answers the end of her Creation when she does bring
Comfort and Benefit to Man; and a very noble requital does Man make to her when
he follows this Gentleman's Instructions. Now I own it is true that Woman was
made for the Comfort and Benefit of Man: but I think it a much nobler Comfort
to have a Companion, a Person in whom a Man can confide, to whom he can
communicate his very Soul, and open his Breast and most inward Thoughts, than
to have a Slave sitting at his Footstool, and trembling at every word that
comes like Thunder and Lightning from the mouth of the domestic Pharaoh. An
honorable and noble Companion was doubtless intended by the wise Creator. It
is not good that Man should be alone, I will make him an help meet for him:
Certainly this is meant of a Creature that should be a social help, not a
servile one. And the argument he takes from the Woman's being made for the
profit of Man, is not so very strong, if we consider the ground upon which it
depends, which is, that Man was created first. Now if it had so pleased the
Eternal Father to have made the Woman first, then because Man was made last,
tho he be, as he thinks, the nobler Creature, yet by this Argument he had been
to have taken extraordinary Care to please his Wife. Now there are some Divines
that tell us, that in the frame of this lower World God proceeded from the less
to the more perfect; and therefore, according to them, the Woman's being
created last will not be a very great argument to debase the dignity of the
Female Sex. If some of the Men do own this, it is the more likely to be true:
The Great Milton, a very grave Author, brings in Adam thus speaking to Eve, in
his Paradise Loft, lib. 9.

O fairest of Creation! last and best
Of all God's Works --
It Is granted the Woman was created for the Man, but we deny that this is any
pretense to use the limited Power which Heaven has given him to the Unhappiness
and Ruin of a Creature that was made for him.

If the Scripture tells us, that tho the Beasts are made for Man, yet a good
Man is merciful to his Beast; much more regard is there to be had of a nobler
Creature, which tho inferior in Brutal Strength of Body, yet in Strength and
Beauty of Reason (when cultivated) equals the superior Sex. It Is true, a Woman
that abridges her Husband of his reasonable Authority, and has Impudence enough
to put on the Breeches, does certainly pervert the end of her Creation; and
such, without any Defense, I leave to the Mercy of this Gentleman, and the
Discipline their Husbands think fit to exercise upon them.

Tho Women are for the Comfort and Benefit of Men, yet that is no reason why
they should be their most obedient Slaves and Vassals. I suppose the Author
will grant that Men are to be for the Comfort and Benefit of Women; and yet the
consequence will not be allowed, that therefore Man is to cast this way, and
that way, and every way, how to please his Wife.

The 2 d Argument he brings is, P. 12. Because by the Woman's occasion the Man
was ruined and undone. It Is true both Sexes have reason to remember the first
Apostasy from God with all imaginable regret; but I never heard or read that
there was a particular Original Sin imputed to the Woman, and another to the
Man. I thought learned Men had held that Original Guilt was conveyed alike to
both Sexes, however it be explained, which I pretend not to do, only following
his Argument, which supposes the Imputation of original Sin. And certainly it
must be granted that Adam was guilty of a very great Crime, to hearken to a
Woman more than his God, and let go his Innocence upon the word of a guilty
Creature. And if it be true, as some of the Divines tell us, that the Woman was
created with less noble Faculties of Mind, weaker Judgment, and duller
Thoughts, no wonder that she was more obnoxious to the Tempter, and that she
fell first of all: He that, according to them, had the greater Strength, must
of consequence stand longer. But, according to this Argument driven home, all
the barbarous Actions, Wickedness and Rebellion committed in former Ages, must
be imputed to this Age; and they must suffer for it. So that I don't argue for
our Mother Eve to defend her Transgression, but to show the unreasonableness of
the Inference from it. All the other Sex sprang from her as well as we, and are
therefore, I think, equally guilty of her Transgression; and I would be glad to
see any one strongly prove, that because we are of the same Sex, therefore that
Sin in imputed to us more than the Men. Besides this, I think it is beyond
doubt, that tho the Woman had retained her Innocence, yet it had not been
impossible for the Man to have transgressed: for tho he was a happy Creature;
yet not being immutable, but left to himself and the Power he had given him
from Heaven, he might have fallen singly, and by himself. All this, I think,
something lessens the force of the Argument; and it has not so sharp an edg as
our Adversary would threaten us with. 1 Timothy 2. 14.
And as to that place he quotes out of Timothy, I think there the Apostle
speaks of Women's learning in silence and subjection, and not usurping Authority
over the Man. This they will own to be their Duty; for they are not ambitious of
the Revenues of the Church, nor envy any Man the Glory, especially of such
Sermons as this I am now considering. However, since it has pleased God so far
to repair the honor of our Sex, as to send a Savior into the World by the
means of a Woman, methinks that should more than recompense for the
consequences of the other, since we are told that the Happiness we are advanced
to by the second Adam, is much more great and certain than that which the first
possessed. If God has so far pardoned the fatal Transgression of the Woman, it
looks a little too bold and revengeful for Man to pretend not to do it, but to
exact so many unreasonable things on this pretense. Nay a late learned Man,
whom I suppose the Author honors, has on the Verse following in Timothy, these
words, viz. That by a Woman a Savior came into the World, which is some
reparation of the Honor of the Sex. Now this coming from a Man, and one that
was known not to be blass'd by any Passion for Women, it is the more noted and
singular a Confession.

Then he tells us that God imposed this Task upon her as a Punishment for
seducing her Husband. (Very true!) And thy Desire shall be to thy Husband, and
he shall rule over thee: Genesis 3. 16. And the Comment on this is very admirable
indeed: Wherein is implied, says he, not only Subjection to him in obeying his
Commands, but it reaches farther to the bringing under unto him the very
Desires of her Heart to be regulated by him so far, that it should not be
lawful for her to will or desire what she her self liked, but only what her
Husband should approve and allow. P. 13. I suppose this good Gentleman believes
that these words contain part of the Curse for the Primitive Trespass; and by
consequence he thinks it the Duty of a Man to execute the Curse of God upon his
Wife. But let us try the Consequence which he makes, and see if the Thread of
the Argument is not stretched very far. Suppose that be the meaning of the
words, that our Sex shall have an universal desire to theirs (tho I believe if
they were all such obliging Sparks as the Author, 'twould cure them of their
Passion quickly) yet it no way follows (with submission to the ruling Judgment
of the Men) that therefore it shall not be lawful for her to will or desire any
thing but what her Husband approves of; I think in some cases it is an
Impossibility. Let it be granted that it is the part of a Woman, being the
weaker Vessel, to submit and learn as well as she can the hard Lesson of
Passive Obedience; yet I defy the meekest Woman in the World, if she meets with
an unreasonable, imperious, domineering, insolent Creature, I defy such a Lady
with all her Virtue and Patience to forbear wishing at least it were otherwise:
No, she must not, our Author tells us, never groan, never sigh for a happy
deliverance from her hated Chains. To use the same Phrase, suppose, I say, my
Desire is toward my Friend, does it therefore follow that I must necessarily
wish nothing whatever till I know it is agreeable to her Humors? But by virtue
of his Office, this Gentleman I see can interpret this way, and that way, and
every way.

It Is to be considered upon this Head, that whatever was pronounced in general
then, cannot be applied to every individual now. For instance (with modesty be
it spoken) the Curse of Childbirth, which God may be thought to have denounced
on the whole Sex, we are told some entire Nations have escaped, as the Great
Montaign tells us in his Essays (I think) Live. 1. chapter 14. And with like force
of Reason might it be concluded, that because God has cursed the Ground, and
said it shall bring forth Briars and Thorns, therefore it is utterly unlawful
to root them out, and sinful to possess any Ground but what is overgrown with
them. The Country People would quickly discern the force of such Reasoning in
spite of all their Duties. So that tho we grant this to be the true sense of
the place, yet it does not follow that the very Desires, and every Desire of
the Heart of a Woman, must be according to the will and pleasure of the Man
this way, and that way, and every way. But if I should meet this Gentleman out
of the Pulpit, with his Hands tied behind him, and his Cane secured (that he
might not use that method of Conviction which he thinks proper for a Woman) I
would humbly presume to tell him there is a far other meaning of the place, and
that not a late Fancy, but a very ancient Translation.

The LXX (and they were all of his own Sex) take it thus, and thy Refuge or
Recourse [(...)] shall be to thy Husband; he shall be thy Refuge in Dangers.
This old Egyptian Translation no question he knew well enough; and I suppose
some will make bold to think it more easy and natural than the forced
Construction, and unconscionable meaning he puts upon the words. Methinks it
should suffice that the Women don't contradict their Lords and Masters, that
they tamely submit, and bear with Patience what is imposed on them: No, unless
they are enamored of their Miseries, and the very Desires of their Hearts
brought under, and in subjection, they are threatened in our Author's Preface
with Judgment, and Damnation. This is a Tyranny, I think, that extends farther
than the most absolute Monarchs in the World; for if they can but fill their
Galleys with Slaves, and chain them fast to the Oar, they seldom have so large
a Conscience to expect they should take any great pleasure in their present
Condition, and that the very Desires of their Hearts should strike an Harmony
with the clattering Music of their Fetters. Certainly, he said very true when
he told us that Women were of weak Abilities to learn, as they must needs have
so hard and impossible a Task.

After all this he acknowledges in plain words, that since the Fall, Man is
grown more humorsom and hard to be pleased, which (tho he feelingly knows it)
he would never have owned, if he had not designed to make even that an Argument
against us: for, says he, it is not the Woman's pleading that her Husband is
hard to be pleased that will excuse her; no, tho it be impossible for an
incarnate Angel to bring him into a good. Humor, and cure him of his
Frowardness. And if the impossibility of a thing be not an excuse, I know not
what is; yet I suppose there are some Instances to be given of such Tempers.
This may, he says, be a Memento to her of her original Guilt; and why may not
the Humors, and unsufferable Passions of some Men be a Memento to them of
theirs too? But however he is resolved to advance an unheard of Notion, That
the ill Humors of some Men, and the difficulty of pleasing them, is a Motive to
the Women to endeavor to please them; a very strong Motive no doubt! and it is
very strange he recommends it to the World unless he has found it a mighty
Obligation to Obedience in his own virtuous Consort. This is a very fine touch
indeed: If Moroseness and Ill-humor be a very good and great Motive to
Obedience, then the higher degree of it the greater Motive; and so the more
barbarous and cruel any Husband is, the more a Woman ought to respect, and
love, and rejoice in him. Precious Doctrine no doubt! and easily believed by
every one who has once cast off those foolish things called Liberty, Reason,
and common Sense. What he says of the happy Temper and charming Sovereignty of
Adam, and the good humor the first and best Husband was always in, seems only
mentioned with a spiteful design to grate upon the Minds of the tender Sex, and
vex them with the comparison between what Man is now, and what he was then: for
immediately he repeats it over again, Man's Temper now is harsh and severe, and
his Humors troublesome and tedious. He seems here to speak in general, as if he
either thought all Men furnished with those excellent Talents of Severity, and
troublesome Humors (which if he has attained, I wish him much comfort in them)
or else endeavored to infuse such into them. It looks a little uncharitable to
his own Sex, among whom yet I hope he cannot find so many as he imagins whose
Humors are so very troublesome and tedious, for there are some great and
generous Minds that scorn to take pleasure in the Miseries of a poor feeble
Woman: tho he is of another mind, and thinks that the necessity of using a
great deal of Art and Skill, Diligence and Industry, and various Methods in
order to please a Husband, is a Truth experienced by most Women. P. 17. And
then he falls a raking afresh in the sacred Ashes of his Mother Eve (whom we
hope God has pardoned, and so should he too) and tells us we may thank her for
it; and that now, if any of her Daughters will have Husbands, and have them
good, they must take a great deal of care and pains to make them so. But if I
can persuade those poor tame Souls he talks of, such sort of Men shall enjoy
their Humors by themselves, and all the Care and Pains he talks of shall be
saved, and bestowed on something that better deserves it: for after their Care
and Pains, they will be nobly rewarded no doubt, and such Husbands will still say
that all their Humors and Moroseness are little enough to make a poor Slave
perfect in her Lesson.

The 3 d Reason he gives is, Because upon the doing or neglecting of this, the
Happiness or Misery of a married Life does depend: and what then? Because such
a state of Life cannot be very happy, unless both endeavor to make it so,
therefore the Woman must be a Slave, therefore her Desires must be brought
under, that she must not wish for better usage; for that is his meaning, P. 13.
and in that latitude I understand him all along, when he speaks of the Woman's
Duty to her Husband. And here for once (that he might not be guilty himself of
any Complement to our Sex) he makes a Quotation, or at least brings it out with
a [says one] which will do as well, and tells us that the Women are indeed very
bright and shining Creatures: A good Wife should be like a Mirror (a wonderful
Discovery, that a Woman should be so exactly like a Looking-glass!) But mark
the Design of it in the following words; Which has no Image of its own, but
receives its Stamp and Image from the Face that looks into it. Now by this
rule, whenever it is a frowning, peevish, fretful, stormy Face, that looks into
this Glass, the Mirror must send back the very same again, or else 'twill be a
false Glass. She must, he says, rejoice when he rejoices (ay most certainly,
tho it be in abusing her, and doing all he can to make her Life a Torment to
her, tho it be in caressing her Rival before her Face) and grieve and be
troubled when he is offended and vexed. No doubt on it, he is here in the right;
the most patient Woman in the World would grieve, and be troubled, when some
Men are offended and vexed: So that it is plain he would never have passed this
Complement of a Looking-glass on us, if he had not intended it as an Argument
for, or at least Illustration of our Misery. But now he begins to recollect
some of his former Courtship and Gallantry, and tells us a very fair Story
indeed, that if we will follow his advice, we should obtain even what we will
of our Husbands; and that such Wives would be sooner tired in making their
Requests than their Husbands in granting. (Dear, Tender, Charming Sir!) But
here I shrewdly suspect, to solve this, it must be remembered, that the Women he
means that endeavor, in his extraordinary sense, to please their Husbands,
will not dare to make any request, but such as they know beforehand are
according to their Husbands minds; no, their very Desires must be in
subjection, and so there is no great danger of their Husbands tyring with
granting their Requests, when according to him the Women must not desire to
form one Petition to their Husbands. By this Interpretation that he has helped
me to, we may easily judge of his meaning in all those kind Expressions which he
has upon this occasion. The rest of this Head he spends in the description of
a complete Billingsgate, and here he fights with the Wind; for every one, of
any sober Reason or handsome Education, will scorn to spend such Language on a
good Husband, and on a bad one it is to no purpose: and if this Gentleman has
lived where there are so many Examples of this kind, let him petition the
Government for an augmentation of Duckingstools, and let him solace himself,
and quench his Rage with seeing the watery Punishment executed upon them; and I
know none will rescue the Offenders out of his hands.

I heartily pity the poor Gentleman he mentions, p. 22. who had so very tender
a Heart, that the Breath of a Woman shattered it in pieces; and indeed he has
done very well to leave his Memory to Posterity, since in this Iron Age there
are few examples of so tender Spirits as to be capable of such dreadful
execution from the Tongue of a Woman. He would make the World believe that most
of our Sex are very Mother Damnables, and always ringing the Bells backwards in
their Husbands ears, P. 6. But the Gentleman he mentions was doubtless a man of
a very tender and delicate Composition, such as is not now adays to be found.

He gives a very pleasant reason why an undutiful Wife is so very terrible a
thing, p. 23. Because all Evils, as Elements, are most troublesome out of their
proper places, as Profaneness in Ministers, Injustice in Judges, and Discomfort
in a Wife. Now this way of talking seems to imply, that Profaneness and
Injustice in some persons look very well, and are in their proper places; by
which what he intends is beyond my weak Ability to learn. If his meaning be
good, I am sure his utterance and expression are not very proper here; but
however, 'twas done with an upright Intention, and a Design to bring down the
Desires of all Women's hearts into subjection to the high and mighty Sex.

As to the Proverb of Solomon he quotes, there is no doubt of the truth of it,
nor his Comment upon it; but really I can see no great Piety nor Ingenuity in
that Sentence he has from his Pious and Ingenious Author, That it is a hundred
pities the Tongues of such Shrows had not as many Blisters as their Jaws have
Teeth; and it is never better with their Husbands than when they are hoarse. If
this be not Billingsgate of the coarsest Alloy, I know not what is; only coming
from the Pulpit, it is sanctified, and becomes a very Pious and Ingenious
Saying. What he says in the conclusion of this part of his Discourse, that a
clamorous and turbulent Wife, that spits Passion and Poison, is a Torment to
her self and her Husband, is a most undoubted Truth, and they are justly
Self-Tormentors: only this I must add, that I think there needs no farther
Torment for a Woman, than only being obliged, on pain of Damnation, to bring
under her very Desires to the unaccountable Humors of a wild and giddy Fop,
who becomes more insolent by Submission, and grows more intolerable by being
born with.

Thus I have followed this courteous Gentleman through all the pleasant Paths he
has here laid down for us. The next thing he tells us, is, how and which way
married Women should endeavor to please their Husbands; And here he pitches on
three very Canonical Heads, Love, honor, and obey: And tells us a very learned
Story, that he has heard some Women say, They never would nor did repeat the
sacred Words; and that if he had been to officiate, he would have kept them to
the Text, or made them lie alone all their Days, to their unspeakable Terror
and Afrightment. This is a fine Period to be delivered from the Pulpit; but
being set off with a vehement Accent and a very earnest Delivery, it passed no
doubt very well, and mightily affected the Auditory. I am not about to quarrel
with the Compilers of the Liturgy, only I shall take notice, that they were Men
who had a hand in it, and by consequence would not omit the binding our Sex as
fast as possible: But it is also to be observed, that those words [with my Body
I thee worship] if they have any meaning in them, can never be applied to such
a sort of Creature as is a Slave, tho our Author should cast in his mind this
way, and that way, and every way, to pervert the sense of them.

He tells us, that every married Woman, in order to please her Husband, ought
to love him. A notable Discovery! and who ever doubted or denied it? But
however, a Man must be a person of extraordinary Merit, all Love and Kindness,
and a thousand good Properties, to bring a Woman to that extravagant height of
Passion, as to be contented and pleased, tho all the World besides were
annihilated. P. 28. And he seems to suggest some odd unlucky thing or other in
this Matrimony, which gives a very strong Temptation to the poor Ladies to be
discontented as soon as ever they come under the Yoke; and accordingly he says,
by all means a Woman, newly married especially, is to avoid all occasion of
Difference with her Husband; and to this purpose makes a very grave and learned
Citation out of Plutarch, for the edification of the Auditory, concerning his
acquaintance with the ancient Fathers; for so, it may be, he supposes, that at
least we poor ignorant Souls do think and know no better. Now by his pressing
so obvious and uncontested a Matter with such vehemence, it looks as if he had
a mind to represent us as a Generation of Vipers, that, as soon as ever any
charitable Man is so kind as to lodge us poor willing Creatures in his Bosom,
immediately sting him to death.

Then he breaks out into the most scurrilous and ungenteel Language imaginable
(P. 30, and 31.) and tells the World that young Women before Marriage do all
they can to engage the Affections of a Husband; so that in their Looks, Dress,
and Behavior, you may read Come love me. Very coming and easy Creatures!
Certainly if they were so very willing, abundance of little arts which the Men
use, might very well be spared. It Is very easy for any Knight Errant to fancy
himself happy, and that some great Lady loves him most desperately, if she is
but civil in her behavior, cleanly in her dress, and has an air of Candor;
especially if she happens to smile, tho it be at his Follies. And according to
this rule, the Author should have made a more civil return to the Sex; for I
doubt not but he has read Come love me, many a time, if this does express it.
But is it not the Vanity of the Men that makes the Women (if any of them are so
vain) to use those petty Arts he here sets down? I hope this Gentleman does not
speak by experience, when he says, that as soon as ever they are married, their
pleasant Looks are turned into Frowns, and the Neatness of their Dress into
Sluttery, etc. Notwithstanding all this, there are some Ladies not so very easy
of access, but hold out desperately against all the arts of the undermining Sex,
and the puling Lovers cannot spell Come love me, till they have given some very
remarkable proofs of their Integrity; which, if they prove afterward to be but
Shams, are no very contemptible Temptations to the new-married Woman to blot
out the Impressions of undeserved Love, which Hypocrisy only had made in her
Heart.

But in my Observation (for let me bring that as an Argument as well as he does
his) I have found very few, if any Women, who have had obliging and respectful
Husbands (for that is his own Phrase P. 20.) that have begun first to withdraw
their Affections, as some have done, no question, who by the undiscoverable
Arts of designing Men have been betrayed, and afterward slighted to the utmost
degree. But it becomes those who are guilty themselves, to talk at this huffing
rate, and silence all Complaints by the impudent Accusations they bring against
those they injure. Thus he talks and raves, like one that has forgotten common
Civility, and the generous Education of the Men of his Coat, and concludes this
Head with a very wooden Simile, for the Instruction and Edification of all
well-meaning Carpenters and Joyners, viz. That when two Boards are first glued
together, a small matter will loosen them (especially such a confounded Jog as
the Author gives us) but if carefully looked to till they are well fastened, and
the Glue be hardened, 'twill not be an easy matter to disjoint or sever them. A
most instructing Similitude! and the truth of which has been confirmed by very
many Witnesses of good credit, as they are ready to attest. Either the Auditory
he preached this to were persons of very wooden Understandings, or else they
were in danger of apprehending the Comparison to be very much akin to the
Author.

Then he tells us, Married Women are to please their Husbands by honoring them
(by all means, Honor to whom Honor is due.) But I think he goes a little too
far when he makes it a Woman's duty to lie like a Spaniel at her Husband's
feet, and suffer her self very civilly to be trampled on. This he intimates by
the authentic story of the Persian Ladies, who had the similitude of a Foot
worn on the top of their Coronets, P. 34. and by the bold and insolent Comment
he makes on it. Now this you know is a most clear and oriental Argument, and
proves just as much as the strongest Hieroglyphics of Egypt. Is it imposed on
them, or do they wear it willingly? If the former, where is the Virtue? If the
latter, I can hardly think it proves what he would persuade us, unless the
Gentlemen of Persia are very obliging indeed. Here again we see very clearly
what this Gentleman would be at: A Woman, when once she is entered within the
Grates, and the Parson has turned the Key upon her, is no longer to look on her
self as a Companion, but the highest place she can expect is to be trodden
under foot. This is the height of Glory, this is the Advancement our Sex is to
meet with, if all Men were of such wonderful Temper, and noble Principles, as
this our trusty and well-beloved Friend is. And under this Head he confesses
something (in my opinion) not much to his design; for, says he, the Apostle
calls the Woman the Glory of the Man, because it is an high Honor to him that
so excellent a Creature as a Woman should be his Inferior. But if a Woman,
according to this honest Confession, be so excellent a Creature, then hence I
think it may very fairly be inferred, that some acknowledgment is due to a Woman
when she condescends to make her self inferior to any of them. And can it be
the Glory of a Man to trample upon, and enslave, and render the Life of such an
excellent Creature as miserable as he can? And here he insinuates that we take
a great deal of freedom in our Thoughts. Certainly if we had not freedom there,
we were very Slaves, and even that he would abridg us of (not that I think a
Woman may harbor any wicked thoughts of her Lord and Master:) But it is very
hard, and a strange Doctrine indeed, that they must not be allowed to have
contemptible thoughts, no not of Persons and Things that are in themselves
contemptible to the last degree. The Instance of Michal is quite another case,
for there was the business of Religion in it, she despised David it is like for
putting on the Linen Ephod, and submitting to meddle with sacred things as he
did. However, if any of the Husbands are such brave and generous Men, of such
obliging Principles, and such mighty Charms as David had, I think their Wives
will find it a very difficult matter so much as to despise them in their
Hearts. Reverence and Love are not things infused into our Breasts by hard
Words, high Menaces, and huffing Language; that dear and tender Esteem is won
by the Charms of an agreeable Temper, the Instances of a noble Generosity, and
those other powerful things which it is impossible to resist, and which will
always secure Honor and Reverence from very Strangers, much more in those who
have the happiness of so intimate a Relation.

Then, he tells us, besides this internal there must be an external Honor; and
that a Woman must use those Titles which may express the Dignity and Excellency
of her Husband's Person. But suppose a poor Lady should meet with a Spark that
is not at all dignified or distinguished from the common herd of Mankind, that
has no Virtue, no Excellency to be commended for, that is of a base,
ungenerous and sordid Spirit; yes, she must give him those Titles which may
bespeak the Dignity and Excellence of his Person, i. e. she must banter him to
his face, and provoke every one to reflect upon his real faults by attempting
to cover them with the vain Names of imaginary Dignity. He brings the Example
of Sarah calling Abraham Lord. But it must be considered that Abraham was
indeed a great Man, and rich; and that it would look a little odd for a Man of
low degree to be greeted, My Lord, Your Lordship's most obedient Servant, etc.
by his Lady in a blew Apron, or a high-crown'd Hat. And by the way, he has lost
a most admirable Argument (which runs thus, according to the way of arguing by
the Persian Shoo) in England the Women many of them (in that part however where
he is) wear the similitude of a Steeple on their Heads, implying by the like
Consequence, that Churchmen are peculiarly privileged to lord it over their
Wives. This would have been a home thrust, and most pertinent to the matter in
hand, for 'twould have invested his Brother Dear (whom he then married) with
full Power and Authority to trample upon, and lead captive the deluded Sister.
But to return from this Digression (which I have made only to let him see
wherein he has failed) it is to be considered that the Apostles might enjoin
more than ordinary Submission in the Primitive Times, that so by their humble
Carriage they might charm their Husbands into a love of Christianity, What
know thou, O Wife, whether thou shall save thy Husband? says St. Paul, 1
Cor. 7. 16. But I shall never believe they designed such a Government for the
Men as this Gentleman and his Followers would fain erect.

Then he bitterly inveighs against one of the most innocent things in the
World, at Women's calling their Husbands by their Christian Names, and their
using familiar terms one to another. This is certainly the effect of Tenderness
and Freedom, which will banish all the names of haughty Distance and servile
Subjection. And his Consequence is very harsh, and disingenuous, that therefore
they esteem them but as their Servants because they use such familiar Titles;
and complains bitterly that some will call them by the solemn Names of Fool,
Sloven, Clown, Sot, etc. I hope he never gives his Lady any occasion to bestow
any of these venerable Titles upon his Worship. But what if so strange a thing
should happen that a Man should be really a Fool, must a Woman call him
Solomon? If he be a Sloven, or a Clown, or a Sot, must she cry him up for a
spruce, genteel, sensible, and temperate Man? Yes! she must give him those
Titles that do imply the Dignity and Excellence of his person, which in some
Men I am sure the Titles of Clown and Sot do fully express. They may modestly
remember the Infirmities of their Husbands, and yet not usurp their Authority,
tho they forget the Title of Lord and Master.

Now (that I may give one bold stroke for once) to prove that it is not always
such an unpardonable Crime for a Woman to call her Husband by an ungrateful
Name, on some just, great, and necessary occasion, I shall produce him an
Instance very suitable to a Man of his Profession, and that is of an Abigail.
Nabal was a foolish Churl; now according to this Mr. Crape, his Wife Abigail
must give him the Titles suitable to the Dignity and Excellence of his Person,
which we find she does: Her words to David are, Let not my Lord, I pray thee,
regard this Man of Belial, even Nabal: for as is his Name, so is he; Nabal is
his Name, and Folly is with him: 1 Samuel 25. 25. Hence (with submission) I
infer, that if an Abigal does meet with a Nabal, a Man of Belial, a Fool, a
Sot, it is not in all cases an unpardonable Sin to call him so; not that a bad
Man's failings are to be insisted on upon every occasion, tho a modest
repetition of them be sometimes necessary, as in this case, for
Self-preservation, which old-fashioned Principle this modish Gentleman would
fain have us cast away for ever and ever. So that it is hence very plain, that
as the Scripture has recorded some Instances of the profound, and deserved
Respect that Men of noble Minds have obtained from their Wives; so on the other
hand, where Husbands deserve such untoward Names as this Gentleman complains
of, it is something difficult to conceive how the Women of moderate Consciences
can heartily attribute to them Titles which imply some mighty Excellence they
never once had the least shadow of in their Lives. Nor is there any thing
formidable in that Reason he gives, viz. for fear lest the Man should come
under the Discipline of the Apron, which either he is not, or else (as I am
informed) his Governess was a great way off when he delivered this Discourse.
If he be under such Discipline, he has doubtless had many a severe
Curtain-Lecture for it since; tho most are of opinion that he is in very little
Terror on that account. These comfortable, and easy things he has been
insisting on, will, he tells us, facilitate the

Third Duty, which is to obey them, (which I confess is due to them that
deserve to command) and here he does make a bold stroke at once, and tells us,
that Subjection and Obedience unto Husbands is required as peremptorily as unto
Christ himself, P. 40. I thought the Authority of Husbands had been at least
one degree inferior to the Authority of Christ; but see whither a hot Brain,
and insulting Temper will lead Men. The Authority or Husbands is as
peremptorily asserted as the Authority of Christ! what else can be the meaning
of it? A little more Modesty would have helped him to another Interpretation of
that place, Submit your selves to your Husbands as unto the Lord; Ephesians. 5. 22.
Who does not see that it is meant so far as the Laws of Heaven require it, and
in obedience to the Commands of Christ? So that if the Authority of Husbands be
limited, and that of Christ not, I think Obedience is not required so
absolutely and peremptorily as to Christ himself; which he seems to be
apprehensive of, and so drops the Jus Divinum, and very prudently owns that a
Man is to go no farther than what comes within the compass of his Authority to
command: P. 41. And here he says, that nothing but what is contradictory to
God's Laws, or impossible in it self, is excluded from the compass of a
Husband's Authority. A goodly Dominion certainly! for according to this Rule, a
Woman (if a Husband pleases) is bound to do a thousand foolish and ridiculous
things. If it be his Will and Pleasure, his House must be her Prison all the
days of her Life, she must never speak a word but to him, she must never eat
but what he leaves, and the Dogs and she may scramble for the Bones; or she may
be obliged to carry his Cloak after him when he goes abroad, and save the
charge of a Groom by taking care of and rubbing down his Horse; and then upon
the least disgust, she may be obliged to go barefoot twenty or thirty Miles to
some eminent Wood, and thence cut and lug home a bundle of sticks, each of
which may be made use of as a Pastoral Staff to discipline her Bones withal.
These, and a multitude of other cruel and ridiculous things a Woman may be
obliged to, because they are not impossible. If it be replied that these
things, when imposed, are contrary to the Divine Law; It Is all we desire to be
granted. Then he tells us, that for a Woman to obey in what she thinks fit,
falls infinitely short of the Apostle's Intent; P. 43. Whence again it is plain
that he means (as any one may guess) that a Husband's Authority is unlimited,
and infinite; for that must be infinite which another thing falls infinitely
short of; tho just before he had set limits to this boundless Authority. Then
he seems to tell us, that Ignorance is the Mother of all this Female Devotion,
that a Woman must not use her Reason so far as to judge of the Laws that are
pronounced to her: No! must obey by implicit Faith. This indeed, as he
confesses, seems difficult on the first view, (and I dare say 'twill not seem
easy on a second) yet for their comfort he tells them that this in conjunction
with the two former will be very easy and pleasant, and will or should be
sufficient to please their Husbands; P. 44. Ay good Sir! no doubt on it, unless
they are Men that fall infinitely short of the least share of Reason,
Conscience and Humanity.

And here at last he tells us that he will dispense with the Persian Shoo,
provided we will but once bring it in fashion to wear Ribbons on our Heads,
with a Love, Honor, and Obey woven into them. An excellent Invention, and for
which (when it obtains) he will doubtless be mentioned with Honor to
Posterity, as every one ought to be that invents any thing extraordinary.

Now he comes to the Improvement of the whole matter; and, first, he applies
himself to the single Men, and the unmarried, and tells them what a fine time
they will have on it when they can persuade any willing Creatures to submit to
their Yoke, and become their Servants for ever. And here he runs out against
the wild and extravagant Inclinations of the Women, and what those Inclinations
are may be guessed from his Discourse all along. There is indeed a very strong
Inclination in us for the preservation of those things called Reason, and the
Liberty of Rational Creatures; which wild and extravagant Humor this Gentleman
would by all means have timely corrected as a thing that is altogether
inconsistent with his most exalted Notions, and pious Design: Yet in the mean
time, I leave the World to judge whether he has not given an infinite scope to
the most wild and exorbitant Inclinations of some Men, tho, as he says, they
can learn to command fast enough.

In his closing Periods (where he addresses himself to the Married) he seems a
little to tack about, and endeavors to roll up his bitter Pill in a few sugared
Sentences: and bids the Men remember that our Duty is hard, (most undoubtedly
true, according to his Description of it) our Frailty great, and therefore our
Task must not be made more difficult than necessity does require, etc. because
they are (says he to the He-yoke-fellows) a part of your selves. This is
certainly all very good. But if it be so, and this be a Man's Duty, then hence
I collect, that a Man goes beyond his Bounds when he imposes things
unnecessary, tho they be not impossible; which does not much resemble what he
has told us, that nothing but vicious or impossible things are excluded from
the compass (or the enchanted Circle) of a Husband's Authority. This makes me
conclude that he would never have once mentioned the Men's Duty, when he tells
them, They must bear with and pardon our Weakness;

And submit to many Inconveniences for our sakes;

And interpose between us and Dangers;

And endeavor to promote our spiritual Good and Welfare.

(Indeed I have heard of a Roman Catholic who attempted to persuade a
Protestant that Marriage was a Sacrament, because it did administer Grace; and
being demanded what Grace, replied, the Grace of Repentance. Now in this sense
the obliging Husbands that follow his Directions, may easily promote their
Wives spiritual Good and Welfare; for I Will engage, that any Women of sense
enough to distinguish between Liberty and Bondage, after they have been a while
within the compass of such a Husbands Authority, shall attain to the perfect
exercise of a most true and unfeigned Repentance.) But these Duties of the Men
he would, I suppose, never have mentioned, if it had not been for the sake of a
most surprizingly witty Jest, which he designed to break, and leave with us for
the parting Blessing: It is this; That he must forbear Enlargement (he means on
the Duty of Mankind) lest by overlading the Memories of the Women, he should
cause them to forget that Duty which has been set before them. He might very
well have spared this Jest, with which he does conclude his pious and ingenious
Discourse; for no doubt the Women will not forget him in have, nor the Doctrine
he has delivered, as he will certainly find, if ever he should have any
occasion once more to attempt to persuade any one of them to renew the
Experiment how obliging and extraordinary a Husband he would prove.

Thus I have hastily considered this extraordinary Piece, in which, I suppose,
the Author takes abundance of Pleasure and Satisfaction: But what could move
him to vent such high-flown ranting stuff as we find here, I cannot imagine. If
the Parliamert were all of his mind, we should have the Salique Law established
on this side the Water, tho he scarcely hoped so great an effect of his first
Endeavors. But I suppose he was resolved, since what he had hitherto published
had not made him so famous as he deserved, he would now do something that
should for ever mark him to posterity, and get him a Name, let it be what it
will; as he that burnt the Temple of Diana at Ephesus, purely that the memory
of the Fact might eternize his Name. Or perhaps, he so dearly loves his present
Consort, that he was resolved, should he lose her, never once to think of
another; and to that end and purpose, has done something to make it impossible
for him to hope any other would ever smile upon him, or that he should read
Come love me in any of them. But I know not what he will say to justify the
Reverence of the Pulpit, after he has preached a Sermon calculated to spoil the
Gravity, and debauch the Devotion of a Saint. Those persons that could refrain
from a loud Laughter at many of his Periods, must have a greater degree of
command over themselves than the Author has. Had he resolved to have talked
thus, the only time had been while he was slabbering the Sack-posset, or
untying the Bride-woman's Garters: And it looks the more awkward, because he
has here and there mingled Gravity even to Terror, and ever now and then all
the Levity and Buffoonery of one that harangues the People from a large wooden
High-place at Bartholomew Fair; which in the Pulpit is not, I think, in its
proper place. Such a Discourse might have passed well enough in Spain or
Muscovy (where the Discipline of the Crab-tree is patiently suffered by the
Women) and he lost a mighty opportunity in not transporting himself with the
Czar. But the mischief on it is, that here in England, tho he has done his
endeavor to make it no more the Paradise of Women, yet there are many of the
Men so generous that they were ashamed of his Design, and (as it is reported)
earnestly persuaded him to let it die, and be buried in deserved Oblivion; but
certainly one possessed of such Notions is utterly beyond all advice.

Notwithstanding all the good he may think he has done by the preaching and
publishing this learned Sermon, I suppose it will not be very hard to prove
that he has done some mischief by it: As, suppose he has caused hereby several
poor patient Creatures to be made Muscovites, and to be cudgel'd two or three
times a week more than usually: Suppose he has inflamed the domineering Temper,
and heightened the insulting Carriage of many a barbarous Husband. Why all this
is nothing: They must thank their Mother Eve for it; tho in truth, if such
Principles as his had never come abroad in the World, they might have escaped
tolerably well for all Mother Eve.

But however, the poor distressed Lady, for whom this was preached, is
doubtless very much edified by it. To come from Your humble Servant, and Yours
to Command, tho it be my Life, etc. to the Persian Shoo, and the new-fashion'd
Motto, was a vast change. From the melting Accents of a desperate Lover, to the
harsh Cadence of such rugged Sentences, and such threatening Pronouncements!
From such Prayers to such Preaching, was a mighty Leap, and no doubt gave the
poor tender Heart a most abominable Jolt.

It Is very natural also, from this Discourse, to observe the vast alteration
there is in some men after they are sure of their Game: Beforehand they will do
all the mean things in the World, and afterward all the ungrateful and
disingenuous ones.

I am sure (whatever a Woman is antecedently obliged to) that when the Men
shall promise and vow, when they shall protest by the most sacred things, that
such shall be their Indulgence and Tenderness, as shall never give the least
cause of Repentance; when they shall declare and swear to be for ever their
Servants; they hereby oblige themselves beforehand to consider the Complaints
that shall be made to them, if they are severe. So that in this sort of
Tyranny, a Man not only violates common Justice, but his own Vows and
Obligations. This Gentleman knows the vast difference between [Bright and
Transcendental Madam!] and the Persian Shoo; between [Yours to the Center of
the Earth, and your Servant to the Antipodes] and know your Lord and Master.

Now those that are of this absolute and unlimited Gentleman's mind, if they will
be generous and honest, ought to tell the Ladies they address, what sort of
Life they are like to lead, what sort of Bonds they are to come under, what
vast Authority must be exercised, and that the very Desires of their Hearts
must be under Government Masculine; and if after all this they will come under
Maladministration, and then complain, they are certainly the persons most
concerned in the Author's Discourse, and ought to consider it, and reap the
benefit of it accordingly.

Thus I have cast away a few leisure hours on these Reflections which I have
ventured to make, and done this Author an honor he could not expect: And being
engaged in defense of the Sex, if he shall preach such another Sermon, I hope
some generous Gentleman or other will save me the trouble, and let the World
see, that even among his own Sex, there are some who are not Partakers with
him, but hate the mean and dishonorable Design with which he was certainly
big, when he uttered so ungenteel and unmanly a Discourse.

FINIS.

