THOMAS CAMPANELLA An Italian FRIAR And Second MACHIAVEL. His advice to the
King of Spain for attaining the universal Monarchy of the World. Particularly
concerning England, Scotland and Ireland, how to raise Division between KING
and PARLIAMENT, to alter the Government from a Kingdom to a Commonwealth.
Thereby embroiling England in Civil war to divert the English from disturbing
the Spaniard in bringing the Indian Treasure into Spain. Also for reducing
Holland by procuring war betwixt England, Holland, and other Seafaring
Countries, affirming as most certain, that if the King of Spain become master
of England and the Low Countries, he will quickly be Sole Monarch of all
Europe, and the greatest part of the new world.

Translated into English by Ed. Chilmead, and published for awakening the
English to prevent the approaching ruin of their Nation.

With an admonitorie Preface by WILLIAM PRYNNE of Lincolnes-Inne Esquire.

LONDON, Printed for Philemon Stephens at the Gilded Lion in St. Paul's
Churchyard.

Mr. WILLIAM PRYNNE his premonitory Epistle concerning Campanella's discourse
of the Spanish Monarchy.
To the Ingenuous Reader.
THou have here presented to thy serious perusal (by an able hand) a faithful
English Translation of a discourse touching the SPANISH MONARCHY penned by
Thomas Campanella (a famous Italian Friar, and second Machiavel) about the end
of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, prescribing sundry politic plots to the King of
Spain, how to make himself sole Temporal, and the Pope sole Spiritual Monarch
of the world, in general; and of England, Scotland and Ireland and Holland in
particular; laid down in the 25. and ^7. chapters; by sowing the seeds of
division and intestine wars between England, Scotland, Ireland and the
Netherlands, eith^r by changing our Hereditary Kingdom into a Commonwealth, or
at least into an Elective Kingship, and other policies there laid down to
destroy our temporal Kingly Government; and by broaching new Opinions and Sects
in Religion, and by scattering the seed of Schism and division in the natural
sciences, and promoting the study of Astrology, to undermine our Church and
Religion, and usher in Popery by insensible degrees by Romish Emissaries. If
thou will but seriously peruse these Chapters and compare them with the
counsels, projects, proceedings, new models of Government, and wars with the
Scots and Hollanders of the late Agitators and general Council of Officers in
the Army, and their Anti-Parliamentary Conventicles, ever since the year 1647.
till this present; thou will most clearly discern, and ingenuously confess that
they punctually pursued Campanella his projects, to advance the Popes and
Spaniards Monarchy over our three Kingdoms and the Netherlands, and reduce them
under their unsupportable Tyranny both in Civils and Spirituals; wherein they
have now made (either ignorantly or affectedly) such an unhappy dismal
progress, by subverting our ancient Kingly Government to metamorphose us into a
Commonwealth, which has crumbled our formerly united Kingdoms, Churches, into
so many opposite irreconcilable Sects, Factions, Parties, Interests,
undermining, oppressing each other by impoverishing our K^ngdoms, destroying
their Trades, and eating them up to the very bones by a perpetual domineering
all swaying Army, and intolerable endless Taxes, Excises, Militia's, Imposts,
Free-quarters, and all sort^ of violences and oppressions, and leaving us no
legal visible Head, Authority, Council, Parliament, Governors, Judicatures, to
which they can fly for protection or advise; that unless Gods infinite mercy
interpose, they are in all probability ready to be invaded, overcome and
swallowed up by the united forces of these Combined Enemies, and to incur that
fatal doom which Christ himself has predicted to every Kingdom and City in
our present condition, Mat. 12.25. Every Kingdom divided against it self, Is
brought to desolation, and every City or House divided against it self shall
not stand. Which Campanella laying for his ground, made it his Masterpiece to
set down stra^agems to divide us and other Kingdoms and Nations against and
between themselves, to bring them first to desolation by themselves, that so
the Spaniard and Pope might without much difficulty seize upon them whiles in
that condition, which imminent danger and approaching ruin we have no probable
means left to prevent, but by a speedy cordial Christian union between our
lawful KING long exiled Head and members; and happy restitution of our
Hereditary King, Peers, and English Parliaments to their ancient just Rights
and Privileges according to our sacred Oaths, Protestations, Vow, League,
Covenant, and an avowed future renunciation of all Campanella's Jesuitical,
Popish, Spanish Counsels, Plots, Innovations, dividings, which I leave thee to
contemplate. Concluding with this memorable observation and passage of St.
Basil the great in his Ascetica. Prooemium de Iudicio Dei.
This holy Saint of God being very much perplexed in his mind at the manifold
Schisms and vehement dissentions then in the Church of Christ, between
Christians, Bishops and Ministers themselves, renting the Church with opinions
and practices contrary to the commands of the Lord Jesus Christ, and diligently
enquiring and much doubting what should be the true cause thereof; at last that
text in the Book o^ Judges coming into his mind, Every one did that which was
right in his own eyes, Judge. 17.6.18.1.21.25
the cause whereo^ is d^clared in the premised words, In those days there was
no KING in Israel, after some consideration and meditation thereupon, he
concluded not as a paradox, but undoubted truth; that the very r^ason why there
was then so great contention and fighting amongst Christians in the Church of
Christ, was, the contempt of that great, true and only KING of all Men, whilst
every one departed both from the doctrine of our Lord Jesus Christ, and did set
up his own cogitations and definitions by his own authority as his rule, and
would rather Command against the Lord, then be subject to the Lord, and
governed by him. When I pondered these things with my self, and stood amazed at
this enormous impiety, and would yet further search out the truth hereof^ I was
persuaded that the aforesaid cause was true in this, as it was in other affairs
of this life. For I saw all the multitude to be a well compounded State, and to
Consent and Consist together so long only as obedience was yielded to some one
Supreme KING of them all: and on the other side, That dissension and division
of every kind, and also Polyarchy to arise from hence, if there being no KING
every man obtained license to do what he pleased, I have sometime seen even a
swarm of Bees out of the Law of Nature to wage War and to follow their own KING
in order, and I have seen and read many such things of them, and those who are
busied about such things know much more; so that what I have said may be proved
true from hence. For it is the propertye and peculiar of those who regard the
command of one, and use one KING, that they be well and Unanimously disposed
between themselves: therefore all dissension and discord is both an Index and
Prognostic of that contumacy, wherein the Principality of one is rejected
Whether this be not the true and principal cause of all our sad divisions and
wars both in Church and State; let the Reader resolve when he has perused
Campanella of whom I have often made mention in my late publications, and was one
chief cause of its Translation into English.

William Prynne.
From my Study in Lincolnes Inn, December. 16. 1659.
The Translator to the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
SEeing that we are fallen into an Age of Translations, that swarm more now
then ever, partly by reason that there are so many that (as things now stand)
have hardly any other Trade of life to take to; and partly also through the
Natural Itch that most men have to appear to the world some way or other,
(especially since they find so good reception from such Readers, as either
cannot, or will not take the pains to peruse Authors in their Originals) I have
also adventured to present thee here with a Translation, which, if thou
understand it, thou will thank me for; if thou do not, thy censure concerns
me not.

But first, before I put thee upon the reading of the Book it self, I shall by
the way take liberty to give thee some little, but necessary Information,
touching these three following Particulars, viz. 1. The Author of this Piece.
2. The Use that may be made of it: and 3. Of this present Translation of it
into English.

First, as for the Author, He was a man that was as famous for his Sufferings,
as for his Learning; for notwithstanding that he was a Roman Catholic, nay a
Friar, and withal so eager and hearty an Asserter, and Maintainer of the Roman
Catholic Sea, and Its Interests; yet for all this do we find him in the
Inquisition, and so terribly tormented there, as that the Learned I. Gaffarel,
a Frenchman, being at Rome, where our Author was then in Duresse, and having a
desire to see him, he went with some friends to the Place where he was, where
he found him (as he expresses himself in his C^riositez Inonyes, cap. 7.)
ayant le gras des jambes tontes me^^tries, and les fesses presque sans chair,
la luy ayant arrach^e par morceaux, (...) de tirer de luy la confession des
crimes don't on l' accusoit: with the Calves of his Legs beaten black and blue
all over, and with scarsely any flesh at all upon his buttocks; it having been
torn from him peice-meal, to force him to the confession of such crimes as they
had accused him of. Niether were these his sufferings of any short Continuance,
as appears out of his own words, as in other places, so in this Book of his now
in our hands; where we have him intimating unto us (as I conceive) these his
sufferings, and casting them Decennalem Afflictionem, his Ten years Affliction,
in his Preface to this Book: and in the last Chapter of it, Decennalem
miseriam, his Ten years misery. But of the reason of these his sufferings, I am
not at present able to give thee any very good Account: only the before cited I.
Gaffarel there tells us, that there was at that time an Expectation abroad of A
full Relation of his whole life; for, ^aith he, Mais un seavant Aleman faira
voir en peu de temps, l' histoire de ses malheurs, and de sa vie: A certain
Learned German will ere long give us the history of his Misfortunes, and of
his Life. Now whether any such Discourse of Campanella's Life ever came forth
or not, I know not; I confess it never came to my hand^

So much for the Authors Sufferings. And as for his Learning, whosoever would
understand how large, and General that was, must not stay upon this our present
Treatise, but may have recourse to other Tracts of hi^, that are written of
Several Subjects, both in Divinity, Philosophy, Politics, Astrology, and what
not I which the shops will every where furnish him with.

As for this present Discourse, touching the Spanish Monarchy, I confes^e I
cannot yet discover in what Language it was first written by the Author; but I
find that the Latin which is now Lately come abroad, and goes under the name
of the Last Edition, and is set forth by Lodwick Elzivir at Amsterdam, is the
Third Edition of it, and pretends to the mending of what was amiss and corrupt
in the two former Editions.

And seeing that we have now, in a manner, found a kind of an Accomplishment of
some Counsels of his, that were given long ago, as namely, touching a war with
the Dutch, it would not be amiss to examine about what time this Book was
written. Now though the very time of the writing of it is no where precisely
set down; yet there are some Circumstances let fall here and there in the Book,
that may serve to guide our Conjecture by. And I therefore conceive it to have
been written about 53, or 54 years. since. For, it is plain, that it was
written in Queen Elizabeth's time, and after 88. and indeed^ when the Queen was
now grown very Old, and that King James was in daily expectation of the English
Crown falling to Him. But this does not do the business: we can bring it yet
nearer home then so; for in his Chap. XXIV. of France, speaking of Henry IV.
King of France, he says that Iam in declivi aetate est, nec successorem nec
uxorem habet; He now begins to be an old man^ and has neither successor nor
Wife. Now the time here pointed out, I conceive to be the year of our Lord
1599. or the following year, 1600. for in the first of these years King Henry
was divorced from Margaret, his former Wife, and he married the year following
Ca^h^rine de Medicis, by whom he afterward had issue, Lewis the XIII. etc. In
one of these years therefore I suppose the Author to have written this book.

2. For the Use of it, we have here laid down, both in a Methodical and copious
way, a perfect Model both of the Original, and Principles of Government. For
here wear instructed both how Princes ought to treat their Subjects at home,
and also how to manage their Affairs abroad, toward other Foreign Kingdoms
and Republics. We have here, as it were, a Political Glass, wherein we have
presented unto us a view of each particular Country, Province, Kingdom and
Empire through the whole World; as also by what ways of Government, whether by
strict Justice, or Lenity, a strait, or a loose Rain they are to be governed,
and kept in obedience: as likewise the Causes of the Rise and Fall of each
several Kingdom, and Empire; together with the Dangers and Hazards they were
exposed to, and the Advantages they had to boast of; and all this Illustrated
and confirmed by several examples, taken both out of Profane, and Sacred
Writers. Now although this be designed wholly, and modelled out, in reference
to the Spanish Monarchy only, and the support of the Papacy; yet may all wise,
Judicious men make very good use of the same, and apply what Counsels are here
given the King of Spain, to their own Affairs.

For, if it be good counsel for the King of Spain to take, To procure and
maintain a perfect Union among his own subjects at home; but on the Contrary,
To sow the seeds of Division among his Enemies abroad: the same must be as good
Counsel for the King of France also to take, or any other Prince, or Potentate
what ever. If it be good Counsel to the Spaniard, Never to trust so much to any
peace made with an Enemy, as thereupon quite to lay aside his Arms: it is
altogether as good Counsel for any other Prince. And the same may be said of
any other of the General Maxims of Policy delivered here by our Author. But as
for what in Particular concerns the Advancement of the Spaniard and his
Designs, in order to the bringing about of his Universal Monarchy; whether the
Rules by our Author laid down were in sufficient to do the business: or
whether, hough they were every way as full and proper as could be, yet having
not been precisely observed, the business has miscarried, and the Spaniard
has not as yet arrived, and perhaps now is never like to arrive to the end of
his Desires; all this needs not hinder, but that thou should look upon this
Author, as a man of a most clear wit, and Judgment and prize him as one that
was full of knowledge, and experience in the Affairs of the World, and a most
industrious, and studious person.

In the Third and last place thou art to take notice, as concerning this
Translation, that we have therein dealt so fairly nd Ingenuuosly with our
Author, as that we have perfectly and entirely preserved his own sense unto
him^ Neither have we stopped his foul mouth where he has either used ill
Language toward any of the Protestant Princes, or cast dirt into the faces of
the first Reformers, Luther, Calvin etc. For to what end should we falsify our
Original, by making our Author more Civil then he had a mind to be? seeing we
are never a whit the worse for being so miscalled by him; nor is he himself a
jot the wiser for using us so. And to say the Truth, we our selves take the
same Liberty toward them: and therefore, for ought I see, -- Hanc Veniam
petimusque damusque vicissim.


We must even be content to allow each other this Liberty on both sides.

An Index of the CHAPTERS.
CHAP. I. Of the Causes of Humane Principalities, Page 1. II. The Causes of the
Spanish Empire. p. 4 III. Of the first Cause of Empires, namely God. p. 6 IV.
Of the Spanish Empire, considered according to the First Cause. p. 9 V. Of the
Second Cause, namely Prudence. 15 VI. How the Clergy are to be dealt withal. 25
VII. What may be further added concerning Prudence, and Opportunity. 30 VIII.
The Causes by which the Spanish Monarchy may be enlarged, and become l^sse. 31
IX. Of the King. 32 X. What Sciences are required in a Monarch, to render Him
admired by all. 45 XI. Of Laws, both good, and bad. 50 XII. Of Counsel. 52
XIII. Of Justice, and its Contrary. 57 XIV. Of the Barons, and Nobility of the
Spanish Empire. 60 XV. Of the Soldiery. 66 XVI. Of the Treasure of Spain. 81
XVII. Of the Peoples Love and Hate; as also of Conspiracies. 93 XVIII. Of
Preachers and Proph^sies. 105 XIX. Of such Kingdoms, as are properly belonging
to the King of Spain: and of such also, as ar^ his Enemies; and of these, which
are in League with each other, and which not. 115 XX. Of Spain. 125 XXI Of
Italy. 129 XXII. Of Sicily, and Sardinia. 136 XXIII. Of Germany. 139 XXIV. Of
France. 144 XXV. Of England, Scotland, and Ireland. 155 XXVI. Of Poland,
Muscovia, and Transylvania. 162 XXVII. Of Flanders, and the Lower Germany. 165
XXVIII. Of Africa. 185 XXIX. Of Persia, and Cataia. 194 XXX. Of the Great Turk,
and his Empire. 197 XXXI. Of the Other Hemisphere, and the New World. 211
XXXII. Of Navigation. 223
The Authors Preface.
THe Universal Monarchy of the World, beginning from the East, and so coming at
length to the West, having passed through the hands of the Assyrians, Medes,
Persians, Greeks, and Romans, (who were divided by the Imperial Eagle into
Three Heads,) is at length come down to the Spaniard: upon whom, after so long
Slavery, and Division, it is wholly conferred by Fate: and that with greater
Splendor, then on any of his Predecessors: to whom also, according to the
Vicissitude of Humane Affairs, it did of right belong.

Now although I had not any Intention to write any thing, touching either the
Government, or the Enlargement of the Spanish Monarchy, which you, most Noble
Alfonso, have desired me to do; yet being at length delivered from my Tedious
Sickness, and my Ten years Afflictions, though I am utterly deprived of the
help of any Books, and am, as it were, shut up as a Prisoner in this my Cell; I
shall notwithstanding in a brief, and Compendious way, give your Lordship an
account, what my Judgment is concerning this Subject; and shall give in the
Causes of each several Point, in General first; not after a Natural, nor a
Theological, but after a Political way: and shall afterward also descend to
trea^ more Particularly of the same.

Tho. Campanella.

A DISCOURSE TOUCHING The Spanish Monarchy.
CHAP. I. Of the Causes of Humane Principalities.
IN the acquiring, and managing of every Dominion, and Principality, there
usually concur three Causes; that is to say, God, Prudence, and Occasion: All
which, being joined together, are called by the name of Fate; which is nothing
else, but a concurrence of all the Causes, working by virtue of the First. And
hence also is Fortune sprung, which is the Success of Earthly things, whether
it be good, or evil; which if it be rightly known, is called Prudence; but if
otherwise, it is then called Fate, Fortune, or Chance. As for example, if a man
find that which he had long sought after, it is called Understanding, and
Prudence: but if he light upon a thing which he did not seek after, nor knew
where it was, it is called Chance, or Fortune. Among these three Causes, One
sometimes prevails in the ruling of things, more then Another; and perhaps
more then the Other two. Yet notwithstanding, if we will confess the truth,
they are all Three Politically concurring in the business. Do but take notice
of the Kingdom of the Jews, wherein God was the Principal Agent; who, by
sending Moses and Aaron, furnished out the Other Two Causes. For Moses was a
person of extraordinary Wisdom, and Knowledge, not only in Divine, but in
Humane things also: for he was well versed in all the Learning of the
Egyptians, and managed a War for King Pharaoh against the King of Ethiopia;
whom he vanquished in the War, and whose daughter also he took to Wife, as both
Flavius Josephus, and Philo testify. And yet for all this he despised not the
advice of Ieth^^, his Father-in-law, touching the taking in of a certain number
of persons to assist him in the Administration of the Government over the
People of Israel. And indeed They, being sore oppressed, and laboring under
their Egyptian Slavery, took Occasion, by his means, of shaking that Yoke off
their necks: whence they were inclined to hearken the more willingly to Him;
and to follow him whither ^e would lead them; the Occasion also, taken from the
Wickedness of those of Palaestine, concurring with their Inclinations.
Besides, the Great Monarch of all the Earth, God, of his own accord, and free
grace, gave Wisdom to his People; as he did likewise to the Apostles, and to
the Bishop of Rome; which was also assisted by Occasion; which is nothing else,
but to know how to make right use of the Time: whence followed the Division of
the Roman Empire, but the utter Subversion of the Jewish.

Yet notwithstanding, where the Power of Man only appeared Outwardly, there was
a concurrence and cooperation of the finger of God, though not so visibly
seen. And thus the Assyrians for some secret Causes were possessed of the
Monarchy of the World; which Causes notwithstanding have been sometimes
apparent: as we see in Nabuchodonosor, whom God rewarded with the spoils of
Egypt, because he had made use of Him against the ungrateful Hebrews, and
against Tire. And in Isaiah, God reproves the King of the Jews, for that,
when by his aid his enemies had been slain and put to flight, He
notwithstanding had ascribed all to his Own strength. Now the Occasion of this,
was, the Wickedness of the Nations, who were governed by no Prudence. In the
Monarchy also of the Medes, the same Occasion carried a great stroke in the
business, when as God (as it appears out of Daniel) came forth upon the stage,
and raised up Arbaces, the Prefect of Media, who was a very wise man, against
Sardanapalus, who wallowed in all Luxury and Womanish delights. In the Persian
Monarchy the Valor and Courage of Cyrus appeared, and Media, being destitute
of a Successor for the Kingdom, afforded him the Occasion of showing it: and
God himself, in Isaiah calling Cyrus, his Anointed, instructed him how he
should bring the Nations under his Yoke.

Who makes any doubt of the Prudence and Wisdom of Alexander the Great; and
knows not, that the Divisions of the Grecians at home, and the Looseness of
Life that the Eastern Nations had at that time given themselves up unto,
administered unto him an Occasion of making use of it. Wherein the Divine Power
was most evidently manifested; for as much as, as the Prophet Daniel testifies,
the Angel of the Kingdom of Greece labored much in the business.

In the Roman Empire also, Prudence, and Valor, did very much; but Italy's
being divided into several Commonwealths, and the Carthaginians Factions among
themselves, were the Occasion. And commonly to that Part that dissolves any
great Empire, all the rest of the Principalities of the World do incline. And
certainly God himself was the chiefest Cause of the Prosperity of the Romans,
because of their Moral Virtues; as it is proved by St. Augustine, in his book
De Civitate Dei. Yet no place does more evidently show, what Occasion can do,
then Sicily, at what time it called forth Peter of Arragon against those of
Anjou; whence sprang the Proverb of those most famous Vespers. Although it
cannot be denied, but that he was assisted very much in that Undertaking, not
only by the Pope; but also by his own Innate Prudence. And truly, although
Historians seldom make any mention at all of these Three Causes, yet the Books
of the Kings of the Jews, and the Successions therein laid down before us, do
sufficiently confirm the same, and make it appear, that which way soever the
Prophesies, and the Valor of the Persons inclined, that way also did the
Fortune of the Kingdom look.

CHAP. II. The Causes of the Spanish Monarchy.
THe same Three Causes therefore have concurred in the Spanish Monarchy. For
after that ^t had, by the Assistance of Almighty God, happily maintained War
against the Moors for near 800. years space together, It at length brought
forth such Valiant Commanders, and Soldiers, that being so fortified both by
Strength and Prudence, and having overcome the Barbarians, they then turned
their Arms another way, and proceeded on to greater Undertakings. And
afterward being, as it were by Divine Instinct, assisted by the Pope with a
great Treasure of Indulgences and C^oisados, and the King being also honored
by the Title of Catholic, that is to say, Universal, It arrived to so great a
reputation and glory of Valor, that the Genueses were so much the more
willingly and readily drawn in to their assistance in the making themselves
Masters of the New World: And lastly, it is most certain, that whilst Wars
were made with Lances, and Horses, the Gauls, Goths, and Lombards enlarged
their Dominions; but when the Sword was the chief Weapon, the Romans then
carried all before them. But in after times, when Subtlety and Cr^ft was of more
Prevalence then Valor, and that Printing, and Guns were now found out, the
Chief Power then fell into the hands of the Spaniards, who are a People that
are both Industrious, Active, Valiant, and Subtle. For then did Occasion join
the King of Arragon with Isabella, Queen of Castile, who had no Issue Male to
succeed her: and at the same time also was added to him the Imperial Line of
the House of Austria: to which likewise, through defect of Issue Male in the
Burgundian Family, there was added a very considerable Inheritance of many
Lordships, and Provinces in the Low Countries, and in other places.

Then follows the Discovery of the New World, made by Christophorus Columbus;
and another accession also, by the joining of the Kingdom of Portugal to Spain.
All which rendered the Monarchy of Spain both Illustrious, and Admirable, and
also, besides other things, made Her Lady of the Seas: to which Advantages was
also added the Troubled Condition of the French, English, and Dutch, who were
at Variance among themselves about certain Points of Religion: by which means
the Spania^d so easily arrived to this height of Power and Greatness it now is
in.

And the King of Spain might grow more Powerful yet, and might attain to the
Dominion of the Whole World, if he would but endeavor the Overthrow of the
Turkish Empire; as Alexander heretofore did of the Persian, and the Romans of
the Carthaginean. For that Empire got up to this height, for the Sins of the
Christians; and the Angel of that People has yet the upper hand. For while the
Imperialists have been at variance with the Pontificians, the French with the
English, the Venetians with the Gen^eses, God has raised up the Turks, and
has sent them into both Empires; because that the Christians were too gently,
and lightly punished for their sins by the Arabians, Tartars, and other foreign
Nations; as I have already showed in my Papal Monarchy.

And the Turk is the same to us at this day, who are so distracted and divided
by several Heresies, that the Assyrians were of old to the Jews, who by
faction were divided into the Kingdoms of Judah and Israel; except the Good
Angel of Spain afford us his assistance; as I have elsewhere showed.

CHAP. III. Of the First Cause of Empires, namely God.
IT is very evident, that neither Prudence alone, nor yet joined with Occasion,
is sufficient for the attaining to, or governing a Kingdom; for as much as we
know, that the Freedom of the Will consists only in the Will it self, and not
either in Action or Passion. For it may so fall out, that a man may over night
purpose the next morning to go to Sea, or to study, or to go to plow, or to do
any other business; and yet upon a sudden the falling of Rain, or unexpected
tempestuous and foul weather may cross that so wise counsel of his; so that he
must be forced to do, not according to his own determination, but according as
matters shall fall out. So that he that knows how so to order his Counsels and
Determinations, as that they shall always be subordinate to the Superior
Causes, his affairs shall seldom fail of succeeding prosperously. Wisemen
therefore make it their business to labor after the knowledge of these
Superior Causes, of God, and His Divine Will, on which the whole Chain, and
Series of future things depends. And hence it is, that some have sought for God
in the Stars; who has also answered some by the Stars; as namely, the Magi, or
Wisemen, at our Saviors Nativity. And perhaps a Rainy Morning may have done no
hurt at all to this, or that Astrologer; because they foresaw this Rain, and so
probably ordered their affairs accordingly, having regard to the Will of God
herein; who, out of his singular goodness, will be found there, where we seek
him with a sincere heart. Nay, when the business so requires, he answers
even those that do not seek him with a sincere heart: as we see in Balaam, whom
he answered perhaps, when he was not asked. And so likewise in King Saul, who
was informed by Samuel, what the Event of things should be, though he had by
Witchcraft consulted the Devil, and not Samuel: as Tho: Aquinas also is of
opinion, in his 2.2 4.140. And therefore we also ought to believe, that the
True God gave answer to the Diabolical Superstitions of the Romans, Graecians,
and Chaldeans, by the Ministry of the peculiar Angel of each of these several
Empires. For the Inevitable Decree of his Will sometimes exalted, and again
sometimes depressed and clouded the Majesty of those Monarchies. Therefore the
Chaldeans, and so likewise the Medes, whenever their own Wisdom failed them,
made their Invocations upon God by the Stars; as the Greeks did by their
Oracles at Delphos, the Romans by their Auguries, and Observations of Birds;
and as the more Sound Philosophers sought Him in the Works of Nature: as
Pythagoras also did in Numbers, which are as a certain Ray of Divinity,
disseminated and diffused throughout the whole Universe. But much more rightly
did the Jews seek after him, by the Prophets which were sent unto them. Which
custom of theirs the Christians also followed, when as the Archangel Michael
had gone over from the Jews, to the State of the Christians. For in all
probability we ought to believe, that when any Empire is overthrown, the Angel
of that goes over to the Conqueror. And this is a Secret which was not
unknown to the Romans, who for this very reason would not have their Tutelar
Angel to be known, to the end that he might not be invoked by other Nations.
And therefore we may probably believe, that either the Angel of Persia yielded
to that of Greece; or else, that He went over from the Persians to the Greeks:
and so consequently, that the Angel of Constantinople does at this time fight
for the Turks; or else, having removed his station, stands now for Germany, and
has joined himself to Her Angel. Now where there are the more of these Tutelar
Angels, There there is the greater growth, and stronger confirmation of Power.
And therefore, being instructed hereto out of the Scriptures, I affirm, that if
at any time God appear to treat either favorably, or else contrarily with any
Monarchy, we are to understand this in reference, not to that present Monarchy
only, but to the succeeding also. For, unless this were so, God should not
have revealed the Knowledge of Future things to his Church by the Prophets;
which is an absurd thing to believe: and it would also follow, that this
Knowledge was to be sought for by the Stars, or some other things. Which
things, seeing they are partly also forbidden by the Pope, we are necessarily
to believe, that all things are otherwise sufficiently provided for.

Wheresoever therefore God speaks of the Babylonish Empire, we are to
understand it as said also of the Persian, Grecian, and Roman, which in their
turns succeeded It. And hence it is, that St. John calls Rome, Babylon. And so
likewise what is said of the Kingdom of the Jews, the same is to be understood
also of the Church of Rome; which has received the Keys of David, and the
Name of Jerusalem; according to that which is said to the Angel of
Philadelphiae: Now Philadelp^ia is, Brotherly Love; as Roma, Rome, by turning
the Letters backward, is Amor, Love. And God oftentimes threatens his Church; I
will remove thy Candlestick out of its place, unless thou repent. For in like
manner the Angel of God may be said to remove from one Church to another, (as
for example, from Heretical England, to Catholic Borussia) as from one Kingdom
to another. And so what is pronounced by Ezechiel, Jeremy, and Esaias, concerning
the Prince of Tire, is sometimes to be taken as spoken of the Prince of the
Angels that fell from Heaven, and were cast out of their Kingdom there. Where
that also which is said; How art thou fallen, O Lucifer! which is spoken of the
King of the Chaldaeans, is to be taken, as, by way of similitude, spoken of his
Successors, and of the Aerial (so called) Empire of the Great Devil. For, both
Empires, and all other Earthly things bear a similitude to the Heavenly; as
those of the Sea do to them of the Land. Whence it is, that you have your
Bishop-fish, your Sea-calf, and the Calamary, or Sea-Clark: for as much as all
of them have their dependence from the Prime Reason, or the Divine Idea, which
is, the Eternal Word. Whence I seem to my self to have found out a Key, by
which I may find out a passage to the knowledge of the Original, Government,
and end of the Kingdom of Spain, by the First Cause, which God has laid open
in the Prophets; and by which we may proceed on further, to discover the
Prudence herein requisite, and the Occasion, which the Spaniard ought to lay
hold on.

CHAP. IV. Of the Spanish Empire, considered according to the First Cause.
IT is evident, that the Prophesy concerning the end of the World, both
according to Nature, and the Art of Policy, is shortly to be fulfilled; being
that the Fixed Stars of Scorpio, and Taurus, have changed their places, and the
Sun is now ten thousand miles nearer to the Earth; and so many Eclipses also
appear, by reason of the Transposition of the Equinoctial Points; which,
according to the Opinion of Plato (though Aristotle, who was Ignorant in Deeper
matters, and was skilled only in Logic, and such like Quiddities, denies the
same,) do foretell Grand Mutations^ These Exorbitances of the Heavenly Bodies,
together with the Deluges, and devastations by Fire that have happened in all
parts, as also the Changes that have happened in the greatest Monarchies of the
World, according to the Gospel (wherewith Seneca also agrees in Opinion) are
the evident signs, that the world is drawing to an end. For the Empire, or
State of Christianity (and it is a thing very well worth our observing) has
lasted already 1600. years (and upward;) Which number, being Composed of
Sevens and Nines, is fatal to all Monarchies, as both Pythagoras, and Plato
have written; and as may be gathered also out of Moses, where he speaks of
Iubiles, and Weeks; as likewise out of Jeremy, speaking of the Sabbatisme of
the Holy Land; and also out of the Art of Physic, touching the Cure of Fevers,
and the difference of Complexions and Ages: and lastly, from a passage of
Augustus Caesar, who in an Epistle of his to his Nephew, rejoices very much,
that he had escaped the Sixty Third year of his age; which year, seeing it is
composed of nine Septenaries of years, is most dangerous and Fatal to people.
And even God himself created all things in Number. Therefore this very time
does presage Enlargement, or Impair, and Mutations in all things. We see also,
that the Prophesy touching the Monarchies draws now near an end, seeing that
Balaam, as it is recorded by M^ses Number. Cap. 2^, reckoning up the Monarchies,
stops at that which concerns Italy, saying; They shall come in ships from
Italy' and shall overcome the Assyrians, and in the end themselves also shall
be destroyed, In which place he speaks of the Monarchy of Spain; so that it is
necessary that it must be ingrafted into that of Italy. And consequently also
the Fate of Tire may be understood of that of Spai^: for as much as Caerthage
was a Colony of Tire, and by reason of the frequent voyages they made thither
by Sea to and fro, it followed the manners and fashions of the Tyrians. And
hence are the Spaniards descended, who at first embracing and applying
themselves to the Manners, subtleties, and Gods of the Carthaginians, and
afterward becoming Christians, were overwhelmed with all those evils, with
which God in his Prophets, Ezechiel, Jeremy, and Esaias threatens Tire. And
besides, they were very skilful also in Navigation, as those of Tire were. And
if Spain shall imitate the pride of Tire, by extolling it self above the
Church, as Tire did, it shall suffer a sorer destruction then that did, neither
shall it ever enlarge the bounds of its Empire. Nevertheless before the end of
the World, the Spaniard being joined in amity with the Pope, shall live in a
more happy condition, and shall reign securely and peaceably, holding
Correspondence with the Church, and courting the Pope and the Cardinals, like
the Daughter of Tire, (as it is in the Psalms, and Esaias) with Gifts: neither
yet shall he arrive to that Height of Universal Monarchy which he had aspired
unto. But this is a business to be handled secretly, and not to be published
openly to the World. And as concerning the Spaniards Ambition, I affirm, that
while he complies with the House of Austria, he shall be humbled, for as much
as Isaiah says; Onus Iumen^orum Austri, the burden of the beasts of the South;
intimating, that He shall effect none of those things which I shall hereafter
touch upon; that is, reigning in the condition he now does; but shall be
destroyed, as one overwhelmed by a Wall falling on him, like as Tire was. And
hence considering with himself the evil likely to befall him, he shall at
length lift up his head, when he shall have called to remembrance, that after
that the House of Austria was once inserted into that of Spain, the New World
was presently discovered by his Agents, and he had thence returns of ships
laden with gold, which are Iumenta Austriae, those Beasts of Austria; and
besides, that the Title of Monarchy, and this so great Principality of his
began under Charles V. had he but known as well how to keep what he had got, as
he knew how to get it. But because that neither in his time Fate answered the
expectation of Spain we must therefore search the Scriptures more ^^ligently,
that we may discover when that time is to be; as a certain Politician said, and
as we also, God willing, shall show; that we may attain to that which they
drive at. But I say, that the end of Monarchies is now come, and that we are
now come to that Age, wherein all things are to be in subjection to the Saints^
and to the Church; which is to be, after the end of the four Monarchies, and
the death of Antichrist, who shall continue for the space of three Weeks and a
half, according to the opinion of Lactantius, Irenaeus, Tertullian, Origin,
Victorianus, S. Bernard, Ioachimus Abbas, Dante, Petrarch, and some others,
both Divines, Philosophers, Prophets, and Poets; as I have elsewhere showed.
Daniels Image also is fallen to the ground; so likewise the Four Beasts, the
Three Weeks, and the Twelve Feathered wings of the Eagle, spoken of in the
second Book of Esdras, are now all at an end, together with the Roman Empire;
which seeing according to him, it is the same with that of Babylon, it is by
succession divided into Three Heads; First, into the Right Head, which is the
Western, or German Empire; then into the Left Head, that is, the Eastern Empire
of the Turks and Sa^acens; and the Middle one, which is that of Constantinople.
For in the Scriptures the Right, and Left hand of the World is otherwise
assigned by Moses, then it is by Aristotle in his works. Now amongst these
three Heads the Left, as the same Prophet testifies, has devoured the
middlemost; that is to say, the Turkish Empire has destroyed the
Constantinopolitan, to wit, in the time of Mahumet the Second. It now remains,
according to the same Prophet, that the Right Head, or Western Empire, devour
the Left, that is, that of the Turks. And hereto agrees the Astrology of
Torquatus, which says, that Hungary threaten^ destruction to the Turk; and
that the Empire of the Moon shall be divided betwixt Two Sons of the Turkish
Emperor, that shall be the Fifteenth Emperor of Turkey; at which time the
Moon shall be bowed into two Horns. And this star is indeed a very terrible
one, and will make it appear, that he that shall conquer, and subdue the
Turkish Empire, shall be Lord of the whole Earth. The House of Spain then can
never attain to any great Monarchy, according to Fate; but only by the
adhering to Italy, and the Roman Empire, which is the German, and the Right
Head. The King of Spain therefore is to use his utmost endeavor, that he may
be chosen Emperor: seeing that not only God, but even Human Prudence also may
inform us, that by that means he may attain to what ever his heart can wish. A
beginning of which thing appeared plain enough in Charles the Fifth, King of
Spain: who being also Emperor, and being assisted with the whole power of
Italy and Spain, overcame those of Tunis, and the King of France, and conquered
all Germany: in so much that Solomon, seeing the prosperous Fortune of this
Prince, had good Cause to say, that it behooved him to take heed of Charles:
neither would he, though he were stronger then He, fight with Him under the
Walls of Vienna. We see therefore that which way the Fates incline, the same
also goes all the rest of the Fortune; and so on the other side, all things
must needs be successelesse, that are taken in hand under a Reluctant Fa^e. I
shall here also open another Mystery, namely, that all Empires, according to
the Prophesy of Noa^, do descend from the Sons of Iaphet; God shall enlarge
Japhet, and he shall dwell in the tents of Sem, and Cham shall be his Servant.
And from Cham are to descend none but Slaves, and Tyrants, who are indeed
Slaves; as I have elsewhere proved. Wherefore the Turkish Empire comes from
Iaphet, by Magog, and as to the Law, from Sem by the Line of Ishmael, from whom
Mahumet descended; as it has allwaies been observed to fall out, that the
Northern People which are fierce, and by the arms of Iaphet still Victorious,
have yet received Laws and Rules from the wiser Southern People, who were the
Offspring of Sem. And yet the Empire sometimes has otherwise had a succession
of Tyrants also, who have descended from Cham, though by the intervention of
the German, who is descended from Iaphet; as the Spaniard himself derives his
Line from Iaphet by Tubal: like as concerning the Law, the Roman Christianity
does derive it self from ^em, in respect of Christ, who is a true Sem, by the
Line of Isaac.

Seeing therefore Dominion was promised to Iaphet, it belongs chiefly to the
Spaniards, who are more nearly, and by a firmer alliance descended from the
Lawgiver, then the Turks; and their Victory drives on to this end, that they
may dwell in the House of Sem, seeing that they possess the Greatest part of
Italy, by the Investiture of the Pope, who is descended from Sem: Of whom this
is no fit occasion to say any more, although I willingly would do so, and
indeed ought. I shall only add here, that they cannot, according to Fate, come
to be Lords of all, unless they become the Deliverers of the Church, and set
it free from out of the hands of the Babylonians, that is to say, of the Turks,
and Heretics. Upon this account they conquered the Moors, God bestowing upon
them so great an Empire as their reward. Now it is evident, that the Church is
in subjection to Babylon, as long as it is Militant: and I have formerly showed
elsewhere, that it does yet retain the days of Tuesday and Friday, and the
months of August and July, which were theirs of the Roman Babylon; and the
Church now suffers most grievous Persecutions under the Babylonian Infidels,
both in Africa, Asia, and Europe, and especially in Germany, France, England,
and Pola^d. This discourse therefore is to be listened unto with attentive
ears, because that all the Jewish Affairs were a Type and figure of those of
the Christians. He therefore, that shall deliver the Church out of these
evils, shall become the Universal Monarch; because He shall perform the Office
of the Christian Cyrus, whom God shall raise up, as Esaias says, to subdue the
whole World, to restore Ierusal^m, to remove their Captivity, and to build a
temple to the God of Heaven and Earth, wherein shall be set up the Continual
Sacrifice, as is foretold by Daniel, Esaias, and Esdras. Cyrus also was of the
Lineage of Iaphet, by the Medes; and notwithstanding that the Turk is descended
of the same stock also, yet shall He not perform the Office, because that He is
become an Enemy, by setting up another Contrary Law. The French in the time of
Charlemagne arrogated this Office to themselves; who by their often delivering
the Pope out of the hands of the Princes of Italy, the Lombards, and the Got^s,
arrived to so great power, that they became formidable to all: and the said
Charlemagne might have come to have been Universal Monarch of the World, had
not his sons been at Variance among themselves, but had managed their Empire
rightly, and as they ought to have done.

But the discords that were betwixt the Christians, and ^he following Heresy,
reigning at this day, broke the neck of the French Empire; at least took away
from it all hope of ever arriving to the height of so much greatness. But the
Spaniards, by being continually rooting out of the Moors, became powerful; but
contrariwise Constantinople, because it deserted the Pope, and adhered to
Arrius, Sabellius, and others, came to destruction. The Venetians also have by
the Popes means arrived to a great height, because that they assisted him
against Frederick. So that it is manifest, that he that shall take any
enterprise in hand, under a Favorable Fate, shall have all happy success
therein; but on the contrary, he that shall rush on upon any undertaking under
a Cross, and Unwilling Fate, shall find the Event also quite contrary to his
desires. Which may also be demonstrated out of Reasons of Policy. For, he that
maintains the Popes Interest, maintains the Universal Right of all
Christendom, which depends upon the Pope. For this Cause is accounted both a
Just, and a Religious one, and therefore all men will take it up. And the
Opinion also of Religion overcomes all other causes; as we ^ave already showed
elsewhere, and shall further show hereafter. Add hereto, that the Pope is the
Universal Moderator, and Judge of all things; to whom all people have their
recourse, and yield obedience to him, as to their God, and Deliverer; as on the
contrary the Sweden, Saxon, and the Constantinopolitan Princes, as being
enemies to, and Stubborn opposers of Him, are rejected, and deserted by them.
Therefore the Office of Cyrus belongs to the King of Spain, who, being now
honored by the Pope with the Title of The Catholic King, may easily arrive to
the Principality of the whole World; and we see that he has already followed
his Footsteeps, in having delivered the Church heretofore out of the hands of
the Moors of Granado, as he has lately done from the Heretics of England, the
Law-Countries, and France: and He maintains besides with yearly Revenues so
many Bishops, Cardinals, and Monasteries: and he has also settled the Daily
Sacrifice throughout the whole World: for as much as that every half hour, and
indeed continually, the Mass is celebrated throughout his Empire: within the
compass whereof the Roman Papacy, the City of Jerusalem, and the Temple are
contained. Neither does it ever Sleep in his Empire. For seeing that the Sun
being carried about in his Course from Spain, to Brasile, the Straites of
Magellan, the Philippine Islands, Iapan, China, Archipelagus Lazari, Calecut,
Goa, Bengala, Ormus, the Cape of Good hope, the Sea Coast of Africa, and the
Fortunate Islands, till it comes back again to the same Spain, there is no hour
of the day but it enlightens some part of His Dominions; there is no question
but that there are continually Sacrifices offered up to the God of Heaven and
Earth. It is certainly a very wonderful thing, and a most evident Sign, that
this Kingdom of his is diffused to a vast distance, wherein Prayers are
continually offered up for the Church, and the King, together with what
Stupendous Sacrifice; which, both according to the Truth, and the Opinion of
Men, is of no mean Efficacy in the hearts of his Subjects. Whence I affirm,
that the King of Spain, following the Order of Things, and by observing the
Rules of Prudence, together with Occasion, may bring all things under his
Obedience; as it shall be made appear out of the Reasons hereafter following.
For this is already evident, that he engages in the same Interest with that of
the German Empire, which is the same with that of Italy, which is the same with
that of Rome, of Greece, and of Persia, or the Empire of Cyrus, and so
consequently of that of Media and Babylon. And he shall have the Assistance of
many several Angels, as that of Cyrus, and of Michael; and afterward all
things shall be delivered into the hands of Gog and Magog; But the Christians
shall overcome: and then shall Christ come to Judge the World. And then shall
the end be. But the Eclipse, and the Great Conjunction in Sagittary, which is
the Constellation of Spain, will discover many secrets, when I shall have
opportunity to discourse of the same.

CHAP. V. Of the Second Cause,, namely Prudence.
FOr as much as Prudence is required in the manageing of all Humane things,
(which is a Cause adjoined to Fate, consisting of an infinite number of Joint
Causes, acting by virtue of the Prime Cause), so especially it is necessary in
the manageing of an Empire: by It the whole World is governed; and it is
disseminated by God through all the Universe. For Nature is an Intrinfecal,
Divine Art: and whosoever shall follow Nature as his guide, he is wise; which
appears evidently in Plants, Ants, Bees, Cranes, and the very Fishes
themselves; which small Creatures do oftentimes afford Instruction even to Men,
in the managing of their Dominions. Whence we are to understand that Prudence
is a different thing from Craft; which is called by some, Ratio Statuum
regendorum, the Reason, or Rule of State-Government. For Prudence is agreeable
to the Prime Cause, namely God; whence it searches into Prophesies, and Divine
Sciences, to the end that it may attain to the knowledge of things to come. But
Craft seeks after its own satisfaction, and Pleasure only, and is Pleased with
nothing more then the subtlety of its own Wit; Which notwithstanding, though
falsely, calls it self Wisdom; according to what was spoken by Pharaoh:
Venite, Sapienter opprimamus eos; Come on, let us deal wisely with them
Prudence is Magnanimous, and Proposes to it self only such things as are
truly of most difficult Achievement But Craft is pusillanimo^s, and sneaking:
yet that it may appear to be Magnanimous, It puts on the garb of Pride, and
would fain seem to reach at high matters^ but always out of the way of Virtue;
and it flies at mean things, such as are scarcely of any value at all. Prudence
is addicted to Clemency, and Truth; but Craft is Cruel, and given to Flattery.
Whence the Crafty Princes saying is, that the Nobles, the Wise, and the Valiant
are to be made out of the way, least happily they should wrest the Scepter out
of his Hand. Quicquid excelsum est, cada^; was the saying of Nero, and
Periander; whatsoever is High, you must down with it. But Prudence makes use of
the Assistance of such, for the establishing of its own Kingdom: as we read
that the Honest Pharaoh, (who differed much from the other Crafty Pharaoh) made
use of the service of Joseph. And this is the Rule also of the Pope, who is
wont to advance such as are Wise, and Learned ^ersons, to be dignity of being
Cardinals. The Craf^y Prince studieth how to find out deceitful tricks, and
fraudulent devises, to impose upon his Subjects: But the Prudent looks after
advantageous, and useful Arts, and such as may encourage his people, and make
every one of them the more ready for the discharge of his duty: as we see in
Numa, who, that he might render Himself the more Venerable, and worthy of
esteem to the People of Rome, found out for them, and established a Form of
Religion, and Sacred Rites, that so by this means He might the better make
them contain themselves within the Bounds of their Duty and Obedience. Prudence
is a Virtue that becomes Kings and Emperors; but Craft is fit only for
Davusses, and Slaves. Prudence, while it loses, is a gainer; (as we may
observe of St. Peter, and from the practice of the Pope at this day,) and the
more inwardly we are acquainted with it, the more fervently we love it; Whereas
Craft, while it gains, is a loser; and the better it is known, and seen into,
the more it is hated. As we see it was in that wicked Disciple of Machiavell,
Caesar Borgia, who by his Crafty, Politic Tricks, lost the Principality of
Flaminia, (which is now called Romania;) and in Tiberius also, and Nero: who by
their Finesses, and Crafty designments darkened, and cast a cloud over the
Majesty of the Romaen Empire, which had been rendered so resplendent and
Illustrious before, by the Prudent Management of Augustus Caesar. The Prudent
Prince proposes to himself the good of the Public only; but the Crafty looks
only after his own Private gain. The Prudent, that he may accomplish his
desires, shows himself Valiant even almost to Rash adventuring: as Columbus,
Caesar, Alexander, and Cyrus did: and withal Liberal also, even to a seeming
degree of Prodigality^ and lastly Just, yet with a Moderation in his Severity.
And therefore when he gets any thing, he bestows it all upon his Subjects,
that so he may oblige them to him by Benefits, and may make them faithful and
true unto Him. Neither yet is He so free in his gifts to them, as that they
shall never have need of him more. But when He has once attained to what he
labored for, he then becomes more thrifty, and looks about him, and considers
how he may maintain his own State; least otherwise He should be forced by the
necessity of imposing upon his Subjects Unusual Taxes, to gain their ill will,
and lose their Affections; which was Caligula's Case heretofore; who, after
that he had in riotous courses fooled away all his own Estate, was necessitated
presently to snatch away other men's. Certainly, whosoever takes in hand any
high and difficult Attempt, under the Assistance of a Favorable Fate, he must
necessarily be Courageous and daring; and indeed every Great, and Memorable
Enterprise requires a certain Extraordinary Valor and Courage; which yet in
case the success should not be answerable, would be called Rashness.

As for example, it was accounted a Bold undertaking in Columbus, to go in
search of a New World; but plain Rashness in Ulysses: only because the one
escaped safe; but the other suffered shipwreck. But when a Prince has effected
his desi^es, he must then have an eye to the uncertainty of Fortune, and must
therefore take heed how he is too bold and daring; the observing of which
Counsel being neglected by Charles the Fifth, was the cause of bringing to
nothing all that he had achieved before in Germany; for he did not take the
same wise Course to preserve what he had gotten, as he had done in the getting
of it. And the case was the same also with the great Julius Caesar. And then
again, in war there is a necessity of using severity, that so the Soldiers may
all be kept to their several duties; and besides, those that perform any
Signal pieces of Service, are to be rewarded accordingly: which Course unless
it be taken, they will begin to spurn at the Government, and break out into
seditious ways: (as Tiberius his Army did, when it was in Germany) and will
fall to an insolent course of Plundering, and robbing: and so by these means
will bring the Victory they had gotten before, to nothing: as it happened to
Conradinus the Swevian, and Charles of Anjou.

Therefore after any Conquest gotten over a Kingdom, the Conqueror must
modestly use his Victory, and endeavor to please the People; For otherwise he
will alienate their affections from himself; and they will be apt upon all
occasions to invite in his Enemies to fall upon him; as it happened to
Rehoboam, and Charles of Anjou in Sicily; and to the Carthaginians after the
First Punick War; and to Aecolinus, against whom his subjects, the Citizens of
Padua, shut their gates; as likewise to Nero, who, though Prince of it, was yet
called, The Enemy of his Country. And although many Crafty Practices are now in
use among Princes, for the keeping of their Subjects in due obedience; yet I
dare boldly affirm, that they will in the end prove destructive to those
Princes. For we see that Tiberius, that Grand Artifex of Subtleties and Craft,
was miserably hated by his Subjects, and so led a very sad life, because he
found he was not loved by any body, so that he was fain to put some or other
every day to death, as contemners of his Majesty, and so to be ever of a
troubled, disquieted mind: which certainly may better be called a Death, then a
life. Therefore the highest, and most advantageous Craft that a Prince can make
use of, is, to show himself Beneficent, Religious, and Liberal toward his
Subjects; yet this in so moderate a way, as that by this means he give them not
occasion to despise him: as happened to Pope Celestine the Fifth.

But let us now proceed to those things, that more Particularly concern Spain.

As I have before showed by Divine Reasons, that there can be no Universal
Monarchy among the Christians expected, save that of the Pope: and have also
declared how he is to be dealt withal; so I shall now prove by Reasons of
Policy, that there can be no Monarch in the Christian World, unless he have
his dependence upon the Pope. For certainly, what Prince soever has any other
that is superior to Him, though in Religion only, and not in point of Arms,
as the Pope is, he can never attain to an Universal Monarchy. For, whatsoever
He shall take in hand, it will be successelesse; and he shall be, as it were,
crushed in pieces by the superior. For, All Religions, as well the False, as
the True, do prevail, and are Victorious, when they have once taken root in the
Minds of men; upon which only depend both their Tongues and Arms, which are
the only Instruments of attaining Dominion. Thus we see that Julius Caesar,
when any were created Consuls, if the Po^tifex Maximus came and said, They were
not created Rightly, they were presently by him put by: and so, whenever he
was to enter into a fight, if the Augurs said, that The Pullen would not eat
their meat, he forbear to go on; and did only what he was directed to by their
Omen. And therefore when the same Caesar had fallen upon a resolution of making
himself A Monarch, he opposed Cato as much as possibly he could, and
endeavored by all possible means to be chosen to be the Pontifex Maximus.
Which when he had once attained unto, he acted another way, and took upon
himself all the Martial Offices that were to be administered by the sword, that
so he might drive on his designs the more securely; and withal by his gifts
obliged all the Soldiery so to him, as that they refused not to bear arms for
Him, even against their Country, and to assist him in his designs of changing
the Government of the state. So in like manner Cyrus would be called by the
Title of Gods Commissary, that so no Prophet might pretend to be greater then
Himself. And Alexander the great would be accounted the son of Jupiter Ammon,
for the very same reason. It is also very evident, that no Monarchy in the
Christian World has arrived to the Height, by reason of the obedience which is
due to the Pope. And hence it is that Mahomet, when he aspired to a Monarchy,
brought in first a New Religion which was quite different from what was before.
For Arms cannot effect any thing against Religion, if they be overmaster'd by
another more powerful Religion, though a worse, if so be it be but entertained
by the People. For as much therefore as there is no more powerful Religion
found in the World, then that of the Roman Christian, it is evident that
neither Spain, nor France can attain to any greater Dignity then It. And hence
it was, that Charles the Great, when he had a design upon the Universal
Monarchy of the World, took upon himself the Title of being The Protector of
the Pope: and indeed so long as he stood up in a defense of Christianity, he
became Great.

If the King of Spain therefore do in like manner aspire to the same Height, it
is necessary that he frame some New Religion; but this, neither God nor Reason
permits him to do. For First, this is never to be done, but in the very
Infancy, and beginning of a Kingdom; as you may see in the examples of Mahomet,
Romulus, and Pythagoras; for otherwise he must needs come to ruin, by changing
the Auspicia Regni, the Fortune of the Kingdom, as I may call it, whose
dependence is from Faith in Christ; and then the People will immediately betake
themselves to their Arms, and revolt from him. Neither indeed have any
Monarchies been either more certainly, or more miserably brought to
destruction, then when they have changed their Religion; as is testified by
Histories. And then again, the Pope, and the rest of the Princes of Christendom
would join their whole strengths together, and would in a very little time root
him out of his Kingdom of Naples, Millan, and consequently also of the New
World, and the rest of his Dominions. And although these things were not done
to Henry the VIII of England, nor yet to the Duke of ^^xony, because their
Territories were encompassed within small, though well fortified Bounds; yet
for all that did they fail of succession, and so their States went away from
them. And we have examples hereof also in Jeroboam, Iehu, Julian the Apostate,
and others; who, for having changed their Religion, incurred the hatred of
their People, and brought destruction upon themselves.

Unless we shall say, that the Pope has no power at all in Temporal things,
nor is any whit above either any other of the Bishops, or theirs Surrogates or
Chaplains, in Authority or degree; which is evidently contradictory to Gods
Ordination, by which He has been constituted a Regal Priest, and has been
armed with both the Swords, as well the Civil as the Spiritual. For, were it
otherwise, Christ should be a very mean Lawgiver, and should be less then
Melchisedech, who was both King, and Priest together; which adds both the
greater Majesty, as well as security to any Kingdom; as I have proved in my
Treatise Touching Monarchy, against Dante, who, looking only upon the
Priesthood of Aaron, allows to the Pope nothing but Spiritualties, and Tithes
only. And which is more, this impugnes also all Reasons of Policy, because the
Pope can never want those that will take up Arms in His defense, (in case He
should not be able to defend Himself) and that either by being moved thereunto
through Zeal to Religion; as the Countess Matilda did against the Emperor
Henry; or else out of Emulation, or some interest of Faction; as it was in the
Case of the Venetians making war upon the Emperor Frederick, whom they
compelled to kiss the Popes Foot: or for both these reasons; as when King
Pipin, and Charles the Great took up Arms in assistance of the Pope against
the Lombards, and others who waged war against him. Thus we see that the
Constantinopolitan Empire came to be destroyed for the Apostasy of Julian, and
Constantius: in like manner as all the Fredericks, Henry's, and other Kings
also of Naples suffered for the same Cause, as often as they denied their
Obedience to the Pope. And certainly the Opinion, and Belief which has
prevailed upon the Minds of all People touching the Christian Religion, is of
very great force; and moves them to defend It to the utmost of their power; so
that whenever the Pope has excommunicated any Prince, He does at the same
instant ruin him also. Do but observe, I pray you, to what state Ferraria is
reduced at this day. But we have discoursed more copiously of this in the
Treatise of Monarchy.

It is, lastly, against all Policy too; for the Pope withholds the rest of the
Princes of Christendom from invading Spain; as he does the King of Spain from
invading them, by continually composing their differences; in like manner as he
divided India betwixt the Portugals and the Spaniards; and thus has several
times made peace betwixt the Spaniards and the French, Venetians, and
Genowaies; and so likewise betwixt Pisa and Florence; which yet he would not so
easily be able to do, by the mere Reverence they bear to Religion. For here in
these Cases they have an eye as well to the force of Arms, as to Religion; for
He that is in the wrong Cause, may justly suspect the Popes joining of his
strength to that of his Antagonist; and so for this reason he will the more
readily obey the Popes Injunction; as I have declared formerly in the
forementioned Treatise. And the King of Spain, if he but declare himself for,
and stand up in the defense of the Pope, shall be sure to have always the
assistance of His Forces at his devotion at any time, which will be a good
means of confirming his Kingdom to him. And therefore I conceave it very
necessary, according to the Fate of Christendom, that if the King of Spain
would arrive to an Universal Monarchy, He must declare himself publicly to
have his dependence from the Pope, and command it to be published all abroad
throughout the World, that himself is the Cyrus that was before typified, and
the Catholic King, that is, the Universal Monarch of the World, declaring this
his Monarchy by his Religious Counsels, and pious Actions; and passing also by
many litigious Controversies which he has with the Pope; and dwelling in the
Tents of Sem, making it appear to all the World, that He is the Chief Defender
of Christian Religion, that depends wholly upon the Pope of Rome; calling
together also the Christian Princes, to consult about the recovery of those
Countries they have lost, and are at this day in the hands of Heretics, and
Turks; and He must proceed to the causing of such to be excommunicated, as
shall deny their assistance herein; and lastly he must also take care that
Pious, and diligent Preachers be sent abroad into the World to promote this
business. For the Plain truth of it is, that the Pope picks quarrels sometimes
with the King of Spain for no other reason, but only because he is afraid, that
in case he should subdue the King of France, and the Princes of Italy, he
would then make Him only as his Chaplain. And this is the reason, why He
desires, that they should always be at variance one with another; that so, in
case either of them should fall off from Him^ by reason either of Apostasy, or
some quarrel or other, He might have the other to assist him. And this is the
reason why he stirred up the Western Empire against the Eastern; only because
they had forsaken their former Religion, and had had many Clashings with the
Pope about It. But now if King Philip will but do that which is his duty, (as
is before declared) and will but give way to the Pope in some things which he
pretends His Right, and will besides send some Bishops, and Cardinals into the
Belgi^k Provinces, and to the New world, to dispose of, and order things there;
he will by this means both free the Pope from this suspicion, and shall
withal effect his own desires: seeing that it is evident, that the Pope, by
his Indulgencies and Croysados, brings him in more money, then those Dignities
which he bestows upon Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops, and other
Ecclesiastical Persons, do yearly stand him in; so that he will be a gainer in
that, wherein he is afraid most of being a loser. And this he would quickly
confess, if he would but cause it to be publicly preached and proclaimed
abroad, that the end of the World is at hand, and that the time is now come,
when there is to be one Sheepfold, under One Shepherd, that is, the Pope; and
that Himself is another Cyrus, whose Office it is to see these things brought
about, and to gather all the Flock into that One Sheepfold; and that what
Nation, or Kingdom soever shall refuse to yield Him obedience, shall be brought
to destruction; and many other things, which I had rather deliver by speech,
then writing.

There are many Causes to be laid open, whereby the King of Spain, as well in
reference to Prudence, Power, and lastly Prophesy, may be rendered Admired by
all the World. For, whether all these things do jointly incline, there
necessarily must the Empire follow. And seeing that this height of Dignity is
to be atained unto, under the Fortune, and Interest of the Empire of Italy,
which is now called the German Empire; there is a necessity that the King of
Spain should labor by all possible means to reduce that Empire under his
power. And the better to effect this he must deal with the Pope, that he would
denounce the most direful Curses that may be, against the Three Protestant
Electors of the Empire; threatening them withal, that unless they return to
the Church of Rome, He will deprive them of their Elect^ral Dignity, which they
received from the Pope only; and that ^eeing they now affirm, that the Pope is
Antichrist, they shall be convinced out of their own words, and made to see,
that themselves are Antichristians: and that therefore they ought of themselves
to lay down that Dignity of theirs, unless they will recant, and again admit
of the Catholic Belief. And to this end the French, Italians, and Spaniards,
being first all reconciled and made friends by the Pope, are to join their
whole Forces together, and to go against them; (which certainly would much
promote this business) and having overcome them, they must utterly extirpate
all the Sects that have reigned among them, and send in new Colonies into their
places. And this expedition is so easy a one, that Charles the Fifth himself
might have been able to have effected it alone. But whereas the Free Cities of
Germany do in no wise desire to hear of any such Empire, or Universal Monarchy,
lest so They should be reduced into their ancient servitude again; and also
because they are very slow in their Deliberations, and as slow also in the
Execution of them; it would therefore very much advance this design, if the
rest of the Princes of Christendom, joining their Forces together, would
suddenly fall upon them; Which business when it should be over, the most
Potent, or most Forward of those Princes should be chosen Electors of the
Empire, by the Apostolical Authority of the Pope, whether they were Germans,
Italians, or Spaniards; or else they might be chosen by Lot, when the most
potent of the Christian Princes should meet together in a Solemn Convention.
And although the Universal Empire of Christendom might easily by these means
be translated to Spain; yet it would be sufficient to do the business, if but
any one King of Spain would so order the matter, that Himself might be but
chosen Emperor; who should then immediately march into Germany with a good
Army, and should instantly subdue it, while it is at so great discord and
variance within it self, both in point of Religion, and of State. And this
Expedition he ought speedily to go upon, and that under a Pretext of marching
for Hungary.

These things I say, that all People might take notice, how much it concerns
the Interest of the King of Spain, that he endeavor the attaining to the
Empire of the World by the means of the Pope.

And indeed his being Dignified ^ith the Title of the Catholic or Universal
King^ shows plainly, that this is the will of the Holy spirit, speaking by the
Clergy.

CHAP. VI, How the Clergy are to be dealt withal.
BUt it is not sufficient that we have the Clergy on our side; but we are
further to labor that at length we may get a Spani^rd to be elected Pope, or
rather, one of the house of Austria; seeing it is evident, that whenever the
Pope pronounces his Oracle for this House, He does thereby raise it withal;
and on the contrary^ He casts a cloud upon it, and keeps it under, whenever
He declares against it. Which the Kings of France observing, they have
endeavored with all their might, that the Pope should remove his Seat, and go
and live in Fr^nce. And so we know that when the Oracle at Delphos began once
to speak on Philips side, King of Macedon: He presently, what by his Politic
Stratagems, and what by Pretense of Religion, arrived to the Monarchy of all
Greece.

In the Determinations also concerning Differences in Religion, it behooves the
King of Spain to be the most Active of any in the managing of the same; and
indeed to take a greater care, and to be more Vigilant herein, then the Pope
himself. Whence we see, that Philip, King of France, did always in a manner,
as it were, command Pope John the XXII. as being himself more Zealous then the
Pope was, in defending, and propagating that decree of the Church, namely; That
the Saints in Heaven do see the Essence of God, even before the last day of
Judgment.

There must also always some Novelty or other, tending to Christian Religion,
be set on Foot; such as are the Canonizations of Saints, the changing of the
Names of Holy Days, and of Months, and other the like things, by transferring
them to Christian Worship; by which means He shall keep busy the heads of the
Prelates as much as he can, and so shall thereby the more confirm his own
Authority among them. He ought besides to oblige the Chief of the Clergy to
himself by the most commodious Arts that he can; as namely, by sending into the
Low Countries, and the like suspected places, Cardinals, and Bishops, to be
Governors there; for the People would much more readily and cheerfully obey
the commands of such, then they will the severity of the Spaniard; and such
Prelates would also adhere more to Them. Nevertheless in the mean time they
ought to have as subordinate to them, some Military Commanders, with Forces
too. And besides, He ought, by the Popes consent too, to send abroad such
Cardinals, as are either Spaniards born, or at least of the Spanish Faction,
into the parts of the New world, and all other far remote Places, to rule and
exercise Monarchical Power there; which would be a business of high advantage
to Him. He must also bestow on all Wise Men, and such as are the most Skilled
in matters of Religion, greater gifts, then the Pope himself does; that so He
may have them at his devotion, whenever He shall have need of them. He must
make choice of, and take into all His Higher Councels two or three of the
Religious, either Jesuits, Dominicans, or Franciscans, that he may bind the
Clergy the faster to Himself, and that his Councillors may be the more
Circumspect, and may in their Determinations have more Authority. In all Wars
that he takes in hand, every one of his Chief Commanders must have an Adjutant
joined to him out of the Clergy; for by this means the Soldiers will hearken
to their Commands with the more Reverence; neither is any thing to be done,
without their being first acquainted therewith. But especially the Stipends of
all Poor Maimed Soldiers are to be distributed to them by the hands of those
of the Clergy; for this is the Misery of Spain, that they pay their money, and
know neither how, nor to whom. And by this means under the Banner of Religion^
He shall both make the Pope more firm to him, and shall also establish his own
Empire; and so complying with Divine Fate, He shall reign the more happily,
and be the more Fortunate. Neither ought He ever to commend to the Pope for
Ecclesiastical Dignities and Preferments, such persons as are not fit for the
same; that so He may have the greater credi^ with the Pope, and that those
Persons, whose wisdom and parts He has commended to him, may be the more
approved, and esteemed. He must always likewise be making Proposals, and
laying down the ways by which the Infidels are to be set upon: and he must be
earnest with the Pope, that he proclaim that all such Princes are worthy to be
deposed, that shall any way impede, or hinder such Religious Expeditions. He
shall do well also to build Hospitals, Almeshouses, and the like Charitable
Places, which, as they are profitable, and give encouragement to the Soldiery,
so may they serve also as so many Seminaries, both for Soldiers and Artificers
for the contriving of Engines for war; in which Houses, Maimed Soldiers and
Engineers may be carefully looked unto, and may also have Indulgencies proposed
unto them, as shall be showed hereafter. He must also be sure, that whatsoever
Expeditions He shall undertake, they shall be approved of by the Pope; that so
they may be commended by all Christians, and also that the Craft of the
Spaniard may be the less suspected; and that the Pope also himself may be the
more engaged to see the same brought to good effect. He must declare also to
the World, that He conceives the Right of Empire to consist, not in Arms
alone; (contrary to the Opinion of the Roman Scipio, who being asked by a
certain Spanish Commander, What Right h^ had to Spain? answered him, only by
showing him the Army he had brought against it;) but in the Auspicious Fa^e of
Christianity. According to what Iephta answered, when he was asked the same
question; Iud. 11.24. Wilt not thou possess that which Chemosh thy God gives
thee to possess? So whomsoever the Lord our God shall drive out from before
us, them will we possess. Whatsoever therefore the Spaniard gets under the
Victorious Banner of Christ, it is his own Right. And this I speak in reference
to the Spaniards Subduing of the New World, which is blamed by so many. For
seeing that the Indians had Violated the Law of Nature, the King of Spain
invading them upon the Interest of the Christian Religion, (whose Handmaid the
Law of Nature is) their Country is his lawful possession; in like manner as
Moses seized upon the Holy Land, after that the iniquities of the Amorites were
once grown full; So also the Turks having possessed themselves of
Constantinople under the Conduct and Fortune of Mahomet, for our sins, they
possess it now as their own Right, as if Chemosh had given it them But
neither are all means of recovering that Empire again denied us therefore;
when as we shall have repented of that sin, which was the cause that we lost
it; namely, the Discord of the Christian World. For then the Angel of that
Empire, which now defends, and takes care of It, not for that false Macon's
sake, whom It invokes; but by reason of the just Judgment of God, shall come
over unto Us.

And these Arguments are of very great moment for the defending, or (as I may
better call it) the Justifying of those Expeditions; the justice of which,
Lactantius especially, lib. de Iustitia Dei, and Cajetan 2^.2x. and some other
of our later Writers understood not.

But now, it seems to me very expedient, for the inducing of the Pope to stand
wholly for the King of Spain, and that the Fate of Christianity may advance His
Monarchy, if that King Philip would promise the Pope, that He, (whereto the
rest of the Christian Princes should give their assent,) would observe
inviolably that Constitution of the Emperor Constantine, wherein he affirms,
That in all Causes, and from what Powers and Courts of Judicature soever,
Appeals may be made to the Tribunals of the Bishops; who are called by Him,
Angeli Dei, Gods Angels; and Dei terrestres, Gods on Earth.

For when the Pope shall once find this promptness, and readiness of Mind in
him, He cannot choose but always be a friend unto him. Neither can this be any
diminution at all of the Dignity of the King: for the rest of the Christian
Princes will never give their consent hereto, without all doubt; and so all
businesses will be betwixt the Pope and Him only to be managed. But in case
that They should also give their assents to this, all Causes would presently be
put necessarily into the Popes hands; so that the King of Spain having united
his Monarchy to the Popes, He should that way also have Dominion over the rest.

And that this may not prove prejudicial to him, He may er^ct some kind of
Supreme Council, and Court of Judicature, into which there shall be admitted
Two Bishops, and His own Confessor; and Himself also, as a Clergy Man, shall
have a Power of Voting there, (for as much as the Kings Eldest Son is always
to be initiated into the Order of the Clergy:) and to this Council there should
be liberty of Appeal, as from all other Tribunals, so from that even of the
Bishops also, in case they shall oppress either their own, or the Kings
Subjects. For by this means, the King shall in effect be the sole Judge, not
only of all other Courts, but even of that of the Bishops too, as being
Himself one of the Holy Order of the Clergy.

And by this means He shall evade that dangerous opinion of D. Rota, who says,
that The Kings Subjects, when they are hardly dealt withal by the Prelates, may
appeal to the Supreme Council of Spain. Which Assertion is certainly both an
unworthy, and an Heretical one, and is of dangerous consequence also to the
King; for it tends to the rendering Him odious to his people, and diminishes
rather, then increases His Authority; as we find it testified by daily
Experience. Or else, it may indeed be desired at the Popes hands that it should
be so; and it may also be declared, that the King is willing to yield, that in
all Causes whatsoever there should be Appeals to the Pope, if so be that it
may be but every where allowed to appeal first to a Council of Three Bishops:
or else, that Appeals in all Causes of the Laity shall come at length to the
Pope, but passing first by degrees, through a Council, consisting of two
Bishops, and the King; and so to be referred afterward to a General Council;
and last of all to come to the Pope: for, Appeals from General Councels are
very seldom heard of; and besides, the very Name of a Council is hateful to
the Pope. So that in conclusion, the determination of all Causes will always
rest with the King; who by this means shall be a Gainer, where he seems to be a
Loser.

CHAP. VII. What may be ufrther added, concerning Prudence, and Opportunity.
THat Prudence ought in the first place to agree in all things with Divine
Fate, has already been showed: it remains now that we speak of all the rest
of the parts of Prudence; and show, whitherto all its Virtues, and especially
Opportunity ought to be referred: for as much as it is the property of
Prudence, to know how to make use of Occasion. We have already also declared.
upon what Interests, and under what Confederacy with the Pope, the Monarchy of
Spain ought to proceed; at least, as far as was fit to be committed to writing:
for the most secret Arcana, and Mysteries of State are not thus to be made
Public. It is therefore Manifest, that the Occasion which the King of Spain
has, consists chiefly in this, that his Neighboring Enemies are weak, and at
discord among themselves touching both Points of Religion, and matters of
State: but his Remoter Enemies are more Powerful; so that these, if his weaker
Neighbors were once overcome, seem the more easily conquerable. The Spaniard
has besides a Notable Occasion from the Extraordinary advantage of Navigation,
and by his having Dominion in all places round about the whole Earth in a
Circle. And it seems to me, that the attaining to the Empire of the whole World
is a very feasible business for Him to bring about, if there could be such an
Uniting of things together by degrees, as I shall show hereafter, according to
the General Rules of Politic Prudence: Where we shall at length come to
Particular Actions, examined according to Nearer, and Remoter Relations. But
first of all the Politic Relation of Spain at home is to be strengthened; and
afterward the Foreign is to be looked after. Thus therefore I proceed on to
the business.

CHAP. VIII. The Causes by which the Spanish Monarchy may be enlarged, and
become less.
THe Occasions, by which the Spanish Monarchy may be kept up, or perhaps be
enlarged also, are these: First of all, The Virtue of the King; Secondly, the
Goodness of the Laws; thirdly, the Wisdom of the Council; fourthly, the
Justice of the Officers of State; fifthly, the Obedience of the Barons; sixthly,
the Multitude, and good Discipline of Soldiers and Commanders; Seventhly, a
Full Treasury; Eighthly, the Mutual Love of the People among themselves, and
toward their King; Ninthly, Good Preachers, in their Sermons speaking for
subjection to Kings; Tenthly, the Good Agreement betwixt his own Kingdoms, and
the Disagreement betwixt his Neighbors. And on the contrary, this Monarchy
has these things that may be the ruin of it: as First, A wicked King;
Secondly, Bad Laws; Thirdly, an Ignorant Council; Fourthly, Unjust Officers of
State; Fifthly, a Disobedient Nobility; Sixthly, the Want of Soldiers and
Commanders, and those He has, not well disciplined; Seventhly, Want of Money;
Eighthly, The Mutual Hatred of the People among themselves, and toward their
King; Ninthly, False Prophets, or else perhaps True ones, that may rise up
against Monarchy; Tenthly, The Discord of his Own Kingdoms, and the Agreement
among others. All which things are Prudently to be considered, and weighed;
seeing that the present Disagreement among the Enemies of Spain, and his Power
at Sea all over the World, have rendered the Attempt not only of maintaining,
but of enlarging this so great a Monarchy very feasible.

CHAP. IX. Of the King.
HE cannot govern the World, that cannot govern an Empire, neither can he rule
an Empire, that cannot a Kingdom; nor he a Kingdom, that cannnot a Province:
nor he a Province, that cannot a City; nor he a City, that cannot a Village;
nor he a Village, that cannot a Family; nor he a Family, that cannot a single
house; nor he a single house that cannot govern himself; neither can he govern
himself, that cannot reduce his affections, and bring them within the compass
of Reason; which very thin^ no man is able to do, except he submit himself to
the will of God. For whosoever rebels against God, who is the Supreme Wisdom,
against him shall all things that are subordinate to him rebel also; and that
justly, and by the Law of Retaliation, which is most just in all both
Governments, and Actions of Men. Having therefore weighed in onr mind, and
considered all the Ideas and Forms of Humane Government, we say, that the King
of Spains endeavors must be, that He may arrive to the Highest pitch of Wisdom
that may be. For every Virtue is an Affection of the Mind, consisting in a
certain Mean; beyound which if it arise, or fall beneath it, it comes to be a
Vice. Now it is Reason, that constitutes this Mean: And therefore we are to
say, that Actions alone do not render a man Virtuous; but to this purpose there
is required also a Natural Inclination in the Person, which is derived both
from the Complexion of his Parents, from the Air, and from the Stars.

Seeing therefore that the Kingdom of Spain is not an Electtive one, but
descends by succession, I say, that the King ought to have but one wife, (for
to have more, is contrary to Reason it self;) which is to be of a tall Stature;
and she must be both fruitful and Eloquent, and must excel all other women in
the endowments both of Body and Mind. Neither must he look after the Noblensse
of her Family only; for so she may chance to be barren, or may some other ways
be not so pleasing to Him; and he should be overwhelmed with all those
mischieifs that Henry the Eighth was, or the Duke of Mantua, Whence Francis,
the Duke of Tuscany, might seem to deserve commendation, if he had married
Blanch only because he wanted an Heir to succeed him. The King is likewise to
exercise the Act of Copulation with his Queen under a Fortunate Planet only,
and after Digestion is finished; and besides, he must not do this, till after
he has abstained some reasonable time from the said Act, to the end that his
seed may be the more fruitful; and when ever he has any thing to do with his
Queen, he ought at that instant to be very hot in his love to her; for it is of
great concernment to the whole World, what the seed of the King be. And I could
wish, that all men did observe these Rules! But the World is now come to that
pass, that men take more care to have a generous Breed of Horses, then to have
generous Children. Then must his Queen, when she is with Child, use some
Moderate Exercise, that so the Child may be the stronger. When she has brought
forth a Son, there must be some woman, that is a Gentlewoman provided to be his
Nurse; which Gentlewoman must also be a Wise woman, and of a high Spirit too.
For, the Manners are sucked in, together with the Milk of the Nurse. When the
Child is grown up to some Maturity, He must converse with Men, rather then with
Women; and he must delight himself with the looking upon Mathematical Figures,
and also with Maps, and draughts of the Kingdoms He is born to; He may also
look upon Horses, and Arms: but he must not be suffered to run about to idle
Childish sports and plays: as were the sons of Cyrus, Cambyses, and Darius: as
if they had been born for themselves only, and not for their People: and who
therefore ( as Plato says) came to destruction. He must have Religious Tutors,
both Bishops, and Commanders, that are eminent for their knowledge in Martial
affairs: He must also have Eloquent persons, that may instruct him in the Art
of Aratory, and informing him rather in the Solid Rules, then the trifling
Quiddities of Grammar. After he has grown past a Child, he must then exercise
both his Mind, and his Body also: for Valor, and Wisdom are Virtues that are
proper to Princes. And we are to know, that wha^ Prince soever shall use the
Exercise of Body only, and not of his Wit, (as well his own, as his Subjects,)
he shall be a slave to him that exercises his Wit too.

And hence it is that the King of France, and his Officers of State, yielded
themselves up to Calvin; as the Germans did to Luther; both which so bewitched
their eyes, that they took all for right and good, whatsoever these laid down
before them. And thus the Tartarians also, after they had made themselves Lords
of the whole East, were at last made fools of by Mahomets Priests. And if they
are not enslaved by Wicked Ingeniou^ Men, yet how ever they are slaves to those
that are Good, as well as Ingenious.

And hence we see, that those Kings of Judah and of Israel, that were both dull
and wicked persons, were given up into the hands of Elias, and Elisha, and
others; who set them up, and deposed them from their Thrones, for their
Ignorance of their own Religion. The Consuls of Rome likewise were in
subjection to their Priests. And again on the other side, he, that exercises
his Wit only, is brought under the power of him that exercises his Body, and
Feats of Arms. Whence it is, that the Popes have so often been made the
laughing stock of the Goths and Lombards; and that Platonical King,
Theodoricus, the second K. of Ravenna, was subdued by Belis^rius. But that King
that exercises himself both these ways, he is the truly wise King. And hence
it was that the Romans never exercised their Wit, without the exercise of the
Body too; as Salust informs us. I add moreover, that a King ought not to bend
his studies wholly to, and to spend all his time in one certain Science only;
as did King Alphonsus, who became one of the most famous Astronomers in the
World; following the Example of King Atlas, who was overcome by Perseus, a
valiant Man of Arms, as the Fable tells us: nor yet would I have him to addict
himself wholly to the Study of Divinity, as Henry the VIII. did, who by this
means utterly ruined his own Wit. But he ought to have several Tutors for each
several Science, and be a hearer of each of them at their several appointed
times. But the Knowledge most fit for the King, is, to know the Division of the
World into its parts, and of his own Dominions; the different manners and
Customs of the several Nations of the Earth, and their Religions and Sects; as
also the stories of all the former Kings, and which of them was a Conqueror,
and which was overcome, and for what reasons: And for this purpose he must make
choice of the best Historians that have written. He must likewise know the
several Laws of Nations, and which are wholesome Laws, and which not; and the
Grounds they were made upon. But chiefly He is to be well skilled in the Laws
of his own Kingdom, and of the Kings his Predecessors; and to understand by
what means Charles the Fifth got here, or lost there; and how Maximilian sped
in his wars: So likewise, with how many, and what kind of Nations and Kingdoms
They made their Wars; and how the same Nations may be subdued. He must also
give an ear to all sorts of Counsels; but let him make choice of, and publish
as His own, the Best, and Soundest only. Let his rule be also, to inflict all
punishments upon his Subjects in the name, and by the Ministry of his Officers;
but to confer all benefits, and rewards upon them with his own hand, and in his
own name. In a word, he must be adorned with all kinds of Virtues; and let it
be his chiefest desire to leave to His Successors Himself an Example worthy of
their Imitation; as it must be his care to imitate all the wisest of his
Predecessors.

Those Affections which he ought with his utmost power to restrain, are Grief,
Pleasure, Love, Hatred, Hope, Fear, and lastly Mercy also. For when a King
shows himself to be cast down by any Ill Fortune that has befallen him, He
betrays his own Weakness, discourages his Subjects; and, lastly, gives
himself wholly to grieve for the same: for which King David was justly reproved
by Ioab, when he lamented so excessively the death of his Son Absalon. As on
the contrary side, when he is too much lifted up with Joy for any good
success, it argues in him an abject and servile Disposition and Temper: And
especially, if he addict himself to keep company with Buffoons and Jesters, and
give himself up to excessive Banquettings, and other the like pleasures, he
must needs be despised by his Subjects: as Nero was, who minded nothing but
Stage Plays, and his Harp; or Vitellius, and Sardanapalus, who giving
themselves over wholly to Women, and Feasting, were therefore scorned by their
Subjects, and deposed, with the loss of their Lives.

And indeed the Love of Women will very often endanger him, unless he fortify
his mind against it: (as it happened to the most Wise Solomon himself:) and
especially of his own Wife, who commonly hates her Husbands nearest, and most
intimate friends; conceiving, that the greatest share of His Affection is due
to Her self: in so much, that she will hate and persecute the Wisest, and
ablest Commanders for War that are about him. Thus we read He wou^d have said,
Theodora: for so was Justinians wise called.
Sophia, Wife to the Emperor Justinian, dealt with Narses; who being thereby
very much incensed, he took occasion to invite the Lombards into Italy; to the
infinite prejudice and loss both of the Emperor and Empress.

Covetousness also proves the ruin of Kings; as we see in Antiochus, who
pillaged the Temple of Jupiter Dodonaeus; and in Caligula, who having profusely
wasted all his own, most greedily gaped after other men's estates: whence they
both came to be hated by their Subjects, and so died a miserable death. Such a
one also was Midas, who wished, That whatsoever he touched might presently ^urn
to Gold; whereas he could neither eat his Gold, nor could it procure him an
hours sleep when he wanted it; that is to say, it was of no use at all to him;
but it only laid him open to the spoil of him, that had but the Skill to make
use of his Iron. Caligula in one year consumed riotously seventeen Millions of
Crowns, which his Predecessor Tiberius had scraped up together: and was
afterward reduced to that want, that he was forced to betake himself to spoil
his Subjects, and to practice all manner of Cruelties upon them. King Solomon
also, what in building of Sumptuous Palaces, and Temples, and about other most
chargeable Pomps and Magnificences, expended the better part of a Hundred and
twenty Millions, which his Father David had left him: and notwithstanding that
he had no trouble upon him from any part, yet did he so excessively overburden
his Subjects with Taxes, that being become Intolerable to the greatest part of
his People, he lost a great part of his Kingdom, in his Son Rehoboam.

We do allow in our King a desire of Honor; but so, that he aspire to it by
the steps of Virtue: for otherwise He will gain only the opinion of being
Proud; which was the ruin of Alboin, and Attila. And indeed Honor is the
Witness to Virtue: and therefore whosoever is a Virtuous Person, he shall
attain to True Honor, without any Flattery; which has been the overthrow of
many a Prince in the World.

And hence it will also follow, that a Prince should not enter into so strict a
Tie of Friendship with any One, or Two of his Subjects, as to indulge them the
liberty of transgressing the bounds of Justice, and the Laws, without
control: For by so doing, the Principal Persons of his Nobility, and
Commanders in War, laying aside all duty, will look upon him as an Abject,
Unworthy person. And, which is more, they sometimes in these cases enter into
Conspiracies against Him; and that very person, whom He advanced to so much
honor as to make him his Favorite, may chance to usurp the Kingdom: as we
read it happened betwixt Gyges, and Candaules, King of Lydia. So likewise
Sejanus did much mischief to the Emperor Tiberius, who notwithstanding was as
subtle and crafty as any man: But yet Macro did more, who made an end of him.
Neither can any thing be more destructive to a Prince, then to single out One
only, to be his Friend and Favorite. And has not Antonio Perez been of very
ill Consequence to the Present King? If the King hate any particular persons,
he must by no means discover it; unless he find that they are hated by the
People also: as are commonly all Heretics, Infidels, Usurers, and Public
Executioners of Justice upon Malefactors: for by so doing^ He shall the more
indear himself to the People. He must also take notice, that Accusations among
his Subjects do not so much avail his Kingdom, as Calumnies hurt it^ and
therefore He ought always to incline rather to the Accused Party. And to the
end that he may attain to the highest degree of his Subjects Love, and
Affection, He must set up some Court of Grace, that shall be above all other
Courts whatsoever; that all such persons as are condemned to death, may have
yet some left to whom they may appeal.

And the King ought to pardon Offenders often, where it may be done safely
enough; and where the Condemned person has not been admitted to make his
Appeal to the Kings Deputies, or has not offended either against the State, or
Religion: and these Offenders by Him pardoned, may be sent out either for
Soldiers, or else to the Galleys: and this will do very much good. And of this
Court of Grace, I would have the King himself to be President; and it should
consist only of his Queen, and his Children, and one Bishop only.

The King must also with all Modesty, and Humility, put his chiefest trust in
God, and repose but little confidence in his own strength: especially when He
is not endued with any Extraordinary Prudence for the managing of the same: and
all the weightiest of his Actions must be referred to God, as the Author of
them, that so they may be looked upon by all with the greater reverence, and
esteem. Let him never hope with a few to vanquish a greater number, nor with
Undisciplined and unruly Soldiers: nor to conquer a foreign enemy in his own
Country: of which things I have elsewhere spoken. He must always remove all
Fear far from him; and ^e must discover his only Fear to be, lest any Sad
Disaster should befall either Religion, or his Subjects. And in all His
Expeditions He must show himself to the Height of Valor, and even of bold
Daring too: provided that ^e do it with Reason, and that so He may the more
inflame the courage of his Soldiers. Neither ought he ever to seem to be
Jealous of the Worth of any one; lest he should so betray His own
Timorousness, and Poorness of Spirit. And therefore, to the end that his
Subjects may not rebel, His safest course will be, to keep them always up in
Arms, rather then to let them lie unarmed quietly at home: for, being in
Arms, they will the easier be kept within the bounds of Obedience. Because
that, if they be by fair, and Prudential means kept in awe, they will be ready
to make use of their Arms at all times for their Kings advantage; but if,
though Unarmed, they be otherwise then fairly dealt with by their Prince, they
will be apt to revolt from him, or (which is worse) will find Arms, which they
will turn against Him. An example of this kind we have in David and S^ul, who
was Jealous o^ David, seeing his Valor and Worth. The King ought also, as
often as he begins to be Jealous, and fearful of the Greatness of any of his
Subjects, under the show of honoring him, to send him abroad out of the
Country he is powerful in, to some other; as Ferdinand, King of Arragon, dealt
with the Great Duke Consalvus; removing him from N^ples, where he might
possibly have raised Commotions in the State, to Spain, where he was not able
to do any such thing. Neither yet are such Men too much to be slighted; for by
this means the Prince might incur the hatred of his Subjects; and it would
be a discouragement to them from the endeavoring at any High and Noble
Actions. Therefore such persons, as He is Jealous of, are to be employed in
such places, where there is the least danger to be feared from them: as, we
read, Belisarius was called home by Justinian out of Italy, where he was
beloved by all men; and sent against Persia.

The Kings Anger must neither be Violent, nor Headlong; as was Alexander's of
Macedon against his Nobles; for so he may chance to be made away by poison, as
Alexander was: and his Subjects may fall off from him, and so his Power will be
diminished; as it happened to Theoderick the First King of Ravenna; and which
was also the cause of the Emperor Valentinian's death. In times of Peace He
must be merciful to such as offend either out of Ignorance, or Weakness of
Body or Mind; and that, in favor of the Multitude, and to sweeten Them: but
this he must take heed of, in time of War; and he must not pardon any Egregious
Offenders, or that are the Heads, and Ringleaders of any Faction: especially
where the Worth of the Persons is not so great, as that, being pardoned, they
may be of greater use to him, then that wherein they offended was prejudicial.
Thus Scanderbeg pardoned Moses rebelling against him, as being the Greatest
Commander he had under him: who thereby became afterward of very great Use,
and Advantage to him: In like manner as David also pardoned Ioab. But yet we
must remember, that this Easiness, and Mercifulness is then only seasonable,
where the Crime concerns not the State it self, but only Particular persons.
And therefore the Prince ought not at any time to deny the Legal Proceeding of
Justice to any one; For, for this very cause, Philip, King of Macedonia, was
slain by Pausanias. And therefore, as we have formerly said, he ought to be
careful, and circumspect in the curbing, and bridling of his own Passions and
Affections.

But now, Piety, and Religion is of it self sufficient to make any Prince
exercise his power of Dominion Justly, and happily: as we see by the Examples
of the Emperor Constantine the Great, Theodosius, and the like. And here we
are always to remember, that it is most certain, that, The People do naturally
follow the Inclinations of their Prince. And therefore Plato was wont to say,
If the King but mend, all the Kingdom mends, without the accession of any
other Law. And therefore the Virtue of the Prince ought to surpass, in a
manner, all Humane sense.

As concerning Making of War, it is certain and evident to all, that Warlike
Princes have still had the better of those that are not so inclined: and
although Wise Kings have always made a shift to preserve their own, yet they
have not always enlarged their Dominions: but the idle, and sloathful have
ever been of the losing hand. I say therefore, that a King, if he would be
accounted a warlike Prince, ought to go in person to the Wars; especially,
^^ere he is certain of Victory. Thus Ioab, having for some time besieged that
City of the Ammonites, and being now ready to take it, he gave notice to the
King, that He should come, and be at the delivery of it up, that so the Glory
of the Action might be His. For by this means the People will be ready to
admire their King, as if he were something more then a King. But He must be
sure to decline all Evident Dangers, and especially Duels; Lest (as the
Israelites said to David) He quench the Light of Israel. For this was accounted
a great fault in Alexander the Great, that he would needs leap down first
himself from off the Walls into a certain Town; where He by that means
received many Wounds: For by that rash Act of his, he in His Single person
brought into Hazard the Monarchy of the whole World. He must also re^ard his
Old Soldiers with his Own hand, and must pre^er them to the Government of
Castles, and Forts: and the rawer sort of Soldiers he must cause to exercise
themselves in light skirmishes among themselves, and in exercises of the Field.

Every King that swaieth a Scepter is either a Wolf, or a Hireling, or lastly
a Shepherd; as Homer, and the Holy Gospel it self also calls him. A Tyrant is
the Wolf, that keeps the Flock for his own Advantage; and always makes away
with all the Wealthiest, Wisest and Valiantest of his Subjects, that so he may
fill his own bags, and may without any danger or control, Lord it as he list,
and range about through the whole flock, spoiling whom he please. And if the
King of Spain should go about to show himself such a one to his Subjects, he
will lose all; as did those Dionysij of Syracuse, Acciolinus of Padou^,
Caligula, Nero, Vitelliu^, and the like. The Hireling is, he that kills not
indeed his Subjects; but rather draws to himself all Profits, Honors, and
advantages acquired by the service of his Soldiers and Vassals; but he does
not at all defend them from the Ravenous Wolves; I mean, False Teachers; nor
other fierce Invaders, and Oppressors. As we may call the Venetians, the
Hireling Rulers of Cyprus; seeing that they did not defend it against the
Turks. And the Romans also were such, in Relation of the Saguntines, from
whose necks they did not keep off Hannibals yoke. And in like manner we may
term Don Philip Maria the Hireling Vicount of the Genowayes; for he mad only
a benefit of them, but showed not himself as a Governor over them; Which
cannot now be said of the King of Spain. And these Hirelings, or Mercenary
Princes, are suddenly losers by it, as the former were. As, we see, the King
of France lost, by suffering Calvin to mount up into the Chair; as the Elector
of Saxony likewise did, by suffering that Wolf Luther. For he that makes a prey
of Men's Mind, has command over their Bodies also: and will at length have the
disposing of their Fortunes and estates too. And therefore it is a mere Folly,
and Ignorance in those Princes, whosoever they be, that shall admit New
Religions into their Dominions, whereby the Minds of their Subjects are lead
away. And hence it was that Saul foresaw his own Ruin, so soon as ever he
perceaved the affections of the People inclined toward David. And the
Mischiefs of Germany, Poland, and France have been infinite, since Luthers
making a ^Prey and carring away the Minds and Affections of the Inhabitants of
these Countries^ But that King is a Shepherd, that feeds Himself with the
Honor, and Love of his People; and them, with his own Example, Learning, and
Abundance of good Things; and withal defends them by his Arms, and Wholesome
Laws. And therefore a good King ought to be endued with so much a greater
proportion of Learning and Knowledge above his People (who do infinitely herein
excel Brute Beasts,) as the Shepherd is above his M^te Flock. So that a Prince
(as Plato said) is somewhat above Humane Condition, and ought to be esteemed as
a kind of God^ or a Christ; or at least is to be reputed as qualified with a
certain measure of Divinity, and to have some emin^nt knowledge conferred upon
him from above, as had that Divine Lawgiver Moses; and as at this day have the
Pope, and the Bishops. Or if this be not granted to Him, he ought however,
through Humane Virtue at least, to submit, and yield Obedience to the Divine
Lawgiver; as did Charles the Great. And there have been some, who wisely
considering these things have endeavored to persuade the World, that they were
Inspired from Heaven, as did Mahom^t, and Minos; whose Laws were thereby held
in great Reverence by the People. And certainly wheresoever the King shall
approve himself to be such, the People in general will be made good; where as
on the contrary, if the Prince be Bad, the People will be so too. And therefore
following the Example of the Pope, and his Bishops, he ought to appear as like
them as he can, doing nothing at all without their approbation, but making a
Union betwixt his Kingdom and their Church, so to make up one Body of a
Republic betwixt them; as I have said before; and by observing the
Ecclesiastical Order, and by constituting good Laws, he must render himself
Worthy of Reverence from the People: which by appearing but seldom abroad among
them in Public, he shall be sure to have from them.

As for those Acts which Humane Nature cannot abstain from, as eating, and the
like, these he ought to do privately. Or if at any time he do any of them in
Publi^k, He must always, after the example of Philopoemen, the General of the
Achaeans, have some by him to discourse touching Peace and War. Our King must
not endeavor so much to be Accounted a Virtuous Person, as to be so Really:
for, where any one is discovered to have but once played the Dissembler, no
body will ever believe him again afterward.

And because that, for want of Issue to succeed him, the Kingdom may easily
fall to the ground; His chiefest care must be, that he get children as soon,
and early as he can. And so soon as ever his Eldest Son shall be grown up to
any maturity, and himself perchance is yet a young man; he may then do well to
^end him to Rome, that so he may be instructed both in the affairs of the
World, and in those of Religion also; and withal, the Kingdom of Spain may be
the more firmly incorporated into the Church, by having both the Cardinals, and
Popes themselves always true to their Faction: and also, that His Son, and the
Barons may not dare to join together, and take up Arms against Him: (which our
King Philip suspected of his Son Charles;) and so, by Obeying, he shall learn
how to Rule. The King of Spain ought also always to design some of the House
of Austria to be his successor, in case that he should die without a successor
of his own.

Let him always speak the Language of his Native Country, and give Audience to
such only as speak the same. He ought always to keep his Court in Spain, the
Head of his Empire^ neither let him ever go out of it, unless it be to the
Wars, and leaving his Son behind him: Or, to suppress some mutinying Province,
or some Baron that he suspects, He may go and take up his quarters among them;
that so, being thereby reduced to want, and scarcity, they may be forced to
serve the King instead of Soldiers, and He by this means may be freed from all
fears and jealousies. The rest of His Male Children, that are not brought up in
the hope, and expectation of Reigning; he may make Cardinals; neither ought he
at any time to commit the rains of Government to their hands, least happily
they should be possessed with a desire of Ruling. And hence it is, that among
the Turks it is the Custom, always to make away with all the younger Sons. And
the King of China shuts up those that are next in blood to Him, in large,
spacious places, which abound with all variety both of necessaries and
Delights: as the King of Ethiopia confines all his to a certain very high, and
most pleasant Mountain, called Amara; where they are to continue, tell they
shall be called to succeed in the Kingdom. But yet for all this, neither does
the King of China, or Ethiopia, by confining their nearest of kin, nor the
Great Turk by killing his, nor yet the Moor, by putting out the Eyes of his,
acquit themselves from the danger and fear of Seditions, and Rebellions. For
notwithstanding that the Parents of these confined Persons may happily bear it
with a patient and quiet mind enough; yet it may possibly be, that either the
Common People, or the Nobles of the Kingdom, being moved either with
Indignation, and Fury, or else Fear of Punishment, or desire of Revenge, may
corrupt, and provoke those Persons so shut up; or by killing their Keepers, may
carry them away out of their prisons by force, and may place them in the
Throne: as those they call, The Common Rebels of Spain, attempted to carry away
by force the Duke of Calabria, who was at that time a Prisoner in the Sciattive
Tower. And in China many most cruel Tyrants ^f both sexes, both Kings, and
Queens, have been murdered. And of late years, in Ethiopia, Abdimalo was called
to the Crown, not from ou^ of the Mountain of Amara, but from out of Arabia,
whether he had fled to preserve himself. Neither is there any Country, where
there have been more Civil Wars, and Rebellions raised, then among the Moors in
Ma^ritania. The Kings of Ormus, before that that Country was subdued by the
Portuguez, were wont to kill their Parents: which custom was practiced also by
some Emperors of Constantinople; by the Kings of Tunis also, and of Marocco,
and Fez; as likewise among the Turks: as appears by the Wars betwxt Bajazet and
Zerim, and of Selim and his father, Bajazet the second. Therefore this Cruelty
of the Turks renders them not much more secure thereby. For in other Kingdoms
it is onely^ Ambition, and a desire of Honor, and Rule that excites men to
raise sedition, and to take up Arms against the Prince: Which Ambitious
Desires may either be satisfied some other way, or be diverted to some other
design, or possibly may be overawed, and crushed: But those of the Blood Royal
among the Turks, and Moors, besides Ambition, have a Necessity also of seeking
the preservation of their own Lives, to force them on to such Attempts. For,
seeing they are all certainly enough assured, that they shall be put to death
by the succeeding Emperor, they have need all of them to provide for
themselves; and so are necessitated, in a manner, to take up Arms, and to
implore the aid and assistance either of subjects at home, of Foreign Princes
abroad. Hence it was that S^lim was wont to say, that He was to be excused for
having made away with so many of his Brothers, Nephews, and Kindred; seeing
that otherwise the meanest person of the Ottoman line, that should have but
escaped acting a part in that Tragedy, might have come to the same Dignity He
enjoyed.

But, passing by these Impious, and yet ^neffectual Examples of Cruelty, let us
now come to the Daughters of the King of Spain. And these Probably may do well
to be matched with the Kings, or Princes of Poland, and France: and also with
the Kings of Denmark, Muscovia, England, and the like: upon this condition,
that these Princes promise faithfully to embrace the Catholic Religion; which
if they would do, there would thence a double Benefit accrue.

The King must take into his Court, all the most able, and most knowing in all
sorts of Sciences: and He must endeavor to render both Himself, and his
Children, as excellent in them as is possible; that so the Eyes of all men may
be turned upon Him, and His, and may join themselves unto them, seeing them
live so happily and securely. In like manner, as all the People of Israel, even
to the Maccabees themselves, who had God for their Guide, became yet admirers
of the Romans; and entering into a League with them, fled to Them for
Protection. Now He that protects, or assists, may naturally be said to be Lord
of him whom he protects; as the Man became Lord of the Horse, whiles He
assisted him against the Stag.

CHAP. X. What Sciences are required in a Monarch, to render him admired by all.
ALl Great Men, when they have gone about to set up a New Monarchy, have
changed the Sciences that the people were exercised in before, and many times
also the Religion of the Country; that so they might render themselves the more
Admired by their Subjects: and by this means also other Nations have come in
unto them too. And this is the reason why the Assyrians, under King Ninus,
changed the Religion of Noah, and set up that of Jupiter Belus, and applied
themselves to the study of Astrology; whereby they became so famous, and
admired, that they brought the whole East under their Subjection.

The like course also was taken by the Persians, under Cyrus, who took upon
himself the Title of Gods Commissary: for These introduced into the World the
Practice of Natural Magic; a Science till then never heard of before; and
furnished it out with great Variety of New, and Admirable Rites and Ceremonies.

The Macedonians made the world believe, that their Prince, Alexander the
Great, was the Son of Jupiter Ammon; and withal abolis^ing the Ancient
Disciplines, they brought in upon the Stage the Aristotelian; which confuted
all that were before it: insomuch that his Father, King Philip, rejoiced very
much thereat, foreseeing that this Novel^y of Doctrine would lay a Foundation
for his son to erect a New Empire upon; and so thenceforward neglected the
worship of Jupiter, Mercury, Osiris, and the rest of the most Ancient among the
Gods. Thus Mahomet also, when he now aspired to a Monarchy, introduced a New
Religion; fitting it to his own Palate, and the Gust of the People. Julius
Caesar likewise, being now got to be chosen the Pontif^x Maximus, and Astrology
being at that time not very well known to the Romans; He, by changing the Old
Account, and rectifying the Year, laid the Foundation of His Monarchy.

And the same must the King of Spain also do; especially seeing He has the
best Opportunity that can be, of doing the same. For seeing that it is not
Lawful at all times to introduce a New Religion, He ought therefore to adorn,
and set forth the Old so much the more, and to enlarge it with variety of New
Rites an^ Ceremonies; as also to bring forth into the World New Sciences, and
such as shall be suitable to His Dignity.

But above all, let him make a Law, to be observed by all Christians; First,
That whenever any People or Country shall forsake the Roman Religion, all
Princes shall be bound, upon pain of forfeiting their Estates, to root out, and
extirpate the same; like as God commanded Moses.

Secondly, That the Clergy, and such as are skilled in Church Matters, shall
make it Their care to look to the regulating of the Months of the Year, and
the Days of the Week; calling the several Months by the Names of the Twelve
Apostles; and the seven Days of the Week by the Names of the Seven Sacraments.
For the truth of it is, that the Inhabitants of the New World, when they find,
in conversing with the Christians, that the Heathenish Names of Months and
Days are still in use among them, they are wrapped into a great admiration. And
the like course is to be observed in other the like things.

Thirdly, that seeing that New Sciences do make a New Monarchy the more
Admired, I would have the Schools of the Platonists, and of the Stoics opened
again, whose Opinions come nearer to Christianity, then the Aristotelian. And,
that we may descend to particulars, the Telesian Philosophy is the most
excellent of all; seeing it comes the nearest to the Holy F^thers, and makes it
appear to the World, that the Philosophers knew nothing; and that Aristotle,
who would have the Soul to be Mortal, and the World to be Immortal, and denies
Providenc^ also, (on which Christianity is grounded) talks very absurdly,
notwithstanding all his so specious Reasons; seeing that the same are refuted
by stronger Reasons, fetched in like manner from Nature.

Fourthly, It is necessary that he set the Wits of the Learned to work with
Scholastic Questions; lest by being conversant in the Sciences of Natural
Things, it set an edge upon their Ambition, and by this means they should
aspire to higher Matters.

Fifthly, That He should banish all Theological Questions out of the
Transalpine Schools; seeing that all the Divines of those parts turn Heretics,
by not continuing firm to the Holy Constitutious of the Pope, but are still
raising up fresh Controversies: and the Wits of these men are to be exercised
only in the Disputes of Natural Philosophy.

Sixthly, He must endeavor to get himself Renown, as Justinian did, by reducing
all the Roman Laws into One Body^ and as Charles the Great did, by opening the
School of Aristotle, which was at that time the only School of Philosophy in
Christendom: for all the rest had been long before trodden down to the ground
by the Barbarians; as I have showed elsewhere.

Seventhly, He shall do well to shut up all the Greek and Hebrew Schools;
because that these Two Languages have been destructive to Monarchy; and are,
besides, the Main Pillars by which those Heresies that chiefly reign at this
day are built upon. And therefore, on the contrary, let him endeavor to bring
in the Knowledge of the Arabic Tongue; by means whereof the Mahumetans may be
the better convinced; and the troublesome Transalpine Wits may employ
themselves rather in confuting the Turks, then in vexing the Catholics with
their Disputes.

Eighthly, Let him also erect Mathematical Schools: because this would be of
great use and advantage in respect of the New World, as well as of the Old:
because by this means the Peoples Minds will be diverted from creating Us any
trouble, and will be incited to bend their studies that way, which may be
useful to the King. Then let him get about him the Ablest Cosmographers that he
can, and assign them Liberal Allowances; Whose business it shall be, to
describe those several parts of the World wheresoever the Spaniards have set
footing throughout the Compass of the whole Earth; because that Ptolomy knew
nothing of most of those Countries at all; And let Him, by the Industry of
these his Mathematicians, correct all the Errors of the Ancient Geographers:
and he may also put forth a Book, under the Title of the King of Spains Name,
wherein he shall set forth the praises due to Christophorus Columbus,
Magellanus, Americus Vesputius, Ferdinandus Cortesius, Pizarrus, and others of
his Valiant Sea-Commanders; whose Posterity He ought to confer Dignities upon,
for the Encouraging of others to fall upon the like undertakings. Let him also
send able Astrologers abroad into the New World, and especially some of those
beyond the Alps; to the end that he may by this means also take them off from
their Heresies, and filth; and let him, by proposing rewards to such, invite
the ablest Wits out of Germany, and send them into the New World; that there
they may give an account of, and describe all the new Stars that are in that
Hemisphere, from the Antarctick Pole to the Tropic of Capricorn: and may
describe the Holy Cross, whose figure is at that Pole; and about the Pole it
self they may place the Effigies of Charles V. and of other Princes of the
House of Austria; following herein the Example of the Grecians and Egyptians,
who placed in the Heavens the Images of their Princes and Heroes. For by this
means both Astrology, and Local Memory will be both learnt together. And when
any such Illustrious Persons are so advanced to Honor, and rendered so
Venerable: and such Astrologers are encouraged with large rewards, it is of no
small advantage to the enlargment of a Kingdom: For, all the Worlds Affections
will be inclined toward such a Prince, and will desire to serve him.

We are to know also, that the Novelty of Doctrine is a great promoter of
Monarchy; provided it be not against Religion, as was that of Luther: but that
it rather agree well with it: as does that of Tele^ius, and that which I my
self have collected, by my reading of the Ancient Fathers of the Church: or a^
least when it does not contradict the same, but rather enlarges it, and
renders it admired by all men, and takes up the Minds of the People, and keeps
them in, from running after, and employing themselves in that which is
prejudicial to the Kingdom.

Aristotle, though his Opinions were impious, yet was he in nothing at all any
hinderance to Alex^nder; and therefore much less can there be any hurt, in
such a Doctrine as we speak of.

The King must also take care to have the General Histories and Annals of the
Whole World, compiled in a compendiou^ and succinct way, like that of the Books
of the Kings of the Hebrews: and which may also show from the first building
of Rome the whole progress of this Monarchy down to this present day, and may
set down the time when the Christian Faith was first embraced by it: and may
make it known to all, so many Kings thereof as were Pious and, and Religious
men, were all of high esteem in the World, and reigned happily; but those that
were Wicked, and Ill men, were also Unfortunate.

Let Him likewise cause a Brief Collection to be made of the Laws of all the
several Kingdoms and Principalities of the World, digested in their several
Orders; as also their Religions and Customs; and let him make use of the best
of these, and reject the bad. But he must be very careful, that He publish not
in any place such Laws, as the Nature of that place cannot bear.

CHAP. XI. Of Laws, both Good, and Bad.
THe King of Spain, as well for Theological, as Politic reasons, can enact no
New Laws. For the Christian Law, together with the Roman Military Power and
Prudence, is that which He succeeds in, and with which He is to comply. He must
take heed therefore, that He make not many Pragmatical Sanctions. And it would
be an excellent thing, if the Laws, as far as it were possible, were all
written in the Spanish Tongue; that so the whole World might be acquainted, and
might have some commerce with the Spanish Monarchy, both in the Language, and
the Laws.

But seeing that this Monarchy had Its Rise under the Roman Empire, and
Religion; the Latin is a Language that it needs not be ashamed of.

Let such Laws therefore be made, as the People may keep rather Willingly,
then by compulsion, and through fear of punishment; as finding them to be
advantageous to themselves. For when such Laws are enacted, as make for the
Profit of the Prince, or some few Particular persons only, the People must
needs be out of love with them; and then do they presently find out ways to
elude the same: whereupon there strait follows Confiscation of the Subjects
Goods, with Mulcts, Punishments, and Banishment. Then must we have New Laws
made, to punish the Transgressors of the Former; and then again other New Laws
must be made, for the punishing of such as have offended against these latter:
and thus is the Number of Laws increased, the Princes Authority slighted, and
the Subjects at length, out of hate to their Prince, either rise up against
Him, or else forsake the Kingdom; to the very great damage (no question) of the
Prince: for by this means both the number of the Soldiery is diminished, and
besides, the Kings Subsidies grow less. Every Tyrant therefore, that makes
Laws that are for his Own Advantage only, and not for his Subjects, is a Fool:
for by this means He loses himself; whereas on the other side, a wise King,
while he seems to do things Prejudicial to himself, does himself
notwithstanding thereby the greatest Right that can be. And we find by
Experience, that Princes that are Popular, are more extolled, then those are
that admit into their friendship and favor some few Noblemen, or Courtiers
only: as we may observe in the Contrary Examples of Augustus, and Tiberius.

It is moreover necessary, that a Law be conformable to the Custom of the
place for which it is made: for all Northern People love Easy Laws; and would
rather obey out of their own Good Nature, then by Compulsion. And the not
observing of this, was the reason of the Dukes D'Alva's losing the
Low Countries. The Southern People, as those of Andaluzia, require strict
Laws; the Italians, Portuguez, and Calabrians, desire a Mediocrity, and
Moderation in their Laws.

The King must also consider, as touching the New World, under what Climate
each particular People there lies. For, those that lie under the Equinoctial,
would have Moderate Laws; but those that are under the Tropicks, must have
more severe and rigid Laws; as also those that are under the Pole: but those
that are nearer to the Frigid Zone, desire Milder Laws: but those that are
more remote, and lie nearer to the Tropicks, as do the Inhabitants of Siam,
require Austere Laws, and such as carry a Religious Reverence with them. But
those that are situate in a Middle Position, as the Italians are, are of like
Nature to those that lie under the Equinoctial.

When another Country loses any of its Inhabitants by reason of the difference
of Religion, New Laws are presently to be made by some Bishop, and some
Eminent Commander of War, and a Colony of fit persons is to be sent thither:
as, for example, Netherlanders may be sent into Africa; Italians into the
Netherlands; and Spaniards into the New World. And the fittest time to do this,
is, when the War is on foot there: but when they begin once to yield, the Laws
may then be altered by little and little: as it is fit it should be done in the
Low Countries, when the People there shall submit, and yield obedience to the
Spaniards. For then there should be more use made of the Tongue, in governing
of them, then of the Sword: and the Inquisition is also to be kept up there`
under some Other Name, and Pretense.

But if any City, or Country, that is addicted to the Catholic Religion, be
taken in; it will be sufficient then to send thither some Spaniards only to
guard it; and some Wise Persons, who by degrees may change the Laws of the
Place: but the King must put some of his own Subjects, and of his own Country,
into the highest, and chiefest places of trust; but with the meaner and lower
Offices he may entrust the Inhabitants of the place: as Duke Francis did at
Sena; and the Venetians at Padoua. But when the Name of a Spaniard begins once
to be hateful among them, let Him then send thither such Italians as He may
safely trust, and employ them as his Ministers there. Now what course is to be
taken in the several Kingdoms belonging to the Spaniard, I shall show
hereafter. Only this I shall say here, that the First, and Principal Keeper of
the Laws ought to be Honor; the Second Love; and the Third, Fear: But where
this Order is inverted, and runs the contrary way, nothing will there prosper.

Of Counsel. CHAP. XII.
THe Supreme Council, or Court, ought to consist of the King, and some few of
the Wisest of his Nobles, with some of the Clergy joined to them. Yet the Court
of Grace (of which I spoke before) must be above the Supreme Court of Justice.
The Councels of that Kingdom are already managed rightly enough; yet their
Decrees would be observed with greater Reverence, and Religion, if that course
were taken which I before proposed; namely, of adding to them a greater number
of the Prelates: for by this means the Clergy will be the easier won; and
withal, the Decrees of the said Councels will be of the greater esteem, and
reverence.

We are to take notice also that persons of any Nation whatsoever are not fit
to be presently taken in for Counselors; but such only, as know the Customs
of the Country, or are Learned Men, as was Plato: or else have an excellent
dexterity of wit, as had Ci^cinnatus. For as much therefore as the Spaniard is
a person of good ability in all matters of a subtle Nature, and where there is
use of Good Language; as the Germans abilities lie chiefly in matters that are
to be done by the Hand, and require Labor; and the Italians in matters of
State Government, and Policy; it must therefore be the Kings Care, that he make
a right Choice of these several persons, and according to their different
Abilities make use of them in His Counsels. My Opinion is therefore, that in
Maritime Affairs, and whatsoever concerns Navigation, He ought chiefly to
employ the Portuguez, and the Genouese: But in things which concern Mechanical
Arts, Artificial Fireworks, and Engines of all sorts, the Transalpine is the
only man: but where the Government of State is concerned, let the Italian be
there made use of: but as for Fortifications, keeping of Garrisons, making
Discoveries, or giving Intelligence, and going on Embassies, or whatsoever
concerns Religion, with any of these let the Spaniard be entrusted.

And seeing that we would have the King of Spain to be Lord of the whole World,
it must be his care, as much as he can, to draw on all Nations to comply with
the Spanish Manners and Customs; that is, let Him make them all Spanish. Let
Him also make them Partakers as well of Government, as of Warfare; as the
Romans of old did; and as the Turks Custom is to do at this day. For
otherwise, the Spaniard will be the less courageous in War, as not having any
to rival him, in Military Glory and Renown; neither will the Counselors
strive among themselves, who shall excel the other in Smartnesse, and
sharpness of Wit, when they find that all Foreign Nations are cut off from
all hopes of being called to Counsel. I say therefore that Spaniards are for
the most part, though not always, to be admitted into the Counsel of Spain;
and especially those of Religious Orders: as being the only persons that have
little or no Interest of their own in Secular Affairs. Into the Council of
Italy there must be taken in such Spaniards, as have lived some time in Italy,
with some Italians, and two out of the Netherlands. For by this means all the
several Nations will rest satisfied, and the Kings Counsels will be ^he better
tempered: because the Spaniard will always be of a Contrary Judgment to the
Italian, as thinking himself the better man, and the greater respect and
dignity due to him, because the Head of the Empire is with Them: and the
Italian, according to the Freedom of spirit of that Nation, will boldly give
such Counsel as he conceives to be sound and Good, and endeavor to curb and
abate the Fierceness of the Spaniard: and then must the Netherlander come in,
and reconcile them to each other. The Council of the Netherlands, (seeing it is
already granted, that the Councels of all Nations must be held in Spain) must
be made up of Spaniards, Italians, and Natives, for the same two causes before
given in. The Councels of both the Indias must consist of Spaniards, and such
of other Nations, as have continued in the same for some time, whether English,
Genuese, or others; provided always, that into such Councels as concern the
State, there be taken in some that are of Religious Orders; and also some of
the Wisest among the Nobility, and any others that are well skilled in the
Customs, Religion, Rites, Situation, and the Policy, both Domestic, and
Military of the several Nations, what Country soever they themselves be of.

I shall here lay down one most Admirable and Profitable Rule more, for the
King to observe, and that is^ that every Seventh, and Ninth year (which are the
Fatal Numbers) He should call together all the Nobility of each of his several
Kingdoms, every one of which shall come to the Court, attended but with three
Servants apiece at the most; and at the same time let there be sommoned to
appear also all persons whatsoever, that are the ablest, and best seen in the
affairs and Secrets of State, and of Government: and there let him command
them to propose, every one of them severally, what they conceive most
advantageous for the promoting of the Greatness of the Spanish Monarchy, or
else for the particular Benefit of their several Provinces: and withal to give
notice, what Errors have been there committed to that very time, which it
concerns the Public should be rectified. And I would have all the
Counselors also of all the several Counsels to be present at this assembly,
that every one of them in particular may be instructed in what concerns the
whole World, and may take notice by this means wherein he committed any Error
for the last Seven years, and so may either be reproved for the same, or may
otherwise r^ceive the praise due to him. For, if this Course were taken, the
Counselors of the Several Councels, growing Wiser and more Circumspect, would
take heed how they gave any either Unworthy, or Unprofitable Counsels: and the
King himself would have a greater insight into the Condition of his Monarchy,
and by discovering New Secrets, and Mysteries of State, should thereby find out
ways of advancing his own Greatness more and more every day: and the Nobles
also would set their brains to work all that Seven years space, to find by
what means their Princes State might be the most advanced, and would not any
longer continue in their former Ignorance; and both they, and the rest of the
learned of the Kingdom would utter the Virulency of their Ambition, not by
their Sword, but by their Tongue. Now there is none so weak, but is able to
deliver in words the State of his own Republic: seeing that there is no
Philosopher, but will undertake out of his own brain to give a description, or
Model of the same: Whence indeed are scattered abroad the seeds of Heresy and
Sedition. But by the taking of this course, when any of these kind of Persons
has hopes of being rewarded by the Prince, he will conceive it his best way to
expect rather to be cal^ed to give his Judgment at the Septennial Assembly, or
else to send it thither in writing, and so will suppress his Opinions till
that time. And so by this means the King shall be rendered the more secure of
the Obedience of his Nobility, and shall understand who they are that deserve
either well or ill of Him: Neither shall He be deceived, and abused by his
Courtiers^ or Flatterers; and shall have the better Opportunity of calling his
Ministers of State to an account, for their evil Administration of the
Provinces they were set over; and shall withal very much mend the condition of
the said Provinces, and shall find many other Advantages to follow hereupon,
which I am not at present able to reckon up; and shall besides bring it so to
pass, that his Council shall be both the Wiser, and withal the Truer to Him.
But the Nobles of the New World, in case they cannot make their personal
appearance at this Meeting, may send others in their places: Which is the
Custom that the Clergy, being instructed by a certain Divine Wisdom, have
always observed in their Ge^eral Chapters: though no Monarch, or State, has
ever taken the said course, except it be the Venetians; whose Ambassadors,
when they return home from any Foreign parts, are to give an account in the
Senate of what they found Observable in the several Countries whither they were
employed.

Now although our Discourse here has been concerning the Particular Councels,
and Kingdoms, that belong to the King of Spain only; yet we may not therefore
omit to say something of Councels in general; seeing that it is certain, That
More Weighty Affairs are Effected by Good Conduct and Counsels, then by
Weapons and Hands. But because a Dissertation of this nature, being besides the
intention of our present design, would be too prolixe, I shall only here touch
at some few particulars.

Such Counsels as are too Subtle, and Nice, are not much to be regarded;
because they seldom are brought to any good Issue: for by how much the greater
Subtlety there is in them, so much the more Exactness, and Punctuality is
there required in the Execution of them; which is a business of the greatest
difficulty that can be. And hence it is that the Venetians, although they are
not so Ingenious a People as the Florentines, yet are they more happy, for the
most part, in their Consultations, then They are; as of old, the Lacedaemonians
were in this particular more Fortunate, then the Athenians.

Those Counsels are not to be much regarded, that have no matter of Weight or
Eminency in them; Yet much less are such to be esteemed that aim at too Vast
and Immense Undertakings; such as for the most part were those that were
designed by the Emperor Maximilian, and Pope Leo X. the Effecting whereof
required both a better Purse, a longer Life, and greater Abilities then either
of them had: which kind of undertakings are very pernicious to a State, or
Kingdom. All deseperate Counsels are likewise Dangerous; and are commonly
attended by Despair and Misery. It remains therefore, that those Counsels
are chief^ly to be Embraced, that have the greatest both Facility, and Security
in them; and such as are well grounded, and upon Mature deliberation resolved
upon, and as little subject, as may be, to Casual^ies, and the power of Fortune.

Slow Counsels become Great Princes; for it concerns them to be more careful in
the Preserving, and making good, then in the Enlarging of the Bounds of their
Kingdoms. But those Counsels that are designed rather for the Acquiring of
More, then the Preserving only of what they have, must be more Quick, and
Sudden. But of this subject I have elsewhere discoursed more largely.

CHAP. XIII. Of Justice, and Its Contrary.
IF the King be just, all his Ministers will likewise be just: and if the
Superior Ministers of State shall be Unjust, the Inferior will be Unjust
also: but there is nothing can hurt a Prince more, then to distribute the
Rewards of Virtue, at the pleasure of any Favorite. And therefore where
Offices are disposed of at the will of the Court Favorites, nothing ever goes
well there: And it is so much the worse, because that now adays the Greater
Officers sell the Lesser Offices to such Creatures of theirs, as shall play the
Thieves ever after for them, and themselves. And thus in Small Countries Common
Justice is not observed: for these men, while they pretend to enlarge the Kings
Jurisdiction, they render him odious to his people, and in the mean time fleece
the poor, miserable Subjects. Therefore let every Officer provide himself to
render an Account of his Administration to the People, who are to give in
Information to the King every ten years, where they have been honestly dealt
with, and where not.

All False Witnesses also, of whom the World is so full, must likewise be
severely punished: and there must be care taken also, that the Atturnies of the
Exchequer may not force men by threatening words, and sometimes by blows too,
to be Witnesses for them. But the best Course would be, that the Law of
Retaliation should be in force; that the Complainant that makes not good his
Accusation, should suffer the same punishment that the other should have done,
if found guilty: because that now adays there are more Calumnies brought into
Courts, then Just Accusations. And therefore any Lawyer that shall be found to
have suborned any such Witness; or any Judge, that shall be proved to have
taken any Bribe, to pervert the Laws, should be debarred for ever after,
either from pleading at any Bar, or giving sentence in any Court.

The King must also take care, that Judges give sentence always according to
the Laws, and not according as Policy of State (as they use to speak) shall
require: and afterward either the King himself, or his Viceroy, or any other of
the Kings Ministers may mitigate the Rigor of the Law, as they shall see
cause, (provided it be not in Case of High Treason) that by this means they
may gain the more upon the Peoples Affections.

And that untoward Custom is to be rooted out of the minds of Ordinary Judges,
which yet has taken deeper root in the minds of the Superior Judges also;
namely, that although they know an accused person to be Innocent, yet they will
condemn him, though it be in a matter of no Moment; to the end that the fault
may at last light upon Him, after the business has been a good while
depending under the Judge; that so, (as they use to say) there may seem to have
been Pregnant Reasons for the long depending of the Cause.

Whereas they should be so far from aggravating any fault, as that they should
rather lessen it as much as may be: and so they should endeavor the rather to
be really Just, then to get an Opinion of being so; to the great detriment of
the People, and also of the King himself; who through the wickedness of these
Unjust Judges, who are hated both by God, and Himself, is deprived of the Love
and Affections of his People; which is the main Prop of His Affairs: and
besides, Good Men, having lost their reputation, desire to change their present
state for a better; as we see it usually comes to pass.

And no people have opportunity of offending more dangerously, and closely,
then your Inferior Officers have; and besides, these men, the more in favor
they are with the Prince, the more grievously are they wont to aggravate men's
crimes. And therefore in this case there ought to be certain Commissaries at
all times deputed, and the same also to be maintained at the Charge of the said
Ministers, who shall yearly also lay down a certain sum of Money to be kept in
some Common place, for the charges of the next Commissaries the following year,
that by these their Books of Accounts may be examined during the time of their
being in Office, or afterward also, if need be. For, by reason of the
Corruption of these Inferior Officers, whole Provinces have many times
heretofore fallen off from the Roman Empire; especially when they have been
found to be too ambitious, and active in squeezing the Subjects, either for the
enriching of the Public Treasury, or else for the filling of their own private
Coffers. And for this reason it was, that the Parthians, having killed Crassus,
filled his mouth full of Melted Gold: as a certain Spanish Grandee was also
served by some Indians in the New World. And certainly Covetousness, and an
open, barefaced Desire of Gold, was the reason, that the Affairs of the
Spaniards succeeded so ill in the New World, into which at first they had so
miraculous an Entranc^: and that the other Nations there, perceiving that
humor in them, stood upon their guard as well as they could against the
Spaniard, whose Government notwithstanding, before, they had not refused. The
same manner of proceeding also in the Netherlands, was the cause of the ruining
of the Spanish Affairs there.

Let all Criminal Causes, in times of Peace, be protracted as much as may be:
(For, No delay, about the death of any man, can ever be too long:) but this
must not be in times of War. As for Civil Causes, they ought all to be without
any demurring, or delay, heard, and determined.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Barons, and Nobility of the Spanish Monarchy.
THe King of Spain, to the end that so vast a Monarchy may not fall to decay,
has need of such men as are excellent both for Learning, and the practice of
Arms; whom He ought to reward afterward with Baronies; that so being from
thenceforth made sharers, as it were, of the said Monarchy, they may to their
utmost power endeavor to maintain, and make good the same to their Prince.
Which Baronies notwithstanding, when they once fall into the hands of Unworthy
persons, are the cause of much mischief. And they do fall into such hands, when
they come to be bestowed either upon Buffoons, or perhaps such Exchequer Men,
as have found out new ways of oppressing the Subject: or else, when they have
been conferred at first upon Wise, and Valiant men, whose Successors for all
that may have proved to be Mean, Inconsiderable persons; or are else riotous,
and proud; and such, as laying aside all thought of their Ancestors Virtue,
take the full enjoyment only of that they have left them, and having no worth
of their own, can only boast of the Nobility of their Ancestors. And hence it
is, that the King is in want so much of Persons of Worth, whilst the number of
such Useless Drones increases in the Kingdom.

The Great Tu^k, that he may prevent the latter of these Mischiefs, putting by
all such as are bottomed only upon Others Nobility, takes notice of such only
as are Eminent for some worth of their own: Neither does he suffer any son to
succeed in the Estate, or Goods of his Father by Right of Inheritance; but he
is to receive the same at his hands, as a reward of his Service, if so be he
deserve it. But in case he do not, he must then serve him either in some
Ignoble Art, or else in some inferior Office in his Wars.

The Former of these Inconveniences any King of Spain may prevent, if he but
confer these rewards upon such only, as are deserving Persons; but the Remedy
of the Second, which is practiced by the Turks cannot be made use of among
Christians. Only let him be sure that many of these Baronies do not in time
fall into the hands of one man, who perhaps upon the first Opportunity given
may revolt from him; as did the Nobility of Iapan, who being grown great in
power, made opposition against their King in the City Meaco, which was also
done by the Barons of France, who thereby hindered their own Monarchy; and as
Scanderbeg did to the Turk: and so likewise the Princes of Ta entum and
Salerne, and many other in the Kingdom of Naples, who made the same Attempts
against their Kings, both those of Arragon, and of Anjou too. Now the Mischeifs
which these Barons bring upon the People, and consequently upon their King, are
these. They come to Naples, and to the Court, and there spending their money
profusely and lavishly, they make a great show for a while, and get in favor
with the Kings friends; and at length having spent all, they return poor home,
and make prey of whatsoever they can, that so they may make themselves whole
again; and then they return to Court again; running round still, as it were, in
the same Circle; in so much that we see these men's Territories much more
desert, and naked, then the Kings in Italy are; all through the default of the
Barons themselves. And then, if the People have been infested with any
Pestilential Diseases or have suffered by the Turks; They presently beg of the
King to have the yearly Taxes to be remitted for some certain time; the payment
whereof they themselves require at the hands of the People, and in the Kings
name too, and that with all the severity that may be: which the Prince of
Rogebo had the confidence to do, after the battle with the Turks. And lastly,
under the pretense of the Camera, (as they call it,) that is to say, that the
Country may be freed from quartering of Soldiers, they extort from the
Subjects many Thousands of Crowns. And they find out a Thousand other ways of
fleecing the poor Subjects, that so they may never want Supplies either for
their Luxury, or their Prodigality. And notwithstadning that the Spaniards
believe, that this Lavishnesse of theirs makes for the Kings Advantage, and
renders his state the more secure; because that those that are so given to
rioting and Luxury, are never any gatherers, and hoarders up of vast Sums of
Money which may prove the Instruments of Rebellion; yet the plain truth of it
is, they do him much hurt: for they by this means reduce the People, from whom
the greatest part of the Kings Revenues come, to a poor, low condition. For the
remedying of which Mischief, it would do well if there were a Law made, that no
Baron should have above 3000. Crowns of yearly Revenues: and that whatsoever
any of them has more, it should not descend to his Successor, but should go
after him to the Exchequer: I speak here only of such Baronies as shall be
conferred by the King, upon the Grounds aforesaid.

As for the Ancienter Barons, it would do well if there were some Competitions
cherished among them, that by this means, by their contentions they might keep
one another under: and so likewise, that at every Seven years end there should
be such an Assembly called together, as I spoke of before: and that the Barons
should be freed from all Bonds. Likewise, that every Baron should every three
years find the King as many Soldiers and Horses, as he has Thousands of
Crowns of yearly Revenue. Let him also divide the Titles of Honor; and
besides, he may do well to create many New Lords, finding out for them New
Titles; that so the smalnesse of their number may not increase their dignity
and honor. Let Him take care also, that the Lordships, and Lords Mannours of
the Kingdom of Naples, Millan, Spain, and the N^therlands may be bought by
Forraigners; that is to say, by the Genuese, Florentines, French, and
Venetians; that so the Barons, that are the Natives, may be brought lower, and
the Foreigners may bring the King in a large yearly Revenue out of their own
Country Lordships. By which means I dare be bold to affirm, that the King shall
have greater power, and Command at Genoa, then at Millan; because that nothing
can be done, or resolved upon at Genoa, without his knowledge and consent;
whiles the Genueses will always be in fear of losing the Lordships they have
in the King of Spains dominions. And by this means also the King shall not need
to trouble himself about allowing them maintenance, as he is with the
Millanois: for, Whosever is fed by thee, he is thy servant. And thus have the
Florentines always been servants to the King of France, into whose Dominions
they have liberty of Traffic allowed them.

But there must be care taken, that no Fortified Places be ever put into the
hands of any of the Barons. And besides, there must be such Provision made, as
that all the Sons of the said Barons should have Spaniards for their Tutors,
who shall Hispaniolize them, and train them up to the Habit, Manners, and Garb
of the Spaniard. And when these Barons shall once begin to grow Powerful, He
must take them down; yet under the pretense of honoring them, by sending them
away to some Office, or Charge, that lies in some place far remote from their
own Lordships, and where they shall be sure to spend more then they get. And
again, when ever the King shall please to take his Progress into the Country,
let him so contrive his Gists, as that He may lie upon these Barons; and so
under the pretext of doing them Honor, may force them to be at a great charge
in entertaining Him. Let Him give a willing ear to the People, when they make
any complaints of them. Neither ought Nobility to be higher prized by the King,
then Virtue; which is a Rule that deserves to be observed above all the rest.
Besides, in all the Metropolian Cities in his several Kingdoms, as at Lisbon,
Toledo, Antwerp, and the rest, as well in this, as in the other Hemisphere, the
King under pretext of doing them honors may constitute, in each of them, five,
eight, or ten Ranks, or Orders of Barons; such as are at Naples; that when they
are to treat of any Affairs of State, each of them may go into his own Order
and Place. For being thus divided, they will never be able to determine any
thing that shall be Prejudicial to the King, by reason of the Ambition that
will be amongst them, and so, where there shall be three Laws perhaps made, to
the Kings prejudice, there will always be eight made for his advantage. And
the common People also may in like manner, be distributed into their several
Classes and Ranks. And this is much the more honorable, and secure way, then
to cause divisions, and sidings into parties among them, which is the counsel
of some Writers, who have a Saying, Divide, and impera: Cause Divisions among
thy subjects, and thou shall rule them well enough.

The King must always make much of such persons, as are of eminent either
Valor, or Virtue, and must prefer them to dignities and honors. In every
place also, where He has any Council sitting, He ought to join to them one of
some Religious Order or other, whom he can trust; and that, for the common
security of both parties, both Prince, and Counselor. And all such persons as
shall be admitted to this honor, should have an Oath administered unto them, or
else should have some kind of Obligation by way of some Religious Fraternity
with the Crown, by which they should be bound, in all troublesome and perilous
times, not only to deliver into the Kings hands all the Gold and Silver they
have, but that themselves also shall in person serve in the Wars, in defense of
the Fortune and safety of the Kingdom. By which means the King shall prevent
all Insurrections among them: or in case they should stir, He shall have a
sufficient Pledge in his hands, as being possessed of all their Treasures; in
so much that their Wives will not spare in this case, to bring in what Rings,
Bracelets, and Chains of Gold, or any thing else of value that they have, (as
we read, the Roman women did, when Rome was distressed by Hannib^l, and other
Enemies,) and lay them all at the Kings feet.

And as for Commanders in War, those he ought to account the best, that were
themselves once common Soldiers; such as Antonius de Leva, and Gonsalvus de
Corduba were; as those Counselors also are to be esteemed the ablest^ that
have risen to that height from the lowest, and meanest Trusts and Employments.
And therefore the King shall not take any great care for such Barons, as have
not been in service abroad before, so that they may have thereby rendered
themselves fit to discharge the offices of able Commanders in War, or to serve
the King in his Counsels. But he must get about him such, as have been men of
long Experience, and are well acquainted with, and versed in the Affairs of
the World.

Neither is it a small Calamity, that the Kingdom of Spain lies under, by
reason of such Quarells, and Suits of Law as oftentimes arise among the
Nobiliy, about Precedence, as they call it: which certainly, in the time of
War, must needs be of most dangerous consequence; for There, Military Valor is
only to be looked after. And who knows, whether or no this very thing might
not be the cause of the Miscarriage of the Armado that was sent against England
in the year 1588. But herein the Barons are of great use, and advantage to the
King, because that in case He shall have any ill success in any expedition, He
can immediately make himself whole again by his Barons: which the Turks can not
do. For when he has once received but one notable Blow, and is now much
weakened thereby, He has no Barons left him, by whose aid he may recover
himself again: which was the case also of D^rius, when he was overthrown by
Alexander the Great; and of the Sultan of Egypt that was conquered by Selim;
both which being once beaten, were never afterward able to make head again
against their Enemy. And if so be that Emulation and Envy had not born too
great a sway among the Christians, in that Memoral Victory obtained at Sea
against the Turk, in the year 71. Constantinople might at that time have been
recovered, and the Turk utterly rooted out.

The King must therefore take especial notice, wherein the Barons may be
prejudicial to Him, and in what they may advantage Him: and He must make use of
them rather as his Treasurers of his Arms, and Moneys, then make them, as it
were, the Patrons of His State. And yet out of these Treasurers of his he may
choose out some to be Commanders in his War; provided, that he lay a Command
upon them to set aside their Second Sons, to be as a Seminary of Military
Valor both for Sea, and Land Service; as we shall show hereafter: and by this
means He shall have their Fathers, the Barons themselves, as it were bound to
be faithful to him, by reason of this Engagement of their Sons to the Prince;
and so He shall be sure to have them at his devotion, whenever he shall have
occasion to make use of them: as shall be showed hereafter, in the Chapter Of
Navigation.

CHAP. XV. Of the Soldiery.
THe Soldiery of Spain, and consequently the defense, and Enlarging of that
Kingdom, may fail two ways; One is, because that Spanish Women, by reason of
the too great Heat of the Country, are not very Fruitful: whence it may well so
come to pass, as that seeing there are very many Spaniards killed, both in the
Netherlands, and in the New World, and other of their wars, they may want
Soldiers. As on the contrary, the Helvetians, and Polonians, and all other
Northern Nations do abound with Soldiers, by reason of the Fruitfulness of
their Women; and especialy, because there are so few of them in those parts,
that put themselves into Monasteries: neither do they suffer any Public Stews
there at all, (by which it is a wonderful thing to consider, how much Humane
seed is lost and utterly cast away,) and also because they deal more openly and
freely with each other; neither are matches among them so often broke off,
through the disagreement of Parents about Dowries, etc. and therefore they
Multiply much the faster, as having fewer Impediments either from Art, or
Nature. And hence it is, that the Franks, Goths, Vandals, Lombards, Herulians,
and other Northern People, have always abounded with plenty of Men: In so much
that by reason of the too narrow Limits of their own Countries, they have been
fain to leave them, and to seek for places of Habitation in ours, and other
Countries; and have like Bees, been continually sending forth fresh Colonies
into other parts: by which means we see it has come to passe^ that the
Oriental Nations, together with the Grecian, Italian, Spanish, and Hungarian
are now in a manner quite extinct. And therefore the Spaniards, being but few
in Number, have been forced, for the reasons before alleged, quite to clear
all the places whatsoever, that they conquered, of their ancient Inhabitants,
as appears by the course they took with the Indians in the New World; least
otherwise they should have lived in a continual fear, that the conquered, who
were much the greater number, might rise up and take arms against^ their
Conquerors. And this is the reason, why by the Ignorant they are accounted
Cruel, Merciless people, for such their proceeding against the Indians. The
number of the subjects also, and the Revenues of the Crown are by this means
diminished; neither will any Nation that is Populous, endure to hear of the
Spaniards: who for the same cause endeavoring this way to bring in the
N^therlands also, became most hateful among them. And this Course is the King
of Spain at this day fain to take in Naples, and Sicily: for he has not above
five Thousand Spaniards to keep those so large Kingdoms in Obedience.

And indeed those Dominions are upheld, and made good to the Spaniard merely
through Opinion only. And for this very reason are they forced to disarme the
People; which causes them to suspect Tyranny, and Inhumanity from them; and
which makes many also forsake their Country; as Solon told Periander, the
Tyrant of Corinth. Besides, seeing they are necessitated to treat the Subjects
hardly, they are therefore fain to get Switzers about them for their
Life-guards; as not daring to trust their persons with those, whose hatred they
have for these reasons contracted; which was also the discourse of the same
Solon to the aforesaid Tyrant of Corinth.

Another means, and cause why Spain should want Soldiers, is, because that
the Spaniards, when ever they conquer any Country that abounds with all manner
of delights, they do so give themselves up to the full enjoyment of those
delights, that they thereby soften, and enervate themselves; and laying aside
all their Innate fierceness, and yet withal securely relying upon their own
strengths alone, they are easily driven out thence again. For this cause the
Romans, when they saw their Army to be grown Effeminate, and much weakened, by
lying in Campania, and enjoying the Pleasures thereof, they presently reformed
it. And at Naples they never had any Native for their King, by reason of the
Delicacy of the Air there, and Venereal Pleasures; whereby all their Manly
Courage, and Gallantry of Spirit is softened, and taken down. Neither could any
Foreigners ever keep it long; because that in process of time they became
cheap in the Peoples Eyes, and so became a prey to other Foreigners; as the
Viscardians were to the Suevians, the ^uevians to those of Anjou, and those of
Anjou, to the Arraganians, and at length to the French, and the Castilians: who
afterward, under the Command of the Great Captain drove the French out of the
said Kingdom of Naples. The like has also happened to ^ll those Fierce Nothern
Nations, that have heretofore possessed themselves of any Southern Countries;
for through the softness, and delights of the said Countries, they have at
length become Effeminate, and broken in their strength. And by this means the
Herulians became a Prey to the Goths, and the Goths to the Grecians: as the
Lombards were to the French: and as at length it befell to the Vandalls also,
and Hunnes. Thus the Tartarians in like manner became the Laughing Stock, and
Scorn of the Turks; but indeed the Turk now defends himself by his Guards of
these Northern People, after this manner.

After He had once perceived, that the Courage of his own Nation began to cool,
He presently erected certain Seminaries of Soldiers (they call them Seragli,
that is to say, Cloisters, or Enclosures,) into which he shut up all the
likeliest, and ablest-bodied young boys of all the Nations that he had
conquered; where they should be taken off from acknowledging their own Parents;
and should be accustomed to reverence, and own the Grand Signiour only, as
their Father: and here they are also instructed in all Military Arts, and in
the Turkish Religion; and out of these does the Great Turk choose his
Ianizaries, for the guard of his own Person; and of these same Ianizaries does
He afterward make his Bashawes, that is, his Commanders, and Counselors in
his Wars; as also the Presidents of his Provinces, and Baronies; and such of
these as He finds to be studiously inclined, and fit for the Book, he chooses
out of them the Muf^ies, and the Cadies, that is to say, the Priests, and
Judges. So that although the race of the Turks should fail, yet will he never
be unprovided of an able Soldiery; seeing that He takes such an order to have
such brought up thus for his service in every Province, by the Presidents of
the said Provinces.

And the Romans of old, to the end that they might never want Soldiers,
proposed great rewards, and Honors for all such as should approve themselves
Valiant in War. Hence we read, that Ventidius, Marius, and other Valiant and
Wise persons, arrived to so great a height of Renown among them; till at length
by this means they made themselves Masters of the Whole World.

The King of Spain therefore, to the end that He may remove from his Soldiery
these two Evils, which It chiefly labors under, must make use of these two
Arts especially.

First, He must presently take away from all People that he shall conquer, all
their Immovable Goods, and must allow them only food and clothing, and so set
them to manure the ground; and as for their Sons, He may make them either
Soldiers, or Husbandmen, according as he shall find them fittest for either of
these Employments. And this will be best done in such Countries, as He shall
have brought into his Subjection upon some certain Occasion: according as
Joseph did in Egypt, who taking his advantage by Occasion of the unexpected
Dearth that arose there, to the end that the People might the better be
furnished with Corn, he caused them to put all they had into their King
Pharaohs hands: from whom the Turks also have learnt this Art. But there will
be need of a very Wise Man, that may be able to bring this about in our
Country, by taking good and plausible Occasions of doing the same: Or else the
King may constitute some Third Person, as an Intermediate Lawgiver, (such as
Joseph was in Egypt; or Plato, who was ^ent for into Sicily by Dionysius the
Tyrant) by whose means He may, in each several Province, reform the Politi^ of
three or five Cities there; the examples whereof the rest will afterward
follow of their own accord, when they shall but once take notice of the
Benefits and Advantages that such a Reformation brings along with it. And
therefore for this end and purpose, there must be care taken especially for the
providing of Wise, and Able Preachers for these places: and I may ^elf have a
certain Secret to communicate, which would much promote this business; which I
shall reserve for the Kings own Ear.

Or if the King of Spain have a purpose and re^olution of prosecuting the
Course already begun, (although it seems not to be so proper a one for the New
World) my Opinion is, that, considering the Multitude of his conquered Vassals
there, and the Small Number of his Soldiers in comparison of them; He ought to
take this Course.

First of all, let Him show himself bountiful to the People, by remitting their
Taxes, by mitigating the severity of the Laws, and by removing all occasions
that the Inferior Officers might have of seizing upon the Subjects Goods; and
restraining the Soldiers from abusing the Inhabitants where they come; for
which very reasons the People do not get so many Children as otherwise they
would, which might afterward do the King service.

And hence also it is, that their Daughters, wanting good portions to put them
off, are fain to become either Nuns, or Whores; and the Men^ to turn Priests,
or Friars, or Renegadoes; and so to serve as Soldiers in other Countries. And
therefore it would be much the better course to use them more Courteously; and
to take this for a most certain Truth, That Money does not give Men Dominion
over their Enemies; but rather exposes them as a Prey to others. And therefore
the Spaniard is in a very great Error, (as we shall hereafter show,) while he
thinks, that Money has the Command of All the World: Whereas in truth, it is
thy Vassals, and thy Soldiers that must make Thee Lord over thine Enemies, and
not thy Money. For, the Only Use of Money, is, to procure, and maintain Soldiers
with it. It is much better therefore, that Soldiers should bear rule over any
Country, then Money: for by this means mutual Amity, and friendship will be the
better preserved betwixt the Soldier and the Subject. And to this purpose it
would be much a safer course, if there were a Law made, both in Spain, and
other places, that the Eldest Sons only should inherit their Fathers Estates,
and the rest should all serve the King, and be Pensioners to Him; then so
severely to squeeze out of the People such vast Sums of Money as the Kings
Ministers do.

In the second place, I would have some course to be taken for the promoting of
Peoples Marrying, by the denying of some certain Honors and Privileges to all
such, who, being arrived to the Age of One and Twenty years, (unless they be
Soldiers,) do not marry: for by this means the sums required for Virgins
Portions in Marriage, which ^ath now rendered the Condition of Matrimony very
hard, will be abated. And this is one of the Principal Elements of advancing a
Commonwealth, and was much made use of by the Romans. It would do very well
also, if a Law were made, that the daughters of no Tradesmen^ or Husbandmen,
should bring above a Hundred Crowns to their Husbands for their Portions: and
that within the compass of this Law should be included all those also, who have
in former time^ ever been Tradesmen, or Mechanical persons. For now adays,
when any one has scraped together but a Hundred Crowns, he presently puts the
same out to use, and looks ever after to be called a Gentleman, quite bidding
Adieu to his Profession: and thus the Kings Tributes are diminished, not
without the loss and detriment of the rest of their fellow Subjects. But a
Circumspect and wise Lawmakers will be able to provide well enough against all
these things.

Thirdly, let the King give leave to his Soldiers to seize upon Women in the
Low Countries, England, and Africa, and carry them away with them by force;
which they may afterward make their Wives, according as any of them shall be
invited to do so by Mutual Love: and these Women thus caught up, I would have
to be maintained at the Kings Charge; who, for this cause, must enlarge the
Soldiers pay. But all these things are to be so ordered, that the Dutch Women
be married to Spaniards, and the African Women either to Germans, or Low Dutch,
and the Spanish Women to Italians. For this the Law of Nature seems to require,
that the Heat of the Spania^d should be rendered more fruitful by the German
Juycinesse; and that the Fiery Temper of the African should be attempered, and
allayed by the Cold and Moist Constitution of the Netherlander; that so both
Venereal Desires, and Fecundity too, may be the more excited, and procured; as
I have formerly showed in My Philosophy. And as concerning this Temperament,
the Italians are good for both.

And from hence will arise two Advantages; the First whereof is, that these
Women will embrace the Christian Faith: for, a Woman will never be of any other
Religion then that which her Husband, whom she loves so dearly, is of: As your
Northern Women, who are naturally cold^ love their South-Country Husbands, who
are hot^ and the Sabine Young Women made peace betwixt the Romans their
Ravishers, and the Sabines their Parents, that came to demand them of the
Romans, and to have them home again. And St. Paul says, that the Unbelieving
Wife is sanctified by her Believing Husband; and so on the contrary.

The Second Advantage is, that by this means the King shall never be without
good store of Soldiers, while He shall always have his Soldiers Sons also to
make Soldiers of. When therefore He shall once come to abound in Soldiers by
reason of this course taken to promote Fructification, which I have now laid
down; it will be a means to inflame the Soldiers minds, and will exceedingly
encourage them to go on against any Garrisons, or Fortified places of the
Enemy, that so they may get themselves handsome women for their Wives, and
afterward may lie still, and take their ease. And this was a Secret of Plato's
finding out, that Soldiers should be stirred up, and encouraged to fight for
Love. I would also have a Law made, that such Soldiers, as have taken away
more Women then one, should be placed in some strong Holds, and keep Garrison
there; and not be forced to follow the Camp: in like manner as at Naples, all
those Soldiers that are married, are put into the Forts there: and it would do
very well if such were sent away into some New Colonies of the New World.

Fourthly, let Him cause to be erected in each of his several Dominions, (as
namely in Spain, Naples, the Low Countries, etc. two, or four Seminaries of
Soldiers, into which shall be put poor Men's Sons only, and Bastards; which
shall be here trained up to the Exercise of Arms; acknowledging the King for
their father, and none else: and these, after they are once grown up to be
listed for Soldiers, shall go and seize upon Women where they can, in an
enemies Country, which they may make their Wives. And this will be a means to
encourage poor people to get children as fast as they can, as being certainly
provided of one that will breed them up for them; and the King also shall by
this means be sure to have faithful Soldiers. But in Foreign Nations, let Him
erect for every several Nation a several Seminary; as for Example, let there be
one for the Moors, and another for the Sons of the Low Dutch: all which He
shall cause to be brought up in Military Discipline, as the Great Turk does his
Ianizaries.

And besides, there should be certain poor women maintained in the said
Seminaries at the Kings Charge, who shall make the Soldiers beds, or may Spin
and Weave cloth for the making of Sails, or the like. Then again, that such
as are too near of kin may not marry, contrary to the Orders of the Church; and
withal, that those Marriages that are made, may prove the more fruitful, I
would have Italian Women to be married to those that are of the Seminaries of
the Low Countries, or of Spain. For by this means also, there will not so many
Idle persons enter themselves into Religious Orders, as there do, who are a
great burden to the Church^ for as much as ^hese Men make choice of this kind
of Life, not out of any sense of Religion, but merely being forced out of
necessity; and so are a Scandal to the rest; and besides, the King is also
hereby prejudiced, who by this means has both the fewer Vassals, and
Soldiers, and the smaller Subsidies also.

There may also be educated in these Cloisters, or Colleges, or call them what
you please, people of all Nations whatsoever: for the maintenace of whom there
may Revenues be taken out of the Allowances of Almes-houses, and Hospitals
appointed for the Maintenance of Old Men, or of any other honest Men; or of
such Friars, as by preaching about the Country get enough to sustain
themselves; and toward this Charge there may be something exacted of all
Usurers, as I shall show hereafter, when I come to speak of the Kings Treasure.
And by this means the Kings Revenue will be so far from being diminished, that
if He do lay out any thing of his own, He will rather prove a gainer by it.

But now, it would be very advantageous for Spain, that the Spaniards should
marry Italian, and Low Country Women, and so make up one Family betwixt them:
for by this means the whole World would by little and little be brought to
embrace the Manners and Garb of the Spaniard, and so would the easilier be
brought into subjection. And those Spanish Soldiers that are at Naples are in
an error, while they seek only for Spanish Women to make Wives of: and
therefore the Viceroy there should see, that the Spanish Women should have
Italians, or Netherlanders for their Husbands; on whom He should confer all the
honors he can; especially, where these Marriages happen to be among the
Barons, or other persons of quality.

Neithe^ let any one think, that those Seragli, or Cloisters among the Turks,
before spoken of, are a mere fiction: for this most excellent Design has been
practiced in the Church ever since the Apostles time: and we see how many
Colleges for young Students the Pope has, both of Germans, English, and
Maronites; that are as so many Seminaries of the Faith. And then, the Orders of
St. Dominick, S. Francis, and the rest, are nothing else^ but Seminaries of
Apostolical Soldiers, who using no Arms, but their Tongue only, do bring the
World in subjection: And These are the very Nerves of the Ecclesiastical
Monarchy.

The Pope likewise promotes Men of all Nations to the Dignities both of
Priests, Bishops, and Cardinals, having no respect either to Rich or Poor,
Barbarian or Roman, (as the Apostle himself commanded) if so be they be but
Wi^e, and Good Men. And hence it is, that His Dominion is so far extended, and
so united within it self; namely through Spain, the N^w World, Af^ick, and
France, as well as in Italy; and that by reason only of the Common Tie of
Religion, and the Union of Men and Minds.

And therefore the King, whose design it is to procure an Association not of
his Subjects Fortunes only, but also of their Persons, and Arms; unless He
be Powerful over their Religion too, which is the Bond of Men's Minds and
Affections, He will have but a kind of an Estranged, and weak Dominion among
them. And it is very evident, that the Emperor of Germany, by reason of his
Subjects being of different Religions, is of less power, then either our King
is, or the Duke of Bavaria. And hence it is therefore that the Turks have
learnt Wisdom, to Our Prejudice and Damage: whilst we in the mean time
transgress against the Laws of Policy, while we observe the Roman, or
National Laws. Wherefore the King might do, what would well become a
Christian, if he would cause to be erected Colleges of Soldiers; and would
also promote to Military Preferments, not Spaniards only, but all Persons of
Worth and Valor whatsoever; by that means engaging them in the Spanish
Manners, and Customs: for by so doing, He should be beloved as well by
strangers, as by his own Subjects. And it is also consonant to the Opinion of
Thomas Aquinas, to take and baptize, in the Seminaries, such Children of
Heretics and Moors, as have been taken from an enemy in time of War; though
not to do so in time of peace: as, for example, to take the Children of Jews,
living at Rome, perhaps, and by force to baptize them: notwithstanding that
Scotus approves of both these.

I would have the King likewise every seven years to pardon all such as are
Banished Persons, or are guilty of Murder; upon condition that they shall serve
Him as Soldiers in his Wars against Africa, or in the New World.

Let Him also make an Act, that each several Parish shall every year furnish
him out one Soldier a piece; (which is a Proposal, Your Lordship says, was
made by a Friend of Yours in Spain;) for by this means there may be raised
Threescore Thousand Soldiers, and more, in that Kingdom. It will therefore be
very expedient, that there should an Union be made up betwixt the King and the
Pope, as has been before spoken of.

But it would be better, that every Baron, at the end of such a set term of
years, should bring in to the King such a certain number of Soldiers: and it
would be best of all, that the Baron himself also should go in person to the
Wars, whenever the King goes. And this ought to be observed not only in
Spain, but in all other of the Kings Dominions: and likewise that other Rule,
that only the Eldest sons shall inherit their Fathers Estates in all places
what ever. But all these Rules cannot be observed any where to any great
purpose, except the Foundation of the Nations be first reformed, namely, in
Making of Marriages, and by erecting Seminaries, or Colleges of Soldiers; who
should be such, as contenting themselves with Meat, and Drink, and Clothes
only, shall have the Courage, through hope of Advancement, in case they
approve themselves stout and Valiant persons, to attempt as daringly, and
adventure upon all the most dangerous Undertakings, and those greater, then
even the Turks Janissaries are wont to venture on. And let this suffice to have
been spoken concerning the means of increasing the Soldiery, and against the
Depopulating of Countries.

As touching Captains, and Commanders in War, they ought not to be made out of
that most Idle sort of men, whom they now adays call Nobiles, Gentlemen: but
rather let the most Stout and Valiant persons be chosen for this purpose; and
such as are inclined rather to Severity, as Hannibal was, then such as are of a
Courteous Disposition, as was Scipio. And I would have these to be chosen out
of the number of Soldiers, that have behaved themselves valiantly in fight,
and such as have step by step got up to what places they are now in: Such as
were Marius, Sylla, Ventidius, Antonio de Leva, Cicala, and Occiali. But the
Person to whom the whole Charge of the War shall be committed, must be such a
one as is of very great Authority amongst the soldiery, and one that is also
of the Blood Royal. Or, if it be suspected, that such a one may possibly
himself aspire to the Monarchy, let there be then one chosen out of the Barons,
who shall be found the most fit for this Trust, and who is a man that is
Eminent rather for Real Action, then for Show and Ostentation.

In this case, that the King may proceed the more securely, Let Him erect a
Council, which shall consist of Wise, and Faithful persons, with some of some
Religious Order or other joined to them; from whose hands the Soldiers should
receive their Pay. For there was nothing that did more promote the ruin of the
Kings affairs in the Low Countries, then the Soldiers being defrauded of
their Pay. And therefore I would have those to be entrusted with the charge of
Paying the Soldier, that are Capuchins; because that these men care for Money
the least of any Religious Order of Friars whatsoever.

And that there may never be wanting fit persons to be made Captains, and
Commanders, there ought to be certain peculiar Seminaries erected for the
education of the Second, and Younger Sons of Barons, and Gentlemen; who shall
there be instructed in the Art of Riding the Great Horse, and using the
Javeling, of raising Fortifications, and making assaults upon, and taking in of
fortified places; likewise of marshalling of battles, and laying of sieges to
places; also of managing a battle, and drawing out an Army into Companies, and
how to give the Word of Command to the Soldiers, and lastly, how to train up
freshwater Soldiers: all which things Hannibal was instructed in, when he was
yet but nine years old. But now, not only the Soldiers having been cheated of
their Pay, but also their Insolency after a Victory, and their contempt of too
mild a Commander, often gives them occasion of Mutinying.

And therefore they are always to be divided into Regiments, and never the
whole Army to lie all together, but when they are to go into the field to
fight; because by this means the fear of the Enemy will keep them in due
Obedience to their Commander. The neglect of this one thing was the cause of
all those Mischeifs that the Carthaginians felt, after the Second Punick War;
and it was destructive also to the Romans themselves, in the time of Furius
Camillus. Let the Authors therefore of all Mutinies among the Soldiers be
immediately put to death in the face of the whole Army, as Speridius heretofore
was; and he that caused the Army of Charles the Fifth to Mutiny; So that he was
forced to retreat back from Austria, and go into Italy again; For it is ^he
duty of these men to be able to make use of their Swords, rather then of their
Tongues. And what Persons soever are condemned to die, let them suffer by the
hands of the Army, rather then by the Commanders; least by this means He
should draw an Odium upon himself. But yet he ought oftentimes to pardon those
that are guilty of death, especially when not a few only, but the whole Army
become intercessors for them: as was the case of Papirius, Torquatus, and
Drusus, as it is reported by Titus Liviu^, and Cornelius Tacitus.

The Spaniards are good Foot Soldiers even in Mountainous places, or when they
are to fight from a wall in defending any strong Hold. The French and
Netherlanders are good Horsemen, and charge Notably well in an open field^ and
at the first Onset. The Italians would do well at both these, did not the
abusing of their own proper Inclinations spoil them. All Mountainous People, as
the Biscaines, Switzers, and the Italians that inhabit the Appennine; So
likewise the Saxons^ are excellent Foot Soldiers, and are naturally desirous
of Liberty; they are also accounted very faithful, though not very subtle.
Those that inhabit Champian Countries, as the Andalusians, Castilians,
Austrians, Hungarians, and Neopolitans, are excellent Horsemen; and are to be
kept in Obedience by a strict hand; but they are each of them both an
Unfaithful, and a subtle kind of People.

All these considerations a General must exactly observe, if he intends to
manage his Army discreetly, and according to Art; unless he have the skill of
judging of the dispositions of his Soldiers by Physiognomy, as Julius Caesar
had.

After any of his Soldiers are arrived to the age of fifty years, he must
then encourage them with gifts; that so they be may enticed to stay the longer
in the Service; and when they once come to the age of five and fifty, he must
either put them into Castles, and strong holds, or else he must dismiss them
quite, and let them go to their homes. He must accustom his Soldiers also to
carry burdens, or to carry forth the Earth in making Entrenchments, as the
Romans were wont to do when they wanted men to dig their Trenches. Or let him
put them to make Bridges, or to mend the Galleys, as Caesar^ Army did in the
Low Countries and in England.

And although the Fortune of the Wars does not always favor those that have
the greatest Armies, as may be seen in the Example of Alexander the Great, who
with Thirty Thousand Old Soldiers subdued the whole World: and of Scanderbeg,
and of Julius Caesar also, who with small numbers conquered Multitudes, yet
however it is a very good thing to be always provided with good full numbers
of Soldiers.

And hence it is, that the Turk has almost in all Battles been the Conqueror:
for having such a multitude of Soldiers as he has, and placing all the most
Inconsiderable of them in the Van, our Soldiers having spent themselves in
fighting with, and cutting off these, are at length fallen upon by the
Janissaries who are fresh, as not having struck a stroke before, and so are
overcome. This Course of his, I confess I should like well enough, were i^ not
a wicked and Inhumane one. Therefore such Commanders are to be sent into the
Wars, as are both Expert Soldiers, and such as will propose to themselves the
Advantage, and Glory of Christianity only, and not their own glory; Neither
ought He upon every slight occasion to expose his men to death. And besides,
the General must sometimes, as occasion shall require, take care in person of
his maimed, and sick Soldiers; that by this means He may the more indear
himself to them. He is also to have Preachers to go along with him in his Army,
who are to put him in mind of God, after the Example of the Maccabees. And if a
Commander would conquer his enemy with a small number, it will concern him that
he have more of his own Soldiers with him, then either of Auxiliaries, or
Hired Soldiers, or of those that are Guarders of the Frontiers: least, when
they come to the point, they all run away. There are many more Observations
required to the making up of a Perfect Commander; all which I cannot here set
down; my design being at present to deliver such things as concern Spain only.
But above all^ care must be taken, that the Soldiers be not used like Beasts;
who, if they have but their wages duly paid them; and, if when they are
wounded, they be caref^lly looked to; and be encouraged also to show themselves
Valiant men through the hopes of Military glory, and by hearing good Preachers,
and by rewards; they will then never think either of running away, or of
Revolting; which are two of the greatest Mischiefs that can befall an Army.

I would also have some persons appointed, out of some of the Religious Orders,
to commit to writing the famous and memorable Acts of each particular Soldier;
which should be read openly, before the King, when ever He bestows rewards
upon his Soldiers. For this is the reason, why the Barons refuse to serve in
person in the Wars, saying; The King himself is not there, to be an eye
witnensse of my Valor; and I cannot confide in the treacherous Memories of
Envious Commanders.

Neither would I have the Soldiers to be rewarded with Money only, but
sometimes also with some Coronet, either of Oak, or of Olive; which is a most
Magnificent argument of Honor to them, and of no charge to the Prince; and by
this means they will be the more faithf^l, and constant to Him. For an other
man's Money may in like manner buy and sell perhaps that Faith, which you have so
purchased of them; but such Honor it cannot: seeing it is a most ignominious
thing, even in the esteem of an Enemy himself, for any one to forsake his King.
And therefore it should be lawful for any man to kill such a one, as should
begin to run away; or, that goes abroad a pillaging without the leave of his
Commander: which very thing has often hindered the obtaining of Victory
against the Enemy; and those that are of least account in the Army do by these
courses enrich themselves, while the Valiant Soldier fights it out to the last
drop of blood in his body. What Soldier soever shall fill up the place of his
slain fellow-Souldier, or protects him, and saves his life; he should have a
Coronet of Oak granted him: This was called by the Romans, Corona Civica. That
Soldier, that shall first get upon the Enemies Walls, should have a Mural
Coronet, made of Herbs wreathed together in form of a Coronet; which he should
recieve at the hands of the General, whiles the rest of the Army standing round
about shall celebrate his Gallantry with Acclamations and Songs, according to
the ancient custom of the Romans. For, these two things, Punishment, and
Reward, are the two Pillars whereon all Military Discipline is founded and
built: the Former whereof deterrs the Soldier from wicked courses; as the
latter pricks him on to do gallant things: the Former was devised for the
restraining of Vile^ Rebellious spirits; as the latter was for the
Encourage^ent of the Generous, and Valiant: the former serves instead of a
Bridle, as the later does of a Spur.

Alexander the Great erected, for the honor of his Soldiers that were Slain
at the River Granicus, Statues of Marble, in a most stately manner. The King of
Siam, that he might encourage his Soldiers to fight bravely, took care to have
the names of all those that had behaved themselves Gallantly in the Wars, to be
registered in a Book, and afterward to be recited before him: which was the
custom also of King Ahasuerus, as the holy Scripture testifies.

Whenever there are any designs on foot for the gaining any large Kingdom, or
Empire; the King ought always to go in person to the Wars; because that
Princes that are Warlick, always get more then those that are sluggish and
negligent: which is a consideration of great importance for all such Princes,
as desire to enlarge their Dominions. But if they care only to preserve their
own, they may then stay at home themselves; provided that they set Valiant, and
faithful Commanders over their Soldiers. However, it will concern a Prince
that he get an opinion of being a Warlike man, unless he mean to be despised
by all People; or let him make an open show that he loves Wars. And to the end
that He may be the more secure of Victory, let him always take with him good
store of Soldiers; that so he may neither lose his reputation, nor be despised
by his Enemies.

Those Defeats of his Armies are the least hurtful to Him, where He himself was
not present at the Engagement. Strength of his forces at Sea, wherein the
Genoese, Portugals, and Hollanders do most excel, is also a most necessary
business. For, whoever shall make himself master of the Seas, the same shalll
command all by Land also.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Treasury of Spain.
IT is necessary that the King have a full Treasury, if it be but for the
keeping up of his Reputation abroad: for, as the World goes now a days, the
Power of Princes is valued according to the fullness of their Purses, rather
then the largeness of their Territories. And therefore not only in the time of
War, but of peace also, it behooves a Prince to have always good store of ready
Money by him: For it is a very hard, and dangerous business also, especially
when He is now already engaged in a War, to expect, and wait till moneys can be
raised.

Toll moras: Semper nocuit differ paratis.
It is necessary therefore, that there be Moneys always in a readiness for
the raising of Soldiers in an instant: least while you are employed in getting
Money together, your Enemy be before hand with you. To this end Augustus Caesar
erected a Military Treasury, as Suetonius testifies; and that he might
always, and without any trouble be provided of Money for the raising, and
paying of his Soldiers, he filled the same with New Taxes, and Impositions.
And certainly very many wonder how it comes to pass, that the King of Spain,
whose yearly Revenues amount to above twenty Millions, has not by this time
made Himself Universal Monarch of all Christendom, nor has all this while so
much as as once set upon the Turk.

To whom I answer, that this is nothing at all to be wondered at, if they would
but take notice, that the reason of this it, because He has not the skill to
lay hold on Occasion, when it is offered Him; which very thing has hitherto
upheld the Fortune of all Great Empires, For there was an Occasion given him at
the Uniting of the Kingdoms of Castile and Arragon, and of Naples, and Millan:
but there was a much fairer offered to Charles the V. who was a man of a
Warlike spirit; and being King of Spain, was afterward chosen also Emperor of
Germany; by all which advantages He might have been able to have made himself
Lord of the whole Earth, had He but known as well how to give Laws to those He
conquered, as He knew how to conquer them. This Prince took Tunis, and having
driven thence Ariodenus the Turk, He made Muleasses King of that place, without
changing the former State of the Kingdom at all. After this He conquered
Germany; that is to say, the Protestant Princes there: whom He divested of
their Electoral Dignity, substituting into their places their Brethren, and
Kinsmen: but otherwise, leaving them in the same state He found them. And
although He had once got Luther himself into his hands and power; yet, looking
after the empty Fame only of being accounted a Merciful Prince, He let him go
again; that so he might have the opportunity (forsooth) of seducing all
Germany, and the N^therlands. He took F^ancis, the King of France; and then set
him again at liberty; that so he might raise up a new War against Him, and
thereby frustrate all that He had done before. He also took in the Cities of
Sienna, Florence; and bestowed them upon the Family of the Medici; that so He
might procure himself more powerful enemies by the bargain. For, whosoever is
raised by any one to some degree of Power, what service soever is due from him
to his Rayser, he will be sure to decline the doing it as much as he can: and
therefore he seeks all the occasions he can of shaking off the Yoke, that he
may make his Benefactor, his Enemy: which very thing was done by the Dukes of
Florence, and by Maurice, Prince Elector of Saxony, against Charles the Fifth.

And indeed such Benefits as, by reason of the greatness of them, cannot any
way be returned; commonly they draw a hatred upon the Virtue of the Benefactor:
as we see it evidently fell out in the case betwixt the aforementioned Francis,
King of France, and Charles the Fifth.

Another cause that this Monarchy has not yet hitherto been brought about, is
this, because that Philip could not succeed his Father, not so much as in the
War, and therefore lost both the Low Countries, together with the Imperial
Titles. But that Affliction which also fell upon him by the loss of Charles,
his Son, was the most grievous of all the rest: for he would have been able to
have maintained the Wars in His stead: which seeing the King of Spain is not
able to do, He is constrained always to defend, and make good the bounds of
his Kingdom rather, then to endeavor to enlarge them: and to look to his
Commanders, and see that they do not pillage the Countries where their Command
lies, and enrich themselves out of the Kings Treasure; it being their only
care, how to keep up such a Trade of War, by which they may make advantage to
themselves, rather then any way enlarge the Kings Dominions.

I shall therefore here lay down these Rules, (though they are not so proper
for this place) that when any new Country is conquered, that is of a different
Religion, and manner of Government, the Natives are presently to be removed out
of it and carried into some other Country, where they may serve as Slaves; and
their Children are to be Baptized, and may be either put into the Seminaries
before spoken of, or else sent into the New World; and into this conquered
Country may be sent Colonies of Spaniards, under the conduct of so^e Wise and
faithful Commander. Which Course ought to have been taken by Charles the Fifth
at Tunis; who should also have carried away Muleasses to Naples. And He should
by right have done the very same thing in Germany; namely, in Saxony, in the
Marquisat of Brandenburg, and the Lantgravedome of Hessen: into which Countries
He should have sent New Colonies, under the Command of New Governors.

The Free Cities also He should have suppressed and have taken away their
Privileges: and lastly, He should have made Three Cardinals the Governous of
all Germany.

But when any New Country is taken in, that is not of a different Religion, but
only differing in Government, let Him then change nothing at all, in matters
that concern the People: but only let Him set strong Guards upon the Country;
and let the Chief Officers be chosen all out of the Kings party, but the
Inferior out of the Common People of the place: the Laws whereof may also be
altered by little and little, and made to conform to the Kings Laws, either
by heightning, or abating the rigor of them, according as the Condition and
Temper of the place shall require. All Authors, or Heads of Factoins must be
presently removed out of the way, either by Death, if they have been Enemies;
or, if they have been friends, they must be carried away into Spain, that they
may there receive Baronies for their reward, or may have liberty of free
Traffic into the Kings Dominions granted them. But the Chief Heads of such
People as He shall subdue, He must never suffer to continue in their places;
which course ought to have been taken with the Strozzi, Medici, Cappones,
Petruccij, and other Ringleaders and Heads of Factions, at Sienna, and Florence.

And indeed the same Course should have been taken with Francis King of France,
that so he might have had no further opportunity of attempting any thing
against Charles the V. But as for the Heretics, and Luther, the best way would
have been to have suppressed them, under some other Pretense, presently after
the breaking up of the Diet at Ausburg; as I shall show hereafter.

And if Cha^les the Fifth had but taken these Courses, He had never left behind
him so much work and trouble for King Philip; and perhaps his young son Charles
too might have been alive at this day; and might perhaps by His Arms have added
Africa, Hungary, Macedonia, Italy, and England to his Dominions. But He, as I
have before said, was the only cause of all those Evils, which we see at this
day. So that I do not wonder at all, that notwithstanding the vast Treasures of
the King of Spain, yet the bounds of His Monarchy are not all this while
enlarged. But I rather wonder, that so Wealthy a Prince has not laid up all
such his Revenues, for Necessary Uses against times of need; which might have
been his ruin. For if so be his Negotiation by Sea should be stopped, or
interrupted but for one five, or six years space together, or that his Plate
Fleet should be intercepted in its return home from the West-^ndies, would it
not be so sore a cut to him, as that he must of necessity be forced to oppress
his own snbjects by laying most heavy and unusual Taxes upon them, and so draw
upon himself their Hate? and besides, should he not also undo all his
Merchants, and defraud his Soldiers of their Pay, and by that means be in
danger of losing them upon every the least Occasion? And indeed it is a thing
much to be wondered at, how, and which way such vast Sums of Money should come
to be wasted, and yet the King not any thing at all the better for it; for we
see, that He is still Poor for all this, and is almost continually borrowing
Money of others. And therefore I say, that it is Impossible but that things
should always succeed ill with Him, so long as there is no provision made for
the remedying of this mischief.

Yet I do not say, that a Kings whole strengh consists only in his Money; but He
is to consider, that Money alone will do little toward the subduing of an Enemy.
And indeed we read that Julius Caesar, by his great knowledge in Military
affairs, and having withal the love of his Souldiers^ though they were but a
very Small Army, to speak of, yet for all this conquered the whole World. And
so likewise the Saracens, Tartarians, and Hunnes, without any Money, made
themselves Lords of almost the whole World. We confess therefore, that Money is
of Excellent good use, and most necessary for a Prince, for the Preserving and
making good the Bounds of his Dominions; but not at all for the enlarging of
them, by adding New Provinces to the same. And therefore let him believe, that
the sinews of his Strength lie in something else then his Money. For, that Faith
that is purchased by Money, may again be sold for Money. And therefore I beseech
you, do but observe, how in France our King Philip by his money procured the
Dukes of Maine, Ioycuse, Mercoeur, and Guise, to take up Arms against the King
of Navarre; and then again, how the King of Navarre by the same means got over
the very same men to His side, after they found King Philip to be grown
somewhat close-sisted, and not to come off with his Money so freely as before.
And in like manner the Commanders, and Soldiers in the Low Countries do now a
days rather exercise the profession of Hucksters, then of Soldiers: for, they
do not fight, that they may overcome their Enemy; but that they may make a gain
of their serving in the Wars; And so have made Arms, which are the Instruments
of Monarchy, to be the Instruments of their Covetousness, and their Sports.
And the King deceives himself, whiles He pursues all Covetous Designs; for, He
has Money enough, if he have but Soldiers enough; and if there be withal but
Mutual love betwixt him and them, and a due regard had to their several merits;
which things if they be wanting, he shall be sure to be a sufficient Loser in
the end.

First therefore, and above all things, let the King endeavor to treasure up
to himself the Minds and Affections of his Subjects and Vassals, and indear
himself to them, by his own Gallantry both in Peace, and in War; making Himself
admired by them, by making profession of, and proposing to them some New
Sciences, etc. as has been said before.

Secondly, let Him raise himself a Treasure of his Subjects Bodies, by causing
them to multiply by Frequency of Marriages; to which they are to be encouraged
by Honors, and other Inticements, etc. as was also touched before.

And in the Third place, let Him raise himself a Treasure out of the Wealth of
his Subjects, whiles He makes them Rich, by taking care that Agriculture, and
Manuring of the Ground be promoted; and that the making of Silks, Woollen
Cloth, and the like Useful and Profitable Arts, and Trades be set on foot, and
diligently followed; rather, then that such Courses should be taken, as we see
now adays every where; whiles in the smaller Towns, most people give
themselves to Usury; and in the Greater Cities men for the most part apply
themselves to Merchandise, and Extorsion. The Pope raises up his Treasures in
the Minds of Men; and therefore is He a Conqueror; because that This, being
conjoined with Eloquence and Wisdom, is the only Instrument by which that
Treasure is acquired. And hence it was, that the Saracens, by the use of their
Tongue, and also by making Profession of New Sciences, and of a New Religion,
became Conquerours. Julius Caesar raised Himself a Treasure both in Minds and
Bodies; by His own Personal Virtue and Gallantry, winning to himself, and
obliging the Hearts, and Affections of the Whole Soldiery. But the Ta^tarians,
and Hunnes did this by Bodies only; rendering them so Fruitful, as that by
reason of their Vast numbers, they were fain to leave their Native soil,
marching out of it in huge bodies, (like swarms of Bees) and seizing upon
others Territories. But now the King may, by His Own just Right, exact all
these Treasures at the hands of his Subjects; as namely, Religion, by placing
Able Preachers among them; Love, by Good Laws, the Subjects Profit, and True
Justice; and Multiplication of them, by the Ways before laid down, where I
spoke touching the increasing of the Number of the Soldiery: and let Him
require of each several Nation, that, which they most abound in; as, People,
from the Germans; Soldiers, from the Spaniards; Commanders in War, and
Garments, from the Italians; from the West Indies, Gold; but not the contrary.

We may truly affirm, that the New World has in a manner undone the Old; for
it has sown Covetousness in our Minds, and has quite extinguished Mutual
Love among men. For, all the World are wretchedly in love with Gold only: and
hence it is, that Men are become Deceitful, and Fraudulent in their dealings,
and have often sold, and re-sold their Faith for Hire; because they saw that
Money was That, that did the business every where, and that was held in
Admiration by all people; and so They are come now to despise all Sciences, and
Holy Sermons, in comparison of Money; and have bid Adieu both to Agriculture,
and other Arts, applying themselves only to look after the Fertility and
Increase of Money, and to get themselves into Rich Men's houses. It has likewise
Introduced a great Disparity amongst Men, making them either too Rich^ whence
they become Proud, and Insolent; or else, leaving them too Poor, whence
proceeds Envy, Theft, and Open Robbery. Hence also it is, that the prices of
Corn, Wine, Flesh, Oil, and Cloth, are very much raised; because that no man
applies himself to this kind of Merchandise; whence follows Want, and Penury;
and yet Moneys in the mean while must be laid out: In so much, that the poorer
sort, being not able to hold out in the world, are fain either to put
themselves into service; or else betake themselves to robbing upon the
Highway, or else turn Soldiers, being necessitated to do so through Poverty,
and not at all for Love either of the King, or of Religion; and many times also
they run away from their Colors, or else change them: neither do they
endeavor to get Children in a Lawful Way of Marriage, because they are not
able to pay Taxes: or else perhaps they try all the ways that possibly they
can, to get to be admitted into some Covent or other for Friars, or Preachers.
I therefore here leave it to the King to consider, whether or no He may not
rather be overcome by Gold, which is the Cause of so many Evils.

I say therefore, that there are many things here that stand in need of a
Reformation, that so the Kings Treasury may grow Rich, and that He himself may
have greater Testimonies of his Subjects Love, and Fidelity: which might easily
be brought about, if so be that those Rules before laid down, touching the
increasing the Number of the Subjects, and the remitting and abating the Taxes
and Exactions laid upon them, were but observed: and if the King, going into
the Wars Himself in person, would by that means chalk out, to his Wise and
Valiant Commanders, and Soldiers, the Way to Honor, rather then to
Covetousness; and would also propose New Arts, and Sciences. So likewise if He
would make some such Laws, to which those that are Obedient, should have their
former honors continued to them; but the Refractory, and Disobedient should
have Disgraces cast upon them: and to persuade Obedience to which Laws, there
should in the Second place, some Profit, and Advantage be proposed for such:
but, in the Third place, before the Disobedient should be laid down the Fear of
Punishment: to which our Modern Writers absurdly attribute the First Place, in
Relation to the due Observing of Laws; who having regard to the Time rather,
then to Religion, require Fear in Subjects, rather then Love: because that the
Rulers of the Gentiles preferred this Later, before the Former; and so taught
that Wicked Wretch, Macchiavel, and other the like Politicians, those Rules.

But if there be no place left for a Reformation, it is then necessary, that,
respect being had to the Present Abuses, there should be good store of Treasure
got up together; lest at length the King should be undone by Use-Mony, or some
other Losses should fall upon him; in case the Plate Fleet should not return
back from the West Indies in three or four years together perhaps. I shall
first therefore lay down the Usual Rules, in this case; and then, such other as
I my self have thought upon.

First therefore, there must be matter administered for the promoting of Usury,
and Usurers; and every one of them is to be bound, under a certain Penalty, to
have always a stock of Moneys lying by them; that so, when there shall be any
Necessity, the King may know where to fetch presently good store of Large
Sums of Money: Which Course is to be taken in all the chief Cities, both in
the Kingdom of Naples, and of Spain. Then, when any great War is near at hand,
the said Sums of Money are to be called for at the said Usurers hands; and
that, by the intervening too of the Popes Authority, that so the King may not
draw upon himself alone the Hatred, and Ill Will of his Subjects.

Secondly, let him introduce the Tribute of Apulia, (which was brought up by
King Ferdinand) through all the Provinces that are under him, imposing it
either in the same, or some other the like Form.

Thirdly, let Him cause all the Barons to bring in what sums of Money they
have, binding them thereto in the name of Religion, and the Crown of Spain, to
which they are joined, and engaged.

Fourthly, let Him procure of the Pop^ Indulgences and Croisados for all his
Kingdoms; and those Sums of Money, that shall be raised by the same, He shall
lay up in some Treasury, where they may increase to such a quantity, as that an
Army may be raised out of them, which may be sent into the Holy Land.

Fifthly, let Him get an Injunction from the Pope, that, for the space of five
years, all Churches, Monasteries, Bishoprics, and Parishes throughout all his
Provinces, shall pay in a certain sum of Money into The Sacred Treasury, so
called, as being collected for the making of a War against the Infidels; that
is to say, Five in the Hundred, of all their Revenues; but so, that every year
there should be an abatement made of One: As namely, the first year they should
pay Five in the Hundred, the second year Four^ the third Three, and so on, till
the five years be expired. But the Venetians exact the Tenths. And this Course
may be taken^ betwixt the King and the Pope, under the Pretense of making a War
upon the Infidels. After all this is done, let Him then appoint two Bishops to
be the Treasurers of this Money.

Sixthly, let the King, by his Treasurers, traffic in every Country, with such
Commodities as are used there; as in Calabria, with Silks; in Apulia, with
Wheat; in Sicily, with Oil; for by this means He will divert his Subjects from
applying themselves to Usury, and will cause them to attend more the Manuring
of the Ground, and withal will hereby mightily enrich Himself.

Seventhly, let Him send out into every City, and Town, especially in the
Kingdom of Naples, a Commissary, having a Counselor joined with him, who
shall be one of the Clergy, to make enquiry into all Usurers; and to cause Them
to make it appear by the testimony of Three Witnesses, that they have taken no
other Use, then what is allowed to be taken by the custom of the Kingdom: and
where they shall find any to have done otherwise, to seize upon all they are
worth, and carry it away to some public place for the King's use.

But then, the King may afterward restore half of it to them again, if he
think fit: as for example; suppose his Officers took away from any of these
Usurers Ten Thousand Crowns; He may then restore to the Owner Five Thousand
Crowns of his Money again. For they are a hateful sort of People, and are
despised by all men; so that you need never fear that they will rebel: and
besides, the people, when ever they see Them ruined, will be very glad of it,
neither will any of them take their parts; and indeed the Usurers themselves,
when they have half of their estates left them, will think themselves very well
dealt withal. And with the rest of such Moneys the King may set up A Bank of
Charity, where poor people shall take up Moneys upon their Pawn; but upon this
condition, that if they redeem not their Pawn by the Limited Time, that then it
shall be forfeit to the King. And afterward with the Money arising from hence,
He may drive a Trade of Merchandise, as the Usurers themselves use to do: or
else He may with those moneys erect Cloisters, or Seminaries for Soldiers, and
Poor Women, as has been showed before. And if some of the Clergy were sent
abroad with the like Commissions to inquire into the Barons also, it would do
them much good, both in reference to their Soul, Body, and State; who otherwise
by their arts would swallow up, and devour the whole World.

Eighthly, let Him require an Account of all the Kings Ministers, and
Commissioners, for the whole time of their being employed in their Offices: and
whatsoever Fines shall be set upon their heads, let it be put into the
Treasury; or the King may remit half to them, if he please; or less, as he
shall see cause: and by taking this course with them, both Himself and his
Subjects shall be much advantaged, and have cause to rejoice.

Ninthly, let Him call all those before Him, that have been condemned by any
Sentence of Judgment, or have any ways been branded with any Note of Infamy;
and let Him command all such Judgments passed against them, within the space of
five years past, to be burnt: by which Act of His, the Offenders will reckon
themselves highly honored; but yet, for this favor of the Kings, they shall
be bound to pay down such a certain Sum of Money.

Tenthly, let every one that enters first into any great City, such as Naples
is, or into any Garrison, such as is that of Cotron, pay something at his
entrance, under pretense of taking notice of all that enter in. Then, let there
be an Imposition laid upon all things whatsoever, that are used both for
Necessity and Superfluity; but upon things of Necessary use, as Meat, Drink,
Oil, and the like, the Imposition should not be great; but upon things of
superfluity, it should be higher. As, upon Cards, let there be put an
Imposition of two Carolines; and upon Dice, one Caroline; upon every Quire of
Writing Paper, one Grain; upon every pair of Gloves, half a Caroline: but upon
Silks, and Garments richly wrought with Needlework, and Embroideries of Silver
and Gold, there must be higher Impositions laid, for the benefit of the King.
But I would have the greatest Impositions to be laid upon Whores; as at Naples,
and in all other places, the Tax should be increased half a Ducat upon every
Bawdy House. Neither should Baths, or Play Houses, and Players be exempted from
these Impositions; nor yet Innes, Taverns^ or any Houses of Public
entertainment whatsoever. And in all things let the Rule before laid down be
observed; namely, that Necessary things should have but a small Imposition put
upon them; but a Greater, upon those that are not necessary.

Likewise the King, when He is pressed by any great Necessity of the State, may
have an Estimate made of all his Subjects Lands, and accordingly impose Taxes
and Tributes upon the same. And that this should be done, is both Right and
Just: for^ every Private Good ought to serve the Public Good; without which,
men's Private Estates could not be upheld, and subsist. But I would have these
to be, not Personal, but Real Taxes; that is, they should not be levied upon
the Persons, by the Pole, but upon their Estates: lest otherwise the whole
burden of these Taxes should ly upon the shoulders of the Poor only, as it
uses to do for the most part. For the Gentry use to shake off the burden that
is imposed upon them, and cast it upon the Commons; as, in like manner, the
Principal Cities cast off theirs upon the Countryman: which is against all
Justice and Equity in the World. Neither ought any Goods to be Taxed, but only
such as are Certain, and Immovable; for, the Duke of Alva, going about to lay
a Tax upon all Goods indifferently, as well Moveable, and Uncertain, as
others, caused the whole Country of the Netherlands to rise up against him. And
if at any time, when the Urgent Necessities of the Kingdom shall so require,
you will lay a Tax upon Moveable, and Uncertain Goods also; I should like it
well enough, if there were the same course taken in proceeding herein, as they
use to take in some certain Cities of Germany; as namely, Norimberg, Ausp^rg,
Collen, and some others; where they use to put every man to his Oath. Yet that
way of Imposing Taxes is the more Just, and Legal, that put them upon all
manner of Merchandise, and Commodities, that are either exported abroad, or
imported into any of the Kings Dominions: for it is but Just, and Reasonable,
that whosoever makes any gain to himself in Our Country, or by our Commodities,
he should pay something in Consideration thereof.

And whereas all Such Merchants are either the Kings Subjects, or else are
Forraigners; it is fit that we should exact greater Customs from Forraigners,
then from our Own Merchants: which Rule the Great Turk observes at this day;
exacting Ten in the Hundred upon all Commodities that are imported from
Alexandria by Forraigners; but taking but Five in the Hundred of his own
Merchants. In England all Foreign Merchants pay four times as much in Customs,
as the Natives do; but in Denmark they pay but three times; and so their
payments are diverse, according to the diversity of Places.

To sum up all in a Word; Wheresoever all those things that are Necessary for
the Substentation of Man's Life, are found in greatest Abundance and Plenty, to
that place will there ever be a Conflux of Riches: so that it will concern
every Prince to use his Utmost endeavors in bringing his Subjects to apply
themselves to Husbandry, and the following all sorts of Arts and Manufactures:
of which we have spoken elsewhere more at large. Then, I would have all those
Ways of raising of Money, that are hateful to the People, either to be quite
taken away, or else to have some other name put upon them: in like manner as
the Taxes also, and Impositions paid into the Exchequer ought to be somewhat
abated, and to be exacted of the Subject under some other Name. And hence it
was^ that Augustus Caesar did not style Himself, King, but only, Tribune;
because that the Name of a King was hateful to the Romans. And therefore I
would have the name of Tribute, to be changed to Erogations, or Contribution:
and these Names also I would have to be altered perpetually. And because the
Name of Donative is now become hateful, and loathsome to the People, the King
may do well to lay aside that Name, and put some Other upon it. But I shall not
discourse so very Particularly, and Punctually of these things here, as I could.

The Kings Trafficking with the Genoeses, is as good as a Treasure to Him: let
Him therefore use all the means He can, to procure liberty of exercising the
like Traffic and Commerce with other Nations and Countries. There are also
many other Extraordinary Profits which Princes may raise to themselves, partly
from their Own Subjects, and partly also from Forraigners: such as are
Casualties, Confiscations, Escheats, Donatives, Portions, Honoraries, as they
call them, and many other the like; of all which I should speak particularly:
But I have resolved to keep this discourse, till I shall have an opportunity of
speaking thereof in the presence of his Majesty.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Peoples Love, and Hate: and also of Conspiracies.
IT may perhaps be thought fit by some, that in Commonwealths, Mutual Love
should be maintained amongst all Fellow-Citizens, for the benefit of the
Public; as we see it is among the Venetians: But that in all Monarchical
Governments, Hatred, and Dissentions are to be sown abroad among the Subjects;
lest otherwise, when any of them were injured by the Prince, the rest should
join in revenging their Fellow Subjects wrong upon the Prince; or lest they
should at any time all Unanimously conspire against Him: and so all the
Subjects Love should be jointly bent against the King. But this Rule is most
Absurd, several ways.

First, because it makes the King to be a most cruel Tyrant, who takes care of
Himself alone, and not of his Subjects in General: and so by this means,
through the mutual Hatred of his Subjects, the King does not at all procure
their Love, but rather kindles their Envy against himself, and so lives in
continual fear.

Secondly, because all Natural Dominion requires Concord amongst the People,
that so they may be able more stoutly, and effectually to resist all Enemies
whatsoever; and may oblige one another by Mutual Offices, both at home, and in
War. And therefore all good Lawgivers have used their utmost Endeavors, to
procure a Union, and, as it were, a knitting together of Subjects, by the Bonds
of Mutual Love, and of Unity in Religion: and therefore they have provided,
that they should All meet together in Churches, to the end that they might the
better know the reason why they ought to love one another: For, Ignoti nulla
cupido: No man desires^ what He knows not. And upon this Consideration it was,
that Plato forbad all Private Chapels: and Moses also gave order, that there
should be erected but One Temple only, in the whole Kingdom of the Jews; that
so, all of them concurring, and agreeing together in One Religion, and in the
Love of One Only God, might every way fill up one complete Mutual Love amongst
themselves. And to this end, besides Marriages, were Clienteles, or Multitudes
of Clients, and Followers designed; and diverse other Institutions, tending to
the promoting, and advancing of Mutual Profit, and Advantage.

As likewise Companies of Merchants; and Officious Relations to great Persons,
taken up upon design of doing them Service, or Honor. And all these things
are profitable to the Prince; But so is not the Hatred of his People; for this
proved very Prejudicial to France. And such Contests betwixt the Prince and his
Subjects have made for the Advantage of the Sea of Rome, when ever the People
got the better of it: Although the Contrary happened in Florence. For there,
the Conquering Plebeians did not raise themselves to the Condition of
Gentlemen; but, on the contrary the Gentry debased themselves down to the state
of Plebeians; the Contrary whereof happened at Rome. And therefore my Advice
is, that the Prince should use his utmost endeavor to procure, that there be a
Mutual love and Correspondence among his Subjects.

Now this Mutual Love is maintained, First, by their Unity in Religion; and by
rooting out all those that endeavor to sow Tares abroad; which was the Loss
of the Netherlands. Secondly, by Spaniards marrying with any other Nations
whatsoever; Thirdly, by having Commerce and Traffic with Several Nations;
Fourthy, by Introducing an equality amongst them; for this is an Error, which
has now spread it self over all the Christian World, that One man should be
very Poor, and another very Rich; which was a thing that Plato hated perfectly.
Whereas a Parity, or Equality between Fellow Subjects is a means of removing
all Envy, Rapine, Pride, Hatred, and Effeminatenesse from among them. And hence
it was, that Moses commanded the Jews, that every Seventh Year, all Families
should have their Inheritances restored unto them again; and all Servants, that
were of their own Nation, should be set at liberty, and have also some thing
given them by their Patrons, at their going off; withal informing them, that
this was agreeable to the Law, and will of God. And for this reason also
Almes-houses, Hospitals, and other the like Places for Charitable uses were
erected; that so Honor might be preserved amongst them with some Equality.

Salust testifies, that there were never any Conspiracies contrived by any of
the Romans against their Country, till such time as a Few persons had gotten
into their hands the Wealth of Many; that is to say, such as Crassus, Pompey,
and Caesar. And in Luthers, and Calvin's time, the Country Peasants in Germany
rose up in Arms aginst the Nobility and Gentry, only because those Two having
trampled under foot the Evangelicall Truth, had Sown Tares, and the Seeds of
Sedition, and Subversion of States every where; to the ruin of whole Kingdoms.

And even in our days also we see that you shall have one Man that has a
hundred Thousand Crowns a year; and a Thousand other men again that have hardly
each of them a Hundred Crowns a year a piece. And all that Wealth will He spend
upon Dogs, Horses, Jesters, and in Gold Trappings for his Horses; or else upon
Whores, which is worse. And if at any time a Poor man shall be put to go to Law
with him for any thing, he is so far from being able to prosecute his Action
against Him, as that he is rather fain to get out of the way as fast as he can,
or else he may chance to be forced to end his days in Prison: Mean while that
the Rich man does every where what he li^ts, without control; because,
forsooth, He has Money to corrupt the Judges with. And indeed, our Judges, for
the most part, are such as have been made Judges either for Favor, or for
Money; as we s^e it commonly falls out in all Smaller Cities: which certainly is
a most Pernicious thing to all Principalities. For, it is almost an Impossible
thing, that a Judge that will take a Bribe, should ever discharge his Office
honestly: For, as God himself testifies, A Gift blinds the Wise. Which, it
is very likely, will be the practice of him that buyeth his Office with Money;
and so enters into it, not as into a Field overrun with Thorns and Briers, but
rather as into a most plentiful and rich Harvest. And therefore I shall here
take the liberty (though it be somewhat beside my present purpose) to admonish
all Politicians whatsoever, that they should take this for a certain Rule; that
Whosoever sells his Offices for Money, the same desires that his Ministers
should be Thieves. Lewis the Twelfth of France was wont to say, that those that
buy Offices, were like Merchants; who buy Goods altogether at any easy rate;
and afterward sell them off in parcels at a dear rate. But to return to our
purpose.

Although our Rich Man is very liberal, and is at great cost and charges in the
maintaining, and richly clothing of his Servants and Retainers; Yet is not the
Commonwealth any thing at all the better for this, but rather suffers by it.

First of all, because by this means He obliges them to Himself only, and
makes them so much his own, as that they will be ready to follow Him against
any person whatsoever, even the King himself: which thing was attempted
heretofore by that Roman, Spurius Melius, against his Country: and therefore
the Venetians, fearing this very thing, suffer not any to keep about them any
great Retinue. Then besides, it renders them soft, and Effeminate; and makes
them to be Flatterers, and Proud Pimps, and Bawds to their Patrons Lust: and so
by this means here is erected, as it were, a Seminary of most Idle and Vile
persons; who after they have once gotten themselves Wives, do then by their
crafty Wiles oppress poor men, and begin to spread abroad the Poison of their
Wickedness far and near. And for this reason it was, that Bishops have
oftentimes forbidden those Prelates that have been under their Jurisdiction, the
use of a Numerous Retinue; though here, there was no great need of any such
Interdiction. For although that such Servants of Prelates are not in truth
Honest, and Good men; yet are they forced at least to appear such in those
places; and so they give the less Scandal to the World. Wherefore the King
ought to endeavor to introduce an Equality by restraining all Numerous
Retinues.

Let Him moreover indulge the Common People so much, as that for the space of
whole ten years, they shall pay only the one half of their Taxes; and for the
other half, let Him exact the payment of it at the hands of the Barons, and
others that are Artificers. I would also have those Laws, and Arts, spoken of
before, where I treated of the Barons, and Usurers, to be brought into use.

But for as much as the Spaniards are hated by all Nations, the best Course
would be, that the King should endeavor to reconcile them to the Spaniard by
intermarrying with them; and also by erecting such Military Seminaries, into
which should be admitted indifferently, and be there maintained, Soldiers of
all other Nations. For by this means the King shall have both a more Copious,
and also a better Tempered, and more Generous Army: as we see Chestnut Graffes,
when they are set upon other stocks, bring forth the better fruit.

And this very course God himself is wont to take; who, that He may render all
Mankind the more Noble, uses to transplant the People of the Northern Parts,
and to remove them into the more Southern: which He also does for some other
causes; which yet are all, save one or two, unknown to us. After this let the
King of Spain so order his affairs, as that not only his subjects may live
together in mutual love amongst themselves, but also that He himself may be
beloved by them: which thing he may easily effect, by Enacting Profitable
Laws, by increasing the number of his subjects, by remitting their Taxes and
Impositions; by bringing in an Equality amongst them; and lastly, by not
omitting even those things also, of which We spoke before.

And because that nothing is so destructive to a Prince, as the stirring up of
the subjects Hate against Himself: whence it is, for the most part, that
Conspiracies, and Treasons are plotted against both Prince, and State; it would
be very well, if all the subjects were of the same Religion that the Prince is
of: for nothing in the World does more set men at Variance, then Diversity of
Religion. And this, the King of France has found to be true, by his own sad
Experience. But it is here necessary, that the Prince should shun those two
Extremes, to wit, Hypocrisy, ^ud Superstition. God is Truth, and will be
worshipped in Truth, and with a Clear, upright mind.

Let our Prince therefore be sure, that he approve himself to be a Pious, and
Religious Prince without Hypocrisy, (by which Tiberius Caesar did himself much
wrong,) and without any apparent softness, or Effeminatenesse. But nothing
more commends a Prince to his People, then to be furnished both with Domestic,
and Military Virtues; which are sufficient to engage all his subjects, of all
Ranks and Conditions whatsoever, to be faithful to Him: for, these are the
Foundation, and Groundwork of all Principalities. For as the Elements, and all
Bodies compounded of them, do without any Reluctance obey the Motions of the
Celestial Bodies, by reason of their Ingenit Excellency of Nature; and in the
Revolutions of the Celestial Orbs themselves, the Inferior follow the Motion
of the Superior; in like manner do all men willingly submit, and yield
themselves up to such a Prince, in whom they find all Eminent Virtues shining
forth. For, this is an Impression of Nature, imprinted on all, that no
Inferiors refuse to yield Obedience to those that are above, or better then
themselves. For it is received by the Eternal Law of Nature, that Inferiors
should obey their Superiors: And it is the Bond of Faith, (says Livy) to obey
our betters. And^ Our Superiors Commands are to be obeyed; says another
Author. And A^istotle says, that Natural Reason requires, that those that do
excel in Wit, and Judgment, should govern those that are not so excellent
therein.

When any Prince therefore is Eminent for Virtue, it gains Him the Love of his
People: especially, if he shall but make it appear to them, that He loves them
with a Fatherly Love, admitting them to come into his presence, and to
discourse with Him, and withal looking into the Accounts of His Inferior
Ministers; and always more readily lending an ear to the Poor, then to the
Rich: and besides, if He pardon all Offenders, and bestow all Rewards Himself,
but inflict punishments on Malefactors, by his Ministers: and also, if He
suppress Usurers, and those Mercenary Barons, spoken of before; and show
Himself clear from all Wicked Acts whatsoever: and withal render Himself
worthy to be reverenced for his Religion, by having Godly Counselors about
Him, and winning to himself a holy love from all, by reason of the most strict
Tie that is between Him and the Pope, and the Holy Church. And let Him in all
things Propose for Examples for Him to follow, David, Constantine, Theodosius,
Trajan, Augustus, Martianus, Charles the Great: all which being endowed with
the forementioned Virtues, and with Sciences, reigned more happily, then
Julian, Frederick, Henry, Tiberius, Nero, and Philip Surnamed the Fair, who
spent his time in a quite contrary course to what Charles the Great did.

Besides, I would have Him to invite his Subjects, by honors and Rewards, to
an Emulation of Virtue, and Sciences, and an Endeavor to excel each other
herein: by which means there would be New Sciences invented. Gaming also would
be of good use in Spain, and would serve to divert the Common People from
prying over-curiously into Affairs of State: or else it would necessitate
those, that have lost all their Estates that way, to turn Soldiers. But yet,
seeing that this breaking of one another is the cause of Extortion,
Covetousness, Hatred of their fellow Subjects, and of the love of Money; this
Gaming seems in the end to bring more damage to the State, then benefit. And
therefore I conceive it were better that there were some Sports of Recreation
devised for his Subjects of Spain to try Masteries in; and some Velitations,
and Innocent Contentions in some Arts, or Sciences: but for his Foreign
subjects abroad they should use Gaming, either at Cards, or Dice; which they
should be put upon by the Leiger Ambassadors there: that so by this means they
may become Broken, and Heartlesse, through Idleness, and want of Exercise. I
would also have some Mathematical, Philosophical, and Political Questions
proposed among them, that they may so be diverted from embracing Heretical
Opinions.

But the best course the King can take, for the preventing of all Conspiracies,
and designs against Him, will be, to show Himself a Good, Awful, and Just
Prince^

The want of the First of these Virtues was the Ruin of Nero, and Acciolinus;
the Defect in the second, undid Sardanapalus, and Vitellius; and the failing in
the last cost Philip, King of Macedonia, his life: who because he had denied
the due Course of Justice to one Pausanias, was by him killed. Inequality also
and Injustice was the Cause of the Ruin of Rome it self.

If any one Single person have any Treacherous Design against the Prince, the
only Course in that case for prevention of it, will be, to take notice of, and
search every one that comes into the Kings presence, least they should carry
any Arms Privily about them; for it is a difficult business to prevent such
Treacheries, as are designed by One single Person alone. And hence it was, that
Henry the III. of France, and the King of Moab, and so likewise Philip, King of
Macedonia were all Slain by single persons; the First of them, for his
Religion; the second, for his Cruelty; and the Third, for his denying Justice
to be done to a Subject of his. But if there be Many joined together in any
Conspiracy against the Prince, it cannot be, but that unless they effect their
design within fifteen, or twenty days space; or, except the Conspirators have
fallen upon their Design out of their Love, and respect they bear to Justice,
Piety, or the benefit of the Public, and so it prove to be only a Conspiracy
contrived by Honest Men against a Tyrant; it cannot otherwise be, I say, but
that they must necessarily be discovered; For, every body will hope, some way
or other to advance himself by the Prince's Favor, if he do but discover the
said Conspiracy to him. And hence it was, that the Conspiracy of Absolon
against his father David, and of Catiline against his Country were detected;
because that those, that were the Conspirators, were nothing at all better, or
honester men, then those against whom they had conspired. Conspiracies are also
easily, and speedily too, discovered by servants; unless they be presently put
into Execution; as was that of Laurence de Medicis against Duke Alexander,
which was deferred but one night only. And whenever Honest Men join in any
Conspiracy against a most Cruel Tyrant; notwithstanding they should delay the
putting of the same in execution, yet would there be no great danger of its
being discovered; and hence it was, that the Conspiracy of John de Procitha,
and the Barons, of Sicily, against the French, and Charles of Anjou, who
miserably afflicted the poor Inhabitants, was kept close above a year before
the Execution of it: and that too, though both the Emperor, the Pope, and
Peter, King of Arragon, who were Forraigners, were all privy to the Same: the
only Reason of which was, because that This was a Conspiracy made by the Nobles
and others, that were therein concerned, against Forraigners, and Tyrannical
Governors. The like was that Conspiracy also, which was entered into by
Iehoiada and the Levites against Athaliah. And yet, for the most part, although
the number of those that are in the Conspiracy be but of a few, and it be
besides contrived against some Wicked person too; yet if it be not speedily put
in Execution, it comes to light, and is discovered: as we may see by that
Conspiracy made against Nero; in which even Seneca himself also was; and that
Other contrived against Cosmo de Medicis by the Wicked Strozzi, who were
themselves much worse then He.

But in case any single person, aspiring to some Principality, shall yet bear
his followers in hand, that He drives at some other thing, and so in the mean
time winnes upon them, and gains their Affections; He shall certainly bring
about his designs.

This was the course that Julius Caesar took, in attaining to the Empire;
though He kept his Design close to Himself, and never discovered it to any;
being yet wont, while He was but a Youth, to have this saying often in his
mouth: Si violandum est jus, Regnandi gratia violandum est: If I would violate
the Laws, it should be, to Rule.

And of this Design of his, he laid for himself Two Foundations; namely,
Religion, and The Love of the Soldiery; to whom at length He made known his
purpose, though under another Pretext. Whereas Catiline in his attempting the
same, took a quite Contrary Course; and having laid down to himself before hand
no one particular Foundation, He, without any more ado, at first made all of
his fellow Conspirators acquainted with his drift, and purpose. By whose
Miscarriage Caesar taking warning, He attempts the same thing, but with more
Caution, and Advisednesse.

The King therefore ought to use all diligence and care, to discover how the
Minds of His Subjects, and Ministers stand affected toward Him, and what they
have in agitation amongst them: and when He has once found what they would
have, He shall do well, immediately to give them Satisfaction in that
Particular. And besides, it would not be amiss, that He should bestow some
gifts, under hand, yet without any show at all of fear, or suspicion, upon some
one Principal person among the Conspirators; who, being by this means wrought
over to the Prince, will be able to acquaint Him with what ever Designs his
Subjects have in hand. And if any shall inform Him, that there are certain
Persons, that have for many months together been openly contriving some
conspiracy against Him; He may very well laugh at such Informers. For,
whosoever shall go about to attempt any such thing in that manner, are either
Fools, or very Unskilful in the Course of the World; or else, lastly, those
that gave him such Information, are Liers, and forged those Stories, only to
ingratiate ^^emselves with the Prince, and get into Favor with him. Thus
heretofore Perseus falsely accused his Brother Demetrius, of having Secretly
conspired against their Father, Philip, King of Macedonia. And in the Reign of
Tiberius, and afterward of Nero, there were every day some or other, that
accused others of Treasonable Designs against the Emperor; Which certainly is
a very Villainous, base thing; for by this means the Prince is both made to
suspect every body; and besides, He renders Himself withal suspected by every
body; so that the Subjects are put to act really upon Him that which Himself
stands in fear of; or else, Innocent men are unjustly put to death; both which
things are of very ill Consequence to a Kingdom. He ought rather therefore to
seem not to believe any such Accusations, although perhaps they should be true,
unless they be also manifestly proved; except they be such, as wherein
Religion is concerned. For, by so doing, He will show himself to be a just, and
Good Prince, and such a one, as does the least in the World deserve to have any
such Conspiracies contrived against him; and so also the Conspirators
themselves will presently lay aside the Ill Opinion they had conceived of Him.
In the mean time, for the Prince to cause any of his Subjects to be thought
guilty of Rebellion, and Treason, when no such thing can be proved against
them, is but a very sad business; for then, out of the sense of the Infamy
that is cast upon them, they will be forced to desire a Change of Government,
and will invite the Kings Enemies to invade him; which has often happened both
in the Low Countries, and in France.

And notwithstanding that there seems to be some hope of gain issuing from
thence; because an Occasion may hereupon be taken of keeping a stricter hand
over the Subject; (which advantage being readily apprehended by the
forementioned Cosmo de Medicis, he took an Occasion presently to break off the
Articles of Peace that had been concluded upon betwixt him and the Florentines;
in like manner as our King also, upon the like Occasion held a harder hand over
the Arragonians, upon Pretense that they had entered into Conspiracy against Him
with Antonio Pe^ez;) yet, in truth, the King receives more damage, then
Advantage thereby. And therefore the more sure, and certain way, to confirm and
assure his Kingdom to himself, would be, so to win over the People to him by
Mutual Love, and favors bestowed upon them, that they should not have any
ground to have any such Suspicions of him. And besides, where this note of
Infamy is thrown upon the Subjects; not only themselves, but their Children
also will be sure to preserve the memory of it, and so will watch for some fit
opportunity of Revenge; which when it offers it self, they will not stick
openly to join with Foreigners against him; and thus their Treasonable Designs
are not by those means quite quashed, but are deferred only. And hence it was,
that Nero's hoping to get money out of the People, about the First Conspiracy
against himself, and so by punishing them, to benefit himself, did not at all
suppress the said Conspiracy, but only put it off, till some other time: which
also the Senators afterward set on foot again, but with greater care, and
circumspection: as it likewise happened to Tiberius, and other wicked Princes.

If any such thing therefore should befall our Prince, He should endeavor to
obliterate, and blot out the memory of such Rebellions, by Benefits, rather
then Punishments; by that means both putting a bridle into their mouths, and
yet withal sweetning them, and winning them over to Himself by his bounty; so
much more advantageous is it for a Prince, at all times, and in all places, to
approve Himself rather Good, then Cunning.

But yet it cannot be denied, but that such Conspiracies are most dangerous,
which are countenanced by the Pretext of Introducing a New Religion; or, when
any Seditious Preacher takes liberty to cast Reproaches upon the State. And
therefore I shall say something, in my following discourse, touching Preachers,
both Good, and Bad; and afterward also of the Uniting, and Division, or
falling off of Kingdoms, and Countries from one another.

I would also have Severer Punishments, and more examplary pieces of Justice
then usual, (if it may be) to be at once, and speedily inflicted upon all
Conspirators; least, by often repeating of lighter Punishments upon them, their
Hate be thereby the more increased, and show it self upon all Occasions. But
again, if any such, having made their escapes, shall yet, after some space of
time, begin to be humbled, and repent of their Wickedness; I would not that
all hope of Pardon, and Reconciliation should be cut off from them. As for the
Preventing of the Barons rising against the King, the courses before laid down
may be taken.

No Heresies can spread, or get any footing any where, but by the Clergy; as I
have demonstrated elsewhere.

The King's Deputies, or Viceroyes ought to have no command over any Castles,
or Frontier Towns that have Garrisons in them: but all such places are to be
committed to the trust of some Particular Commanders residing in the same, and
who are Experienced Soldiers, and betwixt whom and the Viceroyes there is no
great correspondence. And let these be chosen out of the Barons of the
Kingdom; that so their Baronies, or Lordships may be as Pledges for their
Fidelity to the King. And to this end, I would have Spaniards to be sent into
Italy, and contrariwise, Italians to be sent into Spain, to take upon them
these Charges.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Preachers, and Prophesies.
IT is certain, that the People, especially of a certain number of Kingdoms,
are of more power, then the King himself, with all his Friends and Soldiers: I
mean, in the Christian World; for in Turkey, whether it be so or no, is as yet
something a doubtful business. It is therefore necessary to produce here some
reasons, why the People do not, upon every light Occasion rise up against the
King, and shake the Yoke from off their neck: and these are, because that being
so scattered, and at such a distance from one another, they cannot so well join
in a body, and stick together; or else, because they are worthless,
dull-headed fellows, and have none to head them in a Rebellion, in whom they
may repose their confidence and hope. Now it is manifest again on the other
side, that the Causes of the Public peace and quietness, do derive their
Original from the Wisdom of the Preachers, and others of the Clergy, to whom
the people give an ear; and that so much the rather, because These promise unto
them Eternal Blessings, which, if they do but despise their Temporal, they may
attain unto: persuading them withal, that it is agreeable to the Will of God,
that Obedience should be yielded to the King; and, that by suffering
Afflictions, they shall be rewarded by God himself; withal often inculcating
into their minds Humility, and other the like Virtues; but grievously
threatening all Thieves, Murderers, Whoremongers, and Seditious persons,
declaring what Punishments, both from Men, and God himself, continually hang
over their heads: on the contrary, comforting, and encouraging the Good, and
promising them all manner of Happiness. And so by this means, the words of
these men being greedily hearkened unto by their Auditors, overcome, and
captivate their Minds and Affections: and then again, all Wicked, Irreligious
persons are cast out of doors, with their Perfidious designs; being unable to
infect any, either Magistrate, or Soldier, with their corrupt, malicious
Persuasions, or by any means to incite them to a Rebellion.

The First Instrument therefore of Reigning well, and quietly, is the Tongue;
and the Second is, the Sword: And the truth of this will best of all appear, by
the contrary Use of It. For, whenever any Seditious Preachers rise up against
the King, they are able in a short time to bring the people, that before
dissented in Judgments, to be now of one and the same mind, and will add
courage to every Seditious spirit, and so will make themselves the Heads, and
Ringleaders of sedition; by which Princes have oftentimes been brought into
very great Straits; and, which is more, have sometimes also lost their Lives
thereby. An example of this kind may be Mahomet, who stirred up the People
against Heraclius the Emperor. The like whereof has of late years been
practiced by Luther, and Calvin, against an Infinite number of Princes: and
these two have done more mischief with their Tongue, then either Marcus
Sciarra, or Ninus Martinus did with their Swords.

Thus again, on the contrary, Menenius Agrippa, with his Tongue only suppressed
the Mutinying Commons of Rome, and made them again to yield Obedience to the
Senate, against whom they had shamefully risen up. The Pope also has often by
his Preachers repressed Rebellions that were now broken out, and grown high.
Nay, He by this means preserved, and upheld the Western Empire, when by the
Rhetoric of his Divine Tongue, he diverted Attila, the Hunne from destroying
all Italy, and made him return home again. King Ahab also was brought to
destruction by the Tongue of the Prophet Elijah; as Jeroboam was by Ahijah's.
And therefore Good Preachers ought to be had in high estimation, especially if
they be Good Men, and are able to confirm that which they say, both by
Miracles, and by strong Reasons: like as Moses confounded Pharaoh; and the
Pope, the Emperors Frederick and Henry; and as the Emperor Constantine
performed that, which He had conceived by Divine Inspiration.

It is certain therefore, that Tumults, and Mutinies may be stirred up among
the People, by the Eloquence of such persons, as are Powerful with them, and in
high esteem among them: and therefore such are to be had in reverence, whether
they be Good men, or Bad; and they are to be made your friends. For, if they be
Good men, they are then so powerful by their Divine Authority, as that there
can be no Opposition made against them. Look upon Samuel, who set Saul upon the
Throne; and shortly after deposed Him again, and set up David upon it. And so
likewise, what is it, that the Pope is not able to do, in this kind? For as
much as His Supreme Authority, joined with Sermons, is of much greater force
and power. And Bishops, in this case, would also be very powerful, if they
would but take upon themselves to discharge the duty of Preachers. How stoutly
did St. Chrysostom oppose the rage and fury of the Empress Eudoxia, and her
Party! And St. Bernard also made himself very formidable both to the Cardinals,
and to the Popes themselves, setting at odds, and reconciling Princes and
their People, as he pleased himself: as his Epistles do sufficiently testify.
And I am verily persuaded, that if all Princes and Nations should join their
Forces together, for the Overthrowing of the Popedom, they would not be able
to effect it: for thus much Christ has also promised to his Church; Whatsoever
ye bind on earth, shall be bound in Heaven; and whatsoever ye loose on earth,
etc. And again, The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against It. And if there
were but one Expedition only of Croisades appointed to be set forth, all
persons that are of any Religious Orders whatsoever, (and of these there are
certainly many Millions,) would questionless immediately flock together with
their Arms; and making use both of their Tongues, and Swords, would be able to
make resistance against, and to strike a terror into the Whole World. For
indeed all people would be afraid to make use of their Arms against persons
that are in Sacred Orders: and yet if some few of them should dare to do this,
yet would the Major part of them lay down Their Arms; and so the rest, being
by this means disheartened, would not make any Opposition against them.

Do but take notice, if you please, how Moses alone, being accompanied only
with the Levites and Priests, yet took up arms against the Rebellious People
of Israel, and against their Princes, who, together with their Wives, were
above a Million in number; and how with the Arms of one single Tribe only,
and that too of the Priests, he killed t^irty three Thousand men in one day,
The Text says only 3000. Exodus 32.28.
and reduced the rest into Obedience. For, where the True Religion joyneth
Arms and Preaching together, there is no Power so great, as to be able to make
resistance against it. The Romans, so soon as ever they perceived the Power of
the New growing Christian Religion, they presently took up Arms against It,
killing and imprisoning the Christians every where; yet were they fain at last
to give way to It: until at length Themselves also, in the time of the Emperor
Constantine the Great, embraced the Christian Faith. And although that a
Bishop, or the Pope himself should chance to be a Wicked person; yet if any
Prince shall draw his Sword against him, he shall be overcome, though the
Conqueror: Of which we had a plain example in Roger Guiscard, King of Naples;
who though he got the Victory in the Battle, yet was he afterward compelled to
kiss the Popes Foot. A Remedy against which some Kings conceiving they had
found out, (among which number was Henry the VIII. King of England) they betook
themselves to Apostasy; and yet nevertheless did They also come to Ruin: and
this very thing would bring, if it should be attempted, the most certain
destruction upon Spain also; as we have formerly showed.

Some others have thought it the best course to cast the Popes into Prison;
which Philip K. of France made bold to practice upon Pope Boniface the Eighth:
and in like manner St. C^rysostom was heretofore sent into banishment by The
Emperor Arcadius; which yet was destructive to both these Princes. For,
Chrysostom was called home again, and restored to his Seat with greater
honor, by occasion of Gaina the Goth his taking up Arms against the said
Emperor: notwithstanding that Gaina himself could not be preserved in the
Church, because he was an Opposer of that Religion that Chrysostom was of. And
the King of France, after he had by Boniface's means brought it so about, that
a Frenchman was chosen Pope, hoping by this means His Offense would escape
unpunished, he fomented and kept up the Breach, that at that time was risen in
the Church, and sent Clement V. the new Elected Pope, to Avignon, to keep his
residence there; but all to no purpose: For this very Pope Clement, by the
advice of Cardinal Brateus, deceived his Kings expectation, in not keeping
those Promises that he had made to him. And indeed, from that time forward, the
Kingdom of France seems to have been continually in declining; as appears
plainly out of History. It is therefore a Profane Remedy, to lay hands upon, or
to attempt any thing against the person of a Priest.

Other Princes again have elected Anti-popes; as did the Duke of Bavaria; by
which means they were afflicted worse then before. Others have summoned such
Bishops and Popes as have been obstinate, perverse Persons, and enemies to
them, to appear before a General Council: but this devise of theirs the Pope
has now eluded; it being openly delared to all the World, that a General
Council has no power at all over the Pope; and a Decree being also made, That
No Council shall be called, but by the Pope alone. And for this reason did Pope
Leo X. ruin those Cardinals that were present at the Council of Pisa; and yet
neither did their friends, the Princes, obtain what they desired.

Eclesiastical Princes have always been wiser then Secular; some of whom have
found a remedy for this Evil, by yiedling, and submitting themselves; as
Theodosius the Emperor humbled himself before that Good Bishop, St Ambrose;
and the Kings of the Goths left Rome, and went to Ravenna to reside; giving way
to the Popes, as well to the Bad, as the Good. And That King of England also,
by whose command Thomas Beck^t, Archbishop of Canterbury, was murdered, made
choice rather to enter into Conditions of Peace with the Pope, then to lose his
Kingdom; and so was forced to pay yearly to the Pope forty Thousand Marks of
Gold; and besides, at his death, he made the Pope his heir to the Kingdom by
his last Will and Testament. After the Example of these Princes, it will
behoove the King of Spain also to give way to the Pope, whether He be Good, or
Bad; and to lay aside what Controversies soever he shall have with him, and to
leave such Bishops as are his enemies, to be chastised by the Pope, to whom He
must wholly unite himself by those ways which are before set down. Alexander,
the King of the Jews, having drawn upon himself the hatred of the Pharisees,
and being now upon his death bed, persuaded his wife (as Josephus testifies)
that by all means she should take him, and throw him down headlong out at the
Window; telling her, that by so doing she should give full satisfaction to the
Incensed Pharisees, who, after she had done that Act, would suffer her to
succeed him in the Kingdom; giving her Counsel besides, that she should ever
take head how she fell out with any Religious persons, least she suffered that
which himself had done.

But if such men as are Authorized by no Superior Power, (especially if they
be Clergy men, such as were Arrius, Savana^ola, and Luth^r,) shall rise up
against any State, this is a very dangerous case: and it must then be enquired
into, whether these men have any encouragement from the Pope to do so, or not:
for, if so be they have, and He contradicts them not, then is the Evil in a
manner Incurable; but if they have not Him for their Abettor, then may an order
be very easily taken with them. For here it is necessary that it be considered,
whether these Men be Good or Bad; (for both may prove very dangerous) and if
they are Bad, they must then be rooted out by the Authority of the Pope; but if
they are Good men, they must then be cited to appear before a General Council;
where, by the Authority of the Pope being also interposed, they may be openly
convinced; in like manner as Berengarius, being convinced of his Error,
yielded to the Truth, and submitted; and this is the Course that ought to be
taken, where the Parties are sincerely, and really Good men, and not mere
Hypocrites only. But if they maintain a Good Cause, those Faults, which they
did inveigh against in their Sermons, are to be mended; and they themselves are
to be sent for away to Rome, where they should afterward spend the rest of
their Lives; as was done by Bartholomaeus Miranda, Archbishop of Toledo, and
the Bishop of Curzola, who was expelled from his Bishopric by the Venetians.
If they are Laymen, as was John of Leyden, and Philip Melancthon, there is no
great danger to be feared from them; For, these two, after the breach had been
first made by Luther, at length rose up; and when now Luther had already settled
his Erroneous Religion, and false Priesthood in Germany. But in our Dominions,
no One Layman whatsoever would be able to bring about such a business,
without the assistance of some one of the Clergy.

It is an Infallible Rule, that no Heresy did ever do any hurt in a Count^y,
unless the Prince himself of that Country, for some Reasons of State, afforded
some Patronage to the same: as I have showed where I discoursed touching the
Papal Monarchy^ It will therefore concern all Princes to take care, that their
Nobles also be not infected with the said Heresy; which they may prevent, by
taking them off with Employments, and so diverting their Minds from any such
thoughts; as I have delivered before.

Now these Rules are to be diligently observed, with these aforesaid Heretics.
You must be careful that you do not fall to dispute with them about Minute
Quirks, and subtilties in Divinity; but only that you require them to give you
a good account of their Calling: and to produce the Names of their Authors;
after this manner, suppose. Who commanded you to teach these things publicly?
Were they Men, or Devils rather? For we cannot believe, they should be any
other. And then, if they shall answer, that They have their Calling from God^
let them then make the same appear to you, by doing some Miracles or other;
such as God heretofore armed His Messengers with, namely Moses, Elijah, and the
Apostles. And if they are not able to do any such things, you should then bring
them to the Stake, and burn them, if you can, and render them as Infamous as
possibly you may. But be sure you avoid all Grammatical Disputations, and
Logical Subtilties; but dispute with them only according to the Principles of
Divine Logic; as St. Francis did in Egypt, and St. John Guidalbert; and as I
my self have endeavored to do, in my Dialogues against the Lutherans and
Calvinists; laying down a way, how they are to be convinced by an Apostolical,
and Political way; least out of multiplying idle^ and vain words, one
Controversy may still be started out of another; which ^o perverse, and
Malicious spirits will be taken for a kind of Victory. I would also have them
condemned to be Burnt out of the Imperial Constitutions; for as much as they
rob Persons in Authority of their Goods, and Good name, (such as are the Pope,
and other Religious^ and Pious men, who have confirmed the Faith of the Church,
and sealed it with their Blood;) which indeed is more precious then what ever
other Treasures in the World: and therefore whosoever they are, that are
Refractory to, and perversely oppose such Persons, and seduce others to do the
like, they justly deserve to be punished.

A second Rule is, that all care be taken, that there be no fruits suffered to
spring from such branches: for the hindering whereof, the best course would be,
to prefer only men of excellent parts to Bishoprics and Benefices; and withal
you are to consider that such, if they be good Men, will be of good use to you,
nor will ever scatter abroad any Pestilent Opinions: such as were Cato, and
Socrates among the Gentiles; and St. Bernard, and Thomas Aquinas among the
Christians^ There are also other Good men to be found, that are able to act
powerfully on either part; such as were among the Heathen, Alcibiades, and
Coriolanus, both which were the Authors of much good, and as much evil to their
Countries, according as they were led by the Occasion, and present necessity
upon them: as, among the Christians, were Luther, and Sergius; who afterward
recanted, as it were, all that ever they had before Rightly Preached and taught.

And therefore it concerns the Prince, that he show himself Favourable^ and
Gracious to all Learned Men; seeing that he cannot be able to see so far into
them, as to know what their ^nclinations are. And let him use all the means he
can, to know who are the most excellent for Learning in his Dominions; and
having notice of them, let Him invite them to him, and find Employments for
them; preventing even the Pope himself in bestowing perferments on them: and
these he shall encourage, and provoke to show their abilities against the
Infidels. One only Monk converted all England to the Christian Faith: and
Charles the Great, that extraordinary favourer, and Patron of all that were
Eminent for Learning, and Eloquence, whether they were Laics, or Clergymen;
subdued Gotland, Norway, and Denmark^ with a great part of Germany also, by the
means of these Men; whom also He rewarded most magnificently. In the Conquest
also of the New World, the Monks were of more use, and did more good, then the
Soldiers.

And the like might also be effected both in China, Ethiopia, and Persia.
Wherefore New Sciences are to be introduced, and New Sects of Philosophers,
together with the Mathematics; as likewise the study of the Arabic Tongue is
to be taken up, (seeing that the Empires of the Greeks, and of the Hebrews are
now quite extinct) that so, by the use thereof, the Turks may be the better
convinced of their Error.

Let there be also certain Assemblies erected^ consisting of the wisest persons
that can be picked out both of the Religious Order of the Friars, and out of the
Laity; whose business it shall be, to deliberate about such things as concern
the State: that so their Wits being wholly taken up with the meditating about
these things, they may wholly serve the Prince; and him only, and not design
any thing to his disadvantage; while their own only Ambitions will be, who
shall deserve best of the Prince; and so will have no other thoughts: And let
him make it his business, to get together as many of these men as he can; and
withal let him be sure, that they be all honest, good men. For, should there be
never so many of them, yet if they were such as those were that Iezabel had
about her; one Elijah, because he is a Good man, would easily confound them
all, and bring them to nothing.

Antiochus also erected Greek Schools at Jerusalem, to the end that, by that
means, he might abolish the Wholesome Doctrine and Laws that Moses had given
the Jews; but all in vain; because the Macchabees opposed themselves against
him. In like manner ought the King to set up many Christian Catholic Schooles^
and that, against the Enemies of Religion: for, by so doing, he shall render
Himself secure, both from the Pope, and from his Enemies; and shall besides
reduce the Netherlands, and bring them under his subjection; as I have before
declared.

Neither would I have this one thing to be omitted; namely, that He erect
certain Colleges through all the Provinces of his Dominions, in which should
be placed all the most Ingenious Boys of the said Provinces; (and who are
such, may easily be known, by their first Masters, that taught them their
Grammers, and other the First Rudiments) and these, being thus c^lled out of
all Grammar Schools, I would have to be brought up, and maintained at the Kings
Charge; and there should be a New Order set up of them, like that of St.
Dominick; which Order I would have called, The Austrian Order. And when any of
these were come to be 18. years old, they should then be commanded to Preach:
and these I would have to be called, The Kings Preachers; and they should then
be sent abroad, some into Germany, and others into England: where, if they have
managed their businesses rightly, and well; at their return they should have
Bishoprics conferred upon them by the King, of those that are in the Kings own
gift: for, by so doing, he shall render himself secure both from the Pope, and
also against all perfidious Preachers and Heretics; and by this means such
persons only shall be maintained at His charge, as do him service for it, and
advance His affairs.

Neither can it be expressed by words, what great advantages He shall reap to
himself hereby. For, among all sorts of Heretics that are, there are none that
are farther out of the way of Truth, then the Calvinists are, who sow abroad
the Seeds of Sedition wheresoever they come, and endeavor to break asunder the
bonds of that Peace, which was made known unto the world by Angels, and
publicly preached by Christ himself: and, who having neither any respect to
Learning, nor regarding the Authority of the Fathers, do defend their own Sect
by their Arms only, as the Turks do.

There is need therefore here of the most Effectual Medicines that can be,
against this Evil, these kind of Men; and that is, Principiis obstare, To stop
them in their Beginning: which course is to be observed in the Prevention of
all Evils whatsoever: and then afterward are those other Remedies to be
applied, which are before set down; namely, for the converting of them: for
which work there must be chosen out honest, and painful Laborers, who by the
Purity of their Doctrine, and holiness of their Life, may reduce and win
back such wandering sheep, as have gone astray out of the Way of Truth.

The Kings of Portugal, and especially John the Third, erected in India certain
Colleges and Seminaries, wherein are educated a great number of young Youths
of all sorts, under the Discipline of the Jesuits; who also have by this means
done very much good both in Germany, and in the New World. For, those Cities of
Germany, in which these Jesuits live, have always stood firm in the Faith; and
those other, which have been infected with the Venom of Heresy, are cured
thereof by their Means. But if there be no hopes at all left of reducing these
men, and bringing them back again into the True Way, and making them to submit
themselves to our Government and Doctrine; then must the King embrace that
counsel which was given by Terentius Varro to Hostilius, for the keeping of the
Tuscans within the bounds of their Duty and Obedience; namely, let him so order
the matter, as that they should not be able to shake off the yoke, if they
would never so fain. And this may be done, by observing these three things;
namely, by bringing them to be Low-spirited, Weak^ and, lastly, if they be Kept
^sunder from one another: for, the Boldness that any take upon them, in
attempting to cast off the Yoke from their Necks, proceeds either from their
Height of Spirit, or from their Strength, or else from their Multitude.

But before these severer Courses are taken with them, it cannot be expressed,
how mightily advantageous it would be to the business in hand, if so be the
Children of Infidels were put to such Masters as should instruct them in the
Arts, and Liberal Sciences, and all such exercises as are fit for any Ingenuous
Man to be brought up in: for, by this course alone, we should at once oblige
both the Children, and the Parents also to Us. We must therefore erect, as I
said before, Seminaries both for the Tongues, and Arms, which we call the Two
Instruments of our Future Monarchy: the Former of these, for the reducing of
all such of our Subjects, as are Infidels, and Heretics, and the bringing them
back in a peaceable manner into the True Way, and to a Unity of Faith: and the
Later, to the end that they may be utterly weakened, and deprived of all power,
in case they shall stand out, and refuse to return to the True Faith; of which
we have formerly spoken elsewhere.

CHAP. XIX. Of such Kingdoms as are Properly belonging to the King of Spain:
and of such also, as are his Enemies; and of these, which are in League with
each other, and which not.
SOme are of Opinion, that it is Impossible, that the Kingdom of Spain should
stand long, as well because almost All Other Nations are either Enemies to it,
or at least, not very good Friends; as also, by reason of the remoteness of
the several parts of it from each other, some lying in the New World, and
others lying scatteringly here and there like Islands, as in Italy, the
Low Countries, and in Africa; all which are most different from one another,
both in their Languages, Situation, and Temper of the Climate: whereas on the
contrary, the Turk, who lays claim to the Universal Empire of the whole
World, has his Dominions lying all close together; and besides, in his Wars,
he observes the same Course that the Romans heretofore did, in making War
always upon his Neighbors only, that lie round about him. Neither can the
Enmity, or hatred of those Nations that are his Enemies, do him any hurt at
all; for as much as he brings up within his own Dominions Young Children of all
sorts, of which afterward he makes Soldiers: so that his Empire seems in a
manner to be nothing else, but a Military Republic. Neither can Religion at
all hinder his proceedings; and besides, his Bashawes, or Governors of
Provinces, have all of them an absolute power of Rule given them; so that they
need not stand in fear of poor naked, and unarmed People: whom, if they should
but offer to rise, they would be able to suppress by their own Sons.

Whosoever desires to become a great Monarch, it will behoove him to be
continually in making War upon all his Neighbors that lie round about him; and
to reduce them under his subjection as soon as possibly he can. For thus the
Romans heretofore did, first of all setting upon the Sabines, and Latins: and
then afterward falling upon the Aequicolae, the Peligni, the Veientes,
Lucanians, Tuscans, and Samnites; always going round in a Circle, till at
length, having subdued all Italy, they passed over into Sardinia, Sicily,
Spain, Gaul, and Germany. The self same Course was taken by the Babylonians,
in their expeditions against those of Asia, and the Persians. The Macedonia^s
did the like, making War upon the Thebans first; then falling upon the
Epirotes, Lacedaemonians, Achaians and Aetolians; and afterward, passing over
into Asia, they filled it wholly with their Armies. in so much that at length,
as Livy, and Plutarch write, they were so puffed up with the glory of their
Victories, as that they would have marched on against the Romans, and
Carthagineans also. Certainly, had not Alexander the Great been taken off by an
untimely death, he would without all doubt have made an Expedition against the
Romans also.

I say therefore, that the Turk does at this day take the very same course,
that the Greatest Empires in former times did. For, having first subdued all
Asia Minor, he then passed over into Europe, and conquered all Greece: next, he
falls upon Syria, Egypt, and Armenia; till at length he came as far as
Macedonia, Epirus, and Hungary. Where, after he had taken in some certain
Christian provinces, and added them to his Empire; and that the Christians now
out of a General fear of being swallowed up by him, betook themselves all to
their Arms, and joined their whole strengths together against him; He then
very craftily, and subtlely makes a Truce with them, and agrees upon conditions
of Peace.

These things passing on thus, the Christians in the mean while fall at
variance among themselves, and make war upon ^ach other; so that the Turk being
now secure from any Molestation by them, turns his Victorious Arms against
the Kings of Persia, or Georgia: till such time that, finding the Christians
all to pieces again among themselves, he thinks fit then to strike up a Truce
with the Pe^sian, or those other of his enemies whosoever they were; and so
falls on again upon the Christians with all the strength he has, and does them
what mischief lies in his Power. And then, while They are fain to spend time in
consulting what is to be done, the Turk, he goes on still Victoriously, taking
in now one Place, and then another, without control. So great, and of so
dangerous and sad Consequence are those Intestine Dissensions, that are at this
day kept up among the Christian Princes! But the King of Spain, at one and the
same time maintains a War with several Nations; neither has he at any time
all his whole forces joined together in any one Battle; by which means He
utterly destroys himself. For, we shall have him making War in the most Remote
Parts of the World, whiles yet in the mean time He has all his Neighbors,
that lie round about Him, his enemies; as the English, French, Hollanders, and
perhaps even the Italians themselves also. Whence it may seem, that He takes a
very cross, and unlikely way, for the enlarging of his Dominions and Empire.

But, to this Objection I Answer, that though much of this is true, yet the
Course that the Turk takes is so blunt, and plain^ that if he should have but
one overthrow, so that it were a lusty one indeed, it would prove his utter
Ruin; (as I have hinted before,) since that He has no Viceroys, or Barons, by
whom he might be recruited, and made whole again. But we cannot say so of the
King of Spain; who, in such a case, would presently be furnished with Aides
from the Pope, and the Princes of Italy, and that by reason of their Union in
point of Religion. I say moreover, that He cannot suffer any Notable Overthrow,
^nlesse it be by some very Potent Prince; such a One as the great Turk is; who
yet lying so very far remote from him, (as Alexander the Great of old did from
the Romans) cannot so quickly ruin him: whereas, on the Contrary, any Peaceable
Agreement of the Christians among themselves, if so be it were but Firm and
Lasting, would utterly confound the Turk. And therefore I say, that although
King Philips Kingdoms lie scattered far and near, yet his enemies also lie far
asunder one from another: and therefore it is clear, that his Emulators, the
Italians, Tuscans and Venetians, will never enter into a Combination against
him, unless he First give them some evident cause, and wrong them very much.
Neither indeed will the Pope ever suffer any acts of Hostility to be done
against His Catholic Majesty; and besides, it is also most certain, that the
Catholic Princes, both out of fear of the Heretics, and also of the Authority
of the Pope, will never attempt any such thing. And the Heretics are at very
great Variance also amongst themselves; and for this reason Germany being
divided into several small Republics, cannot do him any harm at all; and it
is besides, part of it, made subject to the House of Austria, and the Archdukes
thereof, by the Emperors; and part also to certain Archbishops, who are
withal secular Princes; as namely the Archbishops of M^ntz, of Colen, Trevers,
Salsburg, Strasburg, and Bamberg; and part also to the Dukes of Bavaria; so
that the Protestants can by no means make any Insurrection against the King of
Spain.

The Lower Germany also is divided into more Commonwealths then the other; all
which bear Arms against the King of Spain, though it be only to defend
themselves, and not to offend Him. And of this number are the Provinces of
Holland, Frisland, and Zealand. Besides, the Upper and the Lower Germanies
differ very much in their Religion: which we may also say of the Danes,
Norwegians, Transylvanians, Gotlanders, Polonians, French, Switzers, and
Grisons: so that the King has no need at all to fear, that these should ever
all join together against him: and besides, the King retains a great part of
these Nations in pay, and by that means keeps them his friends: and then, the
King of Poland, and the Prince of Transylvania are allied to him by Marriage,
and so are in league and amity with him. So that He has no body to stand in
fear of, but only the King of France, and the King of England; which two
Princes, by reason of their being of different Religions, can never agree
together.

Now although the King of Spain cannot as yet subdue the King of France, yet it
makes very much for His Interest, that the King of France, being absolved by
the Pope, is returned again to the Obedience of the Church. For otherwise, he
would have been the Head of all the Transalpine Heretics, and would have
marched with an Army of them over into Italy, to the great Prejudice both of the
Pope, and of our King: which None of the Heretics has to this day adventured
to do, merely for want of a Powerful General to head them. Then besides, there
is a Division broken out in France, betwixt the Catholics and the Heretics:
and, which is the chiefest thing of all, there are in that Kingdom many Potent
Bishops, who would not by any means see Spain ruined. And lastly, our Kings
Subjects do not come into the field with Lances, Swords, and Horses, as the
French use to do; but they come into it armed with Guns, which are a kind of
Arms that are fitter for the defending of strong Holds and Fortifications, then
for the setting upon an Enemy in an open Field. And hence it is, that the
French are able indeed to resist all the Spaniards Attempts, but they cannot
overcome them: for, in this case, the very Princes, and States of Italy, who
have to this day always held with the French, would go over to the Spaniard:
for it is their Design, to keep the Balance always so even betwixt these two
Nations, as that neither of them may preponderate, and bear down the Scales,
and so make a Prey of the Other: which Hiero, King of Syracuse, heretofore
labored to do, betwixt the Romans and the Carthaginians, although he failed of
his purpose. Besides the King of France cannot march with an Army into Spain,
by reason of the Fortified Places, and Castles that lie in his way, and are
kept by the Spaniards, who are very well skilled in defending such Places.
Neither can he so soon march out with an Army against Millan, or Naples, but
that the King of Spain can be much sooner in France with an Army, and shall so
force him to return back again, and defend his own Kingdom. Neither did the
King of France ever pass over into Italy, unless when he was assisted by the
Pope, as the Expedition of Charles of Anjou testifies; or except he were called
in by some Prince, or State of Italy; as Charles the Eighth was called in by
the Duke of Millan: which yet at this time can hardly be done again. For, the
Italians were now afraid, that they would bring in a New Religion with them.
And besides it is a usual thing, that that Prince that first calls Forraigners
in to his aid, shall be first ruined by them: for, he must necessarily
entertain them, and allow them Quarters; who after they have overcome the
adverse Party, will join with them, and so drive out Him, who called them first
in. Examples of this we have in the Sforza's, Castruccio's, and the
Florentines, with many others; and also in the Pope himself; although his own
Papal Authority restored him again. And therefore the Spaniard has no need to
fear the King of France much.

And as for the English, he has much less reason to stand in fear of them,
seeing they are shut up within an Island: and we seldom see Islanders get any
sure footing, and make themselves Masters of any part of a Foreign Continent.
And therefore it is sufficient for them, if they can keep their own; only they
send out their Ships to fetch in Prizes by Sea: but for this Mischief I shall
hereafter set down a Remedy. Only let the King of Spain take care, that the
English join not their Navy with the Hollanders, Scots, Danes, Norwegians, and
Danzickers: for if they should, they might then be able to overrun all Spain;
as the Alans, Goths, and Vandals did of old. And yet seeing that these Nations
differ all in Religion, and the King of Spain does craftily under hand sow new
seeds of Dissension amongst them, there is no great cause to fear, that they
should join their forces together upon any design.

Let us now see, what Spain is able to do within it self, and by what means it
may become Greater, and enlarge its Territories; laying down this for a Ground;
That for the rendering of any Dominion whatsoever Firm, and Durable, it is
necessarily required, that there be first, a Natur^l Sociablenesse, and an apt
Correspondence, among the subjects themselves, and then, betwixt the Prince and
the subjects; as there is in Man's body, betwixt the Members themselves, and
also betwixt them and the Head. Now this Natural Sociablenesse is founded,
first in the Man and Wife; then in the Father of the Family and his Children
with the rest of his Family; and then again, in several Families being linked,
and united together; then, in those also, who are allied together by the Bond
of Consanguinity, or Affinity; and likewise, those that live in one Common
Air, and Climate, enjoying the same Temper of the Heavens; as also, those that
agree in their Laws, Manners, Customs, and studies; whereto also we may add
their using one Common Language, and wearing all one and the same Habit in
Apparel. Neither do I account their Identity of Species or of Humanity, to be
any small Bond of this Natural sociablenesse; namely, because they are All Men:
and wheresoever Many of these Bonds and Ties meet together, there also must
necessarily be a Firmer, and more Durable Association made up, and a more
lasting Dominion settled. Hence it is, that the Italians and the Spaniards do so
readily jump and agree together; both because they understand each the others
Language, and are also like each other in their Manners, Bodies, and their
Rites and Customs; which can never be amongst the French, because they differ
among themselves not only in their Language, and Manners, but are also of a
different Natural Constitution and temper. So the Spaniards would much more
easily, be brought to enter into a league of Society and Friendship with the
Africans, then with the Netherlanders; who are of a much more different
Constitution from them. For, the Spaniards are Naturally Hot and Dry, and are
therefore Lean, and of a Low Stature, being withal Sharp-witted, Subtle, and
Talkative. But on the Contrary, the Netherlanders are Cold, Corpulent, and
Big-boned, and are Heavy and Dull, and of few words. Whosoever therefore is to
Rule Several, and Different Nations, and would keep them all within the bounds
of Obedience, let him endeavor to reduce them into a conformity, as far as he
is able, and to make them in all things like to each other. And this Uniting of
Men to one another, God himself, the Author of all Polity, had pointed out unto
Men.

Now, there are Three sorts of this Union we here speak of: the First is, of
Minds, which is caused by Religion: which is indeed the strongest of all
Unions; for it uniteth together in Opinion Nations, that are at the greatest
distance that may be from each other. Upon this have both Men's Wills, and
Actions, their Dependancy; and in This; are both their Tongues and Arms united.
By this, the Pope rules over Europe, Asia, Africa, and America; and in a word,
over all the Christians in the whole World. Whereas, on the contrary, the
Emperor of Germany is scarce able to Rule Germany alone, although the People
there are otherwise as like, and as much agreeing among themselves as may be,
both in their shape of Body, Habit, Arms, Rites, and Customs; and all, because
It wants this first Union, namely, of Religion. For, there are so many several,
different Opinions in Religion among the Germans, that it may be truly said of
them, Quos homines, tot Sententiae; so many Men, so many Minds. And for this
reason the English, and Helvetians fuffer but two sorts only of Religion in
their Countries: for that common saying, Divide, and impera, that is, Divide
thy subjects, and thou shall ^ule them, is of no use here; but rather on the
contrary, Divide, and perdes, that is, If thou devide thy subjects, thou shall
ruin thy self. Catharine de Medicis, Queen of France, that she might, contrary
to the Salique Law, sit at the Helm, and have the Government of the Kingdom
in her hands, complied sometimes with the Catholics, and sometimes with the
Huguenots: but by this means she brought destruction both upon her self, and
upon her Sons; one of which was Slain by a Dominican Friar.

And therefere, in this Particular, the King of Spain is more happy then any
other besides; because that his Kingdoms, though they lie at a great distance
from one another, are yet all joined together, and united in one Religion; and
in this very respect also he stands upon better terms then the Great Turk
himself, or any other Prince whatsoever; because, as we have showed before, He
converts those that are under his subjection, and makes them to be all of one
and the same Faith.

The second is, the Union of Bodies: and in this, the Turk goes beyond all
other Princes; for He has under his subjection, and in perfect Obedience, both
Mahumetans, Christians, and Jews, which are all as much differing one from
another in their Religions as can be: neither does this their diversity of
Religion prejudice him at all; because that he brings up their Sons to serve
him in his Wars; and besides, He leaves all such of his Subjects, as are not of
his Religion, without either Arms, or any means possible of doing him any
harm. But indeed, in case He should entrust any of these with the Government of
any part of his Empire, and should exercise, not a Despotical, but a Political
Sovereignty over them, He would quickly, be brought into Sad Straites by them;
as we see it, for example, in many of our German Princes at this day; or at
least all means of enlarging his Empire would quite be cut off from him; as,
we see, the case now stands with the Emperor, and with the King of Poland. If
happily among the Turks Vassals there should chance to start up some
Gallant-Spirited Person, he might possibly prove to be the Ruin of his Empire;
as Scanderbeg had like to have been, had he had but the Christians as ready to
assist him, as the Genueses were to do him a mischief^ who both to their own,
and also to the great Loss of Hunniades K. of Hungary, were hired, for so many
Crowns, to pass over forty Thousand Mahumetans out of Asia into Europe; by
which means Amurath, that was before in a manner utterly broken, and had well
near lost all, was now so well relieved and recruited again, as that by these
forces He afterward made himself Master of half Europe. I shall not here
speak of Moses, who was raised up against God by Pharaoh; according to which
example God may also raise up some of the Turks Christian Slaves against him.
The like Insurrection may also possibly utterly Subvert the Spanish Monarchy.

The Third is, the Union of Moneys and Riches, by means whereof the Turk
commands the Ragusians, who are otherwise a free People; but they are forced to
pay Him tribute, that so they may enjoy their Estates, lying within his
Dominions, as also because they are too near Neighbors to him; which
Neighborhood always inforceth the weaker to be a Servant to him that is
stronger then he. By this Third kind of Union the King of Spain bears rule
over the Genueses; because that their Merchandise, and their Baronies lie
within his Territories. And therefore I say, that that Prince, whose Dominions
lie far asunder one from the other, ought in the first place to endeavor to
join them together by a Natural Union; and then Secondly by Political Bonds and
Ties. As concerning Natural Ties, the King may by them join his Spaniards with
any other Nations, although for the most part they are hated by all Nations;
for, a Spaniard, whiles he is a Servant, is humble enough; but, where he is a
Master, he is very proud. And he is, besides, a great Boaster, and Loves to
deal very subtlely, and cunningly in mere trifling businesses: though he does
not carry himself so in matters of any Moment. It is also certain enough, that
the Spanish Language and Habit does please most people; but then again, their
ordinary Carriage and Conversation, and their swelling Titles, together with
their Ambitious striving for the uppermost places at all meetings, and their
too affected, stately Gate, distasts every body. And because these Vices are
Naturally Inherent in this Nation, although they cast a blot upon their
Virtues, namely their Patience, Religion, Manlike Courage, together with their
Eloquence; yet they cannot possibly be quite taken away; and therefore others
must come over unto their Manners, as trees are graffed into one another. And
therefore I say, it would be a very excellent good Course, if our Spanish
Soldiers, and Barons, that live abroad in Foreign Countries, should marry
Wives out of the same: and besides, those Arts by which strangers should be
invited in to match with Spanish women, and by Offices, (of which I have
formerly spoken) deserve so much the more serious Consideration, because there
lies more within them, then they outwardly make show of. And this will appear
more clearly when I shall come to speak of each several Nation in particular.

As concerning Political Unions, the King must endeavor to procure an Union
betwixt his ow Nation and others; and especially in Religion; which is the
surest means of uniting men together in the World; and this must be done by the
means of good, and Learned Preachers; as we have said before. And next, by the
Tie of New, and Famous Arts and Sciences, and Languages, which would draw all
men into an admiration of so great an Empire. And let Him always make war
rather upon his Neighboring Enemies, then upon those that are farther off, and
let Him go himself in person to the wars. And lastly, let him persuade, and
invite all Nations that traffic into the West Indies, to take up their
Commodities in some parts of his Territories; as we see, that Genueses do at
this day. And therefore let Him so order all businesses, as that one Kingdom
may always stand in need of another; that so by this means there may be a
continual Tie betwixt them. And let him seek out all possible ways of setting
his enemies at variance amongst themselves, and labor that they may disagree
both in Religion, Leagues, Manners, Sciences, Conditions, Traffic, and all
things necessary^ and let him be in League with all those that may do him any
hurt. All which things that they may appear the more clearly, I shall now fall
to speak Particularly of all such several Nations, as may either annoy, or be
advantageous to Him; withal laying down the means b^ which they may be brought
to an Union with him. For it is an Undoubt^d Truth, that every great Empire, if
it be United within it self, is so much the safer from the Enemies Incursions,
because it is not only Great, but United also; whence chiefly is derived all
its strength and Power.

CHAP. XX. Of Spain.
TO what has been said, we may further add, that seeing that there are so many
several sorts of people in Spain, the King ought to take care, that those
amongst them, who have heretofore been more Eminent then the rest, for the
largeness of Dominion they had there^ be at Unity among themselves. And
therefore let Him labor especially that there may be all fair Correspondence
and friendship betwixt the Castilians, Arragonians, and the Portugues; and let
Him confer equal Offices upon them in Court, and let him bestow preferments
upon the Portugues in the Kingdom of Castile; and upon the Castilians, in the
Kingdom of Portugal; and also let him, as it were, tie them one to the other by
the common bond of Marriages betwixt each other, and by the Community of
Navigation. And the same course also is necessary to be taken with the
Mountainous Biscaines, and the Lionois; and also betwixt the Astureans and
Gallicians, and betwixt the Champian-inhabiting And^luzians and Valentians: and
let all these be brought to a familiarity one with another, notwithstanding
they are so far distant in place from one another.

Let him also erect in these several Provinces, such Common Colleges, and
Seminaries for Soldiers, both for the Theorical, and Practical part of War, as
we have before spoken, of that by means of these, both themselves, and also the
King may be rendered the more secure: and let Him take such order, that they may
marry Wives from foreign Countries, and so may have Children by them; who, in
case any War should be made upon them, may fight for them, not as if by chance
they were engaged thereto, but as they stand bound to do so by the Law of
Nature. And by little and little their old Customs are also to be abolished,
but not upon a sudden: and let them be instructed how to bear Offices in
Italy, rather then in the Netherlands: But in Spain, let Italians be put to
bear Offices with the Spaniards. And seeing that Spain is the Principal Seat of
the Whole Monarchy, there ought in it to be all Virtues and Sciences in their
prime, and height; namely Justice and Religion; that so others may the more
readily be induced to make the Spaniards their pattern to walk by, and may suck
in Their Manners, whom they see to live so well, and happily. But in case that
They should be of a Dissolute Life, and of corrupt Manners, they would be
abhorred by all Nations: not to say any thing, that in Gravity, and Constancy
of Manners, they ought to excel all others, because they have an example
amongst them whence they may learn these Virtues.

And in the first place it is necessary that they be very faithful, as well in
the times of Peace, as of War; in which Principle they must be instructed, and
brought up, in the aforesaid Seminaries, where they are taught to yield
Obedience and Service to the King.

And then, if the King shall approve himself to be a Good Soldier and a
Cherisher of Valor, and Worth; He will necessarily thereb^ win himself the
Love, and Affections of all men. And let him be sure withal to deal Faithfully
and Justly with every one; for then, all his Subjects will readily, and
cheerfully compose themselves to the Example of His carriage and behavior
toward others.

Let those Castles, and strong Holds, that lie next to France, be very well
guarded, and furnished with all Necessaries; and likewise those that are at
Corrugna, and on the Northern Coast of Spain, looking toward England: and all
care must be taken, that these be not set upon by the Enemy. But yet, the best
way would be, to have a gallant Fleet, consisting of a Thousand sail, to be
always in readiness upon all Occasions, as I shall show by and by. Let the
Spaniards also teach whatever Africans, or West, or East-Indians, are either
brought over to them, or else come over to them of their own accord, all
Mechanical Arts and Professions; but let them study themselves only Military
Sciences; and let them indeed ^ather addict themselves to these Studies, then
to those of Books: But as for all Forraigners, let them be put rather to the
reading of Books, then the Practice of Arms. For we see, that the Learned City
Athens was overcome in War by the Martial City Sparta: both which
notwithstanding were afterward reduced, and brought under the power and
subjection of the Macedonians; namely, because this Nation had been better
instructed in the Use and Exercise of Arms, by their King, Philip of Macedonia,
the Father of Alexander the Great, then either of those Cities had been. It is
sufficient therefore, if the King have Seminaries for the Arts and Languages,
for His new Austrian Order (before spoken of) to be brought up in, among his
Foreign Subjects, and Nations; but as for others, there is no great care to be
taken of them, but they may apply themselves to the Study of Sciences and Arts,
if they think fit: however, it is very necessary, that, in Spain, all persons,
as well in the said Seminaries, as out of them, be brought up in the Exercise,
and Knowledge of Arms.

There ought also to be Schools erected for the Educating and Training up of
the Younger Sons of the Spanish Nobility: whence the King may be furnished with
Able and Faithful Commanders, both for Land, and Sea service: of which thing
also we have said somewhat before.

Neither ought any Man to despise, or set light by the Country of Spain,
because of the Barrenness of it: for this defect is not to be imputed to the
Nature of the Soil, but only to the Scarsity of people to manure it. For this
Country is of a most fruitful Soil of it self; and yeildeth plentifully all
things whatsoever, that are necessary for the sustaining of Man's life; and if
it were but carefully manured, and tilled, it would be able to feed an infinite
number of people: in like manner as heretofore it was able, besides Its own
Inhabitants, to feed also the vast Armies of the Carthagineans, and Romans.
Neither did any Country longer, or more gallantly stand out against the Power
of the Romans, then Spain did: neither had It ever any Army cut off, but it was
able presently to raise a greater.

But to pass by Ancient Stories, it is reported by our Latter Writers, that
the King of Granada brought into the Field, against Ferdinand, Fifty Thousand
Horse; which number of Horse, I doubt, wo^ld scarsely at this day be made up
out of all the other Provinces besides, both of Spain, and Portugal; not that
either the Nature of these Countries, or the Temper of the Heavens, are
changed; but only, because that the number of the Inhabitants is grown less,
and so consequently the Manuring and tilling of the Ground is very much
neglected now, more then heretofore. Now, the number of the Inhabitants is
decreased, first by reason of that war with the Moors, where they got the
better of the Spaniards; for, in that War, within the space of three Months,
there were slain Seven Hundred Thousand Men. After this followed another war,
which continued for the space of Seven Hundred seventy and eight years; till
such time as the whole Nation of the Moors was utterly rooted out of Spain: in
which space of time there was a Vast, and indeed incredible number of men slain
on both sides; insomuch that many Cities, yea and many whole Large Tracts of
Ground were left utterly desert, and void of Inhabitants. And this War was
scarsely ended, when presently the Spaniards prepared for other New Wars again,
setting upon Africa, Naples, Millan, and the West Indies: and having overcome
all these, they then set themselves to endeavor the Recovery of the
Netherlands: in which Wars also there was a vast number of Men lost, being cut
off either by the War, or those other Calamities, that are the usual
Consequents of War. And then again, even now at this day they are continually
sending abroad infinite numbers of people into the aforesaid West Indies,
partly to make Plantations there, and partly to Traffic as Merchants there, or
else to keep some Garrisons or other. And therefore the Practice of Husbandry
has been a long time neglected in Spain, because that the people of that
Nation are naturally inclined to the Exercise of Arms, and so rather seek
after Profit that way, by their Pay, as Soldiers, then by any other way
whatsoever.

And indeed the Spaniard is but a heavy, dull fellow, not only at Agriculture,
and Points of Husbandry, but generally at all Mechanical Arts whatsoever: and
that is the reason that Spain is so unfurnished of Mechanics, and that their
Wool, Silk, and what other Commodities the Country affords, are all
transported abroad; and what ever course matter they do not send out, is in a
manner all wrought up by the Italians only; and as for their Fields, and
Vineyards, they leave the manuring of them to ^he French. And if we would but
diligently examine what the ^eason should be, that Spain has enjoyed a most
quiet, and undisturbed Peace, for so long time together; whereas France is
continually harassed and imbroyled in Wars, we should find the Principal reason
hereof to be this, namely, because that Spain is continually employed in some
Foreign Wars, either in the Indies, the Netherlands, in subduing some
Heretics or other, or in keeping off the Invasions of the Turks, or of the
Moors; in all which the Spaniards have both their hands, and Minds wholly
employed and set on work; mean while their Country continues quiet, and they
themselves vent all their venom of Sedition against others. And therefore I may
not here omit to relate, how that many times, for want of Soldiers, they have
been forced to do, as the Finlanders are used to do; who, when they go out to
fight against the Muscovites, are wont to carry along with them a great number
of Fierce Mastive dogs, which also many times do them very good service. Which
very thing was also put in practice in the West Indies by Vasco Nugnez, not
with out much slaughter done upon those Barbarians, many times also by this
means putting them to flight. But we have already dwelt long enough upon Spain.

CHAP. XXI. Of Italy.
SPain has no Nation, that is more a friend to It, then Italy. And therefore
for the preserving of the Amity and Friendship of the Italians, it is very fit,
that the King of Spain should so court and ply by Benefits and Gifts both the
Neapolitans and the Millanois, as that other Nations seeing it should, admire
the Felicity of those Two countries, and should withal wish, themselve had the
like good Fortune. And this the King may do, by remitting some thing of their
Gabels and Taxes, and by increasing the number of Men in both those Dominions;
and He may also erect in both the Countries certain Seminaries, out of which as
out of these Trojan Horse, may issue forth Able Persons, that are skilled both
in all the Liberal, and Military Sciences, and such as are withal most firm,
and resolved Catholics: as we have hinted before. Which thing would certainly
cause in Foreigners both Admiration, and Astonishment; neither would the King
(as the Opinion of some men herein is) lose any thing at all thereby.

Let there be also some course taken for the Restraining of Usurers; and let
Him set up some Monti della Pieta, as they call them; that is, Banks of
Charity; which are certain public Houses, where the poorer sort of Citizens
have the liberty of taking up Money upon their Paw^s. Let them also restrain the
grouth of the Nobility: and let the Barons Prisons be visited sometimes; for
These are many times too cruel. Neither would I have it in the power of any, to
imprison any man by any private Authority, except it be in Case of Sedition, or
Violation of the Public Peace, or of Treason against the Prince; and, those
that are Prisoners, should be dealt more gently with, then they have been
hitherto wont to be: for, the Kings Officers, by their Intolerable Cruelty,
have caused the King to be branded with that Infamous Name of a Tyrant;
especially in the Kingdom of Naples.

And I conceive, it would make very much for the winning of the Love, and Good
will of the common People, if the King would appoint One Commissary, at least,
who should join to himself some of the Clergy, and should go and visit all the
Public Prisons, reforming what abuses they find there: and should also take
an Account of all Usurers, and of the Inferior sort of Public Officers; as
has been touched before^ I would also have him to show mercy to such as are
Proscribed, and Banished persons, under the Pretense of sending them into
Africa: and I would really advise Him, once in seven years, to ^end all such
into the West Indies.

As for those Soldiers, which have always hitherto been set over the
subjects, I would have them to be all disbanded; and in their stead, to have so
much the greater Number of Galleys provided, that should lie all along the Sea
Coasts throughout all the Kings Dominions, to guard, and secure them against
the Invasions of the Turk. For these Soldiers have always carried themselves
very Insolently, and proudly toward the People; but have been still very
backward, and unwilling to go out in any Expedition by Sea against the Turks:
and besides, when they have returned home from any such Expedition, they have
usually abused poor Citizens, that have behaved themselves stoutly in the
Fight, cudgelling them, and forcing from them such prisoners as they had taken;
and so afterward in a Thrasonicall boasting way, make their brags abroad that
Themselves had taken those Turks prisoners: which most base, unworthy course we
see practiced in Calabria every day. It were a better way therefore, that the
subjects themselves should take up Arms, and go out against the Turks; and
should have at least half the Money that the Prisoners taken in the War are
valued at: for by this means the King will have both Valiant, and Rich men to
Fight for Him: neither shall He have cause to fear, least the subjects, through
the hatred they bear the Soldiers for their Cruelties, should seek to change
their Masters, and bring in some other to Rule over them.

Let Him also take order for the restraining of the knavish Diligence of the
Officers of the Kings Exchequer, who, to maintain the Kings Right, forsooth,
forbear not to use any manner of cruelty toward the poor subjects, imprisoning
them, and extorting money from them, under any pretenses, how unjust so ever.
But of these evils, and their Remedies, we have spoken sufficiently before,
where we discoursed of Justice etc.

These Sea expeditions will render the King secure both from his Enemies
abroad, and his own subjects at home; whereas, on the contrary, the Soldiers
that are set over the Country people, do at first but very little good, and
afterward do none at all: And therefore the putting of good full Guards into
all the strong Holds upon the Sea Coast, will be sufficient for the securing of
the Inland parts: and withal, the People will by this means be kept in a
Loving Awfulnesse, and Dread of their Prince.

The best part of Italy, that is to say, the Kingdom of Naples, and the Duchy
of Millan, is subject to the King of Spain: and those other parts that are not
so, are stirred up by their several Princes, who stand in fear of the Spaniards
Potency, against the Spaniards, and made to hate them: whence it is, that they
are wont to threaten the King of Spain with two things. The first is, that they
will call in the French, and encourage them to set upon the state of Millan:
which mischief however the King might easily prevent, if he would but place
strong Garrisons in all the Frontier Towns of the said Duchy, and would quite
destroy all the small, unfortified Villages, that lying here and there
scattered about, are made a Booty by the Enemy that has liberty to range up
and down where they please. And He might take order also, as the Hungarians do,
that all the Provision of Corn^nd all the subjects Goods be carried into the
Fortified Cities, and Places of strength, with all manner of Mechanical
Instruments; that so those that have fled thither in the time of any Siege or
Incursions of the Enemy, may have where withal to set themselves on work, and
may so get wherewith to keep themselves. But Genoa lies very conveniently for
the coming into the Kings Assistance; and so does Naples also, if so be the
King would but provide himself of such a Fleet as I spoke of before, to ly
about those Seas in a Readiness. For it is a most certain Truth, and that has
been confirmed by long experience, that He that can make himself Master of the
Sea, shall give Laws to the Continent, and command it; and shall be able to
Land men whenever, and wheresoever he pleases, and shall find it convenient
to do so: which the King of France, should he be invited into Italy^ could not
be able to do.

It will be a good course therefore for the King of Spain, to be in League with
his Neighbors, the Switzers, and the Grisons; and let Him choose out of these
Nations Thirty Thousand Soldiers, to whom He shall in the mean time allow half
pay, till such time as He shall have Occasion to use them; according as the
Venetians are wont to do: and this Army let him make use of for the repelling
of any powerful Enemy assaulting him. But yet, lest these people, increasing
their numbers, should themselves invade the Duchy of Millan, which thing we
know to have happened heretofore in the time of the Romans; I would have this
Army to be divided, and some part of it to be sent into the Netherlands, and
another to Naples, and there may some of them also be sent abroad as far as the
West Indies; that so, serving him abroad in His Wars, they may at length be all
destroyed. And certainly should this People but keep at home, and not go so
much abroad to Wars, as they do, but should unite their forces together; it
would be a very easy matter for them to subdue all Italy: but now, whiles that
they serve, some of them under this Prince, and some under that in their wars;
there is no great reason to fear any such thing of them: However it would be a
very good way, to divide them, as we have showed, and to send them abroad
several ways.

The second thing, that the Italians are wont to threaten the Spaniard with,
is, that perhaps They may enter into a League with the Pope, and the King of
France, to the Prejudice of Spain. But this conceit of theirs also, the King
of Spain may easily elude: because no one of them dares do any thing without
the Pope and the King of France; as being not able of himself to defend
himself; much less to attempt any thing against others: unless it be by
chance, and by taking some extraordinary Advantage; as the Venetians did
heretofore, at what time the Popes were at War with the Emperors, and when the
Transalpines made bold to march over into Italy. And therefore, i^ so be the
King of Spain have but the Pope on his side, He has no need at all to fear the
Princes of Italy: neither indeed is there any Change made in any State, or
Dominion in Italy, without the Pope; and, the Pope alone has been the cause of
all the Mutations that have happened in the Kingdom of Naples. And in case the
Pope should take up Arms against any Party, or against any Commonwealth in
Italy; He would presently prove the Conqueror; by having recourse immediately
to his wonted Helps; such as are, His giving out Indulgences against it; and
his absolving the subjects from the Oaths they have taken to be true to the
same; and by calling in others to His Assistance: as Pope Julius the second
did, at that time when He Excommunicated the Venetians: at which time they were
utterly crushed by him.

Now my Counsel to the King of Spain is, that He would yield to the Pope, and
do whatsoever He would have; and that He would give His Commands abroad as
Constantine the Emperor heretofore did; namely, that the Pope shall have
supreme Authority in Last Appeals: and so likewise that Two Bishops with the
King, who then holds the place of a Clergy man, be Judges in all causes that
shall be devolved unto them by way of Last Appeals. And let it be agreed upon
betwixt him and the Pope, that what Princes soever shall refuse to submit
hereto, they shall be deprived by their Authority.

For if some of the Princes of Italy, or indeed, if all of them should fall off
from the Pope: the King of Spain, who is the Vindicater of the Pontifical
Authority, being assisted by Croisados, and other Aides from the Pope, would by
degrees ruin them all, one after another, or else bring them in Subjection
under himself; and thus, whiles he yields to the Pope,, He is sure to have both
His Affections surely united to Him, and His power assisting him; and he shall
withal make himself Ma^ter of the Princes of Italy's Dominions. And this may
possibly hereafter come to pass; although, as matters now stand, all that the
King can do, is, to make it his business to keep these Princes at difference
amongst themselves; and to make either the Duke of Parma, or some other of
them, Sure to Him; and then He need care but little for any of the rest. Let
him also give the Venetians the Tittle of being The Fathers of Italy; and let
him desire of them the favor, to have some of the Principal of them sent to
him, whom he may employ as Judges in the Netherlands: because that this Nation
does more willingly admit of Italians then Spaniards; and, of all Italians, of
the Venetian, rather then any other; and upon These Venetians, so employed by
him, let him confer the Dignities of Barons.

And seeing that it is known to every man, that the Venetians are both very
Just, and also free from Ambition, and so the fitter to be made use of, if not
for the gaining of any New Dominions, yet certainly for the keeping of what are
already gotten; let the King so order the matter, as that the Hollanders may be
brought to desire Laws to be prescribed them by the Venetians: of which I
shall say more hereafter. And if by these Arts He could so far prevail with
them, as to get them to give over their traveling to Alexandria and ^yria, to
traffic there, and to take up a trade of Merchandise with those in the
West Indies, as the Portuguez have done; He would by this means in time make
Himself Lord of the Venetians, as He has already of the Genoeses.

Now that he may also secure himself in the mean time from the Venetians, it
would be his best Course to provide himself of such a Navy, as I spoke of
before; and He should likewise do well to make use of the Archduke of
Carinthia, and His Neighbors the Grisons in his wars; by this means to fright
the Venetians the more. And besides, let him give entertainment to all such
persons as are banished by the Florentines, or by the Venetians, and receive
them into his service in his wars: and he may do well, to bestow extraordinary
rewards upon them too: that by this means he may draw others of them also over
to him, who may serve under him, if neeed be, even against their own Native
Country: Which indeed was the frequent practice of the Duke of Millan: and also
many times of the King of France, when for the same reason, he invited in to
him all the Banished Genoeses, and Florentines. And for the same reason also
the Strozza's, Piccolominies, and the Lord Peter de Medicis might in these our
times strike no small terror into the Great Duke of Florence.

If therefore the King would have these Princes of Italy to continue at
variance among themselves, let him take heed how he strikes any fear into them:
for, Fear is the only means to unite them together: and therefore let him
beware that he discover not at all, that He is angry with them. Now there ought
not any means to be used for the causing of any Division amongst them through
differences in Religion: neither indeed can any such thing possibly be
effected: but this must be done only by bestowing Rewards upon some of them; as
we have said before. And if any one of the House of Austria should chance to be
elected Pope, Italy were then quite undone.

It would do very well also if the King would give way that Others might have
liberty to ^ome and Traffic at Genoa, as His Subjects do: for, Genoa is, as it
were, the King of Spain's Treasury: and He makes use of them, to keep the
Princes of Italy in awe. And besides, the Genois assist Him very much in point
of Navigation, and Seafaring businesses: as has been said before. But yet
these Genois are to be treated handsomely, and cunningly: that they may not
seem to be forced to do what they do, but only by Love, and Fair Usage to be
brought about to be so Serviceable, and Obedient to the King of Spain. Yet
would I have the King pay his Debts to them as soon as might be: and he may
either pawn, or else sell them some few Towns, or Fortified Places; least, if
by chance there should be any General Rising in Italy, the Genoises Banners
might also march along with them for company. Let Him therefore continually
have a Vigilant eye upon the two most Flourishing States of the Venetians and
the Genueses: yet of the two, the Vnetian does far excel the Genuensian, both
in Dignity and Power^ The reason whereof is, because that the Venetians, by
maintaining a Free Trade of Merchandise with other Nations, have reasonably
well improved every man his own particular Estate, but have advanced the
Public infinitely; whereas the Genois, by being chiefly great Bankers, and
Mony-Masters, have infinitely enlarged their own Private Estates, but the
Public has much suffered thereby. Which being considered, the King, in his
Transactions with these two different Commonwealths, must proceed in a
different manner.

CHAP. XXII. Of Sicily, and Sardinia.
THe Sicilians and Sardinians, being both Islanders, and also somewhat near
Neighbors to Africa, ought, for these reasons, to have stricter Laws imposed
upon them, then the Italians: and a good way to keep them within the bounds of
Obedience, would be, for the King to secure all their Havens, and Fortified
places lying upon the Sea Coast. And these places would very easily be rendered
secure, if the King had but such a Navy continually in a readiness as I spoke
of before; which I would not have to lie all together in a body, but to be
divided into several Squadrons, which should lie round about Italy, and these
Islands, and so keep them safe from all Invasions of Enemies; the Soldiers of
which Fleet, if they should be set over the Countrymen, would do much more hurt
then good; and besides, the number of them must then be enlarged. Whereas by
this means the Prizes that they take, from the Moors, and Turks, would be
sufficient to maintain them; and the King would also be thereby enriched, and
the Coast of Aff^ick made safe and secure. And if it should chance, that those
of Algier and Tunis should at any time cause any tumult in favor of the
Christians, there should be Soldiers always in a readiness to come into
their assistance, by sailing over into the Kingdom of Oran: with which people,
they may Traffic, by carrying into them Silks, Wheat, and other Commodities,
so long as the Adriatic Sea is Scoured and made Safe by the Venetians; so that
there would be no need of fearing either the Turks, or Pirates.

In these Islands there may very convenient Seminaries be erected for the
breeding up of Soldiers, of such Children, as with their Mothers shall be
taken from the Turks and Moors; and in these may be also taught the Arabic
tongue; and there may be Monasteries for Friars erected also, as we have hinted
before. And here we are to giv^ a Caution, that whenever any Merchants put in
at either of these Islands, either from England, Turkey, or Africa, there ought
to be present some or other of the Clergy, lest the inhabitants should be
infected with some Foreign Heresy. For Islands, by reason of their
Commodiousnesse for the reception of People of all sorts, are very subject to
such Mutations and Changes; which is also observed by Plato himself. Those that
live near the Sea Coast, by reason of their so constant Conversation with
Foreigners (for which reason Plato called the Sea the Schoolmaster of all
Wickedness) are Crafty, subtle, and Circumspect, and such as know very well
what belongs to Trading and Merchandise; But on the contrary, the Inlanders are
sincere, upright, and just, and content with a little.

The King might also make very good use of Great Cities, such as is Syracuse in
Sicily; which, as Cicero here tofore said of it, had it been divided into four
parts, would very well have made as many handsome Cities. And such as at this
day also is Palermo, in the same Island, which is adorned with Stately
Churches, and Palaces; wherein there are two things worthy to be taken notice
of; the one is, a stately street, that runs all along the whole breadth of the
City, and divides it in a manner into two parts, and is both very straight,
long, and broad, and withal adorned with very fair buildings; so that I do not
know, whether all Italy can any where show the like of it, or no: The other is,
a vast Pile, or Bank, raised up by an infinite expense of money against the
Sea; by means whereof the City is accommodated with a very fair, capacious
Haven: which is a work that is really worthy of the Ancient Roman Magnificence.
Islands, as Plato says, were, for the most part, the Nests of Tyrants. But
touching such Havens as are necessary in case of such fears, and likewise of
Navigation, and Sea voyages, I shall have occasion to speak in its proper place.

And as concerning these Islanders, they ought not to be kept short, and to be
defrauded of things necessary; or to be held to too hard meat: but they have
need rather, that such Usurers, as lie lurking amongst them; and also the
Public prisons should be inquired into, and visited; as we have said before.
There may also be erected some Seminaries for Seamen; to which may be yearly
sent, in Galleys, young men to be instructed in the Art of Navigation, as the
Custom is among the Venetians; and this the King ought to do so much the
rather, because that he wants young Seamen more then any thing: but yet to
these he must join some Transalpine Seamen, for the increasing of his number.

There may also be instituted in these Islands two New Orders of Knights, such
as those of Mal^a; neither ought the Revenewes belonging to the Knights that
are of the Order of St James, or of any other Order of Knighthood, to be
bestowed upon Idle Persons; that the King may not always be forced to make use
of Auxiliary Seamen; or else to employ Mercenaries, such as the Genois are.

In such Islands as these, the Barons ought to have a stricter hand held over
them, then any others; because that the Convenience of the situation of such
places may tempt them to take an occasion of Rebelling, here, rather then in
any other places, these men being indeed Naturally inclined to be Rebels. And
therefore the best way would be, to send Barons from out of some other
Countries into these Islands; and of all other, those of Spain are the fittest;
the rather, because they lie all in the same Climate: and these should be put
in trust with all Offices, and Seafaring Affairs; with whom may be joined some
Transalpines, partly to assist them as Soldiers, and partly for Procreation of
Children. Neither ought any Noble men of the Natives to be entrusted with any
of the stronger Holds, or Castles: for these are most commonly the Authors and
Ringleaders of all Rebellions; as they have always proved, against the French
especially; And yet these men have been since very faithful to the Arragonians,
by reason of their likeness both in Temper and Manners.

In a word, there is nothing more Necessary for the making a Prince to reign
happily, then that he thoroughly understand the Nature, Temper and Inclination
of his Subjects. For, according as He finds these to be, so must He order his
Government.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Germany.
Coming now to speak of such Nations as are Enemies to the King of Spain, to
some of which notwithstanding He has some Title; the Germans first offer
themselves unto us; whom yet the King needs not fear, seeing that the House of
Austria is the most powerful in all Germany; being now raised up to so great a
height of Greatness and Power, by continual Marriages with great Princes, and
Hereditary Successions, and great Alliances, as we see it at this day. For,
Maximilian had the Provinces of the Lower Germany falling to him, by Mary his
wife, who was daughter to Cha^les the last Duke of Burgundy: and Philip^
Maximilians Son, became possessed of Spain, with all its Appurtenances, by the
marriage of Joan, he daughter of Ferdinand and Isabella; in which Kingdoms his
Son Charles succeeded. And in these our days King Philip, the most worthy Son
of so worthy a Father, has had Portugal with all its Appurtenances, which
certainly are very great, fallen to Him by the death of his Mother Isabella:
from which very house is derived the Title of King of Both Spains.

Now we are to understand, that the house of Austria is in league with none,
save only Catholic Princes; such as is the Duke of Bavaria, with the German
Archbishops, and Bishops and some few others: and therefore it is very
necessary, that these should still be more and more closely united to each
other, not only in Religion, but also by Marriages into one another families,
and other like ties and bonds, of Friendship: which as it is the Justest course
that can be taken, so it is also the safest, and is much more firm and durable
then any other whatsoever. But there must be all the care taken that may be, to
sow continuall^ the seeds of discord and dissension between the Marquess of
Brandenburg, the Landgrave of Hessen, the Duke of Saxony, the Duke of
Brunswick, the Count Palatine of the Rhine, and also the Duke of Wirtemberg,
and those other Petty Commonwealths in Germany: which may easily be effected
by reason of those State Divisions, and Emulations that frequently trouble
these Republics, and fill them with suspicions, and Jealousies of each other.
An^ hence it comes to pass, that they never come in with their Ai^es to the
Emperors, in any seasonable time; First, because they conceive the Emperors
business, and design to be, to bring Hungary in subjection, not to the Roman
Empire, but rather to the House of Austria; and then again, they are afraid
lest the Emperor, when he is now grown to so great a height of Power, should
endeavor to put a yoke upon their necks also, and keep them in subjection. And
therefore they do acknowledge Him to be indeed the Head of their Union; but yet
they will not yield Him any Homage; but themselves order matters as they see
cause among themselves, both in reference to the abolishing of old Laws, and
enacting New, as also in doing the like in matters of Religion: a sufficient
example whereof we have both in Norimberg, Spires, Strasbourg, and Frankford.

Yet I shall here add, that this Dissension among the German Princes is in one
respect Advantageous to the King of Spain; and in an other Prejudicial, as it
usually proves to be in reference to all Foreign Powers. For, the Turk has
already taken away Bosnia, Croatia, and Hungary from the House of Austria: and
it is to be feared, that possibly he may some time or other force his way even
into Austria it self also. And then, if Germany should find it self to suffer
thus, under the Protection of this House; possibly they may reject ^t, and
elect some Heretic to be their Emperor: which certainly would prove to be the
cause of many Greater Mischeifs. And therefore I conceive the King of Spain
ought to labor as much as in him lies, to bring either the Emperor himself,
or else his brother Maximilian, to enter into a League with the Duke of
Transylvania, or else with the Muscovites, and that they should join all their
force and strength together, to ruin the Turk.

I would have the Emperor also to engage Himself faithfully both to the
Protestant Princes, and Free Cities of Germany, and also to the Duke of
Bavaria, that what places soever He shall take in, in his Wars, they shall be
all reckoned as Parts added to the Empire, and not be accounted as Additions to
his Own House only. Then again, I would have him, during the time of the War,
to confer upon all such persons of Eminency, as shall be sent to his assistance
by the Free Cities, Lands, and Lordships, and the like Gratuities; by this
means to oblige them the more to His service, rather then to that of their own
Native Country: in like manner as Caesar engaged His Army even against Rome it
self. But this must be the business only of some one of the House of Austria,
that shall be a Person both of great Valor, and Wisdom; neither can any
meaner man undertake it. And then, having conquered the Turks, He must next
march with his Forces against Germany, calling in to his assistance some
^paniards also, and Italians. For, unless He do so, there is some reason to
fear, that the King of Spain may receive some prejudice thereby. He must
therefore take care, and to the same end deal both with the Emperor, and the
Pope^ that the Right of Election of the Emperor may be put into the hands of
such only as are his Friends; such as are the Duke of Bavaria, and the
Archduke; for otherwise, if it should so chance, as that the King of France
should be elected Emperor, it would very much impede, and cross all his
Designs. But what course there might be taken so to prevail with the Protestant
Party, as that they should elect no other for Emperor, but only the King of
Spain, I shall be ready to enform the^ Kings Majesty himself, when He shall
please to give me Audience touching these things: but I shall forbear to set
any thing of This here down in writing.

If the King desire to make Himself Lord of Germany, He must first necessarily
get Himself to be elected Emperor of Germany; and having brought this about,
He must then, under a pretense of making War against the Turk, march into
Hungary; and so He may upon a sudden fall upon the Protestants before they are
aware, and while they dream not of any such thing; and by this means he may be
so much before hand with the Imperial Cities, as that they shall not have any
time to provide themselves to make any resistance against Him: which Course was
practiced by Charles the Fifth, with very good success. And then, let Him
bring in New Colonies, and make New Laws, and place Italians over them, for his
Ministers of State; for the Clime will not bear the Temper of the Spaniard:
neither can this thing be better ordered any other way.

But indeed, the Hungarian Affairs go very ill, and They there have very much
need of Assistance: For, if Vienna should be taken, the Turk might presently
march into Friuli, if he would. Now, what Courses may be taken for the
Prevention of this Mischief, I shall hereafter declare, when I shall come to
speak of the Turk.

The constant Practice of the Turk has been, in his Wars against the
Christians, never to maintain any long War with any one Prince: but to set now
upon one, and then upon another; and to send some to invade one Country, and
others to invade another, and so has sometimes snatched away a whole Kingdom at
a time from them. And least, by being continually thus put to it, they should
so become to be expert in the use of Arms; He presently makes either an
absolute Peace, or else agrees upon a Cessation of Arms with them, and then
immediately falls aboard of some other, not giving them so much as any time to
look about them, or to provide to make resistance against Him: and then, having
taken some City, or some Strong Hold from them, He presently makes either a
Peace, or a Truce with them, and so away again. By which means it comes to
pass, that His Armies are all Old, Tried Soldiers; but Ours are, for the
greatest part, made up of such as are raw, and unexperienced in War. For, the
Turk is continually at war with some or other; but so have not any of the
aforesaid Princes been. And hence it is, that He has always been of the
gaining hand; and that, either by taking in, and adding to His Empire some new
places; or else by establishing to himself, and making sure what He has
formerly gotten. But it is now time to return to our former discourse.

I say therefore again, that it behooves the King of Spain to take care, that
His Friends be at Unity among themselves, but that his enemies, especially in
Germany, be at variance and discord: and He must not let slip any Opportunity
for the bringing of this about. And it would be a most excellent course, for
the bringing down of the Heretics courage, and taking them off their edge, if
there should be erected in Germany Schools for Philosophy, and the
Mathematics; that so by this means the Younger Heads might be busied, and
taken up with these kind of Speculations, rather then spend their time in
Heretical Studies. And I would have others of them to be employed in contriving
of Engines for War, both by Land and Sea; and in other Mechanical Operations:
and let the choicest Wits amongst them be invited, by large Salaries, to go
into the West Indies, and there to apply themselves to the study of Astrology.
But there is an Admirable way of causing a separation betwixt them, which
pleases me very much; and it is done two ways: the first is, if all desire
and willingness of meeting one another, and laying their heads together to
plot or design any thing be quite dashed in them: and this is to be done by
fomenting what disgusts, and Jealousies there are amongst them, so that one of
them shall not dare to tell his mind to another, or to trust any man with any
of his secrets. And this was an Art that Charles the Great made use of; who
also, besides His Ordinary Tribunals, set up a Secret Court of Justice in
Westphalia, for the keeping of the W^stphalians in Order, who, after they had
received Baptism, lived very strangely nevertherlesse; and not without
suspicion of being false to the Christian Faith. A second way is, by hindering
them from ever being able to do any thing, that may be Prejudicial to the
State: and this may be done, by seeing that there be no Affinities, Leagues^ or
other Correspondences contracted between the Principal and most powerful
Persons of that Nation; and Secondly, that no person that is, of any very
Eminent Account amongst them, be suffered to live there, but that he be removed
some whether else. And this course did Charles the Great take, to avoid the
frequent Combustions that arose in Saxony, by sending away all the Nobility of
that Province into France. Lastly, let him be sure to place in all their
Councels, Colleges, and about all Magistrates, some of His Creatures, to serve
him for Spies, and Informers.

CHAP. XXIV. Of France.
SEeing that there is no Christian Kingdom, that is more able to oppose, and
put a stop to the growing of the Spanish Monarc^y, then France is, (I speak
here to such Kingdoms as are United, and lie compacted together all in a body)
as being the greatest, richest, and most Populous in Christendom: for, it has
in it seven and twenty thousand Parish Churches in it, and feeds about a
hundred and fifty Millions of Souls; and is so fruitful by Nature, and so
rich, through the care and industry of its Inhabitants, that it comes behind no
other Country whatsoever: Add hereunto, that It lies not far from Spain; and
the Inhabitants thereof do naturally hate a Spaniard; and are besides excellent
Soldiers, and have all but one Head over them, residing also in their own
Country: all which Circumstances you shall not find to meet in any one Country
besides: for some lie either very far off, as the Turks, and English do; or
else are heartlesse, and unapt for War, as are the Italians; or else are
divided among themselves, as the Germans are: All these things (I say) being
considered, it will be needful that I should here give a more exact, and
punctual account of the F^ench then ordinary; wherein also I shall discover,
what, and how great Errors we have of late years committed, in reference to
them; that so for the future we may be the more wary, as to this Particular.

The French Nation, being descended from Iaphet, by Gomer, by their strength,
and the force of their Arms, and having also their Religion, and the Fates
Propitious to them, have had very great Successes; in that under the Conduct of
Charles the Great, and King Pepin, they arrived to so great a Monarchy, as they
then had. And certainly all the other Princes of Christendom had at that time
an e^e upon the Kingdom of France: and if the French had but crushed the Impiety
of the Mahumetans, when it was yet but in the Bud, they might easily have
compassed the Monarchy of the whole World: and that so much the rather, by
reason that their Rivals, the Spaniards were divided into Many several
Kingdoms, and were besides held in Play with the Moors, who had invaded their
Country; so that at that time they were not at leisure to interrupt the French,
or to take them off from their Designs: as the French at this day hinder Them
in theirs. But for as much as the French have not the skill of carrying a
Moderate Hand in Government over such Forraigners as are under their
Subjection, but are too Impatient, and Indiscreet; they could never yet attain
to so great a height of Power. For they are apt to arrogate too much to
themselves; and showing no gravity at all, they permit their Subjects to do
what they please; and so sometimes they use them too cruelly, and sometimes
again too gently; having no regard at all to their own defects, and weaknesses.
And hence it has come to pass, that though they have gotten many things
abroad, yet they have not been able to keep any of them. For, in One evening^
they lost all Sicily: and almost in as short a time, the Kingdom of Naples too,
together with the Duchy of Millan: and for no other reason, but only because
that they knew not how, through want of Prudence in Governing, to oblige their
Subjects to them by the Love of the Public Good: nor yet took any care to draw
in others to put themselves under their Protection. For, when the people once
perceaved, that there would be very little or no difference to them, in respect
of their Liberty^ whether they served the French, or the Spaniards, they would
not vouchsafe so much as to draw a Sword in their behalf. And for the very same
reason did the King of France, and the Duke of Millan several times lose their
Dominion over the Genois. We may add hereto, in reference to the French, the
Discord that was betwixt the Sons of Charles the Great; because that one of
them would be King of Italy, another of Germany, and a third of France: and
likewise the weakness of the French Nobility, who would needs all be free
Princes, and live of themselves without any Head: such as are the Duke of
Burgundy, the Earl of Flanders, the Duke of Bretaigne, of the Delphinate, of
Savoy, the Count Palatine of the Rhine, with diverse others; each of which
would needs be an Absolute Prince of himself So that as well for these
Reasons, and because of their being d^vided in their Religion, and also as well
by Fate, as by God himself, and besides, by not laying hold upon Occasion, when
it was offered, they seem to be excluded from ever attaining to the Universal
Monarchy of the whole World. And therefore the Majesty of the Universal
Dominion over all seems rather to incline toward the Spaniards, both because
Fate it self seems to have destined the same unto Them; as also, because it
seems, in some sort, to be their Due, by reason of their Patience, and
Discretion.

But because that the very Situation of the Country, the manner of their Arms
in War, and the natural Enmity that there is betwixt the French and the
Spaniards, seem to require that France should be continually in War with Spain,
and should be still interrupting their Glorious Proceedings; like as also when
it was in a flourishing state under Charles the Fifth, it was hindered by
Francis King of France; and as it may also at this day be troubled by the
Heretics of France, and their King Henry the Fourth, who is a Valiant, and
Warlick Person; these things, I say, being considered, it nearly concerns the
King of Spain seriously to consider the state of his own Affairs, and withal
to weigh the Power of France; and to be sure, when any fit Opportunity is
offered to fall upon them with all his might, and to set upon them on that part
where they are Weakest, that ^o that other part, where they are more powerful,
may sink of it self. Seeing therefore that they are weak, not in Arms, but in
Wisdom, and Brain; He ought to manage his War against them accordingly. And
therefore, first of all, he must be sure to lay hold on Fortune, and
Opportunity, whenever they offer themselves; as evidently appears by the
example of that good Fortune, that delivered the aforenamed King Francis, and
Germany into the hands, and power of Charles the Fifth; by which means, had he
pursued that Opportunity, he might have crushed all the Princes that were his
Competitors; for he ought immediately to have bent his whole strength against
France, and by the assistance of the Germans to have repressed, and curbed the
Insolency of the French. I say, by the assistance of the Germans: for they, as
being the more Fierce Nation of the two, have always been as an Antidote
against the Fierceness of the French. And hence it is, that the Franconians,
Normans, Swedes, Gotlanders, Danes, and other Northern Foreign Nations, have
always, in a manner, been to hard for the French, that lie not so Northerly as
they. And therefore, as I said Charles the Fifth ought immediately, with an
Army of Germans, to have set upon France. And after that, he should have put
Guards of Spaniards into all their Castles, and strong Holds, and should have
placed Italians in all their Courts of Judicature, and have appointed them to
regulate their Laws; and then should either have brought France wholly under
his own Power, and Obedience; or else should have put it into the hands of some
Petty Princes, to be governed by them; and so should presently have declared
Himself Head of the Christian World.

But he, instead of doing thus, had recourse to that Vain, useless course of
securing himself, by marriage; choosing rather to win over to him his Rival
Neighbor by Fair means; which is never to be done, but with those that are
farther off; and which is especially to be declined, when a Prince has so
Potent Neighbors that are his Antagonists for an Empire. For, the F^ench had
first a design of making themselves Universal Monarchs of the World, before
the Spaniards had any such thought; whom the French afterward envied, when
they found them aspiring that way.

A second Opportunity of keeping France under in such sort, as that It should
not have been able to have opposed, or hindered the growing Potency of the
Spaniard, was offered to his Son, Philip, had he but had the skill to have laid
hold of it, and to have made the right use of it. For, Henry the III. of France
being slain by a certain Dominican Friar, under pretense of his favoring those
of the Religion; and the whole Kingdom of France being now divided into two
Factions, namely, the Catholics and the Huguenots; and many Governors of
Provinces having at that time the said Provinces at their Devotion as, for
example, Montmorency had that of Languedoc, and Espernon, and others, had
others: the Line of Valois being now quite extinct, and there being a great
Controversy started amongst them, whether it were best for them to think of
choosing any New King of some other House, or not: and lastly, Henry of Navarre
being, by reason of his being an Heretic, hated by the Catholic Party; King
Philip had at that time five Opportunities offered him: either of which had He
but laid hold of, it would have been sufficient to have made him Master of
France, or at least to have weakened the power of it very much; not to say any
thing what might have been done, when all of them concurred, and met together.

And yet to say truth, it lay not in his power at that time to effect this; for
he saw, that if he should fall upon this design in an open way of making war
upon them, it would have been necessary for Him then to have had good store of
Soldiers to have brought into the Field; (which at that time He had not,) to
be able to divide, and distract all the Nobles of that Kingdom, and to set
them together by the ears. And therefore he should first of all have dealt
under hand either with the Duke of Guise, or of Maine, or with some other of
the most Powerful amongst them, and have promised to make Him King, and besides
to make him His Son in Law: and at the same time to give hopes also to all the
rest of the Nobility, that they should every man of them be made the
Proprietary, and Absolute Lord of their several Provinces; as that Montmorency
should have Languedoc confirmed to Him, Esper^on should have Provence; and
every one of them should have had a promise made him of such Lordships as they
liked best; and all of these He should also have furnished with money, that they
might have been the better enabled to make resistance against Henry of Navarre.
He ought also to have entered into a League with the Pope, and the rest of the
Catholic Princes; that so joining all their forces together, they might all at
once have set upon Henry of Navarre, who was of a different Religion from them.

And then besides all this, He ought to have obliged to him the hearts of all
the French Bishops, and Preachers, by conferring upon them large Dignities, and
Preferments. And when all these things had been thus ordered, then either the
King himself in person, or else, if He should not think that fit, His Son, or
the Duke of Parma should presently have invaded France with an Army of at least
a Hundred Thousand men, consisting of Germans, Italians, and Spaniards; and He
should also immediately have sent out some to make Excursions into France, by
the way of the Duke of Savoys Country, and by Navarre, and Picardy.

And all these things should have been, with all care and diligence, put into
Execution: which if they had, He had then certainly done his business, and had
either added France to his other Dominions, or else might have Cantoned it out
into many small Baronies and Republics, as Germany is; and so he should have
been ever after secure from their being able to do Him any hurt.

But King Philip was not nimble enough in his business; and besides, He was
deluded by the French Nobles, who almost all went over to the King of Navarre:
whereas, had He been but as quick as He shonld have been, all this had never
happened. For this is the usual Course of the World, that every man looks first
of all to his Own Interest, and then to that of the public; and accordingly
men use to bestirr themselves in troublesome times.

But here, in this case, where every one of them perceived, that the good of
the Public did consist in the welfare of each Particular person, and so on the
Contrary; they then presently made choice of that which they conceived would be
for the Public Good. And so, although those French Nobles, being at the first
by Money, and fair Promises, wrought over to favor the King of Spain, and so
were brought to enter into Action in order thereunto; yet when upon better
Consideration they found at last that in case the Crown of France should pass
away to another, or that the Kingdom should be parcell'd out into small
Dominions, and Republics, the loss would at length redound to each of them in
particular, whiles that the King of Spain might then with ease reduce them one
by one, and bring them under his Obedience; seeing that they were so divided,
as that they could not in any convenient time join their strengths together to
make any opposition against him; and besides, knowing that France it self,
which had been hitherto so much honored by all other Nations, would now come
to be despised by them; and that all hopes of ever attaining to the Crown would
now be quite cut off from them; and, that they should afterward find, that the
Spaniards would but laugh at them for all their pains; they conceived it to be
the safer, and more advantageous Course for themselves, to adhere to the King
of Navarre, and receive him for their Prince. Which certainly when at the
first, whiles they were inveagled, and blinded by the false hopes of the
Spaniards Money, they had not so well and thoroughly considered, as They did
afterward, when they had once weighed in their minds what the Event was like
to be, and also saw with their eyes what the Kings Proceedings were; They then
at length began to elude Art with Art. Besides, the French, perceiving also how
great Inconveniences would arise, by maintaining a War with the Spaniard, did
therefore the more willingly and cheerfully proceed to the election of a New
King, because that they were persuaded, that when a King was once chosen, those
evils would then be removed, which yet at the first they made little account of.

But the King of Spain committed yet another Error in this Point, in that by
his Slownesse He gave the King of Navarre time to make over to his Party the
Princes of Italy, and the Pope, only by making them believe, that He intended
to abjure the Protestant Religion, and turn Catholic: besides, that those
Princes did likewise consider, that when France was once subdued by the
Spaniards, whom they knew very well to gape earnestly after an Universal
Monarchy, their Own Turns would probably have been next to have been swallowed
up by them. This very Slownesse of his was the reason why the Spaniard gained
the less, and was also the longer held in expectation; and besides, by gaping
in this manner after what belonged to others, became hated by all: So true is
that Common Saying; namely, That there is no place Inexpugnable, into which an
Ass, laden with Gold, can but get in. But then this is also to be added to
that Saying; namely, that That Golden Ass, or that Ass laden with Gold, must
have many Horses laden with Iron to come after it: that so while the Citizens
are all busied in weighing, and telling out their Money, Thou may in the mean
time make use of thy Iron in the subduing, and taking in of that Place.

To this we may add, that the Spanish Commanders, as well as the French, played
booty, as we say; neither of them fighting for the Victory, but for Gain only.
And the reason of this was, because that neither the King himself, nor his Son
were present in person in the Army. And besides the Duke of Parma durst not at
first, in the beginning of the War, hazard all in a Battle, without Commands
from the King; by which means the King of Navarre had time given him to gain
over to him the French Nobility, (whom the Spaniard had before wrought over by
his Money to His side,) only by an Opinion they had conceived of his Military
Valor. And in this He imitated those other most Valiant Princes, who,
neglecting the Common People, made it their only business, to oblige the
Nobles to them only: Which has been the Ancient Custom with the Polonians,
Persians, and French. And because, that the Nobles think it a thing too much
below them, to march with Foot Soldiers; hence it is, that these very Nations
have always been very strong in Horse; but have still been but weak in Foot.

And seeing the business is come to this pass, that the King of France has
now won to himself the Affections both of his Subjects, the French, and of the
Pope also; and has thereby got himself more Renown, then if he had beaten the
King of Spain himself; it is now to be feared, that He may sometime or other
attempt to take in some part of Spain also. For, He is of a Turbulent, Unquiet
Spirit, neither can the French hold, while they have well settled a Country
that they have newly taken in; but they must on still, and fall upon some
other; and this the King of France must the rather do, because that being out
of Money, He is forced to forage abroad, and take from others, that he may have
to pay his own men. And therefore it will be necessary that the King of Spain
take care that the Frontiers of Spain, and the Duchy of Millan also be well
guarded, and fortified; and also, that he carefully observe these following
Rules. The first whereof is, that he enter into a League with the French, who
are his Competitors: and the Second is, that He hinder the coming of any
Assistance to him either from England, or from Italy: both which things may be
effected one and the same way; namely, if He do but persuade the Pope, that the
King of France has a purpose of Assisting the Heretics; and that, should he
but once come into Italy, he would scatter abroad the Poison of his Heresy
every where; and, that Tuscany, and the Venetian Territories will first be the
Seat of the War, and afterward will be his Prey. Let the King of Spain
therefore deal with the Pope, that He would interdict the King of France the
contracting of any League, or Friendship, either with the Queen of England, or
with any other of the Heretics; such as are the Genevians, Helvetians, and
Rhetians, or Grisons: for, these would be able to assist him very much. Let the
Pope also make Him swear, that He will go to the Holy Land, and there join with
the Italians in the Defense of the Christian Faith. But the best course of all
would be, that the Nobility of France and of Italy should all join together,
and should be sent in an Expedition against Greece; and that there should also
be another Association made betwixt the Princes of the House of Austria,
against the Heretics. For, if that the Christian Princes were but thus
dispersed, and kept at a distance one from another, the Kingdom of Naples,
together with that of Spain, and the Duchy of Millan also, would have none to
stand in fear of, but would be secure on all sides: and besides, the King of
Spain might in the mean time bethink himself what ways were the best to be
taken for the reducing of the Net^erlands; over whom were he but once
Conqueror, the forenamed Princes would be so much astonished at the report of
that his Victory, and of his Military Strength, that they would never dare to
attempt any thing against Him; no, though they should return home Lords of all
Asia. For, although Pompey was a Conquerou^ in Assia; yet he was not able to
stand against Caesar, that had now subdued the Belgic Provinces For, the
Belgians, by reason of their Fierceness in War, put Caesar much more to it to
subdue them, then those of Asia did Pompey, who was for this reason also
inferior to Caesar in Power.

Now in case that Henry the Fourth should die, as he begins now to be an old
man, and has neither Successor, nor Wife; or if he should marry, and should
leave a Son behind him, yet probably he would be under Age; and so Conde would
either be the next Heir to the Crown, or else would at least have the
Administration of the Government put into his hands, during the Minority of the
Prince; whose Ancestors, having always been the Leaders, and indeed the
stirrers up of the Heretics of France in all their Wars, were the Authors of
shedding so much Catholic blood: I say, should things come to thi^ pass, it
would then concern the King of Spain to lay hold on that Opportunity, in
proposing to the Consideration of the Catholics of France, whether they
thought would be the better course, to make choice of Conde, or else of some
Catholic to be their King; remembering that He is the Son of that Father, that
acted so much Cruelty upon the Catholics, which this Prince sucked in with his
Nurses Milk.

The King of Spain must also so order the matter, as that if He cannot bring it
about, that the Kingdom of France should be divided in Judgment upon this
particular, he must then deal with them, that it may be conferred upon some one
that they shall pitch upon, by way of Election. Or else, in the last place, He
must speedily have recourse to the Arts before set down: which King Philip
failed in before. And this manner of Electing a King, upon condition that he be
a Catholic, would very much please the Italians; and the Catholic Princes of
France also would very willingly assent thereto; because that every one of them
would have some hope hereby of attaining to the Crown himself. And if this
should once come to pass, it would prove a very great Weakening to the Kingdom
of France: for, during the Vacancy of the Crown, there must needs arise very
great, and long Dissentions amongst them; and, possibly, the King of Spain
also, being called in by some or other of the Princes, might come to have a
finger in the business.

Now for as much as Elective Kings are, for the most part, not much given to
trouble themselves about the enlarging the Bounds of their Kingdom; because
that they know very well, that their Sons are not their Successors; therefore
neither will they expose themselves to danger upon the Account of another man's
Interest. And this is the only reason, why the Emperors of Germany never
trouble themselves about the enlarging of their Empire; as neither do the Kings
of Poland, unless they chance to be Persons of a high, Warlick Spirit, as King
Steven was, surnamed Battorius; and Sigismund; both which maintained Wars with
the M^scovites, Tartarians, and others, about the Principality of Prussia, and
some other Territories; because they hoped, that their Sons should at least
have succeeded them in those. This Course is of very good use to a Prince, for
the acquiring of Military Glory, and through the Multitude of Victories, and
the affection of his Soldiers, for the bringing his own Country under his
subjection: which Course, I before showed, was to be taken by the Emperor of
Germany, according to the Example of Julius Caesar. Yet notwithstanding, this
piece of Craft being well understood by the French, has been the cause, that
they have now laid aside all desires of enlarging their Territories, merely to
avoid that Suspicion. And This Suspicion is the reason why the Venetians do not
send Commanders of their Own into their Wars, but rather choose to make use of
Foreign Commanders, whom a Little Money contents well enough for their Pay.
For, as to this particular, it was no small hazard which they heretofore run,
under Carmagnola^ and Ludovicus Vrsinus. And Francis Sforza, who was but a
Mercenary Soldier under the State of Venice, returning home a Conqueror, made
himself Duke of Millan. For this very cause the Romans heretofore hated the
Tarquins, their Kings, who till that time had always been Elective: and this
very thing also was the Ruin of the Duke of the Athenians, that was Elected at
Florence.

Neither are Opportunities at this time wanting of setting the French together
by the ears among themselves: for although their Peace is not at this time at
all disturbed by any Foreign Enemies; yet they being naturally of an
Impatient, Unquiet spirit, are always rising up one against another, although
it be perhaps but upon their quarrel about the Heresy of the Calvinists, and I
know not what New Gospel; which wheresoever it is preached, it brings, not
Joy, but Mourning; not Peace, but horrid Wars; and fills the Minds of Men,
not with Good Will, but with rage and Madness. This Mischief therefore ought
to be taken in due time, and have a stop put to it: for, this Contagion has
already infected above two hundred thousand persons in France. For, if so be it
should spread further, and should infect the Nobility also, and Peers of the
Kingdom, it would be much to be feared, that there would never be any end of
the Troubles of France: which is now the Condition of Germany, by means of the
Dukes of Saxony, Hessen, and others. For, as we see, such Kingdoms as abound
with Nobles, are made in a manner Immortal; as we may evidently perceive by the
examples of France and Persia. For, when France was heretofore in a manner all
subdued, and brought in subjection by the King of England; yet it was
afterward, through the Industry, and by the endeavors of the Nobility and
Gentry, wholly asserted and restored again to Its first, Natural Lord. And so
likewise the Kingdom of Persia, which is one while annoyed by the Tartarians,
and again another while by the Saracens; is yet so well defended by the Pe^sian
Nobility, as that It is kept from falling under either of their Power, and
Obedience. But yet, on the contrary side again, the very same Kingdoms are by
reason of their Nobility also obnoxious to most unavoidable and miserable
Calamities; seeing they are able at any time either to assist, or protect all
such, as endeavor to introduce any Innovations, either in the State, or
Religion.

CHAP. XXV. Of England, Scotland, and Ireland.
ALthough the English seem the least of all to affect an Universal Monarchy;
yet notwithstanding they have been a very great hinderance to the King of
Spains designs that way: several examples whereof may be gathered from the
proceedings of the aforesaid Queen Elizabeth of England, who appeared both
against the Catholic King, in the Low Countries, and against the most
Christian King in France, by fomenting the corrupt Humors in the subjects of
both these Princes, and in assisting the Heretics both with her Counsels, and
Forces. For they possess an Island that is excellently well furnished both
with Shipping, and Soldiers; and by this means they rob the King of Spain in
all places in the North wheresoever he has any thing; and also wander out
abroad, as far as to the New World; where, although by reason of the
Fortifications made upon the Sea Coast, they cannot lay the foundation of any
Kingdom, yet do they do the Spaniards no small harm there. For, that same
famous Englishman, Captain Drake, following the example of Magellan, who bad
done the same before him, sailed round about the whole World more then once;
and it is no^ impossible, but that the Kingdom of Bacalaos, which lies somewhat
near to the English, and is very convenient for them, by reason of the
temperatenesse of the Air, may be some time or other seized upon by them.
However it is most certain, that if the King of Spain could but once make
himself Master of England, and the Low Countries, He would quickly get to be
sole Monarch of all Europe, and of the greatest part of the New World. But,
seeing that He is not able to reduce this Island under His Obedience, because
that It is so exceeding strong; by reason both of its Situation, and multitude
of Inhabitants, who Naturally hate the Spaniard and are quite different from
them both in their Manners, and also their Religion; it will concern Him
therefore to defend himself as well as he can, and to fortify and set strong
Guards upon all such places of His Dominions as lie open to their Incursions;
least otherwise the English should chance to seize upon them. And such are the
Haven Corugna, and all the Sea Coast of Galicia, Leon, Biscay, and all the
Kingdoms that lie in the other Hemisphere; as shall be showed hereafter. But
this he must make his chiefest business, namely, to weaken the Power of the
English: for the effecting of which design, it would be sufficient, if He could
but bring it about, that the Hollander, and the Freezlander should with their
Fleets fall upon the English Forces at Sea, as I shall by and by make it
plainly appear.

But seeing He is so far from doing this^ that his own Navies are very often
damaged by the English ships, the only Remedy that is left him is, to provide
himself of some Vast Fleets of ships which should lie at Corugna, and Lisbon,
that when ever the Spanish Fleet shall return from the Indies, they may serve
as convoys to It, and may bring it home safely: or else they may be sent forth
either against Ireland, or England, and so may divert them from lying in wait
for, and infesting of the Spanish Navies. And because the King of Spain is to
be Lord of the Seas, it is very necessary that He build himself many Wooden
Cities, that is to say, great Navies, for the securing of His Treasure that he
recieves out of the New World.

It would also be a very good course for him to hire those that are of the
greatest strength among the Hollanders, though it cost him a Million of money,
to guard such Fleets of his, as are to pass to and fro in the Northern Seas;
and to deal in the like manner with such Nations, as are better skilled in
Nautical affairs, then the English themselves are: as namely the Danzickers,
by means of the King of Poland, who is allied to the house of Austria; likewise
with the Gutlanders, Swedes, Finlanders, and the rest that are of Scandinavia,
Denmark, Pomerania, and Borussia, procuring them to declare against the
English, and either to set upon some of their Islands, or else to invade
England it self, that so they may divert them from falling upon the Spanish
Fleets; or else, if the King shall think it better, to set upon the English
Navy it self. If, I say, He would but be at so great a charge, as to hire the
said Nations to fall upon the English, and would besides but give them all the
Booties that they should take from the English, He might compass all his
desires: and besides, the seeds of such a Feude once sown, would spread far and
near, and would never be killed and choked again. And therefore I conceive,
that Money alone would be able to set these People at Variance, and make them
fall foul one upon the other.

And it is certain, that England stands in fear of no other Nations so much, as
of those above named: because they are both more fierce, and more Populous
Nations, and also more powerful at Sea, then the English themselves are. For,
Spain cannot it self make any considerable opposition against the English,
unless it be by makig use of some such Artifice; seeing that they are better
acquainted with those Northern Seas, then the Spanish are. And then, England is
an Island whose Inhabitants are both very Numerous, and they are also a
diligent and subtle People; and it is besides very strongly fortified both by
Sea and Land, and withal a deadly enemy to Spain, partly by reason of their
different Religions, and partly because the English claim a kind of Right to
that Crown, by reason of the Castilian Line, which is derived by the House of
Lancaster; besides, diverse of the former Kings of England of the Family of
York, and others, have been allied to Spain.

Now as concerning the weakening of the English, there can no better way
possibly be found out, then by causing Divisions, and Dissentions among
themselves, and by continually keeping up the same; which will quickly furnish
the Spaniard with better, and more advantageous Opportunities. And as for the
Religion of that People, it is that of Calvin; though very much Moderated, and
not so rigid, and austere as it is at Geneva: which yet cannot so easily be
extinguished and rooted out there, unless there were some certain Schools set
up in Flanders, (with which People the English have very great commerce) by
means of which there should be scattered abroad the Seeds of Schism and
Divisions in the Natural Sciences; as namely, betwixt the Stoics,
Peripateticks, and Telesians; by which the Errors of the Calvinists might be
made manifest. For the truth of it is, That Sect is Diametrically contrary to
the Rules of Policy: for, they teach, that whether a Man do well, or ill, he
does all by Divine Impulsion; which Plato Demonstrates, against Homer, to be
opposite to all Sounder Policy; which says, that every Man has Free Liberty
of Will, either to do Well, or Ill; so that it is in our own Power, either to
observe, or not observe what is commanded us; and from hence we are to expect
either our Rewards, or Punishments; according as I have most evidently
demonstrated in my Dialogue touching Policy, where I have discoursed of this
Point, though but briefly, and without any flourish of Language; which They,
since they have become Heretics, are grown somewhat subtle in: and yet, being
of a Nature that is still desirous of Novelties, and Change, they are easily
wrought over to any thing.

As concerning their Dominions, and Private Estates, the English are divided,
and live in several Countries: whence some time or other the Spaniard may
easily light upon some convenient Opportunity of advantage against them. For
the King of Englands Dominion is divided into Ireland, and England; which
together with Scotland, makes up the Isle of Great Britain. Now Scotland it
self has also many small Islands belonging to it, which are called the
Orcades. And hence it is, that the Isle of Great Britain had always two Kings
reigning over it: namely, one of them was King of England; and the other, of
Scotland, who, by reason of their lying so near to each other, were in a manner
continually at wars, and invading one another Territories; for their Kingdoms
are severed only by a little small River, and some few hills. But now the King
of Scots hovers, as it were, at this time over England, not only by reason of
his Neighborhood to it, but also because of His Right, of Succession; for His
Mother was Niece to King Henry the Eighth, who was Father to Queen Elizabeth
that now reigns; and, if we should confess the truth, there is none so near
in blood to the Crown of England, as He is. And therefore the time now draws
on, that after the death of the said Queen Elizabeth, who is now very old, the
Kingdom of England must fall into the hands of their Ancient and continual
Rivals, the Scots.

We may here add, that the Peers of the Land, who when they are assembled
together in a Body, are called in their Language the Parliament, carry a great
sway with them, and have very great Power: in so much that they seem to desire
to set up an Oligarchy, or an Aristocratical State, according to the example
showed them by the Netherlande^s. For, all Northern Nations are Naturally
impatient of Monarchy, or Abs^lute Power in Princes; and the Kings of England
were always kept under by the Parliament; till that now of later times under
pretext of introducing a New Religion, they have taken upon them to exercise a
more absolute power over their Subjects. But in Ancient Times the whole Kingdom
of England was divided into four lesser Kingdoms; as Spain also has been
anciently distributed both into many several Kingdoms; both of which Countries
did afterward grow into two entire Kingdoms: although it cannot be denied,
but that the Power of the Kings of England was never so great as that of the
Kings of Spain.

My opinion is therefore, that the King of Spain should do well to employ under
hand some certain Merchants of Florence, that are wise and subtle persons, and
that traffic at Antwerp, who (because they are not so much hated by the
English, as the Spaniards are) should treat with some such of the English as
are some way or other descended from some of the former Kings of England, and
should promise each of them severally (no one of them knowing any thing what is
said to the other) all the possible aides that can be from Spain, for the
restoring of them to their Inheritances, Legally descending down to them from
their Ancestors; and undertake to effect this for them, if not as to the whole
Kingdom, yet at least to some part of it: requiring them to engage themselves
to nothing else, (so to give a color to the business) save only that they
shall not join their forces, and assist the English in setting upon the Spanish
Fleet at its return from the West Indies. For by this means each of them being
puffed up with hope, will presently fall to question the King of Scots his Title
to the English Crown, and will endeavor to oppose him in it. Let him also send
privately to King James of Scotland, and promise him, that He will assist him
to the utmost of his Power in his getting possession of the Kingdom of England,
upon this condition^ viz, that He shall either restore there again the
Catholic Religion; for the love whereof, His Mother, Mary Stuart, Queen of
Scots refused not to spend her dearest blood, and even to lay down her Life
too; or at least, that he shall not annoy, or any way disturb the said Spanish
Fleet.

But then again on the other side, let him under hand labor with the English
Peers, and the chiefest of the Parliament, and egg them on to endeavor to
reduce England into the Form of a Republic: withal assuring them, that the
King of Scots, when he shall have once gotten into the English Throne, must
needs prove a cruel Prince to them, as having always about him a deep
remembrance, how injuriously the English have heretofore dealt with the Scots.
Moreover, let Him endeavor to strike a terror into Queen Elizabeth's friends,
by often putting into their heads, that they will find, that King James will
revenge his Mothers bloo^ upon Queen Elizabeth's friends, seeing that She is
like to leave behind her None of Her Own blood upon whom He might take revenge;
especially seeing that His Mother, Queen Mary, when she was now to dye,
seriously commended unto Him the care of the Catholic Religion, and the
Revenge of Her Blood.

The English Bishops are also to be exasperated, and put into Fears and
Jealousies, by telling them, that the King of Scots turned Calvinist out of
hope, and desire of the English Crown, and being also forced to do so by his
Heretical Barons: but that, when He shall once be quietly settled in the
English Throne; He will then quickly restore the Former Religion; for as much
as, not only His deceased Mother, but even the King of France also have both
of them very earnestly commended the same unto Him. By which means it must
necessarily follow, that the seeds of a continual War betwixt England and
Scotland will be sown; in so much that neither Kingdom shall have any leisure
to work any disturbance to the Spanish Affairs. Or else by buzzing into their
ears, that in case King James should be possessed of this Kingdom, He will
however be a Friend of Spain: that the whole Island would be divided into many
Dominions, or else that it would come to be an Elective Kingdom; (by which
means the King of it will be the less careful of making himself Master of
other Countries, and of adding them to the English Crown; neither indeed,
though he should never so much desire it, would he ever be able to do so, as I
have before showed, where I speak of France:) or else, that this Country of
England will be reduced into the Form of a Common Wealth, which will
perpetually be at feude with Scotland; and that all Actions It shall undertake,
will be long in bringing to effect, and so It will be able to do the less harm
to Spain.

The Spirits of the English Catholics also are to be rouzed up, and, as it
were, awakened from sleep, and encouraged to Action: for by this means, so soon
as ever the Throne shall be vacant, the King of Spain shall come into England,
under Pretense of assisting them. Let Him also deal with those English Nobles,
who are possessed of some certain circumjacent Islands lying about England,
that they should exercise an Absolute and full Jurisdiction, each of them in
their several places, and have Peculiar Courts of Justice of their own,
distinct from those of England: which very thing we read to have been Anciently
done by them.

The Chief of the Irish Nobility also are to be dealt with, that, as soon as
they hear of the Queens death, they should new model Ireland either into the
Form of a Republic, or else should make it a Kingdom of it self, throwing off
all Obedience to the English; withal promising aides to each of them in
particular: and that so much the rather, because that in that Kingdom, or
Island, the Catholics, and especially the Friars that are of the Order of S.
Francis, are very greatly esteemed and beloved. There is also much greater
agreement and correspondence betwixt the Spaniard and the Irish, then betwixt
them and the English; whether it be by reason of the Similitude of their
Manners, or else by reason of the Clime, and the nearness of these two
Countries one to the other. There are also in Ireland many Vagabond persons,
and such as have fled their Countries, being men that are most impatient of
Government; and yet are good Catholics, and such as may be able to do good
service in this kind, as has been showed already. But this sort of Men is not
very rare to be found, either in England, or Scotland also.

These, and the like Preparations may be made before hand; that, so soon as
ever Queen Elizabeth is dead, they may be immediately put into Execution. For,
there is no man but knows what horrid Civil Wars, and what strange
Alterations, and Turns have happened several times in England. So that, what I
have here proposed, ought not to appear to any man, as things either New, or
Impossible.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Poland, Muscovia, and Transylvania.
THe Kingdom of Poland is in Our time the most Potent of all the Northern
Kingdoms; insomuch that, if it were not so divided in it self, about Points of
Religion, as it is; and were withal an Hereditary Kingdom, and had a Prince
that were a Native, and were not Elected out of some Foreign Nation, as their
custom is; it would prove a sufficient Terror to the Great Turk; especially,
if the Great Duke of Muscovia were but joined with them. But the Nobility of
that Nation, in whose Power the Election of the King is, are very much afraid
of the King's Power; and for that reason They keep as hard a hand over Him, as
possibly they can. The King of Spain therefore must endeavor as much as lies
in Him, that no King be elected there, but such a one as is of the Catholic
Religion; which course has hitherto been observed amongst them. For, should
they choose themselves a King that were of any other Religion, He would then
very easily be induced to countenance, by his Authority, the Northern
Heretics; who do all agree in these two Points, (although they differ among
themselves almost in all the rest,) namely^ that the Pope is Antichrist; and,
that the Archdukes of Austria are all of them such as fight for Antichrist.
And therefore, upon any the least Occasion that could be, they would be apt to
join their forces together against both the Pope, and the Emperor, their
Neighbor; had they but any Powerful Prince to head them, and to be their
General: which Charge none is so able to undertake, and go through with, as the
King of Poland is. For, the King of Denmark is but a weak Prince; and the King
of Sweden lies too far off; and besides, is severed from Germany by the Sea.

The King of Spain must then in the next place by all means endeavor, that
one of the House of Austria may be advanced to the Crown of Poland: or at least
such a one as is some way or other allied to the House of Austria; as the now
King of Poland is. And lastly, he must be such a one, as shall always make
head against the Turk, and that should enter into an Association with the
Muscovites, who together should to their utmost endeavor, as much as in them
lies, the utter Ruin, and Extirpation of the Turks.

He must also make choice of some of the Wisest, and most Eminent persons of
his Kingdom, whom He shall send as Ambassadors to Cracovia, and who by their
presence may add Authority, and Weight to the Spanish Union, in the Esteem of
the Electors of Poland: and that may obtain of them, that in case the King of
Spain should have more Sons then one, that the^ They would Elect one of the
Younger of them to be their King: for certainly, were any of the King of
Spain's Sons chosen King of Poland, He would never be so simple, and foolish,
as to take upon him to govern the Kingdom of Poland according to his Own Will
and pleasure; as the King of France's Son endeavored to do.

Besides, He must deal with the People of Scandia, and the Dantzickers, by the
means of the King of Poland, who now is King of Swethland also, that they would
join together, and send out a Fleet against the English; as has been said
before. For by taking this course, the Kings expense will not be half so great,
as his Gains will be. He must also labor that the Prince of Transylvania may
in like manner enter into a league with the Polanders; or else, that either He,
or the great Duke of Muscovia may be chosen King of Poland. For, seeing that
these two Nations are not only Neighbors to ^he Turks, but do also naturally
hate them, they might easily be able to stop his proceedings. And I am verily
persuaded, that among all the Northern Nations there is not any so fit, and
able to oppose the Turk, as is the Muscovite; who, would but the Tartarians,
and the Polanders join with him, might be able to make Incursions into the
Turks Dominions, and march up even to the very Walls of Constantinople. Neither
indeed has Macedonia, or Moldavia, or Bulgaria, or Thrace ever suffered so
much loss by any Nation, as by the Muscovit^s.

And if there were an Association contracted betwixt the King of Spain and the
Muscovite, either by Marriage, or else by the nearer Tie of Religion, brought
about there, by the Industry of the Jesuits; it must needs prove a very
advantageous business to Him: because that Spanish Gold is, among these
Northern Nations, of greater Estimation, and Account, then any thing else in
the world. And then must the King of Spain be very careful, that, as soon as
ever he finds he has wrought up the affections of these people to a
Willingness to do him any service, He set them upon some Notable Expedition or
other, while they are now ready for it, and before they begin to cool again,
and repent themselves of their forwardness: For, Delay has always been the
Ruin of the King of Spain's Affairs; by reason that his Confederates, through
his slownesse in putting them in execution, have always had time enough to
smell out the subtilty of His Designs; and by this means it comes to pass,
that he commonly loses his labor, and is at charge to no purpose.

The Bohemians also might be hired by the King of Spain's, and the Popes Money,
to join with the Transylvanians against the Turks; because that They are in
league with the House of Austria. Yet, when all is done, there cannot be any
considerable matter done in this Particular, without the Assistance of the
Polanders also, and the Muscovites: and unless the Emperor himself also be a
Man of a stout, and Warlike spirit; (as we showed before, when we spoke of
Germany,) and use his utmost endeavor to stop all growing Mischiefs in their
very Beginings; least, by Delay, they get head, and grow so much the stronger,
and Intractable.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Flanders, and the Lower Germany.
IT is not without good cause, that the King of Spain endeavors by all
possibl^ means that he can, to recover the Low Countries again: about the
keeping of that only part whereof, which he still possesses, it has cost him
more Humane Blood, then there is Water in it; and about which He has spent
more Gold, then there are stones in it. And yet neither is this a matter so
much to be wondered at; seeing that, could He but once make himself Master of
those Countries again, He might then very easily make himself Lord also of the
Whole Earth. For, were this but done, both France and Germany would quickly
follow, in spite of what ever they could do: and also England it self would be
utterly ruined; and indeed all the Northern Nations would be much weakened, and
rendered utterly unable to make any resistance against Him. For we see that
Caesar, after he had once conquered the Belgians, made little account of all
the rest of the Northern Countries; and so presently passed over into England.
And indeed there is no power that lies more conveniently, and is better able to
destroy the English Navy, then the power of Holland, and Zealand^ for these
Provinces, both for the Number of their Shipping, and also for their skill and
experience in Nautical affairs, do infinitely surpass all other Nations
whatsoever: not to say any thing of the fierce nature, or of the Wealth of
these People. For these Netherlanders have diverse Towns and Cities, that are
built in the very Water, after the manner as Venice is built: out of which
Towns, they may very commodiously issue out, and fall upon the English upon all
occasions; and may be able to secure their Fleet, returning from the
West Indies; and so may have opportunity of carrying over Colonies thither, and
making Plantations; and having subdued many Nations there, may exercise a free
Trade of Merchandise in those Countries. And therefore the King of Spain must
endeavor, to the utmost of his power, to reduce these Countries, and bring
them under his Obedience again; which yet seems now to be a business of no
small Difficulty; and merely through the heedlesnesse, and Ill Managery of the
Governors.

I therefore conceive it would not be amiss, to reckon up here all the Errors
that have been committed by the Spaniards in this particular; that so they may
learn to be the more wary for the future. And I shall also lay down such subtle
ways and means, by which these People may be subdued: For the Northern Nations
are all of such a spirit, as Natural^y is addicted to a certain Licentious
Freedom, and Liberty; in so much that no Prince shall ever be able to rule
them by keeping a strict, and severe hand over them, without using Politic
Arts, and by remitting something of their Authority. For, these Nations by
reason of their Natural Fecundity^ are very numerous: now no Multitude, or
Great Number, is easily kept in order.

They are moreover of a firece disposition; as being born^ and brought up in a
cold Clime. For, those that are born in such cold Countries, have their Natural
Heat shut up close within them, neither does it in them Evaporate in small,
minute parts; whence it is, that they are full of Blood, Corpulent, and are
full of spirits, and valiant; being also Lovers of Bacc^us, rather then of
Venus: and they are, by reason of the Natural Fuliginousnesse, and Mistiness
that is within them, full of unsettled, tumultuous Thoughts; and, by reason of
their abundance of spirits, are very prone to all Licentiousness; being
withal very suspicious, and, by reason of their Drunkenness, showing little
or no Gravity in their behavior.

These Northern People (I do not here speak of those Nations that inhabit the
utmost Borders of the North) are moreover full of Courage, and without any
Craft: whereas the Southern are, on the contrary, full of Craft and subtlety;
but very fearful withal. The Northern People are of a Temper of Body suitable to
the Disposition of their Mind; being big-bodied, and full of Flesh; and are
full of Blood, and Vigorous. But the Southern are on the contrary, Crafty, and
have Dry Bodies; and are apter to run away, then to stand to it in a set
battle. Those former are of a Plain, Open Soul; these other are Wily and
Subtle, and withal very Malicious; those wear a Lions Skin; These a Foxes:
Those are of a Boystero^s, and Inconstant Nature; These Slow, but Constant in
their Actions: Those are Merry, but These are Melancholic; Those are addicted
to Wine; These to Women: Those are Courageous; These are Cowardly; Those are
Licentious; These are more Composed^

And therefore These are to have more gentle and easy Laws imposed upon them
for they are of so free, and loose a course of life, as that they cannot endure
to be bound in by Laws; and besides, relying upon their own strength, they are
apt to care little for those that are their Lords and Rulers. All which things
we find to be quite contrary, in the Southern Countries; and especially in
Spain, which lies something near to the Tropic of Cancer; beyond which are the
Amphiscians, having their Noontide Shadows cast both ways, at several times
of the year. And therefore I say, that this was the reason why they were so
eager to change their Religion; first, because they are so addicted to Wine,
and use to have so frequent Feastings, and Drinking-bouts: whereas the Rules of
Religion require a more strict life, with Fastings and Abstinence. And
secondly, because that being such as are subject to Vehement, and unruly
Passions, they had an Opinion, that they should never be able to moderate
themselves in their Pleasures. And this was the reason, that they were so ready
to give ear to the Doctrine of Luther, and Calvin; because that these men deny,
that Man has Free Will to do either ill, or well; affirming moreover, that God
himself does work in men both good^ and evil: which these Northern Men being
easily persuaded to believe, they conceive themselves to have no power in
themselves, either to forbear Drinking, or to abstain from Women. We may add
hereto, that They have also longed to have an Opportunity given them of
opposing the Pope, and the Princes, against whom Luther in his Sermons
inveighed bitterly.

Which Course of theirs was Diametrically Opposite to that which was taken in
other Countries; where they easily perceived, what strange Troubles, and
Tumults, the Introducing of a New Religion was the Cause of.

Now the Heresies, that sprung up among those of the Southern Countries, were
full of Speculations, and had much subtilty in them; whereas, on the contrary,
those that were broached among the Northern People, were very gross. For, some
of the Southern denied the Divinity, some the Humanity, and some the Plurality
of Wills in Christ; some of them again denied the Procession of the Holy Ghost
from the Word, and the like Points, that were both Sublime, and full of
Mystery. But the Northern Heretics, passing by these High, and Subtle
Fancies, fell to cry down the use of Fasting days, Vigils, Penance, with
Auricular Confession, and all those Points of Discipline, that hindered the
Multiplication of Blood: to these we may add the Single Life of Clergy Men, and
many other points of this kind; which, though they agree with, and are very
Consonant both to Reason and to the Scriptures, are yet very repugnant to the
Flesh, and Humane Senses. These men also oppose the Authority of Christ's Vicar:
for, being Men of a high courage, they therefore stand stiffely to maintain
their Liberty. And as in Temporal Matters, they are indeed under the
Government of Republics, or Elective Princes; and yet are no farther Obedient
to them, then they themselves please; even so in Spiritual Matters also do they
take to themselves the same Liberty.

And as among these Northern Nations their Commanders and Soldiers are more
eminent for their strength and courage, then for their Policy, and Stratagems;
in like manner are their Ministers, in their Disputations, much better at
Railing then at Reasoning. And hence it is, that under the Pretense of Liberty
of Conscience, they only seek after Liberty of Domineering^ and being accounted
the only Men; which pleases them much better. And therefore the first Error
that was committed by the Spaniards in this Particular, was, that at the Diets
of Worms, and Ausburg, Luther was suffered to go away alive. Which although, as
some are of Opinion, was done by Charles the Fifth, out of a Politic
consideration; namely, that by this means the Pope might have some body that
he should always stand in fear of, and so should be forced to hold always in
with the Emperor, furnishing him continually with Money and Indulgencies, till
such time as He should attain to an Universal Monarchy; and withal pronouncing
all wars whatsoever, that He should undertake, to be Just and Lawful: as
fearing, that in case he should not do these things, the Emperor might take
part with his Antagonist Luther: yet the event showed clearly, that this was
done against all the Rules of Policy. For the Pope being by this means
weakened, the whole Christian World is now thereby weakened also; and now that
Heresy is introduced, all Subjects, under the Pretense of Freedom of
Conscience, have shaken off the Yoke of Obedience; an evident example whereof
we have in Germany, and the Low Countries, both which were Subject to the said
Charles V. And therefore we may very well, and safely conclude from hence, that
He was deceived, out of a certain Generous Pity; because He doubted not, but
that He should be able to subdue not only Germa^y, and the Protestant Princes,
but even the whole World also, when^oever, and as often as himself pleased.
Which Fancy of his deceived him in like manner in those expeditions, that He
made against T^nis^ and France. And therefore I say, that it was well done of
Him indeed to keep his promise made to Luther, so long as the Diet lasted; But
yet afterward, He ought not only to have dispatched Him, in his return home;
but to have proceeded to the utter extirpating also of the Protestant Princes.
For, by this means, that Heresy had been utterly crushed in the very Bud;
neither should Calvin, with so many others that have since in^ected both
Germanies, ever have appeared in the World: neither had the Princes of the
Netherlands so carefully followed the steps of the Protestant Princes of
Germany against the interest of Cha^les V.

A second error was committed by them in those Parts that border upon the
Rhine; in that they believed, that they should be able to bring in subjection,
and order, that People, that had now shaken off the Yoke, only by taking the
course that is used by the Spaniards; namely by introducing that Rigid
Inquisition, by the Duke of Alva. For we see, that Fires that are now
beginning^ by the strength of the Winds blowing on them, increase rather the
more, then are any whit put out by the same. When as therefore at the first
these aforenamed People cried out for Liberty of Conscience, that so under this
Pretense they might shake off the Yoke of Obedience; and that they could not at
the first of all suppress them either by Arms, or strong Holds, or by their
Laws, that were yet accommodated to their own Natures and Temper: it was an
easy matter for them to lay hold on their so much Beloved Liberty. And hence it
was, that they divided themselves into several Republics, and chose themselves
Commanders, in order to a War to be made with the Spaniards: and so by this
means it came to pass, that all the most Ingenious, and Valiant Persons among
them, had now an opportunity of showing themselves in the World, either in the
Pulpit, or in the Field. Then presently followed the Wars betwixt them and the
Spaniard; whereby these People were so much exasperated, as that they gave
their Generals a greater Power then they had before; and therefore appointed
Count William of Nassaw, Prince of Orange, to be General of all their Forces;
who was a Man that was indeed more fearful then a Sheep, but more crafty then a
Fox: to whom his Son now succeeds, who is a Warlike young Man, and grown
famous for his worthy Deeds, and Victories that he has gotten. And these
Princes, because they professed themselves the Patrons of the Peoples Liberty
only, were strangely followed by them, and cried up above measure. Then did
they, to the end that they might make the People hate the Spaniards the more,
bring in among them Calvinisme; by which means there was caused a greater
Disagreement betwixt them and the Pope, and Spaniard, then is caused by the
diversity of Manners, shape of Body, and Disposition of Mind that is betwixt
them. For, the Netherlanders, as has been said before, are white of
Complexion, Tall, Licentious, great Drinkers, and Gluttons, Impatient,
Indiscreet, Sanguine, and of a free behavior: whereas the Spaniards are Black,
Crafty, Circumspect, Sober, Continent, Patient, Discreet, Melancholic,
Covetous, Severe, and Grave, and (to say all in a word) contrary to them in all
things. So that it seems to be an impossible thing, where there is so great a
dissimilitude, and disagreement in Manners and Temper of Body, to cause there
any agreement of Minds; which before was maintained betwixt them only by their
being united both in Religion, and Government: which Union being now dissolved,
there was Necessarily to follow a Disagreement, and Breach of all former Ties
of Friendship. And hence it is now come to that pass, that the Low-Countrymen
do more detest and abhor to be subject to the Spaniards, then they love their
own life: and so likewise, on the other side, the Spaniards hate them worse
then the Devil himself: although they know how to conceal their hatred of
them, better then the Netherlanders do theirs; yet in the mean time do they not
omit to do them all the mischief that possibly they can, that so they may make
up their revenge full. Now the want of weighing, and considering rightly of
these things, was the cause of the loss of these Provinces.

By what has been said it appears, that the King should not have made so much
have to have brought in the Inquisition amongst them; neither should He have
put such extraordinary Taxes upon them; or have affrighted them with the fear
of War. But He should rather upon the sudden, and before they were aware of any
such thing, have clapped strong Garrisons into all the great Cities, and all the
Valiantest, and most Eminent Men of any Seditious City, should have been sent
abroad some whither else, under the Pretense of some Military Employment; and
the Ringleaders of all Heresies were to have been extirpated and rooted out;
and honest Preachers, chosen out among the Natives, and such as were ^ound in
the Catholic Religion, should have been substituted in their places: and then
at last, after all this, should the Inquisition have been brought in, by the
means of the Bishops, though under some other name. And yet even then, He
should have forborne to have imposed any Taxes upon them: that so it might
appear to all the world, that nothing but their own Welfare and Good was sought
after, by Religion; and not the Kings Advantage, and Benefit only. There
should also have been set over them such Governors as were chosen either out
of the Germans, or Italians; seeing they naturally abhor a Spaniard; and these
indeed should be employed only in the keeping of Cities, but not be made
Governors of them: for they are too Severe, and Ceremonious; whereas the Dutch
should have such Governors set over them, as are more Remiss, and Easy.

To these Errors were added others, that were committed in the Managing of the
War: for, the King himself, who was very much beloved of them, as being
descended of German Blood, yet never went himself in person to the War, but
sent in his stead Spanish Commanders, who were cruel by nature, and withal
extremely hateful to the Dutch; being such, as in their Commands would make use
of Blows rather, then of Fair Words. And the truth of this appeared, in that
they desired to have one of the House of Austri^ to be their Head; and
therefore made choice of Matthias, the Archduke. After him, they chose one
that was ne^rer unto them, namely Francis, the King of France his son; who yet,
having afterward laid a plot so, as that upon a certain day appointed, he
would have entered into the City of Antwerp upon a sudden, with all his Horse,
whilst the Citizens dreamt of no such thing, and would by this means have
made himself Master of it; (but in the mean time having beforehand laid no
foundation for this his design, neither by way of Religion, nor Policy;) He was
in an instant driven out again by the Tradesmen and Merchants, and that not
only with the loss of his Reputation, and Principality, but so great was the
Tumult, that He had like to have lost his life in it too. And although
Margaret, Arch-Duchesse of Austria, was made Governesse of these Provinces for
one while, and ruled there indeed with the Love and good Will of the Subjects;
yet could She not by any means reduce the same into a due Obedience; because
that Heresy had now taken so deep root amongst them, and that the People had
besides a suspicion, that She had a Design of reducing them, and bringing them
again under the Obedience of the Spanish Scepter: and this was the Pretense,
under which the Ringleaders of that Sedition amongst them, covered their desire
of Principality, and Liberty, which they so greedily thirsted after. And yet
afterward God himself showed a way by which these people might have been
subdued; seeing that they were so divided by their several Sects, into diverse
parts; some of them standing for dull Luther, others for subtle Calvin, and
some again for dissolute Zuinglius, and Mennon: in so much that you can hardly
find a house amongst them, wherein these different Heresies are not maintained;
neither are we wanting to our selves in any thing, save only that we have not
the skill to lay hold on so wished an Opportunity as this is, and to make the
best use of it. For, every Kingdom that is divided within it self shall be
destroyed; and a firm Union has always a very hard Knot to ^ye.

Notwithstanding we have not yet succeeded all this while; not because the
Enemy does do us any harm, but because we annoy them. For it is certain, that
by reason of their differences in Religion, they dare not one of them so much
trust another, as to join together in the Election of a General for their Wars:
so that, if ever any where, it may be truly said here, that, Quot capita, tot
sententiae, so may Men, so many minds. I would be understood to speak here, in
reference to their Making of Wars abroad for the enlarging of their
Dominions. For, they are every one of them so Jealous, as that they cannot
believe, but that, should they proceed to the choosing of such a General to be
over them, He would presently take upon himself the Authority to extirpate all
such Sects of Religion, as are different from that which He professes: and it
would be the general fear of them all, that such a one would usurp an Absolute
Power over them. And therefore we see, that the successes which they have had
in their Wars, under the Conduct of Count Maurice, have yet heartned them so
far only, as to enter into a League amongst themselves of maintaining a
Defensive War, but not of an Offensive.

And then in the last place, there be many other mischiefs that lie in the way,
to hinder the Spaniards from compassing the Dominion of these Provinces.

The First whereof is, because they are to fight with an Enemy in his own
Country; to whom both the Nature, and Site of the Country, and also the Temper
of the Air are very agreeable; all which are most contrary to the temper of the
Spaniard.

The Second is^ because that this Nation understands very well, how great
Inconveniences do arise unto them, by this their War with the Spaniard; and
therefore it is not without good cause, that they do so hate the Spaniards, who
are the Authors of this War: and certainly, to them, -- Pax una triumphis
Innumeris potior. --
A Firm Peace once settled betwixt them, would be infinitely more Advantageous,
then all the Victories they shall get, be they never so many.

A Third is, because that the Spaniards being now, as it were, mad, that the
Netherlanders have been able to hold them play, now for so many years together;
should they but once get the better of them, They would questionless make a
horrible slaughter amongst them: seeing that They do now at this time miserably
afflict what Towns soever they take in, punishing the Inhabitants most
grievously.

A Fourth Hinderance of the Spaniards Success herein is, because that the
Spanish Commanders fight only so, as that they may have still Occasion to
fight, and not that they may get the Victory; by this means making, as it were,
a Trade of War; which should be used rather as a Means, not only of Defending,
but also of Enlarging their Dominions. And the very same is the Practice of the
Commanders of the other side also: for even Count Maurice himself, to the end
that He may the longer keep that Power he has in his hands, and that
conquering the Country by degrees, he may at length get into his power the
whole Principality of it, protracts the War, and spins it out as long as he
can: and His footsteps do the rest of the Officers and Commanders diligently
follow.

Now the Spanish Commanders prolong the War, that so their Pay, as well as
their Authority may also be prolonged; and take the same course here, that
Charles Spinola took, when he was sent into Abruzzo, against Mark Sciarra; with
whom he dallied only, and had no desire to destroy him: that so the Viceroy of
Naples might leave Him to be as it were Lord of Abruzzo, and might also send
him those large Sums which he had promised him for his Service; mean while
that Scia^ra himself also sent him vast Presents, to the end He should not fall
too hard upon him. And thus Spinola being paid on both sides, (both by his
friend, and his enemy) continued for a long time, and without any danger, the
Lord of that Country. So that it is no wonder, that King Philip having spent
such vast Sums of Money in this War with the Net^erlands, has yet not only
done no good upon it, but has besides exasperated the enemy so much the more,
and caused them to be the more exercised and experienced in Martial Affairs,
and has given an Opportunity to his A^tagonist, Count Maurice^ and the rest of
the Dutch Commanders, of acquiring to themselves great Fame and renown for
their Military Prowess: and has now brought the business to that pass, that
his enemies, though never so much divided among themselves in their Religion,
do yet, merely through fear of the Spaniard, continue faithful and Constant to
the League that it made betwixt them.

And therefore truly I am of Opinion, that this War which the Spaniard now
maintains against the Hollander, is both more Disadvantageous to the
Spaniards, and on the other side, more Advantageous to the Hollanders (only
because they are thus continually forced to be in arms^) then if they were let
alone, and suffered to live quietly. For thus we find it testified by Salust,
and after him by Augustine; that the Romans, by being continually exercised,
and vexed with War, by their Neighbors, became by this means more eminent and
glorious every day then other; and by the Tyranny of Tarquin, and others, they
grew thereby more and more united among themselves: whereas on the contrary,
when they were once left to themselves, without any to annoy them, they then
presently fell to raise Civil Wars amongst themselves. For when that Cartharge
was once laid flat with the ground, and that the whole World was now conquered
by them; being thus freed from all fear of Foreign Enemies, through a Mutual
Emulation amongst themselves they became presently to be divided into Factions,
and by this means brought destruction both upon themselves, and their
Common^Wealth; as we see clearly in the examples of Sylla and Marius; and of
Caesar and Pompey: So true an Argument of Wisdom is it, not to hold your
Neighbors in War too long, lest by that means they come to be Skilful and
Valiant Soldiers. For thus heretofore it was objected against Agesilau^^ who
had been wounded by the Thebans, namely, that He had received but his due
Reward from them, for teaching them, by His making a long War upon them, how to
use Arms.

But the chiefest point of Wisdom is, for a Prince not to make War upon his
subjects; especially if they be his Natural subjects, and Natives. For by this
means they will be but the more exasperated, and more Averse from Him: and so,
that which was at first but only a little Heart-burning, as it were, breaks out
afterward into open Rebellion: as we see it happened to Sigismund, in his War
that He made against the Bohemians. For certainly you will never meet with any
People, that are so utterly devoyd o^ all shame, as presently^ and upon the
Instant to rise and take up arms against their Prince; seeing that the very
Name of Treachery and Rebellion is infamous, and hateful every where. But when
that the Princes sword is once stained with the subjects blood, and that the
Tie of Protection is now broken, and all care of Justice thrown aside; they use
then openly to fall off from him, and to declare themselves his Enemies.

Alexander, King of the Jews, beginning at last to be weary of the long War he
had maintained against them, wherein he had destroyed at least fifty thousand
men; and asking some of his friends by what means there might be a firm and
happy Peace concluded upon betwixt them, was answered; that this could not be
brought about by any other means, then by His Death: and thus did He, though
too late, do that which He ought indeed to have done at the first. I could here
reckon up many other examples to this purpose, but that I have resolved not to
transgress against the Brevity which I at first proposed to my self.

To return therefore to my purpose, I shall here lay down for an Observation,
that those that are put to fight in their own Country, for their Wives and
Children, pro Aris et Focis, as the Ancient Romans were used to say, are
always wont to fight more stoutly, then those that make war upon a foreign
Country; for, that Assault which is not successeful the first day, grows by
degrees weaker ever after, and withal adds the greater courage to those that
are assaulted. For, the assailants, be^ides those other Inconveniences that
Naturally accompany all War, which certainly are very great, are also wearied
out by the Disagreeablenesse of a strange Air, and Soil. Which thing, if
Hannibal had understood, or considered, and had immediately after his first
Victory at Trebia, marched against Rome it self, and had besieged It; he might
at that time easily have overthrown the whole Roman Empire: Or at least, after
his Victory at Cannae, which was much the greater, He should not have given
the Romans any time to gather together fresh Forces; but, following the Counsel
of Maherbal, should presently have set upon Rome it self. Thus Absalon also, if
he had followed the Counsel of Achitophel, and had at the first pursued his
Father David; he had utterly destroyed him, and had possessed himself of all
Iudaea; neither had he given him any time to have gathered forces together, and
to have recovered courage, as he did, to his Destruction. The Enemy is
therefore either at first to be presently suppressed, that so he may not get
time, and gather strength; or else he is some way or other to be drawn forth of
his own Country; in like manner as He^c^les drew forth Antaeus, King of L^^ya,
that so He might the easier disposs^sse him of his T^^o^^. F^^ otherwise, the
nearer he came to the g^ound, that is, to his o^^ ^ountry, the stronger he
presently grew: as the learned Fable (...) us. So that it, seems to be both a
vain, and Absurd und^^taking, to maintain a war still with the Netherlanders,
in their own Country, seeing that they could not be conquered at the very
beginning of the war: for the war does but only increase their strength, and
makes them abler to resist. And therefore I conceive, that there are but two
ways left now to be taken, for the bringing this business to effect; the
first of which is to sow the seeds of Division amongst them; and the second, To
draw them forth out of their own Country. Cadmus, having a design of erecting
a Monarchy at Thebes, whether he came a stranger, is said first to kill a
Serpent; by which was signified, the Defense, and Safeguard of Thebes: and then
afterward, to sow the Teeth of it; that is to say, to scatter abroad the
Poison of Desire of Innovation, and an Earnestness to be instructed in the
knowledge of learning, namely, in such New Sciences and Arts, as he had brought
over with him from his own Country. And hence Soldiers are said to spring up,
who through mutual discord slew each other; and the remainders of them that
were left, joined themselves with Cadmus, their Head, and Captain; so laying
the foundation of the Kingdom of Thebes in Boeotia. I affirm therefore, that
these very Courses ought to have been taken by the King of Spain; and not a war
to have been only maintained against them all this while.

And certainly if the Southern People would ever conquer, or lay the
foundations of a Monarchy over the Northern, seeing that they are not strong
enough to bring the same about, they ought to have recourse to the Arts either
of Cadmus, or else of Jason: although of the two, Jason went the more wisely to
work; seeing he first won the heart of Medea, that is, the good will and
Affections of the Northern Women to him: for, the Women of those Countries are
easily brought to love Southern Men, by reason of the Natural Heat that is in
them, which those Women like very well: neither indeed do the Netherlanders
hate the Spaniards so much, as their Wives love them. Afterward Jason, by the
enchantments of Medea, slew the Dragon, that is, the Guard of the Kingdom; such
as are the Warlick and Valiant men of a Nation^ with the Preachers. And then
did he by the means of enchanted Ointments tame fierce Beasts, the
Brazen-footed, and fire-spitting Bulls; that is, by his Friendship and Gifts,
He won over to him the Nobles, and Principal men of the Kingdom. And at length,
by them he sowed about the Teeth of the Dragon; that is, by the assistance of
the Nobles, he spread abroad the Seeds of Discord and Dissension about
Religion, Arts, and Honors. Whence in the last place sprung up Soldiers, that
is, Factions; (such as are those of the Guelphs and Gibellines, the
Pontificians and Imperialists, the Lutherans and Catholics,) wherein they
killed each other: But those that remained, chose Jason for their Head, and
Commander; and, though few in number, yet afforded Him their assistance in the
getting of the Golden Fleece, that is to say, such an Empire as we here speak
of.

This Learned Fable I have therefore proposed, and explained, that I might show
the King of Spain what he is to do; seeing that He has hitherto taken so great
pains, and lost so many men, and all to no purpose; as Cadmus did, before he
had killed the Serpent. Namely, in the first place, I would have either the
King himself, of else his Daughter, or his son, to go and dwell either a
Antwerp, or Bruxels; or, if he think fit rather, at Gaunt; that so, by their
Presence, the Subjects may be the more encouraged, and withal Forraigners may
be drawn thither too; herein following the Example of Cadmus, who, after his
men were slain, went himself to the Fountain of the Serpent, that kept the same.

In the next place, I would have Him remove from all the Neighboring Provinces
all Suspicion, or fear of having any more Wars made upon them by the Spaniards;
and He should suffer them to live a while in peace, and quietness: and He
withal show himself so gentle, and full of humanity to his own Subjects there,
that Foreigners, taking notice of it, should even repine thereat, and should
have a desire kindled within them of enjoying the same happiness, and of
joining themselves with His Subjects in the defending of that his Dominion.

In the Third place, He should remit the Taxes and Impositions that have been
laid upon those Places that are under his subjection; and should exact no more
of them, then what is necessary for the Maintenance of the Kings Court only,
and the payment of the Soldiers that keep the Garrisons there: But however,
instead thereof, He should require a certain number of Soldiers to be raised
yearly out of every City; which He may send away into the West Indies. And let
him be sure to pick out the stoutest, and ablest men, for this purpose; by this
means diverting the Noxious Humors from hence, and turning them another way;
and filling up with these men his Armies in other Parts. For, from all such
Countries as abound in Men, it is better to require Men, then Money: for, this
is both more advantageous to the Prince; and also more agreeable to the humor
of the People themselves.

Fourthly, I would have Him make a General Feast every year, to be kept upon
one certain day, in each several City and great Town, and at His own charge; at
which time every City throughout the whole Province would Voluntarily declare
their readiness to serve the House of Austria. And at this Yearly Feast I
would have no cost to be spared: for, there is nothing in the world that does
more unite this People among themselves, and bind them to others, then to Feast
them, and make them Drunk once a year at least: which Practice is said to have
been first taken up by Minos, the ancient Lawgiver.

Fifthly, I would have the Name of the Inquisition taken away; though the
Inquisition it self should be kept up by the Bishops, but under some other
Name; and ^t should not be so severe, as it is in Spain, and at Rome; but the
Terror of it should consist in Words only, and Threatenings, rather then in any
more Harsh Usage.

Sixthly, that under pretense of a Croysade Expedition, there should be
Indulgences, and Dispensations procured from the Pope concerning Fasting days,
and the Abstaining from Flesh at certain times of the Year: for, these People
are infinitely given to Feastings, and Revellings.

Seventhly, all Garrisoned Towns should be kept by Spanish Soldiers; but the
Government of the same should be committed to the care of Bishops; as the
Government of the several Provinces should be put into the hands of Cardinals;
who should be such as are of Ripe Years, and a^e eminent also for Wisdom. And
then would I have some of the Gentry of Venice to be appointed as Judges, and
to have the hearing of all Law Causes amongst them: for by this means the
Italians and Low-Countrymen will easily be reconciled to each other; seeing
that these later love the Itaelians much better then they do the Spaniards.

Eighthly, let Soldiers be tempted by large Pay to leave the service of the
Rebel Netherlanders; and these should be sent away to the King's other Armies
abroad; and the Spaniards should do well to inveagle, and fetch away Women out
of Their Quarters into their own; where they should be married to Spaniards.
And I would also have Women of Q^ality from among the Dutch Heretics to be
chosen out, and married to some of the Catholic Nobility: for, as I have
showed before, these Women would willingly yield to love such Husbands. And
indeed it is a wonderful thing to imagine, how Advantageous a matter it is to
such Princes, as have conquered any Nations, to have their Subjects contract
Marriages with the Women of the said Nations. For, Alexander the Great himself
marrying Roxane, a Persian Lady, and giving to others of his Army a hundred
other women of the same Nation for Wives, got Himself a great deal of good Will
among the Persians; who hereupon persuaded themselves, that they should find
Alexander a very courteous and loving Prince to them. And Livy writes of those
of Capua, that nothing did more hinder them from joining with Hannibal, then
the Affinity that had been contracted betwixt them and the Romans.

Ninthly, let Him endeavor to weaken the Heads of their Factions, by making
War upon them from several parts at once, and let all diligent care be used,
that they may be more distracted every day then other, and divided among
themselves: that so through their own dissentions, and their envy at the mutual
Concord and Prosperity of their Enemies, they may even despond, and lose all
heart and courage. And this course, of making your own Advantages out of your
Enemies Sufferings, is a most useful one, and was very much practiced by Queen
Elizabeth of England.

Tenthly, seeing that it is only the fear they have of the Spaniard, and
especially the hatred they bear to the Pope, that keeps them at Unity among
themselves; because they do all unanimously agree in this, that the Pope is
Antichrist, though in all other of their Tenets they are at sufficient
difference among themselves; there must therefore care be taken, that all fear
of War being removed, That Controversy only be proposed to be publicly
disputed on; for, upon this do all the rest depend. Neither would I have any
other Nice, or Frivolous Questions to be at all proposed to them to be
discussed; but only that one, Touching the Novelty of the Papal Authority; as I
have touched before, and whereof I treated sufficiently, in my Dialogue against
These Men.

In the Eleventh place, it must be Unanimously, and stoutly maintained against
them, that All Commentaries whatsoever that have been written upon the Bible,
whether by Catholics, or Heretics, ever since S. Augustin's time, are to be
suspected, and not to be trusted to; and that the only Authors that are to be
received, are S. Clemens Romanus, S. Cyprian, Clemens Alexandrinus, S.
Chrysostom, Basil and Tertullian. For, the Heresy of Denying Free Will, and
the like, are to be better understood out of the Ancients, (to whom also these
people are most of all addicted) then out of Later Writers, (whom they cannot
endure to hear of:) as appears plainly out of Clemens Romanus. I would have
that controversy therefore to be discussed, touching the Original of that
Evil, that moved Epicurus, and some others, to deny that there was a God: for,
they persuaded themselves, that He was excluded, by reason of Evil. Others
there were, that believed there were Two Gods; of which number were Manes, and
perhaps Pythagoras too. Others, as the Libertines, have boldly declared that
their Opinion was, that there was no such thing, as either Evil, or Sin. Others
have taught, that God is the Author, and Cause of all Evil; and that he is a
Tyrant: and of this Opinion are Calvin, Zuinglius, Bullinger, Luther, and Beza;
namely, while they will have God to be the Author of All Things. Which Opinion
certainly, as both Cicero, and Plato teach, must needs tend to the disturbance
of every Well Ordered Commonwealth, for as much as it deprives Men of all
Freedom of doing either well, or ill; and so in effect destroys all Law and
Discipline. And the long Canvasing, and dwelling upon the Examination of this
Opinion, has made all those on the other side the Alps, Atheists, and
Epicureans; who have therefore denied that there is a God, because they would
not assent to yield Obedience to the Pope of Rome.

And therefore my judgment is, that in disputing with these men in the
presence of Learned men, they should have Political, and Natural Arguments
urged against them: And again, before the Common People, they should be
required to give an account, whence they had their Calling: as I have showed
more at large in my Dialogue, and my Political and Theological Questions,
written against These Men. For, the Multiplying of Books, and the Spinning out
of Controversies, do but add Authority to a Bad Cause, and besides also show
like a kind of Victory.

Twelfthly, these Heretics after they had put forth New Bibles into the World,
and wresting all the Fathers and Historians as they pleased, put such
interpretations upon the same as they thought good; they then began, in order
thereunto, to apply themselves to the study of the Hebrew, and Greek Tongues,
and started a thousand Grammatical Niceties, wherewith they have filled up many
great Volumes: in so much that the whole North in a manner makes a Grammatical
War upon us, rather then a Spiritual: whereas We have long since laid aside the
study of the Languages, ever since we overcame the Hebrews, Greeks, and
Latins, and have made them submit themselves to Christianity, or else have
divested them of the power of discharging all Political, and Sacerdotal
Administrations; as it is with the Jews at this day. And therefore we intend
not now to trouble our selves any further with Petite Sophistical Niceties, and
Grammatical Quirks; but relying only upon our own strength of Wit, we let alone
all Prolixe Courses of Disciplines, and the tediousness of writing huge
Volumes: mean while that these men spend their time herein, and weary us out
almost with their Cavillings, although they do not get the better of us.

I conceive therefore, that these men should be taken off from these their
Grammatical Heresies, namely by some New Arts and Sciences^ and such wherein we
are excellent our selves. And to this end the King should erect certain Schools
in all the Principal Cities, wherein the Arabic Tongue should be taught; that
so by this means there may be such among his subjects as shall be able to
dispute with the Turks, Moors, and Persians, who by the use of that Tongue
spread their Ma^umetanisme, as We do Christianity, by the Latin Tongue: and so
by this means our Intestine Wars may be laid aside, and our Arms turned
against Foreign Enemies.

There should also Schools be erected for the Mathematics, and Astrology; unto
which these Northern People should be invited to come, by proposing some
Salaries for such of them, as shall apply themselves to the Discovering, and
giving an Account of such Stars^ and Constellations, as are found in the other
Hemisphere, in the New World. For, by this means there would redound to the
Spanish Empire both Hono^r, and Profit. I would also have the Schools of the
Old Philosophers to be opened again; as of the Platonists, and Stoics, and of
the Telesins; that so the People may be diverted from Theological Questions,
and may apply themselves to study Questions of Philosophy; for, these come
nearer to the Christian Faith, then the Doctrine of Aristotle does. Now the
King, in doing these things shall follow the Example of Hercules, who, to the
end He might the more easily overcome An^taeus, drew him forth of his own
Territories; and also of Cadmus, who brought over New Arts and Sciences with
him into Boeotia; and by means of the same, got to be Prince of that Country.
And by taking this Course, the Principal among the Heretics, when they shall
see there is more to be gotten there then here, forsaking their Heresies, will
become Ringleaders in the Sects of Philosophy, and Astrology.

And besides^ that they may gain our favor, they will probably make head
against their enemies the Turks, and their impious Doctrine, which has
insensibly crept into Germany; because it agrees very much with Calvinisme.
There should also be erected Public Workhouses, for the exercise of
Mechanical Arts, to which this People is exceeding Apt; and so by this means
will the Business of Navigation be much promoted, together with the skill of
Besieging Towns, and of taking them in by the use of Artificial Fireworks. By
this means the People (probably) will be taken off from their False Religion,
and divided one from another; to the great Advantage of the King, and Kingdom
of Spain; to whom many will now come and tender their Service; and His Empire,
which of late has been Contemptible, and hateful to all the World, shall
recover its ancient Splendor and Honor.

13. There must mutual Contentions and Hatred be stirred up amongst the Nobles,
and Principal Men of the Country: and that part, that most favors the Spanish
Interest, must be assisted, and rewarded with gifts; that so the rest may be
brought over too, and may be encouraged to do the like. But if this cannot be
done, He must then rid them ^ut of the way; or if the cannot ^e found to have
deserved death any way, then must their Rep^tation only be diminished, (^or
Injustice never yet took deep root) or else they must be sent away into some
other parts. Paulus Aemilius, that he might leave Macedoni^ in a quiet and
peaceable condition, persuaded all the Principal of the Nobility to take their
wives and children, and go live in Italy. And Charles the Great, to prevent the
frequent Tumults and Commotions that were in Saxony, sent all the Nobility of
that Country into France.

14. They should be prevailed with to sail away into the New World, and to join
with the Portugal Fleet, and break into Arabia and Palestine, through the Read
Sea, ^o to annoy the Turks, as shall be hereafter showed: that so being drawn
out of their own Country to fight against Foreign Enemies, they may be
destroyed by the Spaniards, who in this particular are much abler men then They.

15. The seeds of Emulation, and Envy should be sowed amongst them, that after
the example of those Brothers that sprung up out of the Serpents Teeth, they
may destroy one another; and that those few of them that shall remain, may be
afterward made use of by the King of Spain, for his service. But then it is
necessary, in the first place, that the Serpent of Sedition it self, I mean
Count Maurice, should be destroyed; and not have Opportunity given him, by the
continuing of the War, of growing greater and more powerful every day then
other. But before all^ as I said before, there must be New Learning, and New
Languages introduced amongst them, according to the Example of Cadmus; and
there m^st likewise Women be got away from them, after the example of Jason.

16. The Hollanders are to be hired every year, (though it should Cost the King
a Million of Gold) to be a convoy to the Spanish Fleet returning out of the
West Indies; and also to secure the Sea Coast of Spain against the English; and
those that are the Chief amongst them in that expedition, should deliver up
their Sons for Hostages, till such time as they shall have done their business
effectually. For these men will willingly be hired for money, to fight against
England: and very probably there will at length be found some one or other of
them, that will for money also betray even Holland it self, and their whole
Fleet, to the Spaniards. And certainly, if the seeds of Dissension, and Envy,
were but once sowed among the Principal men, and Nobles of these
Commonwealths; they would never be able to hold up so stiffly against the
Spaniards, and gain strength every day, as they do: neither would those, that
now maintain Bookish Controversies against the Pope, get so much reputation and
Authority among the People: and the King himself would also by this means
confirm his own Empire both by Sea, and Land, and would draw these People over
to him.

17 These People are wonderfully taken with Miracles, and are great Admirers of
any Excellency, and Eminent Virtue: so that any Holy, and Wise men, might
easily by their Arts draw them to any thing. Therefore there is need of such
diligent Workmen, who by their Doctrine, and Spotless Sanctimony of their
Life^ may call home those straying sheep to the way of Truth. And if it should
please God to call Me to take this Employment upon me, I should etc.

18. When these People were now once divided, and weakened; they should then
upon the sudden be set upon by an Army: for Delay tends rather to the
confounding, then the well Ordering of Affairs: For, -- Semper nocuit differ
paratis.
When Preparations now are made,
Designs are by Delay betrayed.


The King should therefore fall in upon them with a numerous^ and powerful
Army, in the head whereof Himself should be, and should withal make use of some
unusual Stratagem; without which, all his Designs will come to nothing. There
should also some one among the Spanish Commanders, who is both a Stout, and
also a Wise and circumspect man, be suborned by the King of Spain, to
counterfeit himself to be a Renegado, and going over to the Enemy, should
insinuate himself into the States General, and should prevail with them to make
him their General^ as we read Zopyrus did, who betrayed the City of Babylon,
whether he had fled, (having first cut off his own Nose, Ears, and Lips, and
making them believe, that all those were the Marks of the Cruelty of Darius) to
his Master: or, as Sinon did to the Troj^ns; and as Sextus Tarquinius did, who
going over to the G^bii^ and making them believe that he was fled from his
Father, and being both believed by them, and also chosen to be their General,
he first cut off the chief men of the Commonwealth, and afterward betrayed
the said Gabii to his Father. For the bringing about of the like Design
whereof, the King of Spain has need of a man that is most faithful, as well as
Valiant, and Wise; and not such a one as was that Perfidious fellow, Antonio
Perez.

19. Seeing that the Cities of the Netherlands were in former times, and before
the Wars, the greatest Mart Towns in all Europe, and that for no other reason,
but only because that the Customs of all such Commodities as were either
imported thither^ or exported into other parts (which were both infinite in
number, and of all sorts) were but small: it will therefore concern the King,
whiles He endeavors to reconcile these People to Himself, to take this into
his consideration, and to recall again that Ancient Custom, and, in a word, to
restore to the Netherlands its former Happiness, and to endeavor the
Continuation of the same. For, although these Countries have no Gold Mines of
their own, yet, while all things were quiet with them, and no noise of war
heard amongst them; what by their various, and inestimable Pieces of
Workmanship, and their admirable skill in Manufactures, and other Arts, they
had got together so much Gold, as that they needed not at all to envy either
the Hungarian, or the Transsylvanian Mines: Neither was there any Country more
Glorious, rich, or more frequented by Foreigners, I will not say, in all
Europe only, but in the whole World, then this was; in so much that, in regard
of that vast, immense Treasure, that Charles the V. received from thence, it
was for just cause called by some, The Emperors Indies.

It much concerns the Interest therefore of the King of Spain, that He
reconcile these People to Himself, and that things may be restored to their
former State and condition; which is a thing that is wont to be very easily
brought about. And to the effecting hereof He ought not to spare either for
Cost, Pains, Counsel, or Industry.

20. A Careful Administration of Justice, together with Peace, and Plenty of
all things, will contribute much to the bringing of these things about; as also
the Maintaining, and keeping up of Religion, Learning, and Virtue. For seeing
that those that are of Religious Orders, and other Learned men, and Persons of
Worth, are the men that are as it were the Heads among the rest of the People;
whosoever has These of his side, he may easily draw all the rest over to him
also.

For, those of Religious Orders bear rule over the Consciences of the People;
as the Learned do over their Wits; and those of Eminency and Worth, over their
Purses, and Military strength: Those former are looked upon for their Piety,
and Religion; the Other for their Learning and Wisdom: Those through
Reverence; These through the Esteem the World has of their Parts.

And hence it is, that what soever Those men either do, or say, it passes for
Oracular, and is thought worthy to be embraced and followed by All men.

21. The same also of a Princes being addicted to Mercy, and Clemency, and
constantly per^evering in the same, will stand him in very good stead; if so be
that it may be but made known to all men, that this Gentleness, and Connivence
in him proceeds merely from his own good Nature and Inclination; but that when
^e punishes any, it is out of Necessity, and his Zeal toward Justice, and the
love of the public Peace. Thus Nero, in the beginning of his Empire, by his
cunning dissembling his Natural Inclinations, and his appearing to be a
Merciful Prince, wonderfully won the hearts and affections of the people of
Rome to him: which part He acted so cunningly, and to the life, as that, when a
certain Sentence of Judgment, that had been pronounced by the Judges against an
offender, was brought to Him to set his hand to it, He sighing said, O quam
vellem literas non didicisse! I could wish, I had never known a letter.

22. The Rays of some extraordinary, eminent Virtue, shining forth in a
Prince, would also be of very great advantage to Him: for by this means he
would not only oblige his own Subjects to him, but even his Enemies would be
won over to love, and favor him; examples whereof we have in Alexander, and
Scipio; both of which gave testimony to the World of their Singular Continency,
and Moderation in all things; as likewise in Camillus, and Fabricius; who both
gave evidence of the Greatness of their Courage, the one against the Falisci:
and the other against King Pyrrhus. These sparks of Gallantry appeared also in
the Emperor Conrade, in his war again Misic^; and likewise in Charles the
Great, who besides his diligent Observance of Religion, and his endeavors to
promote Learning, got himself a great deal of Reputation also by his
Beneficence, and Liberality toward all sorts of men, both the highest, lowest,
and of middle rank, and indeed generally to all. And certainly there is not a
more Lovely, strong, and commendable Tie, whereby to bind the Affections of the
People to a man, then Liberality and Bountifulness.

23 But above all things, it would be a business of very great Efficacy, if
that such Covenants and Agreements as have been made betwixt the King and them
were but kept; which yet the Spaniards have neglected to do^ though to their
Cost, and the loss of their own lives. For, nothing does more offend, and
alienate the hearts both of Natural, as well as conquered subjects, then when
they see that those Capitulations, as they call them, and Articles, upon which
they have submitted themselves to any Prince, are altered, and changed by him.
And we see, that this being not observed by the Duke of Alva, who was a
Covetous, and Unjust man, and one that looked after nothing but his own Gain;
was the cause that the Netherlands began to raise such Tumults there, and at
length openly to rebel against the King. Whereas on the contrary, Alexander
Farnese, Duke of Parma, for his fidelity in keeping his promises and
Agreements, (which is certainly an Infallible Argument of a Constant Mind, and
of an Excellent Judgment, got himself an exceeding great repute of Gallantry
and worth among the Netherlanders. And questionless He was a most Complete,
and throughly-accomplished Soldier; and served as General under a most Just
King, always commanding an Army under Him, for the service of the Church, and
of God; sometimes following the example of Fabius, and sometimes that of
Marcellus.

24. Neither would it be a business of small moment, to bring in the Spanish
Tongue into these Countries, and to cause it to be spoken there; according to
the Practice of the Ancient Romans, who, when they had conquered any Country,
caused the Nation conquered to learn the Latin Tongue. Thus did the Arabians
also, after the example of the Romans, introduce their Language into a great
part of Africa, and of Spain: and William Duke of Normandy, surnamed the
Conqueror, endeavored, about five hundred years since, to do the same in
England^ But now, for the introducing of a Language into any conquered Country,
it is necessary, in the first place that the Laws of that Country be written
in the said Language, and that the Lawyers Plead in that Language in all Courts
of Judicature; and likewise that all Commissions, Proclamations, and Petitions,
be published, or written in no other Language but that. This was also done
heretofore by Charles the Great, who having made himself Master of the
Exarchate of Ravenna, which He afterward bestowed upon the Church, He would
have it called by the Name of Romania; that so by degrees He might bring into
disuse the Language, and Customs of the Greeks, to whom that People had been
formerly subject; and might withal implant in them the love both of the Roman
Church, and of the Roman Emperor. And even the Great Turk also does not suffer
any of the Inhabitants of Natolia to use any other Language but the Turkish,
save only in their Church Services.

25. Education also seems to have a great stroke herein, as being indeed, as
it were, a second Nature; by the means whereof, strangers are in a manner
Naturalized. The King of Spain therefore should do well to take the Sons of the
Nobility, and Principal men, as also such Poor men's sons, ar are found to be
endued with any extraordinary Natural Parts; and to take order that they may be
carefully brought up in some of the before mentioned Seminaries in Spain, either
of Arms, or of Arts. Alexander the Great, finding the benefit of this course,
commanded that so many Thousands of the Pe^sian Youth should be picked out, and
be Trained up in Learning the use of Arms, and in the Habit, and Manners of
the Macedonians; conceiving that He should b^ this means receive as much
benefit by them, when they were once grown up to be men, as by his own Natural
Subjects of Macedonia themselves. After the same manner does the Turk bring up
his Ianizaries, who are only the Children of such of his Subjects as he has
conquered by war, or else of Christians, and Foreigners, such as he can catch
abroad at Sea; which afterward prove the most faithful Soldiers to him that
ever he had. And indeed these are the men, to whom the Guard and Protection of
the Emperors person is committed; and these men does the Great Turk make use
of only, in all Affairs of the greatest consequence, where there is most need
either of strength, or Fidelity. By means of the Turks thus bringing up of ^he
sons of his subjects, He makes two great Advantages to himself; For, first he
deprives his unfaithful subjects of their strength; and then, secondly, by that
strength of theirs, of which he has deprived them, he confirms his own.

26. I would advise Our King, not to despise, or make light of any the least
Commotions, or Distempers among his Nobles, or Subjects: for, all Mischiefs
have but small Beginnings; which yet, if they be neglected, and not looked unto
in time, will very probably bring Ruin with them in the end: as we see, the
least Clouds in appearance at first, do in the end produce most Horrid Tempests
and storms.

27. I would not have the King to assent to the Proposal of any thing, that may
introduce with it any Change, or Innovation in the State: for, His very giving
way to have the same deliberated upon, adds both Authority, and esteem to the
same. All the Troubles that have befallen, both in the Netherlands, and in
France, took their Rise from Two little Books; of which the one was read to
Francis the Second, King of France, by Caspar Coligni; and the other was
presented to the Duchess of Parma by the L. de Brederode.

28. Let the King take heed, how he ever exercises his Absolute Power among
those people, where His Ordinary Power will serve the turn well enough: for,
That way of proceeding is proper to Tyrants only; but this Later, to Good
Princes. And indeed, all Absolute, and Extreme Power may rather be said to be
Tempest as, then Potestas, a Tempest, rather then Power.

29. Let there be all care taken, about the choosing of the Ministers of State
in those Countries, that only such be made choice of, as are but just
sufficient to discharge the Trust committed to them; and that they be neither
too much above it, nor beneath it: which we find to have been carefully
observed by the Emperor Tiberius. For, those whose Abilities are above the
Employment they are put upon, will be apt to neglect the same, as despising it,
and thinking it below them: and then, the other are not able to discharge it,
if they would.

Lastly, Let Him never so much trust to any Peace, as to make him quite lay
aside his Arms: for, such an Unarmed Peace would prove but a weak one.
Constantine the Great, enjoying now a Settled Peace every where round about
Him, disbanded all the Soldiers that lay in Garrisons upon the Borders of his
Empire: by which means He set open a Gate for the Barbarous Nations, to break
in upon His Territories. And in like manner Maximilian the First, trusting too
much to the Truce agreed upon betwixt Him and the Turk, and thereupon laying
down his Arms, was the cause of the Ruin of very many Christians.

And thus have we discoursed of these Particulars, as copiously as we thought
was fit to be committed to Paper: but, as for the rest of those more Secret
Particulars, and which are more worthy of Observation, I shall reserve them
till some other time, when it shall please his Majesty to admit me to his
Presence, and shall give me Audience concerning the same. However, in the mean
time, those things which we have here proposed, are not to be omitted: for,
unless by these Means here set down, the Peoples good Affection toward their
King be stirred up, and cherished, His Dominion in those parts will prove to be
but like a Plant without any Root. For, as every the least Storm will be apt to
overturn a Tree that has no firm Root in the ground; in like manner will every
the least Occasion offered alienate the hearts of the Subjects from their
Prince, where they are but ill affected to Him before; and will take them off
from their Allegiance to their Natural Prince; and being thenceforth hurried
about by Fortune, they will one while adhere to One, and by and by again to
Another. And hence arise all the Mutations that we see, in Kingdoms, and
States: a most evident Example whereof we have in the Kingdom of France.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Africa.
THe Turk possesses in Africa all Egypt, Algier, and Tunis. The Ki^gdome of
F^z has a peculiar King of its own; who nothwithstanding might very easily be
cast out of his Throne; because that Mahumetanisme in those parts is divided
into above sixty several Sects. The rest of the Kings in Africa have but very
small Dominions; except only the King of the Abyssines, who is commonly called
Prester John, and has above fifty smaller Kingdoms under him. This King of
the Abyssines is a Christian, although He does not profess the Pure, Catholic
Religion. It is necessary therefore, that Forces should be brought over thence
into Spain, seeing that the passage to and fro is very easy. For, our King is
possessed of the Kingdom of Oran there already, where He is in continual Wars
with the Moors: who might easily all of them be conquered, if he should but
make One Invasion only upon them with an Army of Germans. Neither indeed need
the King fear any Obstruction to His Spanish Monarchy from those Parts. For,
those Nations are much fitter to serve, then to Command, and bear Rule: neither
have They ever been able to conquer any of the Northern Nations, but rather
themselves have been always conquered by Them: excepting only Carthage, which
was a Colony of Tire; who yet were at length utterly ruined by the Romans. And
the Arabians also passed over out of Africa into Spain; where they kept their
footing for the space of Eight Hundred years; yet were at length quite driven
out again. Neither indeed were they truly Africans: but only the Novelty of
their Arms, together with that of their M^hometan Religion encouraged them so
far, as to fall upon so bold an attempt. But the Africans at this day are a
very Weak, unwarlike People: and, for as much as they are Naturally Envious,
Crafty, and of a servile Nature, the King of Spain, by making use of one of the
little Kings there, might in a little time break in upon them, and make his way
to the most Inmost Countries of all Africa; as the Romans of old did, by the
help of M^sinissa. And therefore Sebastian, King of Portugal, did wisely, when
he made use of the King of F^z his sons, for the getting, and possessing
himself of that Kingdom; although he was not so very wise, in venturing his own
Person in that Expedition. And indeed, because that the sons of those Kings are
wont to kill one another, they are so much the more easily conquered, if a man
do but make any one of them over to him. But seeing these People are so much
divided among themselves, there is no need of fearing them at all.

The King of Spain ought therefore to get further footing in Africa; seeing
that he has opportunity enough of doing so, by reason of the many strong Holds
that He is Master of, all along the Western, and So^thern Coast of Africa. And
He should do well, to make over to him the above named Prester John; whom he
should cunningly set against the rest, and get him to make War upon them. And
the King of Spain may very easily contract friendship with this Prester John by
means of the Jesuits, whom he may send thither; And He should also, by his
Em^assadours sent to him for that purpose, put him in mind of the Duty, and
Obedience that he owes to the Pope; (which was formerly done in the time of
Pope Eugenius IV. and Clemens VII. by means of the Portuguez;) and so should
make a League with him. There should therefore be sent thither such as are both
true Catholics, and Learned men, to instruct them in the Arts, and in the True
Religion, both which they are as yet Ignorant of: For, they would be easily
converted; and that so much the rather, because they say it has been
heretofore foretold them, by a certain Prophetess, whose name was Sinoda, that
They were predestined to join with the Latins, and to root out the Turk, and
to set at Liberty the Holy Sepulcher of Christ.

Seeing therefore that the King of Spain is Master of all the African shores,
He must make it his care, that none may have any Fleets to pass by the said
Coasts: but that it may be free and safe for the aforesaid Prester John, by the
assistance of the Portuguez, to sail into Palestine, when ever he pleases, by
the Gulf of Arabia, and there to fall upon the Turks, and to do them what
mischief he can. And to this purpose He is to be furnished with all Necessary
Means, (as namely^ Engines of War, and other such Provisions) whereby he may be
the better enabled to conquer the Turk. For, if Mahumetanisme should but once
be introduced into that Kingdom of his, it would prove extremely prejudicial to
the whole Christian World, and especially to Spain. He may also come in by
Egypt, and so fall upon the Turk. And if there were but a gallant Fleet lying
about Naples, that might go out at pleasure, and scour the Seas all along the
Northern Coast of Africa, it might easily be brought under the King of Spain's
power: and those Slaves also that are at Algier, and in Cyrene, might be dealt
with, to rise up all at once, and rebel, in favor of the Spaniard. And such a
Fleet, as I but now spoke of, might be maintained merely by the Prizes that
they should take: and so by that means would both Italy be secured; and all
such other places also, that are now obstacles to the Spanish Monarchy, might
be taken in.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Persia, and Cataia.
THe King of Spain must endeavor by all Means possible to hinder the Persians,
and those of Taprobana, from putting out any Fleets of Ships to Sea; and also
the Arabians; for these people would questionless be a great hinderance to his
Affairs in the East Indies, and would annoy His Fleet in its passage that way:
and might also probably infect the New-converted Christians there with
Mahumetanisme. He ought therefore to build strong Castles all along the Coasts
of Arabia and Ethiopia, and so likewise upon the Coasts of the Arabian Gulf,
and also in all the Southern Islands that lie upon the Coast of Africa, and
Asia: and He should enter into a League with the Persian, against the T^rk. And
yet perhaps He need not so much care to have the Turk quite extirpated; for,
whosoever of those two, should overcome the other, whether the Turk, or
Persian, he would thereby become so powerful, as that he would be able to
conquer the whole Christian World, and so consequently to spoil all the hopes
of a Spanish Monarchy: and it might prove as Prejudicial to Christendom, to
have the Turk ruined by any other, but some Christian Prince; as it would be
for the advantage of Christendom, that he should be conquered by the
Christians themselves alone.

But yet, seeing that the Turk does us continually very much harm, breaking in
upon us by Hungary, Sclavonia, and Africa; it would be good Policy to set the
Persian upon him; and to take a course that He may have Guns, and such like
Artillery ^ent unto him, to make use of in his Wars against the Turk. For, it
was merely the want of these, that was the cause that He lost almost all
Armenia, and that the Turk is now so Potent in the East, and that he so little
fears the Persian, as he does: for by this means, whiles he is making War upon
the Christians in the West, He is secure from all danger from Asia; and so gets
ground upon us daily more and more. It would be convenient therefore to make a
League with the Persian; and especially, in respect of the Kings Negotiations
in the East Indies; because that His Fleet must pass by the Persian Coast. And
I am of opinion also, that the same ought to be done with the Kings of Calecut,
Narsinga, and Caramania: but these are not to be furnished with Guns. They may
indeed be instructed in the Art of Printing, and other Arts, that are in use
among the Christians: to the end they may thereby have the Christians in
admiration, and high esteem; and that by the introducing of Ingenious Arts and
Sciences amongst them, they may be made our Own. And yet Arts are wont to
become a Prey to Arms at last; unless they be both equally in practice
together. And hence it is that Pallas, in the Fable, is said to have overcome
both Calliope, and Mars; because She was experienced as well in the use of Mars
his Arms, as Calliope's Arts.

The like course is to be taken with those of Taproban^, China, and Iapan, by
communicating our Arts and Sciences to them; as Printing, Painting, and the
like; which will be very much admired by them; and by the means of which, they
may by degrees he won over, and may be brought to embrace the Christian Faith.
But those that deal with them, must be sure, that above all things they abstain
from Covetousness, and exercising of Cruelty upon any of these people; lest
otherwise they should be provoked, and should join all together against us, and
should thereby prove a great hinderance to the Spaniards Designs.

We shall not need to speak any thing here of the Great Cham of Cataia, seeing
that his Country lies so far out of the road that the Spaniard takes in his
Voyage to the East Indies; notwithstanding that the Persians, and Turks have
cause enough to stand in fear of him: and we know very well, that the
Tartarians have many times overrun all Asia; and that also, becoming
Christians, they restored unto Us Jerusalem. Yet afterward, when they once saw
Our Unworthy, Base Disposition, in that, notwithstanding we all professed the
same Christian Religion, we were yet continually at War one with another; they
forsook Christianity again, and presently embraced Mahumetanisme, which at that
time flourished infinitely, and was in high esteem throughout the Whole East.
And by this means was it, that they came to give over making war any longer
upon the Persians and Turks, whom they now suffered to live quietly, without
being at all annoyed by Them, who yet had in former times often overthrown, and
beaten them: But, on the other side, they were more and more alienated from the
Christian Faith, and from the Christians, whom they saw to be so Base, and
Unworthy, as to be continually at discord and variance amongst themselves. And
yet I believe, that the Glorious Spanish Monarchy, which encompasseth the whole
Earth, will shortly reduce them, and bring them to embrace again the Christian
Religion: especially if there should any Wars break out in the Eastern Parts;
and that so much the rather, because that Macon is now divided into many
several Sects. Besides, the People of Calecut, and of Goa, are Christians
already, though but Nestorians: yet they might easily be brought to embrace the
True, Primitive Christian Religion, if it were but proposed to them to
consider, that God has always preserved the Church of Rome, and firmly
settled it in its own Proper Seat, and Power: whereas on the Contrary, all the
Heresies of others have been successelesse, and could never get any Dominion,
or Authority throughout Christendom: as appears by Arius, Nestorius,
Macedonius, Apollinaris, and all other Authors of Heresies.

Now I do not know any thing that would cause those most Remote Kingdoms to
admire us more, and that would sooner draw the Inhabitants of the same from
their Superstitions, and would besides weaken them too, and make them unapter
for War, then if the Knowledge of the Liberal Arts, the Languages, Philosophy,
and the Mathematics were carried thither from hence, by some of our Western
Professors of the same; because that -- Minuit vires, nervosque Minerva.
Minerva's quiet Arts
Take off, and Chill our hearts.
Let the King therefore take care, that Forraigners may be exercised only in
Idle, Umbratil Sciences, and Light, toyish matters, and Pastimes: but in the
mean time let Him keep His own Natural Subjects to the exercise of their Arms
also, together with those forenamed Sciences: by which Means He may still be
victorious.

But lastly, (that we may return to our former discourse, touching the Persians
aiding us against the Turks,) The Persians, having always relied wholly upon
the Number, and Goodness of their Horse, have notwithstanding in the mean
time, while they have been Victorious in the Open Field, yet lost their Cities
at home. And therefore I say, they are to be advised to fortify their Cities
with Castles, and strong Holds every where. For the Turk, although he have been
many times beaten by them, has yet by little and little so entrenched himself
about, as it were, with Garrisons, and Fortifications, made in all convenient
places, that he has by this means made himself Master of a very great part of
the Persians Country, and has possessed himself at last also of the great City
Tauris, or Ecbatan. They must be taught therefore to make use of the same Arts
in defending themselves, by which they have formerly been beaten.

CHAP. XXX. Of the Great Turk, and his Empire.
BY what means the Turk endeavors to make himself Lord of the whole World,
has been, as I conceive, sufficiently declared before in this Treatise: and He
will also at this time already be called, The Universal Lord; as the King of
Spain is called, The Catholic King: so that these two Princes seem now to
strive, which of them shall attain to the Universal Monarchy of the whole
World. And therefore I think it not amiss to examine here, in what Particulars
the one of them is either Inferior, or superior to the other.

The Great Turk is the most Absolute Lord of, and Heir to all the Goods that
his subjects have, throughout his whole Empire: and not of their Goods only,
but also of their Persons. And in this, He is worse then ever any Tyrant was;
in that He arrogates all to Himself: and, because that although He calls all
his People, His Sons; Yet He does not, like a Father, suffer them to inherit
any thing; but only bestows yearly upon every one of them as much as He thinks
fit, appointing them withal the Employments that they shall serve him in. He
has also a Religion that is framed according to his own Will only, without
taking the advice with him of any Archpriest. He has likewise a most Able
Soldiery; because that He takes all the likeliest boys, and youths through
all his Dominions, and breeds them up in Seminaries, erected for that purpose:
and these He employes both in his wars abroad, and in peace at home; making
some of them Soldiers, and others, Judges, and Noblemen also.

Neither has He any Barons to stand in fear of; neither has He any Brothers
to share with Him in the Empire: For, the Eldest Son, coming to the Empire
after his Fathers death, presently makes away with all his Younger Brothers.
Neither can He want any Men: seeing that He permits every one of his subjects
to take as many Wives to him as He is able to keep: so that neither
Inheritance, nor Virginity are any hinderance to the Procreation of Children in
his Territories. His custom is also in making his Wars, to go as it were round
about in a circle^ and so to deal with his Neigbouring enemies; neither leaving
any enemy behind him, nor ever going farther from home one way then another, as
has been said before. And he has besides an Admirable Art in his making his
Cessations from Arms, and Truces with his Enemies; being sure always to make
them for his own Advantage.

Now the Turk is descended from Iaphet, by Magog; and he has the Laws of Sem,
derived to Him by Ishmael; whence has sprung Mahumetanisme. And of Him, God
himself foretold Agar, that His hand should be against every man; and every
man's hand against him: and, that He should dwell in the p^esence of all his
brethren. And therefore we see, that He has pitched his Tents at
Constantinople, in the uttermost Angle of Europe, over against Us, who are his
Brethren, descending from Isaac, who was both the Legitimate, and Natural
Brother of Ishmael. For, as the Spaniards are descended from Tubal, so the
Turks are descended from Magog; who were both the Sons of Iaphet.

And truly the Turk does put forth his hand every way, not only against all
Christians, but also against Mahumetans, now here, now there; one while on the
right hand, and then on the left; and still goes away the Conqueror. He makes
use also of another point of subtlety, which is, that so soon as ever He finds
that we are at union amongst our selves, He then presently flies to making a
Truce with Us: which notwithstanding he presently breaks off again, so soon as
ever he sees us at dissension among our selves. And whenever he is returned
Victorious from one Couutry, He presently falls to the making of some other
Expedition, either against the Persians, or the Ethiopians etc. as has been
showed before.

And yet though all these things be thus, yet does the King of Spain lay claim
also to the Dominion of that Empire, or at least of part of it, and tha^ by
reason of his Fraternity, both Natural from Iaphet, and also Legal proceeding
from Abraham; but yet in respect of this Later, he has the Pre-eminence above
the Turk. For, he is descended from Isaac; from whom Christ, who is also God,
is descended, the Chief Lawgiver of All; and He has also thereby a general
Promise made him, of the Universal Empire of the World.

And because He was Blessed also in Abraham, the last Kingdom of the Saints,
which is to succeed after the end of the Four Monarchies^ and of which Daniel
Prophesied, belongs unto him. But Ishmael, from whom Mahomet, the Turks
Lawgiver, is descended, had no other promise made unto him, but that he should
be an Absolute Lord, and a great and famous Warrior. Besides, both these
Princes are a part of the Roman Empire; for after that the Roman Monarchy shall
be at an end, there shall no other succeed it.

But according to Esdras, the G^rman, which is now the same that the Spaniard,
(as has been said before) is the Right Head, but the Turk is the Left Head of
the Imperial Eagle; after that Mahomet fell off from the Emperor Heracli^^^
during whose Reign the Eagle was divided: to whom notwithstandi^g there was no
other promise made, but that He should Devour the Middle Head, namely, the
Constantinopolitan; whereas the Spaniard has this Promise made him, that^ he
should devour the Left Head, that is to say, the Turk: as we have hinted
formerly. And although that the Spaniard has above him one that is a Clergy
Man, and that is also Armed with the Temporal Sword; yet does this make for his
advantage, both in respect of Fate, and of His State, as has been written
before; for as much as the Spaniard, according to the example of Cyrus, has
under him the United Monarchy of the Saints; and the Pope is also a most sure
defense and Safeguard to Him; by whose Assistance, he is able to deal well
enough with his enemies, both with spiritual, and Temporal weapons: and yet
so, as that He may easily withal avoid the suspicion either of Covetousness or
Profaneness.

Now as concerning the Absoluteness of Dominion, the Great Turk is herein much
above the King of Spain. But yet I have formerly showed, that this very thing,
of his not caring to have any Barons, or Nobles under him, renders Him, and His
Condition and State so weak, that if he should receive but one sound Blow only
in an open field Battle, it would so crush Him, as that he would never be able
to hold up his Head again. Which cannot happen to the King of Spain; because
that His Nobles, and Bishops, and also the Pope himself would speedily in such
a case send in Relief to Him. The Great Turk keeps under all the Great ones
among his Subjects, least they should attempt any Innovation in the State, or
act any thing to the Prejudice of His Monarchy; as the Nobility of France did
heretofore. But then in the mean time He does so weaken them, that they are not
able to yield him any Relief or Aid at all, in case he should come to have
need of it.

As concerning Military Discipline, and the Manner of making War, the Turk far
excells the Spaniard, as I have before shewed^ yet notwithstanding, if the King
of Spain would but use all convenient diligence, and withal carefully observe
those Rules, which I have here laid down before him; He might, even in this
Particular, surpass the Turk; and the rather, if so be He would but go himself
in Person to the Wars.

And as for the number of Men, and of Soldiers, the Turk goes beyond the
Spaniard; and indeed in all his greatest expeditions, He has ever done his
business rather by his Numbers, then by valor. And yet his Subjects are
divided amongst themselves in Religion; and then besides, all the Lands of
every Country are given in Fee only to the Principal Commanders of his Militia:
whereas the King of Spain has fewer Subjects indeed in number; but yet they
are more at unity among themselves. But I have already shown how the Number of
the King of Spains Subjects may be increased, by their Marriages with Foreign
Nations^ and also how, by means of erecting Seminaries for the instructing of
Youth both in learning, and the use of Arms, the Valor of his Soldiers may
be increased; the Neglect of making use of Which Means, has been the cause,
that the Turk has overstript us in this particular.

As concerning the business of Money, I conceive there is little or no odds on
either side. But if the King of Spain would but proceed in that Absolute way of
Power over his Subjects^ that the Turk does over his; He might easily surpass
him in Riches. The King, I confess, wants Money; but I have formerly showed
him, by what ways He might gather together Money enough to maintain a war
against the Turk. Now the Turk uses infinite Celerity and speed, in putting
what ever designs He has in execution, sparing no cost or charges for the
providing of all things necessary for the same: so that with the present Money
that he has in his Treasury He presently raises Men, and provides them Arms,
and gets all things immediately in a readiness, in order to the expedition He
is upon; and when he has laid out all the Money that he had in his Treasury,
he then presently falls to filling it up again, by laying fresh Impositions and
Taxes upon his Subjects.

It is a necessity, that is in a manner Peculiar to the Turk, of making War
upon his Neighbors round about, and as it were in a Circle: for, they are all
his enemies. But now, the condition of the Spaniard is otherwise. For, betwixt
His Kingdom of Naples, and his Duchy of Millan^ there lie the Pope and the
Tuscans; who are united unto him by the Tie both of Religion, and Friendship.
He lies something remote indeed from the Netherlands, and the West Indies:
which notwithstanding render him worthy the more admiration; because that, by
reason of his Fleets, he lies as it were near unto them: and by means of the
same he may possibly in time make himself Master of those other Parts also
which he has not yet possessed himself of; as we shall show hereafter. The
King has also this advantage, that although those Countries l^e at so great a
distance from one another; yet, by the Tie of Religion, they are all joined to
Spain.

Lastly, whereas in Turkey the Eldest sons of the Emperors are wont always to
make away with their Younger brothers, this piece of Cruelty of theirs does but
set a Note of Infamy upon them: and it may easily so fall out, that some One of
these Younger Brothers may get away out of his Elder Brothers power, and may be
able afterward to make War upon his Brother. And we see that this had been
like to have come to pass in Gemes, the Brother of Bajazet; who, having gotten
out of prison, might have been able to have done his Brother very much
Mischief, and, by the Assistance of the Christians, might have made his way
into Greece, had he not, by the Arts his Brother Bajazet used, and by the
treachery also of the Christians, been taken off by Poison. And Selim, although
He did not desire to make Himself Emperor, yet He made himself very strong; at
first, only to preserve himself from being put to death; but afterward, taking
the Opportunity when it was offered him, He turned both his Father, and Brother
out of the Empire, and commanded them to be both put to death: at which
Juncture of Time, that Empire might very easily have been utterly subverted,
and ruined. And truly I conceive, that the Total destruction of that Empire
cannot be brought about any other way, then by this one thing; namely, their
most bloody Cruelty that they Practice upon their nearest, and dearest Friends
and Kindred. For, seeing that the great Turk takes as many Wives to himself as
he pleases, and so gets an Infinite number of Sons by them; all which are most
certainly assured, that, when ever their Eldest Brother comes to be Emperor,
They shall be all of them murdered: it is very probable, that some time or
other there may Civil Wars arise in that Empire, by which it may either be
totally destroyed, or at least may be divided into many parts: which would give
the Turks enemies an Opportunity of falling upon him, and so of ruining him.
Neither need any one wonder, that this has not as yet happened to this very
day; seeing that this Empire is not of any so very long standing^ For, Ottoman,
who was the Founder of it, died but in the Year of our Lord 1328. in the time
of Pope Benedict XI. And yet we know, that there have already been bloody Wars
amongst them; which seems to confirm this our Prognostication; and makes me the
willinger to give credit to Torquatus the Astrologer, who foretold that it
would come to pass, that in the time of the Sixteenth Emperor of Turkey, that
Empire should fall to the ground: namely, when the Moon, which is the Ensign of
that Empire, shall begin to decrease; that is to say, when It shall be divided
into Two Horns, by two of the Great Turks Sons rising up one against the
other, and causing the Empire to be divided into Two parts: One of which
Brothers, turning to Christianity, shall come over to the Christians. Now these
Two Horns signify Two Kingdoms: for Kingdoms are oftentimes denoted by the
Ensigns, or Arms of the same: as we see in the Revel^tion of St. John, where
the Kingdoms themselves are from their Insignia, called sometimes Dragons,
sometimes Eagles, and sometimes also Lions; and the Prophet Jeremy calls the
Kingdom of the Assyrians by the name of a Dove; because the Assyrians had the
Figure of a Dove for their Ensign, or Devise.

Now in this Particular the Spaniard is much more happy then the Turk; because
that His Sons do not fall out, or hate each other for any such Cause. Yea, we
see at this day, that those of the House of Austria, partly by reason of this
very thing, because they are Brothers, and Kindred, and partly also through
fear of the other Christian Princes, and of the Heretics, are at so much the
greater Concord, and Agreement among themselves. And you shall scarce find more
Brothers, or Kindred, in any one Princes Family, then in that of Austria; and
yet have not these ever broken the Bond of Consanguinity one with another; nor
have ever raised any Commotions in their Republic, through Ambitious Ends and
Respects: but have, on the contrary, preserved each to other their Just Rights
Untoucht, and have lived together in so Unshaken a Concord and Union, as that
they seem to be so many Bodies, animated all with One Soul, and guided all by
One Will.

We may add hereto, that the Younger Brothers of this House have hopes either
of being made Cardinals; or else of being Elected Kings of Poland, or of some
of the other Foreign Elective Kingdoms: so that the House of Austria, by
reason of the Multitude of Sons, grows the Greater; whereas the Ottoman House
does, for the same reason, decrease every day more and more: not to say any
thing, how much the Turk's Subjects are offended with this Tyranny of his.

Experience also testifies, that the Daughters of the House of Austria have, by
their Marriages with other Princes, and the Inheritances thereby fallen to
them, very much advanced the Greatness of the Austrian Family, and have
enlarged their Dominions in a wonderful manner: and besides, they have also
caused the hearts of their Husbands, and of their Subjects, to incline to Our
King: and of this we have a clear Example this day in the Wife of the Prince of
Transylvania, and likewise in the Duke of Savoy's, and the King of Poland's
Wife. And the women of the Austrian Family are also all of High Spirits, and
are besides adorned with the Endowments of Virtue, and Gravity. Whereas, on the
contrary, the Great Turk bestowing his Concubines only upon his own Slaves, and
Bassaes, (as they call them) gets himself no advantage at all from abroad;
only He hereby obliges these men to be true and faithful to Him. And
therefore my Opinion is, that it would be the best way for the King of Spain,
never to marry a Wife out of the Austrian Family; unless He should thereby
come to inherit some New Country: because that it would be much better, that
those Daughters should be married abroad to Foreign Princes; that so they may
turn the hearts and affections of their Husbands toward the King of Spain.

But seeing that, as has been formerly said, the Turk stretches forth his
hand against All Men; whence it comes to pass, that All men in like manner
stretch forth their hands against Him; all whom yet he is frequently wont to
delude by his Cessations from Arms, and Truces, (for He keeps his faith with
none of them:) it would be a business worth our serious consideration, how
this Practice of his might be turned against Himself. Which that it may the
easilier be effected, the King of Spain should prevail with the Persians, to
invade Arabia with a Sufficient Army, persuading them, that this would be the
only means of securing their Own Territories; and possessing them withal with
this persuasion, that the Turk is the Common Enemy, and that therefore he ought
to be set upon on all sides to the uttermost of their power; least, after they
have once overcome us Christians, They themselves should fall to be his next
Prey: And then^ that under a Pretense of Zeal for Religion, they should
possess themselves of the City of Mecha, where is the Sepulcher of Mahomet,
who was the Head of their Empire: which Designs being but once happily, and
Prosperously accomplished, that then all other things would the more easily be
brought about.

Let the King of Spain also take care, that there may be a League made betwixt
the Persian and Prester John; and this Later should be persuaded to send out as
great an Army as he could, to invade the Common Enemies, the Turk's Country;
which Army should be carried over by the Red Sea, by means of the Portugals
Fleet; or else, He may send those Forces of his in by Land: and that not only
to enlarge their Own Empire, and Dominion, but also for the Advancement of
their Religion, namely, by recovering of Jerusalem, where the Sepulcher of our
Savior Christ is, which both We, and the Ethiopians too have now so many Ages
been deprived of. Both Nations therefore ought to bend their whole Forces that
way.

It would also be very Convenient, that the Muscovite (who should be persuaded
to this by some Polonian Orators) should at the same time fall in upon
Bulgaria, and Moldavia, with an Army. And the King should so order the Matter,
that at one and the same time the Emperor, and the Prince of Transylvania
should fall upon him in Hungary, and the Polander upon Macedonia, and Mysia:
that the Tu^k being by this means so distracted, may not know which part to
relieve first. The Georgians also should be secretly dealt withal, to embrace
this General Association, by the Venetian Merchants, and to fall upon Natolia,
and Trapez^nd, or Macedonia. And for the promoting of this Design, it would be
very convenient, that every one should keep to himself what he has got; except
Jerusalem only; which should be reserved for the King of Spain: of which
Country the King also should shortly afterward by little and little get the
Possession, by making use of the Convenience of the Red Sea.

I would also advise, that the King of Spain, and the Venetian, together with
the Pope, entering into a Mutual League together, should at the same time also
fall upon Morea, Cyprus, or Egypt: for which purpose such a Neapolitan Fleet,
as we have formerly spoken off, would be of very excellent use and Advantage.
And afterward, they should divide such Countries and Places, as they have
taken, and share them among themselves, making the Pope their Judge, and
Arbitrator herein. And this Association and League made betwixt the aforesaid
Princes, I would have to last for the space of whole ten years. For by this
means the Turk having his hands full at home, would be taken off from making
War upon the Christians in the West, as he now does, to the great detriment of
the House of Austria.

And to this end, it would be very Expedient, that there were a League made
both with the Persians and Prester John: for these People might very much annoy
the Western Countries. And this would also make very much for the Advantage of
the Venetians too, who stand in no small dread of the Turks; whom, because they
are not able to match them in Power, they are fain to pacify and keep quiet by
fair means, and Presents.

There are some that are of opinion, that there are two ways by which an
Association, or League might be made by the Christians against the Turk, if not
for his total ruin, yet at least to the bringing about of some very good
effect. And One of these is, that all such Princes, whose Territories border
upon Turkey, should at one and the same time set all upon him, every one of them
invading that part of the Turks Dominions that lies next him, not with any
certain part only of ^is Forces, but with the whole strength and Power that he
can possibly make in the World: for so, all of them should enjoy an equal share
in the spoils that were taken.

The second, and that the more Noble, is, if that very many several Princes
would but resolve, for the glory of God, and the Propagation of the Church, to
set upon the Turk, either altother from one part, or else from diverse parts
all at once: as we read to have been done in those former Heroic times, when
as many several Valiant Princes, out of Germany, the Netherlands^ France, and
Italy, some of them selling their Territories outright, and others of them
pawning the same, gathered together an Army of above forty Thousand Men, and
marching with them into the Eastern Countries, and there beating the Turks out
of Nice, the Persians out of Antioch, and the Saracens out of Jerusalem, they
afterward laid wast the whole East, and in a short time recovered the Holy
Land. In which Expedition this especially is to be taken notice of, that
neither the Emperor himself, nor any other King, was either their General, or
so much as went along with them in it. And notwithstanding that afterward
indeed the Kings of France, and of England, as also the Emperors, Conrade, and
Frederick, made several expeditions into those parts, not for the taking in of
any New Countries, but only for the keeping of what the others had formerly
gotten; yet for all there was not any thing at all done by them, worth the
speaking of.

But now there ought to be care taken, in this business, that all may share
alike in what shall be gotten: for otherwise, the Design would be quite
spoiled, and never come to any thing. For, as in a Clock, if there be any one
Exorbitant, or Irregular Wheel, it spoils the whole Harmony, and mutual
Agreement that should be in it: so likewise, in all Associations, if there be
any Deficiency in one Part, it proves to be the cause of the Dissolution of the
whole Union.

A clear example whereof we have in the League that was made betwixt the Popes,
Paul III. and Pius V. the King of Spain, and the Venetians: which though it
were managed with the greatest diligence, and eagerness on all sides that
could be, and with Incredible success also; yet it came all to nothing at
last; and that merely for this one reason, namely, because that it did not
equally concern the Interests of all of them, that That Expedition should be so
carefully undertaken, and so diligently carried on. For, Spain has no great
advantage by any thing that is done against the Eastern People; which yet is
most beneficial to the Venetians: in like manner as it is of little or no
concernment to the Venetians, what ever is done against Africa, which yet is of
very great advantage to Spain.

And this is the reason, that the Venetians, who stand in fear of the Power the
Turk has in the East; and the Spaniards who are afraid of their Neighbors of
Algier, can never unanimously go on together against the Enemy, with equal
courage, and desires. And by this means the Pope, lying in the mean time in the
midst betwixt them both, and being forced to be at a great charge, yet has no
benefit at all thereby. But to return to our Present discourse again, whence we
have digressed.

There is yet another way, whereby the Turkish Empire might be overthrown; and
that is, in case that some one of His Chief Commanders in war, who was at first
a Christian (such as were Cicala, Occhiali, and Scande^beg) should be prevailed
withal, by such large Promises as should be made him, as namely, that he should
have some Christian Province given him for his reward,) to betray the Turkish
Navy unto us, if at least He have it committed to his charge: or else, in case
he has been appointed by the Great Turk to manage any Kingdom under him, as
His Viceroy; he should then have the possession of that Kingdom promised him;
as suppose, of Tunis, Algier, or the like. For there is no doubt to be made,
but that such a one had rather be the Sole Absolute Lord of any Kingdom,
whatsoever it be, and so to have the Power of transmitting it over to his
Posterity; then to be but a kind of Nobler Slave to the Great Turk; having
neither Power in his li^e time to give away any thing to his friends; nor at
his death to leave any thing to them, And I am verily persuaded, that there is
nothing that keeps these men from attempting such a Rebellion against the Turk,
more, then because they despair of ever being able to bring any such their
Undertakings to effect; as not daring to confide in the Christians, or to rely
upon them for Assistance. Yet if they were but sincerely, and Ingenuously dealt
withal, I am clearly of opinion, that they might be brought to this.

It may also so happen, that some such Gallant Vindicator of the Peoples
Liberty may spring up among the Turks themselves, as was Moses, the Hebrew,
among the Subjects of Pharaoh, King of Egypt; and such a One, in case the Great
Turk should entrust him with any great Authority, or Charge, might
questionless be able to do him an infinite deal of Mischief. There might also
a General Association be made amongst the Christians; by whom He might be
brought to a Pitched Battle; (as we said before) and might have one or two such
Notable Blows given him by them, that he should be never able to hold up his
head again: because that he has not any Nobles, that might relieve him in such
a case. And this might the more easily be done, because that he has within his
Dominions an Infinite Number both of Christians, and Jews: who, if they but
once saw him overthrown, would all presently come over to Us. And yet in the
procuring of such an Association as this, there would be required either very
much Patience in the Pope, and the King of Spain; or else a very great
necessity, that should force All of them to join together.

Now these Princes should all be bound, by mutual Covenants drawn up betwixt
them, that every one of them should have a Proportionable Share of what soever
shall be gotten by the said expedition; and also that those that have gotten
possession of their own share, shall assist the rest also in the getting of
theirs; after the Example of Reuben, and Dan: who after they had possessed
themselves of the Country that lay on this side Jordan, were then to assist
their brethren in the subduing of the further part of it, that lay beyond
Jordan.

There ought also to be a persuasion wrought into All, and every one of these
Princes, that by the King of Assyria, in the Scriptures, is prefigured unto us
the Great Turk: who, after he has destroyed the Kingdom of Israel, that is to
say, the Kingdom of the East, or that of Constantinople; He will then next
overthrow the Kingdom of Judah, that is, of the West; except they repent them
of their Heresy, and return again into the Bosom^ of the Church of Rome, which
is our Jerusalem: (as I have written in my Christian Monarchy) and that so,
together with the Empire, the Priesthood also will be lost, and will pass over
into the New World, (as I have there demonstrated by Political Reasons,) except
they take the Course here set down before them. And perhaps also it may
hereafter so come to pass. And when the Turk, who is the Typical Cyrus, is
destroyed, then shall the Church be renewed again. It is therefore most
Necessary, that all Christendom should join their forces together, for the
destruction of this Ravenous Wolf, who by his Strength, and Cunning, has taken
from us Two Empires, and Two Hundred Kingdoms; mean while that we do nothing
but fall together by the Ears one with another. But if this cannot be brought
about, the Persians must then be persuaded to join with the Ethiopians,
Muscovites, and Polonians, as has been said before. And I do believe also,
that the Great Turks Bassaes, and other of his Subjects would quickly be got to
fall off from him, if so be they could but be once fully persuaded and assured,
that they should each of them really be made the absolute Lords of what they
now possessed. All which things ought to have their Accomplishment in the death
of this Mahomet III. now Reigning, seeing that That Number is Fatal. The Great
Turks Younger Sons also are to be seized upon, and conveyed away, least the
Eldest Brother should Murder them according to their usual Custom: and this
the Venetians may do conveniently enough by their Merchants; or else the same
may be committed to the Christian Slaves that are there, to be done by them.

After that this Empire shall be thus weakened, and divided, it would be
convenient then to send thither some Preachers, who should endeavor to
convince the Natives of their Error. There should care also be taken by means
for the bringing of Printing into Turkey; by means whereof that People may be
taken off from the exercise of Arms, and may apply themselves to Books; and by
being taken up with Disputations concerning Points of Divinity, and Philosophy,
both of the Peripateticks, Stoics, Platonists, and Telesians, they may be
divided amongst themselves, and so be the more weakened. For, those that give
themselves to the study of Books only, usually become a Prey to such as apply
themselves to the exercise of Arms, and the study of the Arts too: as we see
in the example of Athens, which became a Prey to the Lacedemo^ians; both which
Nations Philip, King of Macedon, by the force of his Arms afterward subdued,
being first instructed by Epaminondas by what means this was to be effectd.
Cato was wont to say, that the Romans would lose their Empire, so soon as ever
they should begin to apply themselves to the study of the Greek Tongue, and
Sciences. This the Great Turk, who is wiser then We are, knew very well; and
therefore preferred rather the exercise of Arms, and got him great Guns, and
Slaves; I mean, those Jews, that were sent to him by Ferdinand, the last King
of Arragon: for he knew very well, what, and how great Advantage might be made
by Slaves; and that the Children that they should beget, were to be brought up
in the exercise of Arms, and the knowledge of Military Affairs.

But then, on the contrary, He would not receive, nor accept of those
Printing-Presses, and Letter, ^or the Printing of the Arabic Tongue, that were
sent Him by the great Duke of Tuscany; because he would not have his Dominions
filled with Books, because that would much take off the Military Valor of his
Subjects; and besides, because that Mahumetanisme, by frequent Disputations
about it, might easily in a short time have been overthrown.

It has also been very prejudicial unto Us, that we have had no Law made for
the Injoyning of Silence; whereby we should have been commanded to conceal some
things from others: which Law certainly would have been of very good use. But
now adays in Germany all things are made Public, and laid open to the whole
World: and hence it is, that we see every one there publishes in Print a New
Bible; and that the Empire goes to ruin, and that all places are overwhelmed
with Luxury, and Riot. And, had not the fear of the King of Spain's Armies kept
the Netherlanders in Awe, they also would by this time have been at Eff^minate,
and Luxurious as the Germans are. And the like would have befallen to the
English also. So that we might have hopes, that unless there were a War
maintained amongst them, to keep them in exercise, they would all quickly come
to utter ruin; after that they should but once come to be Effeminate,
Heart-lesse, and at discord one with another; as we have said formerly: and
that so much the rather, because that the Heresy they profess, seeing it
denies the Freedom of the Will, is repugnant to all Principles of Policy. Now
all Heresies, when they are once gone so far as to Atheism, are reduced again
into the way of Truth by some Wise Prophet or other; such as were in Italy,
Thomas Aquinas, Dominicus, Scotus, and others. For, Her^sies also have their
Periods, as well as States; which fall first, from being governed by good
Kings, into the hands of Tyrants; from their Tyranny, into an Aristocracy, from
thence into an Oligarchy, and so at length to a Democracy; and in the end they
shift about again, and in a Circle, as it were, return again to their first
form, either of a Kingdom, or a Tyranny.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the Other Hemisphere, and of the New World.
THe Admirable Discovery of the New World (which was foreseen by St. Brigitt,
and expressly foretold by Seneca, in his Medea, and there lively set forth in
its proper Colors and Names, according as he had received the same from one of
the Sibylls,) has been the cause that this Hemisphere of Ours has been
thereby rapt into the greatest Admiration that can be. For, some of the
Ancientest among the Philosophers, of which number was Xenophanes, were of
Opinion, that That Other Hemisphere lay all covered over with Water; some
others, as Lactantius, and St. Augustine, thought that the Earth was not a
Perfect Globe, about which the Sun was carried in his Diurnal Motion. And some
others believed, (among whom was Dante,) that those Countries were Inhabited,
and were a certain kind of Earthly Paradise. Some there were that doubted
hereof; amongst whom was Aristotle: and again some others of them confidently
affirmed, that the Earth was an Absolute and Perfect Orb, or Globe: and of
this number were Plato^ and Origin. And therefore it is but for just cause,
that all the World admires the Spanish Monarchy, as both very Daring, and very
Powerful; seeing that It has measured, and overcome so many Seas, and in a
short space of time has put a girdle about the vast Globe of the Whole Earth:
which neither Carthage, nor Tire were ever heretofore able to do; nor yet the
wisest of All Men, King Solomon: whose Fleet, making its Voyage as far as Goa
only, and Taprobane, spent always three whole years in the same; which yet Our
Seamen now adays perform in three Months time. So that, although the Vast
distance of place, that there is betwixt the several parts of the Spanish
Monarchy, seems to render It Weak; yet does their Admirable Skill in
Navigation, for the shortening of those Distances, together with those other
Means of Uniting these Parts, which the Spaniards daily do make use of, or, may
make use of, when they please, make the same most Illustrious, and more
Admirable, then some perhaps do imagine. However, to the end that the King of
Spain may not only keep what He has already gotten, but may also enlarge his
Empire; I shall here give in a Catalogue of such Errors as have been
heretofore committed, in reference to the managing of his Affairs in the New
World; and shall show, that they ought with all speed to be corrected, and
taken out of the way; laying down withal those ways and Means, by which the
Kings Power in those Parts may yet be enlarged.

When that the Spaniards, directing their Course through the Western Ocean,
were now first arrived in the New World; the Natives beheld them with
Astonishment, and Wonder; and, having never dreamt of any other World but their
Own, believed verily Those Men to have dropped down from Heaven; and conceived
them to be the Sons of the Clouds, by reason of the Thundering Noise they made
with their Guns: And then again they heard, with Trembling, and fear, Speaking
Papers, and Writings: all which things likewise even Our selves at first
wondered at, as well as they. For, neither had We All these things upon ^
sudden, all together, and in one and the same instant of time presented to Us,
as they were then to Them: and besides, Assu^faction makes all the most Unusual
things at length Familiar to Men. In a word, They could not choose but have all
yielded themselves up freely, and of their own accord, to the Spaniards, who,
as they were really persuaded, were all Gods; had not They themselves, by their
own Dissolute and Corrupt Life, removed all such Opinion of Divinity far from
them, by their Cruelty, and Covetousness in hunting after the Indians Gold,
which they themselves regarded not: insomuch that the Natives were fain to
betake themselves to the Mountains, and to defend themselves against them as
well as they could. And this is the reason, that the Spaniards could never make
themselves Masters of the whole Country of Peruana, (which is half as big again
as all Africa) but were fain to keep about the Sea Coasts, and those Plain and
Open Countries that border upon the same; nor could ever get any farther
Northward then Florida, New Spain, and New France, Baccalaos, and the Country
about Mexico, but were always repulsed by the Natives. Whence it plainly
appears, that the Spaniards ought at the first to have cherished that good
Opinion which the Indians had all generally conceived of them, by their
Innocent, and Virtuous Life: for, by this means, they must needs have become
Masters of the whole Country. And besides, they should have openly professed,
and made it known to all, that They were really the Sons of God, and not of the
Clouds; and were sprung from a much Nobler Seed, and were endowed with an
Immortal Soul: and that it was God, that had created both the Heavens and the
Earth, and that disposes of, and governs all things according to his own
will and pleasure: and that by how much the more Noble any Creature is, (such
as are Men, who are His Sons, being created after His Image,) so much the
Greater, and more Vigilant Care has He over Them, then over the rest. So
likewise they should have informed them further, how that All Men sinned in
their disobedient First Parent, Adam, whom they have ever since imitated in
that which is Evil, rather then that which is Good: Yet notwithstanding, that
God, who is the Father of All, loved them so dearly, that He found out a Means
of calling them back again to His Worship, and of translating them at length
even into Heaven it self, sending amongst them Abel, Enoch, and others to
instruct them. But, that They, growing continually Worse and Worse, provoked
God, their Father, to wrath; who therefore suddenly swept them all away, except
One only Family, by an Universal Deluge. And, that it is the Same God, that by
putting a vast Sea betwixt them, had divided Their World from Ours, which very
thing was asserted heretofore by Plato, where he speaks of the Atlantic Ocean.
And, that Noah sent over Colonies into their Countries, and peopled that whole
Tract of Land, from Peru, as far as Baccaleos with Inhabitants. And that
afterward the whole Progeny of Noah, within the compass of which the Indians
themselves are comprehended, sinned also; except some few of them only: and
that God sent afterward among them also Other Instructers; as Moses, and
others: whom, when the World believed not, that then God himself took Humane
Flesh upon Him, and out of the Infinite Love that he bare us, put on Our
Nature; that so, making use thereof, as of an Instrumental Means, He might the
more Effectually teach us, what way we must take, for to go to Heaven; and how
that Truth is to be observed in all things: (And all these things should have
been instilled into them by friendly Persuasions, and fair Means; and not by
force of Arms:) And lastly, that God himself in his own person, and by his own
Example confirmed all things that He ever taught; and laid down a Pattern
before Us, according to which We ought to walk in this life.

And that, after He had taught us, that we ought not to be terrified, or
affrighted from the Worship of our God, even by threats and Death; Himself
first underwent Death, suffering it by the hands of Cruel Tyrants, to the end
that we might be encouraged to follow his steps: and that, Rising again the
third day from the Dead, He ascended up into Heaven, leaving behind Him his
Vicar upon Earth, who is called by the name of The Pope; who sits in His
Tribunal, being endowed with Celestial Wisdom; being assisted also by many
most Valiant Princes, who all mantain the Divine Truth; among whom the King of
Spain is the Chief. And, that now God, being moved with compassion toward
Them, who were all Idolaters, and Violaters of the Law of Nature, had sent
their Brethren the Spa^iards, to convert them, and to bring them back again
into the way of Truth, and by means of the Pope, and of the King of Spain (from
which Country Their World was divided at first by the Flood) to bring them home
to Him: Adding further, (and saying^) that, God has given us skill to build
Ships, and to tame Horses, and command the Sea; and has showed us how to make
Voc^l, Speaking Papers; that so, the Indians seeing all these things, might the
more readily believe us. And that we are able, besides these things, to do any
other such Miracles as He himself did, when He was upon Earth; as namely,
Healing the sick, Raising the Dead to life, if so be that we be but Obedient to
his commands, and be Baptized with water, in the Name of the Only One God, and
be cleansed from Our Sins by His Invisible Grace. And that He has given us
these Arms, to punish all those, that should endeavor to hinder the
Propagation of the Truth.

Some such Prologue as this should have been used, to win upon them at first:
and they should also have made choice among the Indians of some such, as by
their looks they should have guessed to have been the fittest to be instructed
in this Doctrine, and should have instilled the same into them: and should
afterward have sent them, like the woman of Samaria in the Gospel, to call
their Countrymen, and fellow Citizens, and should have used them with all
gentleness, and courtesy, and without either Cruelty, or Covetousness. And
they should besides have persuaded them, that They regarded Gold as little as
the Indians themselves did; and that they made use of It only by way of
Exchange for other things; and desired to have it, without any Covetous mind at
all; letting the Indians see withal, that they brought them Iron for their
Gold; which is a much more useful Metal, both for the Manuring of the Earth,
and also for the defense of Man's Life it self.

And then, after all things had been thus carried, they should have presently
clapped abroad their ships as many of the Natives as they could, under pretense
of some such Command, given from Heaven, to the Pope and the King of Spain;
into whose Dominions they should have carried them, and have disposed of them
in Colonies dispersed up and down through Africa; from whence they should
afterward have been conveyed over into Spain, to be made to labor there, and
to till the ground, and to be instructed in Mechanic Arts; mean while that the
Spaniards themselves should follow their exercise of Arms, and so by degrees
shall subdue their whole Country.

But now, the Spaniards that first landed in those parts, were mere Rude,
Boisterous Soldiers; and such as knew not of how great force the Opinion of
Divinity, once raised in the minds of men, is, toward the subduing of them.
But they, as if they had been come into an Enemies Country, fell immediately to
hunt after their Gold, and to pillage them of what they could; making it
plainly appear, that they took little care of the saving of the poor Indians
Souls; and yet though they never had prepared them at all by preaching Christ
to them before hand, yet how ever they would needs by threats fright them into
Christianity, and force them to be Baptized, and to believe that Christ was
Crucified for them. Which things certainly at the first sight, could not choose
but seem to them to be most Absurd; as Namely, that Water was able to bring any
one to Heaven; or, that God could die: and so by this means They at the very
first became a Stumbling Block unto All of them, as the Apostle Paul speaks, by
not observing that Apostolical Rule; Praedicate hominibus, Preach to All men.

By this means therefore the Spania^ds coming to be repulsed by the Natives,
they Presently fell to killing of them: so that the Natives betaking themselves
to the Mountains, the Spaniards then fell to hunt after Men, no otherwise then
they used to hunt after Wild Beasts; and returning home at night, they made
their brags how many Indians each of them had killed that day: and so by this
means, they in a short time laid that Country, for the space of three Thousand
Leagues together, utterly Wast, and void of Inhabitants; never considering at
all, that by the common Tie of Humanity the^ were their Brethren whom they had
so Barbarously destroyed; and that we are All of us descended from Noah; and
therefore that all that are not Baptized, are not presently to be accounted no
better then Beasts.

But by this means it came to pass, that the miserable Wretches, seeing that
Gold was so highly esteemed by the Spaniards, and indeed was more accounted of
then the Men themselves; they grew to be very much offended at them, and said,
that The Spaniards desired to bring them under their subjection, only by the
Sprinkling of a little Water upon them, (meaning that of Baptism) but that
their Dominion over them, would be the very same with that of the Wolf over
the sheep, only to worry them, and tear them in pieces.

They retired themselves therefore to the Mountains; and from thence afterward
issuing out, they have sometimes got the better of the Spaniards; in so much
that to this very day, having now pretty well learnt how to deal with them,
they have the courage to come out against them with their^ Arms; no longer
reverencing them as Gods, but driving them away, and chasing them as so many
Ravenous Wolves.

And from hence sprung up another Mischief also^ which is, that Spain, which it
self was very bare of Men, was notwithstanding ^orced to send over Colonies
into those Parts: and yet for all this, the plain truth of the business is,
that the Soldiers that were there, were so inconsiderable for their Number, in
respect of that Vast Tract of ground, as that they were very hard put to it, to
keep what they had got. For the taking off of which fear from themselves^ they
fell to Slaughter, and to kill up the Natives out of the way: which is an
argument of the greatest Ignorance, and Cruelty that can be.

So that I am clearly of opinion, that the King of Spain should make it His
business rather to people those parts, and to increase the number of the
Inhabitants; then to enrich himself only with the Gold and Silver that is
fetched away from thence; if so be He look after his Own greatest Advantage,
and would continue Lord of that Country. And therefore I would have him in the
first place to take order, that there be a Catechism made, and published in
the Language of the Country; whereby the people there might be instructed,
first of all, in the Principles of the Law of Nature, and of Gods Providence.

Then would I have a History to be compiled from the Creation of the World down
to Christ, and so continued on to Our times; which should be written in a
brief, Comp^ndious Way; according to that short Form which I have laid down in
few words, in my Preface to this D^scourse; and after the example of the
Fathers of the Church, who in converting the Heathens to the Christian Faith,
made use of the like Compendious Method; as, for instance, Clemens, and
Lactantius did: and not such Prolixe, tedious Forms, as our Modern Writers use
now a days.

There should also be chosen, out of such of the Natives as are instructed in
the Principles of the Christian Faith, some, who should take upon them the
Office of Priests, and Preachers; and these should be sent abroad among the
rest of their Countrymen, that keep about the Mountains, (to whom the Spanish
Preachers cannot come) and should offer them their Brotherly Assistance; and
should tell them what things the Pope, and the King of Spain, as in the Name of
God, would have them informed of; and withal, how grievously, and severely God
had punished our World, by Heresies, and Mahumetanism, only for the former
Inhumanity, and Cruelty used by the Soldiers toward Them: And that now the
King has sent again to them the second time such Persons, as should with all
mildness and gentleness invite them to receive the Christian Religion. And
with these should be joined also some of Our Preachers; who, after that they
had faithfully, and Effectually discharged their Office there, should then be
preferred to be Bishops, or Abbats; that so, others, by their example, might be
encouraged to do the like; and also that those People might know, and see, that
great Honors are by us proposed to such men, as we send over to them, to teach
and instruct them.

And it seems also to be very Necessary to institute some certain Order of
Preachers of the New World, to be expressly known by that name; seeing that
the Business seems altogether to require it. And the King of Spain must also
take care rather, how that Country may be made Populous, and full of
Inhabitants, then how the Natives may be all rooted out. And such among them,
as will not be converted to Christianity, He may make Slaves; after the
examples of the Romans; and Lucullus, who alone had forty thousand Slaves of
his own, by whose means he dug down nine Mountains, and laid them level with
the plain ground; and these Slaves the King of Spain may put to row in his
Galleys. But as for those that shall embrace the Christian Faith, they may be
put to learn Mechanical Occupations, as Smiths, and Carpenters, and the like;
that so the Spaniards themselves may not need to look after any thing else, but
wholly to mind the exercising of themselves in Military Affairs; following
herein the example of Croesus King of Lydia, whose Custom it was, to put all
such Prisoners as he had taken in War, to learn the trades of Carpenters, and
Smiths; but to keep his own subjects close to their Arms only. I think it fit
therefore, that a great number of those Indians should be transported over into
Spain, and Africa, and should be set to build great Cities all along upon the
Coast of Africa, and of Asia; the strong Holds, and Government of which Cities
should be put into the hands of Spaniards only; but the tilling of the Ground^
and the Mechanical Arts should be left to the Indians to follow, or to some
other the like Slaves of the Spaniards, that should also be Christians. And
when any of the Indian Kings should chance to be converted^ and transported
over into Spain, they should have Baronies conferred upon them there, that so
the Spanish Empire might thereby be rendered the more Glorious; and that the
Indians also might by this means be brought by degrees to love us, and our
Countries.

And if the King of Spain had but observed all these Rule^, He might at this
day have been possessed of larger Territories, both in Africa, and Asia; and
Spain also would have been more Populous, and strong, and the New World much
Richer then it is. And therefore in my Opinion, it is the most Absurd thing in
the World, for the King to make those parts a Treasury to supply Him with Gold
and Silver only, and not rather with Men; seeing that these later are, of the
two of much the greater Value.

Now of those Indians being brought up to Trades, and coming in progress of
time to be sufficiently Hispaniolized, the King may make Soldiers also: as the
Turk is used to do with such of our Children as he takes to bring up in his
Turkish way of life. Then would I have in each several Province of the New
World, an Austrian Seminary to be set up, for the training up of Young
Soldiers; who should acknowledge no other Father, save the King only; and
another Seminary for Women; of which we spoke formerly; and likewise another
for Mariners; of which I shall speak more hereafter. And by this means it
would so come to pass, that within less then Thirty years, the King would so
abound with Faithful Domestic Servants of his own, that He would have no
further need to make use either of Auxiliaries, or Mercenary Soldiers; and He
would hereby also win the hearts of the Indians to him, when they shall see
their Children to be brought up in so Liberal and Ingenuous a way of Education,
and shall find them nothing so Rude, and Ill-behaved as they were before; and
so they will the more readily yield to serve the Spaniard.

Lastly, seeing that That part of the World is at so vast a distance from this
of ours, it is ^ecessary that these Parts should be united, and joined together
as much as possibly can be, for as much as there is no Empire but is Lame, and
Imperfect witho^t this Union.

The first sort of Union is, True Religion: and therefore there ought to be
strong Castles, and Block-houses erected upon all Havens, and Mouths of Rivers;
least the English breaking into these Parts, should bring in Heresy: whereby
the whole Design of the Spaniard would be utterly frustrated, and come to
nothing. And besides, there should be nothing had in greater Reverence, where
any of these People are in Presence, then the very name of the Pope; that so
they may be kept the faster to our Religion. And they should be brought also to
sue to us, and to desire us to prescribe them some Rule of Living here, and
also the Means of attaining to Eternal Life hereafter.

In the Second Place, the King of Spain must make himself Absolute Lord of
those Countries; for if there should but any other Christian be chosen King in
that Part of the World; Our King were then quite lost. Now there is none that
He need to fear in that point, unless it be some Principal Noble Man;
especially, if it should chance to be such a one, as is descended lineally from
some of those Worthies, that were the First Discoverers of this New World; as,
namely, if he should be descended from Columbus, who first of all discovered
these Parts; or else from Cortesius. So that it seems to be necessary, that
such as have performed such gallant pieces of Service, should be rewarded
indeed with very great Honors; and Preferments: but then it should not be in
those Countries, that they themselves had subdued. For we know that Marquess
Vaglio, who was Nephew to Columbus, was once very near being chosen King; And
even the Viceroys themselves, (as they call them) might easily make themselves
Kings, if they pleased. And therefore none but some Principal Nobleman, that
has great Revenues of his own either in Spain, or Italy, is to be placed as
Ruler of the New World; or at the least, some Cardinal, or Bishop, that has
many kindred here with us. The keeping of all strong Holds also, and Castles,
is to be committed to some Garrison Captains, who are to expect their reward
from the King; and the Vice-Ro^s are to live, not in any of the strong Holds,
but in Cities: and it must be so ordered, that those that are the Commanders of
the strong Holds and Castles, and the Viceroys, may be as much at variance and
discord, as possibly may be. Over such Countries as have been conquered by
Portugals, there should be placed Spanish Governors; and so on the Contrary;
thus uniting the two Kingdoms the more; and by this means the Kingdom will be
the more happily, and the more safely admininistred. Clergy men should also be
frequently sent to these strong Holds and Castles, to take a view of them; and
especially the Capuchins. The Authority also^ of Particular men is to be
restrained; neither ought too great a Power to be granted to any One man, in
any matters that are of very great Moment and consequence; but these should be
transacted by the Personal, joint consent of all, or at least by signifying the
same by their Letters, In like manner as all things that concern the Kings
Interest in Italy, are by a very wise course therein taken, appointed to be
considered of by the Kings Ambassador, lying Lieger at Rome, the Viceroy of
Naples, and the Governor of Millan.

The Third sort of Union is of Goods: and therefore my Opinion is, that the
King should do well to divide every New discovered Country among the common
People, and Maimed Spaniards, according to the Ancient Roman Law, called Lex
Agraria; joining with them also such Africans, and Indians, as he had, not long
before, transported into Africa; but still under this Condition, namely that
None of them all shall account what he possesses to be his own proper Goods;
but must reckon upon all to be the Kings; save only what belongs to the
Clergy. And Fields, Castles, and Offices are to be frequently taken from those
that hold them, and to be disposed of to others; that so the Eyes of all may be
upon the King only, in whose gift, and at whose disposal all these things are:
yet the fruits of the Earth of every man's Land they may gather and enjoy as
their own.

There should also Judges be appointed out of the Clergy, who should assign
every man what is his Due; and should allot so much for the Maintenance of the
Clergy, so much for to pay Soldiers, and so much to be paid to the King for a
Tribute. And these Judges should take care to see, that no Spanish Soldier
shall possess any thing as his own, save only his Arms; unless it be by
chance some small Orchard, or Garden, for to recreate himself in: but they
shall all be maintained at the Public Charge. And as for such sons of
Soldiers, as shall not be fit to serve in the Wars, they may be put to the
Plough; and in their places, to the end that the whole Power may still be
solely the Kings, there may be some such chosen out among the Husbandmen, as
shall be thought most fit for that purpose, and may be trained up to the use of
Arms. And thus shall all things be ordered according to the Kings own wish,
and desire; and the King himself also shall be beloved above all things;
neither will his Subjects desire to have any ample Possessions, seeing they all
depend upon Military service only, by means whereof they are daily enlarged.
And when it shall be thought convenient so to do, there may be Vines, and the
Seeds of other things sent over to them; that so they may have wherewithal to
delight themselves: but yet, let them be so sparingly furnished with these
things, as that they may always stand in need of us for their support. For, if
that the use of Vines, the liberty to till the ground, and the exercise of
Arms, together with the use of Printing, and the Building of Ships should be
denied them; the King might thereby easily incur the Suspicion of Tyranny.

In the most convenient places of that Hemisphere there should be erected
Schools for the study of Astronomy, the Mathematics, the Mechanical, and other
Arts and Sciences; as has been formerly showed: that so the Constellations of
the Heavens, and the Seas, and Countries of that Part of the World may be the
more fully discovered, and made known.

I would not have either the Kings, or lesser Princes of any of those Countries
to be killed; but rather to be carried over into Spain: For, that will both
add to the Majesty of the Spanish Empire; and will also very much win upon the
Affections of the Indians.

CHAP. XXXII. Of Navigation.
BUt now, for the better preserving of this Dominion of the New World entire to
himself, the King of Spain had need to build him a great number of Wooden
Cities, and to put them out to Sea; which being laden with Commodities, may
continually pass to and fro betwixt this and the West-Indies^ and by being
perpetually abroad, and so scouring those Seas, may hinder the English, and
others^ from making any Attempts that way. For the performing of which Design,
the King of Spain will have need of very many Ships, which should also be very
well Manned, with a sufficient number of Seamen; which should sail about to
the New World, and round about Africa, Asia, Calicut, China, Iapan, and the
Islands adjacent; subduing all where ere they come.

And all this might easily be effected, if that the King would but give his
mind to gather Men together, rather then Money: seeing that it appears evidently
enough, that in those Expeditions of his against England, the Netherlands, and
France, He was utterly frustrate, and failed of his designs, merely through his
trusting too much to his Money, and his want of Able Soldiers.

First of all therefore in all the Islands of Sicily, Sardinia, the Canaries,
those of the Achipelago, St. Lazaro, in Hispaniola likewise, and the Philippine
Islands, I would have Seminaries to be erected for Mariners, and places
appointed all along the Coast of Spain, where young youths man be taught to
build Ships and Galleys, and may learn to know the Stars, and the use of the
Mariners Compass, and of the Sea Tables, and Charts: all these things I say, I
would have beaten into the dullest heads. And then, whenever He destroys any
Country, He ought to have more regard to the Captives, then to the spoils of
it: and so becoming wiser then formerly, He shall change away Gold and Silver
for a better sort of Merchandise.

Secondly, at what parts so ever His Navy shall arrive, He should make Havens,
and erect such Workhouses; especially at the mouths of Rivers and Bays, He
should cause Ships and Galleys to be built; in the manning of which He may make
use of such Mariners as have been brought up in the foresaid Seminaries.

Thirdly, when He has thus gotten to be well stored with Men, He may then
treat with the richer sort among the Portuguezes and the Genois, and let them
know, that they shall have both of them free liberty to buil^ themselves Ships
and Galleys, and with the same to sail round about the New World, which is now
almost wholly the King of Spains, and to go into the Havens, and to fall upon
Towns and Castles there, and to keep all the Booty they shall there find, to
themselves; only the places themselves they shall deliver up to the King^,
together with all the Elder Children of both sexes, for the supply of His
Seminaries. And if they chance to take any whole large Country, they may have
whole Baronies bestowed upon them for their Reward. And by this means both the
King will be enriched, and the Genois will become the Instruments both of
confirming and enlarging the Kings Empire: who yet are themselves so rich, as
that they are able either of them to set forth whole Fleets of Ships against
the Great Turk^ and to take in very many Countries for themselves, if they
pleased: and therefore the Kings Navies ought always to be so much the
greater, and the better provided.

Fourthly, the Hollanders also, Dantzickers, and the Gutlanders are in a
friendly manner to be dealt withal, and persuaded to do the same, as is said
before; only upon this condition, that ^hey shall deliver in their Sons as
Pledges, that what places soever they shall take in, they shall not reckon upon
them, as gotten to themselves; nor shall introduce Heresy into the same. And
by this means they would be the easier brought in subjection to the King, even
without making War upon them, in like manner as the Genueess are; and thus by
degrees would the whole World be brought over to comply with the Spaniards
Customs, and Manners.

Fifthly, every seventh year such persons, as are condemned to death, are to be
called forth; and, under the show of a gentler punishment, are to be sent away
into the West Indies: and so likewise the Children of Heretics, and of such
others as shall be conquered by Him, either in the Low Countries, or Africa,
should be sent into the Seminaries: that afterward they may be serviceable to
the King, both at home and abroad, both in Nautical Affairs, and in the Tilling
of the Ground.

And, I would have the King to be well assured, that He has not more need of
any thing, then of Men; and especially, of some most Experienced, and Able
Person, for the managing of His Affairs; such as were Lycurgus, and Solon; of
which sort of Men there are many more to be found now adays, then there were
then; only, by reason that they are Obnoxious to other men's envy, they are not
so much taken notice of as they ought to be. There should also be
Mathematicians sent out of the Low Countries, and out of Germany, into all
parts of the World, for the observing of the Motions of the Stars, and what New
Constellations there are; as also to observe the Situations of Countries, the
depths of the Seas, what Motion they have from the East toward the West,
together with their Ebbings and Flowings, and which of them increase when the
Moon is twenty five days old, and again decrease when she is twenty six; and
which are fitter for the Summer Voyages, and which for Winter, and under what
Star reigning; so likewise in what parts their waters are thick, and heavy, and
in which they are thin and light; and again, which of them are wont to be
frozen, and which not: together with all their Rocks, Islands, and Shelves:
for, the knowledge of these things will tend to the advancement of the Spanish
Monarchy, more then any thing else whatsoever. For, God himself desires, that
these works of His should be known; and He also reveals them to all such, as
desire earnestly after the knowledge of the same.

There ought also diligent notice to be taken of all Habitable Places, and
Temperate Climes; and in what parts of the World there are Pygmies found, and
where G^ants; where the Inhabitants are Black, and where Red; where White, and
where Green; passing along thus in order from one Climate to another. For the
perfect knowledge of the World, is as good as the Gaining of That half of It.
And God himself has given the World into the Possession of the Spaniards,
because that They, above all others, have the most earnestly thirsted after the
knowledge of the same; and because they also graced Columbus with Honors, and
dignities, for that he desired to inform himself in the knowledge of World, as
being the Handiwork of God himself.

Besides, this course would be also of very good use, for the bringing under
(through their Admiration of the Spaniards,) and also the weakening of the
Northern People.

Now, that there may be continually safe Passage for the Kings Navies to and
fro, He ought to set up two Orders of Maritime Knights, after the example of
those of Malta: the Masters of which Orders should have their Residence in
Spain, and they should be divided into Two Colledges^ one of which should be
called The Eastern, and the other, The Western: in which these Knights should
be brought up from their Youth in the study of Nautical Affairs, and the
Exercise of what ever concerns Navigation; where also they should take an Oath,
that they will employ themselves contin^ally in the scouring of the Seas, and
use their utmost endeavors, both for the Protecting, and also the Enlarging of
the Spanish Monarchy; for which purpose also the Younger Sons of the Barons
should be made use of especially, and be employed in these Sea-Services, some
as Commanders, and some as common Soldiers only. And if the King would but
once resolve to put all these things into practice, He would quickly render
Himself Formidable to the whole World; much more therefore to England, which
yet He now stands in fear of: and besides, all hopes of being able to put forth
any Fleets to Sea, would be quite cut off, both from the Turks, Persians, and
all others whatsoever: and withal, those Salaries which are now swallowed up
by Idle, useless Persons, would be more profitably bestowed upon such Worthy,
Heroic spirits as we here speak of.

There should also be proposed, for the greater Encouragement of all such stout
propagators of their Country as Cortesius was, some Proportionable Rewards; not
so much of Money, or Possessions of Lands; (for these savor too much of
Covetousness; and may possibly by corruption be purchased for money;) but
rather of Honors: namely, that they should be allowed to have their Triumphs,
after the example of the Ancient Romans; and should enter into Spain under
their Triumphal Arches, wherein should be described such Places as they had
taken, together with the manner how those Places were taken by them. They
should also have their Statues Erected, for their greater Honor; and
underneath the same there should be such New Stars as are found to appear in
the New World set up, wrought in Metal. Neither can it be imagined, how much
good this course would do for the preservation of Military Discipline, and also
for the exciting, and stirring up of all Men's minds toward the attempting of
noble, and high things.

It would also make very much to the business in hand, in case that the King
would but command, that all the famous Acts of what persons soever, whether
Commanders, or Common Soldiers, should be Publicly recorded, with the Names
of the Authors of the same set down ^o them: for, this would serve as a Spur to
stir up others to the like Attempts. For seeing that those Monuments and
short Inscripti^ns that we see in small Chapels, do inflame those that are
living, through the Desire of Fame, and excite them to the study of Virtue;
what ought we to think it will do, when Men shall see that their Names shall be
recorded in Annals and Histories, and shall be carried throughout the whole
World, and celebrated to all Eternity? In which Particular certainly our
Castilians were very much overseen; who, notwithstanding that they performed
things most worthy to be committed to everlasting Memory, namely their so
frequent Compassing the Earth about, their finding out of so many Islands and
Continents, and, which is the most eminent piece of service of all the rest,
the Discovery of the New World; yet did they never all this while take care to
employ any Able person, in the committing of these famous Acts of theirs to
Memory, and, after the example of the Greeks and Romans, to record them in
Writing, and transmit them over to the Perpetual Memory of Posterity: Although
that the Portugals have herein gone far beyond the Castilians; for they have
found out such able persons, as have published abroad to the world their
gallant Acts, both in Latin, and in their own Native Language.

The Second sort of Rewards should respect Profit; and this I would have to be
the Chiefest Dignity, or place of Honor in the Kingdom that should be taken
in: the King whereof should be carried over into Spain, and should there be
instructed in the Catholic Religion; and there should also be conferred upon
him some Barony in Spain; to the end that It might so be rendered the more
Illustrious; and also that the rest of the Indian Princes might be given to
understand, that we put not to death any of the Kings of such Countries as we
subdue, if that they will but embrace Our Religion; (as, for instance,
Motecuma, Atabalipa, and some other petty Kings that we could name:) but rather
use them with all courtesy, and civility that may be. For, it is Fear of being
put to death only, that forces those Princes to take up Arms against the
Spaniard.

Businesses of State do all contain in them some Certain thing; the not knowing
of which, makes all other things both Difficult, and also Vain, and to no
purpose: as in sailing, there are some that spread the sails, and others that
ply their Oars, and some again are employed either in casting forth, or taking
in of Ballast; yet are all these things to no purpose, unless there be joined
with these an able Pilot, who by his skilful steerage of the Vessel, shall make
good, and set forward the Labors of all the rest. And therefore Spain
especially has very great need of some Wise Person, that should know in what
thing chiefly consists the Stern (as we may call it) of the Kingdom; without
the knowledge whereof, all Conceits, Contrivances, Labors, Charges, and
Consultations whatsoever will come to nothing. After that Pope Clement the VIII
began to think of making a Reformation among the Clergy, all men were ready to
put to their helping hand, and assist in the framing of New Laws, Orders, and
Ceremonies, together with appointing of Fasting days, and such Habits as every
one should wear. But I, living at that time at St. Sabines, told them plainly,
that all the endeavors of the Commissaries were vain; seeing that the Rule it
self was sufficient for the bringing about of all those things; neither indeed
did they know, wherein the main point of the business lay. I added moreover,
that the whole business of the Reformation consisted in this, that no one
particular person of the whole company in Monasteries, or the like Religious
Houses, should have a Key or Lock to himself of his Cell, but that there should
be only One Common Key, that should serve both for the Dormitory and also for
every man's particular lodging. For this would have been a means at once to have
put an end to all Proprieties; and to have kept out all Wanton Books, Gifts,
and Obscene Poetry. But when that the Chief and Principal Governors of this
Ship once perceived, that all this would redound to Their Loss, there was none
of Them then that would set his hand to the Stern, nor come to the head of the
matter: but they would only have some Laws to be made, concerning Novices
only, and such as were newly entered in Religion: but would not hear of any
thing at all that touched their own interest. And so by this means the good
Intention of the Pope was utterly frustrated, and came to nothing.

The Kingdom of Spain therefore has need of some Wise Palinurus, by whose
Conduct all things may be rightly managed according to the Rules before laid
down. Which certainly would much more tend to the advancement of the Majesty of
its Empire, then any Macchiavilian Suggestions, and Cunning Devises whatsoever,
which have nothing of a Good Conscience in them at all; and which besides serve
as a Cloak only, to disguise the Tyranny, and Cruelty of Princes, by arming
them with the Law of Majesty; and which countenance such Abuses, as even not
silly Women, much less People that have been accustomed to Liberty, can
endure. And therefore I cannot sufficiently wonder, that there should be any
that should so extol this Impious Politician to the heavens, as they do; as if
His Writings were a Certain Rule, and Idea of a Good, and Happy Government. And
yet this I do not so much wonder, as I am angry at, when I see that most Vile
Maxim in Politics to be admitted in the Administration of State Affairs;
namely, That some things are Lawful in respect of the State, and others in
respect of Conscience: Then which Opinion there cannot certainly be imagined
any thing to be either more Absurd, or more Wicked. For, he that shall take
away, or restrain that Universal Jurisdiction, that Conscience ought to have
over All Things, as well Public, as Private, shows thereby, that he has
Neither any Conscience, nor any God. The very Beasts themselves are lead by a
Natural Instinct to such things as are good for them, and refuse whatsoever
would be hurtful to them; and should the Light of reason, and the Dictate of
Conscience, which were given unto Man that He might know how to distinguish
betwixt Good and Evil, be utterly Blind in Public Things, and fail in
businesses that are of the Greatest Moment? I have had, I confess, I know not
what Itch upon me, to give an account in writing of such Points, as that Author
ought to be chastised for with the Rod of Censure; and not only he himself,
but all his Disciples, I mean, the Counselors of Princes, and their nearest
Favorites; for certainly both all the Scandals of the Church of God, and all
the Perturbations and hurly burlies that have happened in the whole World have
had their rise from hence. But yet I have thought fit to hold my hand till some
other time, seeing that some others have written of the same Subject already
very copiously, and also because that the thing is of it self clear enough. And
therefore I fell upon another Design, whereby I might Illustrate the Majesty of
the Spanish Empire; the conservation whereof is a business of much greater
difficulty, then the Acquisition. For, Humane Things do, as it were, Naturally
increase sometimes, and sometimes again decrease; after the example of the
Moon, to which they are all subject. And therefore it is a most High, and
weighty undertaking if not such a one as is above the Power of Man, to
endeavor to Fix them, and keep them in one Certain, standing Condition; that
so they fall not from the pitch they had arrived at, nor grow worse, and fall
to decay. For, in the Acquisition of any thing, both Occasion, Fortune, and
also the Enemies Errors, and other the like Accidental things do very much
assist; which are yet all of them placed without a Man: But to keep what is
got, requires both an Excellent Wit, and singular Wisdom. Valor is of use for
the getting; but Prudence, and that not Ordinary neither, for the Keeping what
is Gotten. For the raising of Tumults, and Sedition, the Vilest Persons have
power enough: but Peace, and Quietness have need of Art and skill to maintain
them. The Lacedaemonians, that they might show, that it was a business of
greater moment to keep what was Ones Own, then to possess himself of what was
another man's, appointed punishments for those only that had lost their shield
in fight; but not those that had lost their Sword: and among the Germans, of
old, it was reputed a most Heinous crime for a man to have left his shield
behind him; neither was it Lawful for any man in that Scandalous manner, to be
either present at their Sacrifices, or to join with them in any of their
Meetings. The Romans also were wont to call Fabius Maximus, the Shield of their
Commonwealth; but^ Marcus Marcellus, The Sword: And it is certain enough, that
they made much more account of Fabius, then they did of Marcellus. Of this
Opinion also was Aristotle, who affirms in his Politick^, that the Office, and
Duty of a Lawgiver does not so much consist in the constituting, and Forming of
Cities, as in the endeavoring to preserve them when they are formed, and to
make them stand firm as long as possibly may be.

Neither need that to trouble us at all, that the Propagators of Kingdoms have
always been more highly esteemed then the Conservators of the same; for the
reason of this is, because that their Present Acts do more affect, and take up
the Eyes of men, and do make a greater Noise, and show, and are fuller of
Ostentation, and Novelty, which all People so dearly love. And this is the
reason, why most people do more applaud, and are delighted to hear of
Expeditions, and Conquests; then they are taken with those other more Peaceful
Arts of Preserving what Men had before gotten: which Arts notwithstanding, by
how much the more Tranquillity, and Quiet they work withal, so much the greater
both Judgment, and Wit, do they argue to be in him whosoever he be, that knows
how to make use of them. And as Constant Rivers are much more Noble then sudden
Torrent^, that are caused only by the Accidental falling of some Violent
Showers of Rain; which yet are with more Admiration gazed upon, then those more
quietly-flowing Rivers; Just so is it with the Common People, that always have
him in greater Admiration and Account that Wins Countries, then that preserves
them when they are gotten. And yet the truth is, that it is a much harder Task,
(as Florus has also observed) to preserve and make good a Province, then to
make one. These things are indeed gotten by strength; but they are kept by Good
Laws. And therefore I shall conclude with that of the Poet: Non minor est
virtus, quam quaerere^ parta tueri.
It shows as great a Skill^
To keep, as Conquer still.


And now I conceive I have treated Copiously enough, touching the Prudence, and
Occasion that the King of Spain ought to make use of, both in General, and
Particular: notwithstanding that having been detained ten years in misery, and
being also sick, I could not have the opportunity of furnishing my self with
such things as this business required, nor could have the help of any Books;
for indeed I had not so much as a Bible by me when I wrote this Discourse: so
that I shall the more easily deserve the Readers Pardon, in case that I shall
have any where doatingly failed, either by setting down some things in such
places as were not proper for them; or else by writing some things twice. I
have done what I was able to do; though I could not do what I would willingly
have done: the fuller handling of all which things notwithstanding I shall
reserve for some fitter Opportunity.

In the mean time I desire, that Your Lordship would take the pains to peruse
this Tumultuary, sudden Piece; which yet I hope I shall revise again, against
the next Easter: and therein I shall take the more pains and care, and shall
take away, and add, where I shall see cause. This Age of ours has also Its
Solons Lycurgusses, and Joseph's, which are sent by God himself: but they are
kept under, and are not admitted to the Presence of Princes: And that Common
Saying, namely, that there are no Solons, or Aristotle's born now adays, is
most false. For indeed there are such born even in these our days; and such as
are better then they too: but they lie hid, and concealed; whiles that Gentiles
are had in admiration; but Christians are envied.

But I would have these things committed to Secret Ears: for hereafter, when
they shall have been viewed over again, and correct^d, they will be more
esteemed of, then the Sibylls Books were by the Roman King. It is not in the
power of Envy to hinder me from speaking thus much: for, when those things
which I have here delivered shall but come to be examined, and made trial of,
Spain shall know what It has to do, and shall perceive how great my desire is
to assist it in what I may. Pro captu Lectoris habent sua fata Libelli.
Books either fail, or hit,
By the Scale of the Readers Wit.
And thus I shall now take leave of Your Lordship; whose Honors, and Deserts I
desire, and earnestly pray, that Almighty God would crown with a happy length
of years, and a full increase.

FINIS.

