A TESTIMONY TO The fulfilling the Promise of God, relating To such WOMEN WHO
Through the pouring out of Gods Spirit upon them, are become Prophetesses,
Daughters and Handmaidens: And their Prophesying, Teaching, Preaching and
Praying through the Operation of the Spirit of Christ, in the Church proved
lawfully, by several plain Scripture Testimonies and Examples, out of both the
old and new Testaments, both under the time of the Law, and also in the Gospel
Despensation. And the common Objection alleged against the same, from the
Apostle Paul's words, in 1 Cor. 14.34. and 1 Timothy 2.12, etc. clearly answered.

Recommended to the Consciences of all that value the Testimony of holy
Scripture, by one who has diligently searched the Scripture, and has had an
high esteem thereof from his youth.

Thomas Camm.

This is that which is spoken by the Prophet Joel, And it shall come to pass in
the latter day says God, I will pour out of my Spirit upon all Flesh, and your
Sons and your Daughters shall, Prophecy, your young Men shall see Visions, and
your old Men shall dream Dreams: And on my Servants and on my Hand-maidens I
will pour out in those days of my Spirit, and they shall Prophecy, Acts 2. --
Follow after Charity, desire spiritual Gifts, but rather that you may
Prophecy, for you may all Prophecy one by one, that all may learn, and all
may be edified, 1. Cor. 14. -- For as many of you as have been Baptized into
Christ, have put on Christ, there is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither
Bond nor Free, there is neither Male nor Female, for you are all one in Christ,
Gal. 3.27, 28. Printed by Andrew Soul: And sold at the three Kyes in
Nags-head-Court in Grace Church Street, 1689.

THE PREFACE To the Reader.
NOtwithstanding that several have written upon the same Subject, and that both
plain, clear and weighty, as the Lord by his blessed Spirit has moved and
assisted you, yet was I under obligation to cast in my Mite amongst my
Brethren, that by many Witnesses the matter may be Established) in Testimony to
the fulfilling that blessed Promise of Almighty God, in pouring out of his
Spirit upon both Daughters and Handmaidens, as well as Sons and Servants, and
their Prophesying to Edification in the Church; and the more especially because
the following Testimony has been a weighty concern upon my mind, for several
days, in the movings and openings of the holy Spirit: And now in the tender
B^wels of Love sincerely as a Christians Duty and Service, Recommends the same
to the Consciences of all sort of People that profess Christianity.

Yet more particularly; And first, unto such as have taken occasion to render
and conclude those People called Quakers to be deluded, and sleighters,
undervaluers and den^ers of the holy Scriptures, only because Daughters and
Handmaidens, through the operation of Gods holy Spirit, in the divine movings
thereof, do in their Meetings and Gatherings together, Speak and Prophecy as
the Spirit gives utterance, that the gainsaying Reflections and common
Objections of such may be repelled and fully answered.

Secondly, That all such as are well satisfied in the aforesaid Practice of
Women's Speaking and Prophesying in the Gatherings of Gods People, which is his
Church and Congregation, may be furnished with Scripture Testimonies and
Examples, to answer the Objections of all Gainsayers.

And Lastly, For the information and help of such as may through a kind of
respect, to (at least the Letter of) holy Scripture, yet being but little or
rather unacquainted with the holy Spirit, that opens the mystery therein, does
either read them in too literal a Sense, or else through Ignorance wrest them,
and therefore may scruple or doubt of the Fractice of Gods People in this
particular; now if thou Reader be such a one, I tenderly beg of thee to wait
low in thy Mind, to feel the Illumination of the holy Spirit, by which holy
Scripture was given forth, whereby thou may not only have the mystery thereof
opened in thee, but also receive benefit by what hereafter (in this following
Treatise) out of holy Scripture, is in the Love of God recommended to thee in
order to thy Satisfaction.

I have only made use of Scripture Testimony and Examples, as through the holy
Spirit that good Remembrancer they were brought into thy mind, yet I believe
much might be added, not only from holy Writ, but also from the Practice of
many Godly Women, in the dawning of the Gospel-Day, and beginning of
Reformation in these latter Ages, when the Superstition of Popery began to be
discovered and protested against, who through the Spirit were made Instrumental
in the Hand of God, for the building up and confirming others in their Meeting
and Congregating together, as by Hystory of credit amongst Protestants may more
fully be demonstrated, but at present omitted for Brevity sake, wherefore read
and receive the following Lines in true and sincere Love to the Truth as it is
in Jesus, abandoning all Prejudice, that the benefit designed thou may reap
to Gods Glory, Truth's Praise, and thy own Satisfaction and Comfort, wherein my
end will be fully answered, who is one that heartily wishes to thee, and all
Men, the knowledge of the Truth as it is in Christ Jesus, to whom with God the
Father be Glory and Praise in all his Churches, World without end, Amen.

Thomas Camm.
Camsgil, the 10th Month 1684.
A TESTIMONY TO The fulfilling of the Promise of God, etc.
AND first in the time of the Law, you may read in Exodus 25. that Miriam,
Moses's Sister, was a Prophetess, and prophesied in the Church or Congregation,
for the Word Church is by worthy Tindal most frequently Translated
Congregation: And in Number. 11.29. you may read how Moses the Man of God, who had
the Spirit of God, and knew the Mind of God, wished that all the Lords People,
(Mark, all the Lords People) both Sons and Daughters, did Prophecy or were
Prophets: Again you may read in the 4th and 5th Chapters of Judges, how Deborah
that Judged Israel, and was a Mother in Israel, through the Spirit of Christ,
Prophesied and Praised the Lord amongst the People, the Congregation or Army to
whom the Lord had given a great Victory over their Enemies; further it may be
observed, that Deborah was a Mother in Israel; and its the concern of Mothers
to Instruct and Teach their Children, yea all others over whom God has made
them Judges and Overseers.

Again in the 1st. and 2d. Chap. of 1 Samuel you may read how Hanah Pray^^ to,
and Praised the Lord, and rejoyed in Gods Salvation, in many gracious
Expressions; yea, and in the Temple, and in the presence of the High Priest
Eli, and we read not that he for bad her: And in 2 King 22. you may read how
good Josiah King of Judah, sent to Husdab the Prophetess to enquire of the Lord
by her, and not by any other Prophet: And you may also read what a blessed
effect her Words had upon both King, High Priest and People, to a great
Reformation: Moreover in Luke 2. you may read how, that at the time, that the
Child Jesus was by the Parents brought into the Temple, to do to him after the
Custom of the Law: There was one Anna a Prophetess, a Widow of about Fourscore
and Four Years old, who departed not from the Temple, but served God with
Fasting and Praying day and night; and in that instant (with good old Simeon)
gave thanks likewise unto the Lord, and spoke of Jesus there, in the Temple
(Mark in the Temple) to the Church or Congregation there) yea to all them that
looked for Redemption in Jerusalem; now observe she was a Prophetess and
departed not from the Temple, then where did she Prophecy but in the Temple,
Pray in the Temple, gave Thanks in the Temple, and spoke of Jesus in the Temple
to all that looked for Redemption in Israel? And we read not that any of the
Priests or Ministers of the Temple did forbid Her, neither good old Simeon that
was filled with the Holy Ghost, and came by the Spirit into the Temple, and
knew the Mind of God, he did not forbid Her to Speak or Pray, or Prophecy in
the Temple, the Church or Congregation; no they joined and was at unity in
their Testimony, in that blessed Spirit by whom both their Mouths were opened
to speak in Prayer and Prophesying to Gods Glory, and the Comfort and
Edification of all that looked for Redemption by Jesus Christ in Israel:
Further you may read in Luke 1. how Elizabeth was filled with the Holy Ghost,
and did Prophecy, and Mary blessedly magnified the Lord; what gracious Words
proceeded from them through the operation of the holy Spirit that is one in Male
and Female: Again in John. 4. it may be read how the Woman of Samaria that
discoursed with Christ at Jacob's Well, went into the City Syehar, and Preached
Christ to the Men therein, and what an effectual Sermon it was, though but
short, Come said she, See a Man that has told me all that ever I did, Is not
this the Christ? and many of the Samaritans of that City, believed on him, for
the Saying of the Woman which testified, He told me all that ever I did; now by
what is abovesaid, its plainly evinced, that God in the time of the Law poured
out of his Spirit upon Daughters and Handmaiden, as well as upon Sons and
Servants, and they Prophesied, Preached and Taught, yea and Prayed too, and
Praised the Everlasting God in the Church or Congregation, in the Temple, and
in the prefence of the Highpriests and other Ministers of the Temple, and we
read not that they were for bidden.

But it may be Objected, This was in the time of the Law, but now the Gospel
time is come, and has not Paul, that was a Minister of the Gospel, prohibited
Women's Speaking in the Church, in 1 Cor. 14.34. and 1 Timothy 2.12. etc.

To which is answered, that by what is above written its manifest, how God did
pour out of his Spirit upon some Women, Daughters and Handmaidens according to
measure in the time of the Law, and they Preached or Prophesied, and Taught in
the Church or Congregation, and Praised and magnified God there also, through
the operation of the Spirit then poured out upon them, though but in the time
of the Law, which was to be fulfilled and come to an end (mark that) And then
God promised, that cannot lie, to pour out of his Spirit more universally upon
all Flesh, as may be read in Joel 2. And it shall come to pass afterward, that
I will pour out of my Spirit upon all Flesh, and your Sons and your Daughters,
(mark, Daughters also) shall Prophecy; your old Men shall dream Dreams, your
young Men shall see Visions, and also upon the Servants and upon the Handmaids
(mark Handmaids also) in those days will I pour out my Spirit: O blessed
Promise to be fulfilled in the latter Days, the Gospel Days; yea, the Apostle
Peter bears Record to the fulfilling thereof, as may be read in Acts 2. This is
that, says he, which is spoken by the Prophet Joel, And it shall come to pass
in the latter Days says God, I will pour out of my Spirit upon all Flesh, and
your Sons and your Daughters shall Prophecy, and your young Men shall see
Visions, and your old Men shall dream Dreams, and on my Servants, and on my
Handmaidens, I will pour out in those days of my Spirit, and they shall
Prophecy; mark, God says they shall Prophecy, here is the time of the
fulfilling of the Promise, this is the Gospel Day, wherein Daughters and
Handmaidens is to Prophecy more universally then in the time of the Law,
though then God poured out of his Spirit upon some, and they Prophesied as
before said: This is so glorious a Dispensation, that the Apostle Paul says,
You may all (mark all) Prophecy one by one, yea, he advises all to follow
after Charity, and desire after spiritual Gifts, But rather, says he (mark
that) that you may Prophecy, for he that Prophesies speaks unto Men to
Edification and Exhortation, and Comfort, yea, he that Prophesies, Edifieth
the Church, 1 Cor. 14. Now that the Church might be thus Edified, has God
Almighty in his infinite Kindness, in this latter Day, and Gospel Day, poured
out of his Spirit upon both Sons and Daughters, and they may both Prophecy in
the Church or Congregation; yea, God that's above all has said, they shall
Prophecy, who therefore can limit the Spirit of the Almighty, who can set
bounds thereto, its one and the same in the Female as the Male, and is through
both to speak, yea, for all in this Church of God, that has the Spirit of God
poured upon them, may by the same Prophecy to Edification, For you may all
(mark all) Prophecy one by one, that all may Learn, and all may be Comforted,
etc. 1 Cor. 14.31. For its not the Woman that speaks, but the Spirit of the
Father through the Male and Female, according to Christ's Saying in Mat. 10.20.
Its not you, says Christ, that speaks, but the Spirit of the Father that
speaks in you: Now its not the Man nor the Woman that speaks, but the
Spirit that God the Father has poured upon Sons and Daughters, Servants and
Handmaids in this Gospel Day, that Holy Day and Sabbath, testified of in Isa.
58.13. as follows thus, viz. If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath,
from doing thy Pleasure on my Holy Day, and call the Sabbath a Delight, the
Holy of the Lord, Honorable, and shall honor him, not doing thine own Ways,
nor finding thine own Pleasure, nor Speaking (observe nor Speaking) thine own
Words; here neither Man nor Woman is to speak their own Words, for every Woman
or Man either that speaks their own Words, are forbidden to speak in the
Church, in the Congregation, in the Meetings and Assemblies of Gods People, for
such regard not the Holy Sabbath, the Gospel-Day, and Holy, in which Male nor
Female are to speak their own Words, for who are Baptized into the one Spirit,
who have drunk into the one Spirit, who have put on the Lord Christ, is a new
Creature, as says Paul in 2 Cor. 5.17. Therefore if any Man be in Christ, he
is a new Creature, old things are past away, behold all things are become new;
here is the blessed Restoration out of the Fall, through Christ that's one in
both Male and Female, both has he purchased by an high price unto himself; and
such are not to speak their own Words in his Church, in this Gospel day and
time of his holy Sabbath, but to adminster out of the Abundance of the Spirit,
that God the Father gives; here the Spirit utters it self through the Male and
Female, for both are one in the Spirit of Truth, both are one in Christ as may
be read in Gal. 3.27, 28. For as many of you as have been Baptized into Christ,
have put on Christ, there is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither Bond nor
Free, there is neither Male nor Female, for they are all one in Christ; Here is
no difference in Christ, Christ may speak in Male and in Female, who is it that
will limit him in his Church, may not he speak through the Daughters and
Handmaidens that is filled with his Spirit, as well as through the Sons and
Servants being there is no difference, all are one in him? yea, he does and
has done it in his Church and Congregation, who is Lord and Lawgiver, and is
to be Obeyed, Worshipped and Served both by Male and Female. So its clear that
its not the Woman that is filled with the Spirit, in whom Christ dwells, rules,
and is Head that is forbidden, or not permitted to speak in the Church; but such
as are silly Women that are ever learning, but never come to the knowledge of
Christ the Truth, that is not taught by him, nor led by him, such as obey him
not; so usurps an Authority, speaks their own Words, speaks of themselves, not
from Christ, not out of the abundance of the Spirit that God gives, but out of
the abundance of their own unsanctified Hearts and Wisdom, such, whether Men or
Women, are forbidden to speak in the Church, in the Congregation they are to be
silent, and to learn in Subjection, its a shame for such to usurp Authority and
speak. Now by what is before said its cleared that the Spirit is poured out upon
Sons and Daughters also, and they are to prophecy; let us see what Testimonies
the holy Scriptures affords, as with respect to Practice, since the time of the
Gospel revealed.

First, Mary Magdalen was commissioned to Peach and Publish the Resurrection of
Jesus Christ to his Disciples, as may be read in Matthew. 28.7. where she was
commanded to go quickly and tell his Disciples, That he is risen from the Dead,
and behold he goes before you into Galilee, there shall you see him, lo, I
have told you. And in Mark 16.7, 9, 10. Mary Magdalen, and Mary the Mother of
James and Salom were commanded to publish unto the Disciples the Resurrection
of Christ, where its said, Go your way, tell his Disciples, and Peter, that he
goes before you into Galilee, there shall you see him, as he said unto you.
Here you may see that these good Women were commissioned by the Angel to preach
the Resurrection of Christ to his Disciples: Furthermore, when Jesus was risen
early the first day of the Week, he appeared first to Mary Magdalen, out of
whom he had cast seven Devils, and she went and told them that she had been
with him, as they mourned and wept. And in Luke 24.9, 10. And returned from the
Sepulcher, and told all these things unto the Eleven, and to all the rest
(mark, all the rest) it was Mary Magdalen, and Joana, and Mary the Mother of
James, and other Women (Mark, other Women also) that were with them, which told
these things unto the Apostles. Again, in John 20.16, 17, 18. Jesus says unto
her, Mary, she turns her self, and says unto him, Rabboni, which is to say,
Master. Jesus says unto her, Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my
Father, but go to my Brethren, and say to them, (observe) and say to them, I
ascend unto my Father, and your Father, and to my God, and your God. Mary
Magdalen came and told the Disciples, that she had seen the Lord, and that he
had spoken these things unto her. Hereby its clear that Mary was the first unto
whom Jesus appeared after he was risen, and the first Preacher of his
Resurrection; she and the other Women, before mentioned, spoke of and published
the Resurrection of Jesus unto the eleven, and all the rest. Surely none will
deny but the eleven and all the rest was the Church of Christ in that day; in
this Church they spoke, preached and taught, and was commissioned thereto by
the Lord, Christ, the Head of the Church, the everlasting High Priest, whose
Lips preserve true Knowledge, whom all are to hear and obey, and whoever does
not hear the voice of this Prophet, is to be cut off from amongst the People,
is to be separated from his Church, and not to speak therein, for its whom he
Commissions, whom he dictates to, and speaks in, whether Male or Female, that
is to Speak, Preach and Teach good things to Edification, in his Church, in the
Congregations and Meetings of his People. Further, Aquilla, and Priscilla his
Wife, were both Expounders of the Way of God more perfectly, as may be read in
Acts 18. verse. 27. Them does Paul greet by Name in his Epistle to the Romans,
Chap. 16. and there calls them both his Helpers in Christ Jesus: To whom not
only Paul, but also all the Churches of the Gentiles gave thanks, whereby its
evident, they had been both of them public Laborers amongst the Believers in
all the Churches of the Gentiles: Moreover, Paul greets the Church in their
House; here was the Church in their House; and must not Priscilla speak in her
own House? Must not she labor there? Must not she Pray and Prophecy there,
and teach good things there? Must she not expound the Way of God more perfectly
in her own House where the Church is? Is she prohibited to Speak or Teach good
things? there does not Paul will that Prayer be made every where; where then
must this good Woman, Paul's helper in Christ pray, if not in her own house? If
she may and ought to pray every where then in the Church? In her house she is
not commanded Silence by Paul. Again, you may read in Acts. 21.8, 9. that
Philip the Evangelist, one of the seven, had four Daughters Virgins, that did
Prophecy; and Paul gave directions how, and in what manner Women shall Pray
and Prophecy, as may be read, 1 Cor. 11. where he says, Now I pray you
Brethren, that you remember me in all things, and keep the Ordinances, as I
delivered them unto you, every man Praying and Prophesying, having his Head
covered, dishonors his Head; but every Woman that Prays or Prophecyeth
with her Head uncovered, dishonors her Head: for that is all one as if she
were shaven, etc. Now he, even Paul, that gives this direction, has advised to
desire after Spiritual Gifts, but rather to Prophecy; for Prophecy tends to
the Edification of the Church, and the Apostles travel and labor was, that the
Church might be edified by Prophesying in the Church: So its clear he did not
forbid the Female that had the Spirit of prophecy to speak in the Church, to
prophecy and pray in the Church; nay, he has given directions how they should
demean themselves when they pray and prophecy, and says he, You may all speak
one by one (mark, all) that all may learn, and may be edified: God that has
poured out his Spirit is not to be limited in the Male nor Female; these four
Daughters of Philip's Paul says did Prophecy, God had poured out his Spirit
upon them for that end, that they might edify the Church, that it might be
builded up and established in the most precious Faith of Jesus Christ; such
Women as were thus endued, labored in the Gospel as well as the Men, as may be
read in Phil. 4.3. And I entreat thee also, true Yoke Fellow, help those Women
which Labored with me in the Gospel, with Clement also, and with other my
Fellow Laborers, whose names are in the Book of Life. Now Paul bid help the
Women Laborers in and Publishers of the Gospel, and not forbid them to speak
nor publish the Gospel in the Church, for their names were written in the Book
of Life, they were come to Christ, by him they had Life, he had poured out of
his Spirit upon these Daughters and Handmaidens, and they were in his name, by
his Power and Spirit to Prophecy, to Preach and Teach in the Church, to Labor
with Paul and Clement in the Gospel^; yea, Paul was so far from forbidding,
that he entreats his yoke fellow to help them; yea, he commands them to be
Teachers of good things, as may be seen in Titus 2. But speak thou the things
(says Paul to Titus) which become sound Doctrine, that the aged Men may be
Sober, Grave, Temperate, sound in Faith, in Charity, in Patience: The aged
Women likewise, that they be in Behavior as becomes Holiness, not false
Accusers, not given to much Wine, Teachers (mark, Teachers) of good things,
that they may Teach the young Women, (observe, Teach the young Women) to be
Sober, love their Husbands, to love their Children; to be Discreet, Chaste,
keepers at Home, Good, Obedient to their Husbands, that the Word of God be not
Blasphemed, etc. Here is good Women Teachers, this is blessed Teaching; such
Teachers are not forbidden to speak in the Church, such have Author^^ from
Christ and the Apostle Paul to be Teachers of good things amongst them, with
whom they Congregate and Meet, for how shall they Teach them with whom they do
not meet? and where two or three are gathered in the Name and Fear of Christ,
there is he present, there is his Church met together, though but two or three,
and Females; here they may, yea, Paul says, Let the Elder be Teachers of good
things to the Younger, such as are learned in the School of Christ, have
received the Spirit of Christ, the Spirit of Truth, that leads into all Truth,
and are led thereby, acted thereby; the Spirit speaking in them, may instruct
others, teach others good things when they are gathered and congregated
together, yea, in the Church.

Moreover, Paul commends Phebe to the Romans, as may be read in Romans 16.1. And
again, makes mention of her in the Conclusion, as follows, I commend (says
he) unto you Phebe our Sister, which is a Servant of the Church, which is at
Cenchrea, written to the Romans from Corinth, and sent by Phebe Servant of the
Church at Cenchrea; here Paul calls Phebe our Sister and Servant (that is
Minister) of the Church at Cenchrea, for a Minister is a Servant: So here all
may see how Paul commends her to the Romans, as a Minister of the Church, and
bids receive her in the Lord, as becomes Saints, and to assist her, not one
Word of forbidding her to Speak and Minister; no, no, such as labored with him
in the Gospel was his fellow-Helpers therein, his Sisters in the Lord, and
Companions in his Work and Ministry; yea, God Almighty through Christ had
poured his Spirit upon them all, Sons and Daughters, Servants and Handmaids,
they are all therefore to Prophecy, Pray, Preach and Teach as the Spirit
moves, leads, instructs and gives utterance; all is to wait upon God to be
filled with the Spirit, as Paul directs the Ephesians, Ephesians. 5.18. Be not
Drunk with Wine, says he, wherein is Excess, but be filled with the Spirit,
etc. And further he advises not to grieve the Spirit, as may be read in Ephesians.
4.30. And grieve not the holy Spirit of God, by which you are sealed to the Day
of Redemption; neither is this Spirit to be quenched, nor Prophesying despised,
as may be read in 1 Thessalonians. 5.19, 20. Quench not the Spirit, despise not
Prophesying; now to forbid to speak, or command silence where God has poured
out his Spirit upon Daughters and Handmaids, is to grieve the Spirit, to quench
the Spirit, to despise Prophesying, which Paul advises the Ephesians and
Thessalonians not to do, but to be filled with the Spirit, to desire spiritual
Gifts, and rather to Prophecy, and gives the Reason, because says he, It
tends to Edification.

Now by what is above written, its cleared by Scripture Testimonies, that Paul
did not forbid Women, filled with the holy Spirit, to Speak and Minister in the
Church; so those that use Paul's Words against such Women's Speaking or
Prophesying in the Church, are ignorant of the Spirit that spoke in Paul,
unlearned by the same, knows not the meaning, mystery or inward sense thereof,
but either takes it too Literally, or else as the Apostle Peter well observes,
in 2 Pet. 3.16. Even, says he, as our beloved Brother Paul, also according to
the Wisdom given unto him; as also in all his Epistles, Speaking in them of
these things, in which are some things hard to be understood, which they that
are unlearned and unstable, wrest, as they do also the other Scriptures unto
their own Destruction: Now its such as are unlearned by the Spirit of Truth,
that leads into all Truth, from which Spirit the holy Scriptures were given
forth, that wrests them, for its not by any other Learning that the heavenly
Mystery in holy Writings of the Prophets and Prophetesses, Apostles and holy
Women can be understood or known, its not all the natural nor acquired Learning
that may be got, that can do it, its the Inspiration of the Almighty that gives
this Knowledge and Understanding, its this Spirit that searches out all
things, yea, the deep things of God; none can rightly read or understand the
holy Book, but such as are come to the holy Spirit according to measure, by
which holy Men were moved to give forth, and write the same, that is the only
Key, who wants the same are the unlearned and unstable, though outwardly never
so profoundly Learned, and its they that wrests the Scripture, as aforesaid,
its such that knows not the fulfilling of that ancient and blessed Promise of
the Everlasting God, in Pouring out of his Spirit upon Sons and Daughters,
Servants and Handmaidens, such forbids both Sons and Daughters, yea, all
besides themselves to Speak, Preach or Prophecy in the Church, they are not of
Moses's mind, for he wished all the Lords People, Prophets; and Paul says, You
may all Prophecy one by one, and if any thing be revealed to another that sits
by, let the first hold his Peace; but now none must Speak but themselves,
neither Son nor Daughter, neither Servant nor Handmaid, although God has
poured his Spirit upon them, and said They shall Prophecy: Yet
notwithstanding, such as are made Ministers by Men; Ministers of the Letter,
but ignorant of the Spirit, for the love they have to the Gain of their
Ministry, yea, for filthy Lucer sake they forbid all, both Men and Women
besides themselves; and furthermore, if any that sits by have any thing
revealed, and do Speak, he or she have been quickly hailed out, and often
either Beaten, Stockt or cast into Prison for three Months (by a Law made
formerly to guard the Priests of that time) as a Disturber: And thus while they
talk of God and Christ, Moses, Paul and the holy Scriptures, they are acting
quite contrary, like the Scribes and Pharisees of old, who in Words pretended
love to God, Moses and the Prophets and their Writings, and to be waiting for
the coming of the Messiah, yet when he came, they knew him not, received him
not, though Moses and the Prophets were by them read every Sabboth-day, that
testified of him, and they no doubt thought themselves profound in the
knowledge of them; yet as before said, they did not know him, nor receive him,
but crucified him as the greatest of Malefactors, and the reason of their
Ignorance is rendered, the Vail was over their Hearts, they knew not the meaning
of the Spirit that spoke in the Prophets that testified of the coming of the
Just One; none that is ignorant of the meaning of that Spirit that spoke in and
through Paul, can understand his Writings, but either takes them too Literally,
or else wrests them as beforesaid; for whoever draws that Conclusion from
Paul's words in the Text before cited, that all Females are prohibited to
Speak, Teach, Preach, Pray or Prophecy in the Church or Gatherings of God's
people, do make Paul not only to contradict God Almighty, and the Practice of
many Godly Women before cited, but also himself and his own Testimony: for
first, God has said, They shall Prophecy, Christ has commanded Mary, and the
other beforementioned holy Women to preach his Resurrection in the Church to
the eleven Apostles, and the rest, and they did it; and we read not that any of
the eleven, or the rest of the Church then met together, did forbid them:
Moreover, Paul himself bids help those Women that labored in the Gospel, and
commends Phebe as a Servant, which is a Minister of the Church at C^nchera; he
has given directions also how the Women are to demean themselves when they
Pray or Prophecy, and says he, You may all Speak or Prophecy one by one: All
that have the Spirit poured forth upon them, may speak as the Spirit moves and
gives utterance.

But it may be further objected, That if it be thus, that they may Speak and
Prophecy, who have the Spirit poured forth upon them, who then are they that
Paul prohibits or permits not to Speak in the Church? 1 Cor. 14.34. and 1 Timothy
2.11, 12. where he says first to the Corinthians, Let your Women keep silence
in the Church; for its not permitted unto them to speak, but they are commanded
to be under Obedience, as says the Law; and if they will learn any thing, let
them ask their Husbands at home, for it is a shame for a Woman to speak in the
Church.

Now let all seriously weigh the Words of the Text; for if the Words must be
taken in the Literal sense, the Woman is not only prohibited speaking, but
learning in the Church; for its said, If the Woman will learn any thing, let
her ask her Husband at home. And if so, it does not only contradict what God
Almighty has said shall be, and what holy Women have practiced, as before
clearly is demonstrated, but also Paul himself in the very same Chapter, verse.
30, 31. where he says, If any thing be revealed to another that sits by,
let the first hold his Peace, for you may all (mark, all) Prophecy one by one,
that all may learn, (mark) all may learn, and all be comforted; Furthermore, by
the Text, Women's Teaching or Prophesying is not prohibited, but to speak, which
speaking must by the Words before related, be understood to be Questions
tending to strife and the disturbance of the Church, wherefore its said, Let
her ask her Husband at home: And such Speaking or Questions tends not to
Edification and Comfort, but Disturbance and Contention, of which there is no
custom in the Churches of Christ: And further, to manifest that this was Paul's
sense, hear what he says to the same Corinthians in Chap. 11. Now in this that
I declare unto you I praise you not, that you come together not for the better,
but for the worse; for first of all when you come together in the Church, I
hear that there be Divisions among you, and I partly believe it. Now its such
speaking as tends to Division and Contention, that is for the worse, and not
for the better in the Church, that is forbidden, but teaching good things,
Praying or Prophesying, is for the better, praiseworthy, tends to Edification
and Comfort, and has no tendance to Strife or Contention, neither can any
reason be rendered that such Women thus Teaching, Praying or Prophesying should
be refered to learn of their outward Husbands at home; besides, many have none:
Further, Paul in his second Epistle to Timothy very clearly declares what
manner of Speaking, and the Spkeaers which are forbidden in the Church, hear
what he says, Of these things put them in remembrance, charging them before
the Lord, that they strive not about Words to no profit, but to the subverting
of the Hearers: Shun profane and vain Bablings, for they will increase unto
more Ungodliness, and their Words will eat as does a Canker: but foolish and
unlearned Questions avoid, knowing that they gender. Strife, having a Form of
Godliness, but denying the Power thereof, from such turn away; for of this sort
are they which creep into Houses, and lead captive silly Women, laden with
Sins, led away with diverse Lusts, ever learning, and never able to come to the
Knowledge of the Truth: Here are the Women described that are not permitted to
speak in the Church; also the Speaking, the vain Babbling and unlearned
Questions that grenders Strife, from them that have a form of Godliness, but
deny the Power, such Speakers and speaking is not permitted in the Church; this
tends not to Edification and Comfort, and teaching good things, and Prophesying
does, that all may do in the Church that has the Spirit poured upon them. But
such Questions are not proper or convenient in the Church, they usurp Authority
that are found in the Practice thereof; there is no such Order or Custom in the
Churches of Christ, for what is there done, is to be to Edification, if Women
that are thus idle, Busybodies and Disorderly shall propose, ask, or speak
any such things or Questions, ought not to do it in the Church, they are not
permitted there, but rather let them ask their Husbands, or others at home,
such are unlearned, not come to the knowledge of the Truth that sets Free, but
in the Sin and Bondage, in the Transgression and Fall from God, where the
Subjection is to be kept under, and the Husband is to rule over, as says the
Law; Its a Shame for such to Speak in the Church, such are not Witnesses of the
Restoration by Christ, in whom Male and Female are all one, and he in both may
Speak in his Church, Prophecy in his Church to Edification and Comfort, that
all may Learn, and that all may be Edified and Comforted.

Secondly, As to the Words of Paul to Timothy, which are as follows, viz. But
I suffer not a Woman to Teach nor Vsurp Authority over the Man, but to be in
Silence. Here is not one word of Teaching in the Church, but has only relation
to such as would usurp Authority over the Man, which Paul permits not, suffers
not, to teach in that Usurpation, but such as are taught by the Spirit he
permits and commands to teach others good things, to Love and Obey their
Husbands, not to usurp Authority over them; for all that comes to learn of
Christ and his good Spirit, they learn Meekness, Humility and lowliness of
Mind, and such know how to Honor their Husbands, Obey their Husbands, and are
thereby preserved out of the Usurpation, though God by his Spirit, that is not
to be limited, may make them Instrumental to Instruct their Husbands, as he did
by Sarah, and Abraham her Husband was commanded of God to Obey and Answer what
she Taught or Instructed him in, yet the Apostle says, She called Abraham (her
Husband) Lord; here is no Usurpation there.

Wherefore its clear that Paul's Words of not permitting or suffering Women to
Speak, had only relation to the Unlearned, Unruly, the Usurpers of Authority
amongst the Corinthians, or other Churches, such as usurped Authority over the
Man, such are to be slent, they are not permitted to Speak in the Church, they
Minister Strife and Contention, and there is no such custom in the Church of
Christ. Further, it may very properly be queried of all Objecters, in this
wise, That if Women must Learn of their Husbands at Home, of whom then must
they Learn that have no Husbands, if there be no other way of Learning, then
must they be concluded in Ignorance to remain? But Philip's four Daughters had
no outward Husbands to Learn of, Paul says they were Virgins, yet well
Learned, they did Prophecy, wherefore the prohibition by him of not speaking,
belongs not to, nor has any relation to them, nor such other, they may
notwithstanding Speak and Prophecy in the Church, and all others who have the
Spirit of Prophecy poured out upon them, as the same Spirit moves and gives
utterance.

Now to conclude, God Almighty that is greater then all, has said, They shall
Prophecy; and Daughters and Handmaids have Prophesied, both in time of the Law
and Gospel Dispensation in the Churches or Congregation, Christ the Lord and
Lawgiver has Commanded and Commissioned Women to Teach or Preach or Prophecy
in the Church, as before is clearly demonstrated, and they obeyed and
practiced; moreover Paul has commended Daughters and Handmaids to the
Churches, Commanded to receive and assist them, and to help those Women that
labored with him in the Gospel, they did Prophecy, says he: Therefore let
all Gainsayers and Contradictors of God Alimighty, of Christ Jesus the Lord
and Lawgiver, and the Apostle Paul, cease therefrom and stop their Mouths for
ever, and let the Unlearned and Unstable, cease to pervert or wrest the Holy
Scriptures, for such know not the meaning of the Spirit that spoke in the
Prophets and Apostles, Holy Men and Women that have given out the Holy
Scriptures by Inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof,
for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness, and are able to make wise
unto Salvation through Faith, which is in Christ Jesus, that the Man of God may
be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good Works, Glory to God for the
unspeakable Comfort thereof, administered through the Holy Spirit.

A POSTSCRIPT of some Testimonies showing, that the Apostles Precepts against
Women's Speaking was not universal; and that Women have had a Service in the
universal Church in several Ages.
BEfore the Law was given, Miriam was given for a Prophetess, Exodus 15.20.
Mica. 6.4. And among the Gentiles under the Law of Nature (as it is called) the
Sibyls in several Ages prophesied; Augustine says, By the same Spirit of God
that the Prophets did to the Jews, Decivit. dei l. 18. c. 18. And Bishop
Montagues writes a whole Book about that matter, Acts and Monuments (before
Christ) the 9th Book.

And for Women's Services under the Law, and under the Gospel, Bishop John
Bridges writes near a whole Book, Defense, etc. 9th Book, where he shows that
though Calvin was the vehementest against Women's Teaching, of all that he had
read, yet he makes his concession this, That as necessity might require this
Precept of Paul of the ordinary course, makes no absolute debar to all manner
of Women, but that now and then some may speak lawfully; Yea, and their Voice
is requisite, even in the most sacred, public and greatest Assemblies of the
Churches. The said J. Bridges also brings the further Concessions of Peter
Martyr, Musculus, Marlorat, Alesius, Aretius, and other emnient Teachers, all
granting Paul's precept not to be an universal restraint, bringing the Examples
of Women under the Law, as well as Gospel times for instances, as Philip's
Daughters, Anna, Deborah, Hulda, Hannab. The Woman's Claim, Deuteronomy. 25.7, 9.
Abigal the Woman of Abel, 2 Samuel 20.18. The Mother of the seven Sons, 2 Mac. 7.
Judith. The Woman, Luke 11.27. The Virgin Mary. The Woman Matthew. 9.20. and Luke
8.44. The Woman of Canaan, Matthew. 15.22. The Woman of Samaria, Miriam,
Elizabeth, Samson's Mother, Judge. 13.22. The captive Maid, 2 Kings 5.2. and
others. That though they be under subjection, yet they may speak, counsel, and
teach. So Bridges says, Defense. lib. 1. (which I have heard was set out in
Churches) That Extraordinary Gifts are not altogether ceased in the Church.
Gualter an Entertainer and Adviser of Queen Elizabeth's Bishops, on Romans 16.
says, Paul is not ashamed to call Priscilla his fellow-Helper, not ashamed of a
Woman at the Church of Rome, whose Faith was spoken of through the World. That
she was the first named, because perhaps she was first converted, and more
known, afterward instructing her Husband, and they expounded the Way of the
Lord to Apollos, and without doubt to many others, making their House a public
Meeting House, in time of Persecution. Augustine says, Every Father and Mother
in a Family should play the Bishop. So Gualter called the learned, who speaks
there much against the haughtiness of the Clergy, despising mean helps, knowing
that in Jesus Christ there is neither Male nor Female. So Dr. Cave says ( Prim.
Christ. part. 1. c. 8.) He meets with frequent mention of Deaconesses in
ancient Writings, as Phebe, two Maids in Pliny's Letter to the Emperor; Clem.
Alex. strom. l. 3. Of (...) calls them She (...). W. Tindal, that famous
Martyr, in his Answer to Sr Thomas Moor, page 322. and 287. says, In some cases
Women may Teach and Baptize, and Rule their Husbands too if they be besides
themselves: Yea, says he, if Histories be true, Women have preached since the
opening of the New Testament. And in four Historians of the ancient Church, (
Socrat. l. 1. c. 16. Theod. l. 1. c. 24. Sozom. l. 2. c. 6. Niceph. l. 8. c.
34.) we find that a Woman converted the Nation of the Iberes, who first
converted the King, then he preached to the men, and she and the Queen to the
Women. Puffinus says, he received it from Bocurius their first Ruler. And even
in declining and corrupter times, mention is made in Histories, what liberty
Women had in some Councils. As in Wilfrid (Samms Brit.) a chief Bishops time,
when he would excommunicate the Scots and Northern English, because they would
not receive the Romish Rites, Hilda Abbess of Whitby in Yorkshire withstood
him, Illyricus test. verit. And also in his time in a Council at Baconkeld,
five Kentish Abesses were not only present, but subscribed their Names above
all Presbyters, and a Bishop, G. G. Brit. chapter hist. Cent. 7. And Illyricus
mentions another English Abbess that wrote to the Pope in defense of Ancient
Canons. And Heldegardis she instructed the Pope in his Life, Prophesied, etc.
whom Ja. Max^ell in his Book of Prophesies (dedicated to K. James's Bishops)
produces, with many other Women. And in the Council of Trent it was confessed,
That the Service of women in the Church was degenerated, Hist. Counc. of Trent.
l. 2. In the year 1414. Joan White taught and spread her husbands doctrine, J.
Fox Martyr. And Dr. Roll. Tailor speaks of Women's Services. In the last Age a
Woman was principal Ordinary in the Church hers; and in her time there remained
Permission for Women to Baptize, as well as in her Sisters time (Conference at
Hampton Court) and I find nothing, but there does yet. and then why not to
Preach? For many therein are permitted to Preach, yet not to Baptize? And it is a
Rule, that they that may do the greater may do the lesser. However, they are
not only permitted, but commanded in the Liturgies Rubric, to speak in the
repetition of the Creed, Responses, Psalms, etc. if they be of the
Congregation, though not Prophe^eises. For all are not Prophets, Paul says,
whose restraint therefore is not universal (confessed by Judgment and Practice)
but on occasion of Abuse, as Jerome says, and Calvin too.

RICHARD RICHARDSON.

THE END.

