A SERMON CONCERNING National Providence, Preached at the ASSIZES Held at
AILESBURY IN BUCKINGHAMSHIRE March 13. 1693/4.

By AB. CAMPION. D. D. Rector of Monks Risborough Bucks.

Printed for Anthony Piesley Bookseller in OXFORD An. Dom. 1694.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir JOHN HOLT, LORD CHIEF JUSTICE OF ENGLAND, AND One
of their Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
MY LORD,
WIthout leave I presume to prefix Your Lordship's Name to this Discourse. That
it was Preached, I my self stand accountable; but that it was Printed, It has
Nothing to justify it but Your Lordship's Command, whom nothing can or does
resist. For the greatest Obscurities of the Law, Its most sullen difficulties
scatter before Your Lordship's Eye, as the Clouds before the Sun. The most
intricate knotty Cases, You untye with that Ease and Dexterity, as that they
seem of themselves to open. It is not in You to cut or force, It consists not
with that sweetness of Temper, by which You so charm all You have to deal with,
as that You seem most deservedly to inherit that Glorious Title of the Great
Vespasian, of being the Darling of Mankind. For the very Curse of the Law You
manage with that Tenderness and Indulgent Affection, as even that the Condemned
go away satisfied, if not pleased. That I might not therefore appear the only
stubborn Thing in Nature, I submit, and subscribe my Self,

My Lord, Your Honors most humble and obedient Servant, AB. CAMPION.

A SERMON Preached at the Assizes, etc.
127. PSALM I. Except the Lord keep the City, the Watchman waketh but in vain.


A GREAT and pregnant truth, that deserves to be fixed as a Motto to every
Charter. It holds good in what ever sense we take the word City. It is true of
all sorts of Societies, greater or less, families or Empires; From the little
dirty Prince of a Cottage, to the proudest Monarch, that styles himself King of
Kings and Lord of the whole Earth; of Him especially most true; so
disproportionate are his abilities, to the weight of his burden, that except
the Lord uphold Him, He is undone.

It may perhaps be thought an unnecessary undertaking to prove or vindicate an
overruling Providence. The world has generally appeared in some measure
sensible of it; but yet it must be said, that it seems to have had but a
disturbed Possession in the minds of Men, sometimes confessed, sometimes
doubted of, or disputed against, but almost always practiced against.

The Epicurean was loath to put his God to the trouble of looking after the
World, thinking all happiness to consist in a slothful ease and having nothing
to do; like some Men of Quality and Fortune, conceiving all business a
professed enemy to enjoyment, and a mark of Honor to be useless.

The Stoic made his God a servant to something, or rather nothing; He knew not
what, but called it Fate. But to put the best interpretation his Fate seems
capable of; He represented his God, so tying up his own hands by his own
positive peremptory Decrees, as that he thereby destroyed if not all Providence
yet all Religion; (i. e.) all such Providence as is the true foundation of
Religion. For if it were true that God took such an original care of all his
Creatures, as from the beginning to appoint every one his portion by an
irreversible Decree, what ever thanks may be due from such, who have a
prosperous beneficial lot in this World, yet (as the Roman Orator well argued)
it seems in vain to pray to, or implore the aid and assistance of their God in
times of danger or distress, if all things were from the first sullenly fixed,
so as not to have left to Himself liberty to succor the oppressed, reward the
good, or punish the wicked: To which the Apostle assents as a thing
fundamentally requisite to all Religion, Heb. 11.6.
That whosoever would come unto God, must believe that He is a Rewarder of such
as diligently seek him.

Some there are who under the Name of Fortune have fallen very foul upon
Providence; For this they must mean if any thing; If Fortune be not a mere
name, a fancy, a word without sense, an Invisible overruling Power must be
understood thereby, which is the Providence we contend for. But yet how
infamously does she stand branded for her blindness, her levity and
inconstancy, her rashness, madness, and what not. So do fools under this
feigned Name curse their God and reproach his Wisdom. Because they are kept
strangers to the Councels of the Most High, and discern not therefore the true
reason of events, the affairs of the World appear to such short-sighted
Creatures, as a mere jumble of action, and heap of uncertainties. This tempted
the wise Philosopher to exclude the Providence of God from things done under
the Moon, and had the things above the Moon been contrived according to his
foolish scheme, he might much more justly have excluded Him thence too.

But among Christians it is hoped there is little need of vindicating the
Providence of God. Truly, if such I may call all those who have been baptized
into the Faith, in no Age has the Being and Providence of God been more derided
and scoffed at than in this. For God governs the World now in a spiritual
manner, not by visible appearances of Angels or messages of Prophets; His
footsteps are only to be discerned by the eye of Reason and Faith; He works by
second causes, and under them lies concealed from careless or perverse minds
that will not see. His Finger is only to be discried by their admirable
concurrence and wonderful effects beyond the power of any visible cause. Such
is the Art of God, or stupid blindness of Man, that He that does All things, is
by vulgar eye seen to do Nothing.

But even among the better sort of Christians, we may observe the sense of
God's Providence to be very weak and faint; For were it heartily believed what
mean the bleatings of the sheep? whence those impatient complaints in times of
Calamity or Affliction? Why so dejected, because the Clouds gather blackness?
Why does the heart ache, the Countenance wax pale at every evil tiding; if they
are verily persuaded that they are in the hands of God, a good God, their best
Friend, and that nothing can befall them but what He ordains or permits what He
knows and observes, and that no danger can be so great but that He has Power
and Wisdom sufficient, and Goodness too, to extricate them out of the
difficulty? This Doctrine heartily believed would work its wonders. Let us
proceed therefore to view it, and its influence from the words I have read.

Except the Lord keep the City, the Watchman waketh but in vain.

Which words do naturally afford these Heads for the subject of our discourse.

First, That the care of the Watchman is not alone sufficient to keep the City.

Secondly, That therefore it is to the Lord that the City ows its safety. And
to excite us to render our selves fitter Objects of Gods care and Protection, I
shall farther observe,

Thirdly, That God watches over some Cities with a peculiar and distinguishing
care. We begin with the First.

I.

1. Because the Watchmans care is not sufficient to keep himself, except the
Lord keep him he stands in a very unsafe place, and is likely to make but ill
work of it.

Had Man continued in a state of Innocence there would have been but little
need of government. For where love and universal Benevolence had been the
general practice of the World, and the only prevailing ambition, who should be
most kind, most beneficial: There would have been no need of the Magistrate to
decide the quarrels of Love; no use of the Sword to punish where there were no
faults or injuries. Apparent therefore it is, that sin brought into the World
the use of an armed Magistrate. When men's appetites grew irregular and
boundless, and reason was not sufficient to restrain, then something more sharp
and terrifying was requisite to check the outrages and villainy of fools and
madmen. But herein lay then the infelicity of Mankind; had God left them to
themselves, that very sinfulenss of nature which made Government necessary
rendered man unfit to govern. For impossible it is that he should govern others
well, who has not first obtained the government of himself, the dominion over
his own passions. For if a Prince take his lusts with Him into the Throne, what
mischief then will naturally ensue, the history of those Nations will inform
us, where, out of judgment to the people, God has left such a Prince to the
wildness of his own spirit.

Little are most men aware how much corruption lies lurking in their natures,
and what great enormities they might be guilty of, did God but place them in
suitable temptations and leave them to the conduct of their own foolish hearts.
It is a common observation how much the sentiments of men usually change with
the alteration of their condition; Tu si hic sis, aliter sentias, Then was
then, and now is now. Many men's virtues hold out pretty well in a private life,
where they meet with few or but vulgar temptations, which would miserably fail
them were they more exposed to stronger assaults. This admonishes us therefore
not to be over-confident of our own integrity and present resolutions, and to
cast a mantle over the miscarriages of those above us, who stand at difficult
posts, and in slippery places; perhaps where they trip, we should have fallen.
When the Prophet had by divine inspiration acquainted Hazael, 2 Kin. 8.12.13.
what a villain he would prove; He astonished at the ugly character of himself,
rejected it with abhorrency, but the Prophet to make good his charge only told
him, Thou shall be King over Syria; such an alteration of condition, if by God
not duly qualified for the high Office, was enough to make him do he knew not
what; what He could not at present believe true of himself.

The necessary Royalties of a Crown do carry a violent temptation with them.
That high Honor, that Sovereign Authority and Power, and those large Revenues,
which are requisite for the ends of government, to be invested in the person
that manages it, are not themselves to be duly managed, but by a mind
extraordinarily fitted by the Father of Gifts and Graces.

Small men have many restraints upon them, to keep them within due bounds. The
lash of the Law, the frown and rebuke of their Superiors; the fear of blasting
their reputation and hopes of preferment. The narrowness of their Fortunes may
be a check to many, not well perhaps affording the necessary expenses of vice:
for many vices are costly, at least if enjoyed to the best advantage. But to a
Prince vice comes ready dressed, set off with all the witchcraft that cursed art
and wealth can furnish it withal. Nature is racked to treat him with the most
luscious and exalted pleasures; He is continually courted with gaudy
temptations, improved to the utmost by the Devils care and industry; for it is
his masterpiece to debauch a King, the greatest interest of his Kingdom, so
many are the ill consequences of it. Add to this that He is free from most of
the common restraints of other men; the many hellish instruments also that He
has about him to provoke and inflame his appetites, none to check or curb them.
So that if He be not caught in the snares, it is a sign He has a good keeper.

To what insufferable pride would his high Honor inflame the minds of meaner
men? To see all the World to stoop and bow before Him, and caress him with
awful solemnity, would be a strange poison to a common soul, it would infect it
with giddiness and a most absurd vanity. It requires a mind rarely well poised,
fortified with sovereign antidotes to preserve it self untainted from the most
subtle penetrating charms of praise and flattery. But above all his
temptations, methinks his necessary power is a most dangerous weapon, nothing
seems harder for man than to use great power well. Never to oppress the
Innocent or justify a bad cause by might, argues a generous mind, a Soul free
from corrupt prejudice or partial affection. Great power is only fit for God,
or for those that are like Him, that have Wisdom and Goodness to govern it.
Power and ill nature are the essential qualities of a Devil. It is not in man:
Necessary it is therefore that the Watchman be taught of God to use his sword
aright, That the Vicegerent bear the Image of his God, as well in his gracious
qualities, as in his Authority.

2d. The care of the Watchman is not alone sufficient to keep the City, because
his best care cannot be commensurate to his work. It is too great, it exceeds
his abilities, it transcends the natural power and reach of his Faculties. So
various are the affairs of a Kingdom, as that they even overwhelm an humane
understanding. It must be always upon the rack, distracted with perpetual cares
and thoughtfulness; how to remedy this evil, prevent that threatening danger.
His own understanding, as humane, is subject to infirmities and mistakes, and
of what boundless ill consequence may a mistake prove in matters of such high
importance; where the interfering interests of so many thousands are wrapped up?
His own eye was it infallible cannot be every were; He must for the most part
see with other men's eyes, and they may deceive Him. In his circumstances it is
hard not to be deceived. Some men out of their own ignorance or mistake deceive
Him, others out of design. As his eye so neither can his hand be every where
to execute his purposes; Instruments therefore He must have; but honesty is not
always engraven in the lines of the face. It is therefore a difficult matter
for a Prince to know his Friend, and who is fit to be trusted. Let him be never
so wise to contrive and direct, yet if his Instruments be false, He is
deceived, and the City suffers. God was pleased to give his Apostles a power of
discerning Spirits, of knowing the hearts of those, they entrusted with the
care of Souls; but his Infinite Wisdom did not see this miraculous gift
requisite for the support of civil government: for it may be reasonable to
think, that that great concern, which men usually have for their temporal
interests, and that interest particular men have in the public welfare, might
be of force enough to engage men to be faithful to their civil trusts; if not,
it is to be hoped that the Sword of the Magistrate may be of force enough to
revenge the wrong. To this we may add; The ungovernableness of some men's
spirits, their impatience of any yoke, do often render it very difficultly
possible for the Watchman to keep the City in tolerable peace and good order.
The unruly passions of some will neither suffer themselves to be at rest, nor
the State to be long in quiet. Some Creatures are born to live in the fire,
uneasy but when they are in flames; it is their hellish delight to be
cherishing quarrels, and fomenting misunderstandings. Covetousness and ambition
inflame some to the most daring attempts. Pride and Revenge will stick at no
villainy to accomplish their ends. They are eager and violent whilst in pursuit
of their cursed designs, and enraged if they suffer a defeat. What peace can
there be in a State which has various parties struggling within its womb; with
jealous eye watching each others motions, and always tugging for mastery; their
spirits boiling against each other with fierce animosities; and this especially
if Religion and pretense of Conscience be got into the quarrel? Conscience is
the most uneasy thing to government, and that principally because it pretends
an exemption from humane Jurisdiction, and appeals to the Bar of Heaven; where
causes will not be tried till the day of Judgment, and then it will be too
late to right the State. In such convulsions and tempests of State, what Pilot
can stear the vessel safe? Truly only He who has the winds and seas at his
command, and can with a word still the proud waves when they arise.

It may be farther observed that in the course of public affairs, there are
many things in the dark as to humane eye, of very uncertain consequence,
doubtful and intricate nature, and therefore not in the power of a man to be
managed as they ought. The Crown has sometimes secret ill-willers, which lay
their plots often as deep as Hell for its ruin, only therefore to be
discovered and prevented by Him that is there also. The success of the greatest
undertakings often depend upon very small accidents, mere contingencies; which
does show how little the Watchman has to do in the Case. From all which I
conclude, that the preservation of a Kingdom in peace and safety, is nothing
less then a standing miracle of Providence.

We are in innumerable instances both in our private and public capacities,
highly indebted to the watchful Providence of God when we little know or think
of it. Did not God by some secret influence overawe and curb the minds of the
multitude, no Kingdom would stand long. If the popular Beast finds its own
strength, the hands of Government would be too weak to restrain it, the
violence and outrage of sinners would make Earth like Hell for confusion, in
spite of the Magistrate's Sword. The Prince of darkness is very powerful, and
has a terrible flaming sword; but he himself is a very ill Governor, and his
people as ill subjects, and therefore they make very bad work between them, but
yet they show us, what sinners would do, were they left to themselves.

This World is a scene of good and bad, that the good may here have some
tolerable abode amongst the Giants of the Earth, God by his Providence sets
bounds to their rage. One ingredient of the miseries of Hell is, that sinners
are there let loose upon one another, free from the restraints either of Grace
or Providence; Devils and men to rage and tear, and be a mutual plague to each
other. A true emblem of what our condition on earth would be, did God resign
us up to the malice and madness of each others hearts. But our comfort is, that
the wise and good God, takes the reins of this World into his own hands; if a
man through weakness cannot govern the World, God can. If sinners will not be
governed, they shall be governed till they go down to their own place. If the
Watchmans care be not alone sufficient, let the City rest satisfied, the Lord
keeps them, and their Watchman too, which brings me to my second general head.

II.

Safe it must be in his hands, if Infinite goodness, Infinite Wisdom, and
Infinite Power be good security. For this Trinity is that natural notion which
all have of a God, who own any. Such security they have therefore who have God
for their keeper. His perfections do abundantly supply for the Watchmans
defects. For He sees all things and can do all things. Whether God does take
care for Cities, I think, is not to be doubted, except by such as would exclude
Him altogether out of the world. An attempt sufficiently absurd, for if there
were no God, I am sure there would be no Atheist to betray the secret.
Creatures therefore I will presume to call all things besides Himself. But
Creatures as such, are dependent beings and must be upheld, or they will sink
into their primitive nothing. They stand in need of their Makers hand as much
for their support as their first composure. Characters of Divinity therefore
are every where visible, not only in the Fabric and contrivance of every
Creature, (of which the more we understand, the more we are rapt into
admiration) but likewise in the conduct of them and their natural operations.
For do we not see the motions and products of Mortal beings curious and
regular, constant to themselves so that a Monster or false step in nature is a
rare thing? But matter we are sure cannot move it self, much less can it direct
its own motions, and these always with the highest art and regularity. We, that
boast of our Reason, mistake and blunder at every turn, and are forced for the
most part to review our work for fear of error; impossible it is therefore but
there must be something besides Matter, to govern the Corporeal world, to
manage all their internal motions and fermentations, and direct them all to
their designed end. If every plant therefore, every being has not a peculiar
Guardian Angel, some universal Superintendent there must be, some general
Overseer of the works of nature; an Intelligent Being, call it by what name you
please, the Plastic Power or Soul of the World, or what ever else, we contend
not about words; but if we remove the great God himself from this immediate
care, yet reason will drive us to Him at last.

But what ever are the conceits of vain Philosophy, or the more vain
Philosopher, who idly dreams of building a World without a God, yet Scripture
the infallible Philosophy, assures us that the great God does not disdain to
take care of the least of his Creatures, and thinks it no encumbrance to his
Infinite wisdom to observe and govern all their concerns. Psalm 145.9.
The Lord is good to all says the Psalmist his mercy is over all his works. He
looks to the ends of the earth and sees under the whole heavens. Job 28.24.
In him all things live, and move, and have their being, (though originally the
saying of a Poet, yet is by the Apostle consecrated into a divine Oracle) All
things are but sparks or streams of being, Acts 17.28.
from Him the fountain of all Being, and depend continually on Him as the rays
of light on the Sun; if his face or influence be for a moment eclipsed, they
vanish. He makes the grass to grow; Psalm 104.13.
and clothes some of it more gloriously than Solomon in all his gaiety; There
falls not a sparrow to the ground without his knowledge; Mat. 6.29.10.29.
His eye runs to and fro upon his Creatures giving them their meat in due
season. Ps. 145.14, 15.
They as by instinct seem instructed in their duty and privilege. Ps. 147.9.
Ps. 104.21.
For the eyes of all wait upon him. The young ravens cry to him, and he feeds
them. The young lions seek their meat from God. In a word, the whole family of
Heaven and Earth He every day provides for, Ps. 105.16. Acts 14.17.
filling every thing living with plenteousness, refreshing their hearts with
food and gladness. But of all his Creatures Man is cherished as the darling of
the family; at first fearfully and wonderfully made, by a consult, as some
imagine, of the blessed Trinity; curiously wrought in the lower parts of the
earth. Every part of Him formed with such exact superlative care of the Deity,
Ps 139.13, etc. Matt. 10.30. Ps. 22.9.
as that God is by the Psalmist represented as writing all his members in his
book; by our Savior as numbering all his hairs. It is he that takes him safely
out of the womb, and makes him hope upon his mothers breasts, conducts him
through the paths of life; upholds him when feeble and gray headed; Ps. 27.10.
when his father and mother forsake him. His soul is a most precious jewel of
divine extract; It is a stream of Divinity, the Breath, the Image of God.

If God take this care of the natural and single state of Man; we have less
reason to doubt of his care to his political state, the Community of Mankind,
if our Saviors way of arguing be good. For if the Providence of God being
extended to the grass of the field, or to sparrows, argues the care of God to
be greater on the behalf of Man: so say I again, if God vouchsafe to take such
care of Man in his natural and individual state, much more does he charge his
Providence with whole Societies of Men; Nations and Kingdoms are his peculiar
care, in which the dearest interests, the Lives and Fortunes of many Millions
are involved.

Though Man be a Creature of most wonderful composure, yet it is very observable,
that by the same Infinite Wisdom it is contrived, that of all the Creatures of
God, none so helpless as Man, so uneasy or unfit to be alone, being so full of
wants, standing in need of so much care, such long attendance. Which
infirmities do early instruct him in the duties of mutual love and kindness,
and show him the abfolute necessity of imbodying into fraternities and civil
Societies, for mutual defense and safety. That this is the will of his Maker,
he by good consequence concludes, his natural state and condition making it
very necessary: so wisely has God by means of his infirmities consulted the
greater safety of Man, thereby constituting every Man his keeper. From all
which it follows, that Cities or public Societies are of Gods making or
designing, though the model of them may be in great measure left to humane
contrivance; and for this reason therefore do they entitle themselves to his
protection as being his Creatures, his Leviathans, in the government of which
he appears most of all as God. For by setting bounds to mighty Empires; by some
slight means scattering and confounding the most dreadful Armies; turning about
Kingdoms as little things, as though they were but the sport of Providence; He
shows the transcendency of his own Almighty Power. He holds the world as in the
hollow of his hand, and all its prodigious massy Globes, with all their
Myriads of Inhabitants, to us inconceivable either for their magnitude or
number, are to him but as the drop of a bucket, or the small dust of the
balance.

As a farther demonstration, give me leave to observe, that all those duties
which are essential to the well-being of a Society, are by God enjoined under
the most weighty sanctions of Religion; they are the second Table, the one half
of Religion. So that he that is peccant against any such rules of duty, does
not only incurr the wrath of the Magistrate but of God himself. Than which can
there be a higher instance of Gods care in keeping the City, than by enforcing
civil duties with eternal punishments? One would think obedience to Magistrates
well secured; when the offender stands not only exposed to the sword of
Authority; but to that damnation too which is threatened to him that resists:
and that that villain had need to be well baited or very stupid, who will
venture to be a thief in spite of the gallows and of Hellfire. Nay more, God
has guarded the Temporal laws, by carrying his Spiritual laws up to greater
height. The Magistrate punishes only the gross acts of Murder, Adultery, or
the like; and humane laws are often too remiss to a fault; for not censuring
severely enough reproachful provoking words, which naturally draw on blows, and
break the harmony and peace of Societies: but a malicious thought, a lustful
desire, an unjust coveting, God revenges with everlasting burnings. So that if
the sanctions of Religion had but tolerable effect, the Magistrate would have
so little trouble as that the sword of Justice might rust in the scabbard. From
whence it appears to be the high interest both of the Magistrate and the City
to preserve Religion in due credit, and that professed Atheism and Debauchery,
deserve the Gibbet more than Theft or Burglary, as strikeing more at the
foundation of Government.

To all this we may add several observable occurrences in public affairs,
which plainly speak themselves the footsteps of a God, as when we see good men
by surprise snatched out of eminent danger; raised by unexpected means to
wealth and power. When an honest and good cause prevails by its own simplicity,
against wit, and power, and all worldly advantages. When wise Politicians are
infatuated and caught in their own snares. When hellish plots, and inhumane
Murders are brought to light none knows how; Hab. 2.11.
betrayed by a stone in the wall. When persons notoriously wicked are pursued
by a secret vengeance, tumbled down from their height of honor and power, into
extreme disgrace and misery; When Tyrants and bloody Persecutors are observed
to die by violent deaths, Lactant. de mort. Pers.
and usually under horrid tortures of Body and anguish of Mind; When things are
grown insufferable, and nothing but a black prospect of evils, present
themselves to view, then to see affairs turn gently about without visible
force, or some unthought of Deliverer start up, and breaking through
innumerable difficulties, rescue a Nation from slavery and bondage; When the
Stars fight in their course, and the winds and weather and natural Agents,
which are only in the hand of God, concur to promote the cause, and disappoint
the Enemy: These and such like do demonstrate God to be concerned in the event.
The truth is, if God do not exercise a National Providence, I know not what
business we have here. Public worship supposes or proves Gods care of the
public, or proves it self to be vain and absurd.

But if all this be not yet enough to assure us of the care of God in keeping
the City; will his own word be a sufficient testimony. He is in his own book
frequently set forth as King of Kings, Lord of Lords, King of the world,
Governor of all the nations of the earth; Ruler over the kingdoms of men;
Pulling down one, setting up another. Judge of all Nations, Dan. 2.21.
his eyes beholding all the kingdoms of the earth. That the battle is not
always to the strong, Eccles. 9.11.
That salvation is only of the Lord. Tell it among the Nations that the Lord
reigns, let the earth rejoice. It would be endless to quote particular Texts to
this purpose. In like manner the Historical and Prophetical books of the Bible,
are full of most glorious Prophecies concerning the Rise and Fall of Empires.
The Prophets are big with the burden of the Nations, as well as of Gods own
people. We there see the reason of Gods proceedings with the Kingdoms of the
earth. For the Spirit of God which indicted those holy books, knew the mind of
God. In other Histories we have naked matters of fact barely laid down, but
here is declared the Counsel of God, the Wisdom and Justice of his disposal of
Kingdoms. Solomon has in short given the fundamental rule of Gods dealing with
them; Prove. 14.34.
so that by righteousness a Nation is exalted. Never was there any Nation but
flourished whilst it was victorious, but sin is the ruin of any people, it is
the natural as well as the meritorious cause of it. Having thus, I hope,
sufficiently proved Gods care of the City in general, and consequently their
safety, I now proceed to observe.

III. in distress and want, that have no friend in the world, when there is no
help in Man, no comfort in the Creature, then are they fit objects of Gods
care, then is his season to appear. It pleases Him therefore to be styled a
Father of the fatherless, an husband to the widow, a refuge for the oppressed.
When the poor cry, the Lord hears them, and delivers them from him that is
too strong for them. Prove. 22.23.
He pleads their cause. Which holds as well of distressed Nations as single
persons; for there are many miraculous deliverances on record, which God has
sometimes vouchsafed to a distressed people, from the jaws of a proud insulting
enemy, snatching the trembling prey from between their teeth.

So also for the Good and Pious for those that love and fear God, He has a
professed kindness. No harm shall come nigh their dwelling. The wicked shall
not approach to hurt them. The righteous cry and the Lord hears them, and
delivers them from all their trouble. Good men by reason of their good
qualities stand in nearer relation to God than that of Creatures; they resemble
God as children their Father, and have a title therefore to his Paternal care.
So in the old World, those pious families which retained the worship of the
true God, were called the sons of God, in opposition to the sons and daughters
of Men, and when the world was reduced to that pass, as to have but one
righteous family, (as we know of) with what an amazing Providence were they
saved, when the whole world beside was drowned for their wickedness?

And if we proceed on farther in the History of the world; when mankind was
again relapsed into an universal Idolatry and Apostasy from God, so that he
seemed in a manner justled out of his own world, so had the Devil every where
usurped upon him, engrossing all the worship of it to himself: Then as the best
expedient to preserve himself a light to the world, was God pleased to pitch
upon one family, even that of Abraham, to enter into a particular Covenant with
him and his posterity, That if they would be his people, He would be their God.
He then gave him an explicit promise of the Redeemer, the foundation of all
mercies, and upon condition that he would walk before him and be perfect, God
promised that he would be his Shield, his Protector from all his enemies, his
exceeding great reward. Accordingly we afterward find as if God had forgotten
all the rest of his Creation; The Lord of Heaven and Earth, Oh wonderful
Honor! assumes the name of Abraham and his family, into his own great Title,
and was pleased in an eminent manner to style himself, The God of Abraham, the
God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.

In prosecution of these glorious promises made to their Fathers, we afterward
find Moses caressing their posterity with their transcendent privileges, their
near relation to God and his particular love to, and care for them. So Deuteronomy.
7.6. Thou art a holy and separate people unto the Lord thy God; The Lord thy
God has chosen thee to be a special people unto himself, above all people that
are upon the face of the earth. So again Exodus 19.5. If you will obey my voice,
then shall ye be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people, for all the
earth is mine, yet I reject them all in comparison of my love and care for you.
In like manner the Psalmist sings, The Lord has chosen Jacob to himself, Ps.
135.4.
and Israel for his peculiar treasure, to this purpose in many other places,
they are courted in the most indearing terms, (...)
as the Segullah of God.

In which word is included the most choice and best possession; any thing that
is rare and precious; to be kept most carefully and charily; a peculiar
treasure, his very jewels, as they are styled, Mal. 3.17. Nay farther, God was
pleased to put himself into the relation of an Husband to them, they were his
Spouse, and therefore to expect from Him the highest indearments suiting to
that relation, therefore did He express himself as very jealous over them, and
accused their departure from Him as notorious Adultery.

These high caresses made the Jew insufferably proud, so as to look down upon,
and greatly despise all the rest of the world as dogs and outcasts; that they
only were Gods Kingdom and particular concern, and all the rest of the Nations
were (as they conceived) governed only by Angels as Gods Viceroy's. This was
the ancient notion of the Jews, and continues amongst them to this very day.
And it seems not to want some countenance from Scripture; for I cannot but
observe that when God was angry with the Jews about their golden Calf, which
was a sin scarce ever forgiven to that Nation, so highly did God resent it, of
which the Jews too were so conscious as to own, that in all their judgments
there was a spice of that disease; I say, that God then refused for that
heinous provocation to go along with them Himself, but promised to send an
Angel before them, Exodus 32.34. The consequence of which seems to be, that He
did thereby cancel that near relation and special favor of being his peculiar
people, and designed to leave them in the common condition of the rest of the
Nations of the earth, namely, to be governed by an Angel only. Which Moses
seemed very apprehensive of, and therefore most earnestly deprecated that
severe sentence, Exodus 33.15, 16.
If thy presence go not with us, carry us not out hence. This appears to be the
general notion of the world too, namely, that the supreme God did govern the
Nations by Angels and inferior Deities, as His Viceroy's or Tutelar Demons.
This seems to be the meaning of the Angel and Prince of the Kingdom of Persia
and Graecia in Daniel. Chapter 10.20, 1 Kings 20.28. 2 Kings 18.34.
Of the Gods of the hills and the Gods of the valleys. The Gods of Henah, Ivah,
and Sepharvaim, namely, The Tutelars and Patrons of those places. And the
Papists who are almost degenerated into complete Heathens, have their Patron
Angels and Saints at this very day. Now according to this notion as the Angel
allotted to this or that Nation was more or less powerful; so did the affairs
of that Nation prosper or otherwise. For I cannot think that Senacherib as
proud as He was, did intend to insult it over the supreme God; but only as He
had found by experience of his own victories and great success; that the
Guardian Angel of his Country, as He conceived) was more powerful than the
Angels or Gods of all those Countries, He hitherto had to deal with; He did not
doubt therefore but that he might be too hard for the Guardian Angel of Israel
also; He little understanding that the great God of Heaven and Earth, was their
particular Patron and Defender. But whatever becomes of this notion of the
Vice-royship of Angels, it is most certain that Israel was Gods particular
care, his Inheritance.

But it may be asked, What Is all this to the purpose? God has certainly long
since cast them off, How does it appear that God does now take a more
particular care of one Nation than of another; which was the thing you
undertook to prove? To this I answer, That what I have discoursed is to the
purpose, because it has given you the reason of Gods particular care for that
people, and if the reason still hold, we may presume the consequence also; the
reason of Gods particular care of Abraham and his posterity, was founded upon
the faith of Abraham in the promised Messiah upon the Covenant of his
obedience, his Household being made the Church of God. So that if God has a
Church still in being in the world, nay the same Church, children of Abraham's
faith, though not of his loins; we may justly argue that they are as much Gods
particular care as ever the natural Israelites were.

Accordingly do we find the very same titles of indearment given to the
Christian Church which before we observed of the Jewish. So that St. Paul Tit.
2.14. tells us, That Christ gave himself for us, that he might purify unto
himself a peculiar people, (...). The word signifies a people acquired,
purchased for a possession to Himself, as a thing of great dignity and worth, a
beloved, precious, most excellent people, His Estate, His Treasure, any thing
that is dear to Him. So again, 1 Pet. 2.9. we find that great Herald after the
same manner blazoning the Christians titles. Ye are a chosen generation, a
royal Priesthood, or a Kingdom of Priests, (as it is phrased, Exodus 19.6. to
which it refers) a holy Nation, a peculiar people, again, but expressed by
another phrase in the original, (...), but much to the same purpose, and
signifies an acquired possession, 1. Pet. 1.18.
dearly bought, even with the precious blood of the Son of God. It is a
treasure, a (...) a jewel, any thing that is laid up and preserved charily. for
the word signifies saving or preserving, and they both of them are the full
import of the Hebrew Segullah; and signify to us, that such a people are those
whom God is resolved to keep most carefully, His dearest Children, His most
valued Treasure. And truly if there be any difference in the title of the Jew
and Christian to the particular favor of God, I have reason to think that the
advantage lies on the Christians side, and that God has really more love and
kindness for the Spiritual than for the carnal Israelite.

For they were in many respects used as servants, kept at distance from their
Masters secrets. They were treated as Children, with toys and ceremonies, and
beggarly elements, subjected to laws and ordinances which were not good, which
they were not well able to bear. But the Christians are by their Mediator used
as friends, acquainted with the secrets of the Kingdom. They are treated as
Men, have none but laws of the highest reason imposed on them. They are taught
the perfection of duty, the mystery of godliness and have the Spirit of God
given them, to enable them to be more than Men to live like those that are
acted by God. Christ has also taken upon Him the relation of an husband, the
Christian Church is his Spouse, He is the head also and we are the members of
his body, his very flesh and his bones, Ephesians. 5.30.
as his Apostle has taught us to express our selves.

But I suspect that it will still be objected, that I am not yet come up to the
business in hand; no body questions but upon Spiritual accounts the Christian
Church has greater privileges, and higher interest in God, than ever the
Jewish had; but the care of God as to temporal matters, was that that I seemed
most concerned to prove in my present undertaking, and here the Jew seems to
have the advantage, his Covenant being more temporal than the Christians is
thought to be. To this I answer,

It Is true that the Jewish Covenant was in many respects more temporal than the
Christian; though theirs was the same Spiritual Covenant, but under a temporal
disguise, and therefore no doubt a particular Jew might lay a more certain
claim to temporal felicity, by virtue of his obedience than a single Christian
can. For though the Christian has temporal promises as well as the Jew, yet they
are but in the second place to be minded by him, and given with many
limitations. God having afforded the Christian so clear a prospect of much
better things for the encouragement of his obedience, and if God permit him to
be hardly dealt with sometimes in this world, yet he knows that He both can and
will reward him an hundred fold in another.

But yet let it be considered, that there is a great deal of difference as to
these temporal things, between the state of a single Christian, and of a
Christian Nation; the one a Creature of Eternity, the other of time; and a
great deal of difference between rewarding and punishing of a Nation, and
rewarding and punishing of National virtues and National vices. God may reward
or punish a single person for his National virtues or his National vices in
another world: But Nations are temporal bodies, and must therefore be dealt
with after a temporal manner. If God then still exercises a National
Providence, He must reward and punish Nations, for their public encouragement
of virtue, and discouragement of vice, or the contrary. But Nations can only be
rewarded or punished where there are Nations, and therefore only in this
temporal life. To conclude then, If a Nation has a greater interest in the
favor of God and his care, upon the score of becoming the Church of God, as we
have seen: and a Nation is but a temporal thing, and therefore must be rewarded
or punished after a temporal manner, and a Christian Nation also as much a
temporal thing as ever the Jewish was; I cannot see any reason why a Christian
Nation (though not a Christian person) should not have as good a title to the
temporal promises of God, as being his peculiar chosen people, as ever the
Jewish had. If so, then all Nations at this day that profess the true Religion,
and live answerably to their profession, have reason to look upon themselves as
under the special and distinguishing care of God, as to their temporal
concerns, which was the thing I undertook to prove; that God takes a more
particular care of some Cities than of others.

Of this comfortable truth God has not left himself without witness in all
ages. For have you not heard of an Invincible Armada scattered by an invisible
Fleet, such was its smallness in comparison; and that that Ocean which was made
to groan under its burden, was afterward covered with its wrecks, by so
visible a miracle as made the proud Spaniard profanely to cry out, That God
was become a Huguenot? Have you not heard of a cursed Powderplot to confound a
Nation at a blow, as effectually as if the old Roman had had his wish, that
they had all but one neck, and he the pleasure of cutting it off; and yet in
the very nick of time, when just ripe for execution, was the mystery of
darkness discovered, as by a bird of the air? Let them not disown the fact, the
Child resembles the Parent: no beast could ever hatch such a dreadful
destruction, but Rome or Hell.

Have you not heard or seen a banished King riding without blood triumphant to
his Throne, almost stunned with the joyful acclamations of his people, when it
was the interest and the Religion too, of all that were in authority to keep
him out?

Have you not also seen the Reverse of this miracle, another King by the same
hand chased from His Throne, that God might not be out-rival'd in his own house
by Saints and Angels; a powerful Army driven and disbanded by their own fears,
flying when none pursued, from a handful of Men, many miles distant; the
friends as well as the enemies of the cause standing as in a gaze, could
neither find their hands, nor know their own resolutions, till God had done his
work? A work of so strange a nature, considering all its circumstances, which I
have not time enough to weigh, as that our successful Deliverer cannot but in
cold blood stand amazed at the hardiness of his own undertaking, scarce to be
accounted for by the rules of humane Policy; but that He found an impulse upon
his Spirit, which He could not well resist. And I cannot but esteem it no small
part of the miracle, that our neighboring watchful Monarch, who is rarely
found guilty of an oversight, should sit still so unconcerned whilst one of
the most professed enemies he had in the world, got three Crowns, and those too
from his only Friend. Certainly never did so sleepy a moment seize that
Sagacious Prince, and can be attributed to nothing but a strong dose of Divine
Opium. To our dissatisfied brethren therefore, I recommend the Counsel of old
Gamaliel, that they have a care least happily they be found fighters against God.
The Providence of God, though for several reasons it may not always be a good
rule of action, yet may be a good rule of after-compliance. If God has a right
to pull down one King and set up another, His finger when visible transfers the
right, and his King must be submitted to; the change of circumstances
necessarily inferring an alteration of duty. And the cases of Conscience which
arise from matters of mere civil dispute, can be of no more validity, but must
stand or fall with the fundamental controversy on which they are built, and
can administer matter therefore for none but a State-Schism, the only one that
ever was in the Church of God. In the late times the Providence of God appeared
only to destroy; it established nothing. God was angry with Church and State,
and destroyed them both: but when his Instruments had done his work, He
regarded them no farther, but left them to their own confusions and distracted
Counsels; like a sick distempered State, they tumbled about from this side to
that, from one posture to another, every day almost bringing forth its new
model of government: they could find no ease or rest, could fix no where, till
they settled upon their old Basis again.

If I have not pressed too much upon your patience, give me leave very briefly
to draw an Inference or two from what has been discoursed.

1. If the care of the Watchman be not sufficient, except God also keep the
City, it much concerns us to engage the care of God over us, especially in
stormy times, when the Kingdoms of the Earth are under such violent
concussions. But how shall we do to insure our God to us? We have heard of some
who have chained their gods to their Pedestals, that they might not depart from
them. A conceit suitable enough for Idol gods; what ever need there was of it.
But ours is an Almighty God, no material chains can hold Him. But yet by our
devotions and obedience, the Almighty himself may be secured. So powerful was
Moses in this kind, that God is pleased to express Himself as struggling to get
loose from those fetters, that holy Man's prayers had cast upon Him; Let me
alone, says God, that my wrath may wax hot against this people. Exodus 32.10.


2. If God be King, it will concern us to own Him in his Authority, to honor
his Name, observe his Laws, and punish those that transgress them. For if
sinners are suffered to go unpunished, sin then becomes National. The
Magistrate himself shares in the guilt, and the whole body stands obnoxious to
the Divine vengeance. When vice is grown impudent, it is then fit only for the
Magistrates rebuke; and the great King will severely require it at their hands,
if they be not faithful to their trusts. Those that are ashamed of Him and his
Cause, of such He has declared that He will be ashamed before his Father and
the holy Angels. Luke 12.9.
The Laws of God are the Laws of the Kingdom; let Magistrates look to the Crown
and Scepter from whence they receive their Commission, they will find the Cross
there advanced; the Badge of Him who is our Kings King, and from whom all
Authority is derived.

3. We have seen that if God has a more particular regard for any Nation, it is
for the sake of his Church and true Religion amongst them. The Church is the
Palladium, the safeguard of the State, the best way therefore to secure the
State, is to preserve the Church in its purity, and so conformable to the
primitive pattern, as God may know it to be his own Church, and not be provoked
to remove his Candlestick from us. Though the Spiritual curse thereof would not
perhaps be much regarded by hardened sinners, yet let such know that the
Temporal Guard and Fence of the Nation, goes along with the Candlestick, and
God leaves such a Nation to its own confusions or the ravage of its Enemies.

History and experience abundantly confirm this. When the Jews forsook God, God
forsook them. The Angel of the presence departed out of the Temple with a loud
voice, saying, Let us be gone hence, Jos de Bell. Jud. L. 7. c. 12.
as their own Historian informs us. And then presently followed that fearful
destruction, such remarkable vengeance, as never was the like from the
foundation of the world, nor shall be till the day of Judgment. We might call
in for witness all those Countries where Christianity once flourished; places
which were once famous in History and renowned; but since their degeneracy and
falling off from the faith, they have continued for many years in obscurity and
slavery, and their Countries in great measure desolated, are become an
habitation for Thieves and Robbers, for Owls and Jackals. To be sure the more
we have been Gods favorites, the worse will our condition be when he comes to
cast us off. Nothing provokes more than despised favors, You only have I known
of all the families of the earth, therefore will I punish you for all your
iniquities; punish you with an emphasis. Amos 3.2.

What the measure of a Nations iniquities is, I know not, He only can tell, who
knows how far He will be pleased to extend his own mercies. Most certainly
where the light of the Gospel shines brightest, the date of Mercy will soonest
there be out, if not complied with. If so, I am afraid we may read our own
destiny, and I almost tremble to enquire into it.

Though my self an unworthy Member of the Order, I must do my brethren that right
as to own, that the Gospel of Christ was never since the Apostolic age more
substantially and usefully preached, than in this our age and Nation, and the
Press too did never more abound with pious and discreet practical discourses.
And yet to our horrid shame, never did wickedness more abound, and this not
common wickedness; for it is not enough now to be wicked, except it be in a way
of triumph over Religion. Vice insults amongst us, it is the part of virtue to
blush and sneak. The Devil seems to be here trying his masterpiece, and
showing to what height he can possibly advance his Kingdom of darkness in the
midst of the greatest Gospel light; as though it were his ambition to nose God in
his own Kingdom, where Christ appears most of all to reign, and to bid defiance
to Him; so impudently does vice rage in our streets.

Scarce does a good Man now dare to venture into a mixed company, for fear of
having some horrid oath, or some hellish curse belched into his face; it is
great odds but he hears the name of God presently blasphemed, or some lewd dull
jest upon a sacred text of Scripture, or some such filthy discourse as Sodom
would have blush't at. And as though Comorrha and all that cursed Sisterhood were
sprung again out of their ashes, and transplanted into England: we may see
bargains for lusts driven in our streets, and the family-whore as publicly
owned, perhaps jointur'd as the wife. And do not these things call aloud for
some speedy remedy? For the Cities sake, for God the keeper of the Cities sake
we beg it.

And yet this is not all; though a wicked life be the worst of Heresies, yet to
carry on all the despite that Hell can possibly manage against God, our Age and
Nation grows now also infamous for the greatest Heresies. The conceited
grinning Atheist laughs at the belief of a God, and scornfully pities the
Psalmist for taking him for a fool. For great is the power of a jest in some
heads, neither good sense or reason can stand against it. The malice of others
is particularly bent against the Son of God, for attempting to save them from
eternal perdition, some under the title of Theists deny his being, and deny his
Gospel as a Fable, others make Cabals against His Godhead, and upon one
pretense or other, the whole blessed Trinity is scoffed at as a Monster. And
all this, besides a swarm of innumerable croaking Sects amongst us, who have
some of them destroyed all difference between good and evil, and have weeded
the most frantic opinions, and wildest dreams into their Religion. And dare we
still plead our privilege with God as His Church, and claim the right of being
his favorites? All our hope then is, That there are still some righteous left
in Sodom, some who stand in the gap, who by their prayers and tears in secret,
do screen the Nation from vengeance, do wrestle with God and prevail not to
cast us yet out of His protection. To conclude.

Lastly, If God keep the City, with what confidence may a good people triumph
in their keeper? Let them but take care to continue His favor to them, what
can in reason affright or dismay them? Fear of any thing besides God seems
inconsistent with the Christian faith, even in the midst of the most pressing
eminent dangers. Peter was sharply rebuked as one of little faith, Matt. 14.31.
for fearing when just sinking, almost swallowed up by the Sea. Their case
cannot be desperate or without remedy, who have a God engaged to rescue and
defend them. Nothing but sin can be the ruin of such a people, as Achior
wisely told Holofernes, It is in vain to assault them, Judith 5.20, 21.
if their God be not first angry with them, it is kicking against the pricks.
Happy are the people that are in such a condition; blessed are the people who
have the Lord for their God. In perpetual triumphs they securely live,
rejoicing in the Lord always. Nothing to cloud the serenity of their minds;
nothing to disturb the cheerfulness, the gaiety of their humors; nothing to
damp the briskness of their delights, their full satisfaction in their God and
Patron. Let them but pray, and Kings with their Armies fly, and they divide the
spoil. They only stand still and see the Salvation of their God in the
confusion of their Enemies. They as upon a safe shore sit viewing those storms
with which the world is tossed; spectators of the destruction and calamities of
sinners, and approving of Gods righteous Judgments; but the name of their God
is to them a strong Tower, They run to it and are safe. Under their Vines and
Fig Trees they entertain themselves, with songs of praise and thanksgiving;
telling their pleasant stories of all Gods wonderful works and mighty
deliverances, Rejoicing always in His Salvation, and in the name of their God
setting up their Banners. Thus is it with the City which God keeps, so shall it
be with the people which the King of Kings delights to honor.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost;

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end. Amen.

FINIS.

