COMPLAINTS CONCERNING CORRVPTIONS AND GRIEUANCES in CHURCH GOVERNMENT.

DEDICATED AND DIRECTED to the KINGS most Excellent Majesty, the right
Honorable LORDS, and the Honorable House of COMMONS now assembled in
PARLIAMENT.

By certain peaceably affected Presbyters of the Church of England, in the
name of all the rest of their BRETHREN.

Undertaking to maintain the truth of their Assertions, against whatsoever
Contradictours, if by public Edict of supreme authority they be called forth,
granting them as safe and free audience as their Adversaries and Judges not
preingaged, or preresolved for either side.

Printed in the year. 1641.

COMPLAINTS CONCERNING CORRVPTIONS AND GRIEVANCES IN CHURCH GOVERNMENT.
IT is the misery of pious undertakings, especially in matters of weight, that
by reason of humane frailty, they cannot be perfected at once, but by degrees,
and after much time: whence it comes to pass, that they are often given
over, or by interveening opposition forced to abortion, and imperfect issue.
Such was the case of that great reformation begun with us, as in the days of
those renowned Princes, King Edward, and Queen Elizabeth, and till this day,
remaining unaccomplished.

Those now blessed Martyrs and holy Confessors, who were under those pious
Princes, the first Reformers of our Church found things by that Papal Apostasy
so much corrupted and disjointed, that being unable at once to cope with all
the diseales of the Church, they did, as wise Physicians, set themselves first
against the most deadly, deferring the rest till afterward.

Hence by suffering and preaching, they mightily pulled down the Babylon of
Popish doctrine, and something too they did in matter of Government and
Discipline. But because the vitalls of the Church consist in doctrinall
verities, therefore their chief bent of endeavor was for a reformation in
them, which in their time with great success they effected: leaving the
reducing of Government and Discipline to it is Primitive integrity, as a work
to be done by posterity.

But, alas, as usually it falls out, the bellows of persecution ceasing, the
fire of zeal soon began to abate: so that after that first heat and
impetus of reformation, (as if they which had but begun, had at one essay done
more then enough) the business went on no further even till this day; Nay, (as
some edifice given over before it be covered) it has since rather decayed and
fallen back again. Such power has pomp and ease to blunt the edge of sacred
inventions, and quench the spirit of reformation.

As maladies not perfectly cured, return, or turn to some other diseases, so
was it with this imperfect reformation; doctrinall points being reduced, but
matter of discipline left in it is former state, almost untouched: hence arose
amongst us, even from the cradle of our reformed Church, three several
opinions, which have continued even till this time: whose discord nourished by
opposition of hot spirits, has increased till now they are come to that
extremity, that the life and being of this sacred Body, is even endangered
thereby.

One side cries down Episcopacie for Antichristian; and all the dependent
Government, Canons, Ceremonies, and Liturgy for remainders of Popery,
abominable, and to be departed from. The other extreme, cries it up for
sacred, of Divine, Apostolic institution; and it is dependent Polity for the
most absolute, to which all ought to be brought, as to a Rule of Perfection:
censuring other Churches which have it not, either as none, or else imperfect,
wanting a maine part of their been esse.

In the midst of these two, are a Remnant of sad lookers on, which have mourned
in secret, suffered with patience, prayed for peace, and preached it, and
sanctification to the people; while those other two, one by separating, the
other by persecuting, and both by froward disputing, have served up their
differences to an intolerable, irreconcilable height. Both these sacrificing
to their own conceits, account all which are not with them, to be against them.

But especially, that Episcopal faction (for distinctions sake give us leave so
to call it:) which by the indulgence of gracious Princes growing powerful,
have labored an extirpation of all which will not think, say, and swear to
their opinions. Hence of late have all been involved, as of the opposite
faction, which are not of theirs; and no place left for a moderate neutrality.
New Ceremonies, Taskes, Canons, Oaths have been invented, as nets and fives
to try out all, as bad fish, or chafe, which have but disliked the remaining
corruptions and defects, which the first plunge of Reformation did not
redress. No tolerating now of any thing as a burden; much less silent
disliking of what we could in secret grieve for, but not amend: but approve
all, swear to all we must, or else be thrust out, as schismatic Puritans,
and excrementitious burdens of the Church.

On this enforcement, We (a part of a Multitude of laborious Presbyters of the
Church in the name of all the rest) do now Complain: because in this height
of all devouring Faction, our patient silence will no longer privilege us from
extirpation.

And since into our hands, God has put so blessed an opportunity, as to speak
to the whole Kingdom, Head and Members at once, in one Body conjoynd and
intent, about a work of Reformation. We be humbly bold and plain to lay open
our Grievances, hoping that the set time is come for the quenching of these
coals of dissension, which have not only lived, but increased for so many
years in the Church; by completing of that Reformation, which in the maine
vital points was long since effected: and in the rest (we hope, and pray)
after more then an age of interruption, is reserved as your Crown and Glory to
be perfected.

Experience has e're this taught as the woeful effects of an half done
work: the upshot of our jarres now declares that scrupulous urging of
Ritualls, cannot stand with the welfare of a Church. Those Convulsions, and
renting Pains the body now feels, show us that the humors were not at first
fully purged: God will have a through work done. If instead of redressing that
which remains, you think to transact all these differences by removing of
Persons, and not Things; well you may hush our Troubles for a season, but they
will return again with a greater violence.

Now is that Power actuated, which alone can bring to pass this great work.
And if the Lord take pleasure in this his poor Church, he wi^ll give the
effect, that it may be performed.

If men would rest in the sole authority of the Scriptures, most controversies
both about points of Faith and Forms of Government would find an easy
resolution. And if besides Gods Word, we bring in men's authority we draw out
the thread of contention into endless disputes: men's faces differ not more in
feature then their minds do in opinion: and each will dote on, and propugne
his own conceits: their judgments dissent one from another, and often from
themselves.

Let the divinely inspired writings then be our guide in this point of Church
Government: what is there constituted must be held inviolable: what is a
deviation from that, must be accounted Apostasy and Corruption, as well in
Discipline as in Doctrine: no plea of antiquity or universality, can privilege
it from that imputation, what is not therein appointed, must at most be held
but as conducent not necessary. No, though it be proved to be received into
the Churches, in the age immediately succeeding the Apostles: all after them
were but of a private spirit. And it is apparent that Ambition and Corruptions
grew up as soon in the Covernment of the Church, as Errors in the Doctrine
thereof.

Suffer us therefore, with your wonted patience and lenity, which are men
preingaged to no side or faction, but the free humble and meek servants of
Truth, to declare our minds concerning the first and purest form of the
Churches government; and then (as Verit as est mensur^ sui et obliqui) from
that light to discover the heavy grievances which at this day remain
unremoved in our National Church.

1. It is a perpetual Ordinance of Christ, that there should be Pastors and
Teachers in the Church for the administration of the Word, Sacraments, and
spiritual Discipline.

2. That there should be a Society of these Pastors or Presbyters in every
particular Church, is an Apostolic appointment; who have also exactly
prescribed what manner of men they ought to be.

3. That this company of Elders should have the charge of the Church, in which
they are constituted: and the power of Feeding, Censuring and Ordering the
Flock committed to them: as also of ordering Elders and Officers in the
Church: The work of Preaching and sacramental administration to be done by
any one of them: But that of Jurisdiction and Ordination by the society, as a
common Act, not competible to any one in particular.

4. Among these, and in all their Acts, there ought to be Decency, Order, the
Bond of Peace, Humility, Meekness, and an aim, that the spirit of the most
scandalous Offender, or stubbornest opposer may be brought to Repentance, and
saved in the Day of the Lord Jesus.

5. That the Bounds and extent of every particular Church ought to be a Town,
and so much of the adjacent Territory and Villages as such a Presbytery can
well by themselves watch over, and take a spiritual care of.

6. That this society, especially those of them which labor in the Word and
Doctrine, may challenge from the People, whom they take spiritual care of,
double honor, and liberal suitable Maintenance, to the Calling they execute.

7. That every one who is consecrate to this Presbytery or Office must wait on
it: be instant in it; and therefore reside within the confines of that Church,
where he has such charge, or there where he may by himself on all occasions
attend on it.

8. That in cases of strife and difficulty in any Church, recourse must be had
to the Meeting of the most able Presbyters of the Churches for their
determinations: and every one ought to subject his Spirit to the Spirits of
such Prophets, yielding to the Customs of the Churches of God: provided they
cross not the All-commanding evidence of Gods immutable Word, either directly,
or by due consequence.

These are Rules in the Gospel, either directly constituted, or evidently
deduced out of express Constitution; or practice so solemn and Universal,
that it has in it the reason and virtue of a Constitution: so that every
addition which thwarteth or hinders the due execution of these, must needs be
accounted a Degeneration from original purity of Government; and a corruption
in sacred Polity, have it never so much Antiquity, or weight of humane
Authority to plead for it, and give countenance to it.

One thing more there is which on probable ground, seems to be taken up by
the practice of some Churches in the latter end of the Apostolic age, some of
them yet living; and that is the prostasie or presidence of one of these
Pastors, Bishops or Presbyters above the rest. But it cannot possibly with any
color of consequence be proved to be Authoritative: being only for Order and
Unity, that all their common Acts should have a beginning from One: as if many
Deacons should appoint an Archdeacon; or many Bishops an Archbishop, in
common acts to be the Mouth and Hand of the society.

And this preeminence of One (if the utmost of dark probability be granted)
appears to be but the mere practice of some particular Churches; so that it
cannot have the universal binding force of a Law from that ground; much less
of an Apostolic Constitution, or Divine Right.

Now are we descended from the first Age; and so what ever follows can be but
of humane and alterable Constitution. Very soon these presidents of the
Presbyteries, either assumed, or by their Compresbyters had conferred on them
Authority and Jurisdiction; and by way of propriety the name of Bishop: so that
where before it was the Presbytery, now it was the Bishop and his Presbyters.

But observe: 1. That his Dioces, Parish, or Church was no larger then He and
his Presbyters could well Oversee and Govern. 2. That this Bishop had the
Burden, as well as the Dignity and Chiefty passed over to him, for He was the
ordinary Preacher of that Church: the Presbyters for the most part assisting in
matter of Discipline and sacramental Administration. 3. That he did nothing of
weight by himself, but with the concurring Authority and consent of his
Presbytery.

Beyond this, we will not proceed: for these Bishops now gotten above their
Brethren, and making up the maine body of the Councels, in which all Decrees
were enacted, knew how to make the distance 'twixt themselves and their once
Compresbyters greater and greater, by lifting up themselves, and depressing
those, who now of Associates were become Servants and Vassals to Episcopal
principality.

But whatever came to pass in after Ages, it was but by the hand of Man
established, and the like hand may abolish it: reduced all must be to the
former Scripture and Apostolik rules. If accessories deviat from them, they are
Apostacies, which must be reduced, if there bea through Reformation. How can
their maintenance be justified in a Church which has professed to make the
Scriptures her Rule, and to reject all which is exalted against its Divine and
absolute Sovereignty.

Proofs we have not annexed to the former asserted Truths, to avoid over-bold
prolixitie in a supplication of this nature: as also because the most of them
are obvious to every Man's collection which is exercised in Gods Book. But if
any of them shall be opposed, being called to it by Authority, and having the
freedom of indifferent, not preingaged Judges we will by Gods grace with all
meekness make good what is here asserted against all contradiction of
gainsayers.

Now will we proceed to an enumeration of those obliquities and corruptions in
our Church Government, which call to your supreme Power to be rectified. And
we protest before the All-knowing God, that We doeit not out of envy of any
man's Greatness, or ambitious Affectation to be meddling in State affairs,
things too high for us: but from the powerful command of Conscience; from
unfaigned love to the Gospel of Christ, whose Efficacy is much impeached by
the following Corruptions; and and from filial Commiseration of our wounded
and torn Mother. Whose breaches we verily apprehend cannot be made up, but by
reducing of her Discipline to a pure Concordance with those original Divine
Prescriptions. We complain then,

1. That the Power of Jurisdiction and Ordination is claimed and exercised by
Bishops, as their sole Right, in a distinction from Presbyters. This we affirm
to be an Exorbitance from the second of those right, original and Apostolic
Ordinances for Church Government. And as it is a departure from the Rule; so it
is a maine corruption of evil consequence in the Church: for it is, First, an
Usurpation and undue appropriation of a Legacy which Christ bestowed in
Common, to reside in the Consessus, or whole Presbytery, and to be exercised
by their common suffrage. It not being in the Presbyters power to strip
themselves, and cast on one man that which was bestowed, and by the Donor
intended to the whole Community of their society. Secondly, a severing of the
Word and the Keys, which cannot without detriment to either be sundred. To
Feed and Rule are the two parts of Pastor-ship: where both are, there is a
Pastor: so that, with us, while it is Ones work to govern which seldom
Feeds: and the work of the rest to Feed, which must not meddle with
Government, there is no full Pastor: But the Office is destroyed by being
divided; and the Word in the mouths of a disarmed Presbytery is weak,
edgelesse and contemptible. Thirdly, the ordaining of a Number of Presbyters at
large: whereby the Church is filled with needy Ministers, loose from any settled
employment, fit at low rates to be hired by fat Pluralists, Non-Residents, and
Lazy Voluptuaries; which else would be to seek of Mercenarie supplies, or
be driven in a penury to give higher wages. But hereby the Sacred Office is
exposed to Contempt* and the Ordination to the Office and Institution into a
Charge, are made several Acts; a divorce unheard of in that Primitive Polity:
Which gross abuse could not be, if Ordination were the common Act of the
whole Presbytery of a Church. Fourthly, intromission to the Oversight of
Congregations of Men Simoniacall, scandalous, and unapt to teach: which can
easily steal into Office, by the connivence or corruption of One; but if the
Power were in a Multitude, it could not soon be effected.

2. The excessive Provincial extent of Diocesan Churches, is an evident
departure not only from the fifth of those pure original Constitutions; but
also from the manner of after Ages, till Bishops in their Synods provided
better for their own Greatness, then the Churches welfare. Then they degraded
the Chorepiscopi; and made Orders that Bishops should be placed only in the
greater and more frequented Cities. This is, as a departure from the first pure
manner; so much for the worse; for hence arise these Grievances: Neglect of
Reformation, both in disordered Ministers and People: Remoteness of the
Bishops seat: Expenses of Travailing; Difficulty of proving, and tedious
expectation of the issue of Suits, where Crimes must be tried before Judges,
who are mere strangers to the Persons and Causes coming before them, deter
almost all men from so troublesome an undertaking: And thus the Churches are
pestered with infamous Offenders: which could not be if the bounds of a Church
were so appointed, that all its members might be under the eye of the
Governors. 2. Deputation of Authority and Jurisdiction to others; ^ most
gross degeneration from that Primitive Discipline; which never heard of such a
thing as the deputing of any part of Pastoral Office: which is committed to
Men for their Personal abilities; and cannot without abuse be committed to
those who are often Lay men, and neither of Pastoral parts or Calling. Hence
that numerous fry and subordination of Officers, with the multitude of Fees,
which must needs be, where the Churches are whole Countries; so large, that it
is impossible that one Pastor should dispatch all by himself.

3. The Non-residence of men having Pastoral Charge is a gross violation of
the seventh of those Apostolic Constitutions; and is an unexcusable
Corruption, unfit to be tolerated in any well governed Church.

4. A Plurality of Pastoral Charges undertaken by one Man, is also a gross
exorbitancie, brought in with the former, after Church Government was at the
worst. Two Evils, which are the shame of our Church, not fit to be named in a
Reformed Church: brought in, and continued merely to nourish Ambition, Pomp,
Voluptuousnes, and Avarice in Clergymen. These two usually go together, this
last necessitating the former; and are seminary Evils. First, inducing a
necessity of deputing Pastoral Charge, which every one before God undertakes
to perform in his own Person. Secondly, Church Robbery, by transporting the
sacred allowance paid and intended for the maintenance of a vigilant painful
Pastor over the souls of the People which afford it to another Place and
Person; which has only the Title and Charge, but does not the work of a
Pastor. 3. Thirdly, Impiety in placing a Mercenary unable for the Charge; or
Injustice, if He substitute one able and fully discharging the Office, allowing
him the least part of that maintenance which was originallyintended (and in no
other plea can be challenged of the People) for performing the Office.

5. Imposing, and rigorous urging on great, undoing, extirpating Penalties,
Ceremonies, Taskes, and Oaths, merely ad placitum, and for their own ends;
contrary to the fourth of those prime Scripture Cannons; whereby Christian
liberty in indifferents is much impaired. Many worthy Men of great abilities,
pains and success of Ministry in their Charges, but of tender and strict
Consciences, have been thrust out; schisms and dissentions in the bowels of
the Church, for the space now of more then fourscore years nourished, to the
prejudice of our Ecclesiastical Peace; which we apprehend can never be fully
attained, till liberty of Conscience in indifferencies, and points of small
consequence, but great Controversy be granted. If severitie of Censures, and
force could have brought forth Unity, it had in this time been effected. This
Remedy has been long applied, and yet sadd experience now tells us, that the
disease has grown worse and worse.

6. The carriage and constitution of our Convocations or (if they may be so
called) our National Synodes is such, that it is impossible to proceed to a
reformation in any of these Ecclesiastical distortions, by that way: what are
they, for the maine, but Meetings of the one Party, consisting of Bishops,
Deanes, Archdeacons, and other dependers on Episcopacy, and preengaged
persons? So that there is as little hope for us of reformation in points of
Government, from them, as was for the Protestants side, of a fair decision of
their controversies in the Council of Trent, where parties are Judges, the
sentence is passed, before the cause is heard.

We have done. Would to God we could make the Churches maladies, and our
grievances fewer: So far are we from making them odious, by raising them to a
multitude. These six we conceive to be the Capital and Seminary evils: Others
of inferior allay we omit, because they mostly flow from these, and the
principal being removed, the Accessaries will also fall.

Oh that there were a way to cure Ulcers, and not first to unrip them, and lay
them open? We protest before the searcher of all hearts! that nothing but our
zeal to the Truth, and our Mothers welfare, could have moved us out of a
resolution of silence, and brought us to stand up thus as Plaintiffes.

Far be it from any charitably minded Christian, whose eye shall be cast on
these papers, to pass on us any hard Censure of Heresy, Schism, or factious
inclination.

We call not all Episcopacie Antichristian, nor condemn their superiority, as
simply unlawful, as did that old Aerius. Though we must needs say, what every
Godly Antiquary cannot but see, that it was a fair occasion for that Mystery
of iniquity to work on; a fitly raised ground on which to build that fabric
of confusion, the Papacy. That man of sin, soon learned to exalt himself
above Bishops; from their elevation above their once fellow Presbyters. How
justly were they made Vassals to the Pope, who first had made the Presbyters of
the Churches theirs?

Neither do we erigere altar contra altar, dissolve the Churches unity, and
leave her Communion for these corruptions. When we call for a Cure, we affirm
that there is life, and hope of recovery. It is an argument that our charity
remains; and therefore we cannot be charged as Novations, and Separatists.

A turbulent distempered zeal, cannot be imputed to them whose aim is peace,
whose dear esteem of unity is such, that they could redeem it with their
blood: And who all this time have borne these burdens, now complained of, with
a silent patience, and had still continued under an humble submission, and
yielding conformity, if that would have given content, as till these times it
had done: But when things grew to that extremity, that we must not only bear,
but allow, and swear Vassallage, to that which we cannot but call corruptions,
and deflections, in Government, from Apostolic Puriy: It was high time to
complain, and to cry out, for a removal of evils, which we must approve, or
not Be.

Political defects and distempers, can have no redress, but from that power,
which is supreme; Unto that therefore, with all prostrate humility, we present
our earnest request, that these evils, being discovered, may be removed.

We are poor Men, of low condition, whose measure is not to rule, but to
submit. We prescribe not forms of Government: We disclame not Episcopacie,
Government must be, or ruin will be in all Societies. If we must obey, as good
a Bishop with a Presbytery, as a Presbytery without a Bishop. Al we sue for is,
that Christ may rule without impeachment, in his own House. That those
general forealledged constitutions, which he and his Apostles settled in the
Churches of their first gathering, may be observed inviolable.

Humane Ordinances should further, not make void, or hinder Divine. Let your
Authority reteyne in Government, or establish what it sees convenient, so it
concord with, or at least, do not en^rvate those sacred Rules. What ever is
against them, or so besides them, that it any whit stands in their way, must be
removed, or we shall never see true peace: That peace which kisseth
Righteousness, which is the firm Band of Spiritual unity.

Restless pains, and inordiate Action, must needs be the consequent of
Luxations: when the members are out of their due places, some higher set, some
lower, then they should be: Innovation it must needs be termed, and defection,
be the Authors never so many, Ancient, or holy, where their additionals swerve
from, and oppose the use, and intention of Original Constitutions.

A redressement of this, is the substance of our lowly Petition; we presume not
to define the manner how, but we beseech that it may be, and fully; so that
matter be not left for a third Convulsion, and solidly, that Corruptions spring
not again, out of any remaining principles. So shall the Souls of all those
who love the Lord Jesus in sincerity, and prefer his Truth, beyond
selfe-respects, both in present, and future ages renown your names, as of
those who have done worthily: How ever, we have discharged our Duty; and let
the Lord find means, and time, to root out, whatever he has not planted,

FINIS.

