THE Inheritance of the Saints in Light;

Set forth in a SERMON Preached at Whitehall, August 11. 1700.

By AB. CAMPION, D. D. Dean of Lincoln, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

Published by Order of the Lords Justices.

LONDON, Printed by J. Leake, for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's-Head in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1700.

COLOSSIANS I. 12. Giving thanks unto the Father, who has made us meet to be
partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light.


THESE Words stand here as a great inforcement of Duty, to walk worthy of the
Lord in all well pleasing. And as a Sovereign Cordial to support the Spirits of
Christians under their sharpest Trials; to bear them not only with Patience but
with Joy and Thanksgiving, as the Context informs us.

It is the Christian Faith only that can with good Reason Administer such
comfort under the Crosses of this World; because how afflictive soever they may
sometimes appear to sense or vulgar apprehension, yet if compared to the
Gospel-Treasures, the Joys above, they are light, very light.

Amongst all the Afflictions of this Life, nothing (I think) pierces more to
the quick than the loss of a Person dear to us, especially when it surprises.
And yet if God think fit, to tear from our bosoms the Delight of our Eyes, the
Darling of our Souls; our Church has directed us in her Funeral-Service (so
full of Faith is her Holy Office,) to give God thanks for the Cloudy passage of
his Providence. It is a strong Combat between Flesh and Spirit, when we are
engaged thus to thank him with Tears in our Eyes; but Faith will justify it.

The Great Disposer of all things has at this time called us of this Nation to
a Signal Exercise of this Faith, by an amazing Providence, on a sudden
snatching from our Embraces our young Josiah, the Delight of the present, the
great Hope of the future Age. We had not time to think, not time to Pray, to
hold, if possible, the Almighty's Hand: Immoderate Virtue is seldom long-lived;
it is often dangerous to be loved too much. The Divine Jealousy will not
permit us to be confident in Man; for this Reason perhaps not long since we met
with a very fatal disappointment of our Hopes. This Stroke, succeeding the
other, is so much the more severe; we can scarce discern the Fathers hand, it
looks so very angry. And yet we are sure God is always Good, whether we are
ready with our Reasons or no. Can we then heartily thank God for this? We have
done it already at his much lamented Funerals; and if Heaven exceeds the Earth,
we had reason so to do.

We Inhabitants of Earth are apt to be too partial to our present state of
Things. Such is our fond admiration for Earthly Treasures, though we are
Christians, as perhaps to pity the hard Fate of this young Prince, for being
deprived of so near a prospect to a Crown. Foolish pity! Such short thinking
betrays the sleepiness of Reason as well as Faith, not considering the Scene is
now so changed, that whatever Delight He might once take in his Temporal
Birthright, Earthly Crowns now appear despicable in his Eye, who is admitted
into that Heavenly Inheritance of Light, my Text holds forth to us. The Advance
is His, the Loss is only ours.

Many may be the Great Consequences of this Fatal Stroke as to us, but it is
not my business here to instruct in Politics, or to provoke your Passions by a
Panegyric; rather, as my Text directs, to excite your Faith, and descry what
Comfort is thence to be derived under this, and all our greatest Calamities.
When our Affairs here afford us no good prospect, look up, our Faith will never
fail us. The more tottering our Condition seems here to be, the greater reason
we have to give God thanks for the hopes of an Eternal Inheritance, which in
the Gospel is brought to light.

What Rewards God has treasured up for good Men in the other World, was the
grand Discovery the Son of God came from Heaven to make. He scattered the
Clouds with which the face of Heaven was covered, and assured the World of that
Eternal Life, of which they had before but faint and wavering expectations.

Some Philosophers have observed, that of all the habitable Globes of the
World, the Earth only is wrapped in Clouds, made thereby a proper Seat for
Sinners. A fit Emblem of Man's moral State and Condition. Those Clouds hanging
in the Air as a Curtain drawn to shut them out from the sight of Heaven; being
also Treasures of God's Vengeance hovering over their guilty heads, from whence
do sometimes issue Storms and Tempests, and many of the most dreadful
Calamities which Sin has brought upon the Earth, and its Inhabitants. But what
ever becomes of this Philosophical Notion, the Clouds which do more fatally
veil the face of Heaven from the Sinner, are those which lie upon his own
Heart, his Lusts and Passions. These do so blind the Eye of Humane Reason, as
that it can neither discern the Light, nor relish the Joys of the Heavenly
Mansions, nor the beauty of that Holiness which leads thither.

The Spiritual Happiness of Heaven does no more affect a vitiated Palate, than
painted Glories: And the Conditions upon which the Gospel has proposed its
Immortal Crowns are to the Sinner perfect foolishness. The pure in heart only
see God, our Savior has told us, and they only care to see him. That this Veil
then might be taken off from the Sinner's Heart, the chief part of Christ's
Salvation was to save his People from their Sins, not only by making Atonement
and Reconciliation for them, but by taking away the Pollution, Purging the Soul
by Grace, and so qualifying it for the State of Light from which he descended,
to acquaint the World plainly with the happy News of it.

He that came from the bosom of God, 1 John 5.11.
and therefore best knew his Mind, has assured us upon Record, that there is a
Life after this, an Eternal Life of Happiness beyond expression, and present
Conception, provided for all Saints, for all that will live answerable to the
holy Profession of Christianity. So much of that State and Condition at present
is revealed as is requisite to excite attention and obedience in all that have
Ears to hear. It comes with sufficient Evidence to satisfy sober Inquirers,
that are contented to be wise unto Salvation. The Gospel of God has been
adorned by the Example of many such Children of Wisdom who have gone before us
in the Faith; many that have suffered the loss of all things, the worst that
this World could inflict, the Madness, the Wit of Cruelty, in hopes of a great
recompense of Reward; many I say, whole Clouds of such Witnesses as the Apostle
styles them, by reason of their numbers.

That, by the grace of God, we may be enabled at this time to make some advance
toward that state of Light and Happiness, by becoming in some degree more
qualified for the partaking of it, I purpose to Discourse on these Words in
this Method.

I. To consider the Nature of the State and Condition of the Saints in the
other World. It is here set forth as a State of Light.

II. The Certainty of it, the sure Title they have to it: It is their
Inheritance.

III. The Qualifications requisite to make them meet to partake of it.

IV. How these Qualifications are to be obtained; that so we may upon good
grounds, give thanks unto God, who has made us meet to be partakers of the
Inheritance of the Saints in Light.

We begin with the First; The Consideration of the State and Condition of the
Saints, here signified by a State of Light.

Light is the most proper word to express a State of Happiness, and set forth
to us the Heavenly State and Condition, in whatever sense we take the word
Light; whether

(1.) In its common or natural Sense, for a Bodily Quality, a visible Luster or
Glory. Or, (2.) For Knowledge, which is sometimes called Light. Or, (3.) For
Purity and Holiness; they are all of them Ingredients of the Heavenly State,
and concur to complete its happiness.

As to the First;

If Light be taken in its vulgar sense for a visible Luster and Glory, Light
seems in this sense to be essential to the Notion of Heaven; for Heaven is the
Seat, the Country of Light. The Sun and Stars are Bodies Great and Glorious,
yet these are but the Ornaments of the outer Court of Heaven, serving to
Beautify and Enlighten the lower World: For the Heavenly Palace, the New
Jerusalem, as St. John styles it, the Seat of God, and of the blessed Spirits,
that stands not in need of these Lights, they shine not there, they have no
influence above. The Divine Apostle ( Rev. 21.) has collected every thing that
appears at present most bright and gay to help us to conceive the Glories of
that Heavenly City. He represents its Walls and Gates as built of the most
glistring Pearls and Precious Stones, as paved with Gold; that there is no
Night, but a perpetual Day; no need of Sun or Moon, for the Glory of God does
enlighten it, for God is Light, and the Lamb is the Light thereof, ver. 23. The
Light of the Sun would sully and defile the pure brightness of that Region,
that being fitted only to serve the uses of this Elementary World, is a gross
Light, a mere Kitchin-Fire, if compared to that most refined Light with which
God is Clothed as with a Garment; Light inaccessible to us in our present
Capacities, but those that shall be thought meet to be admitted into that State
of Light (I pray God it may be the happy Lot of all here present) they shall
have their Organs strengthened, fitted to approach and enjoy that Light.

For they themselves shall be Clothed with Light, and dressed up in the Habit
of the Country; their Earthly Tabernacles shall be transformed into Glorious
Bodies, such as their Savior wears now in Heaven, Mat. 13.43.
for they shall shine then as Suns in the Kingdom of their Father he has
assured them. Their Bodies shall be like the Glorious Body of Christ, though not
equal to it in Glory.

Amongst the Saints themselves there shall be Degrees of Magnitude, as one Star
differs from another in Glory. They that turn many to Righteousness, says
Daniel, (12.3.) shall shine as Stars for ever and ever; and they especially
that have Suffered with Christ, shall be also Glorified with him. They that
thought nothing too dear for their God, but had the Grace and Courage to Die
for their Savior, as he had Died for them, their mangled Bodies shall shine
next to his in Glory.

This imperfect Account of that State of Light may suggest to us the Happiness
of it, for Light is pleasant to behold; it is so much the experience of every
one that has Eyes to behold it, as that I need not quote Solomon for it. Light
gives Beauty to all things, it is the Paint and Varnish of the World, it is the
Life of it; for when Light breaks in upon us, it awakens and gives new Life to
the Soul, it brisks the Spirits, and puts them in Tune for Joy and Mirth.

Whereas on the Contrary, by Darkness is signified a State of Melancholy and
Misery. The Scene of Grief and Sorrow is black, the Afflicted shut out the
Light, and condemn themselves to Darkness. Darkness is a sad ingredient of the
Miseries of Hell, it is the essential Character of that place of horror; for
the melancholy abode of the Damned is expressed to us, by a Dungeon of
Darkness, of utter extreme Darkness, the very blackness of Darkness. This makes
the Sorrows of that Place more oppressive to the Spirit, its terrors more
frightful and amazing. Besides, Darkness gives scope and liberty to the Rage of
guilty Consciences. We know by woeful experience, that our thoughts are always
most tyrannical in the Dark, and sting most severely when any thing lies cross
or heavy upon the Spirit. Then when the Soul has nothing to do, but to think,
has no Pleasure to divert it, nor the too common refuge of Drink to drown its
Cares, nor the least pretense of Business to employ it for a moment. The steady
remembrance then of the mad follies of a brutish Life, being reflected on in
the Dark to all Eternity, and continually repeated with fresh vexation of
Spirit, must of necessity strike deep, pierce to the quick, and wound to the
very Center of the Soul. One Prospect of that State of Darkness, one serious
thought of it would quickly teach us what abundant reason they have to give God
thanks (as my Text exhorts) who are, by the Grace of God, made meet to be
Partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light.

(2.) Light is frequently put for Knowledge; in this respect also the State of
the Saints in Heaven may properly be styled a State of Light. Knowledge is
Spiritual Light; it has the same influence upon the Eye of the Mind, as Light
upon the Eye of the Body. Knowledge is pleasant as Light, it cheers the Soul,
it brings in Day upon it; it opens the World as Light, and gives a prospect
even to the utmost ends of the Earth. It sees into the very Heavens, it takes
in past and future Ages into its view, and by the help of Revelation even
Eternity it self.

Knowledge gives Confidence and Security; the understanding Man goes on freely,
and cheerfully, as he that Travels in the Day. He is in no danger of being led
aside by Shadows, and false Lights, whereas Ignorance and Darkness hide and
shut up every thing in Obscurity. The Ignorant Man is like one locked up in a
close Room, or that walks in the dark Night; he has no prospect of Things about
him, he knows not whither he goes, he stumbles, and wanders, and fears every
step, all the Dangers that a benighted Fancy can represent.

Knowledge is often expressed by Light in the Holy Scriptures. Particularly the
Gospel-Revelation is Emphatically called the Light; and he that brought this
Wonderful Discovery to the World, is therefore himself styled the Light of the
World, enlightening every Man coming into it.

And yet though the Gospel Revelation be a great Light, in respect of all the
Discoveries which were made before; insomuch, as the Ancient Father well
observed, the very Children of Christians are in their Catechisms taught to
stammer forth greater Mysteries and sublimer Truths than the Wisest
Philosophers could ever arrive to the Knowledge of; yet this bright Revelation
is but dark in respect of Vision: We do as yet see but as through a Glass
darkly; we have a good Right, Title, and sure Promises, but Promises are but
Glimpses in respect of Enjoyment, and that full Possession with which the
Saints in Heaven are invested. That therefore is well styled a State of Light,
because a State of most certain, enlarged and exalted Knowledge.

The State of this Life is really a State of Darkness, we see but in part.
Truth is infinite, as God. A small portion of it is allotted us at present; we
know no more of it, than God is pleased to let us into. So much of it as may be
useful to entertain us here, and to secure our Eternal Interests hereafter.

But the Darkness of this State I now complain of, is what Sin has brought upon
our Understandings, disturbing our Judgments, and possessing us with infinite
variety of wild and absurd Opinions; to that excess, as that it has passed into
a Proverb, So many Men, so many Minds. We might multiply much farther, for it
is seldom long that the same Man continues in the same Mind. An infallible
Argument of Darkness, for Truth is always one and the same, whatever differs
from that must be Error and Darkness. The Wisest Men are here observed to have
their blind sides, some mistakes for which they have been remarked. All Men
have Motes in their Eyes, some have Beams. It is too Notorious what senseless
Errors some have espoused, (the Particulars are innumerable) and maintained
with heat and fierceness, to the great disturbance of the World, and confusion
of the Church of God. It might be something pardonable, if we discovered our
Weakness only in Tattle, and common Conversation, when we profess to unbend our
Souls; but what Abominations do we see in the very Worship of the greatest part
of the World? What ridiculous Follies and Idolatries are to be found even at
Christian Altars. Their Understandings must needs want Light, that play the
Fool with their God. When Men would be thought Wise, Serious, and Profound, how
often do they betray the nakedness of their Souls. Our very Libraries are full
of the blemishes of Mankind. And the Works of the Learned are too often
standing Monuments of the defects of Human Understanding. We smile and pity the
rude ignorance or short-sightedness of those that went before us, but their
Cause will be revenged; (trust an ill-natured World for it) when those that
follow us will laugh at ours. But the comfort is, we live in hopes of a better
state of Life; when every Man's Brain will be settled, and all Heads set right.
When the Messiah shall next appear, he will infallibly teach us all things. He
will then conduct all those to a State of pure Light and Knowledge, whom by his
Grace, he has made meet to be Partakers of such Happiness. All mists of Error
will then be scattered by a clear Head, an impartial Reason, and fervent
Charity. A State of pure Light and Knowledge therefore I call it.

(1.) Because there will be no Body, no Worldly Interest to cloud the Light of
the Mind, or disturb it in its Reasonings. No Flesh and Blood enters that
Kingdom; for the Natural Body we are assured will be raised a Spiritual Body;
by which Phrase we cannot well understand less than a more refined, a more
exalted state of Matter; far removed from its Original Clay; purified perhaps
into Light, as near as possible into Spirit, that it may be a more suitable
Companion for the Rational Spirit of Man, a fit Partner of its Glories.

(2.) A State of pure Light I call it, because a State not of Revelation, but
of Vision. In a State of Revelation we know no more than the Revealer is
pleased to discover, some Glimpses only of things, the rest often reserved, or
wrapped up as Mystery: But in Heaven the Saints are admitted to see with their
own Eyes the naked Truth of Things. Then will be set to view the Wonders of
Heaven; the Passages of Providence which are at present a Riddle, will be
explained: The unfathomable depths of Divine Wisdom; the unsearchable, and at
present inconceiveable Riches of his Love and Kindness, will then be the
Entertainment of our Souls; the Secrets of God which have been locked up from
Eternity, will then be laid open; so far at least, as Creatures will be made
capable of knowing them, or be made happy by them. Then may be infused New
Ideas into the Understanding; for the want of which, those things which are now
therefore unintelligible, may then be clear to our view. An Unity in Trinity,
and a Trinity in Unity may possibly then be understood.

(3.) A State of pure Light and Knowledge it will be, because the Saints are
there admitted into open and free Converse with the Wisest and Best of Beings,
with the Renowned Worthies of all Ages: All those Departed Souls that were Wise
unto Salvation, with that innumerable Quire of Holy and Blessed Spirits, the
Wise Angels of God; Lastly, they are admitted into the presence of the
Omniscient God himself. Our Knowledge of his Creatures, which is but imperfect,
(for it is but little that we know of the Mysteries of the Creation) and they
themselves but shadows of their Maker's Wisdom, Goodness, and Power, gives
wonderful Delight at present, and is one of the most Ravishing Entertainments
our Reason is here acquainted with. How transporting then must that Light be,
which shows the Creator himself face to face, and gives a close view of all his
Glorious Attributes in Substance, in Fullness and Perfection; where they live
under the immediate and most powerful influence of them all, having the most
lively and comfortable sense of them continually injected into the Mind. For
Spirits seem to Converse by infusion of Thoughts and Affections, and the
Goodness of God makes him always Communicative of himself. If we now consider a
thirsty Soul, a Spirit that has an insatiable appetite after Knowledge, whose
Thoughts are swifter than Lightning, placed not only in the prospect of but
united to a Being of infinite Perfections, a Being that can never be thought
through, that can never be exhausted by the Eternal thirst of his Creatures,
the contemplation of infinite Ages. How will such a Soul continually increase
in Knowledge, in brighter and brighter Light, 'till it kindles almost into a
Seraphim; whither will such a Spirit grow? I cannot tell what bounds to set to
that Knowledge that is growing to all Eternity; nor how to measure the Powers
of a Humane Soul in its State of Light and Enjoyment.

If the Soul of Man then be such a Wonderful Thing, capable of such elevations
of Spirit, of Infinite Enjoyment; what pity is it, that God should entrust the
greatest part of Mankind with such a precious Jewel? What pity is it that this
Heaven-born Creature should be suffered to trifle away its time here on Earth,
and which is worse, to wallow in Filth and Brutishness, and at last descend
into Everlasting Darkness, and Eternal Wailings, Cursing and Blaspheming of
that God, which it was made to Admire, and Adore, to Love and Praise to all
Eternity.

(3.) I hasten to the 3d Acception of Light, as it is taken for Purity of
Heart, Holiness of Life in reference to Practice: In this sense also, the
Inheritance of the Saints above is a State of Light, because a State of the
greatest Purity.

In this Sense, our Savior enjoins us to take care that our Light so shine
before Men, as that they may see our good Works, and by our bright Examples be
directed and enlightened in the Paths they should walk in; that by the Beauty of
our Conversation they may be enamored and charmed into a compliance, and
glorify God by an ambitious imitation of our Wisdom and Holiness. Christians
are therefore styled the Lights of the World, 1 John 1.
the Children of the Light, and of the Day. In this sense we find it introduced
by St. John, with a most pompous Preface; the four first Verses being a solemn
preparation to this great Truth, that God is Light (v. 5.) and in him is no
Darkness at all, to fully the brightness of his Understanding, no impurity to
biass his Will; he hates it therefore, as being perfectly contrary to his pure
Nature, what communion has Light with Darkness?

Impurity is indeed Darkness, it clouds the Mind which is tinctured with it, as
we have seen already in Matters of Opinion or Doctrine; in practical Matters
much more. In these especially, the Flesh having a greater interest and
concern, the Soul of a Man is in greater danger of being benighted and fooled,
and often made to act contrary to the Principles of all good Reason. The
inconsistencies and madness of Sinners are every where notorious; their brutish
and perverse reasonings and actings, especially in moral Matters; their whole
Life being a continued course of follies and ill humors.

If thine Eye be Evil, says our Savior, Mat. 6.23.
and the Light that is in thee be Darkness, how great is that Darkness? even as
great as the Evil which is in the Eye, and bears always a proportion to the
power of the reigning Lust, being a result and effect of it. Hence it becomes
so hard a thing amongst us Sinners, to find that precious Jewel (so much talked
of) Right Reason. Most certainly it is no where to be found, but in a purified
Soul.

The only Expedient therefore to restore Light to a Sinner's Soul, is to
purify it from its Lusts. For this Reason did Baptism anciently go under the
Name of Illumination; as conveying the Holy Spirit with his Sanctifying Graces
into the Soul; which do by degrees enlighten it here in this Life, as it passes
from one degree of Grace unto another, 'till at Death it is completely
Sanctified, and fitted for its Heavenly State of Light; especially when at the
Morning of the Resurrection it shall be dressed up with its Spiritual and
Glorified Body, which will then be no burden to the Soul, as this Fleshly
Tabernacle is now, but will conspire with it in its operations, in its
enjoyments of God, in the perfect practice of Holiness, and all the business of
Heaven. There will be right Reason in Perfection, according to the extent of
its Knowledge, no Darkness at all; the whole face of the Soul will be bright
and clear, not one spot to be discovered there. This is a State of Light
indeed. And let me farther observe, that in proportion as the Body was purified
by Grace here in this Life, shall it be more refined, more Spiritual, and have
brighter degrees of Glory. Its sight of God more clear, its communications from
the Fountain of Light more strong, having its Faculties extraordinarily
strengthened to behold the Glorious Godhead. The more pure Souls shall be
peculiarly fitted to receive the stronger impressions of Divine Love.

For the State of Light is a State of Love. If Love be the fulfilling of the
Commandments, complete Holiness can be no other than perfect Love, the Top of
Heavenly Happiness. Love is the Beauty of Angels, the Glory of God himself. God
is Love, and God is Light; his Love and Favor is often expressed in Scripture
by the Light of his Countenance. Love has its Flames we all know, the Love of
Saints especially. For inexpressible are the transports of a Purified Soul,
when admitted into the immediate presence of God; when it has a clear view
given it of the best of Beings; when it has all Goodness for its Object, all
Perfection. How quickly like Lightning its Affections are kindled! how
vehemently! In a moment it is all on fire, and with an inflamed appetite flies
to its most Beloved. Excessive Love placed upon a Creature is Torment, and does
abuse the Appetite, because quickly drawn dry. But when God is the Object, Love
cannot be excessive, there being enough in him to give Eternal Satisfaction.
Thrice happy Souls, infinitely more than thrice happy, whose Business it is to
love. They love always, they love vehemently, and yet can never, never love too
much. But beyond all this, if any thing can be more; a sense of being beloved
by God, of living always under the smile and shine of his Countenance. This
indears all his Infinite Perfections, and gives them another Infinity.

To be beloved by a Creature below our selves is very obliging, and does
wonderfully draw forth our Affections to that little thing, what ever it be.
When the Great God then infuses a sense of his Love into the Soul, it
transports it into such an Ecstasy as is fit only for the other World.
Mortality cannot bear it, Mortality cannot conceive it. It is necessary
therefore that I stop here.

So near as I can conceive, such as this is that State of Light, that
Inheritance of the Saints, the great Object of our Hopes, the Business of this
Life, that we may be made meet to be partakers of it. If what has been
Discoursed has raised in any Person desires of being well assured of this State
of Happiness, I proceed.

2dly, To consider the Certainty we have of it; our good Title to it, it is
called an Inheritance.

The whole Creation is the Family of God, he provides for it every day; he
gives even the Ravens their food: But Man that was made after the Image of God,
has a more particular Relation to him. By his Natural likeness he would have
appeared a true Son of God, had he preserved his Original Character undefiled.
But what Man lost by his Folly, God has mercifully restored to him again by
Grace. So that he who is by his Natural Birth now a Child of Wrath, is by his
Spiritual Birth become a Child of God again. He is adopted Son and Heir of God,
not for any desert of his. There can be no pretense of merit in being Born to
an Estate, and truly not more in being adopted Son of God. It was mere Grace,
unprovoked Goodness. For whilst Man continued in his Rebellion, whilst in his
Blood and Filth, God cast his Love upon him. He past by those Noble Creatures
the Angels, for Reasons best known to himself, to make Man his Son and his Heir
too, by giving him a good Title to the Estate of God his Father, who is Lord of
Heaven and Earth. Who would not be ambitious to be his Heir, who has such large
Patrimony to bestow; not cantled into Portions, but every Heir has a Title to
the whole. He that overcomes shall inherit all things: We are assured by the
Infallible Charter, ( Rev. 21.7.) They shall Inherit the Earth, for none have
so good a Title to the Creature, as those who honor the Creator. So much of
the Earth they shall be sure of, as their loving Father sees best for them, and
will best consist with their Eternal Inheritance. For Heaven is the chief
Patrimony of God.

Here we live like Heirs under Age, under Tutors and Governors, 'till we are
trained up and fitted to have our Estate put into our hands, to be invested
with the full Possession of that vast Inheritance; Romans 8.17.
where we are to be admitted as Joint Heirs to the Natural Son of God,
partakers of the same Glories with himself, sitting with him upon Thrones. Mat.
19.28.


In this Life we have given us that ample Security that is fit for Heirs at
present to have; sufficient for our encouragement, our Immortal Inheritance
being set before us in a clear Light. Eternal Life is not secured to all the
Heirs of Salvation by absolute Decree; for it is plain, that many perish for
whom Christ died. And it will no doubt be an heavy-aggravation of the Damnation
of Christians, that they refused that Salvation which they might have obtained,
and sold their Spiritual-Birth-right for a Mess of Pottage. It will be the
Sting of their Misery that it was by their own fault that they fell short, God
having given all the Security that is fit for him to give. For we have (1.) His
repeated Promises of Salvation to all that Believe, and Repent; and sooner
shall Heaven and Earth fail, than one tittle of what he has promised. God so
loved the World, his Promises are so very great to Sinners, as that they might
appear incredible. We might with some color of Reason stagger in our Faith, if
we were not well assured of the Reality of his Promise. To help therefore our
Infirmities, that we may not suspect the goodness of his word, he has (2.)
Confirmed it by an Oath, that our Consolation might be strong, Heb. 6.18.
having two immutable things to support it, the Promise and the Oath of God.
And yet these two things in themselves unchangeable, for our more abundant
security are (3.) farther confirmed by the Blood of God, the Seal of the
Covenant of this Eternal Life; it being an ancient way of making Covenants
inviolable by Sealing them with Blood. And lastly, If it were possible for all
these to fail us, this Covenant of God is Sealed by the Spirit also, given as
an Earnest of our Eternal Inheritance. His Graces are not only Pledges, but
part of Payment; the Glory of the Saints in Light being only Grace in
perfection. Having so good reason to be well satisfied with our Title to this
Inheritance, our next Concern then may be,

3dly, To Consider of the Qualifications requisite to make us meet to partake
of it. The State and Condition of the Place does sufficiently discover how he
ought to be qualified, that would be admitted into that Holy Place. No unclean
thing can enter there; none can be happy there. The Light will shame and expose
its filthiness, and render every spot an Object of hatred and abhorrency to all
the pure Inhabitants. All Works of Darkness would there appear monstrous,
whatever we either are, or should be ashamed of; what wants concealment and
will not bear the Light, can never be fit for a state of the purest Light. But
yet we need not inquire who shall ascend into Heaven for us, to view those
Regions of Happiness, and bring down to us a Description of the Place and
Character of the Blessed Inhabitants. All that we need to know in this Case is
very nigh us; the direct way to Heaven is in the Book of God, which we have in
our hands, drawn out in plain Rules and Precepts, and if it be not our fault it
is legible in our Hearts also.

Besides this, because Examples are usually more powerful, as having more of
Life in them, than the dead Letter of a Precept; we have therefore in the
Gospel drawn out to the Life an Heir of Heaven.

God showed us at first what manner of Men we ought to be, even such as he made
us at first, when we came pure out of his hands, when we were like himself. For
it is the Design of Religion to reduce us back again by the Methods of Grace,
as near as possible to our Primitive Original State; to Sanctify and make us
clean, even Innocent once again if it might be. However, to come as near to
Innocence as our present State of Flesh and Blood will permit.

If much of that State of Innocence is not to be learnt from the first Adam, by
reason of his short continuance in that Original State, in the second Adam we
have a complete Pattern, it being the great Design of his coming from Heaven,
at least of his living so long upon the Earth, that he might show the way
thither by his Example.

He gave us therefore the Pattern of a most Holy, and for the most part of a
very imitable Life. A continued practice of those Virtues with which he would
have his Followers to be exercised and distinguished, and trained up for their
Heavenly Inheritance. We may thence learn the whole Duty of Man, toward God,
and every Person.

For he did truly Love God, as he requires us to do, with all his Heart and
Soul, God was in all his thoughts. It was therefore his constant endeavor to
do what he knew to be most pleasing to him. It was his meat and drink to do the
will of his Father, to work the work of him that sent him while it was day,
before the night came. When but Twelve Years Old, he slipped from his Secular
Parents, that he might spend some time in his Father's House, or as we
translate it, be about his Father's Business. Knowing what was wrote in the
Volume of God's Book, he voluntarily came to do his Will; seeing it highly
pleasing to his Father that lost Mankind should be Redeemed, he freely offered
himself to the Work, though they were bitter things that the incensed Father
required of Man's Surety; But so that God might be glorified, it pleased him to
become an Object of the greatest Misery and Contempt. To give us an Example of
an entire dependence upon the Providence of God, and trust in him, he made
himself poor, destitute of Worldly Comfort and Accommodation; the Foxes have
holes, but he had not where to lay his head. He could indeed turn stones into
Bread, but we do not read that ever he worked a Miracle to sustain his own
hunger, but trusted himself entirely to his Father's keeping. It Is true, he
complained with loud passion upon the Cross, but not from despair, or the least
mistrust of God's failing him; for with considence he commended his Spirit into
his hands; but a quick sense he had of that unusual change in his Father's
Countenance. It touched him to the quick, that the beloved Father should look
so full of Anger upon his most beloved Son: It was the sting of his Sufferings
to see a Cloud and severe Frown upon that Beauteous Face, which always used to
shine upon him with a pleasing Aspect; now especially whilst he knew himself to
be performing an Act highly acceptable to his Father.

Observe yet farther, and imitate; his Conversation was in Heaven whilst here
on Earth, his heart always there, his Discourses tended thither, Heavenly
things being ever predominant in his Thoughts; he was always ready to take fit
Occasions to improve all Occurrences to Spiritual Purposes, and raise up the
Minds of his Company to the things above. He sought opportunities of
Retirement, that he might have frequent and immediate Converse with God his
Father. Those hours wherein Nature called for Ease and Sleep, he very often
employed in his Devotions, spending whole Nights in Prayer. He sat loose from
the World, perfectly dead to it, The great and most difficult Lesson of
Religion. He had no affection for the things of it, they appeared not worth his
thoughts. But yet his contempt of them was decent and generous; he did not with
proud disdain spurn at them as a rude Stoic would have done, he did not
affront Men of Quality and Title, but paid all becoming respect to those
Honors of the World, which he had not such regard for, as to assume them to
himself. In his common Conversation he was very obliging, affable, courteous,
always in good humor, conversing freely, even with the worst of Men, with
Publicans and Sinners, to make them if possible, wiser and better. He was
always disposed to put the most fair and candid interpretation upon the
Behavior of Men, ready to make the best excuses for them that their Case would
admit of, with any tolerable show or color of Reason; willing to impute their
faults and neglects to infirmity, the weakness of their Flesh or Mind, rather
than to Malice, or ill design.

When the Case would admit of no excuse, but he was treated with the vilest
usage, and ill language, yet he reviled not again, but by cool and good
argument endeavored to convince them of their Blasphemy and Outrage. How
calmly did he receive even Judas himself in an Act of the basest Treachery,
with the Title of Friend, wherefore art thou come? When his mind was loaded
with grief, to that extremity that he sweat drops of Blood, no murmuring,
fretful or discontented word dropped from him, he retained his Temper as well as
his Integrity. When he hung upon the Cross in most excessive pain, no
uneasiness of Spirit appeared, but he was quietly submissive to his Father's
Will. His whole Life was a constant course of Charity, always doing good to the
Bodies or Souls of Men; healing their Diseases, raising their Dead to Life, and
at last dying himself an accursed Death, that his Enemies, his Enemies that
used him despitefully, that hated him to the death, might be saved.

This is our Calling, Christians, this is our Pattern, Let us go and do
likewise. If we can thus live, if we can thus love, then are we meet to be
partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light. But if the Case be thus
with us, we may begin with amazement to cry out, who then can or shall be
saved? We seem to have reason to fear that our Savior has undone us by his
Example; has carried the Mark so high, and proposed such Conditions of
Salvation as Flesh and Blood can never reach to, can never hope upon these
terms to be made meet partakers of the Heavenly Inheritance.

4thly, It highly concerns us therefore to inquire, if they be possible,

How these Qualifications are to be obtained.

In a word, it is true that Flesh and Blood, Corrupt Flesh and Blood
especially, can never advance to that pitch of Holiness as to live as our
Savior lived, and cannot by its own strength (we may be sure) fit it self for
an admittance into that high and Holy Place. But the Comfort is, we do not go
forth in our own strength, we have the same Spirit of God promised and given to
every baptized Christian, which sanctified our Lord Christ himself, and enabled
him to walk as he walked. It Is true, he had the Spirit of God given him in much
greater measure, Heb. 1.9.
and was anointed above all his fellows (as the Apostle has taught us to speak)
whether Angels or Men, for the advancing and perfecting of all kind of Virtue
and Holiness; and though it may not consist with the method of God's Grace, and
our present State and Condition, that the Spirit of God should act so
powerfully in us; yet if it be not our own fault, he will certainly act as
effectually, and afford us sufficient strength for the doing of what is
requisite in order to Salvation, and by degrees will lead us on toward that
perfection, as will fit us to dwell with the Saints above. The difficulty of
the Work can give us no just reason to despair, when we have a God working in
us, and will not fail to do his part: But yet, though nothing is impossible with
God, and he will not fail us, there is something for us to do in this great
Work; there lies our Danger, therefore there ought to be our Care. The Advice
which I shall briefly offer shall be this, and so Conclude.

1. To be very Constant and Diligent in the use of those Means which the Gospel
has prescribed; For a Qualification for Heaven is not a Fit, but a lasting
Temper of the Mind, which is only to be obtained by a Constancy in Religious
Practice. Let every Morning and Evening at least have its fixed times for
Private Devotion, with serious application of Mind: Let us every day look over
and examine well our Account between God and our own Souls. This is an
excellent Expedient to make short Reckonings at last. He that makes even with
God every day by Repentance, is every night qualified for Heaven, and has but
one day to account for, when ever he dies.

Read some part of the Word of God, digest it well by Meditation, this supplies
the Soul with its daily Food; for Spirits must be nourished as well as Bodies;
be continually fed with good Thoughts, or they will languish, or which is
worse, grow Brutish and Devilish. In their proper Seasons, Public Ordinances
are to be duly attended, and more Solemn times of Self-examination fixed; but I
lay the greatest stress of Religion upon those private daily Performances. In
the neglect of these, it is impossible to be Religious in earnest, and keep up
a true Spirit of Devotion. It is difficult to persuade to these, but they being
once secured, the rest will easily follow. The Gospel-Means are not empty dead
Ceremonies, like those of the Law, they are Living Ordinances, they are Bodies
with a Soul, for the Holy Ghost accompanies the due performance of them; which
as at first conveyed with the waters of Baptism to the Soul; so by every
Sermon, Prayer or Sacrament rightly performed, takes fresh possession, and
comes in with new degrees of strength. A diligent use of these means of
Religion are therefore necessary, as being the only way to obtain and secure
this Spirit of God.

2. Keep your Eye always fixed upon your Inheritance, having his Eye upon the
recompense of the Reward, animated our Savior himself to go through with his
difficult Undertaking. This is one of the peculiar Advantages of the Gospel,
that the Gates of Heaven are in a manner set open to us, and such a view given
into those Regions of Happiness, as is sufficient to excite to Duty, and keep
us in our way thither. More knowledge of Heaven might do hurt at present, might
exalt us into rapture and ecstasy, and make us impatient of tarrying here. God
has therefore wisely proportioned these Discoveries to our present
Circumstances and Necessities. It concerns us to make a right use of this
peculiar benefit of the Gospel, never to lose the sight of Heaven which it
affords. All the Kingdoms of the Earth, and Glory of them, are not sufficient
to make an impression upon that Mind that is full of Heaven. He walks therefore
with the World under his feet, having his Heart always with his Treasure above;
and he that lives above the World at present, where should he live but in
Heaven hereafter?

Being by the Grace of God, thus made meet to be a Partaker of the Inheritance
of the Saints in Light, let him give thanks to the Father, and with joyful Lips
bless his Holy Name, and begin his Eternal Praises.

To God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory, now, and for
Evermore.
FINIS.

