ARTICLES OF ENQUIRY CONCERNING Matters Ecclesiastical Within the DIOCESE of
CHESTER, IN THE Primary EPISCOPAL VISITATION OF THE Right Reverend Father in
God JOHN Lord Bishop of CHESTER, Anno Dom. 1674.

LONDON, Printed for JOH. WILLIAMS Junior, M.DC.LXXIV.

The Tenor of the Oath to be Tendered to the Churchwardens and Sidemen.
YOU shall Swear, diligently to enquire, and true Presentment make, of all
Defaults and Offenses against the Laws Ecclesiastical of this Realm. In which
you are to take Direction from these Articles. And that you will not Present
any Person out of Malice or Ill Will, nor spare any out of Fear or Favor. So
help you God.

ARTICLES OF ENQUIRY Within the DIOCESE of CHESTER.
TIT. I. Concerning Churches or Chapels, with the Ornaments, Furniture and
Possessions belonging to them.
I. IS the Fabric of your Church (or Chapel) with all things appertaining to
it, kept in good repair within and without, in such order and decency, as
becomes the House of God?

II. IS there in the Church (or Chapel) a Font of Stone standing in the usual
ancient place, with a Cover to it, for the Administration of Baptism? Is there
also a convenient Communion Table, with a fair Carpet of Silk, or other decent
stuff, in the time of Divine Service; and with a fair Linen Cloth at the time
of Administering the Sacrament? What Cup, Chalice, Patin or Flagons, have you
belonging to that Service?

III. HAVE you in your Church (or Chapel) a convenient seat for the Minister
to read Divine Service in? And a Pulpit with a decent Cloth or Cushion for the
same?

IV. HAVE you a large Folio Bible of the last Translation, with two Books of
Common Prayer well bound, one for the Minister, the other for the Clerk? Have
you the Book of Homilies set forth by Authority, the Book of Canons, and the
Table of Degrees prohibited in Marriage?

V. HAVE you a Register-Book of Parchment for all who are Christened, Married or
Buried in the Parish? Does your Minister every Lord's Day in the Presence of
your Churchwardens set down the Names of Parties, with the Day, Month, and
Year of each Christning, Marriage, or Burial? Is the Transcripts thereof every
Year, within one Month after the Twenty fifth of March, carried into the
Bishops Registry?

VI. HAVE you a Paper-Book in which the Names of Strangers who preach or
officiate in the Church (or Chapel) are set down; and another Book for the
Churchwardens Accounts?

VII. HAVE you a fair Surplice for the Minister to wear at the times of his
public Ministration provided at the Charge of the Parish?

VIII. HAVE you a Chest with three Locks and Keys to keep the Books and
Ornaments of the Church? Have you a Bier with a black Herse-cloth for the
Burial of the Dead?

IX. IS the Churchyard sufficiently fenced with Walls, Pales, or Rails, and
decently kept from all Annoyance or Encroachments? Are the Trees therein
preserved?

X. IS the Mansion House of your Minister, with all other Houses thereto
belonging, kept in good repair? Have any of them been pulled down, or defaced?
Have any Incroached upon the Land thereto belonging, or felled the Trees
thereon growing?

XI. HAVE you a perfect Terrier of all Glebe-Lands, Gardens, Orchards and
Tenements belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage; as also an Account of such
Pensions, Rate-Tyths, and Portions of Tiths, or other yearly Profits (either
within or without the Parish) as belong thereunto? Have any of the same been
withheld from your Minister? And by whom, as you know, or have heard?

XII. HAVE any of the ancient Glebe-Lands belonging to your Parsonage or
Vicarage been taken away, or exchanged for other, without the free consent of
the Incumbent, and License from the Ordinary? Have any Enclosures been made in
your Parish, to the detriment of the Church, by the decay of Tillage, and
converting Arable-Land into Pasture? By whom has the same been made? And how
many years since? and how much is your Parsonage or Vicarage damnified thereby
in the yearly value thereof; as you know, believe or have heard?

XIII. HAVE any new Pews or Seats been erected in your Chancel or in the Body
of the Church (or Chapel) without leave from the Ordinary?

TIT. II. Concerning Ministers.
I. IS your Minister, Curate, or Lecturer, Episcopally Ordained?

II. HAS he been Licensed to Preach by the Bishop or either of the
Universities?

III. IS he defamed or suspected to have obtained his Orders or Benefice by any
Simoniacal Compact?

IV. DOES your Minister diligently read Divine Service, and preach every
Lord's Day in the Church, unless hindered by sickness, or reasonable absence?
And in such cases does, he procure some lawful Minister to read Prayers, to
Preach, and perform other Ministerial Duties?

V. DOES your Minister in the Morning and Evening Service, in the
Administration of the Sacraments, and in performing other Religious Offices
appointed by the Church of England, use the respective Forms in the Book of
Common Prayer, together with all those Rites and Ceremonies which are enjoined
in this Church? And does he make use of the Surplice when he reads Divine
Service, or Administers the Sacraments.

VI. DOES your Minister diligently Catechize the Youth of his Parish? Does he
prepare and procure them (as occasion is offered) to come and be confirmed by
the Bishop? And does he endeavor to reclaim all Popish Recusants, and all
Sectaries in your Parish, to the true Religion and Worship of God, as it is
established by Law?

VII. IS your Minister a man of a sober, unblamable and exemplary life? Is he
grave, modest, and regular in his outward demeanor and apparel, according to
the Constitutions of the Church? Or is his carriage, conversation, or company
in any kind whatsoever disorderly, or scandalous, and unbeseeming his Calling
and Charge?

VIII. IS your Minister ready to visit the Sick, and to Baptize Infants in
danger of death, being so desired? Is any Infant or more aged person in the
Parish yet Unbaptized by his default? Does he duly Administer the Blessed
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, Three times every year, at the least, whereof
Easter to be one? Does he baptize with Sureties?

IX. DOES your Minister Marry any persons at Vncanonical Hours, not between
eight and twelve, or in private, or such as are under Age, not having the
Consent of their Parents and Guardians? Does he Marry any either without Banes
first published Three Sundays or Holidays in the Church; or without License so
to do; or with the License of any other than the Archbishop, Bishop of this
Diocese, or his Chancellor?

X. DOES your Minister duly bid and observe Holidays and Fasting-days, as is
appointed? And does he then use the Forms of Prayer prescribed by the Church?
Has he taken upon him to appoint any private Fasts, or Religious Exercises
without lawful Authority? Does he or any other Minister or Lay-person in your
Parish hold any unlawful Conventicles, or Meetings, under pretense of any
exercise of Religion?

XI. IS your Minister constantly Resident among you? Has he a Curate
conforming to assist him in his absence or presence? Does he carry himself in
all things, as an able and discreet Minister, and conformable to the Church of
England? Does he serve any more Cures besides that of your Parish, on the same
day? what is the name of your Curate, and what yearly Stipend does your
Minister allow him?

XII. IS there in your Parish any Lecturer; what is his name? Does he read
Divine Service before his Lecture, as by Law is required; and is he Conformable
to the Discipline of the Church of England?

TIT. III. Concerning Parishoners.
I. ARE there any in your Parish who are reputed Heretics or Schismatics
refusing Communion with the Church of England? Any impugners of the Religion
established, of his Majesty's Supremacy or of any the Laws, Rites, and
Ceremonies Ecclesiastical? Have any spoken or declared any thing in derogation,
or to the depraving of the Form of Gods Worship in the Church of England, and
Administration of the Sacraments, Rites and Ceremonies prescribed in the Book
of Common Prayer as it is now established by Law?

II. ARE there any in your Parish, who lie under a common fame, or vehement
suspicion of Adultery, Fornication or Incest? Are there any common Drunkards,
Swearers or Blasphemers of Gods holy Name and Word?

III. ARE there any Excommunicate persons, or any who countenance, or keep
company with them?

IV. DO any of your Parish profane the Lord's Day by neglecting of public Holy
Duties, or by doing the works of their ordinary Calling, or using unlawful
Recreations, or permitting their Children or Servants so to do? Do they duly
observe other Holidays, Festivals and Fasts appointed by Authority.

V. DO all those who inhabit in your Parish duly resort to your Church (or
Chapel) and continue there during Divine Service, Sermon, and other Holy
Duties, with that Reverence, Order, and Decency, as befits devout Christians?
Or, have any occasioned Riot, Clamor or Fighting in the Church at any time? Are
there any Recusant Papists, or Sectaries in your Parish? Do they, or any of
them keep any Schoolmaster in their House which comes not to Church to hear
Divine Service, and receive the Holy Communion?

VI ARE there any in your Parish who refuse to have their Infant-children
Baptized by your Minister? Or do they keep them unbaptized longer than the
Church allows? And what Infants, or more aged persons, are there in your Parish
unbaptized.

VII. DO all your Houshoulders duly send their children Apprentices and
Servants to be chatechized? And do they take care (when occasion is offered)
they should be confirmed by the Bishop?

VIII. IS there any person in your Parish being Sixteen years of age, who
refuses to receive the Blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper, at least three
times every Year? whereof Easter to be one? And do all receive this Sacred
Mystery with that outward gesture of Humility and Reverence as becomes them,
meekly kneeling upon their Knees?

IX. ARE there any in your Parish who are known or suspected to be unlawfully
Married, contrary to the Laws of God and this Church? Are there any (who being
lawfully Married and never divorced) do yet live asunder? Or any who being
lawfully Divorced, do live together again? Or being separated for Adultery,
have afterward Enter-married with any other, during the life of their First
Consort?

X. ARE there any Married Women in your Parish who after their safe Delivery
from Child birth, neglect to make their humble and public Thanksgivings to
God, decently apparelled, according to the appointment of the Church? Or refuse
to pay the Offerings according to custom.

XI. ARE there any of your Parish who refuse to pay their Easter Offerings, and
other Duties to your Minister? Or to pay the Rates assessed on them, for the
Repair and provisions of the Church?

XII. DO you know, or have you heard of any Patron, or other person in your
Parish, who having the gift of an Ecclesiastical Benefice, has made gain
thereby upon any Bargain, either for Money, Pension, Lease, Reserve of Tithes,
or Glebe, or other Simoniacal Compact whatsoever?

XIII. DO any among you refuse to Bury their Dead, according to the Rites of
the Church of England? Are there any Wills of Deceased persons unproved, or
Goods not administered? Do you know of any Legacies given to your Church, not
yet received by you, or detained from you, or not applied to the uses appointed?

TIT. IV. Concerning the Officers belonging to the Church.
I. ARE the Churchwardens of your Parish, yearly chosen according to Law? And
are there Sidemen appointed to assist them, for the due ordering of the Church?

II. HAVE the former and last Churchwardens given up their Accounts to those
that succeed them, together with all Moneys and other things belonging to your
Church (or Chapel?)

III. HAVE you a Parish Clark, aged one and twenty years at least, who is of
sober life and good report? Is he chosen by your Minister, and approved by the
Parish; and is he able for Reading, Writing, and Singing as a Clerk? Are his
Wages duly paid him?

IV. DOES he or your Sexton take care of your Church, to keep it locked, and
clean, to open the Doors, and ring the Bells in due times to call the
Inhabitants to the Worship of God? Also to admonish them by Tolling of a
Passing Bell for any that are dying, thereby to meditate of their own Death,
and to commend the others weak condition to the mercy of God;

TIT. V. Concerning Almshouses, Schools, and Schoolmasters, Phisicians,
Chirurgions, and Midwives.
I. IS there any Hospital, Almshouse, or Free School founded in your Parish
not of the Kings Foundation? Are they so governed and ordered in the use and
Revenue as the Founders appointed, according to het Ordinances and Statutes
which have been made concerning the same?

II. DOES any man keep a public or private School in your Parish? Is he or
they licensed and allowed thereunto by the Bishop? Is he of sober, religious
and exemplary Conversation? Does he instruct his Scholars in the Catechism and
Religion of the Church of England? Is there any Woman that takes upon her to
instruct and educate any young Maidens? Does she resort duly, and bring with
her to Divine Service, upon the Lord's Day and Holidaies, all such Young Maidens
as are committed to her Care?

III. DO any in Your Parish practice Physic, Chirurgerie, or Midwiferie,
without License from the Ordinary?

THe Minister of every Parish may join in Presentiments with the Churchwardens
and Sidemen, and if they will not present, then the Ministers themselves
(being the Persons that have the chief care of the suppressing of Sin and
Impiety in their Parishes) may present the Crimes aforesaid, and such things as
shall want due Reformation. Can. 113.

JOH. CESTRIENS.

THe Ministers of every Parish are desired to give in the Names of such of the
younger sort, in their several Parishes, as they judge fit to receive
Confirmation from the Bishop.

FINIS.

