Causes of a public Fast and Humiliation, appointed by the Commission of the
General Assembly, To be kept in all the Congregations of this Kirk upon the
third Sabbath of September, in this year 1646.
I. NOtwithstanding of our profession in the last Article of our Solemn League
and Covenant, yet to this day the Son of God is not honored amongst us in the
excellency of his Person, nor employed in the virtue of his Offices; But the
unsearchable riches of Christ and the inestimable treasure of the Gospel are
neglected and despised as things of no value.

II. We do not tremble under the threatenings of the Law, verified upon us in
many sad and fore judgments, Nor do we follow the direction thereof as a rule
of our obedience, but the whole Land almost and many in our Armies still lie in
a deep security, and live under gross prophanity and hardness of heart.

III. We have reason to mourn for the issue of that horrid Rebellion, as a
testimony of the continued indignation of the most High against our
backslidings and provocations.

IIII. The lamentable condition of our Brethren in Ireland, almost brought unto
fainting, and near to be swallowed up by the power and cruelty of the Rebels
there, Together with the danger that we are threatened with from them, and the
afflicted estate of those parts of this Kingdom which yet lie under the feet
of the Enemies.

V. Seeing the Lord has been pleased to stain the pride of all our glory, by
blasting all our (...) confidence and making the emptiness of means to appear,
we would seriously entreat him that he would make himself glorious in the midst
of is, by the manifestation of his free grace and wonted favor, in pardoning
our sins, reclaiming us from our backslidings, and healing our Land for his own
Name sake.

VI. That the Lord would often the Kings heart, and give unto him the spirit of
Humiliation that he may mourn for his iniquity, and that the spirit of wisdom
and understanding may be given to him, and all these that are employed in the
public affairs in both Kingdoms, that all their counsels and actions may be
means for the advancement of the Kingdom of the Son of God, promoving the work
of Uniformity, holding fast the League betwixt the Ntions, and for procuring a
firm and wellgrounded Peace in all the three Kingdoms.

VII. That the spirit of Faithfulness, Unity, and Zeal, may be poured upon all
the Ministers of the land, that in integrity and love they may bear burden one
with another, for seeking the honor of Jesus Christ and the edifying of his
Body the Clurch.

VIII. That the Lord woe(...) crown the year with his goodness in granting a
fair and fruitful Harve^^.

Printed at Edinburgh by Ev^n Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Vajestie. 1646.


