THE Church of Rome Unmasked: OR HER FALSE PRINCIPLES Briefly Detected.

TOGETHER With some Reasons of so many retaining or returning to Communion
with Her, and the great danger of everlasting Destruction: That such Persons,
especially after separation from Her, return to Her Communion, do run
themselves upon.

Written by a Learned Divine, by way of Letter to a Friend in the Country.

Prove. 4.14, 15, 16, 17. Enter not into the way of the wicked, and go not in
the way of evil men. Avoid it, pass not up it, turn from it, and pass away. For
they sleep not except they have done mischief; and their sleep is taken away
unless they cause some to fall. For they eat the Bread of wickedness, and drink
the Wine of violence.

I heard a voice from Heaven, saying, Come out of her (from Babylon) my people,
that ye be not partakers of her Sins, and that ye receive not of her Plagues.
For her Sins have reached unto Heaven, and God has remembered her Iniquities.
Rev. 18.4, 5.

LONDON, Printed for Isaac Cleave at the Sign of the Star next door to
Searjants-Inne in Chancery Lane, 1679.

The Fallibility and Falsehood of the Church of Rome, briefly detected and made
manifest.
SIR,
SInce Providence cast me so luckily into your company and acquaintance, your
affable carriage and obliging civility, has stirred up in me, both toward
your self and your relations, no small affections and affectionate desires of
your best welfare and happiness, and therefore having heard, not without grief,
that the Roman party have endeavored to seduce you or them into their
communion. I have not been a little exercised in my heart with desires to
prevent or rescue you therefrom, being well assured that the Factors for that
communion are Deceitful workers, evil doers; such, as the fruit and product of
their Principles in them, who are snared with them, is no less than imminent
danger of, if not inevitable destruction. And indeed I cannot but bewail that
any ingenuous persons brought up under the light of the Scriptures and of
Protestant doctrine, should have attained to no greater understanding and
better judgment thereby, than to be imposed upon by persons guilty of so much
corruption in their Religion, as that a man with half an eye, (as they use to
say) if not careless to use and improve it for his own welfare, may easily
discern it, but yet I know their subtilties are great and their insinuations
strong where they can get admission: to obviate which, I shall endeavor a
little to help you against them, and to let you see wherein the Roman Church,
and the men of her communion, are so dangerously erroneous and corrupt, that it
behooves all men as they love their souls to avoid them.

And first, her claim of Infallibility is a most palpable error and
miscarriage, for which she has neither any good ground nor color; for what
though Christ has said that he will build his Church upon the Rock and that
the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it, yet that affords no more ground
for the Roman Church, or any officer in her, to assert her or his
infallibillity than for any other Church, for granting that by the word, [It,]
is meant the Church built upon the Rock, and not the Rock it self upon which
he builds it (though the word (...), came, it, being a relative agrees in gender
with, and may therefore be referred indifferently to either of them) yet its
Christ's Church indefinitely and generally that our Savior asserts that of, and
the Church of Corinth, the Church of Ephesus, the Churches of Galatia, and the
rest mentioned in the Scriptures, yea, and beyond what are their mentioned,
were every whit as much the Church or of the Church of Christ, as the Church of
Rome, that is, they were all equally and indifferently members of the same
Catholic or Universal Church when they were first planted, and when the
Apostles wrote to them; and they were all one as well as another by the
Apostles ministry, and by Christ as going forth with them, built upon the same
Rock, and so they were under the same promises and in the same state of safety,
for all of them conjunctly made up that Church which was and is the Church of
Christ in its Catholic and Universal capacity: and yet we see the other
Churches might possibly and did actually err very grossly, as is evident in
what is said of the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 15, 12 2 Cor. 11.2.3. and the
Churches of Gallatia. Gall. 1.6. and 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 10. and 5.2.3.4. and where
now I pray are the Churches of Asia, Ephesus, and the rest? have none of them
failed or erred grieviously? and what promise made our Savior to the Church of
Rome more than to any of them? nay, he made such to some of them (as to that of
Philodelphia, of Keeping her in and from the hour of temptation that should
come upon all the earth) as we no where find the like made unto Rome, Rev.
3.8.9.10. oh how would Rome have boasted her self had such a thing been
directed to her or to her Angel! if there be any such to her, where is it
written or recorded? And yet the gates of hell shall not prevail against
Christ's Church, namely, so as to ruin it. Christ has and will have a Church in
the World, Maugre all the power and malice of hell, yea, and he may have part
of it among those Churches in Asia and Graecia that are yet lest in being,
though under great oppressions, and not free from corruptions, for they whoever
they be that heartily believe Jesus to be the Christ, so as sincerely to
embrace his doctrine, and be followers thereof, to the best of their skill and
power, and keep singly thereto, they, even the whole company of them, whoever
they be, or how much soever outwardly dispersed, are Christ's church: the Church
built upon the Rock, against which the gates of hell shall not prevail. And
such there are, not only (if there be any such) at Rome, and under her
jurisdiction, but more purely and less corruptly in diverse parts of the world
that are no members of her.

If it be said (as I know it is by them) that Christ gave a more peculiar
privilege to the Church or Bishop of Rome, than to any other Church or Bishop
belonging thereto, as to infallibility, in that it is built upon St Peter as
its Bishop, the Bishops thereof being his successors, To that I say, that the
Scriptures know or use no such language as the Churches, or any Churches being
built or founded upon St. Peter. Yea St. Peter himself tells us, that the true
Believers (and so consequently the Church ( comes to Christ the living Stone,
disallowed indeed of men, but chosen of God and precious, and are built upon
him, so us to grow up into a spiritual house, an holy Priesthood, etc. not
making any mention of their coming to himself, that is to Peter, and being
built upon him 1 Pet. 2.4, 5. And St. Paul tells us, other foundation can no
man lay, than that which is laid, which (he says not is St. Peter, not Petrus,
but Petra) is Jesus Christ, the true Rock; who is the foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets, both that upon which they themselves were built and
stood, and that upon which they as God's Builders built his Church, 1 Cor.
3.11. Ephesians. 2.20. And surely no man can stand more strongly by being built
upon St. Peter, than by being built upon Christ. Nor find we either Christ
himself or any of his Apostles to say or signify any such thing, as that the
place or Church where Peter should reside or praeside, should be more
Infallible than any other Church or Churches founded, resided in, or praesided
over by any other of his Apostles. Nor that such as should succeed him as
Bishops in any place, much less in Rome praesided in by him, should be more
Infallible than other Bishops. If the praesidency of St. Peter in Rome can
secure that Church or it is Bishop from failing or falling into Error, how
comes it to pass that his sitting at Antioch, did not also secure that place
and Church? Yea and those Churches of Judaea and of the Circumcision whereof he
was the Prime and immediate Apostle, Gal. 2.9. Surely they ought rather to have
had this Privilege and Praerogative from him than Rome a Gentile Church, which
was rather under S. Paul's and Barnabas's Jurisdiction, as being the Apostles
of the Gentiles. It Is strange that none of the Churches more certainly planted
by him, should have this Privilege, but only Rome, which it is not certain that
he planted or ever came into: for some of no small learning have made a
question of that that I say not have positively denied it. Surely none but
simple persons and such as are easy and willing to be deceived, and therefore
look not well to their goings, will believe such groundless praetexts imposed
upon them. True it is that some of the Ancient Councels gave a Patriarchal
power to the Bishop of Rome subjecting these Western Churches thereunto; but
that was but an humane constitution for order and unities sake, and gave him no
more Infallibility than the like constitutions gave to the Bishops of
Jerusalem, or Antioch, or Alexandria, or Constantinople, whom they made
Patriarchs also in their respective Jurisdictions. Nor yet did that make Rome
or it is Church the whole Catholic Church, or the Bishop thereof the Head of
it, as is evident by the 6th Council of Carthage, where Faustinus the Popes
Legate, challenging for his Master a power to order all great matters in all
places, and pretending for it a Decree of the Nicene Council, was upon diligent
search into the Records of the said Council found a falsifyer thereof, and
thereupon was decreed an equality in power with the other Patriarchs. But
beside all this, against the plea of that Church's Infallibility, it is evident.

2. That she has in Fact erred, and can there be a clearer and better
demonstration of the possibility of her Erring, deceiving and being deceived,
than that she has actually Erred: For though a posse ad esse non valet
consequentia, yet ab esse ad posse est validissima. Now that she has actually
Erred is evident not only in her members and different parties, but also in her
conjunct consideration, and in her Head. As for her having erred and yet erring
in her parties and members, it is demonstrable in this, that contradictoria non
possunt esse simul vera; of two contradictory positions maintained by different
parties; the one must needs be false. Now in the Church of Rome there are
contradictory positions maintained by several parties; witness the Dominicans
and Franciscans, the one contradicting the other in the matter of the
immaculateness of the conception of the Virgin Mary, the one denying, and the
other asserting it; if the Virgin Mary was conceaved in her Mothers womb
without sin, then the Dominican Party of the Roman Church errs, and if
otherwise, then the Franc^scan Party errs. The like may be said of the
Jansenists and Jesuits in the five Articles wherein they differ. But I say not
only their members, but their Head and Bishop may err also even in Cathedra,
or in his solemn Determinations and doings, yea in matters of Faith; as is made
manifest in Liberius, subscribing to Arrianisme, and Vigilius who both
condemned and commanded the same things to be believed; as in the three
Chapters condemned by a Council as favoring Nestorianisme, and in Honorius who
was condemned by a Council for a Monothelite. And surely if a Pope may
contradict himself, and say and unsay a thing as Pope and Head of their Church;
and both condemn and command the belief of the same thing (as in that case of
Pope Vigilius) he must needs be Fallible and err in the one of them. And there
is no way to avoid it, but that either some of their Popes have erred, or some
of their General Councels (which is the Church representative, and were some
time also declared and held to be about the Pope, and were usually consented to
and confirmed by their Popes) have been deceived in condemning them as having
erred: either of which supposals mightily infringes the Infallibility of their
Church. Nay, and it is believed that the Jansenists, would they speak out, do
not look upon the late Pope Innocent as Infallible in his condemnation of the
five Articles maintained by them. Nay, did not St. Peter himself greatly err
in a main matter of Faith, and that too after our Savior had said to him, Thou
art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church, when he preaches such
doctrine to his Master, as that he should not suffer death, for which our
Savior rebuking him, called him Satan, Mat. 16.22, 23. But not only have and
do great Parties in her and branches of her err, and even their Popes
themselves, but She herself in her whole Authoratative Constitution and
Catholic complex consideration, and that very grossly too: if we look upon her
Doctrines and determinations in the light of the infallible testimony of God,
and of his holy Spirit speaking in the holy Scriptures, which is the
Touchstone to which the Prophet Isaiah or the Lord himself by him in Isai.
8.20. and Christ himself in Joh. 5.39. directs us; and to which the noble
Boereans brought the Apostle Paul's preaching with commendation for their so
doing, Act. 17.12. yea and the Apostle St. Peter himself directs the Churches
and the believers therein to that in 2 Pet. 1.19. and 3.1, 2. and the Apostle
Paul commends Timothy for that from a child he knew the holy Scriptures, they
being able to make men wise unto Salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15. implying therein that
even Children if they will mind the holy Scriptures, and set themselves to seek
the knowledge of them, may as they grow up in some good measure obtain it to
their great benefit, and salvation. Now contrary to these holy Scriptures this
Church of Rome errs.

1. In forbidding and witholding from men the reading of the Scriptures both
while in childhood and afterward, which is a manifest opposition to Christ and
the holy Spirit, and his faithful Servants, for therein she forbids what they
bad and exhorted to, as is showed in what is already said. They said the
Believers did well to take heed to them, and willed them to be mindful of the
words of the Prophets, and the commandments of the Apostles, 2 Timothy 1.19. and
3.1, 2. And this Church refuses to let men have them in their own languages
that they may read them, especially except they will purchase a License with
money, which is the great Goddess worshipped at Rome. An evident and plain
demonstration that the deeds of this Church are evil, because she withholds
from men the light whereby they should judge of them; and that she leads her
Followers into bypath and ways of error, when she witholds from them what
holds forth, and would guide them into the truth. Chrysostom in his time
exhorted his hearers to take the Bible into their hands, and call together
their Neighbors, and by those holy Oracles to water the minds both of
themselves and them, that they might the better withstand the wiles of Satan,
etc. Hom. 6, in Genesis But this Church is for taking away these weapons of the
holy Spirit and divine waterings of their minds from them.

2. In making herself the whole Catholic Church, while she ties up men's
Salvation to their communion with her, and subjection to her Bishop, which is a
gross and grievous error; and all one as to make a part (and that a very
unsound too) to be the whole, to the denying in effect this fundamental truth,
that whosoever believes on Christ shall be saved. For while she maintains that
out of the Church there is no salvation, and then assumes that all that are not
in her communion and of her Church are out of the Church, she makes all those
Believers in Christ however cordial and constant they be therein, that are not
of her society, to be in the state of damnation: and so contradicts Christ and
his Apostles that say whoever believes on him shall be saved, and that there is
no respect of persons as to their belonging to this or that place or Church, as
to that matter. It was not so in the Apostles time; for neither the Churches of
Judaea, nor the seven Churches in Asia, nor the Churches uf Galatia, or any
other Churches mentioned in the Scriptures distinctly from that of Rome were
ever said or signified to be the members of the Church of Rome, or to owe any
subjection to the Bishop of Rome. Nor does the Apostle when he says, if thou
shall confess with thy mouth Jesus the Lord, and with thine heart believe
that God raised him from the dead thou shall be saved; put in as a third
requisite to the definition of a right Christian, and an Heir of Salvation if
thou acknowledgest the Church of Rome as the Mother Church, and be subject to
the Pope or Bishop thereof, as if without that they were not true Members of
the Catholic Church of Christ, nor might be saved, Romans 10.9. yet this is now
an Article of the Roman Creed, wherein they imitate the Donatists of old who
would confine the Church of Christ, and by consequence Salvation to Africa,
and therein to the Men of their Communion as St. Augustine testifies. Surely
this is none of the least Errors of the Roman Church but a gross and grievious
one, making Christ and his Apostles, upon the matter, to be Liars, and the
Scripture sayings that own all Believers in Christ for Members of her Church,
to be falsehoods.

3. In doing contrary to the Apostles express direction, that all things in the
Church should be done to edification, to which he adds, that if any man judge
himself a Prophet, or spiritual, he ought to acknowledge the things he wrote
thereabout to be the commandments of the Lord, 1 Cor. 14.26, 31. yet these men
and this Church, contrary hereto, impose upon their Members in most places yet,
and have upon all formerly for diverse ages, to perform their Service, or
Prayers, and Thanksgivings to God in an unknown tongue, notwithstanding that
the same Apostle has expressly testified that the so doing is contrary to
edification, 1 Cor. 14.10, 11. to 28. and will we follow men, or join our
selves with them, that so palpably and openly contradict the Word and
Commandment of God, and so loudly proclaim that they fear him not, and believe
them when they tell us they are infallible? and though perhaps it may be said
that in this and another Nation they do, or are willing to permit their Service
in an unknown Tongue, yet that excuses them not for so much as they have all
along so notoriously practiced otherwise, till of late some have extorted this
as it were unwillingly from them, nor do they yet acknowledge their error and
iniquity in what they have done formerly, but justify themselves in it, by not
altering that evil practice and imposition every where; for in Spain, Italy,
and in many other parts, I suppose they retain it. Nay Mr. Egan a lately
converted Friar, informs us that the Pope forbids the use of their Prayers
which some have turned into the Vulgar Language, so as that they that use them
are not right Roman Catholics, in his Recantation Sermon, page 10. but if they
had reformed this every where, yet even their Reformation would be a Conviction
that they have erred therein, and destroyed their Plea for Infallibility,
whether in their Church formally considered, or in their Head the Pope, seeing
both the one and the other of them have a long time practiced, allowed, and
imposed so gross a miscarriage, and taught the people to believe it to be a
service acceptable unto God. Can this Church be Infallible that has fallen and
done so fowly? or can they be innocent that join themselves in Communion with
her, when she so much slighting and acting impudently in opposition to the
commandment and directions of Christ, and as it were openly disclaiming therein
what his authority injoyns, and practices things so contrary thereunto;
especially how can they but be horribly guilty of casting away their own Souls,
who being brought up under clearer and better light, do willingly depart
therefrom, or suffer themselves to be seduced into a compliance with her?
Surely, since it was the design of Christ to bring light into the world, and to
be the Light of the world to direct and guide their Feet into the ways of
Peace: and he has set his Church and Servants for lights therein also; they
who take away that light, or withhold it from them, and lead them into
darkness, denying them the Scriptures, and teaching them to pray, or rather to
say Prayers in an unknown tongue, wherein they cannot edify or be edified,
they therein declare themselves to be opposite to Christ, and so to be very
Antichrists. Oh that none of your Souls may come into their secret, or have
fellowship with them; but yet this is not all in which they declare plainly
that they err grossly from the Faith and Truth of Christ, and the true way of
his Worship. Behold it still in other particulars. For,

4. Whereas the Lord Jesus in the Night in which he was betrayed, instituted
his Holy Supper, to be Celebrated in commemoration and remembrance of him. In
which He gave to his Disciples (and ordered his Apostles to do the like to the
Churches afterward) a Commemoration of his death and passion in two distinct
Elements of bread and wine, the one before and the other after, and bad them
all expressly drink of the cup, and the Apostles plainly tell us, that they
delivered to the Churches that which they also received of Christ Jesus, and so
that they both gave the bread to be eaten, and the cup to be drunk by them.
Witness the writings of the Apostle Paul, in 1 Cor. 10.15, 16. Where not
directing them to some eternal infallible Judge and Determiner of their
understanddings; he bids them as wise men, to judge of his sayings, and
mentions both the cup of blessing which they blessed, calling it the communion
or fellowship ((...)) of the blood of Christ, and the bread that they brake,
calling it the communion of the body of Christ; and in chap. 11.23, 24, 25, 26.
Where repeating the words and order of Christ's instituting his Supper in both
branches or parts of it, he says, for as often as ye eat this bread, and drink
this cup, ye show forth the Lords death till he come; and let a man ((...) any
man of the Church indefinitely, Lay or Clergy, as they are now a days
distinguished) examine himself and so let him eat of this bread, and drink of
this Cup. He says not only let him eat of this bread, but also let him drink
of this cup. And whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this Cup of the Lord
unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself. And the Apostle says
also in chap. 14.37, as we noted before, that the things He wrote were the
Commandments of the Lord, yet this Church of Rome most audaciously, and with a
non obsunt or notwithstanding all this, presume to deny the cup to the Laity,
yea and to the Clergy too say some, if any of them be present beside the Priest
that celebrates or says Mass; making nothing of Gods or Christ's authority to
the contrary. Surely therefore to them may most truly and fully be applied
those words of our Savior, spoken by him against the Scribes and Pharisees in
whose steps they walk, viz. well has Isaiah prophesied of you Hypocrites, as
it is written, this People honors me with their lips, but their hearts are
far from me. Howbeit in vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the
Commandments of men. For laying aside the Commandments of God, ye hold the
Tradition of men, etc. And full well ye reject the Commandments of God, that
you may keep your own Tradition, making the word of God of none effect, through
your Tradition which ye have delivered, Mar. 7.6, 7, 8, 9, 13. For what is
their doctrine of Concomitancy but their own Tradition? wherein they teach
their Followers to believe that the Cup is in the bread as it were; the blood
of Christ is in his body, and they as well taken together, For were they not so
when Christ being yet alive instituted the Supper? And after his Resurrection,
when the Apostle and the Primitive Christians observed it in both kinds. And
can the supposal of both together in one be so lively a resemblance,
representation, and commemoration of his death, as when they are given
seperately? The end of our Saviors instituting, and of the Churches observing
this Ordinance, is to show forth the Lords death till he come. 1 Cor. 11.26.
And is not his death more lively set forth and represented when the Elements
are given apart, and so the body represented as without it is blood, and the
blood as separated from the body, than when both are supposed to be given
together in one. In Christ's state of death his blood was shed forth from his
body, and in the supper as instituted of Christ, the cup was given by it self,
as a representation of his blood shed for the remission of our sins. So that
here is in this bold contradiction to our Saviors precept and practice, both a
rejecting of his commandment, and a making null the end of his institution, the
showing forth of his death. Though yet neither is this all (nor the half of
that) in which this bad Church dares to confront the authority of God. For

5. They also leave out in their Catechismes the second Commandment. Thou shall
not make to thy self any Graven Image, etc. And to make up the number of ten,
they divide the last into two; both contrary to the express voice and command
of God, who gave the second as audibly as any of the rest, and with more
express sanction by way both of threatening added, as a jealous God, punishing
the Offenders, and promise of blessing to them that love him and keep his
Commandments, and to the practice and manner of the Christian Church in all
it is Primitive times. Because they confront Gods Commandment in their practice,
setting up, and injoyning Images, and the Likenesses, and the Representations
of things and Persons to be erected and worshipped, though God has expressly
commanded the contrary. Oh audacious Church, and Congregation of evil doers!
And can any be so blind, as not to see palpably in this and the other
particulars, that they both can, and do err? And how then can it be possibly
imagined, that they are Infallible? Nay rather verily it is far righter to say,
that they are incorrigible, impenitent and impudent in their notoriously evil
Principles and Practices. God says, thou shall not make to thy self any Graven
thing, nor the likeness or similitude of any thing either in Heaven above, or
in the Earth beneath -- thou shall not bow down to them nor worship them: And
these men do make the similitude of many things in Heaven and Earth, as of the
Virgin Mary, the Saints deceased, the Cross of Christ, yea, and as they pretend
of God himself, etc. and bow down to them, and worship them, and yet they say
they are innocent, and so did the adulterous Church of Judah, when they upon
every high Hill, and under every green tree wandered and played the Harlot, yet
they said, they were not polluted, they had not gone after Baalim, they were
innocent, and therefore surely Gods anger would turn away from them, Jer.
2.23,35. Even so does this corrupt and erroneous Church plead not only that she
is innocent, but also that she cannot err. But we shall have occasion to say
more to this anon. Besides all this,

6. What is their Doctrine of Transubstantiation, but a most gross and palpable
error against the Verdict of Sense, and Reason, and the Word of God; and
therefore must needs be without any substantial reason therefrom. And me thinks
it is strange, that men will believe Lies, that are so evident and notorious,
that their very senses may convince them thereof. If Christ should have told
his Disciples, that a Spirit has not flesh and bones, as they see him have,
and yet might impose upon their senses, and make them to believe that to be
flesh and bones upon the Verdict of their senses, which yet in truth for all
that might be other-wise, had he not been really, what his Adversaries falsely
accused him to be? And what weight would there be in that argument, so often
made use of by the Apostles to assure us of the truth of their Doctrine, viz.
that they were Eyewitnesses of the things they delivered for truths to the
Church, and see, and heard, and felt what they testified; if things might be
quite otherwise than the most plain and constant evidence of them to our senses
represent them? Now we may see the substance of bread in the Sacrament, as
plainly as our eyes can discern any substance, we may feel it with our hands,
taste it with our mouths, smell it with our nostrils. And when we have so many
evidences that it is bread, yea, and the word of God, and Scriptures of the
Apostles call it bread too, as they do after the words of Consecration, when it
is broken, yea and eaten too (for they say, the bread which we break, is it not
the Communion of the body of Christ, and so often as ye eat this bread, etc. 1
Cor. 10.16. and 11.26.) to be persuaded upon this Church's or it is Priests
authority, that there is no bread there, but the very natural body, and the
substance of the flesh and bones of Jesus Christ; is the most palpable
imposture upon our faith, and the most unreasonable credulity, that ever was
heard of, not to be paralleled in any Histories. Oh but say they our Savior
said, this is my body, and therefore it must be his very natural body. As if
our Savior never spoke in Parables, or used not similitudes and figures in his
speaking, and so must be understood to speak Literally, when the understanding
his words so contradicts our senses, yea, and our reason too. For if the
substance of bread be gone, and the very substance of his body, flesh, blood,
and bones be there really present under the forms of bread and wine, upon the
Consecration or pronunciation of those words, this is my body, how many
absurdities must follow thereupon? As then Christ must have many bodies
distinct from one another, or the same to be multiplied beyond all possibility
to say into how many; yea then while Christ's body sat by his Disciples whole
and untouched, it must be at the same instant in their hands and mouths, yea
his whole body in every one of their hands and mouths in it is mortal state, and
yet his whole body visibly before them all, and distinct from them all, and
from all their hands and mouths, and what was therein: yea, then his body must
be broken by himself before it was broken, and he was as it were his own
Crucifyer before he was crucified and slain, and while as yet nothing of that
nature was done to his body. For if that bread which he took and blessed was
transubstantiated into his body, then he saying of it, that it was broken for
them, in that he brake the bread, it must then be broken by himself, and yet
for all it was broken and eaten too, yet it was as whole after that, yea, and
in the very time of it is being broken and eaten as ever; and was taken, and
broken, and crucified on the Cross by his enemies, after every one of his
Disciples had eaten it in it is natural substance. Then also he must have a
thousand and a thousand bodies at once in the several places where the Mass is
Celebrated, and the Host eaten, and the whole body eaten by every Communicant
in it is substance corporally, and yet his body whole and entire in Heaven; and
the Heavens must receive or contain it till the time of the restitution of all
things, spoken of by the Prophets. Yea and when the Hosts is reserved in the
Pix or Box, the same body must be in the same time in Heaven and Glory, and
shut up in a narrow box in diverse places, where possibly it may mould; or if
the Mice can come to it, be eaten too by them: except the Mice can eat
accidents without the substance, and they can be accidents without substance to
inherein, that are in such case moldy or the like, and all the absurdities
that the Prophets cast upon the Heathen Idolaters, when they tax them with
making a God that cannot help or save it self, but may be carried to and fro as
men please; may be all justified as rational, or warranted as possible enough
by this one Doctrine. For do not the Priests, they say, make of a piece of
bread the person of Christ, God and man, even their Maker? And when a Baker
has of the same dough made diverse cakes or wafers, and diverse of them being
caught and taken and eaten by men, the Priest takes one or more of them, and
Consecrates and makes a God of it, and falls down and worships it, and
persuades the people to worship it, telling them it is very God and their
Savior. Though yet when it is in their hands, it is in their power if they
will to cast it away, or to burn it in the fire, if they secretly reserve it,
and it cannot rescue it self from them and their power, no more than the God
made of a piece of a Tree could. May it not as well be said to these, as to
those Heathen Idolaters, remember this, and show your selves men; bring it
again to mind O ye Transgressors, Isai. 46.8. For are not these men every whit
as much infatuated, as those persons or worse. For there they took a piece of a
Tree, the workmanship of God more immediately, and having burnt part of it in
the fire, and roasted meat and warmed themselves with it, they made another
part of it into an Image or similitude of something, and set it up, and
Consecrated it with some words or charms, and then they called it their God,
they prayed to it, and said deliver me, for thou art my God, Isa. 44.14, 15,
16, 17. Giving it Divine worship. Perhaps they might think as the Papists do,
that after they had Consecrated it, it was transubstantiated too, and ceased to
be wood; the matter and substance of that was gone, and it was thenceforth not
a Block or wood, but really a God, and had power to help and save it is
Worshippers. As the Poet deridingly sings of their Priapus.

Olim truncus eram ficulnus, inutile lignum,
Cum Faber incertus scamnum faceret ne, Priapum
Maluit esse Deum. --
Whence it might say in English.

I some time since a Block of Figtree was,
But now I for a God do firmly pass.
And do not the Papists after the same sort, while that which was as to it is
matter, Corn growing in the field, and after that was reaped, threshed, ground
in the Mill, kneaded in the Trough, and baked in the Oven, some parts of the
same dough or mass being taken and eaten, another part of it is taken and
consecrated by the Priest with some words said over it, and then thenceforth it
is called, taken for, and worshipped as God. The very Person of Immanuel, God
with us; though it be equally in the hand and power of men to dispose of it as
they please, to cast it away, or burn it in the fire, as to the power of
possibility, as the Trunk or stock of the Consecrated Tree was; for it is some
time shut up in a Box, while it may mould. Nay, Friar Aegan in his Recantation
Sermon preached in London April the sixth 1673. having been Confessor General
in the Kingdom of Ireland, and Guardian of the Friory of Monasterioris in the
Province of Lemster, tells us, pa. 6th. That coming to a public house to
refresh himself, he found that a Lewd Priest had pawned the Consecrated Host to
the woman of the house for five and thirty shillings (possibly enough as the
price of his drunkenness, or of some worse prankwith the Hostess) and that he
the said Friar Aegan redeemed it with this remark (as he says) that Christ was
made by him not an Offering for sin, but a Sacrifice for his Lust. See here if
those latter persons are not worse than the former, the Heathen Idolaters. For
they did not either tear their Block in pieces, when they had made him a God,
these tear him with their teeth, as the Lateran Council expressed it, nor did
they use to pawn them, as this Priest pawned what he called his Savior; so as
had not the Friar redeemed him, which they worship as their Redeemer, might
have lain in captivity and bondage, till he had been utterly lost or spoiled.
Oh sottish error and ignorance! Oh but our Saviors words, together with the
Omnipotency of God must be made to bear the burden of all these absurdities.
But why must these words (this is my body) be pressed to so undue and absurd a
service, when many others of like import are lest at liberty therefrom? Did our
Savior call the bread, or that thing he gave his Disciples, God-man, or did he
require them to kneel down and worship it, as these men do? That would have
been to the purpose indeed: but in that he said, take, eat, not take, worship,
this is your God; it may be well apprehended, that they go herein besides his
Warrant, in what they do, and that his words afford no ground for it. Oh but he
said, this is my body, and he is true, and his words are to be believed. Do
these men think then, that where ever our Savior or the Holy Ghost calls one
thing by the name of another to which it has some reference or relation (as is
usual in Sacramental matters) the thing is transubstantiated into the being and
substance of that thing which it is named? I suppose not. For then the cup must
be transubstantiated into the New Testament. For our Saviors words are as
express in the other part of the Sacrament for that, as they are for this they
so grossly understand, and impose upon the understanding of all others; for so
St. Luke and the Apostle Paul expressly render and relate his words, likewise
after supper the Cup, saying, this Cup is the New Testament in my blood, (...),
hic Calix. Not this wine, or this that is in this Cup, but this CUP is the New
Testament. Would the word [Is] and the Omnipotency of God do such a Miracle in
the bread, as to transubstantiate it into the very body of Christ; and will not
the same do a Miracle here, to transubstantiate the Cup into the New Testament.
No, but here they are forced to grant a Figure. Though the Omnipotency of God
is able to make as great a change upon the golden or silver Chalice, as upon
the bread. And I suppose the change is somewhat less. For the New Testament is
somewhat less than God himself, a Covenant or Will made by him with us. And may
not a Divine Writing be as easily hid under the form of a silver Chalice, as
the Christ, God man under the form of bread? And yet here they, notwithstanding
Gods Omnipotency and Christ's express saying, allow a figure in the expressions,
and leave us the substance of the Cup entire, and command not men to worship
that: thinking that by the Cup is meant that in the Cup, though they think (or
would have others so simple as to think) that what is in the Cup, is
transubstantiated into the blood of Christ that was shed for us, and not into
the New Testament; and so that the Disciples drunk the blood of Christ really
and verily out of that Cup, though it was all, as then, in his veins. But there
is no more ground for their imposing the one than the other, the wine more than
the Cup except that it is their pleasure so to do; for both St. Luke and St.
Paul render it so, this Cup is the New Testament in my blood; and they spoke
certainly the words and mind of Christ, as truly as St. Matthew and St. Mark,
who render them, thi^ is the Blood of ^he New Testament, and God is as able to
effect the one as the other; and the one is no less absurd than the other. For
if the wine in the cup or what was so, be now really and substantially blood,
even that blood, that was shed out of Christ's ^^de for us. Must not then the
blood of ^^rist while his body is in Heaven be really and substantially
separated from his body: and so his body in Heaven is a bloodless body, as often
as the Priest Consecrates the Cup, and drinks what is in it: or do they say
that the body is in and with the blood, as they say the blood is in the bread
or body, and therefore that alone is enough to be given to the people. If so,
then flesh, and blood, and bones, and all are in the Chalice too. And no marvel
then that they give not the Cup to the people, if they believe verily that the
flesh and bones of Christ are in it, even the same that was born of the Virgin
Mary, and hung upon the Cross. Nay, it is rather to be marvelled, how the Priest
dare venture upon them all to swallow them down. They might as easily believe,
that the matter of the Cup be it silver or gold, is turned into the New
Testament, and become a real Handwriting of God, though it appear still to our
senses to be a cup, as that the Priest swallows down his throat, or the people
eat very flesh and bones: and the same Miracle and Omnipotency will make the
one as possible as the other. Or that the same thing that is shut and hung up
in the Pix, being a Consecrated Host, is the same numerical body that is
glorified and gloriously appears in Heaven, and also what was eaten by the
people in their receiving and eating what of it was given them. But we may see
how these men straining the words of Christ where they please (as they do also
some expressions of the Ancient Fathers) make the word of God subject to their
wills and pleasures, and where they please they will grant a Figure, and where
they please, they shall be properly and literally understood; yea, and strained
beyond their litteral expression (for Christ said no such thing as, this is
transubstantiated into or is the substance of my very body, as they say) though
the like absurdities following upon the litteral sense of or collection from
it, as would from taking the other expressions literally, makes it necessary
to understand them figuratively and sacramentally in the one place as well as
in the other. It Is true that in this Supper, Christ would have us (and it is
necessary for us) to abstract or withdraw our minds from the consideration of
the bread and wine in their own proper substances, and to fix them only upon
the body and blood of Christ, whereof they are a communion or communication
[(...)] and so to have no more to do with those Elements in our thoughts in a
manner, than as if there were no such matters: only as they may occasion us to
meditate and consider that his flesh is meat indeed, the true bread, and
everlasting nourishment of our Souls: and his blood or the New Testament
confirmed by it. Drink indeed, a most comfortable matter of refreshing for the
Soul, to take into it is believing consideration; and so spiritually and
sacramentally to feed upon his flesh and blood. But to impose upon peoples
Faith, that the things which they see with their eyes to be very bread and
wine, are very Christ, his very flesh and blood, yea God-man, their Savior;
and to cause them to worship them, is a very gross departure from and abuse of
Christ's institution, and of his command for our observation of it. And why may
they not as well impose upon men's faith, that St. Peter after he Confessed
Christ, was transubstantiated into a hard stone, and his flesh, blood, and
bones; yea his Soul, and body, and all was metamorphiz'd into a Rock. For our
Savior said unto him, Tues Petrus, in the Syriac [Cephas] which in our English
Language signifies a stone, Mat. 16.18. with Jo. 1.42. here is Christ's
assertion as plainly of Peter as there, of the bread. And if the word [Est, is]
imply the substantial change of the bread in the one, why may not the word [Es,
thou art] imply the substantial change of Simon Bar-Jonah in the other? And why
may it not be as rationally believed, that his flesh, and bones, yea Soul and
body were immediately and substantially turned into stone, living stone, as
that the bread was changed into the body of Christ substantially; seeing the
Omnipotency of God was as well able to do the one as the other. And that is
pleaded as sufficient for our Faith to believe this. And so St. Peter was a
living walking Stone, that had not the substance of either flesh, or blood, or
bones in him, though the appearance of them all to the senses. Yea, and why may
it not be as well imposed upon men's Faith, that Christ himself is so changed in
his substance into stone too. For he is called (...), the living stone, 1 Pet.
2.4. and that the Altar, that Jacob built at Shechem was transubstantiated into
the Essence of God, because Jacob Consecrating it called it El Elohe, Israel,
God, the God of Israel, Genesis 33.20. Surely they are strangely infatuated or
obstinately wilful, that cannot or will not see the absurdity of this Doctrine
of theirs, so contrary both to sense and reason, and so void of any solid
ground for it in the Holy Scriptures.

Object. Oh but they will say, they are the Church, and their judgment is to be
taken as the infallible truth, and therefore if they did assert the like
changes and transubstantiations in other things, then they were to be believed
too. For our Faith is to be resolved into their sayings, as our Savior tells
us, that, they that hear not the Church, are to be accounted as Heathens and
Publicans.

Ans. But to that it is said and showed before, that they are not the Church
Catholic, but only a part of the Church, and a very corrupt part too. To
which I add, that I find it enjoined to us, that we should hear Christ, the
great Prophet of God, in all things which he shall say unto us, but I find it
no where enjoined us, that we should hear the Church in all that she shall say
unto us. And that the Scripture here quoted by them to serve their design, is
perverted by them from it is true and genuine intent rnd scope. For our Savior
did not there intend nor speak any thing, as signifying an intent to teach us
to build our Faith or belief of the Scripture-sayings, or the Exposition of the
Scripture, upon the Authority of the Church, or it is sayings, much less of any
uppermost party, that unduely challenge to themselves the title and appellation
of the whole Church, much less the Church of Rome. But his discourse is
evidently about offenses, given by any sinning Brother, which being evident in
themselves, might by any particular person against whom they were committed, be
reprehended and faulted, and in case the party offending would not hear a
private admonition, then it should be reproved by the same person again, taking
one or two persons as witnesses with him, who might also join in reproving or
admonishing him. And if still he harden his heart, and retain his offensive or
evil way or practice, then they should declare it to the Church, who might all
testify their dislike, or give him a joint admonition of the same fault. And
if he hear not them, in such joint admonition given them by the Church, then
the offended Brother might disclaim communion with him, and leave him as no
more to be owned by him than an Heathen man or a Publican. Here is nothing of
the Church's giving the object of faith to be believed, or of her being to be
heard in whatsoever she shall say, though never so contrary to sense or reason,
or to the Scripture sayings, or to the commands of God and Christ; but of the
Chuch's admonishing an offending Brother, who being admonished by her ought to
hear the Church therein. But that is in no other thing, than in what he ought to
have heard first the offended Brother in, upon his own private admonition; or
the offended Brother with one or two joining with him, upon his slighting the
admonition given by the offended Brother alone. But surely no private Brother,
nor any one or two with him is to be heard in whatever he or they may give out
for truth or matter of faith whether it agree with the Scriptures, and the
commands of God and Christ or not; or put absurd expositions upon the
Scriptures, that may be confuted by common sense. And therefore neither speaks
it there of any such authority given to the Church to give such interpretation,
or imposition laid upon any to receive such an interpretation given by any
under that name. Nor indeed by the Church can be meant there the Catholic
Church all over the World, much less is it tied up to the Church of Rome,
except in it is proper Jurisdiction: but it is meant evidently of the particular
society or congregation or Church, to which such an offending Brother belongs.
For it is such a Church as any offended Brother, his private admonition being
rejected, may inform of the offense, and that upon the information given, may
also admonish the offender, which can neither be done to or by the Catholic
Church in it is Catholic and extensive capacity, no nor yet to or by the
Church of Rome; as to the case of every or any offender to whom this rule
appertains (as to what is observable in case of scandal and offense) that live
in places remote from Rome and her Jurisdiction. Surely our Savior no where
signifies that persons living in Judaea or Galilee should go or send up
information against an offending Brother as far as Rome. Nor find we that in
any dissentions in the Churches, any of the Apostles left any such orders in
any of their Epistles; however Rome may have challenged or desired such homage
and honor to be done to her, and has put men upon such unreasonable and
chargeable burdens, since the times of her usurpations upon the World. Her
challenging that authority and homage to be done to her, is but what the false
Prophets of the Church of Israel, calling themselves the Church or holy City,
were wont to do. And therefore being forewarned by the Apostles (even by St.
Peter from whom the Pope pretends to derive his power) that there should be
false Teachers in the Christian Church or Churches now, that would imitate and
do like those false Prophets, we are concerned to stand upon our watch, and
when we discern any party taking that course, and walking in their steps, not
to give heed to them. The Apostle Peter tells us, that as there were false
Prophets formerly among the people, so there would be false Teachers among the
Christian People, that would bring in damnable Heresies going beside the
Scriptures, for that properly the word translated privily, with reference to
what was said before, imports: He had commended them before for taking heed to
the sure word of Prophecy, as to a Light shining in a dark place; even the
Prophets that came in old time by the will of God: wherein the holy Men of God
spoke as they were moved or carried by the Holy Ghost, the Scriptures of the
Prophets. Now these false Teachers going besides or contrary to them, would
bring in Heresies of damnation, denying the Lord that bought them. For (...) is
introducent, they shall bring in; and (...) is often either contra or praeter,
against or besides; as (...), i^ contrary to the Law, Act. 18.13. and (...) is
either contray to or besides what we have preached, and (...), is contray to or
besides what ye received, or rather to what ye have otherwise received namely
than as the false Apostles taught them, Gal. 1.8, 9. And so the sense is, that
these false Teachers should or would bring in damnable Doctrines or Heresies
contrary to or besides (that is differing from) the forementioned Scriptures,
swarving from or opposing their sayings. And such we find) and have mentioned
some of them, and we may instance in more) brought in and maintained by the
Papists. Now the false Prophets of old among the people, to whom these false
Teachers are compared, and made to answer (as the words (...), even as there
shall also be among you false Teachers, imply) were oftentimes the greatest and
Prevailing party of the Prophets among the people; such as the generality, even
the Kings, Princes, and multitude of the people usually followed, as appears in
Isa. 9.15, 16. and 29.9, 10, 11. Jer. 5.31. and 14.13. and 23.9, 30, 31, 32.
and 26.8, 11. Lam. 2.14. and 4.13. Ezekiel. 13. and 22.25, 28. Zeph. 3.4. And
thence it was that the true Prophets were evil spoken of and traduced, yea,
Persecuted and slain by them; as if they had been false Prophets and seducers,
as is to be seen in Jer. 2.30. and 20.2. and 29.26, 27. and 37.13, 14, 15, 19,
38.4, 6. Mat. 23.29, 30, 31, 37. Act. 7.52. Even as here the false Teachers are
such, and so received as that the (...), the multitude, or many it is said shall
follow their pernicious ways, so as the way of truth which is agreeable to the
Scriptures of the Prophets, and the commandments of the Apostles, shall be evil
spoken of, reproached and cast out as Heresy; as the Church of Rome and it is
Teachers cast out the commands and sayings of Christ and the Scriptures in many
things, and the way that is agreeable thereto, accounting it Heresy, and them
that stick thereto Heretics. Now it was the way of the false Prophets whom
these false Teachers, which in these last days men have heaped up or multiplied
by heaps to themselves (that is in abundance, as the Apostle Paul prophesied
they would do, 2 Timothy 4.3.) do imitate; that they used to say that they were
the persons that had the Law with them; and that therefore were to be listened
to and followed, as those to whom the Interpretation of it were committed, and
from whom it was to be received, and that the true Prophets (who clave to God
and his word indeed) were not to be hearkened to, but persecuted and punished
for contradicting them. That this was the way of those false Prophets, is
evident in that they said, we are wise, and the Law of the Lord is with us,
Jer. 8.8. Just thus say the Church of Rome and it is Teachers, we are the wise
men, we have the Law and Scriptures with us, we are the true Interpreters of
it, and ye must take it from our mouths. But the Prophets of God reproved those
false Prophets and the people as joined with and led by them, saying how say ye
we are wise and the Law of the Lord is with us -- the wise men are ashamed --
for lo they have rejected the word of the Lord, and what wisdom is there in
them? Even they that said they were wise, and that the Law of the Lord was with
them had in truth rejected the word of the Lord, and therefore were destitute
of true wisdom, and dealt falsely from the Prophet to the Priest, verse. 9, 10.
Even so the Church of Rome and it is Teachers reject the word of the Lord, as is
evident in the instances we have given, and yet they say the Law, the
Scriptures and it is Exposition are with (that is, belong unto) them. They are
they from whom men must receive it, and upon whom they must depend for it. Yea,
they do as the false Church in Isa. 48.1, 2. is said to have done; who make
mention of the name of the Lord, but not in truth nor in righteousness; though
they called themselves of the holy City, that is in effect, the holy Catholic
Church. The like is timated of them in Jer. 18.18. where the persecutors of the
Lord's Prophets that were such in truth, yet said of themselves, come let us
devise devices against Jeremiah, and add, as if they had thence authority to do
so, for the Law shall not perish from the Priest, nor counsel from the wise,
nor the word from the Prophet. Now when we see or may see by the Scriptures of
truth, and the testimony of the Holy Spirit in them, that there should be false
Teachers among the Christians answerable to the false Prophets among the Jews,
that would bring in Doctrines swarving from the Scriptures; and find that the
Papists and their Teachers evidently do so, their challenge of authority to be
the sole Expounders of the Scriptures should nothing move us, while we see that
they therein walk in the steps of the false Prophets, especially seeing also
that they challenge an authority which the Holy Ghost has not given them, nor
directed his followers any where unto. For the Holy Ghost himself who led the
Apostles into all truth, Joh. 16.13. does not in any Scripture testify to us
of Rome or the Roman Church, that we should derive our Faith from her, or
resolve it into her or her Doctors, more than into any other Church. The
Apostle Peter whose authority they pretend to have committed to them (but
without any evidence of the holy Scriptures) and whose Successors they tell us
their Popes or Bishops are) could not leave more authority to them than he had
exercised himself. Now we find him expressly preferring the authority of the
Scriptures before his own saying or testimony as to the resolution of other
men's Faith. Yea, he as well as other Apostles proved his sayings by the holy
Scriptures, as is evident in his Epistles, 1 Pet. 2.6, 7. and 3.10, 11, 12. and
obtruded nothing upon men on his own authority barely, as the Popes presume to
do. He calls the word of Prophesy a more sure word, than what he related of his
own knowledge, 2 Pet. 1.16, 17, 18, 19. and instead of directing the Believers
after his death to the Church of Rome and her Bishops (which surely he would
and ought to have done had he known of any power given of Christ to her or to
them, for resolving men's doubts, and determining their Faith, and exercising a
dominion over men's consciences, more than to other Churches or their Bishops)
yea, or directing them to himself more than to the rest of the Apostles, when
he forewarned them of false Teachers and Scoffers that would come in the last
days: He stirs up the Believers minds to remember the words of the Prophets,
and the Commandments of the Apostles of our Lord and Savior. He says not his
own Commands, or his rather than of the other Apostles, but indefinitely of the
Apostles putting in himself with them as one of the same rank, and of no
superior rank or authority among or over them, much less does he say that we
should after his death be take our selves to the Church or Bishop of Rome for
our direction, guidance, and preservation from the Error of the wicked, but
directs us to the Scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles, the things spoken
and commanded in and by them. He thought not of the Lord Peter, or the Lord
Pope; nor signified that the rest of the Apostles stood in relation more than
himself to any man as their Lord, but only to him who is the Savior. Yea, and
the Lord Jesus himself when afterward he appeared to John in the Isle of
Patmos, and gave him visions and revelations of the things that should come to
pass in the world, and unto the Churches, directed him not to bid us go to Rome
for resolution of our hearts in the matters of God, and in what concerns our
preservation in his truth; but he in his several Epistles to the Churches bids,
Let him that has an ear hear what the Spirit says to the Churches. He bids
not, That he that has an ear should hear the Churches simply, no, nor yet what
the Spirit says in the Churches; much less says he, Let him that has an ear
hear what the Church of Rome says, or, what her Bishop as an heavenly Oracle,
or the Spirit, as either in it or him, as Infallibly tied to his Chair, should
dictate to us. And yet (which is very considerable) this Book of the
Revelations, according to the most authentic testimonies of Antiquity, was
written after the Deaths of all the other Apostles, and its probable at least,
that he lived not long after it himself who was the Penman thereof; and
therefore if there were any judge or orderer of men's faith infallible to be
looked to by all Churches, besides the holy Scriptures of the Prophets and
Apostles, or any Infallible Interpreter of them above the rest to be taken heed
to, it had been the proper place and time surely for Christ the faithful and
true witness of God, the Amen, the firm and sure friend and Pastor of his
Church, to have signified who it is, and directed the Church, and every one
that has an ear to hear, and hearken to him, but neither when he was asked, or
there was a strife among the Apostles who of them should be the greatest; did
he tell them Peter should be their Prince and chief among them, nor did he
direct them here to any Successor of his at Rome or elsewhere, as an infallible
Guide and Head to them: no, there is no other Director as to matters of Faith
and Worship, directed to of God by his Holy Spirit in any Scripture as our
absolute and infallible Guide, but only the Spirit himself as speaking in and
by the Scriptures to the Churches, what the Scripture says, being called the
saying of the Holy Ghost or Spirit, as is to be seen, Heb. 3.7. and 10.15. Act.
28.25. And surely they are guilty of horrible Idolatry that prefer the
Testimony, Word, or Determination of any person or persons, Church or Bishop,
before or above; yea, or but as equal with the testimony of the Holy Ghost, to
cast by his sayings or commands, to listen to, and be ruled by men, is indeed
to have the fear of God taught us by men's precepts, and in vain to honor God,
or worship him, which was the fault of the Jewish Church, reproved by the Holy
Ghost in the Prophet Isaiah, for which also he threatened to give up their wise
and prudent men, on whom the people leaned, to an infatuation of their
understandings, Isa. 29.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. and the fault charged by our
Savior on the Scribes and Pharisees, and the Jewish Church, as depending on
them, Math. 15.1, 3, 7, 8, 9. Mark 7.6, 7. to verse. 13. and it will be as great
or a greater evil in us, than in them if we make our selves guilty of it, in as
much as God having now spoken to us by his only begotten Son, has declared his
Name more plainly and expressly than he had done in former ages; and therefore
greater heed and acquiescence in his words and sayings, is expected from us;
for us then to forsake the fountain of Living waters, (which is Christ speaking
in his Servants, the Apostles and Prophets in the Scriptures) to dig up
Cisterns, broken Cisterns, (as all men with their inventions and decrees, and
all their authority and power that are not his, are) would be a more
astonishable madness, than what of that nature was practiced under Moses and
the Prophets by the Church of Israel, Jer. 2.12, 13. Our Savior in the
Relation of the Rich man, and Lazarus introduces Abraham, directing the Rich
man's five brethren to Moses and the Prophets, and not to the Jewish Sanhedrim
or High Priest; or any other persons claiming an infallible authority distinct
from them (though they might have had more color by far for claiming such a
thing, either from that in Deuteronomy. 17.8.11.13. appointing men in case of doubt or
controversy to stick to, and observe the determinations of the High Priest, or
chief Ruler of the People; or from that promise in Isa. 59.21. where God
promises to put his Spirit upon Zion, or some persons in it, and his words
into their mouth, so as to continue it from generation to generation, than any
the Pope or the Church of Rome can show for their claim, yet I say Abraham
directs them to no such person or persons, but only to Moses and the Prophets)
and if he so directed them then, surely now that we have Christ and his
Apostles also added as a compleatment of the revelation of Gods mind and will,
and as infallible Interpreters of Moses and the Prophets, it behooves us to take
heed to them, as speaking in their words and writings, and not to neglect or
refuse them under pretense of insufficiency in them to direct us now aright,
without some other infallible Guide that he no where directs us to, to
determine us. And that Rome, or her Head the Pope, is not Infallible in her
doctrine of Transubstantiation (the thing last insisted on) is evident from
hence, that Gelasius one of their Popes or Bishops, has taught the Church that
the bread in the Sacrament is not naturu or substantia mutatus, changed in its
nature or substance: and others of them have taught and determined that it is
substantially changed, so as the flesh of Christ it is that is eaten and torn
with the Teeth of the Communicants, as in the Luteran Council was defined, and
in contradictories one part must needs be false, which things duly considered,
may imbolden us to reject the Pleas and pretense of that Church as more
groundless Usurpations and Inchroachments, by which they pervert men from the
right ways of God, which our Lord Jesus has delivered to us.

Nay, our Lord Jesus in the Book of the Revelations, instead of directing us to
Rome, does clearly call us off from it, and has revealed that to us concerning
her, which being taken heed to by us, will admonish us to flee from her, for by
the concurrent consent of Interpreters, as led to it by the Scripture it self,
compared with the state and condition of Rome: it is Rome deciphered in that
Book, not by the Name of Jerusalem, the beloved City of God, in the light
whereof the Nations of the saved should walk, but by the name of Babylon, the
Enemy of Jerusalem, and her Inhabitants, and the subject of the deepest died
sins, and heaviest judgments mentioned in that Book. Yea, the Papist writers
themselves are also forced to confess the truth hereof it is so palpable and
evident, (yea, rather than they will not prove St. Peter to have been at Rome,
Babylon shall signify Rome too in his 1. Epistle 5.13.) surely she was the
City that then ruled over the Kings of the Earth, and was built upon seven
Hills or Mountains, and that is the City called Babylon, Rev. 17.9, 18. and its
evident that she ruled over the Kings of the Earth, not only in her Pagan, but
also as much or more in her Papal State, wherein their Popes or Bishops have
exacted Homage of them, made them kiss their Toes, hold their Stirrups, wait at
their Doors, and do things far below their Majesty and Grandeur in subjection
to them. Now in all that Book no good is spoken of Babylon, nor any direction
is given to Gods people, the followers of the Lamb to resort to her for any
thing, but much is spoken of its Wickedness, Whoredom, Idolatry, Bloodiness,
while it remains, and of its woe and misery irreparable in its fall, as that
that shall for ever Perish, with express and vehement command to Gods people
that are in her, to come out of her, lest pertaking with her in her sins, they
should also partake with her in her Plagues, Rev. 18.4. which one consideration
also quite overthrows that corrupt interpretation that would confine what is
said of her to her Heathen state only, as the Papists to excuse themselves do,
or rather to blind themselves from seeing their own guilt; for if it were so
then, she should have found her not as a City or Harlot destroyed for ever; but
by a glorious Metamorphosis or dispossession of the Spirit of Whoredom, and
Resurrection from her falls in Heathenism, changed into the holy City, or the
Lambs Wife, whereas there is not the least intimation of any such thing, but a
vehement assertion of her sinking like a mighty stone in the waters, never to
rise again, Rev. 18.21. whence it is evident, (which I shall mention as a
farther distinct charge, and a farther instance not only of her fallibility,
but also that she is fallen foully already in that it is thereby evident) That

7. She is guilty of Idolatry, for that is it that in Scripture is represented
by Whoredom; and she is called the great WHORE, and the Mother of Harlots, and
abominations of the earth. And she is certainly as great a WHORE from Christ,
as ever the old Babylon, or the old Pagan Rome was, and more truly so also,
being not so espoused to Christ in her Pagan state as since she turned
Christian. Indeed she is a Mystical WHORE, corrupted from the purity of the
Faith and Worship of God in Christ, yet giving out herself to be a Queen and
Lady, the Queen or Darling of Heaven, the only Catholic and Infallible
Church. In her Pagan state she was more openly and grossly a Harlot, a gross
Idolatress, and there was not Mystery writ on her forehead; but now as very and
as arrant an Harlot or Idolatress as then, but more spiritually such, and under
finer pretenses. That we may make good this charge against her, let us first
inquire and take notice what Idolatry is in the Scripture language. For as it
is no asking a man's partner whether he be a Thief, so neither will the
Adultress confess her self to be such a one, but she eats and wipeth her
mouth, and says I have done no wickedness, Prove. 30.20. Now Idolatry in the
Scripture language is with reference to the worship of God what Fornication or
Adultery is among men; therefore it is often compared to and illustrated by the
practices of Whores and Harlots, as in Jer. 2. and 3. Ezekiel. 16. and 23. and so
as she is a Whore that takes into the bed of love with her, and prostitutes
herself to any man that is not her husband espoused and married to her, whether
it be her servant, friend, or a stranger; so he is an Idolater that falls down,
and gives religious worship to any beside the true God, whether it be with the
heart-worship only, or whether also or only with the body. In the former way
Covetousness is Idolatry, because it is a putting riches in the place of God, as
to inward estimation of, affection to, confidence in them, Ephe. 5.5. Coll.
3.5. Some also make their Belly their God, and commit Idolatry therewith, while
they prefer their Belly before God and his favor, and love in Christ, or his
word and Spirit directing us to worship him, and walk with him rightly in and
by Christ, Phil. 3.19. whether by the Belly be meant the grosser appetites and
brutish sensual lusts in gluttony, drunkenness, intemperance, unchastity and
the like; or else their own wisdom, understanding and will, the Belly being
often used to signify and put for the inward man or heart, and what is
therein, as in Job 32.18, 19. Joh. 7.38. Job 15.2, 35. and 20.15, 20. Pro.
18.8. and 26.22. Now that the Church of Rome is guilty of Idolatry in those or
some of those ways of it, what can be more evident. For her covetousness is
insatiable grasping or gaping after Crowns, and Scepters, Kingdoms, and
Dominions, so (as was said of the Caldaean Babylon) that she enlarges her
desire as Hell, and is as Death, and cannot be satisfied, but gathers to her
all Nations, and heaps up to her (as far as she can) all people, Habak. 2.5.
and this that she might be enriched with their worldly riches and treasures. So
as it may be said of her, that she is abundant in treasures, and in the measure
of her covetousness, Jer. 50.13. Yea, and (was said sometime of Jeboiakim in
Jer. 22.17.) that her eyes and her heart is not but for her covetousness, and
to shed innocent blood. Thence the Proverb, omnia Romae venalia, that all
things may be sold at Rome for money; and the very Letters of her name are the
Initials of Radix Omnium Malorum Avaritia. And as for her Voluptuousness,
Uncleanness, Sodomy, and Filthiness, their Church and City is too notoriously
full of such things, witness the lives and doings of diverse of their Popes and
Bishops, and their taking money for the open maintenance of Stews and
Brothelhouses, and for her preferring her wisdom, will, and inventions before
the word and appointments of God and Christ. What is said before may in part
give evidence. So that in these things she is a notorious Idolatress, though as
if we ask any of the covetous, Epicures, or Self-conceited Persons, whether
they be Idolaters, they will deny it stiffly, and if we charge them therewith
they will be angry; so it is with Rome and her Church also. But again, the
giving external religious undue adoration to any thing or person that is not
God, is Idolatry, as is evident from the Scriptures. For so the falling down to
the Molten Calf and worshipping or adoring it, is called Idolatry in 1 Cor.
10.7. though it was professedly in honor of Jehovah, Exodus 32.5. so also was
the falling down to the Stock and worshipping it in Isa. 44.15. And God in the
second Commandment forbids both the making to our selves any graven or carved
thing [(...)] or the likeness of any thing [(...)] in Heaven above or in the
Earth beneath, etc. so as to fall down to and worship it. Yea, in the Greek it
is (...), thou shall not bow down to it, neither shall thou worship it, either
of them, viz. either to bow down to it, or worship it, is Idolatry, and
forbidden to any similitude made any way, either by carving, graving, painting,
or the like by men. And when the holy man John fell down to the Angel that
showed him the things revealed to him in the Revelations, he was twice forbid
to do it, and bid to worship God, as implying that the worshipping or bowing
down to the Angel was a derogating from and a sin against the Commandment that
bids us to worship God He might not it seems join the worship of an Angel to or
with the worship of God. Nor is it said that he fell down [(...)] but only
(...), to kneel down to or adore him. Yet it was a thing forbidden him as
injurious to God and his worship, as intrenching upon his prerogative therein,
and so certainly reducible to the sin of Idolatry; even as for a married woman
to admit to bed to her some of her servants, though the chief about her
husband, yea, though they be his familiar Friends, it would be Adultery as
really as if she should admit mere strangers or enemies to him. Nor would it be
an acceptable plea to him that she showed therein the greater honor and humble
respect to him that she loved his friends and servants so well for his sake as
to admit them to bed with her also, and judged her self too low for his
fellowship, and therefore thought it meeter to honor him after that manner, by
contenting her self, at least sometimes, with them; hoping that way to make
them her greater friends to him from whom alone she expects all her
maintenance, though by their mediation she hoped to have more of it and much
better. Nor would a King take it well that some Homage proper to himself, in
which the kingly power is ascribed to him, should be given out of pretended
respect to him, to some of his Nobles or Courtiers also. Now that the Church of
Rome is grossly guilty of the giving this solemn religious prostration and
adoration to those that are not God, is so openly and evidently true, that
nothing can be more true. For what do they in worshipping God do unto him that
they do not to the Virgin Mary, or to some other Creatures? Certain it is that
neither the Virgin Mary, nor any of the deceased Apostles or Martyrs, or holy
Men, are God; much less the Images, Pictures, or Statues of any of them; nor
the Cross, or the Picture, or Image of it, no, nor the Picture or Image of
Christ himself. Nor is the Bread in the Sacrament God, for that may be shut up
in a Pix or Box, so as God cannot be. Yet to all these things and diverse more
they fall down and worship them with that kind of worship forbidden in the
words [(...), thou shall not fall down to them; (...), worship God] Yea, what
worship the Idolaters used to perform to their Idols, graven Images, or Stock
of a tree made a God to them, that they perform to others that are not God;
that is, they fall down and pray to them to do such things for them, as only
God can do, only they say not to or of them perhaps that they are their Gods.
Nor will their distinction of (...) and (...) excuse them; for both are
forbidden to any but God in a religious way of worship or adoration. Therefore
the Heathens are faulted for serving those things that by nature are not God,
Gal. 4.8. Where the Apostle says, not (...) but (...); ye served or performed
(...) to those things that by nature are not God. They were no doubt guilty
therein of Idolatry; though it is expressed by that kind of worship which the
Papists by their distinction allow themselves to give to what by nature is not
God. As none of those things before mentioned are by nature God. None of them
can say that either Angels or glorified Saints, much less their Statues or
Images are by nature God, by the Apostles description of Idolatry, then in
which he represents it as a giving (...) to or serving religiously any thing
that by nature is not God, they are concluded to be Idolaters. Yea, the words
in the second Commandment (...) are properly, thou shall not bow down to them.
nor shall thou serve them. For [(...)] is properly (...), to serve. Yea, it may
be observed that what the Papists do to the things that by nature are not God,
is the same that our Savior calls (...). For they do (...) fall down to and
adore, or kiss those things before mentioned or some of them. Now when the
Devil tempted Christ to do that to him, (...), or as it is in Luke 4 7. (...)
falling down if thou will worship or prostrate thy self to or before me (which
is what the Papists cannot deny but they give to the things above mentioned,
they fall down to and kneel to or before them in their acts of religious
worship) our Savior repelling him with this, (...), plainly implies that, that
that they call (...), a Divine worship to be given to God alone, is contained
therein. That the Roman Church then are Idolaters is evident, for they worship
and serve those that are not God, nor allowed of God to be worshipped, or
religiously adored and served by us. Nay, I may say too truly that God has
given them (as was said of his dealing with Israel formerly for their neglects
of God, and lifting up themselves in pride against him) to worship the Host of
Heaven, Act. 7.42. only this difference there is, that the Israelites
worshipped the Visible Host, the Sun, Moon, and Stars, but these the Invisible
Host, that is, the Saints, Angels, and Glorified Persons; who as truly are the
Host of Heaven and not the God of Heaven, as the other was, though not so
Visible: and the worship of them as truly and really Idolatry, as the worship
of the Visible. Yea, they worship those of whom there is less certainty that
they are in Heaven, and so of whom there is less certainty that they are any
way beneficial to men in the least, than there is of the Visible Stars, as
Thomas Becket, St. Francis, Ignatius Loyola, and others, that probably might be
no better Saints than Annas or Caiphas or some of our QVAKERS.

That they give religious adoration to them that are not by nature God and to
their Images too, is too gross to be denied; and what kind of worship they give
may be discerned in these ensuing instances that I shall here set down. First
in their Devotions to the Virgin Mary, who I am sure is not by nature God. To
her they pray, and of her they ask such grants, as only proper to God and
Christ to give; and to her they ascribe most blasphemously the same things that
are ascribed to God. As is to be seen in the ensuing instances among many
others. Even St. Barnards devotions joining the Virgin Mary with Jesus Christ
are too full of this Idolatry, witness these following expressions.

Audi precor O plena gratia
Peccatoris hujus suspiria,
Et pro tua misericordia
Deo meo me reconcilia,
Matter bona.
And again Tibi Matter fac acceptabilem
Peccatoris hanc vocem flebilem,
Read mihi Deum placabilem,
Ne se praestet inexorabilem
Quem offendi.


I english it thus. Hear I pray O thou full of grace
This sinners sighs in piteous case,
And for thy mercy me again restore
Into favor with my God whom I adore,
O good Mother.
Make acceptable O Mother to thee
The wailing voice of the sinful me,
Make God with me to be appeasable,
That he may not be one inexorable,
Whom I have offended.
And yet he is modest in comparison of some others who invoke Her by such
titles, as Reparatrix and Salvatrix desperantis animae,
Irroratrix and Largitrix spiritualis gratiae.
The Repairess and the Savioress of Souls in despair,
The Bedewer with and Conferrer of graces that spiritual are.
Another accosts her thus, peccatorum Consolatrix, infirmorum Curatrix,
errantium Revocatrix, Justorum Confirmatrix, desolatorum spes and auxiliatrix
atque mea promptissima Adjutrix; that is, the female Comforter of sinners,
Healer of the weak, caller back of those that wander, Confirmer of the Just,
the hope and helper of the desolate, and says the Devotionist, my most ready
Helper. She is addressed to and prayed to also by the names of Excelsa Domina,
Salvatrix saeculi, Regina Gentium, etc. the high Lady, the Savioress of the
World, the Queen of the Nations. Which what are they but highly Idolatrous
expressions contrary to him that said, thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and
him only shall thou serve. But besides these, the very expressions of the
Scripture directed and attributed therein to God himself, are applied to her,
as may be seen in the Mary's Psalter. So from the thirtieth (or according to
our division of them; the one and thirtieth) Psalm they thus say to her. In te
Domina speravi non confundar inaeternum, in gratiam tuam suscipe me, inclina ad
me aurem tuam, and in maerore meo laetifica me. Tu es fortitudo mea, and
refugium meum, consolatio mea, and protectio mea; ad te clamavi cum
tribularetur c^r meum. In manus tuas Dom na commendo spiritum meum, meam totam
vitam, diem ultimum, that is, in thee O Lady have I put my trust, let me not be
confounded for ever, receive me into thy favor, incline thine ear to me, and
in my mourning comfort me. Thou art my strenght, my refuge, my consolation and
my protection; unto thee have I cried when my heart was troubled. Into thy
hands, O Lady, do I commend my spirit, my whole life, my last day. See here, is
there not herein beside the outward worship of the body, and the bodily act of
invocation; a profession of the most inward worship proper unto God, and most
incommunicably to be reserved unto him? Is there not here then gross Idolatry
and Blasphemy, ascribing to a creature that that is peculiar unto God. Of the
like sort is that in Psalm. 71. Resperge Domina cor meum dulcedine tua, etc.
Besprinkle my heart, O Lady, with thy sweetness, make me to forget the miseries
of this life, stir up everlasting desires in my soul, and inebriate, or make
drunk, my mind with the joys of Paradise; and in Psa. 46 alias the 47 thus,
Omnes Gentes plaudite manibus, psallite Jubilo Virginis gloriosae, quoniam ipsa
est porta vitae, Janua salutis, and Via nostrae reconciliationis, spes
paenitentium, solamen lugentium, pax beata cordium atque salus, etc. that is, o
clap your hands all ye Nations, sing with a joyful voice to the glorious
Virgin, because She is the Gate of Life, the Door of salvation, and the Way of
our Reconciliation, the Hope of those that repent, the Comfort of those that
mourn, the blessed peace and safety of hearts, etc. with reference to Psalm. 18.
it is also said, Religiosi omnes honorate illam, quia ipsa est Adjutrix vestra,
and specialis Advocata. Esto refrigerium nostrum gloriosa Matter, quia Tues
totius Religionis mirabile firmamentum, etc. that is, All ye Religious men (or
Cloysterers) honor ye Her, because She is your helper and special Advocate. Be
thou our refreshing, O glorious Mother of Christ, for thou art the marvelous
foundation, or establishment, of all Religion; upon Psalm. 20. Exaudi Domina,
succurre Animae cum deseruerit corpus suum, mitte Angelum in occursum ejus per
quem ab hostibus defendatur, sentiat in paenis refrigerium tuum, and concede
locum inter Electos Dei, that is, Hear O Lady, succor my soul when it shall
leave it is body, send an Angel to meet it, by whom it may be defended from it is
enemies, let it feel thy refreshing in the pains of Purgatory, and give it a
place among the Elect of God. And if this do not sufficiently show their guilt
of Idolatry, I shall add a passage or two that will show it with greater
Blasphemy, as when they say in Psalm. 34. Quia Domina humillima fuisti, Verbum
Increatum ex te carnem suscipere coegisti, that is, Because thou, O Lady, wast
most humble, thou did constrain or compel the Increated Word to take flesh of
Thee, and in Psalm. 36. Matter Dei, inclina vultum Dei super nos, coge illum
peccatoribus misereri. Mother of God, incline the countenance of God toward
us, compel him to be merciful to sinners. But enough of this blasphemous
Idolatry with her. Yet all this and much more is to be found in that Psalter of
the blessed Virgin, said to be made by their Seraphical Doctor St. Bonaventure,
Bishop of St. Albans, and one of the Cardinals of the holy (they might better
have said unholy) Church of Rome. And their Primer made for their children
after the use of Salisbury printed with a privilege according to the Kings and
Queens Majesty's Letters in the reign of Queen Mary is of like complexion with
that Psalter, as is to be seen in Fox Martyro. volum. 3. pa. 273. witness these
among other passages.

Holy Mary, -- So comfort us in our Desolation,
That by thy prayer and special Mediation
We may enjoy the reward of the Heavenly reign, etc.
And again, The dolorous passion of Gods sweet Mother
Bring us to the Bliss of Almighty God the Father.
Again, O Thou meek Mother have mercy therefore
On Wretches for whom thou had these pains all
Seeing thy Son that Vine-cluster pressed sore,
And from the pestilence of death eternal
Keep us by voiding the Fiend Infernal.
And join us with them that rewarded be
With eternal Life seeing the Deity.
Nor only with Her do they commit this Idolatry, but with others also both
Apostles and others of less worth, if not evil persons, as may appear from the
same Primer. Whence they teach their Children to be such in Idolatry betimes;
teaching them not only to say, O Lord defend us always through the continual
succors of St. John Baptist; or with reference to the Apostles Peter and Paul,
Hear us mercifully, and grant that through the merits of them both, we may
obtain the glory everlasting; but also with respect to Thomas Archbishop of
Canterbury, murdered by occasion of contempt against the then King, this is
said.

By the blood of Thomas which He for thee did spend,
Make us (Christ) to climb whither Thomas did ascend.
O Blasphemy! And with respect to St. Nicholas, O God which have glorified
blessed Nicholas, thy holy Bishop, with innumerable miracles, grant we beseech
thee that by his merits and prayers, we may be delivered from the fire of Hell.
To these I shall add some passages that Dr. Moor has mentioned in his Antidote
against Idolatry giving that in English, that He has therein set down in
Latin only. Being pieces of Devotion publicly read or sung with Stentorian
voices, as he phrases it, in their very Churches; as to St. Cosmas and St.
Damian two Quondam Physicians, they thus sing.

O Medici piissimi
Qui meritis clarissimi
In Coelis refulgetis.
A peste, clade corporum
Praeservetis, and operum
Moribus ne langueamus.
Nec moriamur spiritu,
Sed Animae ab olitu
Velociter surgamus,
Et vivamus in gratia,
Ad sacra Caeli palatia
Donec regrediamur.
O Physicians most pious
Who in merits being famous
Brightly in the Heavens do shine.
Keep us from pestilence noisome,
The bodies death; and also from
Bad manners, lest in them we pine.
Neither let us in spirit die,
But from Souls death hastily
Let us rise again.
And that we may live in grace
Till to Heavens sacred Palace
We return to reign.
St. Francis they bespeak to this purpose.

Sancte Francisce propere veni. Pater accelera ad populum qui premitur and
teritur sub onere, palea, luto, latere, and sepultos Aegyptio sub sabulo nos
libera carnis extincto vitio. Holy Francis come apace, hasten Father to the
people pressed and worn out under their burden, the Chaff, the Dirt, the
Bricks. Free us that are buried under the Egyptian sand (perhaps he may mean of
Popish Superstition) the corruption of the flesh being extinguished. St. Andrew
they court thus.

Tam nos foveto languidos,
Curamque nostri suscipe,
Quo per Crucis victoriam
Caeli petamus gratiam.
Cherish us now who do languish,
Take care of us in our anguish,
That by the Cross's victory
We may get Heavens favor high.
St. Nicholas to this purpose.

Ergo pie nos exaudi
Assistentes tuae laudi,
Ne subdamur hostis fraudi
Nobis fer auxilia.
Nos ab omni malo ducas,
Vita recta nos conducas,
Post hanc vitam nos inducas
Ad aeterna gaudia.
Hear us therefore piously,
Who assist thy praise duly.
Against Satan's subtlety
Help us left He us destroy.
Let no evil us infect,
In the right way us protect,
After this life us direct,
And bring to eternal joy.
St. Agnes they address themselves to after this sort.

Ave Agnes Gloriosa
Me in fide serves recta
Dulcis Virgo and dilecta
Te exore precibus.
Charitate da perfecta
Deum per quem es electa
Colere pic omnibus.
Hail Agnes who glorious art
Fro' the right faith let me not start,
O sweet Virgin and dear Heart
With my prayers I thee entreat.
Grant to all men piously
That with perfect charity
They may worship God most high
Whose choice has made thee so great.
St. Bridget they Idolize thus.

O Bregetta matter bona
Dulcis Ductrix and Matrona
Nobis fer suffragia.
Naufragantes in hoc mari
Tuo ductu salutari
Duc ad vitae bravia.
O our good Mother Bridget
Our she Guide and Matron sweet
Help us by thy suffrages,
Who are shipwrackt in this Sea
By thy conduct us safely
Bring to life eternal wages.
But St. Catherine is more largely Deified of them after this manner.

Ave Virgo Dei digna
Christo prece me consigna,
Audi preces, praesta votum,
Cor in bono fac immotum,
Confer mihi cor contritum,
Rege visum and auditum,
Rege gustum and olfactum
Virgo sancta, rege tactum,
Vt in cunctis, te regente
Vivam Deo pura mente,
Christum pro me interpella
Salva mortis de procella,
Superare fac me mundum,
Ne demergar in profundum.
Ne me finas naufragari
Per peccata in hoc Mari.
Visita tu me infirmum,
Et in bonis fac me firmum
Agonista Dei fortis
Praesto sis in hora mortis,
Decumbentem fove, leva,
Et de morte solve saeva
Vt resurgam novus homo
Civis in Caelesti domo.
Worthy Maid of God I greet thee,
By thy prayer for Christ bemeet me.
Hear my prayers, perform my wish,
In what is good my heart stablish.
Grant to me a heart contrite,
Rule my hearing and my sight.
Holy Maid, yea, taste and smell,
And my touch too order well.
That in all, guided by thee,
I may serve God with mind free.
With Christ for me intercede,
Save me from Deaths stormy dread.
Make me overcome the World,
Let me not to Hell be Hurled.
Oh let me not shipwrackt be,
By my Sins in this great Sea.
Visit thou me when Infirm
And in goodness make me firm.
Thou strong wrestler with the Lord,
In deaths hour thy help afford.
When I say Sick Nurse and Cheer me,
And from cruel death loosed bear me.
That a new man I may rise
And may dwell above the Skies.
What they can desire more of Christ himself than they express in some of
these, I know not, but yet besides all this and much more of the like nature,
they have also enacted in their Councils, both in the second of Nice, and in
that of Trent, that the very Images of Christ and of the Virgin, and of the
Saints, are to be worshipped, and that to with the same kind of worship, as
Christ and his Saints are worshipped with, point blank contrary to the second
commandment which they therefore, as is before said, leave out of their
Catechisms, them they kiss, and before them they uncover their Heads and
prostrate themselves, to them they build Temples, and Altars, set up Candles,
burn Incense and the like, pretending that that way they worship Christ and the
Saints themselves, just as the Pagan Idolaters use to do, of whom Origin in his
Answer to Celsus, says thus. (...) that is, we see sometime men that are in
high esteem for Wisdom and Divinity, bowing down themselves to the Image of a
corruptible Man, which they say they do for the honor of God; yea, and Celsus
himself pleading for the worship of their Demons, and for their Altars and
Statues, has this Plea, (...) that is, may not he that worships God lawfully
enough, worship him that receives authority from him, as pretending to worship
the great and most high God, in worshipping those that were honored by him. And
again, (...); He that honors and worships all them, what offense does he to
God (or how grieves he him) whose all are? how like to the Popish Doctors
pleading for worshipping their Saints and Images spoke that Heathen; yea, and
that by erecting Statues, or making Images to them, with which they commit
their Idolatry as the Heathens did with theirs, they act like them also, may
easily be seen with those that will compare them: the Images of the Heathen
used to be consecrated as we hinted before; and what Dr. Moor quotes out of
Minutius Faelix, jearing their Images, may well be applied to them, when he
says, Ecce funditur, fabricatur, scalpitur nondum Deus est. Ecce plumbatur,
construitur, erigitur, nec adhuc Deus est. Ecce ornatur, consecratur, oratur;
tunc postremo Deus est. That is, Io, the Image or Idol is Molten, Wrought, or
Graven, hitherto it is no God, it is sauldred, made up, and erected, neither
yet is it a God, but when it is Adorned, Consecrated, and Prayed to, then at
length it becomes a God, such kind of actions are done to the Popish Images to
make them objects of Worship and Trust; as thus (as the same Doctor tells us
out of Chemnitius) they consecrate the Image of the Virgin Mary. Sanctify, O
God, this Image of the blessed Virgin, that it may aid and keep safe thy
faithful people, that Thundrings and Lightnings, if they grow too terrible and
dangerous, may be quickly expelled thereby; and that the Inundations of Rain,
the commotions of Civil War, and devastations may be suppressed by its
Presence. The Image of St. John Baptist thus, Grant, O God, that all they that
behold this Image with reverence, and pray before it, may be heard in
whatsoever straits they are in. Let this Image be the holy expulsion of Devils,
the conciliating (or procurement) of the presence and assistance of the Angels,
the protection of the faithful, and that the Intercession of this Saint may be
very powerful in this place, who would not be drawn to adore such an Image as
they are persuaded to be of so great advantage? yea, but the Consecration of
Images, as in the Roman Ritual, published by two of their Popes since the
Council of Trent runs higher, being thus, Grant, O God, that whosoever before
this Image shall diligently and humbly upon his knees Worship and Honor thy
only begotten Son, (or the B. Virgin, or what Saint the Image relates to) may
obtain by his or her Merits or Intercession, grace in the present life, and
eternal glory hereafter. So that the Saints here are made fellow Sharers with
Christ or God in the dispensing grace and glory to, or procuring it for us; and
their very Images are great advancers of their beneficence. Is not this too
like the Heathens, who ascribed to their Demons or middle Deities the handing
to us the benefits we receive in all outward enjoyments, as is to be seen in
what the abovenamed Celsus pleads for the worship of them; nay, do they not
exceed their Pleas, in as much as they attribute also to their Intercessions,
the giving of spiritual grace and eternal glory: I shall not insist upon all
the Rites and observances practiced and allowed in the said Church to their
Saints and their Images, which are such as one of themselves: Ludovicus Vives
plainly confesses such likeness to the Pagan Idolatries therein, that he says,
Non potest aliquod discrimen ostendi, nisi quod nomina tantum and titulos
mutaverint; that is, that there can no difference be showed between these
practices and the Pagans to their Idols, but only that they have changed their
Names and Titles; for whereas the Learned Papists will say, that they are not
so silly as to think these Images to be Gods, or to be able to help us, what
say they therein, but what the Heathens also said of their Altars and Images.
Celsus says, If the Christians condemn the Images or Statues of the Gods,
because that Stone, or Wood, or Brass, or Gold, being wrought up by this or
that Man into an Image, is not, nor cannot be God, (...) this is a ridiculous
wisdom, for who except he be a very fool or child, believes them to be Gods,
but only things dedicated to, and the Images of the Gods: but as they thought
that their Demons or lower God, were to be worshipped by such Statues and
Images as representations of them, or Mediums to which their presence and
divine virtue were affixed, in honor of the most high God, as his Ministers of
good things to us, who were therefore to be made propitious to men that they
might convey good things from the great God to them, as is to be seen in the
Pleas of the said Celsus, so these think of the Saints and good Angels, and of
their Images, and the answers that Origin gives to Celsus, showing the reason
why the Christians made or worshipped no such Images, or worshipped not God by
them, will most of them be of the same force as to this practice of the Roman
Church, as they were against that of the Heathen, and do clearly evidence that
such practices were disallowed and rejected in his days by the then Christian
Church, though both the Virgin Mary and the Apostles were deceased long before,
and were as much in glory, and in as good a capacity to help them then, as to
help any now, and they needed as much then as ever, because of their dreadful
persecutions that they then groaned under, for among other things, Origin tells
Celsus, that the reason why the Jews and Christians forbear such worship of
Idols and Images, was because of that in the Law. 'Thou shall fear the Lord thy
God, and him only shall thou Worship, and that thou shall have no other Gods
but me, thou shall not make to thy self an Idol, (...), nor the likeness of any
thing in Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath, thou shall not worship them,
nor serve them, and because of that, thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and
him only shall thou serve. With many other sayings which says he do so deter
us from Temples, and Altars, and Images, that we should rather choose to die,
than to defile our Religion with unlawful matters. And afterward granting that
God may be known, and his only begotten Son, and that those whoever they be
that are honored of God with the title of Gods, or are made partakers of the
Deity, are different from the Gods of the Nations which are Devils. Yet he
adds, (...), that it is impossible for one to know God, and to pray to Images;
and that it is not only a foolish thing to worship and pray to Images, but also
to pretend or appear to do so, complying with the multitude, as certain of the
Philosophers did use to do. Yea, and that they took heed with all care not to
honor Images, lest by any means they should give occasion of believing that
they were others Gods, and often asserts that the Christians refused (...), to
worship any thing else than the God over all, and his Word, the first begotten
of every creature, and that they did, (...), worship the God over all by his
Son, who only brings us to him, without Schism, Separation or division. There
was then no extending the acts of worship beyond God, and his blessed Word or
Son; nor any belief entertained in the Church of the Virgin Mary, or any of the
deceased Apostles, Angels, or other Saints, having any share committed to them
in the office of Mediator, for bringing the worship of the worshippers unto
God; or for imparting his grace unto them. No, these were then accounted
strange and corrupt notions, if any such were as yet crept into any hearts, and
they are evident Adulteries from the fidelity and loyalty or the simplicity of
faith that we owe to God in and by Christ Jesus. The proper Apostasy of the
last times foretold by the Apostle, 1 Timothy 4.1, 2. as Reverend Mr. MEDE has
learnedly demonstrated in his Treatise upon that Scripture. Wherein he that
will may see this argument excellently handled, and amongst other things, a
large relation out of the eight Book of Theodoret, de curandis Graecorum
affectionibus, of the Christians having then taken in the Saints and Martyrs
into the place of the Heathen Demons, as among other passages, these words
testify, Eorum qui passim Dii ferebantur memoriam e mente hominum Martyrs
aboleverint. Suos mortuos dominus Deus noster in Templo pro diis vestris, i. e.
daemonibus iri duxit -- Pro-Jovis liberique Patris solemnitatibus Petro, Paulo,
Thomae, Sergio, aliisque Sanctis Martyribus solennitates epulo populari
peraguntur, etc. that is, the Martyrs have abolished the memory of those that
were commonly accounted Gods. Our Lord God would have his dead brought into the
Temples instead of your Gods, that is, the Devils, instead of the Feasts of
Jupiter and Bacchus, the people now keep Feasts to Peter and Paul, to Thomas
and Sergius, etc. And what the Papists allege of their doing all the same
things that we Protestants do, but they do more also, is but all one in this
matter, as if a Woman should say that she does all things to her Husband that
another honest Woman does to hers, but she does this more, that whereas the
other honest Woman yields her Body to her Husband only, and admits no other man
into her Bed besides, she out of respect to her Husband, admits him and his
Servants, and familiar Friends also. And as a wise Husband would scarce think
that a good honor given or done to him by his Wife, no more will God take such
adulterous embraces of the Saints, and their Images, and the like, as a good
honoring of him, its like also as if the false Apostles and their followers
should have pleaded against the true Apostles, and theirs that they did the
same things with them, but they exceeded them, and did more; for they not only
Baptized into the Name of Christ, but Circumcised too, and were Circumcised
after the manner of Moses; nor did they only celebrate the Lords Supper, but
also observed the days and times appointed in the Law; and surely there was
more color for their so pleading, than for these men's, for they had something
formerly of Gods appointment to show for themselves, but these have nothing at
all but many prohibitions there against to produce. Nothing said I? Yes, I
remember the Plea of a Jesuit for the Picture of Christ (though nothing for
worship to be given it, nor for worshipping the Saints and their Images) from
the Apostles saying to the Galathians that they were Fools to turn to Moses law
when Christ Jesus had been set forth and evidently crucified among them, the
word says he is (...), that is, was Pictured, and therefore they had the
Picture of Christ drawn before their Eyes, even of Christ Crucified; surely the
Jesuits was hard put to it for a proof that he was fain to fetch one from that
word, by the same way he might prove that the Prophets of old were Painters and
Image makers, because its said in Romans 15.4. (...), and so it should be
translated whatsoever things were Pictured aforetime, were Pictured for our
Instruction, and he might have found the Pictures of other men besides Christ,
though not of the Saints, unless such saints as some of them of the Roman
Church may be, for Jude tells us of some that were (...), shall we read,
Pictured out unto this Condemnation? Jude 4. ungodly Men. Surely the Jesuit was
either a man of little judgment, or which is rather to be judged of a
profligate conscience that mattered not with what colors to paint over his
matters, or else he would have waved such a proof for so bad a purpose, and
have remembered that the Apostles and their fellow Laborers whither they did
(...) or (...), ingrave or pourtray, yet it was (...), not in Tables of Stone,
as the Romish Picturers work but in the fleshly Tables of the heart, (...) not
with Ink or such like Paint, but with the Spirit of God, as the Apostle writes
in 2 Cor. 3.3. and with such a manner of drawing, I suppose their Picture
makers have little or no acquaintance, nor indeed would it have deserved the
title of (...), Foolish Galathians; had the false Apostles only drawn them from
a Christ Crucified as represented in an externally visible Picture or Image of
him, wherein nothing but his body and flesh, or rather the external lineaments,
proportion and complexion of it, could be represented, and so the shape of a
man Crucified; nothing of his Deity and inward Virtue, as they deserved for
being drawn from him, as Painted forth by the Spirit in the Gospel, to the eyes
of their understandings, as the Son of God; and so as God manifested in the
flesh, and baring our Sins in his Body on the Tree, and there through geting
the victory over Sin, and death, and the Devil, which no Painters in matters of
Stone or other Metals could draw to the Life, the other might rather offend
them and give the false Apostles advantage against believing on him, than
persuade to constancy therein, there being nothing but a Crucified man
represented to them therein.

But I have been tedious in making good this charge; but therein I suppose I
have abundantly discovered the truth thereof, that Rome Papal is as arrant a
Whore as Rome Pagan was; nay, in one respect far greater and worse, for in
those times she was not espoused to Christ as such, and therefore was not
charged then as commiting adultery from him, or breaking Wedlock as now, that
having been the Catholic Church, and her Faith that that was preached in the
whole World, and she a famous Mother without it, yet she has played the Harlot
from him (like Jerusalem in Ezekiel. 16.15.) as being corrupted from the
simplicity in him to swarve so much from her loyalty to him and admit a
multitude into the Bed of love besides him, yea, the Kings of the Earth also,
with whom she has truckt for their honors and riches, crowns and scepters,
accommodating her self to their wills, that she might lift up her self by them,
and get her will on them, as in the famous Story of her Bishop Boniface,
chaffering with Phocas, who having Murdered his own Master Mauritius, and his
Children, was owned as Emperor in his stead by the said Boniface, that he
might (as he was) be made and declared by him to be the Universal Bishop over
all the Churches in Christendom, upon a fond pretense never before thought on
(its likely) that because Christ said to Peter that he would give him the keys
of the Kingdom of Heaven, therefore the Bishops of Rome (however unlike to St.
Peter) and without any delegation of them by him in any of his Epistles or
other ways of conveyance of them to them) must rule over all the Church in all
after ages. A notable reward of Romes Whoredom with that Murderer, but that
may lead me to another particular charge agreeable also with the character
given her (which also declares her to be the Babylon spoken of) by the holy
ghost in the book of the Revelations, viz. That

8. The Church of Rome is not only a Whore and the great Whore, but a Bloody
Whore too, else she should not be that Babylon, for St. John was showed that so
she would be, for he saw her drunk with the Blood of the Saints, and with the
Blood of the Martyrs of Jesus, to his great admiration and amazement, and that
in her was found the blood of the Prophets and of Saints, and of all that were
Slain upon the Earth, Rev. 17.6. and 18.24. and indeed it may be doubted
whither she slew more in her Pagan state, to raise and maintain her imperial
dignity among and over the nations of the World, as to bodily slaughters in all
her Wars and Battles, or more Souls spritually in raising her self to, and
maintain her self in her Papal Empire. And again, whither she made more Martyrs
of Jesus, or slew more in their bodies for confessing him to be the Son of God
in her Pagan state; or for confessing and cleaving to the simplicity and
sincerity of the Gospel against her spiritual fornications from, and
corruptions of it in her Papal state, but in both states and in both ways its
certain that she has been and is notoriously guilty of Blood and Murder, for
if no Idolater has any part in the Kingdom of God and Christ, and they that
depart from the simplicity of the faith to adulterate it with other mixtures,
are thereby abolished from Christ, as the Apostle says of those that were
Circumcised, Gal. 5. 2, 3, 4, 19, 20.21. how shall not those Millions of Souls
which she leads into those Sins, as is above showed, be ruined by her! and as
for Murdering and Martyring the bodies of those that cleave to the Sincerity of
the truth, and witness against her corruptions, what multitudes has she
Massacred and murdered! witness the Albingenses, the Waldenses, the Hugonots,
(as they call them) in France, the Protestants in Ireland, the Valleys of
Piedmont, etc. besides the Multitudes burnt at stakes and otherwise Martyred,
in England, Holland, Spain, Italy, Germany, and in almost all Countries, so
that what the Prophets testify of Jerusalem, playing the Whore from the Lord,
is too truly applicable to this Papal Babylon, for as Jerusalem was a bloody
City, the City that shed blood in the midst of it, Ezekiel. 22.2, 3. an Imperious
Whorish Woman that slew Gods Children, and therefore was to be judged as Women
that break Wedlock and shed Blood are judged, Ezekiel. 16.20, 21, 30, 38. in her
skirts was found the blood of the Souls of the poor innocents, and yet so
impudently hardened as to deny her guiltyness, and plead I am Innocent, I have
not sinned, Jer. 2.34.35. I am rich, I have found me out substance, in all my
labors they shall find no Iniquity in me, that were sin, Hos. 12.8. an
Infallible Church. Just so is it with Rome, and as her Blood was, so this
Churches is in the midst of her; She set, and this sets it upon the top of a
Rock, in the view of all Men, she poured it not upon the ground to cover it
with dust, Ezekiel. 24.7. no surely, she was not ashamed of all her Blood and
cruelty, though her sword devoured her Prophets, and slew the just, doubtless
she said and justified it by her false prophets, that they were all mad men and
false prophets whom she slew, Heretics and Factious persons that would charge
her with Idolatry and Whoredom from God, for worshipping him upon Hills and
Mountains, and under green Trees, and some Baalim or matters with him, and
therefore she endeavored not to hide her murtherous doings. Just so this
Church of Rome, a Bloody Harlot, both in respect of Soul Murder, and Body
Murder in all her territories, yet she will justify her self by her Panders,
her Priests and Jesuits, that she is Innosent, an infallible Church, under the
conduct of an infallible Guide, her Bishop, that will not fail to lead her
Members and Children to Hell and destruction. She will not yield that she
commits Adultery from Christ, or that Saint worship, or Image Worship, or Host
worship, or any Idolatrous or false worships, nor is she ashamed of those
Bloody facts she has done, she sets her Blood on a Rock, powers it not in the
Dust to cover it, but justifies all, yea, glories in and gives public thanks
for her rare atchievments, and honors those that are actors in them, though
they Murder Kings, endeavor to blow up Parliaments, fire Citys. The more
mischief they do in her service, the more meritorious; she is Innocent, and not
grieved, except it be because she can have her will no more, Massacre Heretics
no faster: but God will give her blood in his due time to drink according to
all her Idolatries against himself, and Son, and Murders done upon the Souls
of Men, and upon the Bodies of his saints and holy ones, as is predicted in the
Revelations, He also will set her blood upon the Top of a Rock, that it should
not be covered, therefore, thus says the Lord God, woe to the Bloody City, I
will even make the Pile for Fire great, see Ezekiel. 24.8.9. Oh, who that looks
upon her in the light of Gods testimony, can be deluded with her fair
pretenses, or reguard her devices, but will rather acknowledge the truth of
what the Apostle Paul long since in his Epistle to that Church predicted would
befall her, upon the course she has since taken. For (to interpose by the way a
third consideration.)

9. The Apostle in Romans 11.21, 22, 23. employed or supposed her Fallible,
contrary to her own boast of her self, and shows the way how she might come to
fall, warning her of it. And indeed that way she is fallen foully, as therein
was foreshewed together with what will befall her further. Let us view his
words, they are thus, Thou stand by faith, be not high minded, but fear. For
if God spared not the natural Branches, take heed lest he also spare not thee
(or neither in any wise will he spare thee) Behold therefore the severity and
goodness of God, on them that fell, severity, but toward thee, goodness, if
thou continue in his goodness, otherwise thou also shall be cut off. Now, who
did the Apostle there speak and write to? Was it not to the Church of Rome (who
were then Saints, but now all her Saints are dead and glorified Persons, no
Saints living now in Rome, none that will own that name, or be acknowledged to
be such. A sign they are fallen, for then the living members of it were Saints,
but now there are no Saints in her, but they that are long since gone, but it
was the Church of Rome that he speaks to) and so it is as if he had said, Thou
Church of Rome stand by faith, that is, by an obedient dependence on God and
Christ, in an hearty belief of his Gospel, cleaving to him, and his
instructions, and commands, and holding fast the faith as delivered to thee.
Implying, that otherwise she is Fallible, and might and would fall, and
therefore it concerned them to take heed of high-mindedness, (...), mind not
high things, have no high conceits of thy self; thou Church of Rome, if thou
would not fall, but keep thy standing, be not high minded, but fear. As
implying, that if she grew high minded, and were puffed up, she would fall. For
indeed Pride goes before destruction, and a haughty mind before a fall, Prove.
16.18. where Pride and High-mindedness then are found, and fear is laid aside,
there a fall certainly and inevitably follows, even as falling from God and
Christ as to a hearty dependence on him, and close cleaving to him, and to his
will and directions in which they should be preserved, as that was the way the
Branches came to be broken off, and Israel to fall by her iniquity. Jesurun
waxed fat and kicked, she waxed fat, grew thick, and was covered with fatness.
Then he forsook God that made him, and lightly esteemed the God of his
salvation; of the Rock that redeemed him he was unmindful, and forgot God that
formed him, and moved him to jealousy with strange Gods, and sacrificed to
Demons, etc. Deuteronomy. 32.15, 16, 17, 18. According to their pasture so were they
filled, and their heart was exalted; therefore they have forgotten me, and
sacrificed to them that were not Gods, to new Gods, etc. Hos. 13.6. with Deuteronomy.
32.17. They boasted that they were Abraham's Seed, and so in covenant with God,
that it was impossible for them to be cut off, and to be rejected; they must
always be owned of him, as is employed of them in Mat. 3.8, 9. Joh. 8.32, 33.
An Infallible Church, not minding that as God said to Moses, He could have cut
them all off generally with his judgments, and out of some one person of them,
as Moses, he could have performed his promise to Abraham, Exodus 32.10. raised
up a seed to him, that should be as the Stars for multitude, yea, out of
stones, as the Baptist says, Mat. 3.9. This High-mindedness and Pride leading
them to boast, as so in covenant with God, and so to boast of God, as so
engaged to them, that they could not miscarry; and so of their Law and skill in
it, and of their Temple and the like, led them into carelessness and
fearlesness, and imboldened them to turn aside from Gods testimonies, and
hardened them against the Calls given them by the Prophets, and by the Baptist,
and by Christ and his Apostles, to repentance. And so they became blind with a
conceit of their Infallibility or impossibility of falling, and so through
unbelief they were broken off, Romans 2.17, 18, 19. Jer. 7.4. and 23.14, 16, 17.
And of this therefore the Church of Rome was warned that she might have
continued in Gods goodness, and it was positively threatened to her that
otherwise she also should be cut off. But has she taken warning, verily no? If
there be a company of people in the World that are proud and high-minded, it
has been and are they. And that is another charge, That

9. The Church of Rome is a proud Imperious Harlot, for has she not lifted up
her self (in her Heads at least) above all that is called God or worshipped, not
only above Kings and Emperors, as is most notorious (as much above them as the
Sun is greater than the Moon, as one of them expressed himself) but even above
God and Christ, also in daring to dispense with his Laws and Precepts, and to
set up their Decrees against them with a non obstante, or notwithstanding that
God or Christ otherwise ordered or commanded. As in leaving out the second
Commandment, and worshipping, and bowing down to Images, contrary thereto;
denying the Cup to the people in the Sacrament. Nay, does she not boast that
her Priests can make God himself of a piece of bread or wafer? And is not that
a wondrous unparalled height of Arrogance to presume to do so, and a setting
her above all that is called God or worshipped? For let reason or wise men judge.
If as one said, majus est Regem facere quam regem esse, it is a greater thing to
make a King than to be one; must it not needs be a greater power to make a God
than to be a God? If therefore they can make Almighty God, as they believe they
do, Christ very God and very man. Do they not set themselves above him, and
have it in their power to make him or not; the effect therein, as they say,
depending on the Priest's intentions, so as if he intend not to
transubstantiate the Bread, it is not made into a God by him, though he say the
words that make him. And if the ordinary Priests have such power, how great is
his height that is the Head and King of them? But besides this, have they not
arrogated to themselves the Title of the Catholic Church, and the promises
made to the Church, as solely belonging to them? Though they have far less to
show for any promises to them more than to any other Church, than the Jews had
to show that the promises made to Abraham and his Seed pertained to them. Nor
have they minded, that as God could have destroyed the Jews as to the
generality of them, and yet have raised up Seed to Abraham to perform his
promises unto. So God can leave and cut off the Church of Rome, and yet perform
his promise of a Church to be given and preserved continually unto Christ; and
to secure the Church built upon Christ, and humbly and sincerely cleaving to
him, against the gates of Hell. Christ's saying to Peter, Tu es Petrus, and
super hanc petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam, and tibi dabo claves regni
Coelorum, that is, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church,
and to thee will I give the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, etc. are not half so
colorable a plea for the Popes and the Church of Romes pretenses, as Gods
saying to Abraham that he would be his God, and the God of his Seed after him
throughout their generations, was for the Jews conceit, that they could never
be broken off by him. For they cannot show that Peter only had the Keys of the
Kingdom, seeing all the other Apostles had the same power of binding and
loosing men's sins as he; as the Primitive Doctors also acknowledged, and as is
evident in Mat. 18.18. Joh. 20.22, 23. nor that the Church of Rome was either
the only or the whole Church built upon the Rock, which was not Peter, but
Christ; unless St. Paul was a false Preacher in 1 Cor. 3.11. and 10.4. Nor can
they find in Christ's grant to St. Peter any such clause, as to thee will I
give them, and to thy Successors at Rome in all ages and generations, as we
find to Abraham and his Seed after him the promises made. But this also is
another evidence of their pride and arrogance, exalting themselves above Christ
and God, that they dare presume to enlarge his promises, and put in clauses of
their own head into his Will and Testament, as well as alter and lay by his
Commandments. A bold Imperious Harlot. It would be accounted a very
presumptuous deed in a Wife to add such a clause into a man's Testament; for as
the Apostle says; If it be but a man's Covenant or Testament, yet if it be
confirmed, no man adds thereto, as they make bold to do to his who is God,
Gall. 3.15. But should we grant beyond any evidence or proof, that St. Peter
left his Keys to the Bishops of Rome successively; yet seeing Pope Julius the
second in his expedition against the French, some ages since threw them into
the River Tyber, saying, because St. Peter's Keys would not do his work, he
would betake him to St. Paul's Sword: how does it appear that he and his
Successors did not thereby loose them forever? When did Christ make any new
ones, and give to him, or those that suceeded him? But herein also her
excessive pride appears, in that her Bishops challenge both St. Peter's Keys,
and St. Paul's Sword; nay, both Swords, both the Civil and Sacred, or
Ecclesiastical (for I think the truly Spiritual they care not much for, at
least as to any true and right use thereof) that is, they challenge Dominion in
Temporal matters, and usurp upon the rights of Kings and Princes, and to
exercise a power in disposing of Thrones and Scepters, and making Civil Wars,
as well as to rule over all Nations in Church matters. Never was there any
Chuch or company of People in the World ranting it so highly, and carrying it
so aloft, as this Church and her Bishops have done ever since they obtained of
Phocas the high Honor he conferred upon them, to make them an amends for
approving him in the Murder of his Master, in settling the dignity of Emperor
upon him; and this suits well with the description of my story of Babylon too
in the Revelations; where she is represented as mounted upon a Stately Beast
with seven Heads and ten Horns, as being both exalted and supported therein by,
and yet ruling and ordering the Imperial Power, Sitting upon many Waters, that
is, ruling over many Nations, People, and Languages, gallantly decked, and
making all Nations drunk of the Cup of her Fornications; glorifying her self in
stead of God and Christ) and saying, I sit as a Queen (as the Lambs wife, the
Catholic Church, to whom all in all estates owe honor and subjection) and am
no Widow (Infallible, not forsaken of Christ, and so) shall see no sorrow; the
City that rules over the Kings of the Earth, Revel. 17.1, 2, 3, 4, 18. and
18.7. Surely if pride go before destruction, and a haughty mind before a fall,
then it cannot be but so proud and Luciferian a Church must needs fall too. If
the Angel of the Church of Laodicea, because of his high boastings, that he was
rich and increased with goods, growing thereby lukewarm, was threatened to be
spewed out of Christ's mouth, and what was said to him, was said to the Churches
by the spirit, as implying that any of them falling into the like temper, must
be so dealt with, except they repented, how can it be, but that this Church
has long since met with that doom, seeing she for a long time, has been far
more Proud and Highminded, than that Angel was, and no less lukewarm or
indifferent for the honor of Christ, so she may be but the Queen and Empress,
especially also seeing she obstructs the way against her repentance; by
pleading she is Infallible, and so needs no repentance: justifying by her
Priests and Jesuits her self and her practices in all these vile and filthy
miscarriages, doing therein (as was noted before) like Jerusalem of old, that
would not acknowledge that she had transgressed, and scattered her ways to
strangers, and had not obeyed Gods voice, but would against the most notorious
and palpable evidences of her guilt, yet say she was not polluted, she had not
gone after Baalim, or other Lords and Masters besides her own proper God. Even
so it is with this proud imperious Chuch, she will lift up her self against all
charges, and will not own her self guilty of Idolatry, or corrupt in her faith
and worship; but will boast of her being the Church, the Catholic Church the
Infallible Church and talk of her Antiquity, Universality, Unity, and challenge
all the Apostles, Prophets, Martyrs Confessors, Ancient Doctors, Councels, to
be hers: when indeed and in truth in their true and genuine Doctrines, the
Apostles, Prophets, Primitive Doctors and Councels, all condemn her. It is true
she may in many things boast of her Antiquity, and so may the Devil and his
Followers who also can show as great an Universality and Unity; for should he
be divided against himself (as our Savior says) his kingdom could not stand,
Luke 11.18. but, non omne quod antiquum est, verum est, sed quod primum; not
all that is ancient (though of great latitude and extent, and at unity with
itself) but that that is the first, that is true and right. So God was the
first and before the Devil, and his truth was before error and falsehood, and
the Articles of the Christian faith were long before any noise was heard of the
Popes Supremacy, or being Christ's Vicar, or of his having derived the Keys, or
the Power over the whole Church from St. Peter, or of the Doctrine of
Purgatory, or Transubstantiation, or their Merit of our works, or of Works of
Super-errogation, or of the Cup being denied to the People, or of the Latin
Service or Prayers enjoined in an unknown Tongue, or of the Worship of Images,
or Invocation of the Saints, or of whatever else is properly Roman, as
distinguished from all other Professors of the Christian Religion. Which are so
many gross and horrid Errors into which she is fallen and from the charge of
guilt wherein she cannot clear her self; But though she wash her with Nitre,
and take much Sop^, yet they are and will be marked before the Lord, as He said
sometime to Jerusalem, Jer. 2.22. and therefore also being so fowly fallen into
Error and Iniquity, and not confessing and repenting, but justifying her self,
and saying, in despite of all the most evident convictions, that she is
innocent; it cannot be but that what God threatened to Israel, will also be her
portion; and that in a far more dreadful and severe manner, that is, that he
will plead with her, and execute upon her all the terrible Judgment written in
Revel. 18. So as she shall be thrown down into the Pit of destruction with
great violence even by the mighty hand of God, so as she shall be found no more
at all; because she instead of owning her guilt, and repenting of her
Idolatries, Bloodshed, Pride, and all her other Enormities says she is
innocent: and her lying false Prophets dawb her up with their untempered
Mortar, and see for her vain and foolish things, instead of discovering her
iniquity to turn away her misery. Yea, they see for her (as Jerusalems false
Prophets did for her) false buthens and causes of banishment of her, and all
that cleave to her for ever from Gods presence, Jer. 2.32. Lam. 2.14. Rev.
18.2. and she loves to have it so. For if any be convinced of her Errors, and
protest against them, being converted from them, they seek if possible to
murder and destroy them. As many have proved, and as Mr. Anthony Aegan tells
us they have endeavored diverse ways to do to him, since his conversion from
them, and protests against them, and endeavors to reclaim any of them. But the
time is hastening, when as she is fallen into the Dregs of Impiety, Error, and
Apostasy, from her Primitive Faith and Worship in its purity; multiplying as
many false Objects of worship, as ever Pagan Rome did with her Pantheon; so she
must because of her obstinacy and impenitency fall under Gods most severe and
terrible Judgments forethreatned: that as she is become a very Sink of sin and
wickedness, spiritual and corporal, so she may sink into an Abyss of woe and
misery eternal.

10. In all that I have said and showed, it appears that she is also a false
Church, or a lying Harlot, so far is she from being Infallible, though I shall
evince it still further in speaking something to what she pretends very much as
an undeniable proof of her being the true Church at least. Namely the multitude
of her Miracles wherewith She endeavors to establish all other her False
doctrines and practices, as her doctrine of Images and Saint Worship, her
doctrine of Purgatory, and of Transubstantiation, and what not almost She
pleads Miracles for confirmation of, and this being added to her other Notes of
her Antiquity, Universality, and Unity, make her to glitter mainly in the eye
of many simple people, concerning which, I may show her to be a false lying
Church too in a two fold respect.

1. In her pretending such things as She calls Miracles, the signs and strange
wonders that she boasts of to be a good and undoubted note of a true Church
owned of God, and that the doctrines which they tend to confirm are true; that
this is false, we have manifold evidences. For,

1. The Lord himself by Moses supposes the contrary, when he says, If there
be a Prophet or a dreamer of dreams, and he give thee a sign or a wonder, and
that sign, or that wonder come to pass that he foretold of, saying, let us go
after other Gods, -- thou shall not hearken to the words that Prophet, Deuteronomy.
13.1, 2, 3. Such signs and wonders then are no true Note, or sufficient
evidence of the rightness of a person, or of a people, that does or listens to
them that do them, or of the doctrines confirmed by them.

2. The Apostle Paul also tells us, that the man of sin, that wicked one, whose
coming is after the manner of Satan, shall come with power and signs, and
lying wonders, (...), wonders of falsehood, partly so called, because done to
confirm falsehoods, and he shall also have a great number of followers after
him, even the generality of those that have not received the love of the Truth,
that they might be saved, 2 These. 2.8, 9, 10, 11, 12.

3. And our Savior himself warning his Disciples of the false Christ's, and the
false Prophets, (which have been creeping into the world, and among the
Churches ever since the Apostles time, such their Antiquity) that should show
great signs and wonders, so as to deceive, if possible, the very Elect; who
being the fewest, its most rational to suppose, that the generality of those
that have not Elect, or chosen out of the world, are deceived by them; and so
that there is a great over-spreading universality of them also, and they at
unity as to their following these Impostors and deceivers of them, by their
great signs and wonders, Math. 24.24, 25.

4. And in Revelations 13. we read of a Beast after whom the whole world
wonders (so great the universality of his power, and of them that approve him
unanimously) before whom a second Beast shall do, or does so great signs, and
wonders, and miracles as to cause fire to come down from Heaven in the sight of
the Beast, and in the sight of Men; that is, he shall do such things in the
sight or judgment of men, as do as clearly in their judgments testify Gods
approvement of him in what he propounds to them, as he did Elijah, when he
caused Fire to descend from Heaven, and consume his Sacrifice offered to
Jehovah, and yet he is a false Prophet for all that, and his Image that he sets
up to be worshipped, and all the Marks and Characters that he causes people to
take, by which they may be known to be the Beast worshippers, and the
worshippers of his Image, it is certain are naught, and most displeasing to
God; who therefore threatens the worshippers and receivers thereof with most
dreadful punishments, Rev. 14.9, 10, 11. and yet he by these Miracles, and
other exercises of his power, causes them that dwell on the Earth to submit
thereto; yea all, both small and great, rich and poor, to give some way or
other an acknowledgment of it, such their universality and unity therein. And
its of great Antiquity, if the judgment of the most learned and judicious
Expositors may be taken, who judge that the 42. months, or 1260 days of the
continance of that Worship, signifies one thousand two hundred and sixty years,
a day for a year, as is sometimes the reckning of the Prophets, as in Number.
14.34. Ezekiel. 4.4, 5, 6. Rev. 13.12, 13, 14, 15, 16. so that this worship has
been in the world, as Mr. Mede has learnedly hinted in his Apostasy of the
last times since between the Fifth and Sixth Century.

5. How early in the world began the Pagan Idolatry! how far and near did it
spread it self, and that for many ages and generations, the Nations of the
world unanimously agreeing therein; for though its true that they worshipped
diverse Gods, and had in several places different rites and ways of
worshipping, yet they might for all that be said to have as great an unity and
unanimity in their worship, as the Papists have, seeing they also worship
diverse Saints, and some of them are more pecularly addicted to one Saint, and
some to another, and observe diverse aind different Orders in their different
Devotions: some being of the Order of St. Dominick, some of St. Benedict, some
of St. Francis, some of Ignatius Loyola, some Votaries to one Saint, and some
to another. Now the Pagans also had their Signs and Wonders to confirm them in
their Religion, by the operation and working of Satan, witness what Celsus
aforementioned writes of them, as it is recited by Origin to this purpose,
(...), etc. what should I reckon up how many things partly the Prophets and
Prophetisses (namely of the Pagans) partly other persons, Lib. 8. contra Celsum
both Men and Women, inspired with a Spirit, have divinely foretold, what
strange and wondrous things they have drawn out of their secret Cells or
Temples? how many things they have also foretold from the Entrals of their
Sacrifices to those that have consulted them. How many things have been
foreshewed by other Prodigies; to some there have also been granted manifest
apparitions of the Gods, the life of men is full of these matters, how many
Cities have been built by the direction of these Oracles! how many have escaped
Pestilence and Famines! how many Cities have Perished regardless or forgetful
of their warnings! how many Colonies have been led out by their directions, and
have been increased with great felicities while they have not neglected their
commandments! how many both Princes and private Persons have fared well or ill
upon these accounts! how many being troubled for want of Children, by taking
heed to them have obtained their desires! how many have escaped the Anger of
the Demons or devils! how many that have been Lame in their Members, have
recovered their former soundness again! how many doing violence to their holy
things, have forthwith been variously punished! some have gone out of their
Wits, some have of their own accord confessed their evil facts, others have
made away themselves others have fallen into incurable diseases, nor wants
there examples of some who have been killed by a dreadful voice that has
proceeded forth from the cells or secret places of their Temples. Such strange
and wonderful things could that Heathen boast of; concerning his false Gods and
their wicked Worship, as I might also mention some instances that St. Augustine
speaks of in his tenth Book, de civitate Dei Cap 16. as of Aeneas his Images
going of themselves from one place to another, of ^arquinius cutting a
Whetstone through with a Raisour, of a Woman with her girdle only fastened
thereto, drawing a Ship that stuck so fast in the River Tyb^r, as it could not
be moved, as a Testimony of her Chastity, and of another carrying Water in a
sieve from the said River upon the like account: not to mention the strange
things done by Apollonius; which Philostratus would make the world believe
might be equallized with the Miracles wrought by Christ. Surely these, nor any,
nor all of these, were no good evidences that they were Gods Church, and that
they, or their doctrine or worship were approved of him, though the Signs and
Wonders seem not much Inferior to what either Theodoret in his 8. Book before
mentioned, relates of miraculous Cures done, or helps obtained at the Monuments
of the Martyrs, or what some others have elsewhere related, as St. Gregory, or
perhaps some of those things mentioned by St. Augustine, lib. 21. de Civitate
Dei, cap. 8.9. etc. But

2. Besides this there is another thing to be said to the Plea of the Roman
Churches Miracles, that a great many of them are fained forged matters, and
therein she is a lying false Harlot, to go about to gull Souls with her lying
and false delusions, not but that those mentioned by St. Augustine or others of
the Fathers, might many of them be true, and God might work many miracles at
such places as were dedicated to the memory of the Martyrs, and of his holy
servants, to draw people thereby to the belief and obedience of his truth,
which they had confessed and suffered Martyrdom for, but doubtless Satan and
his instruments have also taken occasion thence, either to work by Gods
permission diverse strange things, to punish those that therefore departed from
the purity of the worship of God and Christ, or also to counterfeit and pretend
what was not indeed wrought to draw the minds of People into deceit; I shall
not search books for confirmation hereof, seeing if any man will vouchsafe
seriously to peruse what the Learned D. Stillingfleet has largly discoursed on
this subject of their pretended miracles, he may be satisfied sufficiently
hereof, only I shall set down hear what the forementioned Friar, Mr. Anthony
Aegan, in his recantation Sermon relates, which is to this purpose, That about
seven years before his said Recantation Sermon made at London, April 6. 1673. a
Priest near the City of Limrick, by name William Sarchwel, had for fifty
shillings hired a Woman to pretend her self a Cripple from her birth, and that
she had a revelation that if she dipped her self in such a Well while a Priest
said Mass by the place, she should be recovered of her Infirmity, whereupon she
came halting at a time appointed to the Well, and returned out of it as one
perfectly cured, which became a miracle to the people, and both got to the
contriver a vast some of Money, and confirmed the People in their superstition,
which he tells us, the said counterfeit Woman after some time upon some remorse
of conscience, confessed to him the said Anthony Aegan, which he made her
declare to the whole Congregation before he absolved her, as also he tells of a
Friar of great note and zeal, that told him that he was at a Franciscan Convent
beyond the Seas, where was the Image of the B. Virgin, made with a scrue in the
head thereof, where they put in some water; and having a string that came
undeserned to a place where the Friars stood, when they thought the People had
brought a good offering, then by the help of that string they could unloose the
scrue, and then the Image of the B. Virgin would seem to weep, and that was one
of their Miracles which the relator said was a great scandal to him, and that
therefore he complained of it to the General of their Order, who answered him,
that should he make a reformation in that particular, that Convent should
starve, to which he adds that the Monks of a certain Convent put a like cheat
upon St. Barnard by an instrument, carrying the Voice to the Image of the said
Virgin Mary, causing her to salute him with a salve Barnarde when he came into
the Church, but he apprehending the Cheat, gave no other return to the
complement but this, that it is ashame for a Woman to speak in the Church, but
adds the said Friar Aegan of all the fine stories, commend me to this new
Miracle they talk of for the confirmation of transubstantiation, viz. that in a
certain place in the King of Spains dominion, as the Mass was celebrated, all
the perfect effigies and proportion of a man rose out of the host, but when the
People came too near that they might see the Miracle plainly, he Vanished away,
on which he only relates a remark made by a Facetious Person to the relatot of
it, you suppose, said he, that it was Christ himself that appeared, and it
seems upon the approach of the People he vanished away, which is the only
circumstance to make the Story credible, for he might suppose the People were
come to eat him, and so he vanished, I shall add to it this remark of my own,
that many of their Miracles are such as will not abide the search and trial,
but upon a near approach to that end, vanish into nothing but pretense and
delusion. Now if we put both these together, both that false Prophets, and
Persons of false Religion may do signs and wonders, especially lying signs, and
that many that are boasted of in the Church of Rome, are the lying cheats and
delusions of their Priests, then will their Plea of Miracles be too far from
evidencing them to be the true Church of Christ, that it rather argues them
guilty of being a lying Church.

4. There is a brief character of the true Church and her Children in the book
of the Revelations, by which we may better judge of the truth and rightness of
any Church, than by any or all those fair Pleas that Rome makes for her self,
namely, that the true Church and its Children, are that society and company of
men that keep the commandments of God, and the faith or Testemony of Jesus,
Rev. 12.17. and 14.12. But, now if we bring the Church of Rome to this test, I
am sure she will be cast, only let us mind that by keeping the Commandments of
God, is meant both the careful observation of them, to walk after them, and
also the holding them forth sincerely and purely without corrupting them, that
others may know and walk after them also, and by keeping the faith and
testimony of Jesus, is meant, the keeping it without spot or mixture of
corruption with it, either by adding to, or taking from it. And surely if we
take a little view of their carriage in either of them, we shall find them not
a little faulty in both.

1. First as to the keeping of Gods commandments, which of them do they keep in
the senses above mentioned, not the first, for they have other Gods in the
Scripture Language, beside the only true God, the maker of all things, in
Scripture Language they are called other Gods, to whom men give that adoration
that belongs to God, and unto whom they perform religious worship or service,
asking of and expecting from them what is proper to God to give; so the Calves
made by Jeroboam to be sacrificed to, though intended as mediums to worship the
true God by, yet they are called Gods that he made to himself, 2. King. 14.9.
and so the golden Calf in the wilderness, though it was to Jehovah they
pretended to Sacrifice and keep a feast by it, yet they were charged with
changing their glory (that is their God) therein into the similitude of an Ox
that eats grass and so intimately of making a new God to themselves Exodus
32,4.5. Psalm. 106.19.20. now how many there are in the Roman Church, that
according to those Notions they make Gods to themselves, it is not easy to
determine. The host in the Sacrament they stick not to own as God, God-man, and
to give divine adoration unto, insomuch as one of their own Doctors
acknowledges that the errors of those that worship some Golden or Silver
Statues, or some Images of any other materials, for their God, as the Heathen
worshipped their Gods, or a Red Cloth hung upon the Top of Spear, as is reported
of the Laplanders, or some live Animal, as of old the Egyptians did, Fran.
Coster. Enchir. contro. verse. Cap, 12.
were more tolerable than of those who worshipped a piece of Bread, as hitherto
the Christians have done all over the World, for so many hundred years, if the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation be not true. And that, that Doctrine is not
true, we have as good evidence as Christ gave to his Disciples, that he was not
a Spirit, that is, we may handle and see it, yea, and taste and smell it too, as
was said above, yea, we have the same that we have, that the Cup is not
transubstantiated into the New Testament, and we have no more authority from
the Scripture that the Bread is Transubstantiated, than that the Cup is so
Transubstantiated, nay, rather we have more ground to believe, that the Cup is
changed into a divine writing, than that the Bread is changed into the Body,
the very real and substantial Body of Christ. For it is expressly said, this Cup
is the New Testament, but it is not said, this Bread is my Body, nor this that
was Bread is become my Body, and for ought that appears to the contrary in the
Text, his Body being visibly present, he might point to, or speak of it, in
saying, this is my Body, as he speak of the Temple of his body, when walk-in
the Temple, he said to the Jews, Destroy ye this Temple, and in three days I
will raise it up again; as our senses tell us, the Cup is not the New
Testament, but a Silver or Golden Cup or Challice, so the very same senses tell
us as plainly, that the Bread still remains in the nature of Bread, non
substantia aut natura mutatus, not changed in substance or nature into God, or
into the person of God-man the Lord Jesus, besides, it is their own Doctrine,
that the change of the Elements depend upon the Intention of the Priest, so
that if the Priest intend not, in saying the words, to make the body of Christ,
it is not the Body of Christ, but Bread still, and then they are Idolaters that
worship it as God, and who can be certain of the Priests Intentions? not to
mention again the many Saints, both He Is and She Is that they give such
adorations to as belongs only to God, and ask such things of, as God only can
give, so that they are notorious transgressors of the first commandment of God,
and keep it not, and as to the second they are so far from keeping it, and act
so grossly contrary to it, that they expung it out of their Catechisms; The
third also they grossly violate in their Doctrine and practice about sacred
oaths, dispenceing with them, and loosing men from the obligation of them,
enacting them by mental reservations, and breaking solemn Oaths and promises,
as in their breaking their promises with John Hus, and in the Popes dispensing
with the Oath given by Ladislaus King of Poland, to Amurath the Turkish
Emperor or grand Sultan, and causing him to break his Truce with him, to the
great scandal of Christian Religion and slaughter of the Christians. The Turk
himself appealing to Christ, if he were indeed God, to revenge the perfidious
Perjury of the Christians toward him, which he also did in the ensuing
slaughter and destruction of them, but such abuse of Gods name, in dissolving
and dispensing with religious and solemn Oaths, yea, and with men's rash
swearing, they give allowance of in their Doctrines and treatises, as well as
in their practices, yea, it was a thing that the above cited Friar Aegan tells
us, gave him one of his first disgusts at their Religion, that when at his
first being made a Friar, he took one and twenty Oaths, and among them, that he
would never come on Horseback, that he would never ware shoes, that he would
obey his superiors in what ever he commanded, never examining the lawfulness
of his commands; not to be ashamed to beg, never to be out of his Friars habit,
etc. yet after all these oaths taken, his superior told him, that he must take
his former garments and return in the same Posture that he came in (which was
on Horseback, with Sword and Pistols, and gay Apparel) and go see his friends,
though quite contrary to his oaths, from which he would absolve him. If here
was not a taking Gods name in vain, and a notorious leading men to debauch
their consciences, I know not what is: as for the fourth commandment, they keep
not that, while they keep Markets on the Sabbath day, and less observe it than
many of their own instituted holy days: the fifth commandment, how little they
reguard their often absolving Children from engagements, to honor their
Parents and obey them, yea, their stirring up Children sometimes against them,
(as Gregory the ninth stirred up Henry, the Son, against his Father Frederick
the second, Emperor of Germany) and how often they have discharged subjects
from their due allegiance and obedience to their lawful Sovereigns, and stirred
them up to rebel and rise in War against them; both our own Cronicles and the
Histories of other Nations do abundantly evidence. And then as for the sixth
commandment, their Murdering of Princes, and the many great Slaughters and
Massacres, yea, destructions both of Souls and Bodies, occasioned and caused by
the Roman Church and her Bishops, before hinted at, sufficiently declare how
little care they have thereof. That they little reguard the seventh, both their
forbiding Marriage to their Priests, without any order or command of God and
Christ to that purpose, nay, contrary to the express permission and allowance
thereof of God in the Scriptures (for both our Lord Jesus Christ himself chose
Married Persons to be Apostles, at least Peter was such when he chose him, for
we read before, that of his Wives Mother, Mark. 1.30. with 3.16. Which he would
not have done surely, had he judged a Wedded State incompatible or inconsistent
with the Ministry which he instituted, yea, and that St. Peter and other
Apostles, led their Wives about with them, when they were Apostles, is evident
in 1 Cor. 9.5. And the Apostle expressly, both in his Orders about Bishops, and
in those about Deacons orders, and much more allows, that they be Husbands of
one Wife, and have their Children in subjection, which they would not have
done, had they forbidden Marriage to the Bishops and Ministers of the Church,
or judged it unfit for them, as these, according to his predictions of false
Teachers, that would depart from the faith, do, 1 Timothy 3.2.4.11.12. with
4.12.3.) By which means they often put them upon the practice of uncleanness,
whoredoms, furnications, and the like mischiefs; and allow them to keep
Concubines for Money; besides, the Practice of Sodomy, even in the Popes
themselves, some of them, and the notorious Wickedness of one of their
Cardinals, that wrote and Wrote and published a Book in commendation thereof,
and their allowing public Stews for Money, even in Rome it self are sufficient
Proofs. And that they as little keep the eighth Commandment, their insatiable
covetousness, and many frauds to get Money, some whereof have by the way been
hinted at, yea, their grasping whole Kingdoms to themselves, from their lawful
Princes, as they did a great part of Italy, yea, and Rome it self from the
Emperors to which they belonged, and our Kingdom of England, in King John's
time, and taking away by force the Kingdoms of some Princes from them, and
giving them to others whom they have encouraged to get them from them, as
appears in the History of the Albingenses, and the attempts of their Popes, and
Sea of Rome, against our late Queen Elizabeth, are sufficient demonstrations,
besides, the most horrible theft of all others they are guilty of in stealing
or taking forcibly from men the word of God, not suffering men to know or be
instructed into that; therein taking away the key of knowledge, and shutting up
the Kingdom of Heaven against them, and robbing their Souls thereof; a theft
which God complained of in the false Prophets of Israel, when he says, Behold
I am against the Prophets which steal my word every one from his Neighbor,
Jer. 23.30. Against the ninth Commandment is all their reproaching and branding
falsely, as Heretics, those that will not subscribe to their corruptions,
stirring up Princes and People against them, to make Havoc of them. And that
the tenth commandment is little set by, their Doctrine that denies the first
stirrings and motions of Sin to be Sins, and their Doctrine of venial Sins, and
their insatiable covetousness, may be evidence enough, so that they are
horribly guilty of not keeping the commandments of God, the like may be
observed too, of their keeping the things given in commandment by our Lord
Jesus Christ, that they keep none of his commandments purely and incorruptly,
for whereas he commanded Baptism into the Name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost, they have corrupt that with many devises, as of oil, and
cream, and spettle, and the like Fopperies; his commandment of his Supper, to
take and break and eat Bread, set a part with blessing to that purpose, and
drinking the Cup in Remembrance of him, and as a commemoration of his death,
they have horribly corrupted and changed into a sacrifice propitiatory and
unbloody, available for obtaining remission of Sins, for the quick and for
Dead, and into private Masses, and half Communions, and the Pageantry of
carrying the consecrated Host as a God in Procession, the command of Preaching
the word sincerely they have exchanged into teaching for Doctrines of men, that
is, their own precepts and devises, and his command about prayers and
supplications unto God, they have corrupted by injoyning Prayers in unknown
Tongue, and to others besides God, even to Saints and Angels.

But what needed I to have been so larg in going over these several
commandments, when the complexion of much of their divinity is a clear
patronage of all manner of Sin and Naughtiness, while they promise to men the
pardon thereof, upon so easy terms, as the only being at some small time
before they dye, grieved that they have sinned, though, without any real
contrition of heart for it, or love to God, and so hearty sorrow that they have
offended him, as springing therefrom, provided that they receive but the
Sacrament, as they will have it, of their extreme Unction, and the absolution
of one of their Priests, and have devised a Purgatory, in which, after death,
they may be Purifyed, though they continue till death in their Sins, from the
pains of which also, they persuade men they may be soon delivered by the
propitiatory sacrifices, which they say they can, and do daily make in their
Masses, both for the quick and for the dead, and by the indulgences which are
in the Popes dispose, and which for such sums of Money given to their
Churchmen, or for such uses as they prescribe, as for the procuring Masses,
Dirgies, and such like fopperies they propose to sale? what are all these
devises of this covetous Church and its Churchmen, but ways of making
merchandise of men's Souls? and an encouraging them in and unto an impenitent
breach of all Gods commandments all their days? for who that loves his lusts,
and lives in any pleasurable or profitable way of Sin, will much reguard the
ceasing therefrom, or any commands of God requiring it, so long as his guides
and leaders, that pretend to have the keys of Heaven in their hands, assure
them that if but an hour or two before their deaths, they confess their Sins,
and are sorry that they have endangered their Souls thereby, and be a little
attrite or troubled for them, receiving absolution from the Priest, and their
extreme Unction, they may by the virtue of the Sacraments, to convey grace, ex
opere operato, be secured against damnation? and be eased too in, and freed
from their Purgatory pains, if they be but bountiful to their Church, and its
Priests, by the benefit of their devotions, and the Saints Supererrogations? so
that by this first part of the Touchstone, they appear clearly convicted of
being far from being an Infallible Church, yea, or a true and right Church of
Christ, especially, if we also take in what some of them assert, and their
doctrine of probability, therefore, makes safe for all to believe, viz. that no
man is bound of necessity to love God, but that is a work or frame of more
perfection, without which, observing their Church Orders, and receiving their
Sacraments, they may be saved. Surely by our Saviors doctrine, to love God is
the first and great Commandment, and that they that teach that men may be saved
though destitute thereof, cannot be under the commendation of keeping Gods
commandments.

2. And as much faulty are they, with reference to the other branch of the
character of the true Church, opposed to the false Church, or the Beast and his
Image worshippers, namely, the keeping the faith or testimony of Jesus, which
they keep not that corrupt it, and add their mixtures to and with it, as the
false Apostles kept not the faith of Jesus, though they might hold as truths
all the Articles of the Creed, and teach them to others, while they added
thereto the necessity of being Circumcised, and of keeping the Law of Moses
unto Salvation, no more than they would be commended for keeping for any ones
use good and wholesome Wine committed to their custody and charge, who would
indeed deminish nothing of it, but yet would mix with it some of those Stygian
Waters, which had a poisonous nature in them, or other poisons whereby they
might be made deadly to them that drink thereof; such a Person might indeed
plead that he had kept by him all the Wine deposited with him, and took nothing
of it away, yea, and that he gave out again all that other keepers of it, who
keep it Pure, and give it out such as it is given, do, and something more, but
I suppose with no likement or commendation of him that commits it to him for
the benefit of those that will drink of it; just such keepers, that is to say,
corrupters of the faith of Jesus, are the Papists and their Church. They retain
with them indeed the whole Bible, and all the Gospel, and Gospel truths
therein, but so as to keep them in their Bibles from the generallity of the
People, that they may not read or hear them read to them, yea, and they retain
with them, and possibly Preach to the People, and Teach them all the Articles
of the Creed, at least in an unknown Latin Tongue, or if they also interpret
them, yet to be sure, they teach them many other things, as matters of faith
necessary to be believed by them, as much as any of the said Articles, though
they be quite different from all that Christ and his Apostles delivered to the
Church to be believed by us, as for instance, they teach that God the Father,
and Christ, and the Holy Ghost, are one God in three Persons, to be believed
on, and called upon by Men, but they corrupt that with this addition of their
own, that the Saints also are to be called on, and that they ought to believe
on them, to receive help by their intercessions, being worshipped by them; they
teach that Christ is the Son of God and the Savior of the World, that he dyed
for our Sins, and offered up a Propitiatory Sacrifice to God for the whole
World, but then they add and mix of their own therewith, that their Priests can
and do daily make him of a Wafer, and offer him up as an effectual unbloody
sacrifice for the quick and dead to, and that they ought to believe and expect
to receive the forgiveness of their Sins through their Sacraficing him, a most
horrible impiety and indignity to his Cross and Passion, and the alone virtue
and efficacy thereof, and a monstrous addition to, and corruption of the faith,
once delivered of God to the Saints in his Apostles doctrine. They hold and
teach that Christ is risen from the dead, and ascended into Heaven, and sits at
the Right Hand of God, but they mix therewith, and teach their Children and
Followers to believe, that the same very real Body that suffered and is in
Heaven, is also daily in the Host at their Mass, and is hung up in the Pix or
Box that they put him into, and that they carry up and down when they please in
Procession, and that they really tear him with their Teeth and eat him, Lib. de
Natura Deorum.
and therein they do what the Heathen Cicero abhorred to think of in their
Pagan worship, for he said, quem tam amentem esse putas, qui illud, quo
vescatur, Deum credat esse? that is, who think thou is so mad, as to think
that to be a God that he eats or is fed with? those Papists are so mad as to
think and teach so, they hold and teach that there is a Heaven to reward the
righteous, and a Hell to Punish the wicked, and so our Savior delivered in his
faith or testimony, but withal they add, that there is a third place between
both, called Purgatory, wherein Souls that are not fit for Heaven when they
dye, may be purged, by enduring pains and torments there, and that the Pope
has the keys of this place to, and can let Souls out of it, etc. And this
Christ never taught nor his Apostles, they believe and teach that there is a
Holy Ghost, and that he is to be believed in, but they teach also corruptly,
that he is confined, as it were, to them of the Church of Rome, and that their
determinations, or the determinations of their Popes out of St. Peter's Chair,
are his infallible Oracles, to be as much believed, and held as fast as (or
more than) the sayings of the holy Prophets and Apostles in the Scriptures.
They teach that there is a holy Catholic Church, but they add and mix with
that also this Poysonful Doctrine, that the Church of Rome only are that
Church, and that men are to resolve their faith into its sayings and
conclusions, and that the Pope is the visible Head of the whole Catholic
Church, and Christ's Vicar on earth; they teach a Communion of Saints, but they
teach also with it a worship of those that are deceased and canonized by the
Pope, and that they may and ought to be invocated; they teach remission of
Sins, but they corrupt the doctrine of it by teaching that it is to be sought
for, not only in believing on, and yielding obedience to Christ, but also by
their prayers to, and invocation of the Saints, by Pilgrimages and penances of
their own, or others imposing on them, by the merits of the Saints, and not by
Christ's only; by the virtue of their Mass, and the very reception of their
Sacraments, and the like; they hold and teach the Resurrection of the Body, and
Life everlasting; but they teach also this corrupt doctrine, that life
everlasting may be merited of God by our good works, for so some of them do
teach, that good works do truly merit grace in this world, and glory in the
next; and that good works of just persons are of themselves worthy of the
reward of Eternal life without any Covenant or acceptance of God; yea, and
that no increase of dignity comes to just men's works by the Merits or Person of
Christ, which the same works should not otherwise have had, had they been done
by the same grace, bestowed by the liberality of God alone without Christ, and
therefore also they say, that after grace infused, our works are so perfectly
Meritorious of life that it cannot be denied them, and that therefore they
never request of God, by the Merits of Christ, that the reward of eternal Life
may be given to their worthy and meritorious works; but that by Christ, grace
may be given them, to enable them to merit worthily that reward; and much to
the same purpose may be found in some of their Writers, as Vasquez his
Disputations evidence. So that instead of keeping the Faith, and Testimony of
Jesus, they egregiously corrupt, and mix it with their own additions, which yet
they require as much to be believed and practiced upon, as they do any Articles
of the Faith delivered in the holy Scriptures, and as much as the belief of the
necessity of Circumcision, and of keeping the Law of Moses, was urged and
practiced upon by the false Apostles. So that to any that will mind the
Scriptures, and impartially will weigh what is said in them, and compare
therewith the way of this Church, they cannot, unless they be stark-blind, or
wilfully close their eyes, but see and conclude that this Roman Church is far
from being a true or right Church of Christ, muchless can it be the only and
Catholic Church, or Infallible in her Doctrines and Dictates; which things
being so, it might be marvailed that all men do not fly out of, and from her
Communion that have any care of their Souls, and desire the everlasting
Salvation of them, and that may be the matter of another inquiry and
consideration.

5. Whence it is that so many still continue in her Communion after so many
convictions of the evil of her ways, by so many learned and able Protestants,
and Reformed Writers and Preachers, in so many learned Treatises? yea, and not
only so, but that many fall to her also that had rejected her, or have lived
under the knowledge of the Scriptures, and the enjoyments of that light from
them, by which they might be able to discern, and be led to beware of her?

In answer to which, in both its branches, it may be noted first of all, that
this is nothing more than what the Holy Ghost foresaw, and fore-signified in
the Holy Scriptures; for in the Book of the Revelations, it is evident that
Mystery Babylon would have many commit Fornication with her until her
destruction comes upon her, yea, and they also many of them no mean persons;
for it is said, that the Kings of the Earth who have committed Fornication, and
lived deliciously with her, shall bewail her, and lament for her when they see
the smoke of her burning, standing a far off for fear of her torment, and
saying, alas, alas, that great City Babylon, etc. and the Merchants of the
Earth shall weep and mourn over her, etc. and every Shipmaster, and all the
company in Ships, and Sailers, and as many as trade by Sea, stood a far off and
cried when they saw the Smoke of her burning, etc. Revelations 18, 9, 10, 11,
17, 18. Yea, and the holy Ghost signifies, that after the Preaching of the
everlasting Gospel, by an Angel flying in the midst of Heaven, to them that
dwell on the Earth, warning them to fear God, and give glory to him, and
worship him that made Heaven and Earth, etc. in distinction from and in
opposition to all other false objects of worship, such as are in Babylon, as
the Beast and his Image, and after another Angel following and saying, Babylon
is fallen, is fallen, that great City, both fallen from her first love, fallen
into false and corrupt worship, and fallen too from her first dignity and
splendour which she had as Babylon, as that false Harlot that made all Nations
drink of the Wine of the wrath of her Fornications, yet it is supposed that
some might and would yet worship the Beast and his Image, Rev. 14, 6, 7, 8, 9.
which may denote the continuance of the Babilonish Idolatry after the Gospel
Preached by the Reformers, calling men to the right and true worship, and after
the decay and fall of the Roman Church from her pristine splendour and grandeur;
for the falling of her may be one thing, and her Plagues and burning may be
another thing, between which, yet she may be struggling to recover herself, and
while so, she may have some, not only continuing in her communion to the last,
but some also joining themselves to her Idol worship that were sometimes not
joining with her therein; to which purpose also may be interpreted these two
expressions concerning the man of Sin the mystical Jereboam that caused Israel
to Sin, that the Lord shall consume him with the breath of his mouth, that is,
by his word and spirit in the Preaching of the Gospel as the Papacy has been,
and is at this day under a consumption thereby, and then at length he shall
destroy him by the brightness of his coming, 2 These. 2.8. Now as it is in
consumptions, we know persons that labor thereof, will sometimes be very ill
and languish, and sometimes cheer again, and revive, and seem to be on the
mending hand, get up a little, and be somewhat brisk, so may it be with the man
of Sin; he may seem sometime in his consumptive state to be getting heart
again, and men may think he will recover his former health, and get rid of that
deadly wound, that by the Sword of the Gospel he has received, and bestir
himself then again more vigorously than before, that he may keep up, and no
more fall down; but yet at the brightness of the Lords appearance, he will
thereby totally ruin and destroy him, but to speak a little distinctly to the
causes and reasons both.

1. Of the continuance of so many still to cleave to her after she has been so
detected.

2. Of the falling of any to her after so great and long a discovery of her,
and declining from her.

1. To the first of these, with respect to her self, and those that are more
properly the constitutive and essential parts of her, the Church as
distinguished by her self from the Laity, or people adhering to her, and
especially the Court of Rome, she being as she is called, and as we have
showed, a Whore, a Harlot, it fares with her as it does with other Whores, that
is, as such a one that is a Whore, getting gain and profit to her self by her
Whoredom, and finding pleasure and sweetness therein, is hardened against the
discoveries of her false practices, and usually goes on impenitently in her
Trade, because of the profit and gain accruing to her thereby, and especially
if She be Courted by great and rich Persons or Princes, they give her
considerable gifts of Riches, Honors, and Dignities, and makes but a Tush at
the Laws, Threatening Punishment, or Death, for such practices, she finding no
effect or Execution of them for a long time to appear against her, by occasion
whereof, She flatters her Self that it will be never otherwise with her than it
is, but that She shall always escape punishment. So fares it with this
Adulterous Church, she has found, and finds so much gain and profit, of
worldly Interest, Riches, Honor, Dignity, accruing to her since her trucking
with Kings, and Princes, and Emperors, and obtaining of them to be owned and
honored in all her pretensions as the Catholic Church, the Church that all
persons ought to comply with, and submit to, and that her Head and Bishop
should be taken to be the Vicar of Christ, the highest power on earth, that its
no marvail if She repent not of her so sweet and gainful a Trade, but by all
means endeavors to keep up her credit that she may be still so courted and
caressed; and if she has gotten a wound that has threatened her life, that she
endeavors to get cured, and to recover her Pristine strength, which if she do
recover, we expect she will follow her old trade of Strumpetry and
Bloodshedding, as hard or harder than ever, that so she may secure her self,
if possible, from the threatened punishment and judgment, ordered of God and
denounced in his Name against her by us, which maugre all her power and
policy, she shall not be able to escape, for strong is the Lord God that
judges her; the brightness of whose appearing that Man of Sin shall not be
able to endure. To this purpose, that she may recover her Pristine strength and
vigor, and follow her accursed Trade with the greater fervor or fury; her
Politicians, as so many Physicians, are at work very hard, beating their
brains, and using all their skill and Industry to make her whole again: and woe
to us for a while if her disease be cured, and the Beasts deadly wound be
healed; for then will be indeed accomplished more fully that which is written
in Rev. 13.15, 16, 17. but in the mean time there are many cleave to her, and
have all along cleaved to her, Because,

1. Many of them are kept from, or have not the opportunity of seeing and
hearing what is evidenced against her, though perhaps they have heard some
rumor of the Gospel Preached to them that dwell on the Earth, and of the Fall
of Babylon in part from her Pristine power and splendor, many are kept in
ignorance, both of the Scriptures, and of the Sermons and Discourses in Writing
of the Protestant parties, and many neglect to inquire into them, and so come
not to know what is evidenced against her; her Pandors or Merchants setting
themselves to keep them in Ignorance and Error, to keep up their own grandeur
and worldly Interests.

2. The cunning Sophistry and deceits of her Priests and Jesuits, men of a
seared Conscience and stiff Impudence, who like Jannes and Jambres, who
withstood Moses from or in his discovering the truth of God to Pharaoh and the
Egyptians, do stand against the truth, and the Preachers of it, and the
discoverers of the Romish Frauds and Impostures, prevail much with many who are
apt to resolve their faith into their learning, subtlety, authority, and
appearing Piety and wisdom, (even as the slights of James and Jambres prevailed
with Pharaoh and many of the Egyptians) so as that though they hear and may
hear, or read the discourses of the learned Protestants, wherein they have
detected their abuses, yet they do not seriously Ponder or weigh them, or are
blinded from discerning the truth by the mists they cast before them.

3. Worldly interest holds in many both of the Kings and Greater Persons, their
interest being interwoven with those of Rome, and where the Kings and Princes
of the earth commit fornication with her, they do by their Laws in many places,
made against them that reject her Communion, and their rigor and cruelty,
deter many from listening to, and considering what is said against her; yea,
and they keep out such discoverers or discoveries of her lewdness; that
otherwise would be afforded to them, as was predicted in Rev. 13.15, 16, 17.
and where their Laws are not so cruel, yet by their bad examples, and their
indulging their favors to her followers, they keep in many from listening to
what would tend to withdraw them from her; the most of men not searching so
much with sincere endeavors after what is true and right, as minding and
resting in what is uppermost in the world, and worshipping in truth its Power
and Grandeur (which I take to be that which the Holy Ghost in the Apocalypse,
calls the Beast) more than any other God besides.

4. The dependence that the younger persons have upon the Elder, or others
related to them, the Children upon their Parents, and Kinsfolks, and Friends
one upon another, and the respect they have one for another, is some cause also
of many being detained therein, being carried away with such as they have, such
dependence upon, or respect unto, especially the being Educated under such
Principles as have been maintained by, and transmitted to them from their
Ancestors and Progenitors, for many generations proves a powerful motive to
retain, and not reject those principles what ever may be offered to detect and
discover the evil of them, few being so redeemed from the vain conversations
received by tradition from their Fathers and Forefathers, or from the Earth and
Men; even from earthly affections, and from their respects to, and dependances
on men by the Blood of Christ, minded and regarded by them, as it has been
shed for them, as to renounce all such respect to Fathers and Forefathers,
earthly affections, and dependence on, and respects to men, and to follow after
Christ singly and sincerely wherever he by his Word and Doctrine would lead
them, or so as to make such due and diligent inquiry and search into the truth,
as it is in him, that they might understand it, and be led and guided by it.
And then

5. The just and righteous Judgment of God, it is to harden both this Harlot
and her Adherents, for their unfaithfulness in seeking after, or not admitting
the truth of God; but either slightly neglecting the inquiry after it, or
against evident shinings of it closing their eyes, lest they should see with
their eyes, or hear with their ears, or understand with their hearts what they
see would tend to convert them from their gainful and delicious interests and
enjoyments. Even as Gods Judgments were upon Pharaoh and the Egyptians to
harden them; for as Pharaoh and the Egyptians hardening themselves, and doing
wickedly against Israel were left of God to their hardness or hardened by him,
that he might glorify himself on them in their destruction: so it is with this
falsely Infallible, but truly inflexible impenitent Church, he gives her and her
Adherents up to their own hearts lusts, and to walk in their Idolatrous and
bloody ways to fill up the measure of their iniquities, that he might glorify
himself in executing upon them the Doom and Judgment that is written concerning
them.

6. Though also some occasion of hardening this Church, and some advantage her
subtle Factors take to harden people in their obstinate cleaving to her from
the too great divisions found, and by them also fomented among us Protestants,
with the too much iniquity also practiced among us, and some harsh Principles
about Gods Decrees of Reprobation in some among us. Whence they possess the
minds of her Followers that they are in a better state, more at unity, and
perhaps many of them less outwardly vicious (though not their generality) and
more devout than they should be, should they forsake their Communion to embrace
ours. Yea, and they can aggravate our divisions, and represent them, as if they
were the just judgment of God upon us for deserting her Communion; though that
be as false as, and no truer than that the Divisions, Feuds, and Wars among us
Christians, both Papists and Protestants, are the just judgment of God upon us
for casting off Heathenism, or for not turning Jews or Mahumetans.

7. To which add the fair paints and cunning carriage of this Harlot; for as it
is with other Whores, they may and often have as handsome bodies, as comely
faces, as smooth carriages, as good parts, and witty winning behavior as
honest Women and chaste Matrons. Yea, sometimes they may in some of those
things, if not in all, exceed them, and being rich or richly maintained, may,
and often have as costly apparel, as rich ornaments and Jewels, as other
honester persons; nay, and where they find defect of beauty, can supply it by
art, painting their faces with such fresh and lively colors, as shall make
them seem young and youthful, when in truth and underneath they are black and
deformed. Even so this Romish Church being a rich and subtle Harlot, is not
void of many taking and winning matters, wherewith she sets forth her self to
draw or keep in Lovers, and trims her way to seek love, as the Prophet said of
the Adulterous Church that did precede her, Jer. 2.33. Yea, to her may well be
applied that of the Prophet Nahum to the bloody City: That she is a
well-favoured Harlot, (...) the Mistress of witchcrafts, that sells Nations
through her whoredoms, and Families through her Witchcrafts, Nah. 3.4. For it
is true that she has in her Persons endued with great natural parts and
endowments, Men of learning and policy; and that she has many good gifts from
God by Jesus Christ, wherewith she might and ought to serve and please him.
Yea, she has Jewels of his gold and of his silver as it were, which he in her
better state was pleased mercifully and graciously, freely to impart unto her.
But as it is the fault of Harlots to abuse the gifts of God and men to
dishonest arts and ends, so it fares with this Church also; for she does as
Jerusalem did before her, of whom the Lord says; That she took of her garments
(namely that he had given her, for he found her naked and in her blood) and
decked her high places with diverse colors, and played the Harlot thereupon.
And she took her fair jewels of his gold and of his silver, and made to her
self Images of a male, and committed Whoredom with them; and she took her
broidred garments and covered them, and set his Oil and his Incense before
them, and his meat which he gave her, even fine flower, and oil, and honey
wherewith he fed her, she set it even before them for a sweet savor, etc.
Ezekiel. 16.16, 17, 18, 19. Even so we may say of this Church, that she serves her
Idols with the gifts of God, and makes use even of the truths that she has
received from Christ and his ordinances to make up an Image of them, as mixed
with her inventions (a frame of Religion) which she worships, and causes all
to worship. Yea, and she decks her self with her natural parts, and gifts,
Moral Virtues, and acquired Sciences, and with many things which she has
received from God. But not that she might singly serve Christ therewith, but to
seek love from the Kings, and Princes, and people of the World, and to commit
fornication with them; and many are taken and led captive with these her
ornaments, that is, with her Learning, seeming Devotion, Charity and Piety,
which are all made use of subserviently to the grand design of making her self
a Goddess, or an Object of worship by the poor simple Souls that she that way
deludes, and as artifices of drawing them to commit adultery with her. With
such things she paints and guilds over her self to inamour men of her, and make
them her Vassals, that she might enrich her self, though with the spoil of
their Souls. As in a vision was forerepresented by the Holy Ghost concerning
her in Rev. 17.4. while the holy man saw her as a Woman arrayed in purple and
scarlet color, and decked or gilded with Gold, and precious Stones; and Pearls,
having a golden Cup in her hand, in which she gives forth her abominations.
Signifying hereby what a gaudy Church she would be in her appearance and
worship, and how she would be adorned with many fine glittering and rich
colors, the better to inamour the Kings and people of the Earth on her. Yea,
and as crafty and witty Whores can conform themselves to the different tempers
of their Paramours, the better to work upon and captivate, and keep their
affections: so it is with this wiley Church, and her Panders. For those that
are melancholy, or of a more grave sober temper, or religiously inclined, she
can entertain them with Books of Devotion, forms of Penance, rules of
Mortification, and many learned Discourses that may suit their humors; but yet,
so as they must take in therewith her Superstitions; and she has her
Monasteries and Nunneries, places of separation from the World, in a sort to be
devout in, if they be so disposed: and for those that have desires for Heaven,
she can show them (as she pretends) a certain way whereby they may not only
obtain, but merit it too, and to that purpose excites them to much devotion to
God, and to the Saints, and provokes them to bounty, and works of charity,
though she poisons them with her Doctrine of Merit, tending to puff them up,
and corrupts all their good things with the sour and evil leaven of Idolatry,
and other false Opinions before reproved. For as the Apostle says of the false
Apostles, that they could transform themselves into the Ministers of
righteousness, while corrupting men in and from the faith, they were for all
their goodly appearance, in reality the Messengers of Satan; and that they
made a fair show in the flesh, and gloried in appearance, not in heart, 2 Corinthians. 11.13, 15. and 5.12. Gall. 6.12. So is it with these men. They are (as
Dr. Stillingfleet has very well and worthily observed, and in his Sermon upon
that Text manifested them to be) Wolves in sheeps clothing, and the
Religionists that walk after their directions, are corrupted and spoiled by
them. For if the speaking with the tongue of men and Angels, gift of Prophecy,
and understanding all Mysteries, and all Knowledge; yea, and Faith, so as to
remove Mountains, and the giving all a man's goods to feed the poor, and his
body to be burnt, will not profit him if he have not love or charity, 1 Cor
13.1, 2, 3. what profit think we can accrue to this Church, or to any of its
Devotionists from all their Devotions, Gifts, Liberality, Penances, or whatever
else is done by them while they are guilty of gross Idolatry, and corruptions
of the Faith, as is before evidenced. Surely no Idolater has true love to God,
nor any that is partaker with the Blood-thirsty, the guilt whereof lies upon
this Church, and all in its Communion. When the Apostle commends Charity, it is
a Charity out of a pure heart, and a good conscience, and Faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1.5. which cannot be where Idolatry and Superstition, and corruption of
the Faith take place, however liberal they may be in Almsdeeds to the poor;
which the Apostle also supposes may be, where that love and charity which is
so necessary and excellent is yet wanting. Suppose the Gallathians seduced by
the false Apostles to believe the necessity of Circumcision, and the
observation of the Laws of Moses, should have been also persuaded by them to
have retired themselves into Monasteries, and spent their time in Devotions,
and been free to give all they had to feed the poor, would any or all those
things have profited them under that persuasion? I suppose not, seeing the
Apostle says, If they were circumcised, Christ would profit them nothing,
Gall. 6.2. If Christ would profit them nothing, surely much less would those
things, or whatever else could have been done by them. And doubtless if the
corrupting their Faith by Circumcision would have so marred all their Religion,
much more will Idolatry, Superstition, and the other Iniquities before detected
in the Roman Communion, mar all their finest, and otherwise most laudable
actions. But then on the other side, this wiley Church, like a wiley Strumpet,
has other entertainments for persons of other tempers or dispositions; and if
they have a mind to live loosly, and in the practice of any Wickedness, they
have plasters to skin over such Ulcers; they can fit them with loose Doctrines
and Principles, they can hold them in the Roman Communion, by telling them,
that if they confess to the Priest once a year or oftener, and receive
Absolution from their sins upon some petty Penances, and seeming Austerities to
the flesh (which yet they may upon pretty light Devotions, or for money have
Indulgencies in) they may receive pardon for all their forepast faults, yea,
perhaps for a great many years too, or for a great time to come, and if they
continue in sin till death, returning to what they have confessed; yet if but
an hour or two before their death they can but send for a Priest, and make
confession of their sins with some attrition or grief that their condition is
no better, though they be not contrite or broken in heart for their sins, nor
have any love of God; yet having the Priests absolution, and being anointed
with their Extreme Unction, they are secured from Hell and damnation. Indeed
they may be unfit for Heaven, as the foolish Virgins were, that slumbred and
slept till it was proclaimed that the Bridegroom came, and then not having Oil
in their Vessels, their Lamps were gone out; ay, but they shall go but to
Purgatory at the worst, and be purged by those pains for sometime; and from
thence also they may be soon released by virtue of the overmuch Oil in the
wise Virgins Vessels, that is, by virtue of the meritorious works of
Supererrogation done by their more religious Votaries, and Canonized Saints,
and by the Masses and Sacrifices offered for the quick and the dead, and other
Devotions performed by their living Priests; especially if they give a
considerable sum of money to them to purchase their Devotions for them when they
die, and then they may in a short time too be at rest therefrom. And these are
fine pleasing baits to hook and hold in the Souls of vicious persons. Now who
that is religiously inclined, but by a conceit of meriting, will be observant of
the rules of such a Religion? And who that loves his sins but will like such a
Doctrine and Religion, as gives them so good encouragement to hold them fast,
and propounds such easy remedies to secure them from the dreadful punishments
of them? And that is a main reason of so many great and small being held fast in
the arms of this loving Church, that she being in her self gay, and gaudy, and
decked, and painted with fine colors, has the wit, or craft, and subtlety to
bait her Hooks according to the humors of the several persons for whom she
fishes, and accommodates her self to the several dispositions of her Paramours;
to be either more solitary and sullen, or more pleasant and gamesome, as may
suit best with their constitution. What we have said upon this first Head, to
the reasons of so many being held still in her Communion, may suffice to that.

2. And truly in answer to the inquiry in its second branch, some things of
what is said to the former might be repeated again, or rather referred unto by
us, as causes thereof; namely, of the falling off of so many to her that have
been delivered from her, and brought up under that light by which they might so
discover her false colors, as to keep from her. As the subtlety of her
Emissaries and Factors, having now more liberty amongst us to negotiate for her
than formerly; and the occasions of offense ministered by our own divisions, and
the too many miscarriages found among us, especially in some transactions of
the late times; which those Emissaries want neither skill nor will to improve
to the furtherance of their designs: and also the fair flourishes that she by
them makes, especially in these Countries, where being in the midst of
oppositions, they put on greater appearances of Piety, Patience, Charity (as
they call their Almsdeeds) and pretensions of greater Unity and Prosperity; and
what was lastly said also of her wiliness in accommodating her Doctrines, and
carriages toward them, to men's different humors. But besides these things there
may be other causes that are more principal assigned, which in conjunction with
these are of great power and influence; so as there is great danger of the fall
of many into her embraces. As for instance,

1. Men's own former, and hitherto Carelessness to acquaint themselves with, and
seek to be established in the truth, and to walk in it according to its
Instructions, and that has been, and is the case of too many both of our
Gentry and of others of both Sexes, that though they have for many years had
the Scriptures and Gospel Doctrines among them, and many Learned and Solid
disocurses published, to discover the deceits of the Romanists; yet they have
not set their hearts toward God and Christ seriously, to know and walk in, and
be obedient to his truth; but have rested in a bare form of Godliness, denying
the power of it, more minding the World and the things of it, their Estates,
Riches, Honors, Pleasures, Ornaments, Gallantry or Intemperancy, and what
their corruptions lead them to, than how to serve and please God, and make such
right improvements of his truths, made known to and among them, as wherein they
might be fitted for and accounted worthy of its utmost Benefits, especially in
these late and present days, in which, loose and licentious principles and
practices, of Atheism, infidelity and debauchery, take great place and have
wonderfully in a few years thriven so as to overcome the Nations. Now God is
marvailously jealous of his glory, and the glory of his Name and truth, and
will not hold them guiltless that take or receive them in vain, that is, so as
not to be made good by them, and therefore will punish them that so do, for
this cause it was that he gave over the Gentiles to vile affections, and to
gross Idolatry, because, when he had in and by his works of creation and
providence, made known himself to and among them, they did not glorify him as
God, nor were thankful to him, but became vain in their Imaginations, and their
Foolish Hearts were darkened, so as professing themselves to be wise, they
became fools, etc. Romans 1.21, 22, 23, 24, 25. For this cause God also threatened
us Christians, that he would give way to the man of Sin to come in upon the
World with power, and signs, and lying wonders, after the manner of Satan, and
send strong delusions, that men might believe lies and be Damned, even because
God had first sent the truth of the Gospel among us, and men received not the
love thereof, that they might be saved (namely from their Sins) nor believed it
heartily, so as to obey it, but had pleasure in unrighteousness, 2 These. 2, 8,
9, 10, 11, 12. Which horrible threatened judgment he has sadly executed in the
World, after the Christian faith, being spread abroad in it, has not been duly
entertained, partly by leting loose Mahomet, and seting up a Kingdom in the
World, as to its Eastern parts, that received and propagates his delusions what
they can, and partly by suffering Rome in these Western parts, so to exalt her
self with all her corruptions and abominations, and surely this is one, and the
main cause of the falling off of so many to her bad communion after such
detection of her so fully made, to which way has also been the rather made by.

2. The sad debauchings of the Nations, and filling them with Profaneness,
uncleanness, and irreligion, from the one end to the other thereof, which has
doubtless been the project, and work of some that hold the Doctrine of Balaam,
and follow his pernicious ways, who taught Balak to cast a stumbling block
before the Children of Israel to eat things sacrificed to Idols, and to commit
Fornication, Rev. 2.14. Or rather as Jezabel, that painted Strumpet, who
seduced Gods People to commit fornication, (first) and (then) to eat things
sacrificed to Idols, first to commit Fornication, and then, as a fruit thereof
to which they might that way be the easier drawn to eat things sacrificed to
Idols, Rev. 2.20. According to some Machivillian principles, to make men first
of no Religion, and then they may easily be drawn to embrace any false
Religion; how much bodily Whoredom and Fornication overspreads the Land, is too
sad as well as easy to observe, and surely its just with God when men give up
themselves to that, to give them over to Spiritual Fornication also, that they
might fill up the measure of their Iniquities, and his greater and severer
wrath might come upon them, and especially, its the direct way to promote the
Popish Religion and its spiritual Whoredoms, because it gives such indulgences
to, and dispensations for the beloved Sins of bodily Fornication, promising to
those that practice such Sins, Pardon and impunity (at least after some
penances and Purgatory Pains) for their Sins, and Heaven and Happiness to at
last, if they will but join themselves in fellowship with that Church, and
uphold its claims and Pretentions, though for others of a devouter complexion,
as we have noted, she can take some precious truths of God, compared in
Scripture to Gold, yea, fine Gold, or to Silver seven times Purifyed in the
fire, and his precious promises, which are as precious Pearls, more precious
than Rubies, and mixing them with her own superstitions, make up pretty taking
medals, and forms or Images of devotion, and composures of Croizons, and
religious exercises, to allure and bewitch them.

3. Yea, the familiarity and Friendship with Persons of that Religion, or being
yoked up with them, especially in Marriage, proves a great inducement to
diverse to turn to them, for even such correspondencies and conjunctions with
any false worshipers have been allways pernicious, as may appear even in
Solomon, who though a wise man, and of an exceeding large understanding, so as
that (as Nehemiah observes) among many Nations, there was no King like him, who
was beloved of God, yet even him did outlandish (or strange) women (of a
corrupt Religion) cause to Sin, Neh. 13.26. 1 King. 11.3, 4, 5, 6, 7. For his
Women inclined or turned away his Heart, so that it was not right with God, but
he followed other Gods, and built high places for them, and who may presume to
stand under a temptation, when he voluntarily casts himself into it, that
Solomon could not stand upright under, though so wise a man? therefore God
forbad Israel to join themselves in affinity with Idolaters, by Marrying their
Daughters, least they should prove a snare to them, and draw away their hearts
after their Gods with them, Exodus 34.12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Deuteronomy. 7.3, 4. But too
many now adays forget and wilfully overlook such warnings, not reguard such
threatenings, as that in Math. 2.11.12. Where after he had said, Judah has
dealt treacherously, and an abomination is committed in Israel and in
Jerusalem: for Judah has profaned the holiness of God, which he loved by
Marrying the Daughter of a strange God, he adds, the Lord will cut of the Man
that does this, the Master and the Scholar out of the Tabernacles of Judah,
yea, the making friendships, and but contracting familiarities with Persons of
corrupt principles, or practices the Scripture notes and warns of as infectious
and dangerous; see to this purpose, Prove. 13.20. and 22, 24, 25. and 23, 29,
20, 2 Cor. 6.14, 15. But such warnings are in this case too much slighted.

4. To which we may add a particular subtlety and craft of in the Romish
Factors, in that to ensnare people, they raise and scatter reports among them,
that great persons in authority favor and underneath approve their Religion,
Church and Doctrine, as knowing that the multitude too generally, and
especially the looser sort, and those that are ambitious of honor, and of the
favor of great Persons, are apt to resolve their Religion into the wills and
pleasures of Princes and great Persons, and will be ready to comply with their
judgments, and steer their course by what they take to be their Compass to any
point, whither right or wrong; toward Hell or Heaven, as is to be seen in all
Nations where the Religion of the Princes and their Courts bears the greatest
sway among their subjects; they being, as was said before, the Gods that are by
multitudes supreamly Worshipped; or if it be men's own bellies, their case,
honor, wealth, pleasure, or the like, that is the highest and chief God with
them; yet Kings, Princes, and great Persons, they look at as the most powerful
Mediators, by whose means or favor those other things are most probably and
fully to be compassed and enjoyed, and so their highest God may be most
satisfyingly served. That the Priests and Jesuits take such a course now adays
to persuade the people by such an Argument, to comply with their Principles, we
have it made public in Print, by the confession of the late converted Friar,
Mr. Anthony Aegan, in his Book wherein his Recantation Sermon Preached at
London is Printed, where we meet with words to this effect, That after his
Conversion to the Protestant Religion, several of the Papist Priests, and
others living about Loughreats in Ireland, (whom, he says, he is ready to
name, and did thereby accuse) did publicly report that his Majesty, his Royal
Highness, and all the Nobility and Gentry of the Kingdom of England, were
privately of their Religion, using it as an argument to make or move him to
fall back again to Popery. See here what notorious falsehoods they fear not to
report, to the scandal of Authority, yea, and of our Nation it self, to carry
on their own designs; for thanks be to God the contrary hereunto has been, and
is abundantly evidenced, as to such a general overflowing of their Religion
over all those persons whom they have so traduced. Surely, that cause is naught
that the maintainers of stick not to manage by so vile and indirect Mediums, as
so to belly and slander their Superiors; there is no question but it is what
they desire and would gladly effect, to make both the Kings Majesty and the
Court, and all the Nobility and Gentry, of their mind and Religion, but God
forbid that ever they should prevail upon them, or draw them, or any of them,
into so great a mischief, and so certain a way to their own everlasting
destruction. But no doubt but by such suggestions they may prevail upon no
small party of men, whose Faith and Religion lies in the wills and practices of
the Great ones, to listen and consent unto them, being too apt to take things
upon trust of their, (that is) these men's honesty, and not duly weighing what
is said by them, and that questionless is one thing that proves an effectual
Engine to draw away disciples after them.

Upon these and such like accounts, this Church, though so corrupt, keeps up
her self yet in the world, and gets too much credit with too many, who are
either not able, or not willing to search into matters to find them out, with a
diligent and impartial search, with such her Paints pass for excellent beauty
and comeliness, especially her pretty frames and forms of Devotion in her
Prayers and Croisons, partly to God and Christ, and partly to Saints really or
supposedly such; Her abstinences and penances, or other austerities, which have
such a show of excellency, (as the Apostle says of the commandments of men,
Touch not, taste not, handle not: That they have a show of wisdom indeed, in
will worship and humility, and neglecting, or (as the Margin reads it)
punishing, and not sparing the body, Col. 2.21.23. As draws in unstable Souls,
and beguiles them, (as the Apostles phrase is in verse. 18.) of their reward,
which things, diverse of them, I mean Devotion, Abstinence, Mortification, yea,
and Almsdeeds, if rightly done, and upon right and sound principles, are in
themselves very good, and may be, and are by some exercised upon Protestant
Principles, more worthily and acceptably than they can be upon those of Rome,
and in conjunction with their corruptions, by which all their bests deeds are
marred, though indeed I could wish they were more upon good and right
principles, and in a good way practiced among us, than they are, but it is too
often found, that men are apter to do more in, and for a false way, than they
or others are in and for a true, as our Savior says, Luke 16.8. The children
of this world are in their generation wiser than the children of light. So it
may be said also, that the worshippers of Idols are more forward in their
worship, than they that worship the true God, are in his worship; for so we
find it noted of the Idolaters, that they lavish gold out of the bag, and weigh
Silver out of the balance, and spare for no cost to make an Idol or false God,
and then bear him upon their Shoulder, and carry him to his place, Isa. 46.6,
7. And as the Prophet Jeremy notes, they deck it with Silver and Gold, and
fasten it with nails; yea, Silver spread in Plates is brought from Tarshish,
and Gold from Vphaz; the work of the workman, and of the hands of the Founder,
blue and purple is their clothing, etc. Jer. 10.4.9. that is, they spare for
neither cost nor pains, nor matter how they burden themselves to carry on a
false Religion and Worship, when God, in and by Jesus Christ, the former of all
things, and our Redeemer, who proffers to carry and bear us, and work all our
works for and in us, in our listening to him, and following his Word and Spirit,
we are too prone to slight, and think much to put our selves to cost and pains,
and to stoop down to bear any burdens put upon us by him in and for his
service. Israel in the wilderness could readily pluck off their Jewels, and
Earrings, to make themselves a Molten Calf of, Exodus 32.2, 3. when as
afterward they could find in their hearts to put off God with the refuse or
worst of what he gave them; yea, and to rob Him of his Tithes and Offerings,
Mal. 1.8.13. and 3.8. and so the false Worshippers of Rome are forwarder to put
themselves to fastings and abstinence after their fashion, with Devotions,
Alms-deeds, and the like, to make to themselves a confidence of, or establish
to themselves a righteousness in, (as the Apostles Phrase is in Romans 10.3.) and
to purchase to themselves thereby forgiveness of (that I say not with reference
to some of them, also a license to practice) their Sins, and to merit and
deserve Gods favor and eternal Life: when we that have the purity and
simplicity of the truth of God more clearly among us, and are Instructed into
the alone sufficiency in the grace in Christ Jesus, and have all freely
promised to us upon his account only in a way of obedience to him, and his
instructions are yet too backward to yield up our selves to him, and to be at
such cost and charge, and exercise such pains and patience as his instructions
direct us to, and his grace and love engage us to, that we might enjoy the
pourings out of his spirit upon us, glorify him worthily in our generations,
and do good to others to our capacities.

6. Now upon all these premises I cannot but desire for all men, especially for
my friends and acquaintance, that the Lord would grant to them, that by all
that is said, or by what is otherwhere more fully and clearly said by more
learned Persons, they may so discern, and see the Abominations of that Harlot,
as to avoid them, and keep themselves far from them, not listening to any of
their fair and specious flatteries that would entice thereto, of whom I may say
in Solomon's words, None that go into her (that is, very few or none of those
that willingly go into fellowship with her) return again, neither do they take
hold of the paths of life, so as to walk in the way of good men, and keep the
path of the righteous; but with the simple ones, and the young man void of
understanding, that declining toward the corner of the strange woman, go in
the path to her house, who with her fair speech are made to yield, and with the
flattering of her lips are enticed; they go after her, as the Ox to the
slaughter, or as a fool to the correction of the stocks, till a dart strike
through their liver, as a Bird that hastes to the snare, and knows not that it
is for their life, even for the life of their precious Souls. Oh! might what
follows with reference to this scarlet Whore be considered and received,
wherein wisdom adds -- Hearken now therefore unto me, O ye Children, and attend
to the words of my mouth. Let not thine heart decline or bend toward her way,
go not astray in her paths; for she has cast down many wounded; yea, many
strong men (men of strong parts) have been slain by her, as to spiritual life.
Her house is the way to Hell (whether men think and believe so or not) going
down to the chambers of death, Prove. 2.19, 20. and 7.7, 8, 9.21.22.23. etc. For
if the Scriptures be true, as undoubtedly they are (both they and we confess,
that though they love to puzzle men with questions needlessly, how they know
them to be the Scriptures, or word of God, as if we must be beholding to them
for that which is false) then seeing the Scriptures affirm that no Idolaters
shall inherit the kingdom of God, nor any that love or make a lie, they then
that are of, and hold communion with that Church, are in a sad and piteous
case, they being clearly guilty of Idolatry, and gross falsehoods, as may from
what is said, and many other things that I have omitted be easily discerned.
And though some men (they think) charitably suppose that some, who through
their invincible Ignorance, are necessitated to live in their communion, may
find mercy with God, they believing and holding the fundamental Articles of the
Christian faith, though joined with such corruptions, as they join therewith;
whose charitable concessions to that purpose have, I fear, laid a snare for the
feet of many; I am confident have been, and are abused to that purpose by her
Priests and Jesuits to draw many in to join with them (though no ground be
given in them for that) and to hold in them that were before of it. Yet seeing
(as I question not) the false Apostles, and the Gallathians seduced by them,
did hold the main Articles of the Christian faith too, only joined with them a
necessity of Circumcision, as these join a necessity of communion with their
Church in all that she injoynes and imposes, unto their salvation; and the
Apostle for all that pronounced, that in case they were circumcised, Christ
would profit them nothing, Gall. 5.2. I know little ground we have for that
charity, or what more than we may have for those of the Turks or Jews or Pagans
who are invincibly kept from the knowledge of the truth of God, and the true
way of worshipping him, received among us Christians, by the prevalency of
their false Teachers, or the severities of their Rulers under whose power they
live, that they also may be winked at of God and saved. Which if it may be
supposed, yet affords no good ground for any of us Christians to turn to any of
their Religions, and as little have we from the forementioned charitable
concessions or suppositions of some to turn to Romes communion. Nay, its most
dreadfully dangerous for any that have known better, or been brought up under
the Protestant profession, where they have had or might have had clear
convictions of the falsehoods and evils of that Church, to depart from righter
ways to her deceits and corruptions. For to such doubtless belongs that
dreadful sentence which we read of in Rev. 14.9, 10. among others unto whom its
possible it may hereafter also be applicable upon a farther account. Where
after the Angels preaching the everlasting Gospel openly, as in the Mid-heaven,
and warning all Nations to fear God and worship him, in opposition to the false
worship before in chap. 13. related; and another Angels proclaiming Babylon
(that is Rome) to be fallen (both from the true Faith, and worship, and from
her former luster, as before we explicated it) there follows a third Angel
proclaiming with a loud voice, that any man (namely, if now especially after
the two former proclamations either yet, or having not done so before now)
shall worship the Beast, and his Image, and receive his Mark in his forehead,
or in his hand, (shall either more openly or secretly, either in profession or
practice receive the mark and badge of communion and fellowship with the false
worship of Rome, for that is clearly as was before noted, the Woman supported
by, and riding the Beast, whose worshippers are here threatened) the same shall
drink of the Wine of the wrath of God, which is without mixture poured into the
Cup of his indignation, and shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the
presence of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb, and the smoke of
their torment ascends up for ever and ever; and they have no rest day or
night, who worship the Beast and his image, and whosoever receives the Mark of
his name. A dreadful sentence worthy to be thought of and trembled at by all
that still retain the false Idoatrous worship practiced in the Romish Church,
especially by such of them as live among the Protestant reformed Churches, and
more especially still that having had better light and education, do return or
relapse thereto. A sentence in which is no respect of persons, but what or
whoever they be, high or low, rich or poor, Princes or peasants, God will not
be partial in his judgment upon them; but if they will venture upon these sins,
they must also expect to endure these terrible torments here expressed, and the
Mighty man shall cry there bitterly, Zeph. 1.14. O heavy portion of all our
English Roman Catholics. The Lord open their eyes to see the evil of the way
they are in, and persuade them to renounce it, and to depart therefrom, for it
will be most sad in the latter end. Though its probable that they of Rome may
devise to make sad the portion of such as warn and protest against them, and
desire their conversion; and that they may also prosper a while in their
designs, and bring sad things upon the righter Worshippers before their misery
come upon them, and therefore it follows in Rev. 14.12. Here is the patience of
the Saints, here are they that keep the Commandments of God, and the faith of
Jesus. Here namely about this time, when this is proclaimed; and this warning
given that is mentioned in the foregoing verses, here is the patience of the
Saints, then the Saints and right Worshippers shall have a time to exercise
their patience in waiting for the accomplishment of that predicted judgment; or
also they may have a sad time of trial, and therein for exercise of their
parience because of some eminent sufferings then befalling them, to encourage
them under which, and to keep the Commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus,
it is therefore added, That he heard a voice from Heaven, saying Writeb, lessed
are the dead that die in the Lord, from henceforth, yea, says the Spirit, that
they may rest from their labors, and their works shall follow them, as
implying that thenceforth would follow such labors and sufferings of the
Saints, as well would it be with those that should endure them to death, so as
to die in the Lord; and happy should be the dead of them rather than the living,
before the sad doom of the Beast-worshippers come upon them. But yet as they
that thenceforth especially die in the Lord shall be blessed, so the
Beast-Worshippers however long they may live, and their doom be deferred, are
and shall be in the issue most accursed.

Which things being so, let us, I pray Sir, beware of that false worship,
keeping close to the Scriptures of truth, and to the sacred truths revealed in
the Scriptures, and not for any respect, honor, friendship, or worldly and
carnal advantages respect them, and turn aside to so corrupt and dangerous away
and worship, as that of the Roman Communion. God will certainly better bare
with such as have as it were been held captive by their deceits being always
educated and brought up under them, then with such as having been better
instructed, do turn aside to them. Oh that these Nations and the Inhabitants
thereof, would therefore look about them, and beware how they lissen to any
that would thereto seduce them, and mind those many convincing arguments, and
clear and unanswerable demonstrations of the desperate badness of that Church,
and its ways, and Doctrines, and doings, which by many hands have been offered
to them, which yet if they please, they may consult with and consider, among
which, beside these many worthy men who have formerly wrote excellently against
her corruptions, as Jewel, Reinolds, Morton, and many others, the Labors of
the Learned Doctor Stillingfleet, Dr. Tillitson, Dr. Brevint, Dr. Whitby, Sr.
Christopher Wyvel, (who it seems in his Minority was educated among or ensnared
with them) and Mr. Gilbert Burnet, in my judgment, are very worthy
consideration. And oh that men would not dally and trifle in so great a matter
as their own Salvation, but be serious and considerative in what they do
therein, allways remembering that of our Blessed Savior, What will it profit a
man to gain the whole World, and loose his own Soul? Or what shall a man give
in Exchange for his Soul? For the Son of man shall come in the glory of his
Father with his Angels, and then he will give to every man according to his
Works, Math. 16.26.27. And that if thy hand offend thee, cut it off and cast it
from thee, and so if thy foot offend thee, for better it is to enter into the
Kingdom of God, having but one hand or foot, and so halting or maimed, than
having two hands or two feet to be cast into Hell Fire, where the Worm dies
not, and the fire is not quenched. And if thine Eye (thy right Eye) offend
thee, pluck it out and cast it from thee, for better it is to enter into the
Kingdom of God having but one Eye, then having both thine Eyes to be cast into
Hell Fire where the Worms dies not, and the Fire is not quenched, Mark
9.44.48. Consider what is herein (though but briefly and weakly) propounded,
and the Lord bless it to every one that may and shall read it, for the
establishing them in the truth where they are weak and wavering thereabout, if
not, yet waved therefrom, and for the recovering such as have declined or
departed from it, and the Lord deliver us all from every evil work, and
preserve us to his everlasting Kingdom, in whom I take my leave, and remain

Yours and every Man's, to serve you and them in the faith and truth of Christ.

FINIS.

