A DECLARATION OF THE COMMISSIONERS OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, To the whole Kirk
and Kingdom of SCOTLAND,

CONCERNING Present dangers, and duties relating to the Covenant and Religion.

Printed at Edinburgh by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And reprinted at London for Robert Bostock, at the Kings Head in
Paul's Churchyard. 1648.

Edinb. 1 Martii, 1648. Post Meridiem.
A Declaration of the Commissioners of the General Assembly to the whole Kirk
and Kingdom of Scotland, concerning present dangers, and duties relating to the
COVENANT and RELIGION.
IF in a time of so great and imminent danger to Religion and the Cause of God,
the Trumpet in Zion should give no certain sound, nor the watch-mens Tower any
seasonable warning, it might be justly charged upon us as a sinful neglect of
duty, and the blood of many thousand souls might be required at our hands.
Therefore so far as we have discovered the dangerous plots and snares of the
malicious and crafty adversaries of this Cause, we shall freely and faithfully
make the same known; trusting that all who would not make shipwreck of faith
and a good conscience, will carefully avoid as well hid as manifest rocks, when
they are warned of them.

After the Solemn League and Covenant of the three Kingdoms had so prospered
against the enemies and opposers thereof, as made them despair of overthrowing
it in any such way of a direct opposition; they begun with much wit and
industry to endeavor a dividing of the ends of the Covenant, and an altering
of the first principle and state of the Cause. Upon the one hand, the Sectaries
in England (according as is formerly represented by the late General Assembly,
in their Declaration to their Brethren of England, and by our Remonstrance to
the Committee of Estates of the 13 of October last) have by fraud and violence
endeavored the subversion of Religion; whose exorbitant insolency, being now
in Arms, is so unsupportable, that no man can doubt but all the Articles of the
Covenant are in danger by them; the vile Errors, wicked Heresies, and
intolerable Blasphemies daily growing amongst them, can hardly be reckoned up;
all which are mightily aggredged by the lawless and Godless toleration
thereof: And lest Parliamentary authority should curb this monstrous insolency,
they have not only refused Orders for disbanding, but have forced Orders for
their own standing, and do overruled Parliament, King, City, and Country, to
the trampling under foot all Government Civil and Ecclesiastical, and to the
terror, oppression, and apparent ruin of all the truly godly, and sound
lovers of the Solemn League and Covenant. On the other hand, the Prelatical and
Malignant party have catched at and studied to make advantage of some parts and
clauses of the Covenant, without keeping all the links of that golden chain
fast together.

This design of receding from the former principles, and stating the public
Cause otherwise then it was stated by both Kingdoms when they joined in
Covenant and Arms, may be abundantly discovered by two instances: First, the
design has been so fast and so far driven on, that although the fourth
Article of the League and Covenant was clearly framed and intended against the
Malignant party; and although there was one express Article in the Treaty
between the Kingdoms for swearing and subscribing the League and Covenant by
both Kingdoms, as a more near tie and conjunction of both, for their defense
against the Popish, Prelatical and Malignant party and their adherents; And
although in the Declarations of both Kingdoms in the year 1643, it was declared
that all such as would not speedily take the Covenant, and join with all their
power in the defense of this Cause, are to be censured and punished as
professed Adversaries and Malignants; Yet some are not ashamed to plead for the
Malignant party, as if they were friends rather then enemies to this cause, and
as none were now to be looked upon as dangerous enemies to the Cause, but the
Sectaries only; whereas the word of God and the experience of former times not
only teaches us to beware of dangers from the fraud, as well as the force,
from the plots as well as from the power of enemies; but also sets before us
sad examples of great unexpected miseries, and mischiefs brought upon the
people of God, from enemies once broken and quashed, when they got again the
power of the sword, and opportunity to act whatsoever cruelties their
inveterate malice and enraged spirits put them upon.

The other instance is, that although in the Covenant, the duty of preserving
and defending the Kings Majesty's person and authority be joined with and
subbardinate unto the duty of preserving and defending the true Religion and
Liberties of the Kingdoms; and although from the beginning of this Cause, the
good, safety and security of Religion has been principally sought after and
insisted upon: yet solicitations, persuasions, and endeavors have not been,
nor are wanting for his Majesty's restitution to the exercise of his Royal
power, and for espousing his Majesty's quarrel, notwithstanding his not
granting of the public desires concerning the Covenant, and Religion: And this
course is clearly contrary to the declared resolution of the Parliament of
this Kingdom, after advice desired from us, upon the case concerning the King
then propounded to us; And it is no less contrary to the Principles and
professions of the Convention and of the Committee of Estates, before any such
advise was desired or had from us: yea all along, and in the whole course of
the public proceedings, the settling and securing of Religion has been so much
stood upon, that Malignants who intended a new state of the cause did well
perceive how great difficulty, and how small hopes there was of satisfying this
Kirk and Kingdom with any thing else, while unsatisfied in the point of
Religion; and therefore all possible care has been taken by them whereby to
have some specious and fair pretenses of satisfaction in the business of
Religion.

And here, as we do not disapprove, but highly commend the worthy pains of such
as did indeed endeavor to bring the Kings Majestiy a greater length, even to
give full satisfaction in point of Religion; so we cannot but take notice of
that report which many did lately entertain and spread in this country;
namely, that his Majesty has given satisfaction to the desires of this Kirk
and Kingdom in point of the Covenant and Religion.

If his Majesty had indeed given such satisfaction, we should rejoice at it as
much as any; and however shall not cease to pray for his Majesty, that God
would give him repentance and remission of sins, and incline his heart to the
love of the true Religion and Reformation, and that his Royal person may be
preserved from all harm and violence: And being now (as we formerly remonstrate
on the 13, of October) very sensible of the present danger his Majesty's person
and Monarchical government is in by that prevalent party of Sectaries; We
shall, so far as concerns the duty of our places and callings, endeavor the
preservation of Monarchical government in his Majesty, and his Posterity
according to the Covenant; not being ignorant what confusion and calamities use
to attend the change either of the government it self, or of the Royal line.
Nevertheless, the country being so generally possessed with so dangerous a
mistake, misunderstanding of so great a business; and his Majesty himself
professing in his letter to us, dated at Carisbrook Castle the 27 of December
last, that he has resolved so far to agree to the desires of this Kirk and
Kingdom, concerning the Covenant, and settling Religion, as he is confident
shall give us satisfaction; If now we should be silent, we might be understood
as tacitly consenting and acquiescing: We are therefore necessitated for
undeceiving the Nation, and for accquitting our selves, to declare, that a
Narrative of the state of public affairs having been made to us by those who
were entrusted for that effect, and since delivered to us in writing, We have
more especially taken to our serious thoughts so much of that Narrative as was
from His Majesty made known unto us, as his resolutions for satisfaction in
point of Religion. The first Article whereof is as follows:

1. For the Covenant, His Majesty giving belief to the professions of those who
have entered into the League and Covenant, and that their intentions are real
for preservation of His Majesty's Person, according to their allegiance, and no
ways to diminish his just Power and Greatness, is content, so soon as he can
with freedom, honor and safety be present in a free Parliament, to confirm the
said League and Covenant by Act of Parliament in both Kingdoms, for security of
all those who have taken, or shall take the said Covenant: Provided that none
who is unwilling shall be constrained to take it.

Which Article has nothing in it of His Majesty's affection to, or liking and
approbation of the Covenant, but only what he is content to yield in order to
his own interest. Yea, an Act of Parliament for security of those who have
taken, or shall take the Covenant, does or may suppose some fault, or somewhat
justly challengable in the taking of the Covenant, which needs an Act of
Indemnity. Next, the offer is but conditional, and has in the bosom of it a
complication of such and so many conditions, as might open a door to some
evasion or other, by multiplying exceptions, difficulties, and various notions,
either concerning the professions of those who have entered into the League and
Covenant, or concerning His Majesty's just power and greatness, or concerning
his freedom, honor and safety, or concerning a free Parliament. And although
the concession were certain and absolute, it amounts to no more but to a
leaving of the Covenant arbitrary; which is contrary to the Acts of the
General Assembly and Parliament in this Kingdom, to the Declaration of both
Kingdoms before cited, and to one of the chief Propositions of Religion once
agreed upon by both Kingdoms, for a safe and well grounded Peace; viz. The
Proposition concerning His Majesty's (wearing and signing of the League and
Covenant, and enjoining by Act of Parliament in both Kingdoms the taking
thereof by all the Subjects in the three Kingdoms, with such penalties as shall
be agreed upon by both Kingdoms: So that the first Article of His Majesty's
offer is a most manifest altering of the State of this cause; It is also a
strengthening of the hearts and hands both of the Sectaries, and of the
Malignant Party, a partaking and conniving at the sin of all those in the three
Kingdoms who have refused, or shall refuse to enter into the League and
Covenant, an introducing of a detestable indifferency or neutrality in this
cause which so much concerns the glory God, the good of the Kingdom, and the
honor of the King. And therefore we have judged this Article not only
unsatisfactory, but destructive to the Covenant. Neither are we moved with
that objection which is hinted concerning the constraining or enforcing men
consciences: They refuse a necessary duty who refuse to take the Covenant; and
the penalty or punishment of such refusal is no constraining of the
Conscience, more then the penalty or punishment of a Subject who refuses to
take the Oath of Allegiance is a constraining of the conscience to Loyalty, or
more then the punishment of Idolaters, Blasphemers, and Seducers, mentioned so
often in Scripture, can be called a constraining of the conscience to the fear
of God.

The words of the second Article are these:

His Majesty will likewise confirm by Act of Parliament in England,
Presbyteriall Government, the Directory for Worship, and Assembly of Divines at
Westminster for three years, so that his Majesty and his household be not
hindered from using that form of Divine Service he has formerly practiced; and
that a free debate and consultation be had with the Divines at Westminster
(twenty of his Majesty's nomination being added unto them) and with such as
shall be sent from the Church of Scotland, whereby it may be determined by his
Majesty and the two Houses how the Church Government after the three years
shall be fully established according to the Word of God.

For ought we know the conditions couched in the first Article are also to be
understood in this and the following Articles: However this second Article as
it is but the same in substance with some of his Majesty's concessions in
former Messages, so that which is proposed in it, is but a Toleration of
Presbyterial Government in England, and that but for three years, and is a
direct allowance, at least of the book of Common Prayer in his Majesty's
Household: And moreover by the second Article not only a door is left open for
re-establishing Prelacy and the Service Book, But the happy progress already
made in the Reformation, and Uniformitie of Religion according to the Covenant
in a Confession of Faith, Directorie of Worship, Form of Church Government and
Catechism is set aside as so much lost labor, in order to a future settlement.
Free debate with any of the Prelaticall party nominated by his Majesty (when
there was any such occasion) has not been declined: But we have great cause to
be tender of unsetling and razing a good foundation already laid in the work
of Reformation. And whereas his Majesty will have it determined by himself,
and the two Houses, how the Church Government after the said three years shall
be established according to the Word of God: This does at once cut off three of
the most material and most necessary Propositions concerning Religion formerly
agreed upon by both Kingdoms, and from both tendered to his Majesty (though
some of them be now laid aside by the two Houses of the Parliament of England)
namely, The third Proposition, for abolishing Archbishops, Bishops, etc. The
fifth Proposition, That Reformation of Religion according to the Covenant be
settled by Act of Parliament, in such manner as both houses have agreed, or
shall agree upon after consultation had with the Assembly of Divines; And the
sixth Proposition, That such unity and uniformitie in Religion according to the
Covenant, as after consultation had with the Divines of both Kingdoms,
assembled at Westminster, is, or shall be jointly agreed by both Houses of the
Parliament of England, and by the Church and Kingdom of Scotland, be confirmed
by Acts of Parliament of both Kingdoms respectively. Of which three
Propositions, there can be no hopes as to his Majesty's consent or concurrence)
if the offer now made concerning a determination by his Majesty and the two
Houses, be compared with his Majesty's claiming of a negative voice, and with
his Message of Nov. 16. in which he declared that both in Relation as he is a
Christian, and as a King, he cannot give his consent to the abolishing
Archbishops, Bishops, etc. Believing that this order was placed in the Church
by the Apostles themselves, and that his Majesty is also bound by his
Coronation Oath to maintain it. And this message of November 16. His Majesty
adhereth unto, in his Answer to the Bills and Propositions presented to him at
Carisbrook Castle; which Answer is dated December 28. and so after his
Majesty's Letter to us. Upon these and the like considerations we have found
the said second Article of his Majesty's offers in point of Religion to be
destructive to Presbyteriall Government, the Directorie of Worship, and the
uniformitie intended according to the Covenant.

For the third Article delivered to us in these words. And for suppressing of
Schism and Heresies, his Majesty is content and most willing that an effectual
course be taken by Act of Parliament, and all other ways needful and
expedient for suppressing the opinions and practices of Antitrinitarians,
Arrians, Socinians, Antiscripturists, Antinomians, Anabaptists, Arminians,
Familists, Brownists, Separatists, Independents, Libertines, and Seekers, and
generally for suppressing all Blasphemy, Heresy, Schism, and all such
scandalous doctrine or practices as are contrary to the light of nature, or to
the known principles of Christianity (whether concerning faith, worship, or
conversation) or to the power of Godliness, or which may be destructive to
Order or Government, or to the peace of Church or Kingdom.

As we do approve of the Suppression of the particular Heresies and Schisms
enumerated in his Majesty's offer; So we see not how it can be reconciled with
his Majesty's Message of November 16. in which there was a concession to all
such as differ from Presbyteriall Government: And do further find the Article
dangerous and defective in omitting Erastianism, and other dangerous errors,
especially Popery and Prelacy, which may prove destructive to the Covenant, in
ministering the occasion to Papists and Prelates to plead for a toleration;
although the Covenant bind us to endeavor the extirpation both of Popery and
Prelacy.

Having now discovered the snares and dangers, we shall in the next place most
humbly and seriously propose and recommend some wholesome, seasonable and pious
counsels to all the Members of this Church and Kingdom, especially to the
Honorable and High Court of Parliament, and to the Brethren of the Ministry,
which may also serve to express our sense concerning the whole matter contained
in that narrative, delivered to us in writing, so far as is competent and fit
for us to give any judgment thereupon.

First of all we exhort all and every one to make more conscience of
endeavoring a real Reformation of themselves and their Families, and of the
places in which they live then ever yet they have done; to be more serious in
searching their hearts, considering their ways, and purging themselves from all
filthiness of the flesh and spirit to perfect holiness in the fear of God; to
oppose wickedness and profaneness, promote the power and practice of
Godliness, and to be deeply humbled before the Lord for neglecting these things
so much and so long; with all employing and improving Christ's al-sufficiency,
and striving to exercise faith in him for the grace of mortification and
sanctification, as well as for remission of sins and peace with God; that being
implanted and rooted in him, we may grow up as trees of Righteousness, the
planting of the Lord that he may be glorified; for without amendment of life,
and bringing forth of better fruit, the fierce wrath of the Lord cannot turn
away from us.

Secondly, as men desire they may not be led into temptation, but may be guided
in safe and right paths, in the midst of so great difficulties; Let them avoid
the company and counsel of the ungodly, whereby even good men have been often
times most dangerously ensnared; Let all that fear God choose the Testimonies
of the Lord for their counselors, be much in prayer, and searching the mind of
God in his word without leaning to their own understanding, or consulting with
flesh and blood in cases of conscience.

Thirdly, seeing it is no act of wisdom but of folly, so to shun one danger as
to run upon another as bad or worse; Let us therefore avoid enemies, and beware
of dangers on all hands: We cannot see but the cause of God, the true Religion,
the Covenant, Presbyteriall Government, this Church and Kingdom, and whatsoever
is dearest to us will be in as great danger, if the Prelatical party prevail; as
now they are in by the power and prevalency of Sectaries in England, who have
made the Covenant and begun Reformation to be laid aside and hindered the
promoting thereof. So that there is a necessity to be apprehensive of dangers,
and attentive to remedies on both sides, and to beware of compliance with, and
connivance at Sectaries upon the one hand, and Malignants upon the other.

Fourthly, when we speak of Malignants, we desire that the distinction may be
remembered, which was made in the solemn Warning to the Kingdom from the
General Assembly in February 1645. Viz. That the cause is in very great danger
from two sorts of Malignant enemies: First, from such as have openly displayed
a Bannar, or joined in Arms and professed Hostility against the cause, and such
as adhered thereunto: Secondly, from secret Malignants, Discovenanters, and
bosom Enemies. This second sort may be still known by some Characters, given
both at that time and before that time; as by their slandering or censuring the
Covenant of the three Kingdoms and expedition into England, in the year 1643,
as not necessary for the good of Religion, or safety of this Kingdom, or as
tending to the diminution of the Kings just power and greatness, by their
confounding of the Kings Power and just Authority, with the pretense and abuse
thereof by Commissions, Warrants or Letters procured from his Majesty by the
enemies of this cause and Covenant; as if none were faithful and loyal to the
King, who oppose such men and their ways; by their spleen, malice and calumnies
against such as God has made eminently isntrumental in this cause, and who
resolve to be constant to the end in their first Principles; as if such men
were the Kings enemies, who are most zealous for the good and safety of
Religion; by their commending, justifying or excusing other known Malignants,
and by their conversing or intercommuning with excommunicate Delinquents. Unto
which Characters time and experience give us occasion to add some others, as
namely, their unwillingness and declining to reckon Malignants among the
enemies of this cause, from whom danger is to be apprehended; Their disjoyning
and dividing the duty of endeavoring the Kings Majesty's preservation and
restitution, from the duty of preserving, defending, settling and securing
Religion: As if we might and ought to pursue the former without the latter,
while both are in danger; Their maligning of, and uttering malicious words
against faithful and zealous Ministers, and against this meeting and
Judicatory, appointed by the General Assembly: Lastly, their crying up or down
of parties or persons, and even of the Sectaries themselves according as they
have more or less hopes of advantage from them to their own designs. For it is
not long since such men made light account of any dangers, which were
apprehended from the prevalent faction of the Sectaries in England; There being
then some hopes of a compliance and combination between them and the
Malignants: which is an infallible demonstration that such men's pretended Zeal
against those Sectaries now is not from the right Principle. Wherefore, let all
such dangerous persons, as we have here deciphered and described, be carefully
observed and avoided, as men would keep themselves pure, and free of snares:
And let Presbyteries be diligent to discover, try and censure any of this kind
in their bounds, that they may be able herein to give a good account of their
diligence; As also, that they be careful to discover, try and censure any
trafficking Sectaries, and all such as favor their opinions and ways.

Fifthly, Though we esteem that prevalent Faction of Sectaries, with their
abbetters and adherents, Presumptuous and Malicious enemies to Religion, King
and Government: Yet we hold it is our duty to labor to remove and prevent all
occasions of jealousies and suspicions betwixt the Kingdoms, and do or say
nothing that may breed misunderstandings, break off correspondence, weaken the
confidence, or infringe the Union and Peace betwixt the two Kingdoms, so
happily established in his Majesty's presence, and with his Royal consent in
both Parliaments; A caution as necessary now, as when it was given above five
years ago in a Warning from the Commissioners of the General Assembly, met in
this same place, January the fourth, 1643. And Generally we desire that all the
Articles and clauses of the solemn League and Covenant may be kept inseparably,
and inviolably linked together, and that there may be great tenderness and care
to avoid every thing which may be interpreted as a contradicting or abandoning
of the former Principles, Proceedings, Petitions, Protestations, Remonstrances
and Declarations of this Kirk and Kingdom in the pursuance of this cause; and
more especially to take good heed that Scotlands desires, do not mount higher
for the King, and fall lower in the point of Religion, then they were at our
first undertaking and engagement in this cause.

Finally, we do most seriously obtest all the people of God in this Nation, and
especially the Estates of Parliament, by their love to the cause of God, by
their solemn Vows and Covenants, by their first principles and professions, by
their former zeal and sincerity, by the many blessings of God, and his great
works done for us when our zeal and integrity was greatest in this cause, and
by all the curses and judgments of God which his Word denounces against back
sliders and Covenant-breakers, that they may all the days of their lives
continue firm, steadfast, and faithful in their Covenant with God, and one with
another, and make good their former professions in a time of tentation and
difficulty, without waving or falling off to the right hand, or to the left,
and as many as walk according to this rule peace be on them and mercy, and upon
the Israel of God.

A. Ker.

FINIS.

