engraved frontispiece of scenes from this History LONDON Printed for William
Jacob



A TRUE Tragical History OF TWO Illustrious Italian Families; Couched under the
Names of ALCIMUS and VANNOZA.

Written in French, By the Learned J.P. Bishop of BELL^Y. Done into English, By
a Person of Quality.

St nunquam Danaen habuisset abeneaturris,
Non esset Danaae de Jove facta pareus.
Ovid. Amand. - Quis tali fando
Temperet a lachrymis?
Virg. l. 2. Licensed, Roger L'Estrange.

LONDON, Printed for William Jacob at the Black Swan next Bernard's Inn in
Holbourn, 1677.

TO THE Comte de SCHOMBERG.
My Lord,
I Address unto your Piety the ensuing Example of the hand of God upon the
Impious, as I received it from the mouth of a Sage, Learned and Devout Father,
who had had acquaintance with the good Simplicius, one of the principal Persons
in the following History, and therefore the best acquainted with all the
particulars of it.

If mischiefs are cured by their opposite remedies; if we save our selves by
the contrary of that which destroys us, and if things are best set off by
Comparison with their contraries, I question not but the Splendour of your Name,
and the Glory of your Virtue, will here shine with the greatest luster amongst
the thick darknesses represented in the ensuing Narrative. But God who draws
light from the midst of obscurity, does give us good instructions, by the
horror so naturally stamped on the front of Vice. Some Critics who shall run
it over (as it often happens) without stopping at this Epistle, will presently
judge that these are matters as unsiting for my hand, as for your eyes, your
Soul being as far remote from such Idea's, as the East from the West: But my
sentiments are different, as I suppose yours will be, unless you be an Enemy to
your own advantage; for who are fitter to beat down the most enormous vices,
than those who are elevated to the highest pitch of Virtue? The opposing a
Giant to David, was it not the means to aggrandize his Glory? What other rodbut
that of Moses could devour Serpents? and what other strength then that of
Sampson could tear a Lion, subdue the Philistines, and unhinge and bear away
the Gates of a City? it is for St. Peter to kill and eat unclean Beasts. The
generous Julus in the great Roman Poet disdained to hunt the fearful Game, or
to employ himself in chasing or killing the timorous Deer; wild Boars and Bears
are only subjects worthy his pursuit. It Is the valor of an Enemy that raises
the Glory of the Victor. Your deportments so full of Honor and of Virtue, make
you so terrible to Vice, to suffer her to approach you otherwise then as
subdued below your feet, and acknowledging you Victorious against her strongest
efforts. It is in this equipage that this relation does approach you; For as
the Serpent Pithon was one of the most famous Trophies of Apollo, who had
pierced it with his Arrows, a fabulous invention whereby the Poets would denote
that the rays of the Sun do purify all ordures; And as this Glorious planet
does without infection cast his rays upon a dunghill; so those of your condition
can glance upon the crimes against which I declaim in the ensuing pages,
without offense; and your Virtue shall serve me for a Lance and Buckler in my
combat, and (I hope) my conquest, of these Monsters. The Ark which saved from
the deluge the seed of the Universe, did receive the unclean beast without
contracting any impurity; so a firm and well tempered Soul looks down upon the
insolence of Vice with a disdainful Eye, and is so elevated as it were in the
Highest regions of the Air, that their black vapors can never reach it: Judith
offered to the Lord the Equipage of Holofernes, Joshuah accursed things of
Acan, and Moses sacrificed to him the abominations of the Egyptians; These
reasons My Lord, have invited me to address this Tragical Narrative to Your
Lordship, as to a Hercules, the chaser of mischief; nor is this without
Example, the ancient Ethnicks dedicated Wolves to Mars, Eagles to Jupiter,
Lions to Sol, Owls to Minerva, and Foxes to Mercury. And the Hebrews themselves
sacrificed Oxen and Goats to the great God of Israel, and Lord of Hosts: And to
say truly, at the feet of what more signal Virtue can such horrid impiety be
thrown, and where can a more Heroic valor be found to purge Europe of those
vices which render her more fertile of Monsters then Africa. France, which has
seen you manage with so much care, fidelity and prudence her He was Treasurer
of the Army, and Mr. of the Ordnance.
powders of gold and salt peter which compose the Thunders and Lightnings, as
well as Sinews of War, that Lewis the Just might reduce the rebellious Spirits
of his Subjects to some appearance of the Duty and Obedience, will witness to
the World this verity: But since truth is as displeasing to you, when she tells
you of your merits, as she is to others when she reproacheth them with their
unworthiness, I shall only beg leave to hew from this fair Quarrey one stone
to adore the Frontispiece of this Work, and bear this inscription, That you
perhaps amongst all men living are only he to whose sole courtesy I may
declare my self truly obliged, which renders me from the bottom of my Soul.

My Lord, Your most Humble and most affectionate Servant, J. P. B. of Belley.

The Privilege granted by the King.
LEwis by the Grace of God King of France and Navarr, To Our true and faithful
Counselors, the Members of our Courts of Parliament, Bailiffs and Stewards,
Provost or Lieutenants, and to all others Our Officers of Justice, and to every
of them whom it shall concern, Health. Our well beloved subject Martin Lasnier,
Bookseller in our City of Paris, has given us to understand that he has in
his hand a Book Entitled, Alcimus, or a Tragical relation, where the hand of
God upon the wicked is discovered, composed by the Lord Bishop of Belley, the
which he is desirous to bring to light, if he might obtain our Letters
requisite and necessary thereunto; To which purpose, desiring well and
favorably to treat the said exposant, and that he may not be frustrated of the
fruits of his labor, We have granted and permitted, and by these presents do
grant and permit unto him, of Our special Grace, to print or cause to be
printed the said Book. Given at Paris, etc. By the King in Council.

Renovard.

Printed for and Sold by William Jacob at the Black Swan next Bernards Inn in
Holbourn.
THE Life of God in the Soul of Man. With an Account of a Spiritual Life, by G.
Burnet.

England's Remarques: or a View of all the Counties of England and Wales, with
their Growth and Manufacture, the Number of all Bishops, Dukes, Marquesses,
Earls, Viscounts, Barons, Parliament Men, Hundreds, Market Towns, and Parishes
in each County, the length, breadth, and Circumference of the same, and to what
Diocese it belongs; As also the Names of all the Chief Cities or Towns of every
County, and the distance of the same from London; And likewise the Names of all
Market Towns, and upon what days they are kept, etc.

ALCIMUS AND VANNOZA.
LIB. I.
IN one of the most famous Cities of Italy (the name of which I conceal for
certain important reasons) a Lord of great Quality, and an Illustrious house,
which by many Generations had derived down to him the title of Marquess, had
two Sons besides Daughters, and as it ordinarily happens in great Families, the
Children are designed to several Vocations before they have years enough to
make them fit to be judged of to what they are most proper; the younger of a
more sprightly and active temper than the elder, was by the designation of
earthly interest more than sound judgment, or a reasonable examen, designed for
the Altar, to suffer the Spiritual Circumcision of the Evangelical Eunuchs, and
to have Dina for his Hire, that is, to be maintained at the expenses of the
Daughter of Jacob and Sion the Church: Thus were our two Brethren born like
Lycurgus his two dogs, upon one cushion, but destined to as different ways, and
as far separated as Earth from Heaven. Happy younger Brother, if he had
continued in the possession of Mary's portion! but it was afterward taken from
him as much against his will as it was at first imposed upon him. The Elder
Brother was sent to the Academy, there to learn the Exercises proper for a
Gentleman, that was to be bred to the Profession of Arms, to which he was
flexible enough, not that his disposition (which was rather lumpish than
active) was much inclined to so robust an employment, which besides a manly
body required a stout and martial Soul; but having as pliable and docile a
temper as was requisite for a compliance with the Authority and Commands of his
Parents, he rendered his will so agreeable to their desires, that his chief
study was Obedience. But as it is impossible for the endeavors of Art to
vanquish the inclinations of Nature, or to give a hard and impregnable temper
to that which is composed of a brittle clay, instead of growing hardy and
vigorous amongst his exercises of Arms and Horsemanship, he daily grew more
weak and unactive, so that to all appearance this Plant required a
transplantation to some other soil, I mean to another more agreeable course of
life: But that was a thing which he might rather desire than hope for from his
inflexible Parents, who more regarding in him his Age than Inclination, his
Elder Brotherhood more than his Natural temper and disposition, forced his
Genius to bend to what they desired, constraining him to pitch upon a course of
life, which he accorded to with such reluctance that it was more likely to
shorten his days than to advance his reputation.

Vain are their hopes, who think that they
Can bring another will in all things theirs to obey;
Or bend another inclinations
To suit designs, and humor all their passions.
Our younger Brother, of a more vigorous Body and active Spirit, was by a
violent restraint upon them both, put into an Academy more reserved, more
peaceable and more retired, which at first he could look upon no otherwise but
as a Prison, but was forced to bend his neck under the yoke of a Superior
Authority; a yoke too strong to be broken by the weakness of his tender years,
in which his Parents had so great an ascendant over his youthful affections: He
was confined (as a sacrifice to the Church and Muses) to be educated amongst a
Seminary of Jesuits: And as there is no yoke so hard, no burden so heavy, but
Custom (which is another Nature) makes the one easy and the other light, time
by continual and insensible drops hollowing by degrees the resistance of his
Spirit, at length gained such footing, that what was before constrained, now
became voluntary, he making a Virtue of necessity, which is a harsh and
imperious Mistress: Like the Horse, which at first being forced by traces to
pace, is ready to fall at every step, but once having learnt what they are
designed, they go as nimbly as if they had no restraint upon their legs; so the
Gally-slave, when once accustomed to the bank and chain, the Oar which was
before so insupportable, is at last easily managed. So he by little and little
tempered and moderated the boilings and emotions of his haughty courage, and as
the Italian spirits are naturally pliable to any form, and are like wax,
susceptible of any impression, he so far moderated the contrariety of his
Palate, that what was Physic before, now became Natural food; and being
Catechized there by his Tutors, which are the rarest in the World to range
unruly spirits to their terms of Duty, he became of so sweet, humble, modest
and tractable a temper, so fitted for the reception of Learning, to which he
had the accomplishment of an excellent Memory, that all these added together
rendered him a youth of great expectation. His Reason too begun to come over to
that Party, and assisted the design, by forming these considerations in his
Fancy, that his Parents better advised than himself, knew better the bent of
his inclinations, and that aspiring to the Ecclesiastic Scarlet (a color
whose splendour does usually dazzle the eyes of those of that Nation) he might
at last arrive to the highest Degree of Honor amongst Men, and make a plus
ultra to the Pillars of Hercules; and that it would be far more advantageous to
him to be a rich Beneficiary than a poor Gentleman; that his Brother by the
tyranny of Custom, inheriting all the Estate of his Ancestors, to keep up in
him the splendor of the Family, there remained naught to him but Alexander's
portion, Hope: Finally, the bread of the Church seemed to him hearty and
pleasing, delighting his Palate with a Royal gusto. He was not deceived in his
conceits, for his Parents seeing him take the bridle in his teeth, resolving
vigorously to proceed to an accomplishment in his Profession, did soon after
obtain for him a Priory and Abbey, besides a rich Pension; here see him in a
high degree of opulency, and just upon the steps to further Preferment. The
Religious of this great and holy Fraternity, under whose directions he sucked
in Learning with his Letters, seeing him destined by the determinations of his
Parents to an Ecclesiastic Profession, as well as by his own Inclinations,
spared no care nor diligence for his instruction in Sciences as well as
Morality, fitting for a subject whose later season promised great fruits to the
Church: For though these Devout and Learned Fathers have an Universal care
without acceptance of Persons, to water diligently the young Plants committed
to their charge, yet both by their Pious Inclination and Religious Institution,
they have a nearer attention to those who are more particularly dedicated to
the Service of the Altar, who must one day be the Light of the World, the Salt
of the Earth, and the pilled rods with which the great Jacob will imprint his
colors upon the Lambs of his Sheepfold: So that not contented to instill into
their Souls an ordinary and common Piety, they bring them by more lofty and
elevated paths to the top of an exemplary Devotion; making them oftener frequent
Spiritual exercises, and the holy Sacrament the Spiritual food, which
nourishes to a great growth in Virtue such as feed upon it: For them these
holy Laborers in God's Vineyard have many other ways and holy industries,
amongst whom the Congregations devoted to particular Servies, and under the
especial protection of the Blessed Virgin, hold a high Rank, for there the
least Devout are instigated to Devotion by the exemplary Piety of those
Professors, and the deadest coals take fire at their Charity, and flame with
Celestial Love, in imitation of the great fervency that appears there: For
there the works of Piety shine the more bright, the secreter they are kept, and
their Piety and Charity on all occasions are ready with their flames to warm
all that approach them. Our younger Brother remained seven or eight years in
this Seminary of Learning and Godliness, being every day more accomplished than
other, that it seemed he might justly say with David, The chiefest Good I seek
t'obtain
Of him who first did give me Breath,
Is in his house to spend the same
Until he call me thence by Death.


This young Plant daily grew and spread so fast, that it gave great hope of
proving at last a stately Tree, and one of the top branches of Lebanon. He
became very expert in Humane Learning, and skilful in the Mathematics; the
knowledge of Philosophy had long since strengthened and confirmed his Judgment,
and having saluted the Queen of Sciences, and his principal Mistress, Divinity,
he had already been employed six months in her service amongst an Ecclesiastic
order, which by their constitution were to be present in their Habits at the
Celebrating Divine Service, and known by the names of Minors; to this he was
obliged, for the large Revenues he received from the Church, where he had made
himself sufficiently known by public disputes in Philosophy, and had reaped a
great commendation by reading Divinity in the Congregation of our Lady. The
Fathers of the Company took great joy in his Education, receiving infinite
satisfaction that they had sown their Doctrine in so good a soil: he still
proceeded from good to better, and the region of his spirit grew white toward
a complete Harvest, when on a sudden an impetuous whirlwind, an unexpected
tempest swept away the fruits of so grand an expectation. His Elder Brother had
for a great while quitted the Academy, for to learn the Arts of Horsemanship,
Fencing and Dancing require not so long a study as the Sciences; he remained in
his Fathers house as Heir apparent, and led a life honest and modest enough,
but soft and tender and effeminate, according to the custom of great Persons,
not only of that Nation but most others, as if idleness were an inheritance
intailed upon Nobility. We have nothing to say of him, having nothing come to
our knowledge pertinent to this History, only this, that though this Tree
brought not much Fruit, yet its Leaves being shaken with the winds of but few
Passions, made little noise; thus quietly slipped away the few years which he
passed upon Earth, till at last he paid his tribute to the Tomb, not as the
Great Alexander, in the middle of his Course, but even in the first mounting
from his Orient, a lingering Fever taking hold of this heavy Melancholy humor,
which in a short time brought him quietly to his Grave: Some say that too
violent exercise had shortened his days, and that if he had been destined to
Letters and a reposed life, he might have lived longer; but how vain is it to
descant upon the Decrees of Divine Providence? our weak reasons of that sort
being like soft wax before the Sun. Proceed ye Parents in this course, and
found the total of your hopes upon your Eldest, but consider how far different
the designs of heaven are from terrestrial determinations.

He who on Earthly glories sets his eyes,
And fixes them on splendid vanities;
Who in proud Palaces rules without fear
Of the disasters that attend him there;
Here let him fix a while, and contemplate
On the weak frailty of a humane state.
To express the regrets and sorrows of his Parents, is a thing impossible; you
may a little guess at them, by comparing them to those of a laborious
Husbandman, who after much toilsome labor, and wearisom expectation, sees an
impetuous Tempest destroy all the Fruits of his labor and the means of his
subsistence, just as it is ready to be reaped: for just as they were upon the
design of placing richly and honorably in the World this Prop of their house,
and repository of their hopes, by matching him into a Family suitable to theirs
in Wealth and Dignity, thereby to transmit their Name to posterity, they see
themselves on a sudden deprived of that happiness which they had so ardently
desired, so long expected, and so vainly hoped. But considering how vain it was
to lament so irreparable a loss, they began to turn their eyes from him that
was now naught but dust in the Grave, to the other who though alive was buried
as to the World, thinking now to transplant the care of their Posterity to that
only remaining soil, as if they had lived under the old Mosaical Law, where
the living Brother shall raise up seed to the dead, to retrieve his Name and
Memory from the Tomb of oblivion. It is hard to tell you how the younger
Brother received this news, for he found his soul so divided, and so moved on
all sides by several passions, that he needed a strong clew of Reason to
conduct him out of that Labyrinth: He saw himself called to a large
Inheritance, but having levelled his designs a quite contrary way, he was ill
troubled to change his intentions, seeing himself so far advanced into that
Vocation, which he had at first supported with as great trouble and reluctance
as Simon the Cyrenean did the Cross of our Savior, and was now more unwilling
to part with it, and did passionately declare that his desire was to leave the
dead to bury the dead, and pursue his former enterprise, to avoid the reproach
of having laid his hand to the plough and then looked back, and begun a
building which he could not finish: But he had still been educated with so much
subjection to his Imperious Parents, who so rigorously exercised their power
over him, that as he durst not gainsay them when they embarked him into a
profession so contrary to his inclination, no more durst he now thwart them
when they would bring him into another so contrary to the habits he had
contracted amongst so many contrarieties. Austere and savage Parents, who make
Tables of your Families and use your Children as you do your Table-men at Chess
or Tables, place and displace them without regard to any thing but your
temporal advantage, learn not to violate the Will which God has created free,
and upon whom he who has formed the Soul has reserved to himself no
constraint over it, but is contented to conduct it by instructions and
inspirations.

We will leave this Elder Brother without troubling our selves with his Name,
because falling Stars have none, but only those that continue fixed to their
Spheres; and since it is not necessary to our History, let us leave him to the
enjoyment of that Name which God had given him in a better life, and return to
the now eldest, and only remaining Son Alcimus, who is the chief subject of our
ensuing Narrative. He expressed a thousand regrets to his Religious Fathers, to
whom he was indebted for his Education, that he must now be forced to quit that
habit which sat so easily upon his body after it had been unwillingly put on;
and would far rather have chosen (had it been in his power) to be an abject
servant in the House of God, than to possess at pleasure both Riches and Honor
in the Tabernacles of the World: But let him think or speak what he will, he
has neither liberty to deliberate nor consult; and though a grave and Pious
Father, who had a good while been his Tutor, remonstrated to his Parents the
signal disasters which usually attend such changes, he was as little listened
to or believed As famed Cassandra, who of old
The ruin of proud Troy foretold;
That flames of Lust which first did burn,
At last would all to ashes turn.


They contemned his admonitions with the scurrilous appellation of
Cloister-Maxims; But Divine Truth is unchangeable, which has threatened to
forsake those that abandon it, and that their Names shall be blotted out of
Heaven, whose only care is to have them written upon Earth; who for their own
broken Cisterns quit and forsake those of living water: Those who have once
quitted the burning City of the World for Zoar, ought not to look back, for
fear lest they become Pillars of Salt, a Spectacle to Passengers, and a fearful
testimony of Divine Vengeance. Alcimus having quitted his former fetters, which
were now to him grown golden ones, (for the Yoke of God has this property, that
it every day grows more soft than other by the right application of the Oil of
Grace) and now brought into the liberty of a Child of the World, begun by
degrees to efface his former impressions, and the Genius he had sucked in with
his Milk; so true is that of the Poet, Though Nature be suppressed by force,
'Twill still return t'its former course.


So much easier is it to descend than ascend. His Fathers house was for him
formed into an Academy, where in a short time he learnt (so well did his active
body suit his docil wit) the exercises fitting for a Man that had changed the
Cassock for a Corselet, the Book for a Sword. See here the Metamorphoses
incident to a Human state; He thought no more of the continuation of his daily
devotion, as if the management of a Horse were of greater importance than a
communication with God: To quit his Ecclesiastical revenues was the least of
his thoughts, for that fat morsel was too delicious to his taste, like Ruth's
Kinsman, who was willing to redeem the estate but not to be troubled with the
Woman; there are many willing to receive the benefice, few to discharge the
office, though the one was designed only for a recompense for the other, and
that they are or ought to be as inseparable as the shadow and the substance,
the accessory and principal. He alleged that it would not be long e're by
Marriage he should quite those revenues with his coelibate; but the truth is,
he was wholly ruled by his Parents, whose design was he should keep them till
they could light on some old Kinsman or ancient Friend on whom they might have
them bestowed, by whose hands they might one day be transmitted to the Children
yet unborn: See here the ordinary designs of those who say, Let the heritage
with us remain,
Which only does to God pertain.


Not considering the Flames which are usually created by these Sacrilegious
Morsels in the nests of such rapacious Eagles: finally he continued in this
secular course of life to enjoy these Spiritual revenues, without the small
Tribute of ever officiating in Divine Service: The learned Fathers who had
cultivated his Spirit carefully so long as his Parents intentions or his own
inclinations designed him for the Church, begun to treat him so sharply, and
with such irresistible shocks to shake the Foundation of his conscience, as
were enough to tear up this impiety by the Roots, which nevertheless like a
young Tree shaken by the wind took faster footing, till he began to prove to
them as a stranger and a Publican, and reject the practice of the maxims of
true Christian Piety and Religion; for to speak truth, what is this but to halt
between two opinions? to swear by God and by Milcom? to join God with Baal,
Christ with Belial, and light with darkness? to mix the Eagles feathers with
those of the Dove? to make one Sacrifice to God and to Idols? to be at once
cold and hot? to eat the fat of the Altar, and never officiate at it? Is not
this I say to sow the Earth with two sorts of grain? to weave a piece of two
stuffs: and to plough with an Ox, and an Ass? They, who admitted not into
their congregations of Devotion any Souls of a mixed Metal, and consciences
which would not endure the touch, did forthwith exclude him, or rather Alcimus
separated from them of his own accord, prodigally rejecting the substance of
his Heavenly Father; not altogether so shamefully as the young Man in the
Gospel, who foolishly and sottishly wasted his Portion in a far Country; but
yet very unworthily for a Man of his Condition, he turned out of the ways of
Sion, no more frequenting her solemnities. But the Proverb says, there are no
pots so ill but there is a cover to fit them; there are no consciences so large
for commission, but there are others big enough to fit them with an absolution,
there are enough that will praise to the wicked the desires of his Soul, and
bless him in his iniquity; there are but too many guides that are as little
judicious, as infinitely blind, and are not content to be so themselves unless
they bring others into the same predicament: There are flatterers enough, whose
interest makes them speak the Language of slaves, and with smooth words bring
those to sleep in an assured repose who have the greatest subject in the World
to fear, to whom there is nothing more easy than to forge causes apparently
sufficient for the unjust deteinure of the goods of the Altar: And an Erroneous
conscience having once taken footing in the Soul, it is then ready to receive
all Vice and wickedness, which being once rooted there, is as firm as the club
in the hand of Hercules, it lies not there, as a passenger, but in Garrison,
ingarrisoned in an impenetrable, impregnable fort: It is a great sin to call
good evil, but a monstrous wickedness to call evil good, and to cloth Vice in
Virtues livery; This is to mix Wormwood with Sugar, and poison with Honey, it
is in one word to reverse reason and the Laws, and under false appearances, to
maintain the Sinner in his irregular desires. We ought not rashly to judge of
any thing: Who knows the secrets of God, or who has ever been his Counselor?
who has ever read in the great Book of destinies, or sounded the abyss of the
Heart of Man? Who I say, but God, who knows our thoughts afar off, and who
judges the ways and paths of all, to whom all things are naked and open, and
nothing close or secret? But if we may give a conjecture to Humane actions and
Earthly events, it is very probable, that the abuse of the Churches goods,
applied to an use quite contrary to what they were designed for were the causes
of the misfortunes of that Family; as the Prince of the Affyrians, who saw the
Sentence of Condemnation written on the wall for employing the Sacred Vessels
to profane uses. However it were, our younger Brother was succeeding the
Elder, went very pompously both in habit and attendance, which was maintained
by an allowance out of his Fathers Patrimony added to his Church Revenues.
Behold him here withdrawn from his former innocence, and turned from the paths
of his ancient conducters, and now put for the direction of his Soul into the
hands of Persons who had no further care but of the Body. The wit of Man has
subtilties and devices to color over the worst of actions; Alcimus had still
remaining a sweetness of Temper and show of Piety, and not being able so soon
to extinguish The Sacred warmth which in his Breast
Had the first and chiefest room posiest,
Felt in himself some remainder of his former devotion, as a Cinder continues
warm sometime after the extinction of the fire. He frequented the Church and
Sacraments, and continued his former acts of Piety: briefly, he seemed to all
that saw him the most sage and noble Cavalier in the whole City. O! how
dangerous are those remainders of Celestial Love; since they not only deceive
others but seduce them in whom they reside, who thinking themselves the same
that others believe and publish them to be, do thereupon continue sleeping in a
Mortal Lethargy, for as the Poet sings, To what end serve Temples and Vows,
Injustice being lodged within?
Who pious seems and vice allows
Is guilty of the highest sin.


He much frequented a holy and famous fraternity in a Monastery near his House,
very eminent and much frequented, where he pitched upon a Ghostly Father that
suited his desire, whether according to God's own heart I refer it to him, but
according to his own he seemed to be very agreeable; for he confirmed his
conscience in his former Courses, and undertook to bail him from the arrest of
those Terrors which his former guides had seasonably imprinted in his Soul,
which now seemed at last but the effects of scrupulous conceited old Men; by
little and little the fear of God's Judgments vanished from his Soul, which
caused his ways to be every day more defiled, and his heart more hardened; for
as an ancient Father says, It is the property of Sin not speedily effaced by
repentance, by its heaviness to weigh a Man down to more, till the
multiplication of weights at last press him to the abyss of misery, the
addition of sin, like an increasing burden growing at length insupportable;
thus he passed some years, even sleeping in the multitude of riches, and
splendor of abundance; daily as much increasing in exterior accomplishments
befitting a Cavalier, as he impaired in the inward ones of a Christian. He
became a most admirable Horseman, or rather changed from a Man to a Horse, so
delighting himself with that exercise, that if it be true that the Lover
transforms himself into the thing beloved, he loving nothing equal to this
Animal, it might in some sort be said that he was himself become a Brute, as
the Psalmist says, like the Horse or Mule that have no understanding; for
having no care but to aggrandise himself in riches and honor upon Earth, he so
fixed his regards upon that point, that he had none left for Heaven, whose
rules he daily transgressed: But I think I may justly say by the way, that it
seldom happens that those who quit God's service for Earthly considerations
(how just and honest soever) and prosper long in their undertakings, for God
loves not those who so slightly abandon Levi's Portion: Examples are so
frequent upon this Subject, that the very Stones would speak if Tongues and
Pens should be silent; so that I conclude this grand prosperity to be this
young Lords great misfortune: He was now grown brave, active, sprightly, and in
the greatest worldly esteem imaginable; accounted valiant, handsome, generous,
of noble deportment, learned, rich, completely gentile and agreeable, his
conversation full of attractions, principally amongst Women, and which crowned
all his other perfections, he was reputed very devout, and of a religious
behavior, so that there could not one point be found wherein he was not fully
accomplished: insomuch that every ones doors stood open to him, being welcome
and desired in all companies: Nothing was talked of but Alcimus his admirable
and commendable qualities, as the Miracle of Courtesy, Generosity and
Civility: his name passed through all mouths, who seemed by their infinite
praises of him, all to conspire to elevate his Honor above the Clouds. But
ordinarily the Apple that ripens fastest rots the soonest, and that which is
most yellow is the most wormeaten, the fairest outside hiding a worm within
which in short time consumes it. The Vulgar who, as the wise Man says, has
his eyes only in his head, and seeing a magnificent expense, pass no further
nor pry into the bottom from whence should proceed the substance that supplies
it; and so they see but a generous usage of them, mind not whether they were
well or ill acquired; but the more sober sort, who content not themselves with
the outside of the bone, unless they come to feed upon the marrow, pierce with
Lynx's eyes the secretest darkness, and sound the most hidden resorts which
move the stately Machins which so dazzle the Eyes of the beholders; to those
Alcimus his splendid accoutrements seemed composed of Copes and Chalices,
shameful ornaments for a Man of Honor: But gain is sweet whencesoever it
comes, said that base minded Emperor, who made the very excrements tributary,
and threatened to impose a tax upon the Elements themselves. It is no novelty in
the World to see several Men brave it at the expenses of the Crucifix, who, one
may justly say, do again daily crucify the Son of God; selling him at a price
as vile as that was precious which he paid for their redemption. Thus you see
that all is not praise worthy which the World applauds. Happy is the Man, faith
the Psalmist, that may be praised in God, and whose worthy commendations God
will not suffer to be concealed; for to what serves the praise of all the World
without that of Heaven? What advantage is it to be highly prized of all Men,
and despised by the great Creator of all things? The favorites of Princes make
little reckoning of the Courtiers envy or the Peoples hatred, provided they
preserve their Masters Friendship, on which depends their welfare and
preferment: I value not, says St. Paul, the Judgment of Men, he that judges
me is God; I should not be his faithful Servant if I should strive to please
the world: I speak not this to detract from the Merits of Alcimus, nor detain
truth the prisoner of Injustice; but as a spot of Oil makes the greatest
blemish in the most rich and curious stuff, even so, Greatness in him who does
amiss
The greatest aggravation is.


And this might justly appear to be a spot of Oil upon white Satin, it being
the Oil of the sacred Lamp which fullyed his conscience, till from it is former
color which exceeded the Milk or Snow in whiteness, it changed to a
Vermillion, deeper than the Carbuncle, by the abuse of Goods destined to a
better purpose. This was not but that he was furnished (as we had said) with
all recommendable qualities, and which is more (as a thing rare in one of his
youth, and licentious course of life) he was accounted to be very Chaste, and by
a good habit which he had contracted in the Seminary, he had a great Antipathy
against that unclean vice; but his vanity, splendidness of Habit, train of
Servants, stately Horses, too much frequenting the World, too much Gaming, and
keeping loose Company, were the weights that remarkably weighed down the other
Scale. He passed some time in this course of life, being so highly esteemed
through all the City, that none but thought themselves happy to enjoy his
Conversation, and no assembly could be complete unless it were set off with his
admired presence: he charmed the Eyes of most of the Female Sex, as much as he
excelled most of his own, and if their desires could have been effected, he had
been the object of a great many affections. Not a Mother but desired him for a
Son-in-law, as much as her Daughter coveted him for a Husband: mean while he
remained free amongst so many Charms, no Engaging his affection upon any one
object, leaving so many flames to waste themselves, which like coals by little
and little dye, if the blast's of hope and conversation do not inliven them. He
bore Milk and Honey upon his Tongue, (for having much learning he had yet more
Art to express it, and it appeared more excellent, the more Ignorant the
Auditors were) but under it he had none, for his discourses had little
coherence with his heart: his pleasure was to breed love in others, but none in
himself, knowing that a little spark of this fire is quickly by degrees blown
into a flame, and that the little pleasure that is reaped thence, is clogged
with a thousand discontents: His Parents who desired nothing more than to see
him honorably matched, would have been glad that he could have pitched upon an
object capable to restrain his wandering affections, and to make his Neck
pliable to the Yoke of marriage, which he shunned as much as was possible,
being more enamoured of his liberty than of all the Beauties in the World, not
considering what horrible wracks those Ships are subject to, who thus without
either Compass or Ballast expose themselves to the treacherous rocks and winds,
and dreadful waves: Thus pleasantly did he pass his time, in the height of all
Earthly delights, and Worldly pleasures, without considering that, Who highest
stands should take most care,
The falls of such still fatal are.


Amongst his other vanities the chiefest were to be richly habited, bravely
mounted, and nobly attended, in so much that prancing through the streets, he
seemed to be the chiefest ornament of them, attracted the eyes of all the
inhabitants: It is publicly known by all men that the Nobility of Italy,
principally during the heats of Summer, do usually every Evening ride out to
take the Air and make many turns and returns through the streets, upon the
gallant Italian Horses, or the stately Neapolitan Coursers, which may well be
accounted the most excellent Animals upon Earth; this was Alcimus his chiefest
delight. He was exceeding comely and of good grace and behavior; but it was
nothing to see him on foot or in a Hall, in comparison of the gallantry he
showed on Horseback, where, like a complete Horseman, he performed all the
Feats which the most expert in that Art had ever found out, he having a
mavelous excellency that way: The Windows of the streets where he passed were
crowded with as many Admirers as Spectators of his active motions, all giving
him the vogue for the most complete Horseman living. All that offended him
was, that those wicked and infamous Creatures to whom we give the too specious
names of Which in French signifies a Courtier.
Courtizans, desirous to please themselves with sight of him displeased him
with the sight of them, for he took no delight to please them at that time,
whom he scorned to think on at another; for which reason he shunned those
streets which I should call infamous, if the windows abounded with none but
Women of such boundless wickedness, the too frequent meeting of whom is the
cause of great scandal amongst strangers, by their having so much countenance
in this Country: This made him resolve to shun the Eyes of these Basilisks, by
making his rounds in other less frequented streets. O how hard it is to escape
misfortunes destined to us; how short-sighted is man into future Affairs and
Occurrences: Thinking to avoid the rock of Scylla he plunged into the gulf of
Charibdis, and is taken in a snare pitched in the place where he fled for
security: A street as large and spacious as fair and stately was now the
Ordinary stage where, upon a proud Courser, he exercised all the lessons he had
formerly Learnt, his grace and address at this exercise drawing people thither
from many quarters of the Town to behold him; Here by chance in a broad part of
the street, he often used to make a stop, over against the Gate of a sumptuous
House that stood there, which will prove the Theater on which we shall see
acted a great part of the ensuing Tragedy; For the understanding of which we
must know, that a young Damsel called Vannoza, had at a very tender Age been
very unequally matched with a man who seemed rather her Grandfather then her
Husband, which marriage was brought about as I shall tell you by and by. We
shall present him to you under the name of Capoleon, who being rich, and well
descended, had been married at a season so young, as was enough to dispense
with the most hasty from joining themselves so soon in the yoke of marriage;
and that by the disposal of his Parents, who to agree a suit in which a great
part of their estate lay at stake, had Solicited this marriage with a maid
much older then himself, who had as great redundancy of years, lack of Beauty,
having features less apt to breed love than hatred: This Cup though finely
gilded, was very bitter to Capoleon's taste, but the ascendant that his friends
had over his affections, and the fear of ruining his fortune, and leading a
miserable life under the afflictions of Poverty, and his Parents displeasure,
made him do like those who shut their eyes and swallow a loathsome potion,
having more regard to the sweetness of Health, than the bitterness of the
Medicine, the loathsomeness of which begun to appear still worse when he was
come to the age to distinguish Beauty from Deformity; then did the hook begin
to pierce deep, which he had swallowed under so gilded a bait, but it was not
enough that this Leah was blear-eyed, but for a Crown to her other
imperfections, she was Ill-natured, Churlish, Melancholy, and Proud, and would
carry her self more like a Mother to a Son, then a Wife to a Husband, which
redoubled Capoleon's vexation, who seeing himself from a Master become a Slave,
finding as little kindness from her, as she deserved love from him, turned his
regard from so disagreeable an Object, to others more pleasing; a folly scarce
taken notice of in a Country where it is so frequent: This haughty ill tempered
woman finding her self in this manner slighted by her Husband, was transported
with such extremities of rage and jealousy, that her words were not able to
express her resentments. What did she leave unsaid or undone, agitated by this
frantic passion? she both said and did so much as essaying too far the
patience of his young courage, she stirred up a passion in him which proved
little advantageous to her shoulders: this brought her to all the desperatest
vows and menaces imaginable to take a severe Revenge either by Force or
Treachery; So that in one word, never was a more distracted Family or unhappy
marriage since the first Sacred Institution of it: the Parents on both sides
endeavored a reconciliation, but they were Natives of a Country where as
quarrel is like a malignant Ulcer, which may be healed outwardly, but will
still have matter within to destroy the former endeavors of the Surgeon, or
though thoroughly healed, will leave a scarre which time can never efface:
Capoleon did not so much fear her cruel fury, as her feigned affection,
knowing that this Sex has some resemblance with those Creatures, who Flatter
when they intend to bite, or of those which kick when one least distrust them:
both stood upon their Guards, which often bred a mis-construction of what was
never meant amiss, it being impossible for them to draw evenly in that Yoke,
which was composed of such inequalities. Capoleon amongst the women past for a
bad Husband, though all men had just occasion to take his part against a wicked
Wife: indeed both of them had been wronged by a marriage without espousals, I
mean by the conjunction of two Body's whose Souls were so divided, and humors
so dis-joynted; for those marriages which are founded only upon interest,
seldom come to a happy building; and now who could expect any Children from so
notorious an Antipathy and so rare a Commerce. Finally, after having continued
some time in this Hell (for how can I better term this Firebrand of division?)
it pleased Heaven to throw down his Gantlet of death to part the Combat, she
first leaving the World who first entered into it, not without suspicion of some
indigestible Morcel, with which it was judged that Capoleon transferred the War
into the Country of the Enemy, who so loudly threatened an invasion: But this
suspicion proved like a little misty vapor, which is no sooner exhaled but
dissipated; for justice could discover nothing to Capoleon's prejudice, and the
calumnies were buried soon after the body. But the most favorable opinion was,
That her hard usage had abridged her Life, and that the vexation to see her
self despised by him whom she thought to be so obliged to her, for the fortune
she brought him, had been the chief weight that had pressed her into her Coffin:
And we must confess that Jealousy infuses a Poison into the heart, which is
not so easily cured by the remedy of reason, as by that of death; so that it
may justly be applied to this passion, which the Poet appropriates to that of
love, If time nor absence quench the heat,
Cold Death alone can do the feat.


Capoleon was Master of a joy at the breaking of this marriage knot, which he
could never hope for at the tying of it, his present happiness equalling his
former misfortune; So that his present ravishing contentments, having escaped
so Fatal a shipwreck, extracted from him a thousand protestations never to
engage himself again upon a Sea, where he was so subject to the secret Treasons
of the Rocks, and the open Hostilities of Storms and Tempests: but his Manners
were so far from amending with his Fortune that his freedom made him a perfect
Libertine, and he led such a course of life in his present opulency, which he
enjoyed by the death of her who had left him in the double possession of
himself and her fortune, that might justly be said of him, which the Holy
Scripture said of an execrable City, That his Iniquity proceeded from his
abundance, and that the extremity of his bitterness (which is that of his
vices) was the product of is quietness and ease: he now went like a Son of
Belial, with his head erected, being subject to no Yoke, if he may be said to
be free from the Yoke, who is Slave to his Passions and inordinate desires: It
was far more easy to number the faults he was free from, than those into which
he daily precipitated himself; for his Soul was a Sea, a receptacle for all the
Rivers of sensual pleasures, or rather a stinking Lake, receptive of all sorts
of filth and impurity; and though his Sins merited a severe chastisement from
Heaven, yet the indulgence of the Sovereign bounty of him who is long-suffering
and of great mercy, was such toward him, that it might well be said that he
endured not the troubles of other men, nor was subject to the scourges of
impious sinners; contrarily, all things succeeded prosperously to him, the gale
of good fortune filled his Sail with a thousand delicious blasts, and the
success of his Affairs did far surpass both his hopes and desires, but his
wicked inclinations and impenitent heart despising the Treasures of Divine
bounty, heaped up to him a Treasure of wrath against the day of vengeance, and
the last retribution: But the wheels of Gods anger grind small, though they
turn but slowly.

Any Man's happiness to praise
Before his Mortal race be run,
Is crowning Generals with bays
E're the fields fought or Battle won.
And since it is only the end that Crowns the action, what good issue could be
expected of a man who seemed only born to be a shame to mankind, and to
trespass upon God's patience? Wherefore having long led a licentious life, and
arrived to a well advanced Age, whether it were that his nature was changed by
a long habit of vice, or that he sought a means for Repentance, or moved with a
desire to transmit his Estate to a lawful Heir, or that he thought there was no
passage from the sin of uncleanness but through the gates of marriage, he
resolved upon the same Vessel to venture another shipwreck, thereby showing
himself to be a man either of very little judgment, or born under a malignant
Star for marriage; for at first being married too young to one that was old and
deformed (two inseparable adjuncts) and which was jealous of him because he was
young and lusty; He joined himself the second time, being old and wrinckled, to
a Lady that was very young and incomparably fair, of whom he became enamoured
as soon as he saw her, whom he possessed as soon as he demanded, and of whom he
became jealous as soon as he enjoyed her; this was the fair Vannoza, whom he
purchased by an artifice which I am about to discover.

She was born of Parents of very eminent quality, and indeed more Eminent for
Nobility of Blood than abundance of Riches: he saw and fell in Love with her in
a great assembly, and presently sounded her Parents, to whom he made the
ordinary offer of amorous old Men, a great Jointure in recompense for a small
portion; His proposition seemed so advantageous, that it dazzled the Eyes of her
avaritious Parents, so that according to the cruel custom of the Country,
they made him a promise without making her acquainted, it being there the
barbarous Method, (often attended with Evil consequences) for the Bride and
Bridegroom not to see one another before the day of Marriage. And because
Capoleon knew himself to be gray and wrinckled, though he still pretended to be
very vigorous, and like the Plants in winter, who hide their virtue under the
white snow, he was fearful least his eyes should strike into her breast a
remedy against Love, rather then an incentive to it, and therefore communicated
this mistrust to the Parents, who (though they thought their authority strong
enough to vanquish the aversion of their Daughter) did not mislike the
expedient he propounded of Metamorphosing himself, accounting this fraud a
lawful one, which redounded to the profit of the deceived; so that they took
part with the amorous doatard, in deceiving their innocent Daughter, and to
entice this harmless young Dove into the snares. Capoleon without employing
Medea's arts, without casting his skin like the Snake, or beak with the Eagle,
got so complete and handsome a Perruque, that one would have thought (that had
not seen him before) but that it was his natural hair: he trimmed his beard
very curiously, and that little that remained was so handsomely painted, that it
would well have become a chin of thirty years old: he so painted and plaistered
his face, that there remained neither lines nor wrinckles, to betray the age
which time had stamped upon it. This was not all, for he pitched upon a young
Gentleman of his own stature, whose garb and fashion he imitated the best he
could in this transformation; him he procured to appear in an assembly of
Gentlemen, amongst which Vannoza and her Parents were: Him they made her
believe to be her designed Husband; and she, who saw him but by the dim light
and smoke of Tapers, and amongst a confused company, fancied him not to be very
disagreeable, for she who was now as ripe for Marriage as desirous of it, was
willing to subscribe to her Parents intentions, especially in the Marriage of a
young and handsome Gentleman: Thus they made an interview, without any private
entertainments, discourse or conversation; being but a mere fantome and
illusion, upon which the poor young Lady was to fix the remainder of her years,
not being undeceived till it was too late to remedy the mistake. Judge then
whether this were an action becoming a Nation who account themselves (and
perhaps not untruly except in these affairs) the most sage and prudent in the
world. At their return home, her Mother asked her amongst other discourse, how
she approved her choice; she who had remarked no default in him that they had
shown her, with a dissimulation proper to her sex, prudently concealed her
satisfaction, protesting that she only saw with her Mothers eyes, and that
suitable to a Daughter of her Birth and Education, she neither had nor ought to
have a will dissonant from that of her Parents. That she would willingly accept
of any that she would willingly accept of any that was presented her from their
hand, adding to this tender submission the most obliging expressions befitting
such occasions: Thus was our tender young Hind hunted into the snare; she was
no sooner promised but affianced to Capoleon, at the twilight of the evening,
hidden under the shade of a feigned artifice which disguised his real
imperfections: The entertainment was so short, and the silence so deep, his
voice never being elevated so far as to discover the deceit, that he, though an
Esau, was taken for a Jacob, being deformed with age, he was thought to possess
the beauties of youth; his hoary old age being taken for sprightly youthfulness
by a prepossessed spirit. The Marriage was solemnized a few days after, but in
the night time, where he appearing in sumptuous apparel, more fitting for a far
younger man, and ornaments so gaudy as were as unfitting to his sex as age,
passed by the outside for a complete young Gallant: In sum, Vannoza thinking
to have married a young Gentleman, wakened the next morning the wife of an old
one, who having cast off his youth over night with his Peruque, appearing in
the morning as Leah formerly did to Jacob. None but souls assailed with such
surprises, could imagine the greatness of these; Poor simple innocent! she
thought it had been Marriage which so soon made young persons old; and
trembling and fearful, she run to her glass, to see if wrinckles had not made
as bold with her forehead as with her husbands, and whether her hairs were not
become as white as her face was pale with fear, in which she thought she saw
the image of death stamped, the fright had so dazzled her eyes, till by little
and little she begun to undeceive her self, the remembrance of her changing so
lately her Virgin state, did also help to bring the blood into her face, and
mixing the Roses again amongst the Lillies, and adding a lively color to her
cheeks, made her perceive that her flourishing beauty had not left her with her
Virginity. The husband rallyed all his wit to charge her with excuses, her
Parents also running to assist him, dazzling the eyes of this poor young Lady
with the riches of her new married One who desiring long life, lived so long
that the Poets feigned he was turned into a Grasshopper. Ov. Met.
Tithon, representing to her the most advantageously they could the multitude
of his wealth and opulency of his fortune, that this artifice was only intended
for her good, and finally persuaded her she should be the most fortunate and
happy Lady in the City. Thus was she brought from her first astonishment, into
a course of life which however disagreeable to her, ought to give all the
content imaginable to Capoleon, and promised to recompense him with a free
enjoyment of those felicities which his former nuptials had denied him: In a
word, this affair was conducted with such brevity and industry, that Capoleon
was married before any such thing was talked or thought of; and now every one
begun to hope well of his future Conversation, and that the honorable bonds of
Matrimony would tie him up from his former dishonorable actions. But whether a
disordinate spirit carry inquietude along with it, as Devils do their hell, or
whether by misfortune he had conspired against his own happiness, he who had
first given all reasonable liberty to his Wife that could be desired,
permitting her with her Mother to see and enjoy the Company of their ancient
friends and acquaintance, and to frequent what places of devotion she pleased,
being on a sudden inflamed with the fire of Jealousy, which is as fierce as
that of Hell, he begun like Laban to Jacob, to change his countenance toward
her, and to change those Sun-shiny days into obscure nights, he found himself
to be old and deformed, her young and beauteous; the perfections which he
perceived in her, and the defaults which he remarked in himself, were the only
faults of this young innocent; Nothing but administered fuel to this flame: If
any one looked upon her, it was with a lustful eye; if any one spoke to her
prejudice, he believed it; or if they praised her, it proceeded from designs
prejudicial to his honor: The very rays of the Sun were too familiar with her,
and Zephyrus took too much liberty to sport about her breasts, the flies that
chanced to perch upon her face kissed her, and the habits which she wore
touched her too nearly. He thought her so weak that any thing was able to
corrupt her: The thoughts that every one was covetous of this Gold, wrought in
him a design of burying so desirable a Creature from all men's sight, and the
light of the day: But had he brought about this design with better conduct, and
had by little and little restrained his liberty, and Eclipsed this Star by
degrees from the eyes of the World by some condensed vapors which time should
form into clouds; had he but gently accustomed this Bird to the restraints of a
Cage, this slave to the chain, perhaps in a Country where Captivity is so
ordinary amongst Women, that it is even converted into Nature, he had not so
violently exasperated her spirit, and desire of escaping, and had plucked up the
root of many hard constructions and evil speeches against his unreasonable
severity: But what is it but to expect fresh water from the Sea, for one to
look for kind usage from a man blinded with jealousy? is it not to demand
reason of one that has lost it? to seek for grapes of thorns, or figs of
thistles? Those that say that this malady is an excess of Love, as the Fever is
of natural heat, do therein confess that though it be a sort of Love it is but
a sick one; and as a hot and burning Fever brings us even to the neighborhood
of death, so a hot and flaming jealousy is easily brought to consume the fuel
of Love that feeds it: it turns the sweet and gentle heat into a Calenture,
from whence proceed the sharpest effects of hatred, which will not stop short
of an attempt upon the life, or at least of as precious liberty. Thus where
this passion fixes, being born of real love it does at last ruin it, as the
moth eats the cloth in which it took its being. All Capoleon's desire was to
preserve his Wife entirely to himself, and to perfect that design, he lodges
her in a Chamber the fittest he could find out for a Prison, not considering
that in confining the body he disjoyns the soul of affection from it, which
should be the only guard to preserve it to him.

How this vain passion blinds fond man,
To think restraints which thus control
The actions of the body, can
Confine the motions of the soul.
This unexpected whirlwind seized our new-married innocent, who finding her
self not guilty, could almost have wished her self criminal to be revenged for
so unjust a cruelty; Judge then if Capoleon did not do himself a real injury to
shun an imaginary one; having pitched upon the surest way to make himself
odious, by ingraffing this bitter slip of cruelty upon the large stock of his
other deformities, which malicious age had planted in his face: The poor
prisoner laments her condition, being earnestly desirous to understand the
cause of her condemnation, she would gladly know in what she had given an
occasion of distrust, that she might clear her self of the accusation if false,
or correct the fault if true: The Parents took this affront as hainously as the
Daughter, but showed not so much resentment for fear of augmenting the
punishment by provoking him, to the tyranny of whose power they had brought her
to submit: But though the clouds may be so thick as to conceal the Thunderbolt
from our sight, yet still they are easily penetrated by the Lightning, so that
their discontents though dissembled, were discovered by Capoleon, who gave no
other reason (barbarous as he was) but that he might dispose of his own as he
pleased, and order and govern his Wife to his fancy: As if Wives which were
given for Companions, not Slaves or Servants to Men, could or ought to be
guided by any other bridle then that of love and gentleness: But what one would
press him to discover what cause she had given him for so strict a confinement
the force of truth compelled him to confess that he had none, and that this
restraint and imprisonment was not for any fault already committed, but to
prevent those which the future bait of occasions and opportunities might
produce, so that she must be forced to endure a present punishment for a future
fault: Thus might Vannoza champ upon the but, but her Groom would be sure to
avoid the strokes of her heels, for this mistrust did so far provoke her, that
she was not so much vexed at the loss of her liberty as that she could imagine
no means to compass a revenge; but as winds enclosed in the bowels of the
earth, do at last grow so enraged at their confinements as to shake whatever
lies upon the surface; so her vexation meditated none but dismal effects: In
the mean time his testimony of her innocence somewhat alleviated her griefs,
and seeming to agree with him in the care of keeping her undefiled from the
world, She keeps that anger close within her breast,
Which tears her heart and robs her of her rest.


Though she was lodged like a Queen in an apartment behind the house, in a
Chamber excellently furnished, and enjoying a most pleasant air, through the
window of which she had the prospect of a pleasant Garden, decked with all sorts
of delightful flowers, yet still the thoughts of a prison made it disagreeable,
and that liberty which she knew not the sweetness of in the possession, was now
in the deprivation presented to her eyes, in such an equipage, and with such
attractions as rendered it the most sovereign blessing of life. All the Images
of the most excellent rarities, and the most signal persons she had ever seen,
now presented themselves to her eyes, and repassed through her fancy with such
advantage, that the effect they made upon her spirit almost hurried her to
desperation: sometimes making comparisons of the sweet conversations of her
dearest friends and companions, with the heavy solitude which now environed
her, where there was not so much as an echo to answer her complaints: This
solitariness seemed so much the more insupportable, by recalling to her memory
how short the days seemed which she used once to pass in the entertainment of
diverse witty comrades, and comparing them with the length of these, which she
spent without any other company or comfort then that of her thoughts: It was
with her as with Mills, which turning about empty, fire themselves by their own
motion: After this her imagination representing to her the most fair and
agreeable objects which had formerly been represented to her view amongst the
other Sex, and confronting the wrinckles, paleness, and deformities which age
had drawn on the face of her husband, with the polisht foreheads, vermillion
cheeks, pleasant eyes and gilded hairs, with the sweet and gentle behavior,
the inseparable companions of downy chins, O how intolerable did her old
Capoleon appear! She a thousand times repented of having suffered her self like
a silly Lark, to be drawn into the net by the shining of a glass, this gilded
ice, the luster of fading riches. O how infinitely more pleasing seemed a merry
contented poverty than a wretched abundance, clogged with discontents, but void
of pleasure or satisfaction! And indeed he that desires riches with so great a
passion only to glut an insatiate appetite, is still the poorest man alive, and
is not he that is contented and satisfied with a mediocrity far richer than he,
who like Tantalus is choked with thirst and famisht with hunger am ongst
floods of water and plenty of pleasant fruits, or like Midas amidst his heaps
of Gold and Treasures? So true is that of the Poet, The Covetous are always
poor,
He Is only rich that craves no more.


For who sees not that he that has such unreasonable desires is troubled with a
Dropsy, that never suffers him to be satiated? he is only healthful and rich
that is satisfied with the little which he has. But Alcimus, as we have said
before, surmounting in riches, pomp, behavior, wit and gallantry, all those of
his age and quality in the City, it is not to be questioned whether his form
did not pleasingly possess the fancy of our fair Recluse, whose repose rendered
her like a standing pool, in which the circle made by a stone thrown into it,
does presently multiply its self to an infinite number; for this Idol adored by
the eyes, and sighed for by the hearts of so many Females, but all in vain;
took up an immovable habitation in her heart, and this Samson so much beloved
of so many of the Children of Israel, quickly surprised the affections of this
Dalilah; but though amongst other young Ladies, she had sucked in this subtle
poison at the eyes; yet the impossibility of ever enjoying him in the sacred
bonds of Marriage, like a heavy weight did ^l^g the wings of her inconsiderate
desires, notwithstanding which With her own heart she nourished
The Vultur which was in it bred;
Languishing for a happiness
Which she could never hope to possess.


She judged rightly that this was no bird to be taken in a spider's net, and
that her artifices would need great strength to hold him. But, said she, were I
Mistress either of his affections or of some others, I would have recourse to
it for the recovery of my lost liberty: In my happy days I was so little
concerned for others misfortunes that now there is none trouble themselves to
to succor me in the multitude of my own. Thus without any to counsel or assist
her, she wandered in a labyrinth of perturbations: Yet was she resolved to
leave no stone unturned to retrieve her liberty, not considering how she was
likely to fall into a far worse Captivity, the slavery of sin, the most
unfortunate and detestable servitude in the world, not caring so she could
escape a temporal punishment though she lanched out into an eternal one; not
considering the many sad examples of Divine vengeance upon such impieties which
Should teach the wicked to escape the rod,
(By sound Repentance) of an angry God.


We have said that amongst the exercises in which Alcimus was most delighted,
that of managing a Horse was chief, and that prancing ordinarily through the
streets, advantageously mounted and accoutred, and strutting in the pomp and
gallantry of his habits, like the Peacock in the variety of his plumes, he
passed often by Capoleon's house, this street pleasing him the most, being very
large and fair, and most commodious for his exercising his Horse in those
motions he had learnt him; and, as we have said, he did it with such rare
dexterity that he never wanted abundance of beholders both in the streets and
windows. Vannoza during her former liberty had often beheld him in these
postures, through the bars and treillices of the windows, which by reason of
their use are there called Jealousies; but upon the entry of her new course of
life, being wholly taken up in the cold affection and conversation of her
Husband, this Idea had scarce any room left in her spirit, much less to take up
a lodging there. Capoleon himself took a singular pleasure in seeing these
gallantries of this young Cavalier, and with excessive praises, raised his
excellency and dexterity to the very clouds: He had shut up his Wife in a
remote apartment, this spectacle, as most others, being suspected by him, and
therefore reserved it only to his own sight. One evening as He and his Wife
were taking the Air in the Garden, one of his Lacqueys came to tell him, that
Alcimus was in the street at his usual exercise, and that upon a stately
Neapolitan Courser he performed wonders, to the admiration of all beholders.
Capoleon on a sudden left his Wife, to watering the flowers with her tears, to
divert himself with this pleasing spectacle. Vannoza though she said nothing,
thought never the less; she durst neither follow him nor ask leave to do so,
knowing that to his suspicious brain this might bring some sinister ombrage of
her fidelity, and therefore sitting very pensively down in a close Arbor,
bathing her self in tears, she discharged her self of part of her sorrows, in
exhaling these following regrets, often interrupted with deep sighs.

To what has the rigorous influence of my unhappy stars reserved me? must I
thus dye before death's approach, and like a criminal Vestal be buried alive?
Certainly when one has by a bad deportment merited punishment, the rigor of
the pain is somewhat moderated by the consideration of the justness of it, but
to suffer an unjust punishment, is the rudest essay can be made upon humane
patience; and what patience so abused would not turn to fury? Why should I
bestow so much time on my complaints, and none upon my revenge? Dye then,
unfortunate Vannoza, and by one generous death cut off a thousand daily
renewing and languishing ones, which every hour afflict thee. The cold and
pale-faced Moon cannot be more Icy than thy Husband, nor the shades more
horrible than his presence; They deserve to live miserable that know not how to
escape afflictions by a courageous death. But, must I dye then unrevenged?
since revenge to the heart of a Woman abused like me, is a pleasure far sweeter
than life: Thus shall we set Furies upon our Cerberus, who shall sufficiently
torment him, and make him experiment the extremities to which he has reduced
us.

She had farther pursued this furious discourse, if the fear of being heard,
joined to the multitude of her sighs, had not stopped the words that followed.
But this interruption of her discourse gave more liberty to her thoughts, which
came to nettle her spirit with the words which the Lacquey had spoke before
her, so much to Alcimus his advantage; words which were oil to the flames of
her desire: It is an inclination incident to humane nature, to desire that most
earnestly which is most strictly forbidden; And if this flame do seize so
furiously on the green wood of man's spirit, what destruction will it make
among the dry? In that of a Woman, who is more fiercely agitated the more
unable she is to resist. She Is quite averse if you desire,
If you refuse she is all on fire.


Thus said the Poet that best knew their disposition; But if she desire a thing
which she wants power to obtain, then is it she strains the utmost of her
subtilty, to invent crafts and artifices to compass her designs; and then God
only knows what means she will not use to plain the way to her pretensions: The
effects of Lightning which we so much admire, were never more subtle; for as
that will melt the money without touching the purse, and the sword without
prejudicing the scabbard, so they will pass through bolted doors, and scale the
walls of the greatest obstacles, by a most subtle sort of penetration; Can any
hope to fetter thus
A crafty female Proteus?
The guards and bonds which her confine,
Will but help to aid her design.


And this indeed was sufficient to whet her appetite, to call away Capoleon
from her company to see the gallantries of Alcimus, it did indeed prick forward
her desire of taking her turn and leaving Capoleon's Company to enjoy the sight
of Alcimus her self: Thus she resolved to feed her eyes with this lovely
object, like the inconsiderate fly that rashly approaching the candle, burns it
self in it: There was over the apartment, whose walls bounded her liberty, a
Garret in which she pretended to be desirous of building a little Hermitage,
there to make a retreat for the better contemplating on heavenly matters, like
another Judith: she considered that from thence she might pass to the main part
of the House which fronted the street, (and was kept from her approach) over
the top of a Gallery which joined to her apartment, through which Gallery her
husband usually came to her. His project succeeded to her design; so that
having made a Cabinet there of boards, she made it be adorned and hung with
Tapistry and Pictures; so seeming to be very devout, she used to shut her self
in there, to attend more carefully the office of the pious Mary, though her
heart bore the impressions of far worse actions than those of the busy Martha.
Being retired into this remote place, she passed over the top of the Gallery we
spoke of, into the Garret of the main body of the house which fronted toward
the street, where through the window she might easily see there all that passed
to and fro; thus according to her desire she obtained the means of seeing the
world. Amongst others, Alcimus failed not in the evening to come out to take
the air, richly habited, nobly attended, and completely mounted, making his
ordinary corvets and managery; and as he bore innocence in his spirit, so did
he ingenuity in his looks; and though he was not altogether clear of all
faults, yet that of a little vanity was the chief, and he never harbored those
unclean and vile thoughts which now seized the breast of this bird that thus
peeped at him through her cage. If according to custom, he attracted the eyes
of every one, he even ravished and transported with admiration those of Vannoza;
Cephalus never appeared so lovely to Aurora, Endymion to Diana, nor Hippolytus
to Phaedra.

To see and to desire was but the same;
To her whose soul did now so fiercely flame.
Alcimus whom she had so often before considered, did never seem to have half
so many attractions; The Eastern regions have fewer pearls, the Spring fewer
flowers, and the Sun fewer rays than she fancied him to have graces and
accomplishments; and certainly if Envy with her squint eyes were constrained to
confess the advantages which shined in this Cavalier, what must that of Love
do? that penetrating eye, which will often forge imaginary beauties in objects
where there are none; How did she blame the inconsideration of her eyes, which
could formerly behold such perfections with such an indifferency, and not give
a true report to her heart of the rarities they now too late discovered. But
what have I to do to divine, much less to trace upon this paper the diverse
thoughts and passions which swelled her breast, the secret discourses of her
spirit; the irresolute determinations proceeding from her words, thoughts,
discourses and determinations, which made a Chaos of confused desires and
extravagant projects in her imagination.

With hope she fed her self in vain,
Of what she saw no means t'obtain.
These views and passages as innocent in the one as pernicious to the other,
continued some days, these being drops of water which still made the Furnace
flame more fiercely, and oil thrown upon the fire daily consumed her: It must
needs be great because double, that of her new Love being augmented by that of
the hatred she bore to the unjust rigours, and real deformities of her husband,
and the furious appetite she had for a revenge for his outrages; which at last
brought her to this resolution: After the expense of many a Tear,
Which daily flowed from her Eyes,
If Heaven refuse her Plaints to hear,
She Will call Hell to her Enterprise.


But Heaven is too just to authorize such execrable Designs, as render the
ensuing Lines more black, by the wickendess they relate, than the Ink that
forms them, enough to strike a horror into Hell, to see Crimes invented by
Female subtilty, which it can readily punish, but never invent.

Such Crimes proceeding from unlawful Love,
To which Medea's would but slight ones prove.
But for the present, what could she do? for to die every day a thousand
tormenting deaths, in the sight of the Remedy that was only able to cure her,
to die unrevenged, and without complaining to him that is the cause; what is
this but to put a Needle betwixt two Load-stones, and cause that, contrary to
Nature, he that she rejects in her Soul should possess her Body; and that he to
whom her very Heart and Inclinations bend, cannot be informed of her thoughts?
So that she must either evaporate this wind, or suffer an Earthquake to shake
her very Soul; she must either spring this Mine, or be buried in it; but the
way must be to do it with that kind of Powder which destroys without Report.

Were I not desirous to find in the Viper and Scorpion the Antidote against
their own Poison, I should here close up this rugged Clew I am about to follow;
or if I continued in it, I should desire the Reader here to close his Eyes for
fear of defiling them, with the reading the most execrable Actions which humane
Invention could produce; but I hope, the great heavenly Physician will assist
me so artificially to compound my Medicine, that the Antidote may furmount the
Poison.

For in pursuing this Discourse,
I to my self propose this end,
That he who reads may feel remorse,
From that, by which he learns to offend.
Thus the Rays of the Sun pass upon the Dunghill without infection, and a
sound Judgment through the knowledge of Evil, without receiving the least
Tincture: I fear not but to draw Light from this Darkness, and sacred Fire (as
the Children of Israel at their return from Babylon) out of a Pit, filled with
Ordure. And who can blame for unfit or unprofitable the History of the Great
Whore in the Apocalypse? Since God proposes those Examples for us, by seeing
the Punishments, to avoid the Crimes; and often for notorious Offenses, he uses
extraordinary Punishments; as in Thunder, the sound affrights all, but the Bolt
lights but upon few. And God has also Commanded his Prophets to declare unto
his People their Crimes and Offenses, and spit their shameful Actions in their
Faces; to Preach upon the Roofs what is practiced in the Chambers; and to bring
into the Evidence of Light, that which has been acted in the Cover of
Darkness: And the Prophet has said to an Idolatrous People, I will discover thy
nakedness to the Nations. With this Intention I enter into the blackest
Labyrinth imaginable; and into a Recital more horrible, than the Abomination of
Desolation, the Crimes of which are as worthy of detestation, as of punishment.

The End of the First Book.
ALCIMUS AND VANNOZA.
LIB. II.
IT cannot be denied, that those Crimes are greatest, in which God, who ought
to be the Punisher, is made a Party; and when the Sinner endeavors to make him
a Servant to Iniquity; when Godliness serves for a veil to Impiety; this
Wickedness may well be termed deplorable. 'Twas here that the detestable
Vannoza began to warp her Web, and like the Silkworm, dug her Tomb where
she thought to build a House. She was now feignedly become extreme devout,
which infinitely pleased her Husband, who not being able to judge but by the
outside, imagined that her Honor was now fenced with a double Rampart, since
the Exercises of Devotion would serve for a pleasing entertainment in her
solitude, and that the fear and love of God taking up her thoughts, would breed
in her a horror of sin, and a detestation of all other than lawful affections,
resembling the Mother of Pearl, which in the middle of the salt waves of the
Sea, receives no other moisture than what proceeds from from the Dew. He could
not refrain his praises of her, and extraordinary applauses, to testify his
joy to see her mix together her devotion toward God, and her duty toward him:
See here a Husband become a Preacher, a good Husband certainly, far more
careful and curious of the Conscience of his fair Companion, than of his own:
Admirable Charity! Capoleon became the Trumpet of his Wives Devotion; he
thought her employed in her private Closet in the Gallery, in the same
Exercises with the Valiant Bethulian Widow; believing that her Contemplations
were wholly upon Heavenly Objects, which were continually fixed upon an earthly
one, whilst he managed his Horse in the Street: Vannoza seeing that her Train
had taken sire, and that her Husband accounted her very devout, ceased not to
beat this Iron whilst it was hot, holding him in Discourses of Piety and Heaven
(though both as far distant from her heart, as the later is from the Earth)
even unto Visions and Revelations, sometimes intermingling Sighs and
Exclamations, with turning of her eyes almost in a feigned ecstasy, speaking
nothing but of hair-Cloaths, and Mortification, heaping up abundance of Images,
and Books of Devotion, recounting pieces of Sermons, which she retained in her
Memoty, and some Tracts of the Lives of Saints, which so ravished the spirit of
the old Man, that he could not take her for less than a Saint, and termed her
his Tutelary Angel, who inwardly accounted him her Guardian-Devil. Devil.
Nothing so much pleases the old Husband of a young Wife, as to see her piously
inclined, imagining that she will there find such satisfactions of spirit, that
she will never esteem those of the flesh. Thus Capoleon thought that this
design in him of imprisoning his Wife, proceeded from Divine Inspiration, God
having used that means to accomplish so good a Work. He begun to have more
considence in her, and to testify by some more than ordinary Caresses, that
she should never want his affections in recompense of those she had fixed upon
God; and that his love should still increase toward her, as hers did toward
Heaven. After this she made her pious retreats last somewhat longer; but this
was more to watch the passage of him who was the light of her eyes, than to
content her spirit with Celestial Raptures. None in the House knew of this
Artifice, and had her very smock known it, it had been in eminent danger of
burning; for she knew how dangerous it would be to trust either to a Maid, or
Lacquey, who were so many Spies and Sentinels kept in Pay by her Husband, to
keep a strict watch on all her Actions. And now what was she able to do, being
alone confined, revengeful and amorous? She must use some means to escape from
this perplexity, either through the window of Despair, or the door of Artifice.
A religious Artifice, that was the door of the Temple, which she thought to be
specious, but was very fallacious; wherefore she resolved, To try all ways
that Wit or Art could yield,
Before she to despair would quit the field.


One day as she was Cajoling her aged Tithon, (according to the Custom of
Women when they mean to deceive) redoubling her toyings and caresses, she
protested to him, That Imprisonment in his company was the highest happiness
she coveted on Earth; and so she enjoyed but the sight of him, all others in
the World were indifferent to her; so she might but enjoy this shadow of
liberty to go to the Churches in the Company and Conduct of her Mother, to
procure Indulgences, to frequent the Sacraments and Confessions, and to hear
Sermons: That all other Exercises besides these and her domestique ones were as
contrary to her temper, as fire to water, she being no more concerned for the
companies and conversations of the World, than if she had never seen nor known
it: She knew so well to color this just request with sweet and plausible
words, and to accompany her dissimulation with such real tears, that Capoleon's
heart was not so steely but to be softened by them; or had it been of stone,
the falling of these streams had been enough to wear it: He took her inside to
be as lovely as her out, and that both ways though clothed with flesh she was
altogether Spiritual; and that though yet on Earth, she breathed nothing but
what was Angelical: He thought that so holy a request could not be rejected
without impiety; And that he could not without meriting some severe Judgment
from Heaven, resist the motions of the holy Spirit, and stop the progress of
Grace in this holy Soul. The Proverb says, That it is hard to find a trick to
catch the old one, since their long experience has armed them against all
devices; Yet this young Wit, refined by a Passion which inspires the most
simple with subtlety, needed not to go to School to the most ancient
Crafts-Masters. Capoleon falls into the snare, and opening the door to a
seeming Piety, he lets in the blackest mischiefs. Wine taken after Hemlock, is
a good Antidote against its poison, because its gentle heat refreshing the
heart, tempers the mortal coldness of the other: but when they are both
swallowed together, there remains no further remedy; for the one opening the
pectoral veins, makes the deadly venom of the other a more easy entrance, and
renders it so penetrating and active, that the vital heat is suddenly
extinguish't. In like manner the most puissant remedy after the poison of sin,
is the supernatural heat of grace, (Grace which is the true enlivener of the
spirits) which does temper the natural frigidity of the Soul; the Sacraments
and other Divine Mysteries, are the Conduit-Pipes that convey this Divine Mercy
from the Fountain of Salvation; but when one swallows them down mixed with the
venom of Sin, then surely this iniquity is deplorable, which turns the Haven
to a Whirl-pool, the Potion to a Poison.

Death into Sinners entering at this Gate,
Hurries them headlong to a damned state.
And this mischievous invention of Vannoza was sufficient to hurry her to the
brink of Perdition; for she thus obtained this favor of her husband, who
thought this as great an act of prudence as of condescension, hereby stopping
the mouths that were daily open to blame his former unreasonable Severity; and
so thought he might safely put his honor under the conduct of the Conscience
of so devout a Wife. Vannoza's Parents advertised of this good resolution, came
to visit and thank Capoleon for it, and to congratulate with their Daughter
thereupon; She knew so well how to win her Mother's affection, who had for her
a heart truly Maternal, that instead of being conducted by her, she brought her
to accord to all that she desired. See here our Israelite under the rod of a
Mothers direction, delivered from the Egypt of her Prison, and the Captivity
of her Pharaoh, to go feed upon the Manna of absolution, and the Word of God,
in the deserts of Penitence: But her intention was to pass that way into a Land
of Promise that flowed with Milk and Honey far from Celestial. To render her
Stratagem more Complete, she clothed her self the meanliest that was possible,
and promised her husband to veil her face so diligently, that none but a Lynx
his eyes should perceive it; all which he believed as Oracles: Her Mother
astonished to see her in this equipage, became sorrowful for her fixing upon so
strict a devotion, fearing it would end in a destructive Melancholy: Her Maids
that followed her, fancied that they had an invisible Mistress, and that she
rather seemed a moving shadow, than a real substance. Capoleon who according to
the custom of the Jealous, watched her with Argus eyes, could espy nothing but
most devout and modest; and as he loved nothing more then the sight of her when
she was at home, he now cherisht the thoughts of her, whilst she was abroad.
Thus did she dazzle the Eyes of all Men, and was so diligent a manager of her
time, that in a few days she had learnt all the Jubiliees, the Stations,
Fraternities, Feasts and Sermons that were in the whole City, and had all the
Calendar by heart. She was seen to go from one Church to another, and from
Monastery to Monastery still at her Mothers heels, as if she had still
continued an obedient young Daughter; which was a sight commended by all the
beholders: Mean while her designs were so secret, That the most Curious
Imagination would not in the least have suspected the smallest part of them.
All thought it was the Mother that conducted the Daughter; when indeed it was
the Daughter was the Shepherdess, who though she came behind, drove her Leader
whither she pleased; so desirous was this good Woman of the Spiritual
Consolation of her beloved Daughter.

One would have thought she had gone with violence and fervor to the Conquest
of Heaven, when her Enterprises were all fixed upon Earth; like Eagles, who
when they tour aloft in the Air, have their thoughts still fixed below to fall
upon the first prey they can espy. Her veil concealed her from the sight of
others, but hindered her not from the sight of diverse objects which presented
themselves to her sight, which above all desired to satiate its self with the
sight of Alcimus; This was the Butt of her pretensions, her Indulgence and her
Jubilee. Alas! She could see him sometimes in Churches, but he passed out as
swift from her sight as lightning; or if he stood long enough for her to fix
her Eyes upon him, this was to stir up a devouring flame within her self, of
which she could not make him feel the least spark, not being able to contrive a
way to make him the least sign; for beside that, he neither thought of her nor
of any of her Sex, much less could he fix his attention on a Woman who had her
face all covered with a veil; and besides, she had those watchful Eyes about
her, who looked but for an opportunity of her moving her Veil never so little,
to make report of it to the jealous Ears of him, in whom a second Error would
be far worse than the first.

What troubles still destroy her peace!
How her perplexities increase!
Her Soul's wrackt with inquietudes,
And sorrows which do never cease.
How plagues assault sinners in multitudes!
We have said before that Alcimus his thoughts were not also set upon Vanities,
but that he had some left for Heaven, that he frequented the Church and
Sacraments, and was very punctual in his Devotions in a neighboring Monastery.
There was a certain Sunday in which an eminent Fraternity of the City caused a
great Procession to be made, the solemnity and Indulgences of which drew a
great many people thither to be partakers. Our feigned Saint, who was very
zealous for gaining Pardons, failed not to be there with her Mother. Alcimus,
whether by his good or evil Genius I know not, was drawn thither. It was in
this occurrence that Vannoza invented a stratagem as horrible as the end it was
designed for was wicked. Alcimus in order to prepare himself for the holy
Table, intending to examine his Conscience, and discharge himself of the faults
he should find there, went to make his confession at the feet of his ordinary
Confessor, who was a Religious Father, and Brother of this Monastery, and who
then discharged the Office of Confessor in that Solemnity: Vannoza whose head
was filled with other designs then those that seemed to bring her thither,
considered attentively all his actions, remarking the place where he went to
receive the benefit of Absolution, intending, like a crafty venomous Spider,
there to pitch her net to trap this innocent fly: She goes a little while after
as if desirous of the like Medicine from the same holy Physician, there
accusing her self of some little feigned crimes, which made her admired by this
holy Personage, who judging of the Bird by her note, thought he had met a soul
made up of purity and perfection: Thus did she cast dust, or rather seemingly
divine rays in the eyes of this good man which dazzled them so far as to take
her for little less then a Saint: and as there is nothing of equal consolation
to those that work in God's Vineyard, in this troublesome office, which of
Confessors makes them Martyrs, as to meet amongst the thorns of a thousand
iniquities, with which their ears are daily pestered, the roses of some
beauteous souls, moistened with the dew of grace, and which render a sweet
savor in Jesus Christ; this good Father blessed God, and all that was within
him did praise his holy name, that he had yet reserved to himself in the world
such holy souls and faithful servants, who instead of bending the knee to Baal,
and worshipping the calves of Bethel, did endeavor to work out their salvation
with fear and trembling. This crafty penitent finding by the good man's pious
praises of heaven for the divine graces which he thought lodged in her Soul,
that her dissembled holiness was rooted in his belief, having humbled her self
the best she could, with the most artificial words she could invent, like
bladders puffed full of wind, which bound the higher, the more forcibly they are
thrown against the ground; so she continuing still a more zealous discourse,
and painting her self with the colors of a Woman, most desirous to please God,
and preserve her honor, sent out a flood of Crocodile-tears, mixed with a sigh
which seemed to proceed from the bottom of her breast, which were followed with
these following words;

Alas! Father, said she, may I without offending God, discover to you some of
the imperfections of my Neighbor: God knows that it is for no ill will I bear
him, for I desire him as much happiness as my self; it is only for the avoiding
a grand disastre which hangs over his head, and which threatens no less then
the loss of his life, and the ruin of my honor.

Daughter, (answered the Confessor) you are not ignorant of the seal of
Confession, the same thing you think in your mind, you may as safely reveal
here; for whatsoever is buried in the ears of Confessors, does never come to a
resurrection; Nor can I imagine you can think me so ignorant of the grand
importance of these holy secrets, which cannot be revealed without my losing
both life and honor; nor so wicked as to outrage my conscience so infinitely
by so unworthy an action, upon which accounts you may assuredly confide in my
fidelity, and freely commit this secret to my trust, not distrusting the
faithfulness to which all Laws both Divine and Humane oblige me: I am to the
Soul what the Midwife is to the Body, aiding it in the discharge of that
weight, which presses it down with an insupportable burden: It belongs only
to you to judge in what my interposition may be serviceable to your
consolation, and fear not but you have met in me a true Paternal affection.

Thus spoke this good old Father, whose Dove-like innocence well suited his
name, which was Simplicius, comforting a soul whom he thought to have great
need of his assistance: Finally, this crafty female having thus by her
artifices prepossest his spirit, spoke with a great earnestness to give the
better color to her dissimulation, as follows:

Holy Father, it is not my distrust of your sufficiency, piety or fidelity,
which causes me to speak these words, which I would more willingly have buried
in a profound silence, the cause of it is the violence I must do to my self to
reveal the inconsideration and imprudence (I had almost said the impudence) of
another: Notwithstanding which I will discover it, since you assure me there is
no evil in laying open another's faults, provided it be not out of malice, or
an intention to defame him: And moreover necessity constrains me to it, a
necessity exempt from rules and laws of Ceremony.

Though, Father, you are dead to the World, and have few Concerns in Secular
Companies and Conversations, yet do so much of them come under your knowledge,
by the practice of your Office, that you cannot but have heard of the name of
Alcimus, which has so much advantage in fame above those of other Gentlemen of
this City; and that you may the better remarque him, I am informed that he
lives not far from your Monastestery, and to point him out plainly with my
finger, it is the young Gentleman, who came not long before me, to discharge
(alas! I know not, whether as he ought) his Conscience before you.

Hereupon Simplicius told her, That he had not more particular knowledge of,
nor intimate acquaintance with any one in the City than with him; that he was a
great Benefactor to their Convent; that he was one of the fairest, most
judicious and pious Souls that ever came under his acquaintance, nor did he
ever know one of his Age more virtuous.

Ah! Father, said this false Penitent, how easy it is to lie to men, but how
hard to deceive God! (and in this, like Caiphas, she spoke truer than she
intended.) Surely if his wickedness could increase so high as thus to impose
upon you, I take his case to be most deplorable, and it is impossible but that
he must thereby draw upon himself some grand disastre.

What is it you tell me, Daughter? said the amazed Simplicius, Can this man
possibly be so like the Swan, as under an appearance of innocent whiteness, to
conceal the black feet of so horrid an impiety, loosely abusing the Sacraments
for a Cloak to his wickedness.

I come not here, replied Vannoza, to search into the secrets of his
Conscience, but only to discharge my own, by advising him by you, that he break
off his search of a Woman, who being loyal and faithful to her Husband, cannot
without breach of both be enjoyed by him.

What! said Simplicius, Alcimus covet another man's Wife! O execrable
Sacrilege! O mighty God! where is thy Thunder? I have long governed the spirit
of this man, but have never either perceived, or heard such a thing of him; but
trust this to me, and if he come not to see me speedily, I will go seek and
find him out, and endeavor to wash his Soul with so scouring a Soap, as with
God's assistance shall lick away this odious spot: I feel zeal enough to dare
to attempt, and hope I have influence enough upon him to perfect the plucking
up so pernicious a root from his heart: And if you permit me to remark the
particulars to him, it will be from you by me, or rather from God by us both,
that he will obtain the salvation of his Soul; for it is written, That he that
retrieves his Brothers soul from the path of ruin, it is delivering his Soul
from death, does at the same time save his own: and is it not an excellent way
of working ones own salvation in that of another, and this properly belongs to
the Religious, who to Monastique Functions do join the Priestly.

I do not only allow, but entreat you to do so, holy Father (said Vannoza) for
to this sole end have I revealed it to you; and that you may see with what
truth and sincerity I proceed in this Affair, know that I am the Wife of
Seigneur Capoleon, a Gentleman well known in this Town: I tell you this,
because the obscurity of this place, the Veil I have upon my face, and your
Religious Order hinders me from being otherwise known to you than by word. I am
the unhappy Woman, in whose face this rash inconsiderate young man has found
that which pleases him more than it ought, or I desire. But there is no fire
that is not accompanied with some smoke, and he does not only cast out some
sparks, but so visible a flame, as is known and taken notice of by all the
Neighborhood. Now you must know, Father, that Jealousy (is almost an
inseparable Companion of old men, married to young wives) has so possessed my
Husbands heart, that excepting my walks to the Churches and places of Devotion,
which yet is done in company of my Mother (which is the ancient Lady which you
see here so near your Confessional) I am the rest of my time prisoner in a
remote Apartment of the House, which only looks into the Garden, where I have
no other entertainment, but that of Images, Books of Devotion, and my solitary
thoughts; sufficiently happy in this retreat, in which I have the happiness of
pleasing my Husband, and conversing with God, if I did not fear, that so many
follies which Alcimus commits before all the world, and particularly in the
sight of my Husband Capoleon, may force him to the extremity of laying an
ambush for him, and take away his life in so unprovided a condition, as may
render the hopes of his Salvation desperate; for to die in the unchaste pursuit
of another's Wife, is but a crooked way to the eternity of Glory: I have
already discovered some of my Husbands menaces, and perceived him to plot with
his Servants and some Bravo's, against this young Gentleman, which cannot be
executed without a probability of bringing Capoleon to destruction, Alcimus to
Hell, and me into the slanderous mouths of detracters, whose throat is an open
sepulcher; where I should see my Honor unjustly buried. Judge then, Father, if
I have not reason to advertise you of this mischief which hangs over the head
of Alcimus, that he may get into Harbor, to avoid this Tempest, and slip from
the shot of this bended Bow, and that by sorsaking so unjust a Passion, he may
save himself from so eminent a destruction.

In truth Daughter, replied Simplicius, you include many virtuous acts in one;
for besides the testimony of your honesty, and your inviolable fidelity to your
Spouse, you use a grand and signal prudence, to prevent the many slanders which
might succeed so pernicious a design; and principally you manifest an extreme
charity toward this wretched offender, who does justly merit to perish in his
iniquity: But we ought still to hope well of Divine mercy and a sinner's
Conversion, above all when the iniquity is but in its Infancy, whiles the young
man is yet within the gate, or Jairus his Tabitha within the house, without
attending Lazarus his four days corruption, till an inveterate habit have
rendered him incurable. But yet, continued he, may I not yet be further
instructed (that I may more clearly carry my self in this affair) of some
particulars of the unhappy search of this young insolent? I question not but
that against the constancy of your honesty, his sighs and tears are but winds
and waves spent upon a rock: but how far has his vanity proceeded? has your
Husband yet perceived it? or is he yet come to open words, threats, and
bravadoes, or only to small suspicions.

I thank God, said she, he is not yet come to the extremities you first
specified, but he is upon the essay you last mentioned; for Alcimus his
pursuits are so evident, that none, except blind, but must needs remark him;
for every evening, under pretenses of taking the Air, and managing his Horse
(in which, and in his Attendance he has an extreme vanity) he has picked out our
Street, which is fair and spacious, for the Theater of his Exercises (shall I
say) or Follies, and this to endeavor to draw me to the window, as many other
inconsiderate young ones, there to see my face; from the Ice and coldness of
which toward him, he has raised such a flame, as rages with so much more
puissance, as it finds in him less resistance; for this Passion is so voluntary
an evil, that it torments us no longer than we please, and so no longer than we
give it the Sovereignty of our Hearts. In the beginning of these passages, when
I had the liberty to go into what parts of the House I pleased, I became one of
his beholders, and thereby the innocent cause of his Passion, without giving
him any subject for it. Capoleon himself, who took great pleasure in seeing him
in these postures, and who in his time has been a good Horseman, used to bring
me to see him; but since his Jealousy has confined me to a quarter of the
House far remote from the street, it is in vain for Alcimus to make his passings
to and fro; for I am wholly eclipsed from his eyes: But he is of the number of
those foolish Lovers, who content themselves with the sight of those Wells,
which enclose the Object of their flames; like Elephants, who not daring to
swim in a water which has not depth enough to support them, wash themselves by
walking along the edge of a River, where they are often either taken or slain:
And I am so afraid, lest this inconsiderate Bird, if it take not heed, be shot
by an Arrow feathered from its own wing, or caught in lime-twigs of its own
pitching; for as every man is the Artificer of his own good, so is he of his
own bad fortune: I hear the Winds rise, the Waves roll, and the Tempest
approach; my Husband, to whom all things bring cause of suspicion, yet knows
that I am not at all desirous of the sight of this Cavalier, and is hugely
offended that these passages are a common Table-talk amongst the Neighborhood,
amongst whom the murmur runs, that he makes all these turns for a Bird that
Capoleon keeps encaged, meaning me. May it therefore please you, most holy
Father, to do this charitable office to him, my Husband, and my self, to
prevent so great a mischief and scandal, by advertising him for the future to
leave off this unprofitable pursuit, which can neither be advantageous nor
honorable, except he desire to be continually in danger; till perhaps at last,
amongst these turns and passages, he may light on one, he neither sought nor
thought of, which is that which leads from life to death. I being so close shut
up as I am, could not have opportunity to give him any advice of this by any of
my Servants, lest they should suspect betwixt us some secret intelligence, and
that my Husband, who sets them as so many Spies about me, should not have a
pretext to treat me more rigorously; and as I was just going to trust this
important Secret to this ancient Lady you see here, (who though my Mother, is
still a woman, and my own frailty tells me, how bad a repository our Sex is for
such privacies) God inspired me just upon that instant to come to your holy
Fatherhood, having seen him part from you; so that for the future, I shall rely
upon your prudence and charity, to give a remedy to these threatening
Misfortunes.

Daughter ( replied the good Father Simplicius) since you not only permit, but
enjoin me to open my mouth upon this Subject, for the good and safety of so
many Souls, I shall willingly obey you in so just an occasion, which concerns
the Glory and Service of God, whom I serve, therefore rely upon me, and I will
apply my utmost diligence to cut the thread of his folly; be you only constant,
devout, and faithful, and take this Maxim from me, That the best and greatest
Policy and Invention, is to keep a good Conscience, and to walk uprightly
before God; have a good courage and confidence in the Divine Bounty, and fear
not but truth and purity will be your Safeguard. Whereupon having given her
his blessing, he dismissed her in peace.

Imagine with your self, whether this subtle woman might not well be compared
to a Rower that turns his Bark to the Port he aims at; whether to all outward
appearance, her discarding of Alcimus, were not the ruin of her Design. But
infinite are the Inventions of the heart, when it is infected with the Poison
of the old Serpent, who was a Murderer from the beginning, and by whom Sin
entered into the World, with Death for its attendant. None make up directly and
openly to Iniquity, there must be always some Color or Leaves to hide it, or
else it would appear too openly; it has always a specious outside, and though
the inside of the Coin be plain brass, it will be sure to be handsomely plated
over. Vannoza being parted from Father Simplicius, told her Mother, that she
had found so much edification in his Remonstrances, and such profit in his
Instructions, that for the future he should be her only Confessor; which
pleased her Mother very much, desiring nothing more than the contentment of her
Daughter, who in those words only sowed the Seed of a speedy return, to know
whether that Match which she had lighted, had given fire to the Train of her
wicked Intentions. Mean while, the good Religious Father, hurried on by his
zeal, without attending Alcimus his coming, whose loss he apprehended, went to
visit him in his house, as he did at other times before, as well in quality of
a Neighbor, as to cultivate the benevolence of so good a Benefactor to the
Fraternity, and to mix a little prudence with his plainness, knowing by common
Opinion as well as Experience, that all the words of women are not Oracles: he
made private inquiries if it were true that this Gentleman went so in the
evening, prancing through the street where Capoleon's house was; which he found
to be very true; and which was more (as every thing gives cause of suspicion in
this jealous Nation) that he was much spoken of for his gallantry and brave
Behavior. Hence the good man conjectured, that Vannoza's report was but too
true. Therefore being with Alcimus, after many Discourses and ordinary
Entertainments, he fell, as if by accident, upon the Discourse of Serenades and
Gallantries in the Streets, which this young Gentleman ingenuously
acknowledged; and withal told him, That to avoid the eyes of so many infamous
Courtizans as thronged the Windows to behold him, he shunned as diligently as
was possible the places affected with that accursed Race, for that end passing
through the more remote and less frequented ones; confessing further, the
pleasure he took in this exercise, in which he drew the Opinions of all
Beholders to reckon him for excellent.

But Father, said he, do you disapprove of it as sinful? or can this kind of
vainglory, (for that is the worst title it can merit) amount to a heinous
offense? For to be seen, taken notice of, praised, esteemed and admired, is a
thing very ordinary amongst Academies, which pleasing applause does undeniably
tickle the heart through the ear.

Then Simplicius thinking he had brought Alcimus to the point desired, begun
presently to tell him, That this passing through the streets, whether on foot
or horseback, was in it self a thing indifferent; but that indifferent actions
took the tincture either of good or evil form the designs and determinations
which were intermixed with them; for there is nothing so good but may be
corrupted by a malignant spirit, and from which, like a spider, it may not suck
poison. Nor any thing so evil from which a well-disposed spirit may not draw
some advantage. That feasts, banquets, assemblies, dancing, honest plays and
recreations, habits, and such like, were of this nature, and were neither to be
praised or condemned, but according to the usage or abuse, the moderation or
excess of those that use them: But that humane nature and inclinations were so
inclined and bent toward the vanities of youth, that as if our very touch were
infectious, we are apt to corrupt the very best things by handling, much more
indifferent ones. So wine and meats, which are given to sustain the body, serve
for objects of daintiness to one, drunkenness to another, and gluttony to
others, and amongst ^ssemblies to bind the amity of the company, and confirm
their friendship, which conserve the union of all Societies: Many others are
led by irregular affections, from whence arise many scandalous actions: And
further, that these passings and repassings through the streets with so great
attendance, such pomp, splendour and sumptuousness could not well be void, not
only of excess, but of many dangers of taking or being caught, the world is
every way so full of snares: For as the Peacocks in setting up their plumes, do
thereby excite the females to pleasure, so men when they make so splendid an
appearance, are the cause of many inconsiderable Women's sinning in wanton
thoughts or unchaste desires: and what do you think (continued he) men are apt
to say when they see a young Gallant, handsome, brave, well habited, and
advantageously mounted, making turns and returns in a street, but that he has
either love or design upon some object there; whence proceed murmures, curious
inquiries, hard speeches and scandals: And if the object be unlawful to be
desired, then the Woman is persecuted with infamy, the Husband rackt with
jealousy, till he breathe out nothing but fury and revenge; for how can he
otherwise contain himself, who sees his wife courted before his face, and
himself thereby subjected to the reproaches of the world, and laughter of the
people: From this source spring great and dangerous accidents, which it is more
easy to avoid then remedy, when arrived.

And afterward taking his opportunity he proceeded thus,

It is not without some cause, Seigneur Alcimus, that I make you this
discourse, for I have from good hands received a bad report of you, and I
assure you I could never have thought or believed, that a soul so seemingly
fair as yours, would by the easy way of deceiving men, pass so unworthily to
the dangerous one of offending God: but deceive not your self, for none can
mock God with impunity, if he withold his vengeance, it is but to redouble his
stroke. I should be a traitor not only to the obligations I have to your amity
and to the diligent care I ought to have of your safety and salvation, and my
own, but also to the Master whom I serve, if I did not advertise and admonish
you of your danger of both temporal and eternal destruction: the sword of
divine vengeance hangs over your head, and like that of Damocles, but in a
slender thread: Both God and Man have bent their bows, and made ready both
arrows of fire and death against you, except you avoid the blow by repentance,
and arm your self by a serious penitence: all things conspire against you
whilst you continue in your wickedness, unless you turn from your evil way, I
cannot say within forty days, which was the space that Jonas allotted Niniveh,
but within a far shorter term: Think no longer to impose upon me by feigned
confessions, for God will one day lay open your dissimulations and my
intentions, when he shall discover what is hidden in the heart, and shall open
the secrets of darkness.

If ever man were surprised or astonished, it was Alcimus, who seeing his
innocence burdened with a Crime which the other did not name, nor he imagine,
did at once change color an hundred times; and these alterations, caused by
his sincerity and ingenuity, were by Simplicius, who steadfastly regarded him,
taken for the effects of guilt, and remorse of Conscience; and therefore said,
Take Courage, Seigneur Alcimus, all will be well, that skarlet of your blushes
does elevate my hopes, and makes me attend your ingenuous and free Confession.
Alcimus, who felt his Conscience clogged with nothing but the deteinure of his
Church-Revenues, of which we have amply treated in the beginning of this
Narrative, did like those that are struck, presently lay his hand on the
bruised spot, where he felt the pain. And after calling to mind how he had
often conferred about this Affair with this good Father, who had found him
certain Expedients, if not to remove the sting from his Conscience, yet at
least to lay the pain asleep, till he had found an Expedient to assure these
Benefices to his Family.

My good Father (said he) as amongst the Bees, she that makes the Honey stings
most severely, so now this Assault is the more insupportable from that mouth
which has hitherto distilled unto me nothing but sweets and Consolations; God
is my witness, that I have never concealed any thing from you, at the Tribunal
where accusing ones self is the best excuse; and if you have not known any
thing of me there, it must be because I am ignorant of it my self. It is true,
I dare not reckon my self for an extraordinary good man; for if I should
justify my self, my own mouth would condemn me; and if I have offended God,
and sinned against him, it is, that he may be justified in his saying, and what
he judges: I confess, I was born in iniquity, and in sin did my Mother
conceive me; but yet I have ever loved the truth, by and through which I have
accused my self of the most hidden faults I could remarque, and without fraud
or mincing, I have freely discovered my secrets to you; but if God have by some
extraordinary means revealed any to you, that have slipped out of my remembrance,
tell it me, and reprove me in the spirit of meekness and gentleness, and I am
ready to amend it; for I every day heartily beseech God (with the Royal
Prophet) to cleanse me from my secret faults, and from those sins which I may
be guilty of, by the participation of those of others. At this present, I can
boldly say, that nothing lies heavy on my heart, but the enjoyment of these
Church Benefices, without intention of being a Churchman; but they being of
that nature, that they may be possessed by a Secular person, and I being
unmarried, and not able to quit them absolutely, without breach of that respect
which I owe to my Parents, I think I hold them by no such unjust Title; add to
this the many consolations I have received from you, when I have revealed to
you the causes of my Scruples; and yet I am ready at the disposition of those
from whom I hold what I have, to do any thing that shall be adjudged fitting by
any sober and grave Persons.

Simplicius thinking that Alcimus would dexterously thus have warded the blow,
and changed his purpose, to avoid answering to that which he thought he had
plainly enough proposed.

No, no, said he, Seigneur Alcimus, you must not thus think to escape me, I
have fig leaves in my hands to prevent the glidings of the Snake; I should be
very indiscreet to speak in this extravagant manner of that which we have so
often discoursed of before, and which puts me to as much trouble as your self,
since the Confessor and Penitent are both fastened with the same Chain; there
is another far different Mystery, a Mystery of Iniquity which you have not yet
discovered, and which is come to my knowledge by a way which you would scarce
ever divine; and assure your self it will be to your good to make a right use
of my Remonstrance, and to the discharge of my Soul if you reject it: what I
say may serve you for correction, if you take it as you ought, and for
advertisement, though you have no desire to profit by it: Now you must know,
there is a grand difference, betwixt the Laws positive and common, and those
that are Divine; for as men have made the Laws positive, so may they dispense
with them; but for Divine Ordinances, they are indispensable, and whoever seeks
excuses to palliate iniquity, doubles the Crime, and is doubly culpable. For
Example, as to the use of Ecclesiastical goods, the Holy Father, who is Supreme
and Sovereign Disposer of them, may favor those with them, whom he judges fit
and deserving; but there is no earthly Authority that can dispense with these
Divine Commandments, Thou shall not kill: Thou shall not steal: Thou shall not
commit adultery.

This the good man spoke confusedly, that he might not suddenly touch the sore
of him, whom he thought wounded. To this Alcimus replied:

Father, If I were as innocent upon the Hypothesis, which you have made
touching the positive Right, as upon the three last Articles of the Divine,
which you mentioned, my Soul would enjoy a profound peace, and I should have
but little cause to doubt of Divine Grace: For, as for Murder, my hands are
very clear from blood, and I desire not the death of any man. As for other
Men's Goods, I am so far from having my hands sullied with them, or my desires
therewith touched, that those which I already possess, lie somesomewhat too
heavy on me. And as for the Wife of another, God preserve me from desiring her,
since I never cast my eyes upon any lawful Subject, which I would be willing to
take to my self; and this is the only point of difference that ever happens
betwixt me and my Parents, who desire nothing so much as to see me married; nor
is there any thing I fly from more, being more desirous of the benefit of the
Field, than the confinement of the Cage: And my Soul being thus estranged, even
from honest and lawful affections, what is it from unjust and unlawful ones?
For, besides my aversion from all Women in general, I have a particular
abhorrency against the worser sort of them; and as for those that are engaged
in Marriage, I cannot have the confidence so much as to look on them, for fear,
not only of the secret adultery of a wanton look, but of violating so holy a
Sacrament, which is the most Sacred Bond of Humane Society.

O Adam, where art thou? cried Simplicius (thinking that these fair words were
only designed as a Looking-Glass moved against the Sun, to cast the Rays in
his eyes) What Seigneur Alcimus, think you thus to lead an old Man by the Nose,
who though he may come short of you in quick wit and fancy, is as much beyond
you in Experience? Once more, Where art thou Adam? Do you think thus to hide
your nakedness from my sight with Fig Leaves? I may justly threaten you, if you
persevere in this course, to show your impiety to the people, and cast your
shame in your own face: conceal not your self so vainly therefore, O Infant of
my Soul; Prevaricator of the Laws of God: Look back into your own heart, and
retake your former Virtue; fall again to your former good Works, and by a sound
Repentance, regain your lost Robe of Innocence: Return, O Shunamite return.
Come back thou Prodigal to thy Fathers house, whilst his arms are yet open to
receive thee, and the acceptable day of Salvation is yet in the dawning: O fly
and meet the beauteous Orient of the Sun of Mercy, which if once declined, can
never be regained; and then it will be too late to cast off the works of
darkness, when the whole Armor of Light is got beyond your reach.

Alcimus more astonished then before, knew not what to answer to this discourse
so full of obscurity, the words of which were as so many Aenigma's. Good Father
(replied he) speak more plainly that I may understand and answer you, for how
long will you hold me in suspense? tell me but my offense and I am ready for
the chastisement; and may all the arrows of heaven's vengeance make a butt of
my head, if I know my self guilty of more then I have already confessed to you:
Have I committed murder, theft, or adultery? I speak not of either of the two
first ( replied Simplicius) nor of the effects of the third, but who knows not
that as in good deeds God accepts the will for the deed, so evils but designed
by a determined resolution, are as much as executed before him, since we have
to do with a God who searches the hearts and tries the reins; before whom all
things are open, and nothing hid, who sees our thoughts afar off, and
understands our designs before they be disclosed: he will not hold him
innocent, who performs not an evil if he have but once designed it; for his own
mouth has declared, that he who looks upon his neighbor's wife with a lustful
eye, has committed Adultery with her in his heart already: And to what serve
all your serenades, your prancings, carreers, turns and returns (it being the
property of evil to have a circular motion) your amorous looks and glances, and
other such like actions which are daily remarkable in your deportment, the eye
of the world which you think bleared, is far more piercing then you imagine;
yet we have it from good authority how malicious it is withal; Our sinful
Parents did us breed,
We them in wickedness exceed;
Our children will more Vices love,
And theirs will worse then Vipers prove:
Thus Ages change, thus the World worse does grow,
Till he that made both, both does overthrow.


The world has as much advantage of you in craft as age: It is hard for you,
though never so subtle, to charm the sight of this many-eyed Argus: If the
malicious often see (by false conjectures) the things that are not, how much more
easily will they see visible, yea palpable ones: believe me, your fire cannot
burn without some smoke, and who can keep a fire in his breast, and conceal all
the sparks from the sight of the world: So many corvets and gallantries are not
made without some design, some unhappy one, which perhaps, unless you take heed
of your self, will invelope you in grand disasters, and though your designs may
be built up to their full perfection, will at last intomb you in your own
ruins. I speak this without any other interest then the desire of your good,
and fear of your misfortune; I should not love, you if I should dissemble that
which would be so prejudicial to you; friendship and flattery are two distinct
things, too remote to be comprehended in the circumference of one breast:
Finally, return unto your self, and turn from what is bad, cease from what is
evil, and practice what is good: God has given you too good talents both of wit
and body, to be miserably employed, as upon the search of what is forbidden by
the giver, and the possession of which cannot be but pernicious to you. Pardon
me if by this touch of my lancet, I have opened the imposthume, which might
else prove mortal, in respect not only of a temporal life, but also of an
eternal one, and take these remonstrances of coming originally from a heart
which makes its own safety a partaker in yours.

This oblique way of speaking plunged Alcimus in a greater trouble then before;
and not able to divine who it was that had given him so charitable an
admonition by the means of this good Father, whom he greatly honored and
esteemed, as a faithful servant to God, as well as a friend to him, he begun to
call heaven and earth to his party, and firmly to defend his own innocence; but
the more he strove to persuade Simplicius that the report he had heard was
false, the more did he believe it true: which brought him to such profound
oaths and imprecations, as the ears of this Religious Father could not endure,
they approached so near (as he thought) to blasphemy; upon which he said,

And think you, Alcimus, that adultery is a crime to be purged by oaths, or
that the crime of perjury (as two pellets) can drive away and clear you of that
of Sacrilege? if this were admitted, the most wicked villains would soon be
discharged of their crimes, and the accused would quickly be set free: But I
see how the case stands, and that you who have not had confidence in me in a
sacred Tribunal, where my life is bound up with my fidelity, will be much
further from revealing your secrets to me now, when we are but upon the terms
of ordinary discourse; remember only this, That it is as easy to beguile man,
as impossible to deceive God; and he who strives to do either, does fool
himself in the first place, and then, as the wise man says, Who will not
deride the charmer that is bitten by his own Serpent?

Father, (replied Alcimus) I know you speak all this but to essay the patience
of your Penitent, and I wish that heaven may never pardon it, but contrarily
invent some unheard of punishment for me, showring down all its Anathema's upon
my head, if I have knowingly concealed any thing from you, which I thought my
self bound in conscience to discover, or the concealment of which might in the
least render me culpable; God preserve me from so double, deceitful and
sacrilegious a thought, and I do solemnly assure you, by whatever is most
sacred in earth or heaven, that I have no design upon any Woman whatsoever,
much less upon the Wife of another man. All that I can say is, that this must
either be jealousy, which often sees that which is not, or calumny, that has
contrived this accusation against me, and with which I see your spirit so
prepossest, that unless it please God to interpose his hand, I know not how you
will ever be disabused: I know the respect I owe to your character, and how
much I am obliged to the wholesome remonstrances that proceed from your
Fatherhood, and whatever you shall please to say or do to me, shall find a
ready observance from me, knowing what ascendant both our spiritual and
temporal Fathers ought to have over us: I shall only patiently attend, till
time (which is the Father of Truth) bring forth light out of darkness, and
witness my sincerity and integrity to the world; I confess my self a grievous
sinner before God, but not to be ranged amongst Adultererers, Liars, and
Sacrilegious: and if ever you have thought me worthy either of your belief or
friendship, you will clear your self of this Opinion.

Simplicius, who believed that this fair Language resembled those delicate
Viands, which turn either into exquisite nourishment, or extreme putrefaction,
thinking that this young man so fallen into, and strengthened in iniquity, that
it was impossible to draw him to an acknowledgment of it, having briefly
declared to him the desperate condition (as he thought) his Soul stood in, and
that he was upon the brink of destruction, desired him for the future to
provide himself of another Guide to accompany him in so perilous a Voyage; for
him, he was resolved to save himself, and so quitted himself of his Office:
After having given him this charitable advice, That if he left not his former
Courses and Gallantries, accompanied with his too evident solicitations of a
Lady of Honor and Quality, he would find himself into the Grave, when he
thought himself furthest from it; not in the midst, but even upon the point of
his best days, by an accident, as miserable as unsuspected: And thereupon left
him, without suffering Alcimus his instant entreaties to extract from him a
more particular declaration. This Gentleman remained in no little confusion of
thoughts; for though fear (the ordinary tormentor of the guilty) changed not
his courage; yet the apprehensions of death (so ^atural to all men) and that
too of a sudden and unprovided one, did nearly touch his spirit joining to
this his just curiosity, to know who could thus have seasoned the belief of
this good Father, with so false a calumny: he passed all the night without
closing his eyes, and in strange interior convulsions, agitated with a
continual remorse that he had not yet abandoned the Church-revenues, which he
detained and spent so unjustly. Perhaps (said he within himself) this imaginary
adultery which I never thought of, serves for a color to that true one which I
daily commit; adulterating, that is to say, abusing the goods of the Spouse of
the Son of God; applying to profane uses and ornaments, what ought only to be
employed in pious and holy functions: The height of riches and wisdom of God is
extreme, his Judgments incomprehensible, and his ways inscrutable: How many
malefactors have we seen dragged to punishment for crimes which they never
acted, and yet had other-ways merited death, for more black and wicked
Villainies, which had been hid till revealed by their own discovery^ Sure God is
just, and his Judgment is right, and he knows both how and why he punishes.

Who can the Sun of darkness blame,
Or who against God complaints can frame?
Or say his Judgments are not right,
Who Is of Justice made up as the other is of light.
The Sun had scarce restored his face all crowned with Rays, to our Horizon,
when Alcimus, who had never closed his eyelids, but tormented with diverse
fancres, leapt from his bed, whose Feathers were more pungent than so many
Thorns; not able to find rest till he had reduced his Soul to its Center, that
is to God, who is it is true place, and his Grace, the Tabernacle of the God of
Jacob; he went streight-away to Father Simplicius, to be cleared of all these
Aenigma's, which had overwhelmed him with so many inquietudes: Simplicius
suffered himself to be long pressed, and entreated before he would grant him
audience; but the double force of obedience and condescension, rendered
exorable the charity which animated him. Alcimus having declared to him the
torment in which he had left him, and the inquietudes which had robbed him of
that nights sleep.

I question it not (replied Simplicus) for a bad Conscience is an executioner
to him that has not quite lost the sense of his Crime. It is a good sign when
one awakes from a lethargick slumber; this gives some appearance of recovery;
but when one continues sleeping in the Regions of the shadow of death, it is a
sign that the enemy of our Salvation prevails against Grace. God be praised,
who by the healing Eye Salve of my Remonstrance, has restored you your sight,
and made you see the deplorable and dangerous state in which you before did
sleep so supinely. Be of good courage, you shall not die but live, to sing
eternally the mavelous operations of divine Mercy.

My dear Father ( replied Alcimus) I am now blinder than ever, and more
ignorant, of what (as I am your spiritual Son) I suppose you ought to tell me
more plainly; 'cause that I may see, (as the blind man said to our Savior) for
certainly however it be, you ought more plainly to lay open to me the
particulars of this report, that if it be true, I may say as David did to
Nathan, I have sinned; or if it be otherwise, with Joseph falsely accused, and
unjustly imprisoned, I am innocent of what is laid to my charge.

Seigneur Alcimus (said Simplicius) pray speak no more of your innocence, being
so notoriously convinced; otherwise you will make me believe you are one of
those whom Solomon speaks of, who think themselves clean and pure, and yet are
filled with filth and iniquity. If the Infant but one day old is not exempt
from sin (as the Scripture tell: us) one of your age, accomplishments, and
liberty, that is free and dis-intangled from all sorts of love both lawful and
unlawful, may well be accounted A Bird as rare,
As black Swans are.
But think not to feed me now as yesterday you did with aerie words, for I have
more serious affairs to look after, and which do more justly merit the time
which we employ here in cajolleries and vain contestations: I have have said
enough to you, therefore as Joshuah said to Achan, Give glory to God in
confessing your fault, and reconciling your self by a true Repentance, to him
whom you have so grievously offended. I know how unserviceable I am to you in
any Function but this, and you may find Companions enough in the World amongst
whom to ease your itch of talking, without troubling the repose and silence of
a Cloister with the same: Father, (replied Alcimus) the giving glory to God by
a true Confession, is the sole scope of my intention; for I see well the little
credit which my words can obtain, if not supported by this prop of Penitence,
and mixed with a Sacrament, the profaning of which by a Lie merits no less the
eternal Damnation; for which cause I am more firmly resolved than ever to
disburthen my Soul to you in a sincere and hearty Confession.

Simplicius knowing that there are twelve hours in the day, and that the Sinner
ought to be seized on in the critical minute, without further delay accepted
this condition, thinking this the only means to withdraw this Soul from the
jaws of the infernal Wolf, and from the open Gates of eternal perdition: At
this Sacred Tribunal, from whence Lies are banished under so severe Penalties,
the innocent Alcimus discovered the secrets of his heart to his Ghostly Father,
who yet took all this for naught but artifices; wherefore after many menaces of
the wrath of God, if he remained obstinate in his will; and after having
pressed home to him this Sentence of Tertullian, If thou hidest thy self in
Confession here, thou shall be hid in the eternal Dungeons hereafter.

Alcimus answered, Holy Father, if the gaping jaws of Hell were now ready to
receive me, and all its dismal Inhabitants fitted to receive me, I am able to
say no more than I have done, I only desire this favor (which those that like
you do manage and direct our Consciences, ought not to deny to the most
miserable) that you would please to endeavor to supply by your
Interrogatories, what you think wanting in my Confession. David could not have
forgot his Murder and Adultery, yet he remained a whole year without
consideration or discovery of it; till the Prophet laying his hand upon the
sore, presently made him feel the smart, and look out for a remedy.

Certainly (replied Simplicius) I may answer you as St. Ambrose did Theodosius,
who alleged this Example, That you that have followed him in his sin, if not
in effect, yet at least in intention (which is the same Crime in the sight of
God) should likewise answer him in repentance.

And you, Father (answered Alcimus) be pleased to follow Nathan 's steps, in
drawing this thorn gently out of my heart.

Simplicius thinking at this word that he had won the Town, without losing
time, and designing to accommodate himself to this tender spirit, which he
thought to be sick of the most dangerous of all Fevers, which is that of Love;
after having by many circumlocutions imitated the Chyrurgion, who seeming only
to anoint with Cotton dipped in Oil, the aposthumed breast of a delicate Lady,
does dexterously open it with a hidden Lancet; so he by degrees at last brought
Alcimus upon the point of his evening airings and motions on Horseback; all
which Alcimus confessed, exaggerating (like a true Penitent) the excess and
superfluity of his Habits and Attendance, the pleasure he took in hearing the
praises and applauses of those that beheld him, and the extreme vanity with
which his Soul was this way swelled. Thence Simplicius proceeded to the street
where Capoleon lived, a Gentleman for Estate and Quality, well known throughout
the whole City; asking him, why he went there so often, and made a longer stay
there than any where else; particularly before that house?

At this word Alcimus perceived the subject of this long Discourse, and
answered briskly,

Certainly Father, we are as much deceived in what we see through jealous eyes,
as through a false Prospective.

Upon which Simplicius recounted to him that which (else he thought) all the
Town talked and took notice of, the jealousy of Capoleon, the violence of
which had made him become a common Proverb. And is not this (said he) a just
cause of Jealousy to a man of his age, who is Husband to a young and fair
Lady; though certainly as virtuous as beautiful, to see one so openly seek her,
to court and caress her by words, and actions, glances and countenances which
are neither just nor honest?

This is the property of the jealous ( said Alcimus) to believe that all things
conspire the ruin of their Honor: the Days, the Nights, the Stars, the
Elements, the very Animals are suspected by them, much more reasonable
Creatures; they fear where there is not the least subject of suspicion, the
Shadows to them are Substances, and their vain Suspicions palpable Convictions,
and their false imaginations evident and undoubted Verities: But be pleased to
tell me (Reverend Father) of whom in particular Capoleon is jealous; for there
is no appearance it should be of me, who know his Wife so little, that I stould
not distinguish her amongst a Troop of others. I have seen her amongst other
young Ladies before she was made his; but beheld her only as an Object which
never obliged me to a particular regard: I think I have seen her too amongst
other women since her Marriage, whilst she appeared in Companies; but since her
Husband has given her Angelica's Ring, and by a streit Imprisonment has rendered
her invisible, even to the Eyes of Heaven, certainly I must have more than a
Lynx his sight, to penetrate those Walls which enclose her: If the good Man's
Fever burn only on this side, it is very easy to be healed.

Here Simplicius believing that Alcimus still persisted in his dissimulation,
lifting up his voice with a more strong and piercing Tone than formerly, with a
violent impetuosity, vehemence of spirit, he said,

Do you consider what it is you do, or that you stand in the presence of an
Almighty God? Or have you ever read or heard of the terrible Judgment that
light upon Ananias and Saphira; it is not now a mortal man, but an Eternal God
that you impose upon: Whereupon he began to use the Word, as the Apostle says,
In season, and out of season, with opportunity, and even with importunity, to
reprove, pray, conjure, to cry in all patience and soundness of Doctrine: Have
you forgot (said he) that the excuse of Adam, and that of Cain, were worse than
their faults? or that the Royal Prophet begged of God to set a watch before the
door of his lips, lest he offended with his tongue, in seeking excuses or
specious pretenses, to palliate or extenuate his iniquity? for when once it is
come to this point (from which God preserve you) to sin not only with impunity,
but therefore to think they do it with Reason, then is one arrived to the
highest pitch of wickedness; and if this be your case, it is no better than
desperate and deplorable.

By this I understand (replied Alcimus) that Capoleon is jealous of me,
thinking that my passages and managements in his street, and sometimes before
his Gate, are Incense and Perfumes which I offer to that Idol, which ought to
be adored by none but himself. O God! was ever seen such a profound
dissimulation? I can affirm, that there is no person, I will not say, in that
Quarter, but even in the whole Town, that has so much applauded me upon this
subject as himself, nor any that has so much puffed up my fancy thereby. To
whom hereafter shall we trust? since by flatteries and caresses one is so
basely deceived? Certainly, the Wise man spoke with much reason, when he said,
My Son, those that feed thee with fair speeches and artificial praises, are
those that do decline or would seduce thee: But this man has given me as just
cause for the future to distrust him, as his was unjust for suspecting me, who
had never the least thought of attempting the Honor of his Wife, whom I hold
to be as virtuous as fair: And if my judgment fail me not, worthy of a better
chance than falling into his cruel hands.

My dear Father (continued he) I give you my humblest thanks for your
charitable admonition, and promise you for the future to stand upon my guard,
and to cause (without prejudice to my Honor) that he shall lose his evil
opinion of me.

Simplicius then seeing that the Masque was taken off, and that it was now time
to speak plainly, protested to him (as the truth was) that Capoleon had never
spoke word to him of this Affair, but that he had learnt it from a pious Soul
(for such he esteemed Vannoza to be) and one desirous both of his temporal and
eternal welfare.

Father (said Alcimus) It is a thing so shameful to a jealous Husband to
discover his own baseness, that I believe Capoleon would not make you this
report himself; but has for that purpose made use of a third person, who under
the pretext of Piety (a virtue, which opens the ears and hearts of Religious
Souls) has informed you of this false relation, to the prejudice of Truth, and
the sincerity of my own Conscience: I stand here in the presence of God, and in
a place where I had rather die, than be like Ananias; but I do assure you, and
sacredly affirm upon the salvation of my Soul (which I value as a good
Christian ought) that I never had any adulterous design upon the Wife of
Capoleon; and of this you may assure this charitable Soul; and withal (lest I
should leave any of my Honor disadvantageously engaged) that if I were as well
assured of my Salvaon, and as little afraid of the Divine Justice, as I am of
the weak efforts of the jealous-pated Capoleon, I might well put my self into
the number of the Elect; and I fear not, but by Gods assistance, to shelter my
self, not only from his menaces, but also from the wicked and pernicious
effects of his unjust and vain suspicion; I would gladly love him, because God
has commanded it, but will also endeavor to safe my self from the surprise of
so treacherous an Enemy.

Simplicius judging by these words of this Gentleman, whose heart he had long
known the very secrets of, that he spoke the real truth, and that with an
unfeigned Charity he accused himself of that in which he found himself
innocent; would insist no longer upon that subject, for fear of drawing blood
from the nipple or the nose, by too much sucking the one, or wringing the
other, and imagining that Vannoza had discovered to him the real Jealousy of
her Husband, founded upon the false opinion of Alcimus his pursuits, he
contented himself with what his Penitent had already discovered; but to prevent
all future mishaps, and to pluck up by the roots the hatred from his heart
which he had conceived against Capoleon, whom he had already named his Enemy,
(a word of war and defiance in this spleenatique Country) he again protested to
him, that Capoleon neither by himself nor Deputy had given him this
advertisement, or made these menaces, but that it was a religious and timorous
Soul, which perhaps had too far exaggerated the matter, and according to the
Proverb, had painted the Lion fiercer than he was; that he desired him not to
look upon Capoleon with the worse eye for this, nor to do any thing, further to
promote his Malady, which was of the nature of those artificial Fires, which
every thing would nourish; but nothing extinguish: That he ought to have
compassion of such infirmities of spirit, according to the Apostles advice, who
would that Spiritual Persons, and those who are fortified within, should bear
with greater fortitude and patience the faults and insolences of the weak, to
accomplish the Law, which would that we should bear with one another's
infirmities: Adding, that the only remedy he perceived for this
misunderstanding, was to abstain for the future from these passes in the
Street, at least till time with his insensible Sponge had effaced from the
spirit of this offended Husband the impressions which his evil humor might
perhaps have engraved there, it being no part of a prudent man to exasperate
the Wasp, or to provoke the Be; which last though naturally of a sweet and
gentle temper, as being born and bred amongst Honey, knew well enough how to
manage its Sting to defend its Comb: And further, That a true Penitent was not
only obliged to part from the Territories, but from the Confines of Evil; for
to what purpose is it to quit the unfortunate City of Iniquity, and take up
Quarters in the Suburbs? I mean within those of the occasions of Evil, to fly
to Zoar and look back to Sodom? It is not enough for the true Nazarites to
drink no Wine nor strong Drink, unless they also abstain too from the very
Grape, least the taste of the one breed a desire of the other. With these
Reasons Simplicius strengthened his Remonstrances, without assuming the power
of commanding, but certainly with Counsel accompanied with the Spirit of God,
he advised Alcimus to turn away his course from the frequentation Of those so
dreadful Rocks and Shelves,
Where multitudes had split themselves.
Alcimus found it very difficult to submit to these Injunctions, alleging that
the Laws of Cloisters and those of the World were very far different; that the
one prescribed to honor a blind submission, and a renunciation of all Earthly
enjoyments, but that in the World it was one of the greatest marks of Infamy to
receive Laws from the will of the Enemy; and that Courageous souls, like an
unshaken Rock
Undauntedly should brave the rudest shoock.
Nothing's more base than to bad men to yield,
Or to their proud attempts to quit the field.
Hereby Simplicius perceiving that this was a spark of that hidden fire which
would not suddenly be extinguished, Seigneur Alcimus (said he) if you find this
remedy too difficult, you will constrain me to say, that you chain your self to
the Bank of Iniquity, and tug at the oar of violence, and then feign obstacles
for your obeying of wholesome Precepts. Remember Saul 's malediction for
disobeying Samuel; it is a Crime, to disbelieve, but a kind of Witchcraft to
disobey; to speak plainly, you would hereby persuade me to that which I am
unwilling to believe, and under pretext of opposing your wrath to the hatred of
the Husband, make me suspect a secret affection for the Wife: For, Who often'st
says I hate, does prove
Most commonly deepest in Love.
Moreover, you are bound in Conscience to give no occasion of offense or
scandal in your deportments; for if the great Apostle declare, that he would
eat no flesh so long as he lived, rather than by eating to offend the weakest
of his Brethren; How much more ought you to avoid the Actions and Occasions
which might give suspicion of the works of the flesh, unjustly desired or
pursued after? And if the same Apostle would not that the least mention of
Fornication should be made amongst Christians, how much more odious and
detestable ought Adultery to be, either in action or affection?

Father (said Alcimus) your discourses are backed with Reason, and speak you
both a Christian and Religious Person; but be pleased to consider, that I am
not of your Religious Orders, but yet a Christian like you, although a secular
and mundain one; and though there be no more agreement betwixt the rules of
Piety and those of the World, than betwixt light and darkness, the Ark and
Dagon, or God and Mammon, yet are we obliged in performing the one, not to omit
the other, if we intend to preserve our Reputation, without which we render our
selves the reproach of the World, and the most abject dregs or scum of the
People. Consider that I am now a Sword-man, and that formerly studying Cases of
Conscience, I have learnt that when an Enemy shall attacque me, I am not bound
to fly, and save my life with the loss of my Honor; and though the Evangelical
precept of turning the other cheek to him that smites him on the one, extend
its self to secular persons as well as regular, yet we see it otherwise
practiced by both: Our blessed Savior asked that Wretch who shamefully struck
him, Why he did so? and though he did not call Legions of Angels to his
succor, or employed Thunder and Tempests to revenge such injuries (as he might
have done) yet did he mix this point of severity amongst his admirable
meekness, and incomparable humility. If Capoleon attack me, I think it will be
lawful to resist him, and perhaps with the same weapons I shall turn the
mischief upon him, which he designed for me, and confound this Conjurer with
his own Devil; for I am resolved not to suffer my self to be assassinated by
his treacherous hands.

Here Simplicius interrupted this Discourse, fearing that if he let Alcimus
proceed, he would excite that choler in himself which he should be ill troubled
to allay, and perhaps according to the promptitude of his youthful inclination,
proceed at last from words to execution: He therefore smoothed and flattered
this generous courage, protesting (indeed too truly) Capoleons innocence, and
that the report which had been made him, might perhaps be false (too truly
false) but that this his Paternal zeal and care made him not only worthy of
Pardon, but of Praise and Affection; saying, O Alcimus, Alcimus, you know not
what it is to be a Father, a spiritual Father, had you but experimented how the
bowels of the Soul yern after the Infants of the Spirit, you might be capable
to judge of that ardour which made those words boil over from the mouths of
Moses and St. Paul, when they desired to be accursed for the good of their dear
Children and Brethren in righteousness; the day will come when you will know
this verity, and look upon that in me with a good eye, which perhaps does now
appear otherwise to you.

Your heart, dear Father (answered Alcimus) is too right toward me, to do or
say any thing amiss; what ever comes from you to me can never be received
otherwise than well; but withal, I once more entreat you not to condemn me
without hearing, for judgment without preindication, and prejudice without
judgment is the high way to error; it is easy to impeach, but not to
convince; to say, not to produce witnesses; to declare, but not to prove; if
accusing will suffice, who can be innocent, what shelter for the good, if the
storms of the wicked be Oracles. And, Father since God inj^^^ it, to obey him,
I am willing to walk i^ an unpleasant path, and shall gladly look ^^on Capoleon
as my friend, and dear Christian Brother, and I am so far from wishing him any
evil, that I desire him all sorts of good; but since distrust is the Mother of
security, you must allow me to beware of my self, and that not only of my life,
but of my Honor, which every noble mind will esteem more than life. In this
temper of mind, and having disburthened my Soul to you of all that laid upon
it, I hope you will not deny me the benefit of absolution.

Here Simplicius found himself surprised, having to deal with a Soldier, who
knew as well how to feign with his Tongue as Sword, one thing only he required
of him in the Name of the Lord, which was, To shun all rash attempts in his
just hate,
And make his wrath way to evaporate.
And principally for some days to avoid his accustommed passages in that
street; and at last by much conjuring and entreaty he extorted this Promise,
rather violently from his mouth, than voluntarily from his heart; this was not
the first and free droppings of the Myrrh; but rather the second gathering,
extracted from the Tree, by scratching it with Iron Instruments.

Alcimus left Simplicius, more satisfied with his having disabused him, than
with his simplicity in so slightly believing the report; and troubled withal,
that he could not learn from him whence he had had this advice; for he would
rather have suspected any person in the world, than Vannoza, whom he held for
dead amongst its obscurities. In what darkness and ignorance do we spin out the
thread of a frail life!

Mean while Vannoza, who sleeps little, and the Devil much less, are hatching
mischiefs on all hands; for whilst the one as subtle as invinsible, blows wrath
and malice into the ears of Alcimus, the other as dangerous as visible,
presents her self to those of Simplicius, to know the success of her false
report; for it was her principal design (like another Eve) to open the eyes of
Alcimus, by tasting the forbidden Fruit, and to procure him to look diligently
in his passage toward every part of her house, from whence he was otherwise
regarded than she pretended, he suspected, or Simplicius believed; that she
might thereby find means to make signs to him, as Vessels stuck fast upon a
Shelve, or in other distress, do for help to those Ships that pass by. But she
was infinitely astonished, when she found by Father Simplicius his recital,
that she had ruined her own project, and wounded her self by her own Weapon,
and by an ill-temper'd Plaster, brought her Sore from an Ulcer to a Gangrene;
and further when she learnt that Alcimus had not the least thought or affection
for her; this consideration made her despair of success; but to those who are
irremediably overthrown, it is a kind of comfort that they can fear no further
mischief: She took new vigor, when she understood from Simplicius the
indifferency he had for all her Sex, judging that the purity and whiteness of
this Paper would easily be susceptible of the first impression, and that this
green Wood once lighted, would burn most fiercely; Love being a Mystery, in
which the Apprentices are Masters; She begun to project new Designs how to
bring down that untamed Courage, which was yet proof against all Loves
Assaults; and to recall this wild and untaught Hawk to the Lure; At present she
only told Simplicius, that his Monastic life and Relious innocence, rendered
him less subtle in searching into the secrets of the heart, and the spiritual
wickedness of worldly thoughts; and of those, who under pretense of affection,
make it their glory to deceive: believing that Heaven laughs at their Perjuries
and Oaths, which are only writ on running waters; who hold for a Maxim, That
Love, Wine, and Secrets are worth nothing when they have taken the Air; and
that it seemed in our Age, men had effaced this practice from the number of
sins; it being not only common but commendable: finally that it was the
shuttle-cock of Courts, but the ruinous Arrow of hearts; she only, wished him to
beware of a surprise, and since he had drawn from Alcimus a promise not to pass
through that quarter of a good while, that he should take care that he found a
firm performance and long continuance. See here how this subtle crafty Female
spoke what was as far from her desire as intention. In the mean time having
painted her face with a lively joy, she returned home rather dead than living,
with sadness so deeply rooted in her Soul, or rather her Soul so deeply plunged
in sorrow, that she knew not whether it were fittest to reckon herself amongst
the dead or living. She had now lost the sight of her North-Star, her days were
now become but nights, and the very sight of the Sun was disagreeable;
overwhelmed with sadness, sorrow, and melancholy, she did nothing else but sigh
and groan like the solitary widowed Turtle, bewailing nothing but the loss of
the sight of her amiable Alcimus. Was not I (said she) sufficiently miserable
without adding more to my misfortunes? To what new mischief do the Heavens
reserve me, having thus condemned me to perpetual darkness? O thou Light of my
Eyes how art thou clouded! those short and little glances of thee which I once
enjoyed, did give me some sort of consolation, but this sad Eclipse is
insupportable, which for ever deprives me of so dear an Object, and which to me
does seem the pleasantest in the World; But come what will, I must once more
have a sight of my dearest Alcimus, and I will never leave any way unattempted,
though never so dangerous, before I resolve to perish.

Mean time the days slipped away, and this Star never appeared. O Nights! far
longer than those of Norway; She often stood Sentinel like another Hero, but
never could set eye on her Leander: The confusion of her thoughts robbed her of
Discourse as well as of Invention, which made her become lean and pale, her
Husband believing that it was the austerity of Religion, and her continual
contemplation that wrought this change: He did what he could to divert her, but
his troublesome Caresses did but inflame her sorrow. She kisses and embraces
intermixed,
But on her absent Love her thoughts were fixed.
She had once like to have imitated Potiphar's Wife, who accused the innocent
Joseph of a Crime of which she alone was culpable; but reserving this desperate
means for the last extremity, she was unwilling to betray one who had never
offended her, and on whose affection only depended all her contentment. See
here the subtility of this wicked Woman, who thought by sowing an
irreconcilable quarrel betwixt Alcimus and her Husband, to heal her passion
which way soever the chance fell: for Alcimus once slain, her flames would be
extinguished with his funeral Torches, and her insupportable Passion buried in
his Grave; but if Capoleon should fall under his misfortune, she saw her way
made plain over his Grave to the end of her designs, and by her Widowhood put
into possession of her self, and left to a free pursuit after the satisfaction
of her ardent desires. A strange fetch of female subtility. But still she
dissembled her thoughts, and made no outward show but of Sadness and Devotion,
as if these two qualities were inseparable, and thereby she sunk deeper into
her Husband's belief the opinion that it was only her Devotion that procured
this Melancholy; and the truth is, a feigned, false, constrained Piety (if such
deep Hypocrisy may bear so fair a Title) does oftentimes engender this sort of
sadness which is begot by the interior worm of a cauteriz'd Conscience, which
does incessantly gnaw upon the heart: She was however much pleased to see her
old Man so much concerned at her seeming Melancholy; and the more he seemed to
be troubled at it, the more cause she still gave him to be so.

Whilst she so dully past her time, like a Hunter upon a cold Scent, the
Devil, who like a roaring Lion, has his eyes and mouth still open for a prey,
way-laying his stratagems in the spirit of Alcimus, and fanning his delusions
into his head, and so diligently blew up this spark of anger which he had
against Capoleon, that at last he stirred up a devouring flame in his heart; He
represented to him the despicable Age, and ridiculous weakness of his Enemy,
together with the base pusillanimity of fearing so inconsiderable an
Antagonist, who was so far below his birth and quality; that he would derogate
from both, if he did not turn his treacherous designs upon his own head, who
durst not have undertaken such villainous enterprises, had he not believed that
he who ought to be a Gentleman of courage and gallantry, had quitted both for
the Counsel of a timorous Monk; that these Cloister-spirits are never
susceptible of generous resolutions, that like Reeds, they cannot resist a
Tempest but by compliance; that gallant Souls ought to imitate the Cedars of
Lebanon, that can be shaken by naught but thunder; that going out well
accompanied, he might bid defiance to his Enemy, and pass his Horses hoofs over
his belly, if he durst assault him; that there needed nothing but a good Armor
to defend him against treachery, and that he ought to embrace such occurrences
which might manifest his courage and gallantry; for amongst Men of the Sword,
nothing but danger can show what a Man is made of: These were the Remonstrances
of the Enemy both of his Soul and Body, who seemed so diligent a Preserver of
the honor of the one, and the safety of the other, though his design was only
to bring them both to destruction. Alcimus puffed up by the vanity of these
thoughts, did like the Lion stir up his rage by beating his own sides, and
fancying to himself, that his imaginary Enemy would too gloriously triumph at
his too easy retreat, if upon the mere advertisement of a Religious Father, he
forced himself to humor a jealous Coxcomb, those few days which his promise
had bound him to abstain from his ordinary courses seemed so many ages to him,
and this short retreat did but whet his Appetite, and his going back was but to
take the greater leap; Therefore at length he returned to tread over again his
former steps, more proudly and nobly accompanied, mounted and accountred than
before, becoming a new Spectacle of pomp and gallantry to all Beholders; his
Lacqueys were well armed with good swords, and daggers, and private pistols,
resolved (though ignorant of the design and quarrel) to sell their skins dearly
to those that should prove Chapmen for their bodies; he had also some disguised
Bravo's to accompany him, which are a sort of People that will kill a man there
as cheap as Bailiffs will arrest him in other places: As for himself, he wore
under his Clothes a Skirt of Male, and carried one of his best Swords, not
forgetting his Firearms, and private headpiece, resolved in this Equipage, To
be revenged of this affront,
Or hazard Life and Soul upon it.
Thus did this innocent young Gentleman arm himself to encounter shadows,
Chimera's conceived in a Woman's brain, and distilled through the Alimbeck of a
Monastic simplicity. What inward joy surprised Vannoza, when through her usual
Watchtower, she saw this beauteous Star mount the Horizon of her Street, he
must needs be a most accomplished Orator that can express the frozen North,
which after a Night of six Months long sees the first rays of the Sun appear
to visit her, but not more joy than she had now to feed her eyes with so
ravishing an Object; her only unhappiness amidst this bliss was, that she could
not communicate her sentiments to him that caused them; but taking occasion by
the fore-lock, she resolved to discover her face through the casement, and to
talk to him in a Language of looks and signs, a custom so common in this
Country, (born to nothing but dumb shows and such refined inventions) that if
he were not altogether stupid, he could not choose but thereby perceive the
Flame he had unwillingly kindled in her Soul. Alcimus turning his Eyes with a
proud and menacing look toward the house, wondering that he could perceive no
body at the windows, at last attentively regarding it every way, he saw a
little casement open at the top of the house, from whence he presently expected
a treacherous shot; Alas! too true a one which pierced not his body but his
Heart: David, of old, a King so Holy, and (till then) so innocent, looking from
the lofty top of his Palace, saw within a Garden a Bird, or rather a Fish
within a Fountain, which at one glance of the Eye foiled all his holy
resolutions to the ground: Alcimus who was made of no better a mould, looking
up from the street, and expecting nothing but the levelling of a Harquebuz at
his body, felt the blow of a more dangerous one than he expected, I mean a
Basilisk's Eyes in a beauteous face, which soon grinded to dust all his
Virtuous intentions: During this interview he made his Horse corvet and bound,
and exercised all his most excellent postures; till seeing so many attractious
circumscribed in so small a compass, and so many charms contracted in one face,
he thought the windows of Heaven had been opened, and that he saw not a Star,
but rather an Angel or beauty of Paradise; For Vannoza appeared in such an
equipage as was capable to make an impression upon the best fenced heart of a
young Cavalier principally on one which lay exposed to the airy passions, which
make them prefer a shameful slavery before a Glorious liberty. Why should I
trouble my self to paint out these follies? He saw and fell, and Vannoza might
as justly as Caesar bear the Motto of, Veni, Vidi, Visi, upon her Triumphant
Banners. Alcimus was not so much a novice but he knew the Language of his own
Country, which is that of love, and knew well enough that it signified that he
was better beloved in that house then he expected, and that the hatred of the
Husband was sufficiently balanced by the affection of the Wife; And as love is
the only attraction of love, besides so many charms that rendered this beauty
recommendable, he thought himself obliged in honor to render a reciprocal
affection, so that he quickly answered her in her own language, which somewhat
resembled that of Angels, or rather of Demons, which speak to one another in
thoughts, and there needed no Interpreter to make them understand one another;
thus passed this first interview. The next day the Sun had scarce begun by
bending Westward to lengthen the shadows, when Alcimus (whose coming was
attended by his faithful Sentinel long before his approach) returned to his
usual practice, to draw in through his Eyes the poison, not of hatred but of
love, a passion more pernicious to his Heart, where he saw her hold up a letter
in her hand, with sign to come and receive it at night, which he diligently
performed, with no other company then his valor; see here the first thread of
this Web of iniquity which these two Spiders went craftily to weave. This note
in few words, discovered Wonders, wonders that are fittest to be veiled in
silence, and interred in oblivion; yet why in oblivion? since this paper
undertakes to transmit unto posterity the blackest mischiefs, to make them be
so far shunned in like occurences, as the Reader shall abhor them by reading
this recital: Let us only say then, that she advertised Alcimus as follows.

Noble Alcimus,
I Am not ignorant of the Alarms you received from your mouth of your
Confessor, nor can you be so of their meaning, when I tell you 'twas I that
caused them: that was the only means with which love could inspire me to bring
about my design of acquainting you with a malady which none else can cure; If
this general proposition may be worthy of your answer, you may find means to
convey it over the Garden wall, by which I shall understand whether you esteem
worthy of acceptance which is intended only for your service, and any own
satisfaction.

Vannoza.


Alcimus was all inflamed by the many fire-bals which the Evil spirit cast into
his Soul by means of this crafty woman, and netled to the very Heart with
curiosity of knowing the effect of this strange adventure, he returned that
night, and cast the following letter over the Gardenwall, where she stood ready
to receive it;

Fairest Vannoza,
I Know not whether I may more justly extol your worth and ingenuity, or
condemn my own stupidity in not perceiving it before, the one being as far
beyond the reach of applause, as the other is beyond that of abhorrency; but
since you are pleased to make your goodness as conspicuous as your merits, by
pardoning a crime, which a modest offender durst scarce excuse, know, (fair
one) that I value your undeserved affection at so high a rate, that my chief
study shall be to merit and preserve it with my life and fortunes. My transport
is so great at present, that I know not how to express my self further, but
shall impatiently attend the blessed revolution of my happy Stars to produce an
occasion, in which I may better testify the ardour of my unbounded Love, and
inexpressible gratitude.

Alcimus.


Mean while the Boutefeu, which sets both Heaven and Earth on a flame, stuck
his heart quite full of Arrows; and as it is his unhospitable custom to set
that Lodging on fire, which gives him entertainment; he in a short time made a
Furnace in the Breast of Alcimus, who feeling the pungency of this new ardour,
could find no further repose, but in the meditation of his sweet inquietude; he
now accused himself of his former blindness, and it was then that he saw
clearly through these Intrigues, and now that the Cataracts were fallen on his
eyes, he thought himself like Harpastus, the only Argus: O God! How presently
does a small error spread it self into an unbounded bigness!

One spark of evil having seized the Soul,
Soon spreads such flames as nothing can control.
The more difficulty and resistance he found in this pursuit, the more was the
pleasure of winning the Prizes, as Simplicius his Commands to the contrary, had
infinitely whetted the edge of his appetite of returning to his former passages
through the street, there being nothing more desired by humane Nature than that
which is forbidden.

What lawful is does basest seem,
Not worth acceptance, or esteem;
But what is forbid by Law and Right,
We seek with raging appetite.
So these obstacles which seemed to stop his carreer (it seeming as impossible
to attempt this Sun inveloped in so many Clouds, as the true Celestial one)
were so many spurs in his sides, to hurry him headlong upon this dangerous
attempt; yet he found this Current of Contentment interrupted by a troublesome
consideration, which was a suspicion, lest this sudden and unexpected gracious
invitation were not a bait to some hidden snare that was pitched for his
destruction; and whether the jealousy of the Husband by a secret intelligence
with his Wife, had not found out this means to ruin him: So that tormented on
one hand by the charm of so many irresistible attractions, and on the other
with the importunity of his distrust (for wicked women are like those Africans,
which are said to bewitch and slay those before whom they laugh; or like Apes,
whose embraces serve only to smother,) for these Reasons he earnestly desired
to be satisfied from whence proceeded this advertisement which Simplicius had
given him. He went and found this good Man, whom he conjured and entreated to
tell him from whence he had received this advice, protesting not to take up any
resentment against the person he should name; not questioning but that it
proceeded from the mouth of one that was very desirous of his welfare.
Simplicius unwilling to reveal it, invented all the excuses he could, none of
which would content this Gentleman; who protested to retract his Promise, and
retake his former passages through the streets (which he had already done, with
the addition of far worse Errors) for fear of leaving his Honor engaged, and
making himself a scorn and laughingstock to his Enemies. Simplicius continued
firm in his resolution; but for fear of sending him away angry and
discontented, he desired him, to give him time to beg permission of the Person
who had informed him; which was agreed to, and the next day came Vannoza (in
her usual manner) to renew her ancient Complaints, and to tell Simplicius, that
Alcimus having for some days followed his advice, and kept his Promise, had now
renewed his wonted Courses and Carreers, with more pride and insolency than
before, better accoutred and accompanied, and with greater variety of actions,
which drove her Husband into desperation, and would at last provoke him into
action, which could not but produce some tragical and dismal Event. Simplicius
protested to her, that Alcimus had not the least design upon her, but only
stood upon a Punctilio of Honor, scorning to give this advantage to his
Adversary, of bragging, that he frighted him out of the public street: That
he was no man to make love to stone walls, who never did it to any woman
living, who indeed are living walls; but plastered with so unslaked lime, as
is easily fired by the Tears of a Lover. All he could say, was, That he was a
young Cavalier, and so headstrong, that it was hard for a holy Father to guide
him by the Bridle of Religion: That if Capoleon attacque him, he will bring
himself in danger of undergoing a great part of the mischief. That her Husbands
Passion was as full of injustice, as the other was of candor and ingenuity in
his proceedings.

For this (said the subtle Female) I see but one remedy: That is (said the holy
Father) to satisfy him in his extreme curiosity, which pressed me to tell him
whence I had this advice, which I durst not discover without your permission,
thinking it unfit to bring you into the quarrel.

Father (said Vannoza) let me alone, for the love of God, to discover it to
him, since it is for the charitable saving of his Soul, and I fear not but to
find a happy issue, or at least to prevent its ending in so bloody a
Catastrophe. For if Alcimus and my Husband should come to blows (which Heaven
forbid) our Sex is still exempt from duels, and the most base and barbarous
Courages have still some respect for Ladies; so that I fear no prejudice by
being made a Party; and I assure my self, that with one word, I should do more
with him toward the plucking from his heart the fruitless hope which flatters
and abuses him, by making him hope for access to an Object, which can never be
lawfully acquired, than you can perhaps do, by all your conscientious
persuasions. In the mean time, if you please, you may satisfy his Curiosity,
that this advice comes from me, and if you please to bring us together, I will
in your presence dissuade him from his former actions.

That so he may a Medicine bring,
Thence where the Malady did spring.
Simplicius from a well-meaning heart, not only approved, but highly praised
this design, being much rejoiced to see the Scorpion's Oil prepared to cure the
sting; and then Vannoza by this means, cutting off all hope, would thereby take
away all occasions of his continuance in his fond Amors: He therefore promised
to confront her with him; that this Adam taken in the fact (if I may so say)
and convinced in his presence, might seek no further pretexts or palliations to
cover his iniquity. And so forward was this good Man in this design, thinking
therein to do all things for the best, and believing that all would pass under
the Seal of secrecy, that he judged this fittest to be done at the very
Confessional, which according to common Custom, having two places for the
Penitents, and one in the middle for the Confessor, he might thereby more
expressly convince the Criminal, himself being present at the Testimony. But (O
execrable Invention!) she fearing least her Invention might turn to her own
confusion, desired this good Father, that she might a little before have one
moments conference with Alcimus, promising thereby more gently to compose his
spirit to an acknowledgment of his fault, lest being surprised on the sudden,
he might fly out into some extravagant recrimination, or positive denial: The
good opinion which the Father had of this Female Hypocrite, made him approve
well of her Poposition; in so much that he appointed a day for this rencounter,
before which he told Alcimus, that the relation came from Vannoza her self,
which would witness his false proceedings to his face: Provided she lift up her
Veil (said Alcimus) I am confident you will find hers overspread with blushes,
if there remain in her the least quantity of blood: With which words the
Conference ended; and they parted till the appointed day of meeting should come.

The End of the Second Book.
ALCIMUS AND VANNOZA.
LIB. III.
THe day being come, Vannoza having before by a Note advertised Alcimus of her
design, they neither of them failed to meet at the Confessional of the good
Father, whose pious intentions to dis-intangle this Clew, did by this weakness
entangle it more than ever; for Vannoza having put him in mind of his promise
of letting her predispose the spirit of Alcimus, in order to the bringing him
to an acknowledgment of his fault; the good Simplicius; for these pious
considerations, leaving his Tribunal, as if called away by some affairs of
these Statues upon their Pedestals, but such Statues as Pigmalion's, for they
then found themselves alive, and their Tongues at liberty. Vannoza most prompt
to lay hold on this occasion, which she had so long sought for, began first, as
follows:

Seigneur Alcimus, You will perhaps wonder at the many subtleties I have used
to attacque you, but Necessity, the Mistress of Invention was furnished with
Artifices, which opened me the way. Know then, and assure your self, it was
only I, who by means of this holy Father, gave you this false alarm of the
imaginary jealousy of my Husband of you, I say, imaginary as to you, for his
jealousy being notorious through all the City, I durst not in general terms
style it feigned; but it is so universal, that without pitching upon you, or
any other in particular, it extends to all the world; he must be a stranger in
this Town, who knows not the evil usage which that has caused me, and my long
and close Imprisonment, is a subject of sorrow to all that hear of it; it is
natural to the smallest Bird to search about her Cage for a hole to escape from
slavery, which I am resolved to obtain, or lose my life in the attempt, which
is but a burden, wanting my liberty; I know how little worth or merit I have
to work the least affection in you, yet have I miseries enough to stir up a
pity in your generous Breast, so that what I cannot hope for from your passion,
I almost assure my self from your compassion; for this gives so puissant a
sentiment to the bravest Courages, that they make it their glory to be that way
vanquish^d; for this makes their Valor victorious over others miseries, as
constancy makes them over their own: For what would become of the miserable and
oppressed without the assistance of generous Cavaliers of your Quality and
Merits. I have therefore cast my eyes upon you as upon a Gentleman full of
Honor, to the end that throwing my self at your feet, or into the arms of your
pity, in case your goodness prove favorable to my misery, I may by that means
find an issue out of my deplorable misfortunes, before I try the last remedy,
which is death. Which to all sufferings an end does give,
And makes the most unhappy cease to grieve.
This is a Cure which the miserablest Creature alive may obtain, and then defy
the worst of Fortune's strokes: I have here neither time nor leisure to let you
understand the unjust rigours which Capoleon has exercised against my
innocence, and how insolently his cruelty does triumph over my weakness: It Is
enough to tell you, that I implore your assistance to deliver me from my
present miseries, by what means you shall think most convenient; and it is easy
for you to advance this Stratagem, which I have already invented, having
infused into the Soul of your Confessor (a man of a true Monastic simplicity)
a fear of the dreadful events of Capoleon 's fury, which could never find
entrance into your magnanimous Courage, if it were real; but I assure you, that
my Husband does not so much as think of you; or if he either think or speak of
you, it is rather with esteem and praise, than otherwise; and further, I find
that he takes a singular pleasure in seeing you on Horseback, but imagines not
how far I participate with him in it; for the place from whence I behold you is
a secret one, frequented by none but my self, and to which I go by private
ways, to give this incomparable contentment to my eyes, to behold amidst those
noble and gallant Actions, the most complete and admired Cavalier living. I
have (in pursuance of this first impression) made Father Simplicius believe
that you pursued me with your Courtship (though convinced how unprovided I am
of graces and attractions necessary to merit it) and further, that in the
street you gave evident testimonies of your love, but this was only to set a
more specious color on my Husbands jealousy. To sum up all, all this design
tended only to this sole point of happiness I now possess, (but, alas! with
what brevity) to represent unto your view a scantling of miseries, which is so
great an alleviation to them, that I never enjoyed a greater happiness amongst
all the passages of my life: For, I know by sad experience that nothing so much
oppresses the heart, as not to know where to unload its sorrow; and the most
miserable of all griefs, is that which wants a voice for complaints: It Is at
present to you, Gentle Alcimus, and to that courtesy and generosity, so
natural to those of your Rank and Quality, that I now fly for help and advice;
and for what succor you shall please to lend unto my pain, whatsoever shall
come from your hand shall be highly acceptable; for since your merits and my
own inclination have forced me upon a resolution of carrying the love of you
along with me to my Grave; I am ready to commit my Person, Fortune, Life, and
Honor to your generous Protection.

How could she more openly, or indeed immodestly, have explained her self? But
who knows not that impudicity is always followed by impudence? She concluded
her Harangue with such languishing Looks and Tears, as were able to charm the
hardest rock; and Alcimus who was not made of Marble, was therewith so lively
touched, that he did not question but she spoke sincerely, and took her
Discourse for no less than Oracles; and banishing from his spirit all suspicion
of Treason, and all fear from Capaleon's practices, it was impossible to see a
heart touched with the love of him, and he not labor of the same distemper,
which is a malady sooner blamed than avoided, and which is more easily avoided
by flying it is encounters, than healed where it has once taken footing.

Alcimus vanquished with so many courtesies and favors, presently rendered his
arms at the feet of the conqueror, and suffering himself as easily as Sampson
to be bound and brought to the Mill, he tetified his submission by words, which
showed him to be a deeper Student in Rhetoric than Vannoza, and as great a
servant to love, offering her for a confirmation of this truth, all the service
which her commands could impose upon his obedience, saying, That to this he was
doubly obliged, by the desire of possessing so rich a treasure, and by that of
redeeming her from so tedious a captivity, a thraldom, which extracted pity
from the most barbarous hearer: This was to fall insensibly into the net of his
dangerous huntress, whose intentions was, That if she had not wrought affection
in the heart of this novice in those affairs, to induce him by pity (a specious
gate for love to enter at) to carry her away out of that detestable prison, not
questioning but after that she should have graces and charms enough to work the
passion of commiseration into that of affection: and though at last she
prevailed not so far as to make him her captive, yet would this put an affront
upon Capoleon, an affront so irreparable in this Country as nothing can wash
off but the blood of the offender, so that she intended at once to save her
honor, her life and liberty, and either enjoy her unjust pretensions, or at
least discharge her self of the importunity of love or the bonds of marriage.
She hoped to secure her honor by making it be believed (a thing easily
alleged) that her rape though voluntary, and of her own suggesting, was a
forced action, and that Alcimus his passion, which she had before complained of
to Simplicius, had pricked him on to this rash adventure: Her life she thought
secure betwixt the arms of a Gentleman more puissant than her husband; and her
liberty, however, secured by this violence; That if Capoleon fell in this
quarrel, her marriageyoke was thereby broken; if Alcimus, her love was cured by
the removal of the object that gave it being, or at worst she hoped to be
restored into the hands of her parents, Capoleon refusing her, after having
been polluted and possessed by another, which every way would free her from
servitude: but when she saw Alcimus declare himself a lover, and that in so
high a degree, with an ingenuity witnessed both by his words and countenance,
then taking him for captive, and her self victorious, and hapilpy arrived at
the end of her chief pretensions, she saw her self freed from the trouble of
coming to further extremities, and that instead of sounding the trumpet and
making open war (which would occasion more noise than advantage to her) she
might now go more privately to work, and put crafts and subtilties (the
unfortunate source of this infamous passion) in the place of force and
violence. Now as women guarded and kept close by jealous husbands, often work
their liberty out of those guards that are set to prevent it, eighter by
dazzling their eyes by artifices and cajolleries, or by the bribes of gold and
silver, which is more penetrating than lightning, so this subtle woman found it
the best means to entertain a correspondence with Alcimus, by his means whose
chief study it was to prevent it, by working upon the harmless simplicity of
this holy Father, and using the Leaves of devotion to conceal the nakedness of
her execrable impiety; as she projected so she spoke, and no sooner spoke but
it was assented to by this heedless bird, who run head long into the nets and
bird-lime laid to surprise him: O God! what black crimes does he submit to,
enough to press him down alive into the lower Regions, such as Hell it is self
would be troubled to invent, and astonish with horror to commit: he that said,
to him that lives, and to him that desires nothing is impossible, knew well
the force of this passion the Queen of all the rest; but he that painted it
blind was in the right too, for it blindly precipitates into enormous crimes
those that commit themselves unto it is conduct, and such as they would never
commit if they gave but any time to consideration; this is a navigation where
one sails amongst thousands of rocks, subject to as many storms and tempests,
the causes of many dreadful ship-wracks, and as a hunter, violently set upon
the sport, pricked on by that heat is carried in a full carrier, to such rugged
and almost inaccessible ways, as the very sight of them in cold blood would
strike a horror into him; so this passion of love inspires such courage into
him whom it has thoroughly possessed, that he dare undertake the hardest
enterprise, and to content a brutish and inordinate appetite, will violate all
laws divine and humane, and profane whatever is most holy in earth or heaven.
Alcimus thus consented to these unlawful projects, like another Adam in
compliance with his Eve, and as Solomon, a far wiser man than himself, gave
himself so over to the love of Pagan-women, that they induced him to the
worship of what Idols they proposed to him, to all the artificial inventions
that the impiously-subtle Vannoza projected were faithfully (according to the
flesh, but faithlessly as to the spirit) executed and accepted by him: And now
tell me that Hercules, when governed by women did not spin amongst them, or
that Achilles was not so effeminate as to live disguised amongst Ladies, since
Alcimus, who always before was an Alcides Alexicaces, whilst animated by a
better Genius, is now so far transformed that he is rather a breeder than a
tamer of Monsters, the first of which was this: He conspired with this crafty
woman to deceive the charitable innocence of this good Father, and instead of
making him the mediator for their reconciliation with God, and to receive from
his mouth the law of the most high, as being the ministering Angel of the Lord
of Hosts, they made him the Pandour to their designs, and more then Diabolical
Stratagems, without his thoughts or suspicion of it. Vannoza advised him to
acknowledge that he was formerly enamoured on her, but that he hoped in time,
by the assistance of his fatherly advice and wholesome instructions to efface
this affection from his soul, confessing himself vanquished by her presence, and
as much recalled to repentance by her reasons, as before overcome by the
pleasing force and violence of her beauty: whereupon they invented diverse sorts
of intelligence, as filthy and abominable, as crafty and secret, whereby to
understand one another by the contrary report of the harmless Simplicius;
inventions, which I am loath to commit to this Paper, for fear of sullying it
with such a Monopoly of engrossed mischiefs better kept secret than revealed,
least whilst I strive to breed an abhorrency against them, in the Reader, I
may give occasion to some ill-qualified ones of imitation, or at least subject
of murmur and evil-speaking, and matter of scandal rather than edification: See
here how there is nothing so holy as to resist their sacrilege, behold
confession changed into confusion by these brutish spirits, whose distemper was
grown to so dangerous a malignity, as to turn the antidote into poison, and
make that remedy plant new vices which was designed to root out and extirpiate
the old ones.

Simplicius returning from the business he had pretended, to give leisure to
Vannoza's wholesome instructions to work upon Alcimus, retook his Seat of
spiritual Judicature, where indeed he found him really converted, or rather
metamorphosed, but not with a change from God's right hand: For, As Hector
still gave all opposers foils,
Returning loaded with Achilles spoils;
So he before always brought home the prize
Of thousands of admiring beauteous eyes;
Conqu'rour, till now the assault so fierce did prove,
He Is slav'd and dragged after triumphant love.


And indeed in this as well as in other vices, he that commits sin is slave to
it. O Alcimus! how inconsiderate are thy actions! thus to lay snares to
entangle thy self in misery; and instead of cancelling and blotting out thy
spiritual debts with the blood of thy Savior, thus to make a contract with
death, and paction with the devil: But let us hear his well-fram'd Oration to
Simplicius.

Father (said he) I beg of God and you a thousand pardons, for having hitherto
gone about to deceive you; I was indeed the first my self that was so, by the
splendor of a beauty whose puissant sweetness is able to beat down all
opposition, and therefore in that subjugation, I thought my self more worthy of
excuse than accusation, of pardon than reproach, but now you have turned the
Sun into my face, I must surrender up my arms to truth, whose strength is
prevalent over all things, like an impetuous torrent, bearing down all before
it. The clouds may for some time intercept, but never extinguish the Sun's
rays, truth may for some time be invelloped with the umbrages of diverse
subtilties, but can never be altogether obscured. You have so well managed your
diligent endeavors, that finally by confronting me with an irreproachable
Witness, you have totally convinced me, but with a happy conviction, since this
is a tribunal of clemency and mercy, where even the sin of Judas (of which mine
is the image, having so often betrayed the divine bounty by a kiss) is
remissible: Did you (Father) but contemplate the beauteous cause of so
miserable an effect, I am confident as you now think me foolish and
inconsiderate, to submit my self to the captivity of the charms of unlawful
love, you would then think me stupid and insensible, if before such a fire I
should endure without heat or flame; but be pleased to consider that our
affections (principally those that are grown inveterate) are not put off so
easily as a garment: Would God we could as easily quit our habitudes as our
habits, as the primitive Christians cast all they had, even to their garments,
at the Apostle's feet, so I had presently deposited at yours all the passion
that I had for this Lady. But I pray consider, (which you know better than I)
how hard it is for the Ethiopian to change his color, or the Leopard his
spots, but still more for a sinner so suddenly to rid himself of that which is
so deeply ingraved in his soul; I hope, nevertheless, by the grace of God and
the assistance of your Prayers and good Conduct, to draw this thorn out of my
heart, which I once took for a most precious and fragrant rose, the impressions
of which will hardly yet be effaced from my spirit, though I feel sufficiently
the pungency of it, so that I now find how rational that saying was, I see
what is good, but my malignant will
Bends me to love and follow what is ill.
Though this will be the very separation of my soul from my body by so violent
an effort, yet when it shall please God to break these fatal bonds of iniquity
which environ me, I will sacrifice to him an hecatomb of praises, and every
where publish the glory of his name: All I can at present do is to protest,
that for the future I will do my best endeavor to efface out of my memory the
Idea of so many graces and perfections that have enchanted it, and essay to
shut the gate against those thoughts which nourish my passions; and finally, to
take that resolution which is incident to the most irresolute, to hope no
further where the evil is incurable; I say not this because mine is so, but I
see by the firmness of this Lady that she is no less chaste than fair; and if
she have attractions which make her be beloved, she has no less severity to
make her be feared, and all attempts are fruitless upon one so firmly bent upon
the conservation of her honor: I will henceforth endeavor to extinguish my
unlawful fire with the tears of penitence; and seeing the waxed wings of my
designs melted by so audacious an approach, I will like Icarus drown them in
that Sea of repentance: It is fit I banish from my spirit those Idaea's which
flattered my passion, and withal seemed so delicious; for instead of the
contentment, which I promised my self from their success, I now see nothing
attend me but sorrow and regrets. Upon sound advice I find my self obliged,
rather to commend her virtuous resolution, than to blame unjustly her holy
rigor, which now has proved the only eye-water to restore the sight, I have
been so long deprived of: And since she cannot be pitiful to me, but by being
cruel to her self; nor satisfy my humor but at the expense of her Honor, I
shall show far more judgment in making my retreat, than I did in beginning my
enterprise. And I heartily bless God, that having fallen, it is into such
hands, hers and yours, by whose assistance I cannot fear but to obtain a
recovery and making profit of my misfortune, have cause to say, it was good for
me to have this fall, after which I hope to stand faster than before.

Judge now by this Discourse whether the Children of Darkness be not more in
their perverse generation, than those of the light, and whether they be not
more witty, prudent, and discreet, and wsthal more accomplish^d for the
bringing about their wicked designs; Was not this cajollery able to pass, not
only upon the innocence of the well-meaning Simplicius, but even upon the
cra^tiest in the world?

This good Father replied, My Son, it is a good step toward health to be cured;
though you come somewhat late to repentance, yet all is soon enough, if well
enough: I told you before, that all that smoke could not be without some fire,
and that your Mine would at last be discovered, though never so secretly
wrought: But now, God be praised, who has melted the Ice of your obstinacy by
the Sun of truth, and that the acknowledgment of your fore-past fault,
promises us a future amendment; and that which does most rejoice me, is to see
you hope in the Divine Mercy, which is an Abyss without bounds or bottom, and
will not let us want that, which it would have extended even unto Judas, had he
not prevented it by despair, to which the extremity of his grief reduced him:
He who begged pardon for his Crucifiers, will surely do the same for those who
with a sincere heart do now invoke his bounty, whilst he is in the Throne of
Glory, performing the Office of our Advocate.

And after turning toward Vannoza (which heard all this Mystery with that
attentation and joy, which you may well magine possessed her, to see her designs
succeed so happily.)

You see (Madam, said he) our Criminal convinced by his own Confession; What
now rests but to condemn him not to punishment but amendment. It is true, we
are here in a Tribunal, where a free Confession serves for an excuse, and where
excusing aggravates the Crime. A Tribunal where Mercy has predominance over
Judgment, and where there needs only a sound Confession of a fault to obtain
remission, since here we hold the place of him who has said, At what time
soever a sinner returns toward me, my arms shall be open to receive him, for
I am the living God, who would not the death of a sinner, but rather that he
should turn from his iniquity and live: If Wine, Women, and Truth, are asunder
judged in Scripture to be the three strongest things in the world, what must
they needs be, when united in one Subject? We have here the Wine of Charity,
and Divine Love, washing away the filthy putrefaction of this profane Passion:
You, Madam, are that strong Woman, which Solomon desires, whose price is above
Rubies, or the precious things the world can yield; and have by your fortitude
reduced to Reason this wandering Soul, by repelling all his assaults: But above
all, the Strength of Truth is greatest, for you see that Alcimus confounded by
the first Ray that it darted in his face.

To this Vannoza replied, in the Apostle's Phrase, (for she wanted neither wit,
nor words to express it, had she but had Grace to apply it better.) Not I
(Father) but the Grace of God in me, the Grace of God which often makes use of
the weakest things to confound the strongest; of a Rod to tame the pride of the
Egyptians, and of the hand of a woman to behead the great Assyrian Captain.
But, Father, to strike now whilst the Iron's hot, what hinders, but that (as
the Ennuch of Candace was presently baptized by St. Philip) you now speedily
restore to him that Grace of which he had deprived himself by his bad designs.
The Passion with which Alcimus has hitherto been custamed is such, that if
violence be not used to pluck it from his Soul, he will continue in his sin, I
in pain, and my Husband in his evil humor.

You say very well, Daughter ( said the good Simplicius) for since the hour of
death is so uncertain, why should he delay converting himself to God, who has
promised him, as says the glorious Father St. Angustine, to receive him to
mercy every moment, but has not assured him to allow him space till death, to
cry him mercy. It being but just; that that sinner should forget himself in
death, who has never thought of God through all the course of his life. What
think you of this, continued he, (my Son Alcimus) the Grace of God hates
delays, and he that presents it you to day, has not promised to do so to
morrow; if you put your self amongst the foolish Virgins, you must expect to
hear that sad Sentence in the Day of Judgment, Depart from me. I know you not:
Will you by the impenitent perseverance of a wicked heart, treasure up wrath
against the day of wrath? Will you be silent when you ought to speak, and be
deaf to the Voice of God, who calls on you by me? the Voice of the Turtle,
which summons you to a forsaking of your disordinate and irregular Passions.
Woe unto you if you keep silence: There is a time to be silent, and a time to
speak: It is a Malignant Devil, which makes us deaf to the Remonstrances, and
dumb to the Confession of our sins, from which I beseech God to deliver you; I
perceive you are in danger to defer your repentance a while, during which time
the Devil will return with greater fury to recover the prey which grace has
almost snatched out of his clutches, and if he make himself once stronger and
better armed in the fortress of your heart, it is to be feared he will guard it
so strongly as to keep out the holy Spirit, and so your last error will be
worse than the first: Consider that it is humane frailty to fall, but
diabolical madness to persevere: Is it fit to consult, hang backwards, or
deliberate, when you are summoned to render your self to God, and to quit the
creature for the Creator, to whom none is like, than whom none is stronger,
whom none can resist, nor any enter into comparison with ^i^ Almighty Majesty.

Vannoza, hearing this Discourse, backed by the vehemence of that charity which
animated this good Father, who wrought upon his stoney heart, as if he had been
exercising one possessed, and fearing that the efficatious strength of this word
Which converteth Souls, uttered with such a vehemence of spirit, should shake
those yet but feeble roots which she had planted in the heart of this Neophite,
to obstruct his spiritual resurrection; Alas! (said she) Father, in this new
springing of his fault, you must not press too hard upon his heart least you
oppress it: The gentle West-wind that makes the Flowers spring is sweet and
fragrant, but the impetuosity of the North pincheth and destroys them: The
first condescension which I found in him makes me not doubt of a second, but to
this end, time must give assistance unto reason; Your Maxims, doubtless, are
good and prevalent, but be the Medicines never so wholesome and well compounded,
yet are they not always efficatious, if there be not a fit disposition in the
patient that receves them: It is to be thought that Alcimus his Apostume is not
yet ripe, because it is still unbroken, the time will come, when like a good
Tree, planted by the streams of Grace, he will bring forth Fruit in due season.

I know he now perceives at last
The folly of his Errors past,
And in short time I hope see
His Flames to Ice will changed he.
I conceive (with submission to your better counsel) it is fit to give him
respite as to a bad Play Master, that if his levity should bring him to return
unto his vomit, it may take from him all excuse of having had too short a time
to resolve, and to pluck up by reason and the force of arguments, a passion
which has so long rooted in his breast.

Simplicius, easy to work on, as a true Monastic, who thought that all the
World, like him, proceeded in their actions with charity and sincerity, gave
his hand to this female-councel, which he thought fit to be sometimes followed,
and sometimes not, and that Adam and Pilate were equally guilty the one for
following and the other for rejecting the the Counsel of a Woman: Thus was
Alcimus balanced on the one side with Divine Love, and with Humane on the
other, and at last suffered himself to be weighed down by the later, directly
toward Hell and Destruction.

I will not trouble my self nor the Reader with a Discovery of the progress and
success of the artifices used in this unfortunate infection (I would say
affection, but have spoken more properly then I intended) nor declare in what
manner these two impious Lovers abused the innocence of this good man to
maintain an intelligence betwixt them. Sometimes Alcimus making him believe
that he could not, or at least not so soon, rid himself of this passion;
sometimes Vannoza continuing her false complaints, and feigned fears, whereby
they made this holy Father their Shuttle-cock, and through their joint and
deceitful propositions, be entered into such real apprehensions of the loss
either of the Soul or Body of Alcimus, that it robbed him of his rest, and his
trouble brought him to a pining leanness: In this Spiritual Cure he resembled
those Physicians, who not well understanding a Distemper, take care of one part
of it, whilst the other part destroys the Patient: And as those Corporal
Physicians know not the Disposition of the Interior parts but from the
relation of the Patient, so these Spiritual ones, know them not but by the
report of the penitent, which made the Philosopher say to a young man, Speak
that I may see thee; and as the eye being single, the whole body is thereby
conducted, by the aid of an amiable light, so contrarily, he walks in darkness
whose eyes are clouded; and how should our Spiritual Guides conduct us rightly
through a holy discipline, if we do not truly and sincerely discover our selves
to them, without disguising and deceit; for which cause the wise man declares
that the Heart is deceitful above all things, and a double Tongue is an
abomination before God: I will not here make register of the execrable
subtleties of these firebrarnds of Hell, of explaining themselves to one
another by an innocent Interpreter, of whom one may say, as David did of the
Patriarch Joseph, That he heard a Language which he had no understanding of;
but is the fault in the Sword if one commit Murder with it? or of a Sacrament
if many abuse it? Who knows not the corrupt Stomachs turn the best Meat into
Crudities? Besides all this, the counter-sence of their words as well in Speech
as Writing; their cabalistique Ciphers, and interlined Letters, written by a
Liquor, which of invisible became visible by being held against the Fire, and
by such like means; and many other ways, whereby they daily maintained their
wicked correspondence, by abusing in so many several manners the goodness of
this religious person, who was thereby tossed like a Ball betwixt two skilful
Gamesters.

But if the wicked devices and odious sins which were acted in the Temple and
in holy places by the Sons of Aaron and of Eli were so severely punished by
Divine Vengeance, what punishment was due to these sacrilegious persons, who
not content to violate a Sacrament, which is great and honorable, and by an
infamous Adultery projected and acted by them, but also this other holy one,
which pronounces on Earth the Decrees of Heaven, miserably changing into a
crime, that which ought to serve them for an instruction of justification; How
often, like Uriah, did they carry in their own Bosoms the sealed Packets of their
condemnation, but with as much wickedness and deceit as he had of ignorance and
innocence.

But this sort of Writing and Speaking was not all, the furious passion which
so tormented them, and robbed them of their repose was not an evil that could
be healed so, without coming to an effect, (their reciprocal being but too well
desires known to one another) that old Serpent the Devil, Who has so many
names, but more devices,
With which to mischief Sinners he entices.


He, I say, failed not to suggest unto them many means of seeing one another,
and that in such a manner as they desired; for though in this sort of Vice, the
Gospel places the mental Adultry in a lustful look, and a determinate mind to
do evil, yet the execution is not perfected by the view, though these, like
those of the Basilisk, strike death into the Soul; the life of which consists
in Grace, which is lost by a mortal coveting.

Alcimus being assured of Vannoza's good, will (to him, but evil in its self)
did soon find the way (were it by the means of some friends, or rather the
irresistible force of his Coin) to procure access to a house that joined to
Capoleon's, where by the conjunction of the roofs, he facilitated his entrance
to the Cabinet of Meditations of her, who easily waived her devotion, to yield
her self to his: There whilst her Husband thought her taken up with Celestial
Contemplations, she was exercised altogether in Earthly ones, and in the
possession of her new Lover: Thus was this immodest Helena taken for a chaste
Hecuba. And thus these passionate Lovers being arrived to the top of their
pretensions, in the enjoyment of their delights, as execrable as unjust,
thought they had found out the Elyzian Fields in this Garret: But the pleasure
of the wicked passes in an instant; and the Royal Prophet has declared, That
he has seen the wicked elevated above the Cedars of Lebanon (which are the
just and perfect Souls); and soon after repassing by the same Thickets, he has
no longer perceived them, because they were shrunk away and failed; for as the
wax melts before the fire, and the smoke dissipateth and vanishes as it
rises higher, so Sinners are brought to naught in God's presence, in an
instant: This intercourse lasted but a while, for these often frequentings of
this house being observed by the Master of it, (who was not at all advertised
of the reasons of them, all the business being brought about by one of his
Servants, corrupted by Alcimus) it presently buzzed suspicion into his head, (a
Vice natural unto the Italians) and made him begin to look after the honor of
his Wife, who was rather capable to beget pity than desire: See here an
eclipse, and parenthesis for some days to the interviews of our Lovers. Thus
crosses do in multitudes descend
On those who against Gods righteous Laws offend:
But they like Mules and Beasts, quite void of sense,
Feel not the rod, nor turn from their offense.
But the same spirit of darkness that animated them, being as fertile in
invention as persuasive in wickedness, to make them a passage through all the
steps and degrees that lead to the highest top of iniquity, suggested to them
more of his Diabolick ways; Diabolick do I say! nay much worse than the
artifices of Devils, who are forced to confess their impuissance in sacred
places, which our wicked ones chose to make the execrable Theater of their
abominations; whence comes it (says God by the mouth of a Prophet) that they
whom I loved have committed such crimes in my own house? And if a fault which
of it self is but venial, or slightly punishable, becomes inexpiable, et crimen
lesae Majestatis, when acted in a King^s Palace, as being a place of
veneration, and not to be dishonored by an infamous act, what new punishment
must there be invented to inflict upon him who violates the Temple of the
Immortal and Invisible King of Kings, by detestable prophanations; Of a
certainty God will not hold for innocent him that pollutes the place of his
abode, and make that which is consecrated for a House of Prayer, be converted
into a Den of Thieves.

Within this House, Lord, naught is fit to be,
But what in holiness resembles thee.
Vannoza having no liberty to go abroad, but to holy places in the company of
her Mother, Alcimus by an act doubly sacrilegious, still frequented those
Monasteries where there were to be Stations, Indulgences, or Processions of the
Fraternities, and there habited like the Religious of every several Monastery
and Order where he was, he hid himself in some private Chapels, or secret and
dark retiring places, (as those who do evil, hate the light) and was there
visited by his devout Mistress, where under pretense of Consolation,
Instruction or Confession, they acted that which could scarce find remission
from him who was thereby so highly dishonored in his own habitation: I am
struck with horror to discover deeds of so black a hue; but it is to stamp
some horror in the Souls of those who act or are tempted to commit the like,
that I trace these lines upon this paper.

Those who know the dexterity and boldness of the Italian spirits, principally
when they are pricked forwards by this frantic passion which has so puissant
a dominion in their hearts, will not find these horrid impudencies strange,
though to others of another Nation they may seem almost incredible.

Now as in the course of perfection, it is the custom of those who use
themselves to it, to advance from virtue to virtue, till by degrees they arrive
at the top of the Celestial Olympus, so are there steps and degrees in evil;
and though (as an Ancient says) there is no vice but what brings us to the
brink of a Precipice, yet another says as truly, None highly good can in one
moment be
Hurried into the worst impiety.
None from the top of Virtue in a trice
Plungeth into the lowest depth of Vice.
And though this seem to be the last period of it, when a celestial Cloak is
fitted to infernal actions, this I say, may well be thought the Hercules
Pillars, beyond which, wickedness can scarce pass any further. Yet our
Criminals found this way so environed with thorns, their encounters so
perilous, their interviews so short, and their conversations so incommodious,
that though the Roses of this Passion seem not delicious, but amongst such
picquant difficulties, yet they soon left their tract of iniquity, bebecause
having experimented one before, more easy, and more accommodated to their
gust, it seemed to them as hazardous, as it was in it self horrible and
impious: For, besides that the discovery of this Stratagem would expose them to
public infamy, and make them hated and hissed at by all, as the God of War and
the Black-smiths Wise amongst the adulterous Poetical gods, were in the
invisible snares; It further seemed, that humane Justice would hardly invent a
punishment suitably rigorous to so enormous a Crime: Their next recourse was
therefore to a Ladder, which Alcimus having procured to be made of silk, and as
secretly delivered it to Vannoza in one of their private Monastic meetings,
which she in the night, at the appointed hour, fastened to the Window of the
room of her pretended Devotion, and cast down the other end to the ground,
where by his activity readily getting over the Walls of the Courtyard, easily
mounted to the highest Pinnacle of his intended happiness, without fearing a
Precipice into the horrible depths of destruction, any more than that of his
body upon the Pavement, not thinking of the former, since he could escape the
later by his strength and nimbleness.

No wonder if Vannoza pleased her self in her private Chapel, which she had
builded on the top of her house, since there, like Micah, she kept her hidden
Idol, and instead of burying it at the foot of the Oak of Sichem (as Jacob did
those of his family) by a sound repentance, she sacrificed to it (but this word
is too honorable for so dishonest an action) I may more properly term it a
prostitution of her Affections, Soul, and Honor. And if Covetousness be called
Idolatry, and Gluttons are said to make a God of their Belly, how much more
fitly may we term sensual Persons, Idolaters; who seem to acknowledge no other
Divinity, than the object of their filthy desires; like unclean Beasts,
wallowing in the mire, loosely abandoning the Service of the Creator (who is
the sole disposer of infinite Delectations) for that of a vile and wretched
Creature; for as he that adheres to God, becomes of the same Spirit with him;
so he that sticks unto a loose Woman, becomes a Member of her Body, and of the
same substance; so that they resemble two Captives, who by one Chain are
conducted to the eternal Gaoles, unless their repentance prevent their
Condemnation. But this practice, as perilous as unhappy, was not long without
interruption, according to the saying of the Poet, Those whom the highest joys
do bless,
Abide not long in happiness:
The World, like the Ocean, ne're's secure;
A peaceful Calm cannot long endure:
Felicity never rests long in one place,
And Fortune's Wheel moves not a measured pace.
Besides their continual fears (the inseparable scourge of the wicked) and the
apprehensions not only of being surprised in the act, but of being espied by
some Passengers in the street, their Consciences were still plagued with a
thousand remorses.

Alcimus always went in the night to the abode of this deceitful Siren, alone
and armed, resolved to set upon the first that should interrupt his designs,
but it being impossible for him to mount the Ladder with so many Arms as he
carried, in quitting them, which he left at the bottom, he was seized always
with a fear of being surprised thus unarmed, so that that of the Sacred Pages
might justly be applied to him, Combats without, and Terrors within. But if
affection sharpen the understanding, how was it possible for him to continue
blind amongst so many perils as on all parts environed him? How should it be,
but that like Balaam, he should perceive the flaming Sword of Divine Justice
waved over his head, and ready to divide it asunder: But it is in vain for us
to desire he should avoid that mischief he so earnestly pursues. The reason of
this is well expressed in these words of the Royal Prophet, The fire is fallen,
and they have not seen the Sun; for when the flames of desire tyrannize in
their Souls, the light of their eye (that is, their Reason) remains no longer
with them, and the faculties of it quite forsake them.

The jealous in the excess of their love, have this property, to be always
suspicious, and consequently fearful, and even then, when they have least
subject for it; It Is this that banisheth repose from their eyelids, and causes
that the juice of Poppy, which night sheds upon the earth, cannot infuse sleep
into their eyes; they are always waking, or rather awaking, and the ear,
chiefly in the dark, is always open to the least noise; so that though these
two used all means imaginable to be neither seen nor heard, yet walking in
darkness, or in the Scripture Phrase, groping by the wall, and in elevated
places, whose Symmetry was less discernible than the rest of the Building, it
was impossible but that they must make some noise or sound, which would easily
reach a watchful ear. Vannoza had often been advertised of this by Capoleon, who
was troubled that his Wife usually spent a great part of the night in this
Garret, in the conversation of the wandering Ghosts and Goblins of the night,
thinking her Devotion had by this time brought her into the Visions of St.
Anthony or of St. Macarius, and that the Demons strove to interrupt her
Prayers. Vannoza sometimes told him it was nothing, and that she was not so
good as he supposed, or she desired; that she was neither in so profound
Contemplations, nor such deep Ecstasies, to give occasion to the Angels of
Darkness to envy her Piety, or interrupt it by Apparitions or Illusions.
Otherwhiles she made him some crafty excuses, alleging, that during the
silence of the night, the least noise seems great; that there are certain
Animals which stir not abroad but in the dark, principally on the tops of
houses, and always make a rattling and a noise; that if she had been of a
timorous humor, her solitude had administered causes enough of fear; avowing to
him that she had often seen Fantomes in different fashions, but that she
attributed it to the interruption of her spirits, or the weakness of her sight,
amongst the shades of night rather than to her virtue or piety. (As if these
visits of Satan were marks of the grand merits of such his impious servants.) O
Vannoza! remember that God is not thus mocked with impurity, that if his long
suffering wink at thee for a time, till thou arrive to such a height of
wickedness, it is but for thee to take the greater fall.

The old man prepossest with a good opinion of the chastity of his wife, took
her for a Saint, and all she said for Oracles; with which Alcimus and she made
excellent past-time, it furnishing them sufficiently with laughter. One night
amongst the rest, whilst they continued their entertainments and embraces
longer then ordinary, Capoleon, like another Pompilius, attending the descent
of the Nymph Egeria, at length wearied, and oppressed with drowsiness, fell
asleep, and so in a Dream, which brought him into the Country near the
Appennine, where he thought a Bear coming from the Mountains, bereaved him of
his Wife, and tearing her out of his Arms, carried her into his Den, where,
without hurting her, he nourisht her with Apples and other Fruit, of which he
had laid in great store, where helplessly he beheld her embraced by this
Savage-Monster; and being in an inexplicable perplexity how he should recover
his Vannoza from the power of this fierce Animal, as it ordinarily happens to
those who are so afflicted in their sleep, he wakened, overjoyed that this
Misfortune was imaginary, though indeed it was but too real: Therefore groping
round about, to find if his better half were with him, and missing her, fearing
least this Dream might be a presage of some tragical disaster, he leapt out of
the Bed, and running up Stairs to Vannoza's Oratory, he knocked at the Door, at
the same time when she was in the possession of a Bear in humane shape. This
knocking seemed to be her knell, expecting nothing less than death from her
injured Husband; And Alcimus thinking himself betrayed, resolved to sell his
life at the highest rate his Valor could put upon it: at last Vannoza, not
quite despairing of an escape by the assistance of the darkness, advised him to
slip under the Bed; and she, feigning her self to be asleep, let Capoleon knock
a little longer, and after starting up as if affrighted out of sleep, she asked
who it was that came to interrupt her in the midst of her repose: Capoleon
praising God that she was there and safe, recounted to her his Dream from point
to point: To the interpretation of which they needed to consult neither
Morpheus nor Artemidorus, for Alcimus and Vannoza could do it better than
either, but knew not whether it gave them more reason of fear or laughter:
Capoleon telling her he was come to succor her, and desiring her to open the
Door, she knew not whether to take it in jeft or earnest, fearing all this but
an invention and counterfeit pleasantness in order to her destruction, the
conscience of her and that of her Lover, beating up a thousand dreadful alarms;
At last, taking courage from the extremity of danger, My Dear, said she,
know thou not that Dreams are but lies and delusions? I wonder that you
being so wise a man, should trouble your self with these superstitions, which
you would blame in the weakest Woman; pray return to your rest; I thank you
however for your succor, though it be more importunate than opportune; I am in
the little Bed which I have placed in this Room, where pray let me alone this
night: Capoleon notwithstanding urging her to open it, protesting that he could
not sleep without her amidst this inquietude, she judging by his voice that he
was in earnest, but without any emotion of choler, prayed him to stay a while
till she were a little clothed to go with him, for that Bed was too strait for
them both (too strait indeed for the Husband and Adulterer.) This while she
consulted with Alcimus for his escape, who to put himself in posture for
defense or flight as he should see most convenient, (fearing least if by some
sinister accident he should be found under the Bed, it might cost him his life
before he could get up) thought it fittest to get behind the door, which was no
sooner open but Capoleon, taking Vannoza by the hand, led her away to his
Chamber in the dark, hereby making them both an honorable amends for the
fright and trouble he had put them to: Alcimus now had time to clothe himself
and escape, applauding in himself the wit and courage of Vannoza, and blessing
the good fortune that attends on Lovers, Instead of acknowledging (wretched as
he was) the infinite bounty and goodness of God, who by this hazard he had run
(the greatest imaginable) gave him fair admonition to renounce his abominable
wickedness and impiety, and by thus showing him the rod, would fright him into
an amendment. But alas! his depraved spirit and impenitent heart, instead of
repenting for what was past, and amending for the future, strove rather to
imitate the Mariner, who having escaped the fury of a Tempest, which threatened
him with manifest Shipwreck, has scarce dried his Clothes before he is so
weary of Land that he is fired with impatience and desire of imbarking for
another Navigation, to try his fortune the second time: As for Vannoza, her
wickedness whetting her invention, and sharpening her industry, she made her
husband (whom she saw besotted with love of her) believe what she pleased,
telling him, That after some exercises of mortification, which without naming
he was sufficiently satisfied of, finding her self wearyed, and her spirits
weakened and dulled, she was constrained to go to rest, being of opinion, that
after having chastned her body and brought it into servitude, it was not
fitting presently to restore it to delights betwixt the arms of her husband,
whom at the same time she sweetened with many feigned caresses: Thus this false
Female, the more sweetly she flattered him, the more deeply she deceived him:
This brings into my memory the saying of Uriah to David, That he could not
allow himself to take his ease and pleasures in the bed of his wife, whilst
his Captain Joab was armed in his pavilions: Thus ended this Adventure, which
served but for a whet-stone to sharpen their infamous desires and brutish
appetites; The remembrance of a danger vanished with it, and being once in
safety, we forget who set us there; Benefits we write on a wave,
But Injuries in brass engrave.


They renewed their intercourse when the shades of Night rendered all things
invisible; but they forgot that Night has eyes, Night's beauteous eyes, the
Stars do pierce
The Shades which veil the Universe.


Not to mention the great eye of the Divinity, which cannot be clouded by the
thickest darkness, since God is all light, and nothing is hid from him: This
universal sight, which gave him the Name of God, according to the Greek, sees
through the Walls of Heaven, and without being perceived, plainly beholds and
orders the Influence of the Stars and Celestial Bodies, and sees not only the
Actions which are hid from Men, but even the Thoughts, and those very Faults
which are unknown to them who commit them; This drew from the mouth of the
Divine Singer these words which suit so fitly to our purpose: Vain were my
hopes, to think the veil of night
Could hide my secret actions from thy sight;
Night, even then, has eyes to six on me;
What Is dark to us, Lord, is not so to thee,
Who can turn night to day,
Or make noon midnight be.


For as to save Israel, God made use of thick darkness at noonday, so to
discover the wicked actions of the despisers of his Justice, and abusers of his
Mercy, he can make day in the midst of night, laying open to the light the
works that are wrought in darkness: This he brought about here by a way as
strange as that, by which he caused the heads of Goliath and Holofernes to be
cut off by their own Swords.

Alcimus his Servants seeing him so often go out of the house, to pass away
part of the night abroad, in the equipage of one that goes on no good design,
being alone and unattended, as being unwilling to have any witness of his
actions, had cause enough to conjecture, that he went to those Thefts, which
are now as much esteemed in the world, as others were formerly amongst the
Lacedaemonians; but they were in continual apprehensions lest some mischief
should befall him, as it ordinarily happens to the defilers of another's Bed;
but he had strictly forbidden them to follow him, upon pain of his displeasure,
and cashiering them from his Service; so that they were forced to let him run
alone after the desires of his heart; but his Parents being advertised of it
(to whom this only Son was dearer than the apples of their eyes) made him be so
well watched by one of their most trusty Domestics, that at last this subtle
Hunter took him on the Seat, and saw a new kind of Angel ascend and descend a
Ladder, which was quite contrary to that of Jacob, that reaching unto Heaven,
but this to Hell: Yet was it better for Alcimus to be discovered by those who
desired the the safety of his Soul as well as Body, than by a jealous Husband,
who taking him in the act, would have sacrificed both to his fury. But it was
necessary for this headstrong young sinner to be more severely chastised than
by a Fatherly Remonstrance, to turn him from his evil courses and bad designs,
which happened in the manner following: This Servant of Alcimus his Father, who
by his craft had traced out the haunts of this untamed young Courser, not
having on his lips the Seal of silence, which Alexander fixed upon those of
Ephestion, having advertised some of Alcimus his Servants, that they should
take care of their Master, and that notwithstanding his Commands to the
contrary, they ought to follow him afar off, for fear lest some disaster should
befall him for want of succor; they who desired nothing more than the
conservation of him, on whom their fortunes depended, quickly accorded to this
Proposition; but it was fit that their eyes should make them certain of what
they yet knew nothing of, but by the ear; which having done, and no longer
doubting of the certainty of it; it happened that one night having followed him
afar off, and seeing him stop, they made a stand, and there see him mount his
Ladder, whilst they as his Corpse de Guard, stood Sentinel, and made their
Rounds about the street, he having left his Ladder hanging at the Window (as
usually it did) to attend his return: Mean while it fell out that a Party of
Sbirres (who are Sergeants and Officers of Justice in that Country) who came
from the search of some Robbers, meeting these Persons in the street, examined
them, what business detained them so long out of their Lodgings, asking them
their names, their quality, and abode, and going at the same time to seize on
some of them, who gave saucy and abusive answers to their interrogatories,
there were presently Swords drawn, blows dealt lustily about, Harquebusses
lustily fired (the ordinary Arms of these Sbirres) a great Cry made, and the
Alarm hotly given in that Quarter, some crying out Thieves, some Fire, some
Murder, and all was in an uproar, People flocked out of their houses to see
what the matter was, and the street was so full of lights, that it seemed to be
rather day than night; the Inhabitants assembled from all parts, and Capoleon's
Servants went out among the rest; Capoleon himself leaped out of Bed (every one
being concerned at a Cry of Thieves or Fire) This Gentleman being one of the
Chief men of that Quarter, all flocked about him, and before his house, where
the Ladder hung for a Scalado. Whilst these confused Cries, Blows, and Wounds
made all speakers and no hearers, the noise came to the top of the House, where
our two solitary Sparrows were lodged: Alcimus leaping up, run to the Window
(after having habited himself as well as possible on the sudden) and was going
to go down by his Ladder. Good God! what an amazing sight was it for him to see
all the street and Court full of people, which stood thickest about the bottom
of his Ladder: Some seized on the Arms he had left below, others were coming to
search for Thieves in Capoleon's house; some were complaining of their Wounds,
others laying hold on the Prisoners; and finally, all was a Chaos of Disorders.
I have no leisure to describe the fright and terror of Vannoza, who ran down
to her Husbands Chamber, as if she had been going to execution, or descending
alive into the Sepulcher; for what could she promise to her self but certain
death, and the hour of her punishment to be already come? Alcimus having
nothing for his defense but a Pistol and a Dagger, resolved to run down the
stairs of the House, and resolutely to rush through the press, which he did
with more resolution than consideration; and at the bottom of the Stairs
meeting a Servant of the house, which begun to cry out Thieves, he pulling his
hat over his eyes, to avoid being known, fired his Pistol so near his face,
that the other holding up his arm to avoid the blow, had it shot through with a
Bullet, and his eyes so dazzled with the smoke and fire, that that, and the
fright he was in, made him fancy as many Thieves as sparks: the report amazed
all the hearers, and he running to the Gate, gave the first he met so rude a
salute with his Poniard, as put him into a necessity of saving himself, rather
than seizing him; he pressed forwards, pushing one, and striking another, and
crying out, Here, here, my fellows, now is the fittest time to make our way with
our Swords and Pistols; which frighted both the Sergeants, and all the Company
into a belief that there were many of them, and that they should find sharp
service in attacquing such desperate Villains, so that their terror putting
them all to flight, he fled and saved himself pell-mell amongst the rest,
without ever being known or taken notice of^ Vannoza knowing nothing of all
this, and hearing nothing but blows and cries, fancied her self already torn in
pieces, and attended nothing but her death; she knew that in that Country 'twas
in vain to ask pardon of a Husband for faults like hers; these Offenses like
Treason against Princes, are not washed away but with the blood of the guilty,
the spot; like that of Oil, not being to be taken out but with the piece; and
as it is imprinted in humane nature, to endeavor to prolong it as long as they
can, she run down into the Cellar to hide her self, as if she were willing to
go alive to Hell, rather than suffer the pains of death; or like a Criminal
Vestal, be put alive into the pit, as a punishment fit for her uncleanness.
Here she might justly say, as the Reprobates will at the Day of the Universal
Assizes, Mountains fall upon us: with her as with a Traveller, who being in
open Fields in a Tempest, sees the Heavens all on fire with Lightning, hears
the Air resounding with Thunder, sees the Earth washed with the Rain, and
beaten by the Hail, and fearing so many Arrows and Instruments of Death bent
against his head, betakes himself to the shelter of a well-spread Tree, or
secret Grot; but if a Thunderbolt come to tear the Earth from under his feet,
think but what fright he now endures this moment, which he takes for the last
of his whole life; such was the dreadful fright of Vannoza, too happy Vannoza,
had she made use of these Rods of God's Fatherly correction, and if by the fear
of God's Judgments, she had been frighted into Goodness: But God might well
work Prodigies by the Rod of Moses, it nothing abates Pharaoh's courage; there
are some Souls are so depraved, that like Tigres, they grow more fierce by
gentle usage. Lord, with how many pleasant ingredients of mercy do thou
temper the bitterness of thy Potion of Justice! How many warnings do thou
give to them, who amidst their Sins have not quite lost the sense of thy fear,
to make them hide themselves by penitence from the Arrows of thy fierce wrath!
This action of Vannoza's hiding her self, puts me in mind of that of Adam,
after he had tasted the forbidden fruit. And further (which is nearer to our
purpose) of that of Helen, so exactly described by the Prince of Poets, when at
the Sack of Troy Aeneas espied her hid in the Temple of Vesta, for fear of
being involved in the general Ruin; the words, coming from this Noble Genius
are excellent, and worthy the Recital.

- Limina vestae
Servantem, and tacitam secreta in sede latentem
Tyndarida aspicio; dant clara incendia lucem
Erranti; passimque oculos per cuncta ferenti:
Illa sibi infestos eversa ob Pergama Teucros,
Et pena Danaum, and deserti Conjugis iras
Permetuens, Trojae and patris communis Erynnis
Abdiderat sete, atque aris invisa sedebat
Exarsere ignes animo; subit ira, cadentem
Ulcisci patriam, and sceleratas sumere poenas.
In Vesta's Temple Helen I perceived,
By fear of Death almost of Life bereaved:
The dismal flames 'midst the thick shades of Night
Gave to my wandering eyes sufficient light:
She who the Trojans had so dearly cost
For whom their Empire, Goods, and Lives were lost,
Justly expected that such injured Foes
Would with their Swords stamp on her breast their Woes;
Fearing no less with guilty blood t, assuage
Her injured Husband and the Grecian rage.
Expecting thus till wrathful Greece or Troy
Should the dire cause of both their ills destroy.
There the Altars did a hiding place afford,
T^her whom men hated, and the Gods abhorred.
Mean while as this famous Grecian Beauty which first fired the Trojan's hearts
and then their houses, though seized on by so much fear, yet escaped the
mischief she so dreaded, seeing her self after the sack of the great and
stately Ilium, kindlier entertained than ever, in the arms of her Husband
Menelaus, and after her loose abandoning her self to the embraces of Paris,
more honored than before by the Grecian Princes; so Vannoza saw all this
uproar terminated in a gracious reception from her husband, who was over-joyed
at his fortunate escape from the destructive hand of thieves, who (as he
thought) had fixed the Ladder there to scale the Walls of his House and rob him
of his Goods: Thus after a furious storm and tempest, there remains no tokens
of the terror but a little foam which the billows have driven upon the shoars;
and a little rain and dirt upon the ground, after the noise of thunder and
tempestuous whirlwinds: O God where is the verity of thy declaration of
happiness unto the good, and evil to the wicked?

How long, how long, Lord just and true
Shall the cursed troops of evil doers
Boldly their wickedness pursue,
Fearless of eathly or heavenly powers?
Shall they for ever with impunity
Thy Servants wrong, and the dread power defy?
But stay my Soul, the way is slippery, thy feet may well slide and deceive
thee, where thy wings intended to bear thee aloft: Do not molest thy self to see
The wicked in prosperity;
With envy don't thy self oppress,
To see them thrive in wickedness,
Like flourishing and verdant grass
Whose beauty suddenly does pass,
Or flowers which ravish the eye
But soon are withered and dry.
Stay but a while, thou shall behold
The wicked gone like tales long told;
And all their glories no more seen
Nor heard then if they would never been.


What astonishing amazment seized on Vannoza, who seeing her self lifted from
the depth of despair, to the highest top of happiness, could not choose but
suspect its reality, and as a bad conscience is never in security, she feared
that she was brought to be sacrificed, as those of old with Music and
Garlands; But by little and little she reassumed her courage, understanding by
the recital of the adventure (which every one reported according to his fancy)
that Alcimus had escaped unknown, and past amongst that uproar for one that
intended to rob Capoleon of his Riches rather than his Honor, nay rather for a
troop of Robbers, for the wounded servant, and those that fled, deceived by the
darkness of the night and their own fear (which has the property to make that
appear which is not, and to multiply to an infinity that which has any thing
of reality) made this deceit pass for a verity, none being able to contradict
it: Capoleon searched all parts of the house, but found nothing of what he
sought for, but found his traces and footings in the Garret, and thence passing
to the Hermitage of this holy Female, he told her it was no wonder that he had
heard a noise there before, and that there were other Apparitions than those of
Spirits and Fantomes, for these had both Flesh and Bones; the Window where the
Ladder was found fastened was condemned as culpable, the Garret on all parts
barricadoed up as criminal, the passage over the Gallery stopped up, and all
the Avenues made inaccessible; But it was impossible these Serpents to vomit
out their poison which was so deeply fixed in their Breasts; it was therefore
time for Justice to give fire to her train, one spark being enough to blow up
all, and the finding but one end of the thread sufficient to unravel the
entangled Clew: One of Alcimus his servants having been taken and bound by the
Sergeants, was by them carried to Prison, where before the Judge that took his
examination, he confessed but too much, manifesting his own innocence, by the
discovery of his Masters guilt: Magistrates who are living Laws themselves, and
interpreters only of the dead or written ones, are most commonly like the
Spiders, which seize on small Flies, but let the great Wasps and Bees alone in
quietness; so that of the Poet may well be applied to them: Dat veniam corvis,
vexat censura columbas.
To ravening Crows they gentle prove,
But vex and plague the harmless Dove.


His design was to impose silence on this innocent prisoner, and thereby to
purchase the title of prudent, rather than that of just; and it being in his
power by the means of many other witnesses which he named to him, to prove his
Adultery, and punish it according to Law, he was afraid to make too much noise
about it, least (like a Dog that barks too much) he should be beaten for his
fidelity; He knew the Grandeur and Puissance of Alcimus his Family, and
further, that if the secret should once come to Capoleon's knowledge, he would
seek Heaven and Earth for vengeance, and never stop at Blood or Murder. It is
not, certainly without reason, that the wisest of men has said, That a man of
little courage ought not to undertake the Office of a Magistrate, least fearing
the face of the Puissant, or the Power of the Mighty, he cause a scandal, or
act an injustice by his timiditie.

The Judge for fear of raising himself enemies amongst those where both the
offenders and the injured were equally his friends, privately advised Alcimus,
that it was best to withdraw his man from Prison, through the golden gate, and
lock up his lips with a key of the same Metal, least the springing of that
Mine should blow him up into destruction. This young Cavalier, unexperienced in
worldly affairs, slighted this advice, and thinking himself clearly and
secretly escaped from the shipwreck, was not contented wholly to deny all that
had been confessed, but threatened his Servant with the highest Menaces, to make
him be punished as a calumniatour, and lastly, make him die by the hands of
Justice, which made him stronglier persist in his depositions, and all his
companions for witnesses, knowing no other way to save his life and regain his
liberty: The Judge being no less friend unto the Family than to the person of
Alcimus, advertised his Parents of it, who were already told by their own Spy
of all their Proceedings, which was the cause that to avoid scandal, and least
that which was yet secret should become public, they took him aside, and after
many grave Remonstrances and serious Admonitions (notwithstanding his positive
denial and horrible protestations, as if Sacrilege and Adultery could be that
way purged) they gave him to understand how they had light on the Clew that led
them in the pursuit of him through all his crooked Maeanders of wickedness: But
this instead of amending him made him worse, by adding the fire of Anger to
that of Lust, so that his choler choking his reason, put him in a fury against
his servants, their honest care and fidelity appearing to him not only a base
disobedience and disloyalty, but an unpardonable injury: so true it is, that as
the good change all to good, and make profit of their losses, the wicked turn
that which is good into evil, taking services for affronts, and the amity one
strives to show them for a passion rather importunate and troublesome than
worthy an acknowledgment; so that instead of applying soft Oils and Lenitives
to this Sore, to abate the Inflammation, he rather strove to heighten it to a
Gangrene, by threatening nothing else but revenge against his Servants, by
discarding, blows or something worse, so far did his fury transport him against
those whose only Crime was too much fidelity: And to arrive to the top of his
folly, he resolved instead of getting liberty for the Prisoner, to become a
party against him, and procure his death from the hands of Justice, by
Artifices as full of sublety as impiety, thinking to bury his fault in the
grave of this innocent: Thus David strove by the sin of Murder to make himself
more free and secret in the Commission of that of Adultery.

The End of the Third Book.
ALCIMUS AND VANNOZA.
LIB. IV.
SEE here Alcimus arrived at the very Crisis of his wickedness; And see how far
more easy it is to corrupt Judges on the side of Clemency, than on that of
Rigor; since as the Lawyers say, That the sovereign severity of the Law is a
supreme injury; like those Remedies of Steel and Fire, which Chirurgions use,
to dismember and stop the Gangrenes of their Patients; Remedies more painful
than the Diseases which they cure. If Alcimus had prudently designed to free
the Prisoner, and to smother his depositions, to avoid the stirring up a
dunghill which would fill the City with noisome and pestilential vapors, and
by silence to save the lives and salve the honors of the principal offenders,
there is no question but the Judge had closed with the design; for as Eleazar
attacqued Antiochus his Elephant in the flank, the most tender and only
penetrable part of this vast body, so Officers of Justice are sooner vanquished
by pity than by any other means, compassion being a charm whose sweetness
abates and betrays the most hardy courages, but to commit an injustice
attended with cruelty is the part of a Devil rather than a man. This was the
cause that Alcimus, what artifices soever he used, whether by entreaty,
promises, or threats, to arrive unto the top of his pernicious design, was
totally frustrated and deceived, and driven upon the same rock on which he
would have split his inculpable servant. Being in this like the Ape, which
hopping up the boughs of a Tree, the higher he climbs, the more he discovers
his shame; or like the Peacock, who the higher and more proudly he erects his
plumes, the more does he discover the parts he should strive to hide. There is
no stronger accusation than excuses too far stretched, and too violently urged,
as none are less believed than those who think by Oaths and Blasphemies to
strengthen their affirmations.

Judges alone cannot order the Process, having to that end their Clerks,
Proctors, Advocates and Registers; and the parties themselves, who like Birds
discover themselves by their notes: But what was worst of all, Capoleon
prosecuting for Justice against him whom he thought one of the Thieves that had
attempted to rob him, by too sollicitously searching what he ought not, found
what he would not, nor ever thought of; like an ignorant Glass-maker, who
intending to blow a Glass, makes a Bottle, or a more useless and ill-shap'd
Vessel: Good Heaven! how was he surprised at the prisoner's depositions! a Maid
gathering flowers in a Garden or Meadow for a Poesy or a Garland, and
suddenly seeing an ugly Serpent leap from under them, is not in a stranger
disturbance than was Capoleon at this amazing news, which (as it often happens)
was as near the truth as it was far from appearance: But as age had endued him
with prudence, he, like a true Italian smothered his resentments, making a show
to the reporter, as if it were as far from his belief, as it was from truth or
likelihood; But imagine in the mean time what an assault this was to his
jealous spirit: But according to the Custom of the Nobility, who despise the
ordinary proceeding of Justice, which they will render to themselves by furious
revenges; Capoleon being hereupon resolved, though quick enough both of sight
and hearing, seemed to be both deaf and blind, nay more than that, insensible
of this affront, giving out, That he would not engage his Honor upon the
deposition of a Villain, who strove to save himself by accusing his Master; and
who like one that is a drowning, catched indifferently at all he saw, or what
ever he thought might be instrumental to his safety.

On the other side, Alcimus, as if he had sworn his own ruin (it being no
wonder that he who is once blinded stumbles at all that lies in his way, and
proceeds from bad to worse) after having outraged, beaten, and abused his
Servants, turned them all out of doors; they being called for Witnesses by the
prisoner, their despite for this injury made them easily consent to tell the
whole truth against their Master, which appearing by the conformity of their
depositions, the prisoner was enlarged, and cleared of the attempt of robbing
Capoleon's house; and as in War there are no Soldiers kindlier received, than
those whose bad pay or worse usage forces them to change parties, their anger
or apprehension of being taken and punished as Traitors, making them doubly
bold and desperate; so Capoleon, ingenious in searching into the original of
his Evils, by fair words, and ample promises, drew from these shamefully
injured Servants, a perfect declaration of all the most subtle and secret of
Alcimus his Contrivances. Thus was Alcimus the Artisan of his own misfortune,
and the ruiner of his own projects, which he manifested by the same industries
by which he thought to conceal them, like the Hare, which declares the nearness
of her end by her often doubling.

But Capoleon now by many circumstances, assured of that which he before did
but conjecture, no longer questioned the loss of his Honor, and the disloyalty
of his Wife, but studied how to repair it by a memorable Vengeance, which
should serve for an example to all posterity. To this end, making no show of
being offended, and at the same time seeming less jealous than ever of Vannoza,
and letting the Judge know (who he knew would soon advertise Alcimus) that he
did not in the least suspect his Wifes Integrity, believing his own experience
sooner than the depositions of a Rogue; nor would he ever believe that so noble
and brave a person as Alcimus should enterprise so unworthy an action as the
robbing of his house, or attempting the Chastity of his Wife, he by this means
confirmed Vannoza against all fear of punishment, who gave an exact account of
all these passages to Alcimus, who on his part did the like to her of all he
knew, lest she should let her self be betrayed to a confession by furious
threats or deceitful promises, mingled with the false Caresses of Capoleon, so
that strengthening one another in their mischievous actions, they imagined that
they had walked in Clouds hitherto, and feared not but to find means to do so
for the future. Capoleon thus Cajoling his Wife as treacherously, as she
Caressed him deceitfully, do by their reciprocal dissimulation illustrate the
truth of the Wise Man's saying, My Son, those who flatter thee, are they that
do intend to betray thee. Fraud is an impoisoned potion, which first begets a
Vertigo, and then a mortal Lethargick slumber, which securely luls us into
destruction.

Capoleon all this while was pitching his snares to entrap the prey, which
should make an ample satisfaction to his vengeance. He sets more Spies on work
than Argus had Eyes: he gives his Wife more liberty than ever, imitating the
Jailer, who in the morning puts those Prisoners into a pleasant Garden by his
Prison, who at night must upon a Scaffold serve for a Tragique spectacle; or
the Butchers, who gently stroke and claw those Beasts which they are about to
knock down and kill: Thus a dead stillness precedes an Earthquake; but while
our unskilful Mariners thought the storm was blown over their heads, the clouds
were thickening for a Tempest which they were shortly to hear singing through
their Ears, which were now shut against whatsoever seemed to obstruct their new
designs. The difficulty of the action did the more inflame Alcimus his Passion,
who now became the more amorous of Vannoza, the harder it was to enjoy her: The
commerce with bad Women having this Similitude with Mount Aetna, whose flames
grow fiercer by the Rain which extinguisheth others, and Scorpion-like, they
can shoot that sting which nothing can cure but a Medicine extracted from their
own bodies. But if this fire be so imperious in the green Tree, what is it in
the dry? I mean in the feeble spirit of Vannoza, whose flames raged so much the
fiercer, by how much she had the less strength to resist them.

These workers of iniquity begun again to weave a Net for their own
destruction, for which they found no thread fitter than their old one of Father
Simplicius; for Vannoza (having no other door of liberty open but that of the
Church, never stirring out but under the pretext of Devotion, whereby she found
means to signify her mind to her Gallant by those pretendedly holy characters)
went presently after this unhappy uproar to this good Father, to discover to
him the imaginary attempt of the Robbers, in the fashion which she judged most
proper to give a color to her justification. This well-meaning Religious
Father, who had taken the common report for truth, (a report as favorable to
Alcimus as he could desire for the covering of his Theft, which was of far
greater concernment than what had been imagined) was much surprised when he
heard from the mouth of Vannoza, That he who fixed this ladder did it with a
design to attack the impregnable Fort of her Chastity, and that the Robber was
no other than Alcimus accompanied by his Servants, one of which being taken,
had discovered all the design unto the Court of Justice, and whose depositions
had been confirmed by the testimony of his Companions; and withal, renewing her
Plaints against this Gentleman, as one whose often repulses had rendered
desperate, and who by that means was come to this extremity, which was an
injury for which no earthly punishment was great enough; adding, That for all
this, God had been so merciful unto him, that Capoleon's Heart was not thereby
filled with any suspicion or rage, and that notwithstanding his former
Jealousies, which time and her Pious Endeavors had now well near effaced, he
was now more inclined to hold the Servants Accusation for false, than to
imagine that the Master could admit of so base and unworthy a design.

Simplicius knew not what to answer hereunto, only, That her suspicions might
be true, but yet that it was possible for them to be false, since Fear has the
property to make us easily believe ill of those we mistrust; as love makes us
ever think well of those we affect: but yet it was necessary to be well
informed before we condemn, for fear of passing a rash Judgment. Promising her
withal to use his utmost endeavor to free her from this trouble, and the
oppression of her frantic pursuer; and so comforting her the best he could, he
dismissed her with a blessing.

Alcimus betaking himself to the same Asylu^, came to excuse himself to this
good Father, and to make protestations of his Innocence, taking the common
Report for his Vindication; alleging, That the voice of the People and of many
waters, was that of God: and withal inveighing against the treachery of his
Servants, who to bring one of their Comrades out of Prison, had conspired
against his Honor, to save themselves under the shelter of his authority.

Simplicius replied, That he had really been of this persuasion, and that he
had answered the same to the continual suspicions and ordinary Complaints of
Vannoza, who daily buzzed in his ears her suspicions of these passages for
realities.

Alcimus, who desired nothing more than a Personal Conference with this Lady,
protested to him, That in his presence he could bring her to confess that her
opinion was as false as the contrary was true; being now perfectly cured of the
impressions that her Beauty had struck into his Soul. By this means they were
so subtly wicked as to discover their Minds before this good Father, but in a
Language which he understood not; these being of those deceitful lips which the
Psalmist speaks of, that spoke with a heart and a heart. And thus by the
charitable interposition of this Pious Man, whose zeal they abused with as much
Impiety as Impudence, they both by word and writing renewed their former
intercourses, and what was more horribly wicked, in those holy places, adding
to the rest the abuse of those Sacraments, which if rightly used are the seal
of Salvation, but by that means the instruments of insupportable damnation,
from that Eternal God, to whom not only the Intelligences which rule the World
do bow, but even the Infernal Powers tremble. O extremity of hard-heartedness,
and more than Diabolical iniquity! Capoleon, who had always his Sentinels set,
watching the deportments of his immodest Wife, and the means to draw her into
the snares he had pitched, was advertised of all these proceedings, and being
informed that she was often in Confessions with Simplicius, where Alcimus still
came as to Confession, and where they had long discourses together; this Man
whose Jealousy was even increased to a frenzy, meditating nothing else but
vengeance, took it for granted that this Father was an accomplice of his Wife's
wickedness, his spirit being now open to the most horrible and worst
impressions. His suspicions redoubled by the Visits which Simplicius made to
his Penitent in his house, to alleviate the afflictious of spirit which
seemingly tormented her, even to despair, caused as well by Alcimus his
deportments, as by the jealousies of her suspicious Husband; all which were but
so many inventions to cloak her sublime subtlety. These well-meaning Visits of
Simplicius in Capoleon's house were not without some short remonstrances to the
Old man; not lightly to believe the rumors of the Town, the reports of
Lacqueys and such loose kind of people, whose only design was to advance
themselves by flattery, at the expense of another's reputation, and to work
their own credit by the defamation of the most virtuous persons. This added
strength to his Jealousy, and suspicion of Simplicius, whom he hereby
concluded to be one of the parties, and thereby worthy to be included in their
punishment. And thus by a mis-intelligence of what was spoken in sincerity,
this poor innocent Monk was marked out for destruction amongst the rest.

My haste to finish the recital of so many horrible iniquities, will make me
slip more slightly over many of the malicious industries which Satan suggested
to these his devoted servants, to plunge them first into their filthy
pleasures, and lastly into Eternal destruction.

The Poets amongst their many fabulous inventions, metamorphose not their gods
into so many shapes, as Alcimus took to encounter his Vannoza; for as if he had
absolutely took upon him the profession of a Comedian, there was no sort of
habit which he made not use of to see or speak to her, who had wholly
transformed him from what he was before; which was the more easy for him to
accomplish, since Capoleon had now laid the reins on their necks, whom he saw
running headlong to a Precipice. She went and came whither she pleased, and that
without the company of her Mother, and Alcimus daily saw her under pretexts and
different shapes; In Monasteries and Churches in a Religious habit; Otherwhiles
in Churches he conversed with her in the habit of a veiled Woman; If she walk
in Gardens, he becomes Gardener; sometimes accosting her as a Beggar; sometimes
as an Artisan, a seller of Wares, a Waiting Woman, a Kinswoman, and diverse
other ways, his face being still disguised and suited to his several habits; by
which means he deceived Vannoza's followers, who were so many Guards and Spies
upon her actions, to make report unto her Husband of all her passages, turns
and conferences: I^ will a little expatiate upon one of his refined subtleties,
whereby the sharpness of his invention seemed to triumph over that of Vannoza.
Walking one day to a neighboring Church, accompanied only by one of her
Maids, she was (seemingly) accidentally almost covered over with dirty Water
which was cast out of a Window, which defiled all her clothes in a shameful
manner, and suddenly a Woman, whom she knew not, appeared at the Door to
excuse the mis-hap, seeming to be inexpressibly sorry, and offering her her
House, her Chamber, and the choice of all her Clothes to make her reparation
for this heedless injury: These Excuses for an Affront seemingly
unpremeditated, appeased Vannoza's anger, and the present necessity of avoiding
the disgrace and laughter of the people, constrained her to enter into this
offered Lodging; where she was no sooner admitted, but sending home her Maid
for other Clothes, she being left alone, Alcimus presently appeared, and let
her know, That it was he who had invented this Device, which he termed a
Gallantry, (unhappy that he was, thus to glory in his Crime, and rejoice in his
Confusion) to enjoy her with the greater freedom.

See the deep subtlety that is here expressed,
And by this one act judge of all the rest.
If formerly the excellency of a Painter appeared, in a line direct, straight,
slender, and almost imperceptible; Judge whether by this unthought of Artifice,
Alcimus did not manifest himself a good proficient in the School of Vannoza's
subtlety. But finally, as if they had been weary of living longer amidst these
constraints, they consulted how to set themselves at large in the fields of
wickedness, by the assistance of trusty persons: To which end Vannoza thought
it most material to endeavor to make her Sentinels and Gaolers instrumental to
her design, so that finally after many Artifices and Caresses, having dazzled
the eyes of two of her attendants, with a Metal almost as sparkling as the Sun
that makes it, and by the rays of a Thousand promises, he exacted from them
the vows of a faithless fidelity, bound with such solemn Oaths, that their
horror presaged their breach and nullity; and consequently she declared to
them her passion for Alcimus, her secret intelligences, and the desire she had
to possess him, and be possessed by him, with a greater freedom: Capoleon who
before had these Maids his stipendaries, had by one of them the door opened,
which gave him a view of all these dark proceedings. It is hard to judge
whether it be more proper to call this servant Treacherous or Faithful; for if
she was perfidious to her disloyal Mistress, she was faithful to her Master,
who had paid and appointed her to watch his honor: To speak more properly, let
us term her a female, and cast upon her Sex the fault of incapacity of guarding
a Secret, rather than to accuse her of treachery, since (as is to be supposed)
making a profession of honesty, besides inconstancy, she further imitated the
Sea, which will not harbor a dead Carcass or Carrion, (unless kept down by a
Weight) but vomiteth it out upon her Shoars; A Secret in Woman being like new
Wine, which purges its self, and works out at the mouth of the Vessel. And
indeed what reason had she to keep faith with her, who had broken hers to her
Husband? It is the Receiver that makes the Thief; and if there were not these
Mediators, there would be fewer Adulteries. This Servant in accusing the
Treason of her Mistress, must necessarily discover that of her Companion; and
the cautelous Capoleon having doubled her Salary, and made further promises of
Golden Mountains, when he had surprised the Delinquents, and accomplished his
design, he was thereby hourly advertised of all the Words and Intercourses of
our two Lovers: and Capoleon had so wholly won this Servant to his party, (whom
we shall call Adriana) that like a Coy-Duck she served him to draw the rest
into the Net; so that by her Master's order, cutting both ways, she
accommodated her self to all the designs of her Mistress, holding in seemingly
with her and her Lover, but really with Capoleon, she on all hands reaped a
Golden Harvest: The other, (whom we will call Lisarda) whether it were that she
naturally abhorred such double dealing, or whether she feared that her report
(as seemingly it would) should be the occasion of blood and mischief; or were
it that she took compassion of her Mistress, having a horror of deceiving her
who had so freely imparted a Secret to her, which imported no less than her
life; or were it (which is most likely) that the strongest Adamant attracted
this Iron, and that the double recompenses of Alcimus and Vannoza joined to the
gale of promises which filled the Sail of her desires, out-weighed the sparing
Salaries of this penurious Old Man; Which soever of all these was the Motive,
she wholly quitted Capoleon's Party for the other of her Mistresses, and firmly
embarked her self amongst all her Enterprises: But yet she acting with more
fear and mistrust of Capoleon than her Compassion did, she saw (not without
Envy, the ordinary disease of feeble spirits) her self less entrusted and
imploved than Adriana was, who behaved and suited her self with greater
boldness and complaisance to all the impudent designs of her infamous Mistress.

Under the guidance of these two Stars, nothing seemed impossible, nay nothing
difficult to these two criminal Lovers, who raising Trophies to their
Conquests, seemed to lead Capoleon's Honor in triumph; and thought themselves
so far raised above fear, as Thunder and Tempests should for the future be
below their fact: But as Holophernes dulled with the vapors of the Wine, and
Sisera with the Milk which they had plentifully sucked in, were unsuspectedly
transmitted from the Brother to the Sister, from sleep to death, by Judith and
Jael, so our impenitent Offenders securely sleeping amidst the stupefactions of
their sins, did insensibly draw on their punishment by those means which they
thought most conducing to a pleasant and delicious life: They now proceeded
with impunity, and seemed now to glory in their crime, and color their
unlawful passion with some image of reason.

Capoleon advertised by Adriana of all their wickedness and mockeries, kept his
patience, that like Vulcan he might take them at his ease, and have his turn to
laugh at their Tragical success: Imagine but what phlegm the enraged Capoleon
must have to qualify so much choler, and how dexterously he retired to make a
greater leap, and deferred his vengeance to execute it the more severely; all
the Letters which passed through Adriana's hands were communicated to him, by
which he understood all the motions of this unhappy Cabal: Oft-times overcome
with rage and fury, he was on the point of breaking out into a bloody
execution; but whether he thought the fruit not yet ripe enough, whether he
were not sufficiently assured of his men who were to assist him in the action;
whether God (the hour of Chastisement of these execrable offenders being not
yet come) withheld the arm of this Executioner of his Justice, by moderating
the Motions of his heart to attend the repentance of the Criminals: or whether,
after the Mode of that Nation, he staid for an opportunity to envelope in one
common ruin all those whom he thought Accomplices in this fact: However it
were, he was restrained by some secret cause; till one day (the measure of the
sins of these Sacrilegious Adulterers being now arrived to the height) after
having provided himself of all things necessary, both of Men and Arms, he
pretended to take a Journey about an Important Affair which he had at a Town
three days Journey from home. Now consider by what follows, whether it were not
high time for Capoleon to come to a conclusion, seeing the extreme madness, and
last point of Villainy to which these two Criminals were now arrived; for as it
is common with Adulterers, and especially those who have Sacrilege annexed, to
draw on Homicides in the train of their other vices, Alcimus and Vannoza
earnest of an unconstrained reciprocal enjoyment, were come to a resolution of
ridding themselves of the Old Man, either by Sword to Poison, to plain their
way to a future Marriage. This Journey was laid hold on by Vannoza, as a sit
occasion to perpetrate the Murder by Bravo's (so they call the Italian
Assassins) in some Wood or narrow passage, under color of Robbery. This
Counsel broached first by Vannoza, was readily embraced by her Adonis, who for
Money failed not of Men who undertook to execute this Bloody Enterprise:
Vannoza had diverse times attempted the courage of her Maid, to slip some poison
into Capoleon's Meat or Wine, but Lisarda loath to envelope her self in so
desperate a design; Adriana however more seemingly compliant, presently gave
her Master warning to avoid this intended mischief.

But now this Assassinate being projected, broke off the other more dangerous
design of poisoning, but (as if secrecy were incompatible to that Sex) Vannoza
revealed it to Adriana, praising it for an Heroic Action, and singing Songs of
Triumph before the Victory.

Capoleon making preparation for his pretended Journey, Adriana amazedly came
running to dissuade him from it, revealing the Conspiracy that was made against
him; to whom the crafty Old Man to dissipate her Fears, answered her, That he
would countermine them, and by taking the takers, mar all their Plots:
Encouraging her to be faithful to him; and so thanking her for her advice, he
dismissed her.

He had already caused all the Keys of his house to be counterfeited, to enter
at what times he pleased, to take the Criminals in the act: Whereupon he set
forwards in good equipage, and well attended, having underhand given order
that all his Wifes actions should be diligently watched, leaving one in trust
to learn of Adriana the news of her deportments: He had so long given Vannoza
her swing, that he now seemed to be no longer jealous. His Journey was so well
colored, that there was no subject left to suspect it; He was followed three
or four miles by a Servant of Alcimus, to see what way he took: At the place
where he Dined he remained until night, and returned to the Town very late;
where being retired to a private house, he heard from Adriana that his back was
hardly turned when Alcimus came to supply his place in the habit of a Jeweller.

The Night was in the middle of its course, and darkness more then Cimmerian
had overspread the surface of the Earth, and the sweetness of rest and
heaviness of sleep had rendered the Condition of most in the City little
different in appearance from that of the dead; when Capoleon, whose many
designs and thoughts had bereaved him of repose, covered with a Coat of Male,
and Headpiece, and armed with Pistols, Poniards and Sword, accompanied by six
men, some of them (...) Servants, and others Bravo's, completely armed, and
resolved to execute Capoleon's vengeance, with so much the more boldness, by
how much it seemed more just and reasonable, and therefore they less subject to
the fear of scandal or of punishment, came to the house with the false Keys we
lately mentioned, arriving without noise to Vannoza's Bedchamber, who had
admitted Alcimus into her Husband's Bed, where they lay soundly sleeping in the
close embraces of one another. The door being bolted on the in side, he knocked
at it like a Master, and as one resolved to enter by fair means or foul, and
that speedily, being then unable to suppress the movements of his Passion, to
counterfeit his voice, or moderate his Anger. What case Vannoza was in when
thus suddenly awaked, I leave it to the Reader to imagine, hearing the eager
and angry sound of her Husband's voice, who thus surprised her betwixt the Arms
of a man, who together with her had not only robbed him of his Honor, but
conspired against his life: A thousand terrors seized her in a moment; the
fears of death, and danger of Hell environed her, so that it bereaved her of
all usage of Reason or discourse; as those whom a Wolf had got the first sight
of: The two Maids which slept in the Wardrobe being awaked with the noise,
Lisarda was almost dead with fear; but that of Adriana was only counterfeit,
because she kept intelligence with that party; though the thoughts of the
succeeding Execution could not but make her tremble: She rose, and softly asked
her Mistress What she did intend to do? Who being with fear almost as much
stupefied as she that was turned into a Pillar of Salt for looking back upon
her flaming City, answered her not a word. What say thou Alcimus in this
pressing necessity, or to whom will thou betake thy self? O how true is the
Saying of an Ancient Roman Historian! That when the hand of Destiny lays hold
on a man's Collar, he becomes even stupefied, his Senses taken from him, and as
if he were fettered with invisible Chains; he has neither Courage to attacque
his Enemy, nor to defend himself, nor feet to fly. At least ye defiled Souls,
since you are deprived of all hope of escaping a Temporal death, think of
preserving your selves from an Eternal one.

Now think of your Salvation at this point of extremity, this precious moment;
manage with a hearty desire and unfeigned repentance your reconciliation with
the Father of Mercies, who has promised graciously to receive sinners at what
hour soever they heartily repent: But O Lord! how just art thou! and how much
equity accompanies thy Judgments. And how true is that saying of one of thy
Saints, That it is reasonable he should forget himself in dying, who living
never had any remembrance of thee.

During this mute consultation, and fixed resolution, they beat still more
rudely at the Door, calling, swearing, cursing and threatening to break it down;
which so daunted the spirit of Vannoza, ever till then so sharp and subtle,
that seeing her self discovered and betrayed, and without other hope of safety
than what she could gather from the deepest desperation, knowing the
impossibility of her Husband's pardoning this outrage, she took the first
counsel that her despair suggested, and which was infused into her Soul by the
Evil spirit, who like a Crow croaking after carrion, watched for nothing but
his prey; for seeing Adriana going to open the Door, she leaped out of the Bed,
and opening a Window which looked into the Garden, she cast her self violently
down, where lighting upon a graven Effigies of stone, she broke her Skull in
diverse pieces, and her Brains were scattered all about; her Body almost
battered to pieces, made passages enough for her adulterous, sacrilegious and
desperate Soul to go to the place designed for it; but where, I am too
charitable to speak my thoughts.

Alcimus having entered the house in the habit of a Jeweller, had neither Sword
nor Stick to defend himself; all that he could do, seeing the door a opening,
was to leap out of his Bed and exchange it for a Closet, where he entered, and
shut the Door after him; he opened the Window to save himself that way, by
another leap like that of Vannoza, and to precipitate himself into death by
running from it: But this proved no door of safety to him, it being treillissed
with Bars of Iron; for his defense he found nothing but Looking-Glasses
Powders, Perfumes, and such like toys which Vannoza had used either to augment
her Beauty, or repair its defaults; these had been the sparks that had helped
to raise such a flame in this young man's Soul; but now those Odours only could
serve to help to Embalm his Body: For notwithstanding all the resistance he
could make, Capoleon and his followers soon entered into the Chamber, and seeing
Vannoza dispatched by her Fall, and knowing from Adriana that Alcimus was shut
into the Cabinet, the door was quickly forced open, and the young Cavalier
being only in his shirt, soon found himself pierced in diverse places of his
Body, and constrained to yield unto the mercy of his Enemy; who, like the cruel
Tiberius, would not speed him too suddenly, least he should thereby deprive
himself of the pleasure of Revenge, and therefore would stretch his Torments by
the prolongation of his Life; He dragged him into the Chamber, and threw him on
the Bed, which he so lately had unhappily polluted, to use him as they do those
Robbers, whom they execute upon the place where they acted their Villainies:
Fear so seized on Adriana that she run to hide herself, though she had no cause
to fear for that for which she expected a Reward: Lisarda cried out Murder,
despairing of her Life, but was laid hold on all undrest by Capoleon, who
sacrificed her to his fury before Alcimus his face, charging her with as many
stabs as injurious words, letting out her Soul and Blood together upon the
spot: Alcimus then might see before his eyes the cruelties and torments they
prepared for him to suffer, the report of which strikes a trembling and horror
into me, like one who looks on affrightful wounds. Capoleon to complete his
revenge, he sent a Messenger speedily to the Monastery where Simplicius
resided, to beseech him to come to his Wife, who was upon the point of death by
a Catarre, but desired to confess her self to him before she expired: This good
Father arose with all imaginable speed, pressed forwards by a Holy Charity,
which causes a slighting and neglect of rest to run to the succor of Souls and
service of our Neighbor, principally in such urgent occasions of sudden
death, where the least delay is inexcusable: He took to accompany him the first
Brother of the Covent that he met, and so run with all the haste imaginable to
a mischief unjustly prepared for his Innocence: He was no sooner entered the
Chamber where Capoleon was tormenting Alcimus, but this enraged old Man leaping
on him like a Fury, went to stab his Dagger into his breast, but Nature foreing
him to lift up his Arm, he thereby saved his heart, took the Stab there, which
was followed by another in his shoulder: finally, he was going to follow those
with as many as should be more than enough to let out his harmless Soul, if his
barbarity had not withheld his Arm, to bathe himself in the pleasure of his
sufferings, as he had done in those of the wretched Alcimus, who lying
stretched upon the Bed, endured far worse Convulsions than a Woman in her
Travel. The other Religious Brother who accompanied him, was detained below by
the other bloodhounds, who abused him with blows and injuries, which I dare
not, nay cannot report, no more than those which were vomited by Capoleon
against Simplicius; Traitor, Sacrilegious, Execrable, worthy of thousands of
flames, were the flowers of his Rhetoric; as for the other villainous and
filthy words, I have no design here to register them.

There needs a more Eloquent Orator, than I to express the astonishment of good
Simplicius, who coming to assist this Penitent in a holy death, found himself
betrayed to an undeserved one. He was then hardly thoroughly awaked, and was of
a firm opinion that he was still sound asleep, and all that he saw and felt
passed but for a dream; but at last his Wounds so brought him to himself, that
he was too sure that he was fully awaked. Alcimus heavily lifting up his
eyelids, all drench't and bathed in tears and blood, and seeing this new
dreadful spectacle, and hearing a broken and languishing voice, Alas (said he
with a mournful tone) my Father, to what abyss of mischiefs have my inquities
plunged you. And turning his face toward Capoleon, Signeur (pursued he) it is
only against me you ought to turn the point of your weapons, and not upon this
Innocent; it is I only that am culpable, and of whom alone you should take just
vengeance, which can never be so cruel as my wickedness deserves; but imbrew
not your hands in the blood of the just, which God will be sure to require at
your hands, and exact from you a rigorous account of. It is I alone have
sinned, and deceived and abused him; and if you please to give me but one
moments audience, I will tell you in short the truth of the whole proceeding; I
am going to dye, and neither expect or desire pardon from God, if I lie or use
any disguisement of the truth. Then taking Capoleon's silence for consent, he
laid open, as well as his throbs and pangs would suffer him, that which we have
recounted of Vannoza's Artifices and his own, to defile the bed and betray the
honor of Capoleon: adding thereunto many other particularities, (most of which
we have already recited) but with what brevity he could, his condition not
admitting of a long discourse.

He made this public and solemn Confession with so much repentance and
contrition, that his heart seemed to cleave asunder with sighs, which broke out
as fast as the blood gushed from his mouth, and his eyes boiling over with
tears as fast as the blood bubbled from his ghastly Wounds: How many pardons did
he beg of God, and of Capoleon, detesting his faults, and abhorring his
iniquities. O how many Lives could he have desired, that he might expiate his
crimes by as many deaths! animating Capoleon to take all the revenges of him he
could desire, by the longest and most exquisite torments he could invent: He
absolutely cleared Simplicius of the Crime, and made his Innocence
unquestionably apparent; which made Capoleon see the injustice of his Cruelty
to him; who thereupon ordered his Wounds to be bound up, and in the next place
sent to know certainly the condition of his Wife; which vexed him to the Soul
when he was assured that her death had mocked his Cruelty, and robbed him of a
more severe revenge. Before Simplicius was retired from this Bloody Spectacle,
Alcimus making the strongest of his weak efforts, rouled himself upon the
ground, and so prostrate begged of Capoleon, who held his Swords point bent
against his Throat, To have pity of his Soul, though not of his Body, and to
content himself with his Temporal death, and not stretch his hatred to
Eternity, but to permit him to receive Absolution from Simplicius his hands:
Which the Cruel Capoleon would have denied him, (so far did his rage transport
him) had not the injured Simplicius prevented him, by steping to him, and in
this last extremity making him give the best testimony he could of his
Contrition; and thereupon giving him his lost Viaticum.

The words which Alcimus spoke to him, seeing him depart, and leave him as a
prey to his inhumane Enemy, were sufficient to breed Pity in the insensible
Rocks, or in the Waves themselves, which all hold inexorable; but this bloody
Tiger growing still more furious at this Mournful Music, consulted with his
Affistants which environed him, in what manner they should torment him, to make
his death more sensibly painful; He commanded a fire to be lighted, to burn him
by degrees, and laying him in the heat of the flames, had not the parience to
let the Element (though merciless enough) have the sole management of his
vengeance, he therefore begun with him as the Crow does with Carrion, by first
barbarously digging out his Eyes; and in the next place with his Sword made him
an Eunuch; (for that is the modestest name I can put upon so vile an action) He
then cut off the tips of his Fingers and Toes, and after that his Nose, Lips,
and Ears, all which the poor Patient suffered with a Patience and Constancy
that surmounted all imagination, continually invoking the holy Name of Jesus,
from whom alone he expected Salvation.

His cruel Tormentor continuing his Revenge, pierced his Legs, Arms and Sides
in many places, and then applied burning Torches to the Wounds; nothing could
soften the Cruelty of this enraged Old man; his very Attendants, people void of
humanity, could no longer endure the sight of this Barbarity, but conjured him
to give him the Stab of grace, that is to say, to pierce his heart, and
dispatch and free him from his misery; otherwise that they should be
constrained to do him that miserable courtesy: At last when this wretched body
opened in so many places, and casting out blood on all sides, remained without
pulse or motion, and was ready to breathe out the last sigh of its expiring
breath, with a faint and languishing voice, making his last invocation of mercy
from his Redeemer, Capoleon then fearing that he had escaped his cruelty,
suddenly ripped up his Breast, snatched out his Heart and threw it in his face,
as they do in England with their Traitors. And thus expired the unhappy
Alcimus, drawn like an Ox to the slaughter by a wicked Woman, (to use the Wise
Man's saying) having scarce body enough to contain the Wounds which the Old Man
made there; who would lastly have thrown his mangled Body into the fire, had he
not been restrained by a desire to expose to the Peoples view these Three
Bodies which he had sacrificed to his rage.

Simplicius having seen the bruised Body of Vannoza, filled with horror and
astonishment, to avoid further danger of injuries and abuses, fled as speedily
as he could with his Companion to the Convent, to secure themselves, and to
look after the cure of his Wounds: The alarm was there in an instant taken, and
from thence ecchoed through the City: Aurora had scarce begun to peep out of
her obscure bed, but seized with horror at at the sight of so much blood which
spurted in her face as she peeped into the Chamber, she would willingly have
returned to her lodging, being almost afraid to discover to the approaching Sun
so Bloody and so Tragical a Spectacle: Finally, the day beginning to discover
the color of things, the Street was filled with people, Capoleon's Door was
besieged by the Crowd, every one flocking to know what had passed: Capoleon
bold and hardy as a right Murderer, and one that knew the Laws and Justice, by
the Custom of that City, bended toward his side, fearlesly attended the
arrival of the Officers, to whose Eyes he exposed those Massacred bodies, which
he with fire and Sword had so inhumanly mangled. If his severity were accused
by some, his cruelty was as much condemned by others, every one judging of the
action according to their diverse sentiments; but he having brought evident
proofs of the adultery and Sacrilege of Alcimus and his Wife, and the
treachery of his Maid Lisarda, who had been confederate in their crime, the
Murdered remained dead without possibility of being revenged, and Capoleon
free without fear of punishment, having only anticipated the reward of their
Crimes, and prevented the hand of Justice: But because that in the City where
this Tragic Adventure happened, the Ecclesiastic bear a great sway, the
Wounds of Simplicius, and the unworthy usage of the Religious Brother that
accompanied him, caused him to be confined to his house, till there were a
better information made of the proceedings.

This good and truly Religious Father resolved to preserve his wonted Patience,
and readiness to pardon Offenses, and therefore formed no Process against
Capoleon; but contrarily excused him all he could, alleging the strong
suspicion he had of him, till cleared by Alcimus his Confession:
Notwithstanding which, those Ministers of Justice though they absolved Capoleon
of the principal Murder, yet were resolved to prosecute him to the utmost for
this inconsiderate Wounding of Simplicius; And though Simplicius cried out,
That he required no further satisfaction for his wrongs, yet the Fiscal leaving
his particular Concern, undertook the Public one of the whole Church, which
was abused and wronged in this injury of one of its Members, who was not so
much troubled at his unjust Wounding, as that they should envy him the glory of
Martyrdom, being willing to suffer far more than he had hitherto done in the
cause of Piety and Justice.

This Alarm rouzed up Capoleon, who thereupon thought it most convenient and
healthful to go take a little Country-Air, hoping to find more security in a
sudden flight, than in a dangerous delay, and make his Accord the best at a
distance.

But in the mean time the Town was in a Commotion and an Uproar; for the
Parents of Alcimus and those of Vannoza were resolved not to put up so
irrepairable wrongs, as were the inhumane butchery of their Children, but were
determined to bathe their injuries, and wash off the disgrace of their Families
in the blood of the Cruel Capoleon; a Remedy worse than the Disease. This makes
me admire the frailty of humane Nature, which by an extreme blindness in the
execution of its disordinate passions, proceeds from bad to worse; As if the
death of Capoleon could render Alcimus and Vannoza less Sacrilegious or
Adulterous; and as if by this Homicide they could efface irreparable Infamy
with which their Family was sullied and disgraced. See here the paths and ways
of revenge, which the blind actors account a reasonable reparation for the
outrages they would punish. Vannoza's Parents with Money hire and set into the
Field many Bravo's to search out Capoleon in all places by Sea and Land, and to
cut him in pieces in what place soever they should find him, and in the mean
time they were so transported with fury, that they made his City House be
fired, and another stately one which he had in the Country.

As for those of Alcimus, seeing the Channel and Fountain stopped up by the
death of their only Son, which should have transmitted their names unto
posterity, and they deprived of an Heir to their large Revenues, they resolved
to acquire one, and at the same time to satisfy their revenge, an appetite
more dear and sweet unto them, than life it self.

They had sacrificed to a Cloister, partly by force, and partly by consent, but
however, involuntarily (since the Will presupposes a free and spontaneous
determination, without induction or constraint) a Daughter which Heaven had
bestowed on them, because they thought her not fair enough, nor of a ready Wit,
or accomplishments fit for a secular life: And thus this poor Innocent had been
dragged unto the Altar like a Victim, not without many testimonies of her
reluctance and contradiction, but such as appeared so little through the
smotherings of her imperious Parents, that it no whit hindered her from being
first habited, and then professed a Nun: They seeing themselves without a
male-Child, began to cast their eyes upon this Female one, and persuaded
themselves that they might declare her vows void, as having been violently
extorted; They hoped by her to raise up living Pillars to support their names,
and to strike a spark which might again light up the extinguish't Torch of
their posterity: In order to this design, they chose for their Son-in-Law a
young Gentleman, poor in the Goods of Fortune, but rich in those of the Mind as
well as Nobility, being of excellent endowments both of Soul and Body, from him
they promised themselves all submission, obedience, and service: But because
the desire of revenge was predominant in their breasts above that of lineage,
they would have him enter through this Gate into their alliance, a Gate of
blood, from which no good success could be expected.

This young Gentleman's name was Lucio, who seeing himself accosted with so
advantageous a Proposal, as that of espousing Polixena (for so they called
Alcimus his Cloistered Sister) a rich Heiress, which with a little expense
might be withdrawn from the Convent, it being easy to prove that she was
forced thither against her will, he presently closed with them in all their
Propositions, it being a fortune far surmounting all that he could hope for; he
neither enquired after the Beauty nor Breeding of the Damsel, nor desired
either to see or speak to her, but willingly purchased this Merchandise without
ever opening it; so far was he dazzled with the sparkling of her Riches, and
the splendor of her Family.

He consented that the first Child proceeding from this Marriage, should bear
the Name and Arms of the House of Alcimus, which he took for as great an honor
to himself, as satisfaction to them. Finally, this young Cavalier would have
bought this Michol at the price of an hundred heads of Philistines; so that
they had no sooner proposed to him the price to be the life of Capoleon, but he
took them at their word, and struck up the bargain, promising to take away the
head of this Goliath, were he stronger than a Giant, and higher than a Mountain.

You can from nothing him withold,
Who loves th'sacred hunger of Gold.
So cried the Poet, when he saw to what extravagancies men were pressed by the
Covetousness of Goods, and the desire of Riches; But God from the highest
Heavens laugheth at the folly which they call Prudence, and dissipateth the
thoughts and counsels of their malicious hearts, has in abomination such
bloody Treachery.

Judge thou, O God, their perverse heart,
Their wicked Counsels quite subvert,
Let their designs successless be;
Their Actions are so detestable,
Banish, and make them miserable
Who have so often provoked thee.
These words of David are holy Oracles, and seem to be a Prophecy fitted to
this subject.

Lucio is permitted to visit Polixena, who displeased with her profession, was
like a Bird, which sought nothing but a passage from her Cage, she was
presently inflamed with the love of Lucio, who found her passable enough for a
Wife, though like Ruth's Kinsman, he made more reckoning of the Inheritance
than the Woman.

The fire that had seized on this Virgins heart, did in a short time make an
incredible progress, being seized with impatience to be delivered from her
prison, and dis-intangled from her bonds, by a Dispensation, which they found
more difficult to obtain than they at first imagined: Affairs at Rome have lead
hanged on their feet, as well as most of the Acts of Grace have at their
Labels: Adding that in making of Dispensations, without wisely ballancing, they
are turned to dissipations; and he that breaks down the hedge shall be bitten
by the Serpent, says the Wise Man.

Whilst they are making this pursuit, Lucio resolves to execute the vengeance
he was entrusted with, and render it so memorable, that he should thereby seem
to merit the good fortune offered him. But it seldom happens that the ways and
Counsels of blood-thirsty men find success answerable to the pretensions of
those that enterprise them; to be ones own carver, is to stretch one's hand
into the Master's dish, and undertake that which God has reserved for himself,
saying To me vengeance belongs, and I will repay it; This is an absolute breach
of his Commandment, who has not only commanded us to pardon the injuries and
offenses which are done us, but even to love the doers of them; and that we do
good to those that hurt and persecute us. But to return to our discourse where
we left off.

Capoleon having retired himself unto a Sovereignty, where he was freed from
the pursuits of Justice from that where he had outraged Simplicius, for which
sole fault he was prosecuted; the solicitations and diligence of his Friends,
joined to the Prayers of good Simplicius, who became intercessour for him who
had so cruelly used him, brought the Fiscal to silence, and he was about to be
recalled to his Country, there to enjoy the desolations of his ruined houses,
and absolve himself of his Cruelty to the harmless Father, whom he then found
as innocent, as he at first thought him guilty.

Lucio had intelligence of the place of his retreat, where he had several
Kindred and Acquaintance, and thither he followed him; but seeing him well
accompanied, and always upon his guard, he thought it would be more
advantageous to his design, to make use of the Fox his skin, than of the
Lyon's; following this Maxim, It matters not, so we revenged be,
Whether by valor, or by treachery.


Upon this consideration addressing himself to Capoleon, (who knew nothing of
his projected Marriage with Polixena, and much less mistrusted his intended
Treason) he offered him his service, even to the proffering him Money (which is
the highest worldly testimony of friendship) if he needed it. Capoleon (though
nothing be harder than to beguile an Old Man with words) believed by this Touch
that the heart of this Gentleman was of true alloy, so that after a thousand
thanks, and as many protestations of his sentiment of this obligation, he
entered into a strict friendship with him, believing his advice, and accepting
his assistance. But his Acquaintance proved like that of the green Ivy and an
old Wall; for this young Plant sucking it is nourishment from the cement of the
Wall, does in a short time bring it down to the ground, and yet receives no
benefit thereby, remaining either buried in the ruins which it caused, or
creeping and dying on the ground without support.

Lucio to draw Capoleon from among his Guards, that he might more easily work
his Designs, gave him false advice how the Bravo's employed by Vannoza's
Parents did at that instant narrowly watch him, but forgot to give him the true
one of his being for that purpose sent thither by those of Alcimus: Capoleon
taking the Alarm at this new Intelligence, and finding himself not well secured
in an Inn, did (as the Proverb says) put his purse into the Thief's hand, and
his life into that of his mortal Enemy, who having offered him the use of his
Chamber, as a more safe retreat, which was in the house of one of his Kindred,
he with acknowledgments of so singular an obligation, willingly accepted of the
fatal courtesy.

In the dead of the Night, whilst his cares and troubles gave way to sleep,
which had taken entire possession of his Senses, Lucio with the assistance of
two Bravo's or Assassins he had brought along with him, bound him fast with
Cords, and having snickled one about his Throat which might hinder him from
crying, and yet not strangle him, he made him feel almost the very same pains,
and exercised upon him most of the self-same cruelties, which he had bragged to
have inflicted on the miserable Alcimus.

He that shall know the temper of the Nation which I speak of, will find these
actions whose recital so much amazeth us, so familiar amongst them, that they
seldom take any revenge without some extraordinary Cruelty in the performance.

Lucio leaving the Body pierced, hacked, and torn in a thousand places, carried
his Head and Heart to Alcimus his Parents, who exercised upon them all that
their rage and fury should suggest; The Mother, like a Savage Fury, planted her
Teeth in the Heart, and tore the Eyes out of the Head, and mangling the rest,
threw it to the Dogs to be devoured: But who can imagine the multitude of
Caresses, with which they entertained their intended Son-in-Law, as if by this
man's death he had given them life. Their Passion being satiated with revenge,
they could not content themselves with their private satisfaction, but publish
it, and (which is worse) glory in it, praising the Murderer, as having done a
most generous act, and blessing him with their greatest approbation; in which
they were seconded by Vannoza's Parents, who boasted of their having procured
the burning of Capoleon's Houses. Thus the wicked rejoice in their Iniquity,
and glory in their own confusion.

But now their Distemper increased from a burning Fever to a raging Frenzy,
for Polixena's Parents were not able to procure a Dispensation for their
Daughter, because they could not prove the violence done unto her, by any
contradiction that had been on her part, and much less to obtain an abolition
of Lucio's Crime, who was strictly prosecuted by Capoleon's Heirs, (more
discreet than the others in their revenge) but were far more astonished, when
they saw themselves attacqued as the Authors and Accomplices of so horrid an
Assassinate; it was now necessary for the Parents both of Alcimus and Vannoza,
to save themselves the best they could, and to provide for the security of
their lives by a speedy flight.

Lucio, who expected naught but Triumphs for his Victory, was constrained to
slip aside, to avoid the violence of the pursuit, which would have forced him
to change his Nuptial Bed for a Scaffold. Soon after their flight they were all
condemned for Contumacie, and all their Goods being Confiscate, their Effigies
served for a shameful Spectacle in the Public place of Execution of Offenders.

See here the Infamies and Calamities, to which they blindly precipitate
themselves, who will by Vengeance repair their Honor, and thereby wound that
of the Prince, and entrench upon the power of their Sovereign; this is to
snatch the Sword from the hand of him who bears it not in vain, but for the
public punishment of the wicked, and the defense of the good.

Lucio like the Dog in the Fable, lost the substance for the shadow, and to
acquire more, robbed himself of the little that he had; the loss of his Goods
by Confiscation, and his banishment from his native Country, were the least of
his pains; for had he been taken, he had been cut in quarters, the horror of
his Crime meriting no less a punishment, if I may not call it a greater, to
lead a poor and wretched life, which he after did in the depth of misery: For,
He daily mourned for what he would done,
Fresh miseries daily arrived;
He Would naught but shame and horror won,
And's fortunes and himself survived.
Such miseries he daily underwent,
As for worse crimes were ample punishment.


They all died poor and miserable, either of regret, necessity, or hunger,
being beaten by all the storms of Fortune, and having no retreat or harbor but
an Hospital, seeing themselves become the very sweepings and off-scourings of
the world: Some of them were worn out with age and sorrow; others with pain and
trouble; and Lucio at last, flying from the fear of punishment, and pressing
penury, to some remote Country, found by the way a delivery from his Miseries,
and a burial in the Waves, the Ship in which he went being unfortunately cast
away: Thus Heaven even robbed him of his last refuge, Banishment, according to
that of the Poet, The hated seed of evil doers
Pursued by the revenging Powers,
Shall still find Fortune contrary:
By mischiefs daily be annoyed,
By Lice and Vermin be destroyed,
And end in horrid misery.


But to give to this Bloody Relation a Catastrophe, which in its Tragical event
affords something as divertising as strange, we are to know, That the ruin of
Polixena's Family and Parents could not extinguish the wasting flames which the
hope of being married to, and possessing of Lucio, had kindled within her;
habituated Passions are not so soon put off as our Habits: This Maid had no
Ears to hear the impossibility of obtaining a Dispensation, she had so long
persuaded her self that nothing was more certain, but much less to hear of the
flight of her Parents, and of the Confiscation of their Goods, which were the
only things that rendered her acceptable: She at first thought all this but
feigned, and easy to be imposed upon a Cloistered person, but soon after fell
into a matchless Frenzy, and a disconsolate despair, beyond the advice or
comfort of any. Irremediable griefs her Soul torment,
And she is consumed with mortal discontent.
At length perceiving that she might long torment and vex her self before the
walls that environed her (like those of Jericho) would prostrate themselves at
the noise of her lamentations, there fell into her fancy so extravagant an
invention as I should be as much ashamed to relate, as the Reader will be apt
to laugh at as a Fable, were there not a thousand and a thousand witnesses of
it is verity.

Profane Writings are Vermin which creep into the most Sacred places through
the curiosity of the Inhabitants; And though they are apt to corrupt good
Manners, and alter the chastest Resolutions, yet it cannot be prevented, but
that the most retired Vestals will sometimes cast an eye upon their diverting
pages, where learning that which before they knew not; or refreshing their
Memory of that which a long discontinuance had made them bury in oblivion, they
either beget or awake in them the Idea's of a thousand Inquietudes; This puts
me in mind of the Roman Vestal, who having read in a Poet that which had
stirred in her a criminal passion, one day ravished by the force of
Imagination, she unwittingly cried out, Kill me, if Love ben't a delicious
thing,
And Marriage do not matchless pleasures bring.
Which so scandalized those that heard her, that she was by them brought before
the Censour, there to be chastized, as one that had broken the Integrity which
she ought to preserve under pain of death. And that which is remarkable, is,
That Perjury was forbidden amongst them with the same rigor as Dishonesty. The
Censour upon this Accusation adjudged her to be buried alive, the common
punishment of those who had violated the Chastity which they had vowed to
Vesta. This Vestal protesting that she was a Virgin, and that her Body was pure
from the corruptions of pleasure; The Judge who condemned her for her words,
did by the same convince her, saying to her, Either thou have experimented
unlawful pleasures, which make thee culpable; Or if thou have not, thy Perjury
makes thee deserve death, by affirming that which thou art ignorant of. This
Dilemma stopped her mouth, and the rigorous Sentence was executed upon her.
Certainly we live under a Law, so much more exact, as it is incomparably more
pure, more true, more just, than that of the ancient Romans, benighted with the
thick Fogs and clouds of Paganism: For the Spouse of holy Virgins is so
delicate, that he is not only jealous of the purity of their bodies, but even
of that of their thoughts; so that to see him and be happy, they must be pure
in heart: Whatsoever then may in the least sully this lovely whiteness, ought
to be as carefully avoided, as the Ermin shuns what may defile her curious
Furre: Let tender Virgins therefore, avoid as Rocks and Shelves these impure
Books, since under their words of honey, and flourishing expressions, are hid
the Serpents of dangerous imaginations.

The Monastery wherein Polixena was enclosed, was of great Eminency, and full
of Cloistered Virgins, but whether so lively as they ought, I know not: However
it were, this Maid was pleased with the reading of foolish and fabulous Books,
such as are Poetry and Romances. Amongst the Images of Piety and Devotion,
there often slide into the holy places licentious Pictures, which also make
unhandsome impressions in weak and tender spirits, though they be only there
under the pretext of Hangings and Imbroideries, whence it happens that
somethings the most fabulous and ridiculous, often pass for truths in their
belief, and take place of more solid Idea's: This happened to Polixena, who
reading of the imaginary artifice of Dedalus his wings, by which he escaped the
Cretan Prison, and often fixing her eyes upon a Picture represented this Fable,
and having formerly in Hangings wrought it with her Needle, with which she had
made curious Wings which balanced the father and his son Icarus in the Air,
this story wrought so upon her melancholy and distracted fancy, that she would
try to imitate the cunning of the one, without remembering the folly and
misfortune of the other.

She heaped together from all parts as many feathers as she could, and bought
abundance, besides many entire Birds, whose feathers pleased her as much as
their flesh did others; with these she pretended to make Chaplets and Garlands,
and such like pretty toys, in which those of her Sex and condition are for the
most part incomparably ingenious: They let her alone, hoping it might divert
her Melancholy. She made a large habit, of Feathers artificially wrought upon a
linen Robe fitted to her body, and then fashioned two large Wings, with which
by the moving of her Arms she thought she could bear up her self in the Air,
and if need were, fly with this brave accoutrement even into another World. Her
design was to go find her Parents in what part of the World soever they abode;
and if they consented not to marry her to Lucio, to fly to him, and summon him
to perform his promise; which was to reverse the Fable of Leda, who was coupled
with a Swan. See here the extravagant vanity of a spirit transported with Love,
and then tell me whether the blind deity which presides over this passion have
not wings: But it was not enough to put on these toys without she use them;
having therefore one Evening fitted up all her fair feathered attire, and
passed all the Night in an unspeakable extravagancy, in which she made as many
rounds about the World as Job's malicious Wanderer, and not having been able to
close her eyes, it was easy for her to rise sooner in the Morning than any of
the rest. Being therefore mounted upon the Steeple, and having fitted on her
Habit in which she thought to out-flye the Eagle, and feared nothing but being
born up too high and too near the Sun, she cast her self with extended Arms
from her lofty station: But never Hawk struck down so violently upon his Prey,
as she precipitated her self to the ground, where she was crush't almost into
as many pieces as she had feathers on her Habit.

Morning being come, she who had charge to ring the Bell, passing through the
Cloisters, was ready to sink down with fear, seeing this Bird stretched out at
length, of a greater bulk by far than she had ever seen before; fear put wings
to her feet, if not greater, yet however swifter than those which the Miserable
Polixena had fixed to her Arms. This Maid was her self the Bell that suddenly
sounded up all the Convent: The trembling Doves beheld this affrightful Eagle
through the Windows of their Cells, and could almost have crept into the
crannies of the Walls to hide themselves from so terrible a Creature, of which
they had never seen nor heard the like: Some took it for a Dragon; others for a
Griffon, and all for that which their natural pusillanimity dictated unto them:
At last having taken somewhat better courage, and fortified themselves with the
Cross and Holy Water, they approached the breathless Corpse of Polixena, so
battered and bruised, principally her head, that it was hard to know her. At
last they understood the folly, and to what design she had amassed so many
Feathers, and her Companions calling to mind her ordinary discourses about
Dedalus and Icarus, and her desires to be turned into a Bird, and many other
her extravagancies, conjectured it to be as we have said; and it was as soon
divulged through the City, the strangeness of the Event serving a long time for
discourse and entertainment. Some pitied her, others laughed at her; and as
there are as many different Minds in the World as men, every one judged of it
according to their fancy: The wiser sort blamed her Parents, who had rather
imprisoned then vowed her to God, who accepts none but voluntary sacrifices.
Her folly however somewhat excused her despair, being overcome by an enraged
passion which had in others upon like occasion produced more tragical, though
none so ridiculous events.

I shall conclude all with a short Meditation which at that time was that of
Simplicius, who as on the top of a rock, mounted high above the reach of the
fiercest waves, from thence beheld all these furious tempests of a disturbed
Sea, and considering how fearfully the hand of God darts lighting upon the
heads of the incorrigibly impious, after the serious scanning of all the
particulars we have before related, he shut up his Contemplation, as we shall
do our Discourse, with these words of the Divine Singer, Thou who the God of
Justice art
Wilt never take the wicked's part,
Sinners shall not abide with thee
Who foolish innocence use,
And mock at thee, and thine abuse
Shall in an instant scattered be.
This strictest Judgments shall pursue
False men that always speak untrue,
Being still averse from what is good;
Thus Scourges shall or'etake from far
The people that delight in War,
And pleasure take in shedding blood.


The End of the Fourth and last Book.

