Rome's Additions TO CHRISTIANITY Shown to be Inconsistent with the True Design
of so Spiritual a Religion.

IN A SERMON Preached at EDINBVRGH,

IN THE East-Church of St. Giles. Feb. 14. 1686.

To which is prefixed A LETTER, Vindicating it from the Misrepresentations of
some of the ROMISH-CHURCH.

By JAMES CANARIES, D. D. and Minister of the Gospel at Selkirk in Scotland.

EDINBVRGH, Printed in the Year 1686.

THE LETTER.
SIR,
IN compliance with your desire, (to which I can hardly refuse any thing) I
have sent you this Sermon. I know it is the noise has been made about it that
prompts your curiosity to seek after it. It had indeed the good fortune to be
favorably received by an Auditory, which (I need not tell you) is one of the
most learned and judicious perhaps in the whole World. But yet on the other
hand it has met with as ill luck, to be most unjustly misrepresented by some of
the Romish Communion, who have been pleased upon its account to tax me as
guilty of some seditious design to amuse the people with Fears and Jealousies
of Popery, and thereby dispose them for those evils that are ordinarily
consequent upon such prepossessions.

I was indeed much surprised and troubled to see such a strange gloss put upon
it and me. And had I but foreseen that it could have been liable to any such
misconstruction, I had rather chus'd even to suppress a Zeal, which otherwise
was certainly very seasonable, and altogether necessary for my own particular
circumstances, than have given the very remotest occasion for any to entertain
such bad thoughts of me; my Loyalty being as dear to me as my Religion, because
I reckon that I cannot have the one without the other.

But there cannot be any thing more visible, than that the exhortatory part of
that Discourse (at which the great Scandal was taken) was levelled merely
against a voluntary defection; I mean, such a falling away from the true
Religion, as it wrought by other enticements than those which Truth it self
uses to propose. For it is mostly expressed in the words of the Apostle, applied
in his very sense and meaning, and upon the like occasion. And sure none will
say that he had any seditious Design when he wrote his Epistles. Besides, are
not all the Arguments upon which it is founded, evidently of such a nature that
they suppose the whole affair to depend upon the Liberty of every bodies own
Will, without the least syllable that can insinuate or suggest any external
violence to be done unto our Religion, or any thing to be imposed upon us as to
it? And he would have treated his Theme very impertinently, that had such a
wicked design in his view, had he spoke at no other rate than I did. Why then
should such an exhortation be reputed apt to allarm the People, and prepare
them for Tumulis and Rebellion, when thereby they could not be rendered jealous
of any person, but their own selves; since none else was supposed to deprive
them of their Religion? And if Ministers cannot exhort their Auditory
constantly to adhere to their Religion, without becoming criminal upon that
account, then why should they be allowed to preach against Popery at all? For
the Use must needs always follow the Doctrine.

But farther, You Will see that the Sermon is as bitter against the Fanatical
Principles and Methods, as against Popery it self; and that it does commend our
Religion as much for its Loyalty, as for its Truth. So that unless People would
be so very disingenuous, as to follow their Preacher only where he seems most
to please and tickle their Humors, (and so not he, but they only would be to
blame,) there could be no fear of any disloyal apprehensions to be raised by
such a Discourse. Why then should the most uncharitable sense be made of one
part, and such too as it flatly contradicted by another? This is truly to take
things by the wrong handle.

But especially since, as you can bear Witness, I have always been as much an
Enemy to all manner of Fanaticism, as ever I was to Popery. And I bless God I
was educated in such Principles by a Father, who in the late Troubles was a
considerable Sufferer for them, that to this very hour I never knew what it was
to have the least Kindness for any thing that but looked disloyal. And it has
been much my business in my present Charge to preach up Loyalty, and to
persuade my Hearers to rest securely in the Royal Promise for their Religion.
My great Zeal in this, and particularly expressed in that Sermon I preached on
the twenty ninth of May last, and allowed to be printed in the very time of
those infamous Rebellions that then were raging, did expose me so much to the
fury and malice of that bloodthirsty and murdering Crew, as that ever since I
have been thoug^^ unsafe even in my own house. Why should I then be represented
as any-wise ill affected to the Government, or disposed to espouse the Popular
humor? And must now one Sermon against Popery make me be suspected to be so?
Should not rather the whole tenor of my life be the Expositor of that
Discourse, than any other considerations that are but extrinsick to it, and
relate only to the timing of the thing; whereas the Apostle bids us preach in
season and out of season? And especially when one of the chief grounds for
which I am dissatisfied with Popery, is, because I certainly know that it is of
disloyal Principles, and vastly prejudicial to the Rights of Princes, how much
soever the contrary be alleged by those among us, who in their present
circumstances find it their interest to juggle in the matter?

Neither can it ever be imagined that now to Preach against that Religion, does
practically contradict those Principles. For his Majesty himself (whom God
bless and long preserve) has been so far from showing that he thinks so, that
in his Gracious Letter to his Parliament among us, he assures us, that, as
nothing has a greater tendency to secure our Privileges and Properties, than
the aggrandizing his Power and Authority; so he proposes no other end for
maintaining it in its greatest luster, than to be the more enabled to defend
and protect our Religion as established by Law, and all our Rights and
Properties. So that to assert and vindicate our Religion, and to show the
falseness of that which now stands most in competition with it, seemed to me
exactly to comply with the design of the King; for which we have the greatest
reason in the world to be grateful and loyal.

But they go farther than this, and, according to what is objected by a late
Pamphleteer, say that the preaching against Popery, so as to render it odious
to the People, is ill service done to his Majesty, because manifestly tending
to alienate the hearts of his Subjects, and incense the Rabble, whose
ungratious temper cannot love the Person, whilst they hate the Religion of the
Prince.

Sure I am, I never raised any more odious consequence against Popery, than
this is against us. But we never thought that any, who pretend to be his
Majesty's Subjects, would have dared to do him so ill service, as to drive the
affair to this height. For at this rate they render it Leasing-making and
Lese-Majesty, to speak against Popery at all. Because no Protestant can speak
against it, but he must call it such a Religion as is not the safe way to
Salvation. Otherwise he behooved to embrace it, and be Papist himself. Since
there is but one Religion, that as such can lead one to Heaven, and he is
obliged to be of that. But according to that Author, the charging Popery with
any odious thing, (beyond which nothing can be more so than what is damnable)
tends to alienate the hearts of his Majesty's Subjects from him, and to beget
in them a hatred of his Person. And sure to do any thing that has such a
tendency, is as horrid a Treason and Villainy as is imaginable. Wherefore I do
appeal to all the World, if ever there was any thing of a greater tendency to
alienate the hearts of his Majesty's Subjects from him, than for the Papists
thus to scrue up the quarrel about Religion, till it become one of the Crown,
and to muzzle up our Mouths from uttering one syllable against Popery, whatever
the busy Emissaries of Rome should say in behalf of it? For if the fears of
Popery be very apt to produce the greatest mischiefs, as certainly they are,
then questionless the drawing such consequences from our owning our Religion,
and showing how false that great Rival Popery is, (which necessarily we must do
if we own our own Religion) must be very apt to produce these evils; there
being nothing more apt to engender those fears, than thus to carry the matter
to so dreadful an event.

But, blessed be God, we know abundantly that these pragmatical Gentlemen do
run without a Commission, and that his Gracious Majesty himself has no such
thoughts of us, as they have. And we hope there is no ground for any to have
them. For the reason why that Gentleman imagines, that the hearts of his
Majesty's Subjects are thus alienated from him, is, because they cannot love
the Person, whilst they hate the Religion of the Prince. Truly I would not have
thought that any Papist should have been so little considerate, as to own and
declare that Principle, That the People cannot love the Person, whilst they
hate the Religion of the Prince. For this is a plain confession, and not
Auricular either, that since Queen Mary's days there has not been a Prince
among us loved by his Popish Subjects; and that in all times coming no
Protestant Prince can ever expect any of their affection or kindness. And it is
certain, that, as the Priests and Jesuits have made it their business to render
Protestanc as yodious and abominable as it was possible for them to do, so
they will always continue to do so. What then has become of all the Popish
Loyalty that has been so much talked of? And are not Protestant Kings in a brave
and glorious condition, when they have Popish Subjects? But what if Britain
were as much Popish as now it is the contrary, and a Protestant King were
ruling over it, would he not have a pretty Tenure for his Crown? And would
these Gentlemen speak so in such a case? Indeed too much fondness, without any
ground at all, has made them very far alter their Dialect of late. Though at
least Policy and Prudence should restrain them from such Arguments. For we hope
they will not be so bold as to say but that their present circumstances may be
changed, and that Britain may have a Protestant Prince again; although it is
our Prayers (as fervently and zealously as it is any Papists) that we may enjoy
our present Great One reigning over us, till he shall have outgone all his
Predecessors, as much in Years, as in Glory. But moreover, I would ask these
Gentlemen whether or no they think that the Primitive Christians were but very
cold to their Princes, nay that they went so far as even to hate their Persons,
because they were not of their Religion? Sure I am they will not say but that
it was their Duty to do otherwise. And if it was their Duty, sure they will be
so charitable to them, as to think they did not prevaricate in it. So that
Christian Subjects not only ought to love the Person of their Prince, even out
of mere Duty, whatever be the difference of Religion between them; but we must
presume that they have actually done so, there being nothing to recommend those
Princes unto them, but only that they were such.

But when we have a King whose Personal Excellencies are as vast as his Title
is, and whose Goodness to us (and especially manifested in allowing us the free
exercise of our Religion, according to the full extent of all the Laws we have
in the behalf of it,) is as great as either: And so when the Ingenuity of our
rational Nature, and the most pressing gratitude, together with the highest
Duty, ties us as with a threefold cord, that cannot easily be broken, to love
and admire him, and to devote our Lives and Fortunes to His Service: His
Protestant Subjects (and these are all the three Nations almost) must be first
represented as worse than Canniblas and Devils, before they can be imagined to
be guilty of the contrary; And the Ministers must be looked upon as the basest
and ugliest Monsters that ever deserved that Name, before they can be supposed
to design the preaching them into the being so.

Wherefore notwithstanding all that these Gentlemen can do or say, we will
love him as our Happiness, as our Glory, as our Defense, as the very breath of
our Nostrils, and as the Anointed of the Lord, and as much as they for their
Hearts and Souls can do, though we have reason to con them our Thanks for
having extorted this competition from us.

But, Sir, their mistake in all this lies here, that it is supposed that
whatever is charged on the Religion, as it is abstractly considered, is
likewise directed to the Persons of those who profess it. And as nothing can be
more malicious than to suggest this, so neither could any thing be more unjust:
For whoever among us said, that all of the Church of Rome will inevitably incur
those consequences whereof we challenge the Religion it self? God forbid that
we should. And I am very certainly persuaded that there are many good and just,
virtuous and devout persons in that Communion; and that those circumstances
which I presume they do invincibly lie under, are not prejudicial to that
sincere intention for the Manner, and those fundamental Doctrines and Laws for
the Matter, of their Piety, which they may enjoy in that Church. But yet we
must say that all this good comes not by virtue of any thing of Popery as such.
And that thus to distinguish is very reasonable, appears from this, that the
Papists themselves do follow the same Method in dispensing their Charity
toward us. So that in this case we form a twofold judgment; one directed to
the Religion it self, which is the judgment of strict arguing; and another to
the Persons of those who are of that Religion, which is the judgment of
Charity. And the Consequences of the one do neither infer, nor clash with,
those of the other. And thus the way of speaking of Things, without involving
the Persons to whom they belong, has obtained to be common in the World. And
without a new regulation of Speech were first indtroduced, such a Construction
of speaking against Popery, as these Gentlemen fancy, can never be made, nor
such consequences follow upon it.

And here I would have you take notice that there is a great difference between
the preaching what has any proper tendency to possess the people with Fears and
Jealousies of Popery, (which without all doubt is very prejudicial to the
Government, and as such ought to be utterly abstained from;) and what only
represents Popery, as a thing false and odious in it self, without any direct
or indirect insinuation that it will be imposed upon us. For the first does
palpably reflect upon the Governors themselves, and levels all that is odious,
not at their Religion so much as at their Temper and Persons: whereas the
second abstracts wholly from the Person, and strikes merely at the Religion;
and does only intend by way of Argument and Persuasion to prevail with those
who are of that Religion, to forsake it, and with those who are not, never to
embrace it.

Wherefore it would seem that these Gentlemen do principally aim at this, viz.
To have our People led back again to as great an ignorance as was that from
which the Reformation rescued them, and as is altogether necessary for their
designs of wheedling them over to Popery. For either they understand their
Religion sufficiently already, and need not be instructed by any Preacher; and
then, though there were never a word of Popery in all Britain, but what the
Papists themselves do speak, yet (according to that Principle which these
Gentlemen make use of) they would be as much disposed to hate the Person,
because of the Religion of the Prince, as when the Pulpits did thunder never so
loudly against it; because in that case they would understand and know all the
ill things of it, that were requisite to render it odious unto them. Or else
there is need that the Preachers should both instruct and exhort their Hearers,
and as the Apostle says, tell the same things over and over again; and then to
have them silenced from preaching against Popery, as these Gentlemen would have
them, were to have the People left quite to themselves, till by degrees they
should become ignorant enough for their purpose. And so in a few years
Protestancy would wear out of its own accord.

But after all this, I am very far from thinking that Ministers should treat
the Popish Religion more harshly than mere necessity requires them to do;
especially since they see that some people are pleased to make such
misconstructions, and to draw such consequences. It is true I have endeavored
in this Sermon to show how far the consequences of Popery in some cases do
amount. But never having heard that this gave offense, I thought I had the
liberty to manage my Subject to the best advantage I could. And unless those
who are content that we should preach against Popery, would stint and limit the
scope of our Consequences, how should we know where to stop? For it is rare to
find any Man undertake the refutation of a thing, but he will even naturally be
led on to impeach it of all the evil that can render it odious, provided he
sees himself sufficiently furnished with evidence to make out his charge.

But I bless God, that as there is no Man upon earth that I entertain any
malicious thought against, so I never found my self much inclined to render
things more odious than I was convinced that really they were. And with all my
heart I could wish that the differences between the Popish Religion and ours
were brought to as narrow a compass, and to as fair an accommodation, as is
possible. Neither shall it ever be my design to widen them. But the truth on it
is, how to make up one of both, is a thing I could never understand, the
Extremes being at too great a distance to be ever brought to one Point.

But what shall we say of the Consequences which the Papists do endeavor to
draw from our Religion? That forecited Pamphlet, entitled, Popery Anatomized,
expressly charging all the Rebellions that have been since the Forty-one, upon
this blessed Principle, (as in his Drollery he is pleased to call it) that
every Man must be allowed a judgment of Discretion to read and understand the
Scripture for himself, so as not to pin his Religion on the sleeve of the
Church. I wonder what can be more odious against Popery in all my Sermon. But
how very gross, and absurd, and ridiculous, and monstrous, and abominable the
Writers for Rome have studied to represent our Religion, is as well known, as
is the Sun in the firmament.

As for the alleged virulency of my style, you will see, Sir, by the Sermon it
self, that there is not one expression in it but what has been commonly used by
the Writers of these Controversies upon which it treats. And the Author of the
Papist Misrepresented is in several places content to take with as hard
language, if such or such things be made out against him: which I think clearly
done already. So that if the Reasons be good, they justify the severity of the
Terms, for then things are only called by their proper Names. And who should be
angry that they are so?

Yet I am so far from approving any scurrilous or scolding Language in the
handling of Controversies, or in public Sermons, that I have ever been much
prejudiced against those Books and Discourses that are loaded with it. And so
long as good manners can be kept up without any injury done to the Truth,
certainly there can be no such ingenuous pleasure in venting some Satirical
wit, as to be more prevalent with any sober Man than they can be. And therefore
in all the occasions I shall have to deal with Popery, I am resolved never to
assault it so much with hard Words, as hard Arguments, being too well furnished
with the one to need run for any recourse unto the other.

But, Sir, what touched the Loyalty of the Sermon was not all. For it is also
said to be wholly stuffed with Lies and Calumnies. It is good luck I stand not
here alone, it being now the common cry that Popery is Misrepresented. And we
no sooner unveil the Mystery, but the Papists protest against Protestant
Popery. And it is called our ordinary artifice to keep up our People, to draw
the most ugly, and so most false characters of that Religion, which we can only
scold at, but not refute. It is pretty indeed to see the chase so turned. For
the piae frauds were wont to be as much the professed as peculiar Doctrine and
Practice of their own Church. We thank God ours needs no such Supporters. And
our Auditors are not so much kept in ignorance as to be easily imposed upon.
And now, Sir, you have the Sermon. And if it appear not by it, that whatever I
have charged them withal, is, if not the direct Doctrine of the Council of
Trent, yet at least the most common sentiment of their Doctors, and that all my
Deductions are truly consequential and just, then I shall willingly submit to
your censure, which will be more severe to me than any that my avowed enemies
can inflict.

Now, Sir, to complete all, it is said that I should have been civil to a
Religion I was once of. It Is true, I went abroad about nine years ago, scarcely
being then of Age, and very unsettled in my judgment, and unripe in my Reason:
and then I was abused by the Sophistry of some Jesuits, several unlucky
circumstances concurring to favor their ill designs upon me. And thus I
continued with them till toward three years, that through the mercy of God I
was brought back again to that pure and reasonable Religion from which I had so
foolishly Apostatized. And indeed I was not long at Rome when I began to
discover what a lamentable change I had made. For to any ingenuous Man there
can hardly be a more convincing demonstration, than that Ocular one which is
daily to be seen there. So that if Papists will deal prudently with their new
Proselytes, they will be very wary to send them too soon unto that place.

But in all this my case was but such, as if one in a violent Fever should
through his raving distemper cry out that he was a Papist; but so soon as he
recovered his senses and judgment again, would scarcely believe he was ever so
wonderfully transported by his disease, and was mightily astonished, that even
in those Paroxysms he could run so far beside himself. Now why should either
they have any thing to brag that one in a very resembling condition was so
greatly deluded; or should I owe any other civility to that Religion now, but
to let all the World see how much ground I had to forsake it. But sure I am, I
was never uncivil to any person of that Religion, but have ever made it my
business to acquit my self toward them of all the obligations they ever laid
upon me.

But, Sir, you will perhaps wonder that, after there was no more to be said
against the Sermon, or directly against me, because of it, they should come at
last in the general to vent themselves against my having abandoned their
Communion; alleging, that I was influenced by other Motives, than those which
are proper for Religion. I am not to fix measures to any bodies charity. But
God is the searcher of all hearts, and I have a Soul to answer unto him for
whatever I do here in the Body, when that great day of accounts shall come,
wherein the Motives upon which all Men do embrace their Religion, will be laid
open and made manifest.

But, Sir, to satisfy the World I have this to say, that I am ready upon all
occasions to give a reason for the hope that is in me to every body that shall
ask about it. So that I doubt not to show (and I promise my self that this
Sermon will partly do it) that, whatever were my Motives; yet I have done what
was just and reasonable in it self, and what I ought to have done however.

Yet nothing they can say shall ever trouble or surprise me; for I know that it
is through good report and evil report that I must enter into the Kingdom of
God. And it is my comfort, that there is a blessing annexed to us, when men
shall revile us, and persecute us, and shall say all manner of evil against us
falsely for Christ's sake.

But, in fine, Sir, to return to the chief occasion of this long Letter (which
I had never ventured upon without your express Command) so long as those
Jesuits and Priests, and other truckling Emissaries of Rome, continue to busy
themselves so extraordinarily in promoting their Faith, as they have done of
late, they will always furnish their Ministers with Apology enough for
preaching against Popery. For how can we betray our trust so grossly, as to
suffer our People to be shamm'd away from us by the crafty insinuations of a
Set of Men, who are incessant upon all occasions to advance their design,
without doing what in us lies to prevent any inconsiderable mischief that may
happen to our Church that way, as if we were no farther concerned than to be
mere Spectators of the affair? So that it is not out of the least apprehension
that Popery will ever be imposed upon us by our King, that we Preach and Exhort
against it. No certainly. For we look upon our selves as no less secure upon
that head, than it is possible for us to be; having all our Laws in favor of
our Religion confirmed to us by his Gracious Sanction, and being fully
encouraged in that Royal Promise, of which we cannot doubt before we be
heinously guilty of a very great wickedness and sin. But because some eminent
defections give us, alas! but too good ground to fear, that the endeavors of
these our restless Enemies may prove too successful with many, whose pliant
inclinations (upon what Motives themselves know best, and I will not presume to
determine) sufficiently disposes for that Religion. And that my Sermon did but
too luckily hit the juncture of that day wherein it was preached, you will
certainly acknowledge when you know that on that very day a Presbyter of our
Church abjured its Communion. Had therefore the Ministers of Christ's Gospel
ever more reason to bestir themselves in maintaining and defending the truth of
it, than in these our circumstances? That therefore we have since these few
Months appeared somewhat more zealous than ordinarily against Popery, others
than we ought to be thanked for it; these having forced us either to be
perfidious to our God, and his Son, whose Ministers we are, or else to preach
against that Religion, which we saw was like to become so common and ala-mode.

Thus, Sir, I do endeavor to vindicate my Self and Sermon; and I have written
more largely to you, not only to approve my self to one of my best friends, but
also because I know that you will represent these things in my behalf wherever
you hear these Objections made against me. But whatever those Gentlemen shall
say, I am resolved to shelter my self in the peace of a good conscience, and
the protection of the justest King on this side Heaven.

After all this, Sir, I must beg
Galat. v. 6. For in Jesus Christ neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor
Uncircumcision: but Faith which works by Love.
THat which through the assistance of God I intend to pursue from this Text is,
That the Christian Religion is of the most spiritual Frame and Constitution,
the most exactly fitted and proportioned, as to the immaterial Being of the
Object which it regards, so to the reasonable Nature of the Subject in which it
ought to reside; That it is of a more noble and elevated Design, than were any
of those course Models, which either Wickedness or the Necessity of Affairs did
ever introduce among Men: And so, that it does not consist in outward
performances and bodily gestures, in certain Schemes of Sacrifices, or a
ceremonial Worship, in solemn Pageantries and pompous Shows, in external Rites
and Usages, or carnal Ordinances and a sensible Oeconomie; but in a holy and
virtuous Life and Conversation, in Faith, Love, Devotion, Humility, Patience,
Contentment, Sobriety, Temperance, Chastity, in Righteousness, Charity,
Sincerity, Meekness, Generosity, and all those other Graces which concur to
renew the Image of God in the Soul of Man, and to dispose him for that purest
Fruition of the Original it self in Heaven, which is equally apt to encourage
him in the diligent practice, and to teach him what should be the peculiar Kind
of his Obedience upon Earth: For in Jesus Christ, etc.

And indeed this Character I have given of the Religion which is acceptable to
God through Christ Jesus, is so obviously held forth to us in these Words, that
it ought rather to be reckoned as a Paraphrase of, than any formal Deduction
from, them.

For by Circumcision must be understood the whole ceremonial Institution of the
Jewish Law; that word being ordinarily used in this sense by our Apostle in all
his Epistles: because the Circumcision was the most eminent Ceremony of that
Dispensation, and so most proper to give a Name to the whole. And by
Uncircumcision we must also mean any other kind of carnal Worship, of a like
nature unto that of the Jews, and which was either customary among the
Heathens, or should afterward be invented by any of those who should pretend
to follow the Doctrine of Jesus Christ. For by it the Apostle could not intend
any other form of Religion but what was animal, and was chiefly consummated in
corporeal Observances, and outward Formalities; since there is none of a middle
kind, which could be directed to the true God, that can imaginably fall between
the notion of such a one, and that genuine sort which is expressed by the
subsequent part of the Text, Faith which works by Love; as is palpable. And
therefore it is certain that he could not use both these two, Uncircumcision,
and Faith which works by Love, as but different Phrases for the same thing;
because then he had really contradicted himself, by saying, that the former
avails not in Jesus Christ, when immediately he did insinuate the contrary of
the latter. And so by Uncircumcision he must needs have meant that kind of
Religion which stood in contradistinction to this other; and consequently that
which I have now described as the true importance of that word. So that the
Exposition of the Text runs most naturally thus; Neither such an Administration
as was that of the Jews, nor any other whatsoever, of no finer Essence nor
Intent, can signify any thing to those who look for Salvation through the Holy
Jesus; for the main design and scope of that Religion, whereof he was the
Author, is only Faith which works by Love.

Now by this we can only understand that generous and suitable temper of mind,
whereby the Nature of Man is exalted to the greatest height of Perfection that
it is capable of on this side of its glorious Estate. For it is not possible to
conceive a more emphatick or comprehensive account of all that is requisite for
making up the most spiritual and divine Religion, than what is implied in Faith
working by Love; all that can be called Sanctity or Goodness, being fully
comprised in that Grace, thus operative and prolifick. It were easy to show
this, both from the complexion of such a lively Faith, and from the dependence
which all that is truly great or noble has upon it. But that lies out of my
present Road; and so it shall suffice to vouch it by those two other places,
where the Apostle repeats this same Text, and only alters the Expression here;
in the one calling it the keeping of the Commandments of God, and in the other
a new Creature. Christianity then, or that which avails in Jesus Christ, is a
complete Systeme of the most refined and improved Morality, such as wholly
tends to accomplish and adorn the Souls of Men. And therefore it is such an
ingenuous and spiritual Religion, so reasonable a service, as equally excludes,
and does transcend all those low and carnal Schemes, which either Childishness
or Superstition did reconcile to those fond and doting Creatures that have ever
been wheedled with them.

Thus you see that I have not raised any other Doctrine from this Text, but
what the Apostle himself did directly intend when he wrote it, and so what is
the immediate sense of the Words; and that I have not ventured so much upon
Inferences, as Interpretations, in making it afford a Subject patly enough
accommodated for that which this Discourse has still in its view. And now that
I may go on the more methodically with it, I shall,

First, Give a short account of Religion before Christ. And, Secondly, What was
the special and principal Design of that which he preached to the World.

As to the First, It is certain that in the State of Innocence our first
Parents were wholly employed in gratitude and love to their Maker, in admiring
the beautiful Frame of this World, and reflecting the Glory of such a
Workmanship upon him by whose fingers it was fashioned, in mutual love to, and
complacency in, each other; and such like pure and suitable Virtues. And all
this without any external Ceremonies or Formalities, any outward Schemes of
Religion, or Models of Devotion, save only that they, being lodged in Flesh as
well as we, could not but use those gestures and postures which were necessary
for them in any public Worship; so, to wit, as the Saints will do in Heaven
after the Resurrection. And the reason is, because God being a Spirit, and so
not capable to be the direct Object of material Motions, those which formally
respect him must needs proceed from a Spirit too. And therefore all corporeal
Actions come in but by accident into Religion, and cannot be pertinent to it,
but so far as either they tend to occasion some proportionable ones in the
Soul, (as when one in a prostrate posture is thereby moved to thoughts of
Humility,) or else for the mutual subserviency and decent administration of
public Worship among many. Now in that blessed Estate there could not but be
so very little need of any outward Observances, upon either of these respects,
that it were very unreasonable to increase them beyond what was absolutely
necessary and indispensible.

But when Sin had overturned all things, and subjected the supreme and leading
Faculties in Man, to those low and carnal Members wherein he was but a sharer
with the Beasts that perish, then Almighty God, to upbraid his fall, did enjoin
him a Religion as gross and carnal as himself was become, and appointed him to
make Atonement by the Blood of Beasts, for that beastly Nature he had
degenerated into. Not that those material Sacrifices were capable to afford any
congruous satisfaction to that infinite Being, the very Kind of whose Nature,
as well as the Perfection of it, did infinitely transcend and undervalue them.
Neither was there any thing intrinsic in those animal performances to
proportion them for such an end. And therefore it was not merely these that
were exacted, but also, and especially, the inward Sacrifice, and offering up
of the Mind. Thus though both Cain and Abel did equally acquit themselves as to
the outward part of the Oblation, yet not doing so as to the spiritual too, the
one was accepted, and the other not. So that the external observation had no
other excellency to recommend it, but what it borrowed from the ingenuous and
devout Intention of those by whom it was performed; and whatever was done by
the Body, could not pretend to any kind of Worthiness in the sight of God, as
it did proceed from it, but only as it was informed with the pious affection of
the Soul. And consequently all those outward Ministrations did concur to the
true design of Religion, but materially at best; and it was still those
Principles of inward Honesty and Religion, which were preserved after the Fall,
that gave the formal value to them, which were the Salt that seasoned all the
Sacrifices, and the Altar which sanctified the Gifts.

However that great enemy of Mankind, who was but the more enraged to a fresh
assault by that New Covenant of Grace, whereby all the success of his former
was so much defeated, did now look upon himself as furnished with a favorable
enough opportunity to attempt his old project once again, and to make an essay
how he might enveigle poor Man into a second Fall. For finding that an external
and sensible Religion was allowed him, he plies himself with all the dexterity
of his Nature to improve that while it should supplant it self, and by the
numerous crowd of its performances, either quite smother that Mark whereto such
a shower of Arrows were directed, or else tear it in pieces by the several and
various points which should fix in it. And thus by degrees he got Superstition,
and Idolatry, and Atheism, so to overwhelm the face of the earth, as to need
even a deluge to wash it from so much filthiness and abomination.

The like strategeme did succeed too well also in that new World, which by
seeing the ruins of the old, should at least have kept off those rocks that it
was dashed upon. But the Adversary was cunning, and they were frail; so that the
thing that prevented a second deluge was not the want of a second occasion for
one, but the mere promise of God, who was resolved not to strive any more with
such backsliding creatures. And therefore thought fit to form a peculiar Church
and People to himself.

But yet such was the natural complexion and genius of that same Race which he
made choice of, that at the Institution of their Law, their fondness to that
carnal and sensible Worship, to which they had been inured among the Egyptians,
was so very invincible, as in a manner even to constrain him to humor them in
the very kind of that service they were to pay to him, and so to indulge them a
Religion symbolical to that of Egypt, though applied to a better purpose; their
Ceremonies being an allowance that proceeded from no other motive than did
their liberty to divorce their Wives; namely, because of the hardness of their
hearts.

But yet even this Condescension had not its due effect. For as their Law was
at first occasioned by their froward and carnal disposition, with which the
infinite goodness of God chus'd rather for a time to comply, than perpetually
contend. So having once obtained a Religion so grateful to those fulsome
inclinations which did thus closely stick to them, they soon perverted that
gracious condescension to which they owed it, and looking upon it, as if it had
been to be the main and principal design of that Covenant whereof their Moses
was the Mediator; they foolishly imagined that their God was altogether such a
one as themselves, and so more apt to be pleased with the sparkling grandeur
and magnificence of a flaunting and gaudy devotion, than all those ghostly and
invisible motions, which reach not beyond the dark retirement of that breast
wherein they are performed. And thus did they run so far in advancing the
credit and reputation of bodily performances, as at last to become wholly
possessed with the opinion of an abundant sufficiency in them, and that upon
their account they became righteous in the sight of God, so as that by the very
opus operatum of those Sacrifices and Lustrations which he appointed, their
sins and offenses were fully expiated, and he sufficiently attoned for them.

And as for the Moral Law, they owned no farther concernment in it, than merely
to let it alone; that is, being it wholly consisted in Negatives, not to break
forth into any outward commission of those things which were forbidden by it:
looking upon it rather as an extrinsecal Circumstance, than any constituent
part of their Religion.

Yea so vastly did this prevail, that nothing happened to their Works, but what
became the very fate of their Faith too. For the hopes they had of that
happiness, which should accrue to them from the coming of the Messiah, did
chiefly respect that worldly honor, glory and greatness which they imagined
was to attend him. And when so great and learned a part of their Rabbis were
so much immersed in Matter, as to deny even the being of any thing else, we may
easily guess how little they were disposed to spiritual things, and how great
influence their ceremonial Worship had upon them.

Thus you see the original and progress of a ceremonial Religion, upon what
account it was first condescended unto, and what were the ill effects it
produced.

Let us now come to the other thing proposed, the special design of the
Christian Religion. And that, as S. John 1 Ep. 3. 8. tells us, was to destroy
the works of the Devil; namely, those that either were directly suggested by
him, or which he had been the first occasion of. For the Son of God took upon
him the form of a Servant, not only to be obedient unto the death of the Cross,
and be a propitiation for the Sins of the World; But also to be a Preacher of
Righteousness, and to reduce affairs as near as possible to that posture they
were in, when there was no need of one under his Office and Character. And
therefore when he went up to the Mount, in imitation of Moses it is like, to
publish that New Law whereby he would have the lives of Men to be governed,
there was nothing he propounded but what was of an exact Morality and goodness,
of an absolute and intrinsic rectitude and excellency, and which was
altogether congruous and suitable to our Rational Nature, and no less fitted to
defecate and refine us from sense and corruption, than to render us meet to be
partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light; the one being really the
other. So that his Religion appeared rather to be calculated for those unbodied
spirits, that are not encumbred with the propensions of flesh, than for such as
are even sunk in matter, and heavily clogged with those earthly Tabernacles
they carry about with them.

And as for the Ceremonies of the Jewish Law; Since he was the Truth and
Substance of which they were but the Type and Shadow, his very Being, without
any more ado, did fully evacuate and abolish them; as is clearly demonstrated
by S. Paul in several of his Epistles, and especially in that to the Hebrews.
Nay moreover, our Lord himself did expressly show us so much, Joh. 4. 21, 23.
and he gives the reason thereof, verse. 24. For God is a Spirit, and he must be
worshipped in spirit and in truth. Add to this, that he did institute new
Sacraments in lieu of the old ones, which, by consequence at least, was an
entire abrogation of those, and of that Law to which they did pertain. So that
the whole essence and design of that Religion did consist in true holiness and
virtue, in the improvement of the Soul, and renovation of the inward Man.

Neither did he join those new Sacraments unto it, as if he intended to
introduce one Ceremonial Religion in place of another, or to give encouragement
thereby to any to load it with all the arbitrary inventions their fondness
could put them upon. No certainly. It Is true indeed, he saw that the present
circumstances of our frail condition did necessarily require some external and
sensible means, to distinguish us from the rest of the world in an outward
profession; the better to keep us in mind of the import and obligation thereof;
and to prompt us to a severe examination of our ways, a high gratitude to our
Redeemer, and an Universal Love among our selves. But yet those which he did
appoint were of so simple a nature, and so common an use in the ordinary course
of our life, that in reason it could never be presumed they would furnish
occasion for any accessionary throng of pompous Ceremonies, at once to smother
their original simplicity and design too. Wherefore in all the New Testament
there is not the least footstep of any thing that looks like the giving
countenance unto such. And it was in consequence to the contrary that our Text
was written, when several persons that said they were Christians, would have
had That Religion profaned with them. For the Apostle knowing, not only that
it was dangerous to trust those, who had been trained up from their infancy
amidst a crowd of Ceremonies, with any thing that might lead them back to these
again, or at least divert them from that inward Righteousness whereof already
they were become so shy; But also, that even in the nature of things an outward
and splendid Religion did afford matter of tentation to draw aside the most of
Men from paying that due attention to those unseen and retired exercises, which
are only proper to a spiritual piety and devotion; the Apostle, I say,
perceiving these, did therefore by the bulk discharge them all manner of such
observances and customs, and universally remove all these or the like
Ceremonies from Christianity, as wholly inconsistent with, and prejudicial to
such a spiritual dispensation: For in Jesus Christ, etc. So that no Ceremonies
but such as mere necessity, or a discreet decency and order, does require, can
be at all allowable unto those who expect any good from that Religion, which is
to be measured by the Will of Jesus Christ, and not by the fancies of bold and
designing Men.

Now that during the first Ages of that holy Religion its first and main
design, which was so very visible and conspicuous, was carried on with a
candor and integrity suitable to it self, is more certain than that it can
well be doubted of. And I shall clearly evince it by the two following
Arguments.

First, Because it could be nothing else but the strictness of its commands,
and that exemplary purity of life which these did enjoin, that occasioned all
the persecution that was raised against it.

And secondly, because the Primitive Christians exercised their Religion in the
most simple manner that was possible.

First then, 'Twas certainly upon the account of the Excellency of that
Morality, and of that sublime Obedience which the Gospel introduced, that it
met with so bad entertainment in the world, and was persecuted with all the
rigor and cruelty that enraged Tyrants could invent. For the believing and
speculative part of the Christian Religion, in so far as it has no influence
upon the life and conversation of Men, was of no such provoking nature, as to
have embroiled the world so sadly, and raised the most disturbing commotions
that ever set its people in a flame. Since the appearing wildness and paradoxy
of its most abstruse and unexplicable Mysteries, could at worst have been but
resembling to that of those frantic opinions, which in the greatest part of
Religions were admitted with the profoundest reverence and veneration; and
which had given a precedent for the highest extravagances to gain credit and
regard, were they but once shrouded with the common pretext of pertaining to
things sacred. And so as the no less absurd and inconsistent, than unworthy and
ridiculous fancies about the Heathen Deities, were so far from incensing or
offending the Higher Powers, that on the contrary they became the Objects of
their adoration; So it is never to be presumed that any Doctrine or Tenants
whatsoever could have wrought that effect, so long as they went no farther,
than merely to be such, and did not exact any other observance but the
credulous assent of an easy understanding.

Neither could it be the external Worship and Devotion whereof it made a show,
that could give so much offense. For supposing that it had made its appearance
in the world with the greatest pomp and splendor; Yet how can it be imagined
that those who had abandoned themselves to all the sopperies and trumpery that
fond Idolary could inspire Men withal, should have ever been so zealous of
their own madness, as rather than to suffer others be possessed with a greater,
to persecute them with nothing less than fire and sword, destruction and ruin?
This, I say, could never have been, had there not been some other thing of a
nearer concern at the bottom of it. Nay so far was it from this, that That very
Rome which rose up against the Name of Jesus with all the violence and fury
that was possible, was yet as much accustomed to enslave her self to all the
Deities of other Nations, as to enslave these unto her self: Not seeming more
ambitious to have her Empire and the World of the same confines, than to have
her Pantheon well crowded with all its Idols too; as if nothing could have
satisfied her, but to have all the Gods, as well as Men, to be wholly her own.
So that when Cats and Crocodiles, and the ugliest shapes that could be
contrived were advanced in her Temples, surely, had not the God of the
Christians been more ungrateful upon some other account, than that he would
have engaged her to some new superstition; she had rather took it as a
kindness, than any injury, to have got him mounted upon some of her Altars. And
therefore it seems very obvious from all this, that it was chiefly the
preceptive and practical part of Christianity, which was so much the
stumbling block, and for which it came to be more inveterately hated, than any
Religion that had ever before been proposed to the consciences of Men.

For all Mankind being deeply immersed in the corruption of flesh and blood,
and universally addicted to indulge themselves in those lusts and pleasures,
whose fulsome nature did best suit with such degenerate creatures, it was not
to be expected but that when so heavenly and divine a Religion came down from
above the clouds, to insinuate it self into their practice and conversation, it
should encounter with all the spite and opposition that such an unwelcome,
though generous, project could be persecuted withal; when the more excellent
and losty design it carried along with it, the more directly did it contradict
those natural inclinations, in whose satisfaction all the reputed happiness of
the world was formerly placed. And upon that score the Religion of the Holy
Jesus was looked upon as some malevolent and insiduous design, to despoil the
world of all that was dear unto it; and to be as cruel an attempt, as if that
had been even literally directed to rob every body of his nearest Relations,
nay to deprive him of his right eye, and right hand, and leave him no more but
the passive trunk of a mutilous body to breathe into. This is undoubtedly the
most rational account that can be given, wherefore, of all the Religions that
ever set foot in the World, the Christian only was that which looked so
terrible and surprising, as to raise all the Power and Wit of Mankind to the
greatest enmity and violence against it.

Yea, not only is it thus evident that the signal and grand design of
Christianity was to reform and improve the lives of Men; But also on the other
hand it is palpable that in those Primitive Ages, all who made profession
thereof were as simple in the garb of their Religion, as they were in that of
their Bodies; and that was simple enough. Indeed their circumstances were such,
that they were glad to have but any corner to assemble themselves into. And
they were so ill provided of what could advance any external grandeur, that it
became one of the charges laid against them, that their Religion behooved to be
some mean and skulking thing, since of all the Religions that had ever appeared
in the world, it only had no Temples wherein solemnly to worship its God. And
till the days of Constantine, that Churches were built in a Magnificent manner,
they had scarcely Huts to preach in; and the best they ordinarily made use of,
was but some upper Room in some private house or other. What therefore could be
the other pomp of that Service which was so ill lodged, and which for the most
part was brought forth, as was he to whom it was directed, in an Inn or a
Stable?

But though they wanted those outward advantages, yet as to the genuine part of
their duty, there was never any thing more heavenly and devout, more zealous
and fervent; and they were frequent in Prayer and Exhortation, and in receiving
the Holy Eucharist, without any noise or splendor, or any thing that could
look like vanity or superstition; being so extremely intent upon the substance
of the thing, as never to suffer one thought to be diverted about the external
form of it.

Hitherto then did the Christian Religion preserve its native Temper and
Institution. But, alas! not long after that, things began to put on another
face. For when once they got an Emperor to be as much Christian, as before him
all of that Title were the contrary: And so when Liberty and Riches, those two
dangerous things, if not cautiously made use of, began to flow in upon them
apace; then they quickly became proud and wanton, ambitious and fancifull; and
began to vye grandeur and pomp with all the world, and from one extreme running
into another, to busk every thing that related to their Religion in as gaudy a
dress, as that was simple and mean it had wont to be accoutred withal: As if
they had imagined, that since their Religion was the most sublime and excellent
that ever adorned any society of Men; therefore it ought to be the most
splendid and magnificent too. So that the Fathers began to pray for the
Persecutions again, to purge the Church of all those supervenient deckings, and
to force those who did haunt it unto their old humility and charity, and unto
that ingenuous and plain manner of Devotion, which was only suitable for so
sacred a place.

But still they went on, until at last the Visage of the Church became to be
so painted and patcht over, as that one who had seen it before, should not have
now known it for his old and modest acquaintance. And thus at length affairs
came up to that height wherein they are in the Church of Rome at this day. A
Church that has been so much infected with the contagious superstition of other
Religions, as to render her own but a Mongrel composure of them all. A Church
that has perverted the most noble design into the worst purposes, that has
daubed the most beautiful Religion with the most ugly and preternatural
inventions, and that has transplanted the very Being of it from the Soul to the
Body, from a Spiritual to a Carnal Soil. But should I once launch out into this
Subject, so vast and spacious is it, that the whole day would not serve to go
over it. I shall therefore only touch at some few things in general.

And first, What shall be said of the Rites and Ceremonies of their Worship and
Sacraments, and that outward pomp wherein they are performed? They are now
become altogether Theatrical, and their grand Mass, especially if said by the
Pope himself, is certainly one of the most bombast pieces of Pageantry the
world ever saw. The thing is too well known that I should insist upon it; And
therefore I shall only refer those who are not sufficiently informed, to the
2d and 3d Chapter of the first Book of the Famous Mr. Claude his Historical
Defense of the Reformation; where, though the Subject be not more lively than
truly described, yet it comes short of what really it is; as any body who has
been at Rome especially can attest; and as may be gathered from the Description
of a Roman Service, written by a Jesuit in a Letter to a Friend of his. It runs
thus: We are sure (says he) that the Society did employ 9000 Florens in the
late Solemnity. They caused to raise a great Machine in our Church of Farnese
at Rome, in honor of the Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist: It was 120 Palms
high, and 80 in breadth; wonderfully adorned with excellent Statues, with
delicate Images, with rarely painted Histories, and Emblemes, which did ravish
the Eyes of all the Beholders; and having burning upon it upwards of four
thousand Flambeaux, the light did shine so very radiantly all about in the
Church, as that one durst hardly look up, for fear of being quite dazzled. They
did celebrate the Service with so much Pomp, and with such a transporting
Consort of the Popes Musicians, that there wanted nothing but the Presence of
the Pope himself to make up the most magnificent Show that ever was upon the
Earth. The Archbishop of Rhodes said the Mass; there were twenty two Cardinals
present, and the whole Prelates almost of the Roman Court, with all the
Ambassadors of Kings and Princes, and the greatest part of the Religious
Orders of Rome. We may conjecture from this, as ex ungue leonem, what is the
superstition of that Church.

But, Secondly, there is nothing more visible than that it has been its great
study and endeavor to take off all the burden of Religion from the Soul, and
lay it upon the Body. For if this but trudge and smart sufficiently, the other
will have but little to do. And that is evident,

First, By their Doctrine about the Sacrament of Penance; where not only they
have fitted the word for the purpose, but also have so ordered the matter, that
there is no more inward sorrow required in the mind, but what is animal, and
what every Beast has when it is dragged to the Shambles, that is Attrition, or
Sorrow proceeding merely from the fear of Danger. And if the Penance enjoined
be but exactly gone about, then all is well enough. So that at this rate one
needs never to be at the pains so to wean his Soul from the World, as by a pure
and benevolential Love, or even complacential either, to fix it upon God; which
to do is certainly both the greatest Difficulty and Design of our Religion.
Because he has no more to do, but to be afraid of Hell, and to run to a Priest
for Absolution, and then to perform such corporeal Exercises, as he shall
prescribe; and these, no doubt, will not be too severe. Who then would not be
encouraged to sin by this Doctrine, when they are taught by it how to redeem
the offense so easily? And though they require a purpose of sinning no more,
yet that being founded upon the same motive, namely, the Fears of Hell, one may
be in Heaven, or at least in Purgatory, before he begin to learn how he should
love his God as he ought.

But this may be proved, not only by their Doctrine, about this particular
Sacrament, but even about them all in general. For what can do it more, than
that the very opus operatum of the Sacraments, produces Grace in the receiver
of them? And therefore they need not seek for Holiness it self, and a fully
formed piety, before they approach them, since they expect that from them as
their proper and formal effect; but only for certain Dispositions and
Perquisites to it. And who knows not that the one is much more easily acquired
than the other?

Nay, they go farther than all this, and to the Sacraments they add the
Sacramentalia; and these come swarming in upon Religion, as the Locusts did
upon Egypt. For they hold, that by pattering over the Lord's Prayer, by casting
the sign of the Cross, by a dash of Holy Water, by having a bit of an Agnus Dei
about one, or the Relick of any Saint, nay, or even a Medall of one, by being
in such a Confraternity, or Sodality, or by wearing such a Scapulary, or Frock;
in a word, by doing any thing they have a mind to, Grace is still ready waiting
on, and the Soul is thereby sanctified, and made holy.

But moreover, their Doctrine of a general intention concurs mightily to help
up all: For if at the beginning of any duty they shall but in the general
intend to do it for such an end, then there is no more required; and if the
Body do but go about it, the Soul needs not be at the fatigue of a constant
attendance with its Intention. So that the Soul gives out the orders at first
to the Body, to march there, or there, and after that it self goes a wandering
where it pleases. Thus though the Office of their Church takes up a
considerable time, yet if a Priest address himself to it with a general
intention, and his Lips but mutter it over, he may be thinking all the time he
says it, as he lists. It is just the same case with that of those lewd kind of
people, who being bid say Grace before Meat, answer, that they did it in the
morning for all the Day.

I shall instance another Doctrine more, and that is their Tenent, that the
inherent Righteousness whereby one is justified, does not consist in any temper
or frame of the Soul; but in a certain physical Quality which they call
habitual Grace. So that it is not upon the account of any Holiness or Virtue
resident in the Soul it self, as contradistinguisht from that Quality, that one
is justified; but merely by it, as that sanctifying form by which only we are
acceptable to God. Besides the Nonsense of this, which is as great as may be,
certainly there is much prejudice in it to the true intent of Religion,
especially considering that it is produced, not by the Soul it self, but by the
opus operatum of the Sacraments. I do not deny that many of them hold, that
Faith which works by love does formally justify in the sight of God. But
first, this is but the opinion of some, and very far from being that of all of
them. Then secondly, there is none of them but he looks upon it as an
extraordinary case, and so must maintain that there is no necessity at all for
one to be justified upon these terms. So that if ever there was a carnal and
external Religion in the World, sure that of Rome is much more so; for never
was there any so exquisite and learned in the art of carrying it on so far as
this.

Now for improving what has been said to our own use, I shall only recommend
that Exhortation wherewith the Apostle addresses the Galatians in the beginning
of this Chapter, upon the like occasion, Stand fast in the Liberty wherewith
Christ has made us free, and be not entangled again in the yoke of bondage;
For in Jesus Christ, etc. Ye have heard what is the peculiar Design of our most
holy Faith, and how much that is perverted and imposed upon by that Religion
which the Church of Rome has endeavored to shuffle in in its stead. And
therefore if ye have any regard to your Souls, ye'll never abandon so holy, so
rational, so generous a Religion, and embrace so gross and carnal a
Superstition in place of it.

I presume I need not use any more Arguments from the competition of these two,
after what has been already discoursed, having all along so manifestly shown
how destructive and ruinous any such Religion, as the Roman, is to the main and
special Design of true Religion in the general, and far more of that which
avails in Jesus Christ. So that having so fully discovered the precipice, it
were to suppose an equal want of sense both in the Speaker and Hearers, to
press you with any Reasons not to leap over it, when none but such as really
are incapable of any, can ever be guilty of the Folly.

Yet I hope it will not be impertinent to offer some more general Motives to
your consideration, that those who either could not follow the thread of the
Discourse closely enough, or who, having done this, yet perhaps are not so
nearly touched with it, as they ought to be, may meet with what may happen to
be both more plain and convincing unto them, if indeed any thing can be more so.

Now our Savior does aggravate the Infidelity of the Jews with this, that if
he had not come and spoken to them, they had not had sin; but now they have no
cloak for their sin: If he had not done the works among them that no other Man
did, they had not had sin, John 15, 22. 24. So say I to you; If ye had not been
educated and trained up in the true knowledge of the Son of God; if ye were not
furnished with all the means necessary for being fully convinced of the
Excellency of our Religion, infinitely beyond all the false pretending ones
that ever inveigled the World, then perhaps ye would have no sin, that is, not
so great a degree of it, though ye should have been of the Communion of Rome.
But now if ye shall fall away, and turn your back upon that Church wherein ye
have been bred, and which comes as near to the primitive truth and simplicity
of the Christian Religion, as that of Rome does to the Jewish and Pagan, and
that is as near as may be; if, I say, now ye shall make Shipwreck of your
Faith, then you will have no Cloak for your sin. It Is sad Language in the 6th
of the Hebrews, and fourth Verse; It is impossible for those who were once
enlightened, and tasted of the heavenly Gift, and were made partakers of the
Holy Ghost, and tasted of the good word of God, and of the powers of the world
to come, if they once fall away, to be renewed again unto repentance, seeing
they have crucified the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame. An
Expression which quadrates, even in the literal sense, but too well to the
Church of Rome, her Mass equally performing both these.

And indeed if we be mistaken in our Religion, as it stands in opposition to
Popery, we may justly use S. Victor's Argument, and tax God himself with it,
saying, That it is He that has deceived and deluded us. For since we have got
all our Faculties from him, both those of our Reason, and of our Senses, it is
evident that whatever these do necessitate us unto, and do unavoidably force us
to admit, must be refounded upon him from whom that necessity was at first
derived. But sure it is impossible for any (abstractly speaking) to advert unto
the native Dictates and Principles of his Reason, or ever consult the certainty
which his senses afford him, and yet be Popish too. And of this the greatest
Champions for Rome have been so conscious, as not finding any imaginable way
how to reconcile their Religion with the Faculties of Man, to cut the
troublesome knot they could not loose, and cry down all Reason as the greatest
Heretic in the World. And had but that ever been at Rome, or in Spain, in such
a concrete manner, as that Fire or Rack could have got hold of it, we should
long ever now have heard of the sad tortures it had endured in the Inquisition.
And that I may not be thought to say this gratis, I do appeal to Gonterius,
Perronius, Arnoldus, and that Jesuit Verronius, who triumphed mightily in his
bold Method, to confound all the Protestants, which was by denying and
renouncing all the Principles of Reason with an open Mouth, and brazen Brow,
and never to deign an Answer to any Argument drawn from it against any of their
Tenants, but directly and downright to deny it. So that he maintained that
these Maxims of Reason, Impossible est idem simul esse and non esse, Quidquid
est, quamdiu est, necessario est, Non entis nulla sunt accidentia neque
attributa, and such like, ought utterly to be refused. And let no Papists say
that these were but private Authors, and they are not concerned in them. For
this Book of Verronius had all the approbation that their Church could give it,
unless a general Council had been called for that end. For the Pope himself
hugged it very kindly; the King of Spain backed it with his Authority;
Cardinals, and Archbishops, and Bishops, and the whole Clergy of France
recommended it; Nay the very Sorbon put its Seal to it also. Sure the Bishop of
Condom's Book, that makes such a noise, was never better vouched.

But we need not run to this. For I defy them to show me any of their Writers
upon Transubstantiation, who has not some whining kind of Language or other
against our Reason and Senses. And the Author of that late pretended Answer to
the Funeral of the Mass, addresses himself to his Reader thus, page 4. Here I
humbly entreat the Protestant Reader (says he) to reflect, that in the
Mysteries of Religion we must captivate our Understanding (that is to say,
suspend it from asserting what it might judge, had it nothing to rely upon,
but the sole relation of our senses) to obey Christ. God will have, as an
Homage due to him and his Veracity, this proud faculty of Man, which is earnest
to judge of all, submit to his word. Thus he; and surely very like the Wolf to
the Sheep in the tender of peace between them. For the first Article he
proposed to them, was, that they would lay aside all the Mastives by which they
were guarded from him. For well he knew, that if once they were rendered so
defenseless, they would soon become his Prey. Just so, if the Protestant
Readers of that Book, would but once lay down the certainty of their Reason and
their Senses, he would find it no difficult task indeed then to persuade them
of Transubstantiation, if then they could be persuaded of any thing at all.

I shall not stay any longer to confute this: Only I must say, that either we
have certainty in the due exercise of our Faculties, so that whatever we
clearly and distinctly perceive to be true, must necessarily be so; or else we
are but Scepticks, without the certainty of any Thing, or Religion, imaginable.
And I would ask any of the Church of Rome, how, or by what principles he comes
to be persuaded of that Infallibility they boast so much of? For either he
believes it rationally, and upon sufficient grounds, or not? If not; then
whatever He does, yet we presume he must not take Us to be the Fools to be
irrational too. But if he yields his assent, because of evident conviction,
founded upon certain Arguments, then I ask him how, or by what means he comes
to be assured of their certainty? Here he must either run on in infinitum; or
at last must acknowledge an entire confidence in his own Faculties, and that by
an inward Conscience and persuasion of Mind, arising immediately out of the
bright evidence which shines from a clear perception. Now if his Church, that
pretends to so much Infallibility, should define any thing that contradicts the
certainty of those Faculties; then I would desire of him, how he would behave
himself: For it is an undoubted Maxim in nature, That no Consequence can be
more firmly established, than is the Antecedent upon which it is built.
Wherefore no Definition of that Church can be more certain, than it is that she
is infallible. But the certainty of her Infallibility depends entirely upon the
certainty of his Faculties, as I have demonstrated: But now, by the very virtue
of that Infallibility, his Faculties are rendered uncertain, according to his
own Concession; What then shall he do? For now he must either hold this
contradiction, that his Faculties are both certain and not certain; or else he
must reject that Infallibility which supplants it self, by thus overturning and
undermining that very ground upon which it was reared.

From all which it follows, that since the Arguments for which the
Infallibility is pretended, do equally involve the certainty both of our
Reason, and of our Senses: And since the Doctrine of that Church does not only
really contradict both, but is also acknowledged to do so; therefore that
Infallibility, as considered to have actually interessed it self in those
Definitions, is the most absurd and self-murthering Chymera that ever was
dreamed of in the World. And if any Papist will answer me this Argument, then
I Will dare to say, we should indeed turn Papists, but then also we should turn
any thing else: For then we behooved to renounce all the certainty of our
Faculties, to admit the greatest contradictions and nonsense imaginable; and if
we were once at that pass, what ought we not to do? Ye see then how far the
certainty that we have of our Religion amounts; to wit, to no less than to that
we have of the Being of a God, that that God is not a cheat, and that we our
selves are reasonable Creatures; and he that would desire any more would not
know what he were desiring. Reflect therefore well upon that forecited passage
out of the Hebrews; and consider seriously with your selves what a degree of
illumination you have for your Religion, and what will be your doom, if having
such, ye fall away from it.

But though this be sufficient to found the most pressing Exhortation to adhere
with constancy unto our Religion; Yet there is another secondary reason which
I Will presume to recommend to you; and that is, That our Religion is the most
loyal Religion in the World; so that the more closely we stick to it, the more
ground we give our King to trust us, and to be assured of our honesty to him.
For by our Religion we cannot fear our God, but we must honor our king, and
obey him for Conscience Sake. We own a Religion that is both pure and gentle,
meek and peaceable; that teaches us all the suitable qualities that can make us
as good Subjects as Christians. And for those wild and unaccountable
Fanaticisms that at every turn makes Religion their pretense for Sedition,
Tumults and Rebellion, we hate and detest them, and look upon them as the
scandal of Christianity, and plague of humane Society.

But should we once become Papists, then let them talk what they will, our
Religion would oblige us to other things. It is true the French have much
shaken off that Yoke of bondage to the Pope. And our British Papists do now
begin to be ashamed of the deposing Power. But certain it is that the Pope
himself is as tenacious of the pretense as ever he was. And when he has the
Thunder of Heaven in his Hand, and all his Clergy so entirely his vowed Slaves,
there is not too much security to be had; but especially when all the Clergy
pretend to an exemption from the Jurisdiction of the Civil Magistrate, and that
by Divine Right; an opinion very proper to embolden them unto all the villainy
imaginable; and when all the Laics do so hang at the Clergyman's Belt by their
auricular Confessions; an artifice ten thousand times more apt to blow up the
People withal, than ever was the whining tones of a Tub-preacher, though the
World has even sadly enough experimented the influence of this: For suppose
that general Orders were given out by the Pope to all the Confessors to
instill the Deposing Doctrine into the Consciences of their Penitents, and to
deny absolution to those who would not be prevailed upon, or at least to manage
it so warily as to make it depend much upon that; supposing this, I say, would
not the Loyalty of a Nation be much in hazard? Assuredly it would, unless in
such a Kingdom as France, where 200000 Soldiers is the only Counterpoise
against such a mischief. And therefore a King in a Popish Country, must always
either live at his Holiness's Beck, or else, as if he had made but a new
Conquest of it, upon the confidence of an Army still on foot. And he must be a
great stranger to the intrigues of the Court of Rome, who sees not that it is
but waiting for a favorable occasion to pay back the dealing of France in its
own coin; and that so soon as that shall ever arrive, it will not fail to do
so, even to the uttermost farthing.

Wherefore as ye love your Reason, and your Souls, as ye love your God, and
eternal Happiness, as ye love your King, and your Country, hold fast the
profession of your Faith without wavering, stand fast in the Liberty wherewith
Christ has made us free, and be not entangled again in the Yoke of Bondage, of
a superstitious, and unreasonable, and disloyal Religion. For in Jesus Christ,
etc.

Now unto God the Father, etc.
FINIS.

