October 31. 1691.
LET this Form of Prayer and Thanksgiving for the 26th of November next
ensuing, be Printed and Published.

Jo. Cant.

A FORM OF PRAYER AND Thanksgiving To Almighty GOD, For the Preservation of
Their Majesty's, the Success of Their Forces in the Reducing of Ireland, and
for His Majesty's Safe Return.

To be Used on Thursday the Six and twentieth of November next, throughout the
whole Kingdom.

By Their Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb, deceased;
Printers to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's. 1691.

A Form of Prayer and Thanksgiving to be used on the 26th of November next
throughout the whole Kingdom.
The Service for that Day upon which the Thanksgiving shall be observed, must
in all other respects be used, but where it is here ordered otherwise.

The Prayers shall begin with these Sentences.

OFfer unto God thanksgiving: and pay thy vows unto the most High. Psalm. 50.14.
And call upon me in the day of trouble: so will I hear thee, and thou shall
praise me. ver. 15. Instead of the Venite, this Hymn shall be said or sung.

I will always give thanks unto the Lord: his praise shall ever be in my mouth.
Psalm. 34. ver. 1. My soul shall make her boast in the Lord: the humble shall
hear thereof, and be glad. ver. 2. O praise the Lord with me: and let us
magnify his name together. ver. 3. I sought the Lord and he heard me: and
delivered me out of all my fear. ver. 4. The Lord has done great things for us
already: whereof we rejoice. Ps 126.4. The Lord lives, and blessed be my
strong helper: and praised be the God of my salvation. Ps. 18.47 I will
magnify thee, O Lord, for thou have set me up: and not made my foes to triumph
over me. Ps. 30.1. Great prosperity gives he to his King: and shows loving
kindness unto David his anointed. Ps. 18 51. Praised be the Lord: for he has
heard the voice of my humble petitions. Ps. 28.7. The Lord is my strength: he
is the wholesome defense of his anointed. ver. 9. O love the Lord all ye his
saints: for the Lord preserves them that are faithful, and plenteously
rewards the proud doer. Ps. 31.26. Be strong, and he shall establish your
heart: all ye that put your trust in the Lord. ver. 27. Blessed be the Lord
God, even the God of Israel: who only does wondrous things. Ps 72.18. And
blessed be the Name of his Majesty for ever: and all the earth shall be filled
with his Majesty. ver. 19. Amen, Amen. Glory be to the Father, etc. As it was
in the beginning, etc. Proper Psalms. LXXXV. CXLIV. CXLV.

Proper Lessons. The first, Isa. 26. the 12 first verses. Te Deum. The second,
Luke 18. the 8 first verses. Jubilate Deo.



After the Apostles Creed, and the Lords Prayer, the suffrages shall be as
follows,

Priest O Lord, show thy mercy upon us.


Answ And grant us thy salvation.


Priest O Lord, save the King and Queen.


Answ Who put their trust in thee.


Priest Send them help from thy holy place,


Answ And evermore mightily defend them.


Priest Let their enemies have no advantage against them.


Answ Let not the wicked approach to hurt them.


Priest Indue thy Ministers with righteousness.


Answ And make thy chosen people joyful.


Priest Give peace in our time, O Lord.


Answ Because there is none other that fights for us, but only thou, O God.


Priest Be unto us, O Lord, a strong tower,


Answ From the face of our enemies.


Priest O Lord, hear our prayer,


Answ And let our cry come unto thee.


Instead of the first Collect, the following Prayer shall be used.

ALmighty and most gracious God, we bless and magnify thy great and glorious
Name, for thy late Mercies to us of these Kingdoms, in raising up thy Servant
King WILLIAM to be a Deliverer to us in the day of our Distress, and to rescue
us from Popish Tyranny and Superstition, and all those Miseries and Calamities
which were ready to break in upon us. We also acknowledge with all thankfulness
the wonderful Success which thou have been pleased to give to their Majesty's
Forces in Ireland, even to the entire Reducing of that Kingdom. More
especially, we bless thee for thy merciful preservation of the King from the
great and manifold Dangers to which his Royal Person was exposed during his
late Expedition; and that of thy great goodness thou have been pleased to
restore him to us in safety, to the great Comfort and Joy of thy People: Humbly
beseeching thee still to continue their Majesty's under the watchful Care of
thy Providence; and to protect their Sacred Persons from all secret Practices
and open Violence, that no Weapon, no Design formed against them may prosper:
And to make them at last the happy Instruments of Establishing that great
Deliverance which thy Providence by them has wrought for us in so visible a
manner, that all the World may see that Thou art our Savior and mighty
Deliverer: Which we humbly beg for thy Mercies sake in Jesus Christ, our
Blessed Savior and Redeemer. Amen. In the end of the Litany, after the Collect
[ We humbly beseech thee, O Father, etc.] shall be said this which follows.

ALmighty God, the just and wise Governor of the World, who love
righteousness and hate iniquity; We Adore that merciful and wonderful
Providence which has given so remarkable a Check to the Pride and Power of our
Enemies, by the great Success of their Majesty's Arms in Ireland; and has
brought that Kingdom wholly under their Obedience. Blessed be thy holy Name, O
Lord; for it is thou that give Victory to Kings, and subduest those that rise
up against them. Unto thee therefore, O God, do we give thanks, unto thee do we
give thanks, who have wrought this mighty Salvation for us: Give us, we beseech
thee, such a dutiful sense of thy goodness to us, that we may live as becomes a
People saved by the Lord. Banish from amongst us all Infidelity and
Profaneness; Purge us from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit; Take away all
Hatred and Dissension: And endue us with a Spirit of true Religion and Piety,
of Purity and Holiness, of Love and Goodness, of Unity and Concord: that the
Blessing of Peace, and the Gospel of Peace, may be secured to us, and to our
Posterity; for the Merits of Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior. Amen.
Immediately before the Prayer of St. Chrysostom, use the Collect of
Thanksgiving, [for peace and deliverance from our Enemies.]

ALmighty God, who art a strong Tower of Defense unto thy Servants against the
face of their Enemies; We yield thee Praise and Thanksgiving for our
Deliverance from those great and apparent Dangers wherewith we were compassed.
We acknowledge it thy goodness, that we were not delivered over as a Prey unto
them; beseeching thee still to continue such thy Mercies toward us, that all
the World may know that thou art our Savior and mighty Deliverer, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. In the Communion-Service, between the Commandments
and the Epistle, shall this Collect be used, instead of the Collect for the
King and Queen, and the Collect for the day.

O Most gracious God, who of thy infinite goodness have preserved our Sovereign
Lord King WILLIAM from the manifold Dangers to which he has exposed himself
for the Public Good; and have brought him back to us in safety: We beseech
thee to fill our hearts with unfeigned thankfulness to thee for so great a
Blessing; and be pleased still to preserve their Majesty's by thy good
Providence, to guide them by thy Counsel, and to prosper them in all their
Undertakings for thy Glory, and the good of thy Church, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen. Then shall follow the Epistle. Heb. XI. Verse 23. to ver. 34.

BY faith Moses when he was born, was hid three months of his parents, because
they saw he was a proper child; and they were not afraid of the kings
commandment. By faith Moses, when he was come to years, refused to be called
the son of Pharaohs daughter; choosing rather to suffer affliction with the
people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; esteeming the
reproach of Christ greater riches then the treasures in Egypt: for he had
respect unto the recompense of the reward. By faith he forsook Egypt, not
fearing the wrath of the king: for he endured as seeing him who is invisible.
Through faith he kept the passover, and the sprinkling of blood, lest he that
destroyed the firstborn, should touch them. By faith they passed through the
Red sea, as by dry land: which the Egyptians assaying to do, were drowned. By
faith the walls of Jericho fell down, after they were compassed about seven
days. By faith the harlot Rahab perished not with them that believed not, when
she had received the spies with peace. And what shall I more say? for the time
would fail me to tell of Gedeon, and of Barak, and of Samson, and of Iephthae,
of David also and Samuel, and of the prophets: Who through faith subdued
kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of
lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of
weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the armies
of the aliens. The Gospel. St. Matthew. V. Verse 43. to the end.

YE have heard that if has been said, Thou shall love thy neighbor, and hate
thine enemy: But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you,
do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you,
and persecute you: That ye may be the children of your Father which is in
heaven, for he makes his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sends
rain on the just and on the unjust. For if ye love them which love you, what
reward have ye? do not even the publicanes the same? And if ye salute your
brethren only, what do you more then others? do not even the publicanes so? be
ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect. After
the Prayer [ for the whole state of Christ's Church, etc] this Collect shall be
used.

O Most merciful Father, who art nigh to all those who call upon thee in truth:
We bless thy Name, that thou have hearkened to the voice of our Supplications,
and have not cast out our Prayer, nor turned away thy mercy from us; but have
kept us in Peace at home, and graciously preserved our Sovereign abroad from
Perils both by Sea and Land, and brought him back to his People in Health and
Safety, and given him the full and quiet possession of his Three Kingdoms. What
shall we render to thee, O Lord, for all these benefits? We will love the Lord
who has inclined his ear unto us, and will call upon him as long as we live.
Grant, we beseech thee, that being delivered from the hands of our Enemies, we
may serve thee without fear, in Holiness and Righteousness before thee all the
days of our lives: That thou who have hitherto been our Helper and Deliverer,
may be pleased at last to Establish Truth and Peace in the midst of us; to
the glory of thy great Name, the comfort and support of the Reformed Churches
abroad, the propagation of the Gospel, and the Enlargement of the Kingdom of
thy dear Son: Which we beseech thee to hasten, that all Nations may fall down
and worship before thee, saying, Blessing, and Glory, and Wisdom, and Honor,
and Power be unto our God for ever, and ever. Amen. A Prayer for all Mankind,
and especially for the Reformed Churches.

O Lord our God, abundant in Goodness and Truth, whose tender Mercies are over
all thy Works: We beseech thee to extend thy Mercy and Compassion to all
Mankind; more particularly to the Reformed Churches abroad; and especially to
those who are still under Persecution for Truth and Righteousness sake. Relieve
them according to their several Necessities; be a Shelter and Defense to them
from the Fury of the Oppressor. Let the Sighing of the Prisoners come before
thee, and according to the Greatness of thy Power preserve them that are
appointed to die. Visit them in Mercy that are Banished for the Testimony of
thy Truth: Gather thy Dispersed together, and Restore the Outcasts of thy
People; and in thy good Time bring them Home to Worship thee in their own Land:
And whatsoever they have Lost for thy Sake, return it to them, according to thy
gracious Promise, in the Blessings of this and a better Life. And we humbly
beseech thee to Enlighten all those who are in Darkness and Error, and to give
them Repentance to the acknowledgment of the Truth: That we may all become one
Flock under the great Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls, Jesus Christ, our
Blessed Savior and Redeemer: To wham with thee, O Father, and the Holy Spirit,
be all honor and glory for evermore. Amen. FINIS.

