A DECLARATION AND WARNING To all the MEMBERS of this KIRK FROM THE COMMISSION
OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, 1649.

EDINBURGH, May, 11. 1649.
A Declaration and Warning to all the Members of this Kirk, from the Commission
of the General Assembly.
Seeing men of Malignant and perverse spirits do not cease to oppose the Work of
the Lord and disquiet the peace of his People, but after many disappointments
renew their wicked designs and practices against Religion and the Covenant; It
becomes us who the Lord has called to so public a trust, not to cease to
renew our Warnings and Declarations concerning the evil of their way, that they
may be recovered out of the snare of Satan if it be possible, and that others
may not fall therein but avoid such tentations and do their duty straightly and
without fear.

We did not long since bear Testimony against the proceedings of Sectaries in
our Neighbour-Land, in reference to Religion and Government; And it is unto us
matter of very much astonishment and sorrow, that whilst their practices are
not lessened but heightened, there should be found in our Land some who have
taken up Arms and made Insurrection in the North, laboring to strengthen
themselves against the Power and Authority of the Parliament, that they may set
up again the Malignant party to overturn the work of God, and tread upon the
necks of his people: And albeit most of that Malignant party are plagued of God
with blindness of mind and hardness of heart, and stop their cars against
instruction; yet if there ^e any place left for exhortation, We shall desire
these men who are hatching such cockatrice eggs and weaving such spiders webs,
and all others who favor their way and wish them to prosper, or have any
thoughts or inclination to join with them or follow their steps seriously to
ponder and consider these things which follow.

1 What a horrible and high provocation it is for any to be found fighting
against God and persecuting his People and Truth. Is not this it, that has
brought down many Kings and Princes and great men, and overturned many
Kingdoms, Cities and families, and brought many great and sore plagues upon
many particular persons of all ranks and conditions. 2 How abominable and
Treacherous a thing it is for men who are under the Oath of God, and the tie
both of the National Covenant and of the solemn League and Covenant, some
whereof have been lately professing and offering repentance for their former
backslidings, to turn open enemies and adversaries thereto; Perjury is hateful
amongst the heathen and how much more hateful and monstrous should it be
amongst Christians, especially in those things that concern God and Religion. 3
Has not the Lord now for ten years past shown himself strong and mighty,
dreadful and terrible in defeating all the designs, and breaking all the
power, and bringing down all the pride of the Malignant party? Have they not
many times dug deep to hide their counsels from the Lord, and has he not
found them out and filled them with the devises of their own hearts? With what
Art and industry have they many time promoted, and with what power and strength
have they often times backed and carried on their purposes and projects? But he
that sits in Heaven has always blown upon them and brought them to nothing. No
weapon formed against his people has prospered, but after that the Lord had
hardened the instruments of our former troubles by success for a little space,
he did set a snare for them, and brought them down to horrible destruction in a
moment: The Lords dealing with the rebels in this Kingdom, and with the
Authors and Abettors of the Engagement against the Kingdom of England, whom he
has made a terror round about, we hope shall be examples of his wrath against
the Enemies of his Cause and of his People, not only to this, but also to the
following generation. 4. How great a wickedness must it be in such a period of
time, when so much danger threatens Religion and Government, from that
prevailing party in England, for men to arise in this Land to discourage the
hearts and weaken the hands of the Lords People by their Malignant and insolent
attempts. 5. How little pity have they, nay certainly their malice and cruelty
must needs be very great, who will needs after so many and long continued
troubles and calamities again involve this land in confusion and blood. It is
the earnest and longing desire, and in some measure the hope and expectation of
the Lords People in this Kingdom, after so many storms and tempests which have
tossed them for many days, that the Lord may now bring them into the harbor of
tranquillity and peace; And the man who shall obstruct or retard this, as he
shall be hated of good men, so certainly he shall bring upon himself a great
measure of wrath and indignation from the Lord, and God shall make his memory
stink unto the generations that are to come. 6. What Treachery and cruelty it
is against the Kings Majesty, and what an obstruction in establishing of his
Throne in such a nick of time, when both State and Kirk have sent Commissioners
and given in Desires to his Majesty in those things that concern the securing
of Religion, and the settling of his Majesty's Government and the Peace of these
Kingdoms, for any to raise new commotions and troubles, which cannot but foment
jealousies between the King and his Subjects, and beget and entertain
differences amongst them unto the estranging their affection one from another;
And whosoever are the Authors thereof, or accessory thereto shall justly be
looked upon, as enemies to Religion, to his Majesty's Person and Government,
upon whom the guilt of all those miseries that may come upon his Majesty or his
Royal Family does lie in a special way.
These and any other considerations do exceedingly heighten and increase the
guilt of that wicked Insurrection both before GOD and men: And therefore we do
earnestly Beseech and Exhort all who live in this Land, that as they tender
their solemn Obligation and Oath both by the National Covenant, and by the
solemn League and Covenant, and as they love the Honor of Jesus Christ and the
Gospel, and the work of Reformation, and as they respect the Kings Honor and
Happiness, and desire Religion to be secured, and peace to be settled, Nay as
they wish to eschew the heavy Wrath and Indignation of the LORD, That they do
not give any countenance nor assistance, nor connivance to these wicked men in
their wicked way, much less to join with them in Counsel or in Arms: And
because it lies upon us to be faithful in our station, therefore as We have
already given warning unto these men, that unless they do speedily desist from
their evil way and repent, that We will proceed against them with the dreadful
sentence of Excommunication; so We do now declare that this being a crime so
Atrocious that if any shall hereafter join with them, We will be necessitated
impartially to proceed against them with the highest Censures of the Kirk, that
such dross may be purged out from amongst Us, and that others may learn to
fear. We know that these men labor to shadow their attempts against Religion
and the Cause of GOD under the pretext of self-preservation and their being
debarred from public trust, and the respect, which they owe to his Majesty's
greatness, the privileges of the Parliament and liberties of the Subjects;
But We know no cause why they should have feared danger from these to whom God
has committed the power of the sword in the Land, sufficient security being
offered unto them for their Lives and Estates, they obliging themselves not to
disturb the Peace of the Kingdom: That they are debarred from trust, is that
which their own misdemeanors and treachery by betraying of their former trust
has justly procured on their part, and necessitated upon the part both of
State and Kirk, unless they would have resolved after so many sad and
dear-bought experiences of backsliding and unfaithfullnesse of these men, to be
so blind and foolish as again to tempt God to the overturning of his Cause and
exposing the Kingdoms to ruin. Neither will any who has eyes to discern look
upon them but as upon the Kings Enemies and the Enemies of his Throne; For as
they by their perverse counsels and wicked combinations and conspiracies did
harden the King his Royal Father unto the continuing of the afflictions and
troubles of these Kingdoms: So we cannot but think that if they and others of
their way should cease to raise calumnies against those who are truly Loyal to
his Majesty, and to suggest evil Counsels to the prejudice of Religion and
the Peace of his Kingdoms, and to entertain him with hopes of Armies for
carring on their wicked designs, but that his Majesty should in a very short
time be settled upon his Throne in Peace, with all the splendour and greatness
that is due unto him: And who will believe that these men are for the
Privileges of Parliament, who these many years past have pleaded and fought
for an Arbitrary and illimitted power, that ought not (if We will believe them)
though acting never so unjustly be resisted by any; Or can it bethought that
they are for the Subjects liberty, who in the few months time that GOD
permitted them to prevail and use so horrible oppression over the Lords people
in their consciences persons and estates. Most of those who have now made
Insurrection and their adherents, are no other then those who opposed the Cause
of GOD and the work of Reformation from the beginning, Neither are their
principles ways and ends any other then have been owned and promoted by the
Malignant party in these Kingdoms these many years past. Of this We desire to
give warning to all men in the Land that none may be deceived in partaking with
them in their sins, lest they be partakers of their plagues: We do Exhort all
the LORDS people to be strong in the LORD, and in the power of his might, and
as to adhere unto the Covenant and work of Reformation, so to cleave to those
whom GOD has entrusted with the Government, and public Affairs in the Land,
that their hands may be strengthed in the performance of all public duties
which they mind with so much faithfulness and care. These are they whom the
LORD was pleased to honor to be the Instruments, to begin the great Work of
Reformation in this Kingdom, who have been faithful in the midst of many
difficulties and temptations in promoving of it in both Kingdoms, whose
endeavou^s have been attended with blessings and success from Heaven. Neither
is the cause which they now owe and defend any other then that which they have
owned and defended against the Popish, Prelaticall and Malignant party these
ten years past, and are ready to maintain and defend against all enemies
whatsoever, both on the right hand and on the left; And therefore we hope that
all that love Religion and Covenant, will be obedient unto all their lawful
commands, and cordially and actively further and promote the present Levy, and
cheerfully and patiently bear the lengthening of necessary burdens, without
which We can never preserve that which the Lord has wrought amongst Us nor our
selves, and if any Injustice or oppression has fallen out, or shall hereafter
fall out in executing of public orders for Levies or maintenance, as We are
confident that those whom it concerns will take speedy and effectual course
for reparation of the same, so shall we according to our vocation endeavor to
have the same redressed and remedies provided for the time to come. We know no
cause why any man's hand should fail, or his heart faint, the LORDS Hand is not
shortened that it cannot save, nor his ears heavy that he cannot hear; He has
done great things for us, and will never fail us, nor forsake us: Our troubles
shall help to refine us, but not to destroy us, they shall not overturn the
work of Reformation, but put more beauty and luster upon it, and shall give
unto us more pregnant evidences of the power and goodness of the LORD, and set
him high upon the Throne of His Glory.

A. Ker.

EDINBVRGH, 12. May 1649.
Postscript.
Containing the Causes of a solemn Thanksgiving, to be kept upon friday the
25. day of this instant.
WIthin a short time after that we had resolved and concluded thus to Declare
and give warning concerning the Insurrection in the North, We received certain
Intelligence by an Express sent of purpose from thence, that upon Tuesday last
at Balvenie upon Spey side, by a party of an hundred and twenty horse,
commanded by Lieutenant General Leslie to attend these fields under the
conduct of Colonel Ker, Lieutenant Colonel Hacket, Lieutenant Colonel
Strachen, the Lord has defeat the most considerable part, if not all the
strength of the Rebels in the North, to the number of twelve hundred, of whom
betwixt sixty and eighty are killed, near eight hundred taken prisoners, and
amongst those, the now L. Rae with his most considerable officers, and many
considerable gentlemen and officers of the name of Mac-kenie: Which as it is a
great and most seasonable mercy that carries upon it a lively impression of the
power and goodness of the Lord, so does it engage his people to acknowledge
and bear Testimony to the same before the sons of men.

And therefore having now for a long time past, had thoughts of a public
thanksgiving for the many mercies bestowed upon, and deliverances wrought for
the Land; We conceive this day of salvation to be a sitting opportunity,
wherein the Lords people should make mention of his loving kindness and exalt
his Name by public thanksgiving and praise, for all the great things which he
has done for them, especially for these which follow.

1 That as the Lord since the beginning of the work of Reformation has always
gone before his people, and visited them with most seasonable deliverances in
the day of their difficulties and distresses; so also that of late, when all
the power of the Kingdom both in Judicatories and Armies was come into the
hands of Malignant and disaffected men, the Lord was pleased to preserve in
this Land (having been over them in a pillar of direction and protection) a
remnant in the Parliament to dissent from, and protest against the proceedings
of the greater part tending so much to the prejudice of Religion and the work
of God, and that he directed and enabled his servants of the ministry to bear
so free and faithful Testimony in their Sermons, Warnings and Declarations
against that unlawful Engagement, and put it in the hearts of many of his
people to petition against it, and to refuse to concur therein notwithstanding
of their great sufferings.

2. That whilst the Malignant and disaffected party in the Land were in the
height of their strength, and pride of their power, God was pleased to break
their horn, and to scatter them and bring them down, and to put it in the
hearts of his people to come forth for their own defense against the remnant of
their Forces, and so to dispose, that after that Malignant party at Stirling
had shed blood, yet things were concluded in a peaceable way, and both their
Arms and the Civil power gotten out of their hands, and put into the hands of
those that have been honest and faithful in the Cause from the beginning.

3. That the Lord was pleased to give unto us in such a period of time, a
Parliament consisting of so many able and faithful men, who did walk so
straightly in all things concerning Religion and his Majesty's Government, and
make so many pious and laudable Acts for the suppressing of profanitie and
iniquity, and advancing Piety, and Righteousness in the Land.

That the Lord has disappointed and defeated so many secret Plots and devises,
tending to the undermining of his Cause, especially that at the Isle of VVight
so prejudicial to the Covenant and the Union betwixt the Kingdoms.

5. That the Lord has been pleased at such a time when all the Malignants of
the Kingdom were hatching new devices, and strengthening themselves at home,
and expecting Forces from abroad, by so small a number, and in so unexpected a
way, to defeat so many of them, and give such victory and salvation to his
People, without so much as one being killed on our side.

6. That the LORD was pleased to direct and assist both State and Kirk, in
giving so seasonable; full, and harmonious Testimony against the proceedings of
the Sectaries in England.

A. Ker.

FINIS.

