A SERMON Preached at SELKIRK Upon the 29th of MAY, 1685.

Being the Anniversary of the Restoration of the Royal Family to the Throne of
these KINGDOMS, By JAMES CANARIES, Minister of the Gospel there.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno DOM. 1685.

To the Right Honorable JAMES Earl of PERTH, Lord High Chancellor of Scotland.
My Lord,
I Could not slip this opportunity to testify my Loyalty to my King, and my
Gratitude to you, being, so zealously, enflamed with Both, that I needed but
the least hint of an Occasion wherein to let them Flash out.

And for the First; as I bless God that I Derive my Extract from a Father whose
eminent Loyalty to the Royal Family, exposed him not a little to the cruelty of
the late Usurpers, and made him no small sharer in those Losses and Sufferings
which were then the common Fate of all good men; So I do, that being Educated
by him in those Principles, which were so dear to himself, I have never
understood what it was to entertain the very remotest liking to Traitors and
Rebellion, whatsoever was the pretended Account whereupon they were engaged;
but have always detested them as the greatest Plagues and Calamities of Humane
Nature, as well as Society. Wherefore being no less prompted by my Inclination,
than obliged by my Duty, to Preach the following Sermon, not only to those of
that Congregation which God and the King has entrusted to my Care, but also
before so considerable an auditory as the whole Gentlemen of Selkirk and
Peebles Shires, whose Loyalty had brought together for His Majesty's Service, I
thought it would not be amiss, should I likewise spread it over the whole
Nation, especially in this Juncture, that the Generous and Loyal Resentments
which is raised in its first Auditors, might possibly become as Universal, as
in them they were Great.

But, My Lord, What shall I say, as to the latter? How shall I exspress my
Gratitude for such a transcendent Goodness as Your Lordship ha been pleased to
vouchafe toward me, whereby I must not only one to You all that I have, but
whatever I shall have? But remembering that it was propagated even so far, as,
upon my first aiming to signify the deepest acknowledgements, I could either
frame, or harbor, to tell me, That to say nothing, was the best way to say
all, I shall not now break a Silence, which was then so obligingly enjoined,
and which never can possibly be broke without too much injuring what can no
otherwise be fully expressed, but by It.

Only I must beg the pardon to say, that as never King had a more entirely
Loyal and Devoted Chancellor to his Service, as never Church or Church men had
a more zealous and constant Friend, and as never Learning or Scholars had a
braver and more noble Patron, or a greater Scholar to be such unto them, than
all have in Your Lordship; So never Patron had or shall have a more ambitiously
grateful Dependent, than You have in

My Lord Your Lordships most obliged, most humble and most irreservedly Devoted
Servant, JAMES CANARIES

PSALM XX. Ver. V. We will rejoice in thy Salvation.
THo this Day, has lost one half of that blessed Cause, which at first composed
the reason of its Solemnity; and tho there is nothing which can so sensibly
revive in us the memory of Charles the Second (were it possible for us wholly
to forget him) but what likewise ought to plunge us in Howlings and Regrets so
vast, as not to be capable of being exceeded, but by that fatal Deprivation of
the best of Kings for which they were poured forth: Yet there is still so much
remaining for engaging us to celebrate it with the highest Ecstasies and
Transports, that to commence our acknowledgments with any thing of a contrary
strain, were equally to be impertinent to it, and injurieus to our own selves,
by disturbing those Resentments of our Felicity, which at once creats and
testifies it, with the melancholy allay of any sad or mournful Reflection. And
indeed that after the woeful and barbarous Usage of the First Charles, and after
the cruel Exile and Banishment of the Second, the Royal Race of the Stewarts,
under whose Government we had been so long Happy, should have been restored
again to its Native Right, and installed upon that Throne whence it had been so
unjustly tumbled down, cannot but be as perpetual, as transcendent an Occasion
for our loudest Acclamations and Rejoycings while there is One of It to
continue our Glory and Happiness by Ruling over us, and that, I hope, shall be,
while the Sun rules by day, and the Moon by night in the Firmament.

But when all our former Miseries are not only so entirely extinguished by that
blessed Restoration, that nothing but our own Wickedness and Folly can possibly
make us repeat them; but when also the mercy and felicity of it is so
advantagiously lengthened out unto us in the happy Accession of our present
Great Monarch to the Crown of these Nations, as to deaden in us the feeling and
sense of a loss sustained by the removal of his late Dearest Brother, of ever
blessed and glorious Memory, which otherwise had been unsupportable beyond all
the Sufferings wherewith our most resolute Constancy could have been shoked or
assaulted, and had certainly overwhelmed us with Sorrows as excessive and
unconsolable, as our foregoing Blessings in so Good a King were great and
surpassing; When, I say, we find such inestimable Advantages flowing to us from
the Restoration, what measures, what heights of Joyfulness, what soarings of
Exultation, or ravishments of Gratitude, and triumphant Exclamations can be
sufficient to express and solemnize the never to be forgotten happiness of this
Day? This is our Salvation, and thus will we Rejoice in it. We will rejoice in
thy Salvation.

But the better to enhanse and raise its excellency, and so to influence our
intensest degrees of rejoicing because of it, let us cast back a view upon that
wretched and disastruous Schene whereupon all those Miseries and Calamities
were acted, which did so heavily ly upon us in that execrable Rebellion, and
those saddest Troubles that immediately went before it. And who is there among
us who knows not that our Afflictions did so closly besiedge us on all hands,
that whether we looked on the Public, or on our own private Concerns, there was
nothing to be discovered but what seemed to vy the monstruousness and cruelty
of those who usurpt over both, against the utmost passiveness and capacity of
being injured that either of them was indu'd withal?

Was not the Church, alas! violated in its Purity and Glory by the most
sacrilegious Intruders that ever durst enter the thresholds of so holy a place?
when not only its best and most Primitive Government was abolished, and it self
subjected to the basest Anarchical Model of insolent and confounding
Presbytery, wherein a medley of imperious Clergymen and whining Laics
metamorphos'd all things belonging to its Discipline and Worship into as much a
Chaos as was the mungrel composure of their own selves: but also when we had
the most essential parts of our Devotion and Religion turned out of doors, and
it became Schism to pray to Christ in those prevailing words which himself did
prescribe, and Antichristianism to sing Praises to the Trinity in that short
Stanza of Hallelujahs which the first Ages of Christianity brought in use, and
Heresy to profess the Faith of our Redeemer in that sacred Form of Belief
which his own Apostles did bequeath to the Christian World.

And was not the State likewise brought under no less dismal a Catastrophe?
when the Anointed of the Lord, and the breath of our nostrils, was loaded with
all the Affronts and Indignities that Wickedness it self could either deserve
or inflict; when his sacred Person was baffled under the Banners of his
pretended Authority, and it was not enough to have raised an intestine and
Civil War within the very bowels of his Kingdoms, unless to justify that, and
to secure the greatest Crime with another as great, there was one engendered
betwixt those two also; when he was dragged and hurried from Prison to Prison,
and at last brought upon a Scaffold to transcribe the fate of the King of
Kings, and be a second Instance how patient Heaven could be at the calamities
of oppressed Innocence, and how malicious Hell in the persecuting of it. What
eyes can refrain from gushing out in Tears at the sad remembrance of so horrid
a Tragedy, which I am sure cannot be more deplored by us, than it is now
tormenting to those miserable Wretches who were the desperate Actors of it? And
who can but abhor and detest those mischievous Methods and Principles which by
a natural and immediate consequence carried along that Ax, that damnable Ax, by
which it was executed?

But this was not all. For after those inhumane and butchering Usurpers had
assassinated the Father, and thrust out the Children, that they might possess
the Inheritance themselves, was not the Royal Line it self rendered the most
criminal and treasonable thing that their Laws were levelled against? And was
not a price set upon those Heads which were destined for Crowns; and every
covetous or daring Villain prompted to spill that precious Blood, whose
sacredness would have heightened Murder with the dreadfullest Accession of
Sacrilege and Parricide too? And were not the Royal Brothers, both whom
Providence has thought fit to reward with the Imperial Crowns of these
Kingdoms, no doubt for their Christian and Generous Deportment during the time
of their Afflictions, were they not, I say, forced out of their own Dominions,
as well as out of their Rights, and made to wander abroad, tho to the glory,
yet to the eternal shame and disgrace of our Great Britain; The first, that
thereby all the World saw it honored with two such Brothers as each deserved
rather to sway the Scepter of the whole Universe, than that of so small a
Corner of it; and the latter, that it beheld that two such Nations, who know
how to prize and value every thing else, were yet so pitifully blinded, as not
to bestow their Regard where the greatest Merit was to attract it?

Now what can be imagined after all this to aggravate the Misery of a People,
or gradually to improve their Disasters into a more wretched height? yet there
is one circumstance more. For all this was done by a sort of Creatures whose
abject and mushrome extract was equal to nothing beside, but the virulence and
insolence of their Temper. Things that were the very Sediment and Ferulency of
Mankind, and the very Gall and Bitterness of it too. That wrapped the Shape of
Man, and Show of Religion forsooth about the most horrid Villainies and Crimes,
and thus reverst the Jewish method of covering their Tabernacle with the Skins
of Beasts and Goats, by shrouding the most Brutish Natures and Vices with a
Humane Form, and a Pretext of Conscience too. Who made Shams of God Almighty,
and turned Religion to be the great Stickler for Interest, and truckling
Wheedle of all but such as wrought behind its Curtain.

And having thus served themselves of whatever was Sacred, they played the like
Tricks with what was Civil too. For all those Laws that suited not their wicked
Designs, these they cancelled and abrogated: and when they wanted any to give
them something of a color and shadow for perpetrating their Mischief, then
they made them. And to make things Crimes by a subsequent Law which were
committed in Innocence, and then annull that Law when it had done their turn,
was as peculiar to their Government, as their Humors were to themselves.

Was there ever any People more grievously, even surrounded with Misery and
Reproach? Or could any Nation have been subdued by its greatest Enemies into a
more lamentable Condition, or rendered more the contempt, and hissing, and
mockery of the whole Earth, yea the Aceldama, the field of Blood and Desolation
of it also?

But what shall we think when to all this yet there was added one degree
further of what brought up our ruin to so stupendous an ascent? For however
w^e^ch^d and infamous it had been to have always drudg'd under those abominable
Rebels, who at first took hold of the Supreme Power, and thus been enslaved to
a damned Pack of the most Tyrannous and Perfidious Rascals that ever lifted up
humane face to eye the Sun in his; Yet even that state, tho the worst that
could readily have either befallen us, or been dreamed of, had been infinitely
preferable unto what did follow it ere all was done, and iniquity brought to an
end. And none will doubt of this who can but reflect what sad vicissitudes and
alterations that new form of Government, which nothing less than Atheism
Blinded with Wickedness could have introduced, was necessarily obnoxious to,
and actually did undergo. For after that cursed Oliver, whom Providence only
permitted to triumph so long, that he might sufficiently fill up the Cup of his
Abominations, and at last tumble into Hell overburdened with the weight of his
Villainies; after that detestable Traitor, I say, was gone, what Confusions and
Devastations did not immediately arise, as if our British Soil had been sown
with so many Cadmus Teeth, when the ugly Carcass of that Incarnate Wretch dropped
into it. And had not the Bowels of Divine Compassion at last begun to yern upon
us, and to deliver us from that deluge of fury which was a breaking out, our
case had been as far beyond that of the Midianitish Host, when every man's Sword
was at his Neighbors Breast, or Hobbs's imaginary State of Nature, wherein an
universal fear engages to a resembling War, as these are, the little
Marshallings of some Ants upon the easy rising of a Molehill.

Neither could it possibly have been otherwise. For, beside that sad experience
had taught all men in the preceding Reign of the Usurper; what it was to trust
any that could be no other but such an one too, with so edged a Tool, as the
Supreme Power is, and so had made them become warry how they resigned their
share of it; how could any, not wholly sunk in the vilest degeneracy and
abjectnesse, brook to have his neck trampled upon by such an one, as himself
did equal, if not better, at least to whom he could have no other obligation to
be subject, but that he could not command so much force, nor oppress so
irresistably, as the other could. And when the Supreme Management of Affairs
was not yet sufficiently enough settled in any ones hands, that the greatest
miseries and embroilments should have then ensued, would have been so far from
looking like any thing of wonder, that the contrary had been certainly the
vastest one next to the impossibility of any at all.

Thus it was that the Public groaned under the violence and iniquity of that
fatal Rebellion. And we cannot guess shrewdly, because we cannot but be
assured, that then all private men's Fortunes and Lives were at the beck of its
mercy likewise: the one being the necessary result of the other; so that I need
not insist any more upon it.

It was then from such a comfortless estate that the Restoration of the Royal
Family to their ancient Rights and Prerogatives did rescue us. And tho there
had been nothing else in that King, who was restored again to the Throne of his
Ancestors, to recommend him, but that he was Vested with the true Title to be
so; Yet we had had all manner of reason to resent such a blessing with the
highest degrees of Gratitude and exuitancy. And the removing of that one curse,
of having servants ruling over us, had been motive enough for influencing us
still to remember with proportionable reflections the Honor at least, which
with him was restored unto us upon this happy day.

But when it was so Good and Gracious a King, as our late Sovereign was, that
put an end to all those lamentable troubles and confusions; When it was a King
who was as tender of his Subjects interests as of his Own, and made no other
advantage of his Power and Dignity so much as to advance the good and welfare
of his People and to perpetuat to them all those Blessings that ever any
Nations were capable of; and so, when with him both Peace and Plenty, both our
Religion and our Liberties nay and an Indemnity to all our Crimes too, did
return unto us, and he had no sooner mounted that Throne whereto his Right was
as great, as were his Inclinations toward us, but he heaped equal Loads of
Felicity upon us, unto those of Misery which the Usurpati^n had done before;
What can be thought any ways capable to resemble such an Accumulation of
Happiness for expressing the sense we ought to have of it?

And now it having pleased the Divine Majesty to take unto himself that
Glorious Monarch, and to bestow upon him an Heavenly Crown, for having so well
employed the Prerogatives of one that was Earthly; nothing could have more
engaged either our Wonder, or our Gratitude, than so to propogate the advantage
of the Restoration, as to exalt One upon his Throne, who might only not equal,
because he did rather excel Him in all those Royal Induements for which He was
so much the Object both of his Peoples Love and Admiration; and so to give us
an evidence that beyond the Superlative Qualifications of the One, there was
some kind of Transcendency to be allowed the Other, at least upon the account
of that Competition, which in any but himself alone had been altogether
impossible: And without the least imputation of flattery, I may undoubtedly
say, that both these, our Astonishment and Thankfulness, I mean, ought to be
filled to the highest pitch by the happiness wherewith Heaven has now blessed us,
in giving us a King, whom we are bound to esteem more for his being Brother to
our Former, rather in his Virtues, than in his Blood. It were, I know, too much
presumption for me to attempt the Character of a Prince, whose only One is,
that he is above All. Neither shall I dare to meddle with the drawing such a
Pourtracture wherein the greatest Master would but bungle at his best.

Only I must tell you that we have a King whose Education gave him to
understand the state of Humane Affairs at a more advantageous rate, than
ordinarily the breeding of such as are born for Empire can possibly yield.
Since he was not trained up amidst the soft and tempting pleasures of an
enticeing Court, which use to bewitch the most of Princes so, as to divert
their thoughts from these suitable reflections that should teach them that tho
they be gods, yet they must die like men; and so to deprive them of having
those just Measures they ought to entertain, both of Themselves, and Those whom
Providence has placed below them. But he was brought up in the School of
Affliction, and made to pursue his Fortune by those Virtues, which rather use
to acquire, than inherit a Crown.

Nay, we have a King who to the benefit of his Education, has also had that no
less extraordinary one of being so long a Subject to as great a King as ever
the World saw, before his own self who succeeded him; and so, who cannot but on
the one hand have learned all the Arts and Maxims of Government from so
glorious an Example. and on the other what are Inclinations and Interests of a
Subject from his own late and wonted condition. And besides these two there
could not be any other thing more conducive to fit and accomplish him for being
such a King as by no common conjunction might, and I am persuaded will,
reconcile le Bon and le Grand, the being Good and Great, together.

And from what of his Reign has past already we cannot but promise to our
selves that few men have ever made better use of their own most proportionable
advantages, than he has of his. For was there ever a King that entered upon the
Theater of Empire with more gracious and glorious Beginnings than he has? Has
he not equally prevented our Wishes, and outdone our Hopes; and so far
concurred to grant us all that our hearts could in Reason desire, that we have,
and can only have our selves to blame, if our happiness be not as vast, as his
Zeal to promote it is so. Did he not secure to us our Protestant Religion in
this his first Parliament by an Act more great than all that were past by his
Predecessors, at least upon this score that it includes whatever they have
done, and palpably suggests that if more had been possible, it would have done
that also. And to enhance this, if it be capable of being so, did he not all
this, even before he received our dutiful Declaration of his Authority, and
acknowledgements of his Goodness: Thereby to let all the World know that he was
much more concerned for what did mostly concern us, than what upon any other
account carried a nearer relation to his own self. Were there ever greater
endearments from a King to his Subjects? or rather is it imaginable how there
could be any greater, or any besides themselves but so great?

But has he not likewise given us more than sufficient assurance in his
Gracious Letter that as nothing has a greater tendency to secure our
Privileges and Properties, than the aggrandizing of his Power and Authority;
so he proposes no other end for maintaining it in its greatest luster, than to
be the more enabled to defend and protect our Religion as established by Law,
and all our Rights and Properties. Words sure that ought to be as eternal, as
they are obliging; and which ought to be engraved as indelibly upon all our
Hearts as they would, were they where they should be upon the hardest
Porphyries and Marbles.

And let not any envious or embittered Spirit go about to rob us of the full
satisfaction which cannot but redound to us from such signal vouchsafemnts,
providing we will not be more injurious to our own Interest, than to that best
of Princes who contributes so plentifully to advance it; let them not, I say,
evacuate to us such a blessing, by their wicked and base Detractions and
Surmises, as if all this were done with the greater Artifice, the more
inevitably to supplant us afterward. For as Hell could not suggest any thing
more malicious, so neither could it what would be but near so gross or
effronted either: when it is aimed against a Prince whose Personal Excellencies
have been as yet so little questionable by any that ever knew him, that even
his most inveterate Enemies, not kowing where else to fix, have been hitherto
forced to draw Impeachments from his very Virtues, when they were to cast their
ugliest Slanders upon him. So that now to insinuate any thing of him which
would bring his Virtue upon the Stage, cannot but look, as on the one side, the
desperate Effort of forlorn Wickedness, so on the other, the most impudent and
unworthy Attempt that even That was ever straightened unto.

But there are two of his Properties, for which he is at once the Example and
Darling of all good and generous men, that so infinitely baffle and confute all
such calumnious and traitorous aspersions, that it may be reasonably doubted,
whether all those who either hint at, or give ear to them, do more endeavor to
reconcile the greatest inconsistency with one another, or to impose upon all
mankind in spite of the clearest Convictions to the contrary: and these are
his Resolution, and his Ingenuity.

As for the first, He has been from his Infancy, known to excel in in it so
singularly, that as never Man show himself more gallant and brave, than he has
done in the greatest exigencies and dangers, when it appeared to be in his very
Element, to stand undaunted amidst Thunder and Smoke, and all those
dreadfullest hazards, which could either have terrified or affrighted all who
were no more but mortal; So has never Man yet been able to tax him for
compassing any of his Designs, by such undue or unjustifiable Means, as he
would not have publicly avowed, before ever he undertook the atchievment of
them: His amoition never having carried him toward that, which his Heart did
not furnish him with sufficient courage; so to pursue, as not to be affrayed of
owning it, so soon as ever he thought upon acquiring it. And indeed where there
is so little fear, and so much greatness of Mind, it is not possible that any
thing can at once be resolved, and yet need to be purchased by some sinistruous
or cuzening ways too; Since to propose, and to dare it, is the veriest same
thing. And for a valiant and resolute man not to act above board, were as great
a Paradox even in Nature, as for any to do so is one in Morality. Now the
matter of Fact of this being Irrefragable beyond all manner of suspicion, the
Inference which issues from it, as to our present purpose, is so palpably
evident too, that the formality of a Deduction would be no less impertinent,
than it is needless.

But if his resolution be great, sure his ingenuity is no less; not only
because the one is the necessary Product and Consequent of the other, so that
there was never a Dissembler who was not a Coward before; But also because all
the World has particularly observed in him the strickest niceness in adhering
to his Word, that Honesty it self could assume. Neither could this have been so
universally noticed, and talked of, if it had not been proportionably as
excessive in him, as it is too far from being so in the most of men beside:
Things that either are not, or yet are vulgar and common, not happening readily
to gain so much credit and repute in the World.

But when that obliging Force which lies in the Word of a King, and a King
speaking to his Parliament too, comes as an accession to engage the sincerity
of his Intention unto it, shall it therefore be jealous'd what he has
condescended to ascertain us of, because of that redoubled Tie wherewith it is
Twisted, like a threefold cord that cannot be broken? Shall his Word when he
was not a King be so universally Trusted to, and Confided in, that the most of
Kings Laws could not afford half the Security; and shall his Royal Word now
when he is a King become more uncertain than the most of men's ordinary
Asseverations use to be? No, no. These are contradictions not more prejudicial
to his Honor and our Allegiance, than shameful and ridiculous in themselves.

And therefore let us at least vye our own being good to our selves, with his
being so to us, by firmly believing what He has so solemnly set his Scepter to;
Since to do otherwise were the most infallible way to bring that upon us, which
then we were so fondly apprehensive of, as thereby to be guilty of that, which
on any other occasion we would condemn most. And the truth is, were it possible
to tempt and provock him to be unjust to his own self, by recalling that
Princely Word which He has fully engaged (which blessed be God all the malice and
enmity of his Enemies can never be able to do) he could not think he were so to
us, did he once think that we reposed not that entire confidence in what he has
done which it deserves; since whoever Distrusts, has thereby forefeited all
pretense of obligation upon Him that gave His Parol, and formerly renunced his
Right in such a Security, by thus virtually refusing to take it. And all the
end for which one passes his Word, being to assure the other that he shall not
be cheated, he keeps it very punctually to him, that lays no hold nor stress
upon it, tho he should act quite contrary to what it had promised; because then
the other would not be cheated, seeing he cannot be said to be so, who never
expected to be dealt otherwise with. So that whoever will be so wicked as to
call in question what has the Royal Assent to procure it Authority, must
resolve to be so mad and foolish too, as to do all that in him lies to cancel
the Obligation that is on the Kings side of it also, and so to reduce Affairs
unto that same posture wherein they were, before such a positive engagement
made any alteration in them.

Now when it is so manifest, that all things concur to make us as happy
Subjects as it is possible for us to be while we have no other King but that of
Heaven; our present One on Earth having not only blessed us with all that we are
capable to receive from him, but being also such of himself, as cannot but
continue them always unto us so long as Almighty God in mercy does allows us
him (and may that be while he be the oldest King, that ever sat upon any of
those Thrones which he adorns); shall we not gratefully rejoice in that
Salvation, which at first was wrought in the happy Return of the Royal Family,
to the Possession of their Ancient Rights, and is now renewed to us by the
glorious Succession of our Great JAMES the Seventh, to the Crowns of these
Realms? This, th's certainly is so blessed an effect of the Restoration yet
lasting unto us, that while we enjoy it, unless we would affect to be the most
monstrous Wretches that ever trod upon the Earth, and to combine the highest
ingratitude, with the highest folly and madness, it is quite impossible but we
must now show our selves truly and heartily, thankful for the great and
unspeakable Mercies thereof; but we must rejoice in this salvation.

But that such felicities ought to make the deepest impressions of gratitude
upon us, is so certain, and so acknowledged a Truth, that it could not but be
very superfluous to enlarge any further upon it. The only fear is, that we
think not of them what they really are, but through some Rebellious or Fanatic
impatiency, at the present constitution of things, look upon that as our Misery
and Wretchedness, which is so much the contrary, that it could not possibly be
more so. And had not our late Treasons and Conspiracies, but especially the
present rising in Arms, against the Interest and Prosperity of this Nation, as
well as against Him who Reigns over it, made it too notorious to the whole
World, at what Rate many amongst us do value that which all honest and good men
account to be their greatest honor and blessing, I should not have seemed to
deserve so ill of my Nation, as in the least to have insinuated that any such
degenerate things were ever nursed up in its Air. But it being too palpable now
to be capable of being huddled, nay, these Rebels publishing their shame, and
their guilt together, in their voluminous Manifesto's, it is necessary that we
likewise brand them upon all occasions, as the most unreasonable and
unchristian Monsters that ever infested any People. Were it not that I will
neither encroach too much upon your patience, nor prostitute my pains upon such
Fanatical and wildest Miscreants, I should easily make good this charge against
them upon both these respects.

But I would fain know what it is that really they would be at, if they can but
tell so much themselves Is Monarchy their grievance? That perhaps shall be mine
too, after once I have seen that it has done as much mischief in as short time,
as what brought it under, did. But being fully persuaded that I shall never see
That, So I have no fears ever to be guilty of This. Nay it is not possible that
it can arrive; since at least amidst all the miseries, which in that case were
incumbent, this one comfort would remain, that it was a King who did Inflict
them; And who has but a Soul within him, who would not rather choose to be
trod under a Kings Foot, than the ugly hoove of every pitiful Ass?

But I defy the greatest Republican ever to afford me an instance of Plenty
and Happiness which was enjoyed under a Commonwealth parallel to that which we
appeal to of these five and twenty years last bygone, which were effluxt under
our Monarch; whose Subjects had wallowed in such unmixt, uninterrupted
Felicities, as had almost made them forget they were Earthly, had not some
factious devilish Malcontents, kept them in mind of the contrary by those
Disturbances and Rubbs which they threw in their Road. These are Arguments
which our own Experience furnishes us withal, and therefore cannot but be as
obvious, as unanswerable: And upon that head I shall not make use of any other.

Only let me yet ask this one question, Who is it that has any considerable
fortune and interest to be concerned in, and has his wits too, who would
condescend to run all at the risque, and adventure of a new revolution like to
that whose sad effects I shortly Described in the beginning of this Discourse?
And that no change were possible, but what would as exactly copy out the
former, as face answers face in the water, is so undenyably certain, that I
dare refer it to the pretended Earl himself to draw us but any probable Scheme,
how things could be prevented from running into the same Channel. It matters
not much therefore what all those can say, whose desperate condition is such,
that whatever Reelings happen, it is impossible they can be worse than they
are; and it is not so that they may be better: For all kind of variety pleases
where there is something expected, but nothing to be lost. And I doubt not to
averr that, bating those unaccountable vertigo's of some giddy and ignorant
people, this is chiefly at the bottom of all these stirrs, which so much allarm
us. And had not the Earl justly incurred the severest Censures of the present
Government we should have had no man, either more boasting of his Loyalty, or
sooner in the Fields against all its Enemies, than he. So that all the other
pretexts are, and must be held forth upon design to take with silly people who
are soon set agogg, and use not much to look beyond the outmost appearance and
surface of things.

O but the Protestant Religion is in hazard, and just in St. Peter's
circumstances, even sinking down, and ready to perish, if some powerful hand
lend it not help to support it. This is truly the main clamor which breeds us
so much noise; there being a generation of sneaking Yelpers, whose hollow
Mouths have at once profaned these blessed words, and almost deafned us. And
before I go any further I must tell them that as this Plea is not peculiar to
them, so it is too much superannuated now to take in an Age wherein Folks Eyes
are a little more opened that they were wont to be: and as there has been a
long time ago those who upon the least touch howled always furiously out, The
Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord; so whoever gave any heed to them
rendered it puzling to be distinguished whether themselves were greater Fools,
or they greater Knaves; since all the Villainy and Wickedness imaginable has
been abetted under the Vizorn of Religion, by some one Mountebank of it or
other; neither has Rebellion especially ever been beholden more to any thing
for gaining its Partisans than to a lugubrious visage and sniveling Tone which
used to work upon the Vulgar, in stead of Godliness and Devotion.

But briefly to answer this Cavil, or rather Calumny, Is it not conspicuous as
the Noonday, from what I have shown already, that we have all the Security for
our Religion, not only that in Reason we can demand, but even that is possible
to be given us? And what more is it that these People would have? Truly I
cannot guess, unless it be the Kings Head (which God preserve from their Mercy)
for that was the thing which was meant by the securing of Religion about forty
Years since: and we cannot dream what else that Language signifies now, when
Invention it self could not contrive beyond what is done already to satisfy us.

But alas! that were so very wretched an expedient for such an end, that, as I
show before what befell our Religion in the late Troubles, so were these
repeated, there would be no Remedy for it, but it behooved a second time to
demonstrate to the World, that whatever plausible pretense Rebellion carries
before it, as if it were only resorted unto for the maintaining of Religion,
yet after it has served its turn it never fails to prove as treacherous even
unto That, as it was unto him against whom it arose. And how is it possible
that these can have any true Zeal for Religion who stand not to violate its
most sacred and fundamental commands, and make use of it for no other end than
to be a Stale and Wheedle for promoting the most wicked Practices and Designs
that desperate Villainy can prompt men unto; as all Rebels and Traitors of
necessity must do: that which gives them the denomination being in its very
constitution and essence as the sin of Witchcraft, and to be rewarded with no
less than Damnation both here and hereafter. So that let them sigh and talk as
they will, I had rather my Religion were entrusted for its safety unto any man
alive, providing he had any himself at all, than unto such a one as by his
being guilty of Rebellion had rendered himself equally unworthy to be relied
upon, and to defend what he cannot but offer to assist without all his Weapons
recoil most fatally into its bosom.

But now let it be granted that our Protestant Religion is in danger (which for
Argument sake may), yet I should be content to learn whether or not they
pretend to be Christians who thus put themselves in array for protecting it?
sure, if they be, they are the worst that ever durst meddle with that holy
Name: either the worst verst in its nature and genius, or the worst accustomed
to yield it obedience, that ever men were. I had but lately an occasion to show
from this Pulpit how much Christianity is express against the taking up of Arms
to resist the Supreme Authority, and that upon any pretext whatsoever, whether
of Religion, or any other thing; and therefore I shall not now embark my self
into that Theme. But this I would gladly be resolved of, where such a Tenent,
as that of Resistance, would at last take a stop? For let us suppose that the
Presbyterians should prevail (as God forbid), were there not as good ground,
and as much reason for the Independents to take up Arms against them, and by
their own example to make their Swords cut out a way for their Religion, as
there was for them to rise up against the Adherers to Episcopacy? And when the
Independents had got the uppermost, might not the Anabaptists follow the same
method with them; and the Familists against the Anabaptists, and so on in
infinitum. For Religion is still the Plea, and every one is to be Judge for
himself. Neither is there any difficulty in all this, but how to gather
together Force enough to be able to overcome; for if that were once had, there
were no more to do but for all to fall on. And if this be not all one with
Hobbs's Fancied State of Nature, only putting in the word Religion, for that of
Right; and if the same Mischiefs and Confusions would not equally follow from
both; I appeal to the Consciences even of those against whom I am speaking, so
that they have not stiffled them for good and all. And that ever Christianity
would allow that it self was the great Firebrand and Incendiary of the World,
were so very odd to imagine, that nothing could be more so, were it not that
any did ever yet really believe it.

Neither shall they ever be able to produce the least Iotta of Scripture to
vouch their assertion; unless it be that of Luke, Think ye that I am come to
send peace on the earth, etc. Where the visible mistake of a Command for a
Prophecy, were far more pardonable than any other application they use to make
of the Word of God. It is true we are commanded to obey God rather than man;
but when these interferr, are we not commanded likewise to suffer for
righteousness sake? Never one Syllable is to be found for taking up Arms, and
compelling the lawful Magistrate to prescribe us nothing but what we think GOD
has done so too. So that there is a clear midst betwixt these two, of refusing
to obey an unlawful command, and forcing that to be retracted by the power of
Arms, to wit, the suffering patiently for Conscience sake. An harsh Doctrine
indeed to Flesh and Blood, but that is which we must crucify, if we will be
Christ's Disciples, or have any part in him.

And it is further observable that the true Religion may be defended, with the
greatest consonancy to all this, maugre the fiercest Persecution that ever
attempted to ruin and overturn it. For it being only seated in the Mind, and
this not being capable to be vanquished by all the external force that can
assault it, since one may always think as he pleases, do what any body else
can, all the cruelties and tortures that malice could invent needs never
constrain any man out of that which he has so entirely in his own power, that
without his leave it can never be wrested from him. It is but to defend
themselves therefore, and not their Religion, that so much ado, and such a
bustle is made. For whoever has but Fortitude and Christianity enough to expose
and adventure the first, cannot be in great strait about the security of the
latter.

But I wish that it were seriously laid to heart upon what Forge this
mischievous Doctrine was at first hammered out. It is true, it came to Scotland
from Geneva, but it is as true that Geneva brought it from farther South; and
tho it seemed even ambitious of the most Diametrical Opposition to Rome that
the common notion of Christianity to both could allow, yet it stuck not to
borrow from thence a policy which had for a long time proved so very successful
there.

It Is true our modern Papists, especially in Britain and France are ashamed now
to own what brought their Holy Father to the highest top of such a Pinnacle of
Grandeur; being in that but too openly ungrateful to what has served them so
abundantly or rather prodigiously well. But pretend what they will, I know that
things go otherwise at Rome, where the Inquisition were as inevitable ^or one
who would but smatter out any thing to the contrary, as it would be enraged
against him, were he once but within its Clutches. And tho I made it greatly my
business when I was there to learn out what was the opinion of the place
concerning such a Doctrine, yet I can avowedly say, that of all I spoke with
anent it, I never fell upon one, who either did not frankly acknowledge to me,
that it was de fide there, that Heretic Kings ought to be Excommunicated, and
expelled their Thrones; or else did not decline the giving his judgment in an
Affair which he was sensible was so vastly ticklish and nice to be meddled with;
thereby insinuating as much as that he durst not utter any thing contrary to
the Court verdict. But what can be more clear, than their Writings against
Barclay and Widringtoun, and their kindest hugging of Marriana and Sanctarella
at Rome, to evidence what I am alleging? And so while our Rebels and Fanatics
make such a clutter upon pretense of keeping out Popery, they are as great
Papists themselves, and sure as dangerous too, as those whom they are so eager
against, at least in one no less essential a point, than the Infallibility, or
Transubstantiation it self.

Thus leaving them to themselves, as it seems God has done already, let me now
in one word address my self to you who are present, beseeching you that as you
value the credit and glory of our Nation; and as you tender your own interest
and felicity, you would seriously lay to heart what I have been discoursing
unto you. And methinks I may say in Moses his words (Deuteronomy. 30: 15, and 19.) See
I have set before you this day, life and good, and death and evil; I call
heaven and earth to record this day against you, that I have set before you
life and death, blessing and cursing; therefore choose life, that both ye and
your seed may live. I have set before you the miserable and wretched estate
wherein these poor Nations were involved during the late Rebellion; and I have
likewise set before you what has been the vast and inestimable advantages of
the Restoration of the Royal Family, and especially what are our happiest
blessings in our present Great King; and if neither the formidable Aspect which
appears on the one hand can fright you, nor the beautiful and ravishing
countenance of things on the other can allure you; but that in spite of both
you will choose cursing and death and ruin, then you will have only your selves
to thank for the event of the preference, and I have discharged my Soul from
the guilt of your Blood. Alas! shall any be so madly infatuated as so soon
after our late Troubles to run again into the like destruction, when to all the
other miseries of it, there would this one be added too, that there were not
even that of an excuse for it which was before, because now the sad and fatal
consequences of Rebellion are so manifestly known, and so fresh and recent in
our memories likewise.

Let us therefore be so considerate of every thing that can make us to be so,
and so sensible of the present happy estate wherewith God Almighty has to the
wonder and envy of the whole earth most graciously blessed us, as through the
fullest transports of resentment to shout aloud in the words of my Text, and in
the highest raptures of gratitude cry out, We will rejoice in thy salvation.

And indeed it is the Salvation of God: his Providence having all along
appeared so signally in the management of it, that had there not been any other
argument to evince the Being of such a Supreme Government over all the Actions
and Destinies of Men, yet it would have sufficiently done it. It is therefore
unto God especially that we should be thankful, it is to his Infinite Goodness
and Mercy that we should acknowledge the Debt of such Blessings; and so we
should improve them every one at that rate as may best serve to advance his
Glory, and those great Designs and Ends which he proposed to himself in the
bestowal of them; which undoubtedly were, that we might be dutiful and loyal to
his Vicegerent whom he has so visibly set over us, and lead a quiet and
peaceable life under him in all Godliness and Honesty; that being Good and
Obedient here, we may be eternally Happy and Blessed hereafter. Now unto the
great King of kings, and Lord of lords, God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be
all praise, power, honor, glory, and dominion, now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

