A DECLARATION OF THE COMMISSIONERS OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY TO The whole Kirk
and Kingdom of SCOTLAND, CONCERNING Present dangers and duties, relating to
the Covenant, and Religion.

Printed at Edinburgh by EVAN TYLER, and reprinted at London for H. H. 1648.

Edinb. 1. Martii. 1648. Post meridiem. A DECLARATION of the Commssioners of
the General Assembly to the whole Kirk and Kingdom of Scotland, concerning
present dangers, and duties relating to the Covenant and Religion.
IF in a time of so great and eminent danger to Religion and the cause of God,
the Trumpet in Zion should give no certain sound, nor the watch-mens Tower any
seasonable warning, it might be justly charged upon us as a sinful neglect of
duty, and the blood of many thousand souls might be required at our hands.
Therefore so far as we have discovered the dangerous plots and snares of the
malicious and crafty adversaries of this cause; We shall freely and faithfully
make the same known; trusting that all who would not make shipwreck of faith
and a good conscience, will carefully avoid as well hid as manifest rocks, when
they are warned of them.

After the solemn League and Covenant of three Kingdoms had so prospered
against the enemies and opposers thereof, as made them despair of overthrowing
it in any such way of a direct opposition; They begun with much wit and
industry to endeavor a dividing of the ends of the Covenant, and an altering
of the first principle and state of the cause. Upon the one hand, the Sectaries
in Englands, (according as is formerly represented by the late Generally
Assembly in their Declaration to their Brethren of England, and by our
Remonstrance to the Committee of Estates of the 13. of October. last) have by
fraud and violence endeavored the subversion of Religion; whose exorbitant
insolency being now in Arms is so unsupportable, that no man can doubt but all
the Articles of the Covenant are in danger by them; the vile errors, wicked
heresies, and intolerable blasphemies daily growing among them can hardly be
reckoned up; all which are mightily aggredged by the lawless and godless
toleration thereof; and least Parliamentary authority should curb this
monstrous insolency, they have not only refused Orders for disbanding, but
have forced Orders for their own standing, and do overruled Parliament, King,
City, and Country to the trampling under foot all government Civil and
Ecclesiastical, and to the terror, oppression, and apparent ruin of all the
truly, godly, and sound lovers of the solemn League and Covenant. On the other
hand the Prelaticall and Malignant party have catched at, and studied to make
advantage of some parts and clauses of the Covenant, without keeping all the
links of that golden chain fast together.

This design of receding from the former principles, and stating the public
cause otherwise then it was stated by both Kingdoms when they joined in
Covenant and Arms, may abundantly be discovered by two instances; First, the
design has been so fast and so far driven on, that although the fourth
Article of the League and Covenant was clearly framed and intended against the
Malignant party; And although there was one express Article in the Treaty
between the Kingdoms for swearing and subscribing the League and Covenant by
both Kingdoms as a more near tie and conjunction of both for their defense
against the Popish Prelaticall and Malignant party and their adherents; And
although in the Declaration of both Kingdoms in the year 1643. It was declared
that all such as would not speedily take the Covenant, and join with all their
power in defense of this cause, are to be censured and punished as professed
Adversaries and Malignants; Yet some are not a shamed to plead for the
Malignant party, as if they were friends rather then enemies to this cause, and
as none were now to be looked upon as dangerous enemies to the cause, but the
Sectaries only; whereas the word of God and the experience of former times not
only teaches us to beware of dangers from the fraud, as well as the force,
from the plots as well as from the power of enemies; but also sets before us
sad examples of great unexpected miseries, and mischiefs brought upon the
people of God, from enemies once broken and quashed, when they got again the
power of the sword, and opportunity to act whatsoever cruelties their
inveterate malice and enraged spirits put the^ upon.

The other instance is, that although in the Covenant, the duty of preserving
and defending the Kings Majesty's person and authority be joined with, and
subordinate unto the duty of preserving and defending the true Religion and
Liberties of the Kingdoms; and although from the beginning of this cause, the
good safety and security of Religion has been principally sought after and
insisted upon: yet solicitations, persuasions, and endeavors have not been,
nor are wanting for His Majesty's restitution to the exercise of His royal
power, and for expousing His Majesty's quarrel, notwithstanding his not
granting of the publik desires concerning the Covenant, and Religion: And this
course is clearly contrary to the declared resolution of the Parliament of
this kingdom, after advice desired from us, upon the case concerning the King
then propounded to us; And it is no less contrary to the principles and
professions of the convention and of the Committee of Estates, before any such
advice was desired or had from us: yea all along, and in the whole course of
the public proceedings, the settling and securing of Religion has been so much
stood upon, that Malignants who intended a new state of the cause did well
perceive how great difficulty, and how small hopes there was of satisfying this
Kirk and Kingdom with any thing else, while unsatisfied in the point of
Religion; and therefore all possible care has been taken by them whereby to
have some specious and fair pretenses of satisfaction in the business of
Religion.

And here, as we do not disapprove, but highly commend the worthy pains of such
as did indeed endeavor to bring the Kings Majesty a greater length, even to
give full satisfaction in point of Religion; so we cannot but take notice of
that report which many did lately entertain and spread in this Country; namely,
that His Majesty has given satisfaction to the desires of this Kirk and
Kingdom in point of the Covenant and Religion.

If His Majesty had indeed given such satisfaction, we should rejoice at it as
much as any, and however shall not cease to pray for his Majesty, that God
would give him repentance and remission of sins, and incline his heart to the
love of the true Religion and Reformation, and that his Royal Person may be
preserved from all harm and violence: And being now (as we formerly remonstrate
on October. 13.) very sensible of the present danger his Majesty's person and
Monarchical government is into by that prevalent party of Sectaries; We shall,
so far as concerns the duty of our places and callings, endeavor the
preservation of Monarchical government in his Majesty, and his posterity
according to the Covenant; not being ignorant what confusions and calamities
use to attend the change either of the government it self, or of the Royal
line. Nevertheless the Country being so generally possessed with so dangerous
a mistake, and misunderstanding of so great a business; and his Majesty
himself professing in his Letter to us, dated at Carisbrook Castle, December. 27.
last, that he has resolved so far to agree to the desires of this Kirk and
Kingdom concerning the Covenant and settling Religion, as he is confident shall
give us satisfaction; If now we should be silent, we might be understood as
tacitly consenting and acquiescing. We are therefore necessitated for
undeceiving the Nation, and for acquitting our selves, to declare that a
narrative of the state or public affairs, having bin made to us by those who
were entrusted for that effect, and since delivered to us in writing, we have
more especially taken to our serious thoughts so much of that narrative as was
from his Majesty made known unto us, his resolutions for satisfaction in point
of Religion, The first Article whereof is as follows.

1. For the Covenant, his Majesty giving belief to the professions of these who
have entered into the League and Covenant, and that their intentions are real
for preservation of his Majesty's person according to their allegiance, and no
ways to diminish his just power and greatness, is content so soon as he can
with freedom, honor, and safety, be present in a free Parliament to confirm
the said League and Covenant by Act of Parliament in both Kingdoms, for
security of all those who have taken, or shall take the said Covenant, provided
that none who is unwilling shall be constrained to take it.

Which Article has nothing in it of his Majesty's affection to, or liking and
approbation of the Covenant, but only what he is content to yield in order to
His own interest. Yea, an Act of Parliament for security of those who have
taken or shall take the Covenant, does or may suppose some fault, or somewhat
justly challengable in the taking of the Covenant, which needs ane Act of
indemnity. Next the offer is but conditional, and has in the bosom of it ane
complication of such and so many conditions as might open a door to some
evasion or other, by multiplying exceptions, difficulties, and various notions,
either concerning the professions of those who have entered into the League and
Covenant, or concerning his Majesty's just power and greatness, or concerning
his freedom, honor, and safety, or concerning a free Parliament. And although
the concession were certain and absolute, it amounts to no more, but to a
leaving of the Covenant arbitrary; which is contrary to the Acts of the
General Assembly and Parliament in this Kingdom, to the Declaration of both
Kingdoms before cited, and to one of the chief Propositions of Religion once
agreed upon by both Kingdoms, for a safe and wel-grounded peace; viz. The
Proposition concerning his Majesty's swearing and signing of the League and
Covenant, and enjoining by Act of Parl: in both Kingdoms the taking thereof by
all the Subjects in the three Kingdoms, with such penalties as shall be agreed
upon by both Kingdoms: so that the first Article of his Majesty's offer is a
most manifest altering of the state of this cause; It is also a strengthening of
the hearts and hands both of the Sectaries and of the Malignant party, a
partaking and conniving at the sin of all those in the three Kingdoms who have
refused, or shall refuse to enter into the League and Covenant, an introducing
of a detestable indifferency or neutrality in this cause which so much
concerns the glory of God, the good of the Kingdom, and the honor of the
King. And therefore we have judged this Article not only unsatisfactory, but
destructive to the Covenant. Neither are we moved with that objection which is
hinted, concerning the constraining or inforting of men's consciences: They
refuse a necessary duty who refuse to take the Covenant; and the penalty or
punishment of such refusal is no constraining of the conscience, more then the
penalty or punishment of a Subject who refuses to take the Oath of Allegiance
is a constraining of the conscience to Loyalty, or more then the punishment of
Idolaters, Blasphemers, and Seducers, mentioned so often in Scripture, can be
called a constraining of the conscience to the fear of of God.

The words of the second Article are these: His Majesty will likewise confirm by
Act of Parliament in England, Presbyteriall Government, the Directory for
Worship, and Assembly of Divines at Westminster for three years, so that his
Majesty and his household be not hindered from using that form of Divine Service
he has formerly practiced; and that a free debate and consultation be had with
the Divines at. Westminster (twenty of his Majesty's nomination being added
unto them) and with such as shall be sent from the Church of Scotland, whereby
it may be determined by his Majesty and the two Houses how the Church
Government after the three years shall be fully established according to the
word of God.

For ought we know the conditions couched in the first Article are also to be
understood in this and the following Articles: However this second Article as
it is but the same in substance with some of his Majesty's concessions in
former Messages, so that which is proposed in it, is but a Toleration of
Presbyteriall Government in England, and that but for three years, and is a
direct allowance, at least of the Book of Common Prayer in his Majesty's
Household: and moreover, by the second Article not only a door is left open for
re-establishing Prelacy and the Service Book; But the happy progress already
made in the Reformation, and uniformity of Religion according to the Covenant
in a confession of Faith, Directory of Worship, Form of Church Government and
Catechism is set aside as so much lost labor, in order to a future setlement.
Free debate with any of the Prelaticall party nominated by his Majesty (when
there was any such occasion) has not bin declined: But we have great cause to
be tender of unsetling and razing agood foundation already laid in the work of
Reformation. And whereas his Majesty will have it determined by himself, and
the two Houses, how the Church Government after the said three years shall be
established according to the Word of God: This does at once cut off three of
the most material Propositions concerning Religion formerly agreed upon by
both Kingdoms, and from both tendered to his Majesty, (though some of them be
now laid aside by the two Houses of the Parliament of England) namely. The
third Proposition, for abolishing Archbishops, Bishops, etc. The fifth
Proposition, That Reformation of Religion according to the Covenant be settled
by Act of Parliament, in such manner as both Houses have agreed, or shall agree
upon after consultation had with the Assembly of Divines; And the sixth
Proposition, That such unity and uniformity in Religion according to the
Covenant, as after consultation had with the Divines of both Kingdoms,
assembled at Westminster, is, or shall be jointly agreed by both Houses of the
Parliament of England, and by the Church and Kingdom of Scotland, be confirmed
by Acts of Parliament of both Kingdoms respectively. Of which three
Propositions, there can be no hopes as to his Majesty's consent or concurrance)
if the offer now made concerning a determination by his Majesty and the two
Houses, be compared with his Majesty's claiming of a negative voice, and with
his Message of November. 16. in which He declared that both in relation as he is
a Christian and as a King, he cannot give His consent to the abolishing
Archbishops, Bishops, etc. Believing that this Order was placed in the Church
by the Apostles themselves, and that his Majesty is also bound by his
Coronation Oath to maintain it. And this Message of November 16. His Majesty
adhereth unto, in his Answer to the Bills and Proposition, presented to him at
Carisbrook Castle; which Answer is dated December. 28. and so after his Majesty's
Letter to us. Upon these and the like considerations we have found the said
second Article of his Majesty's offers in point of Religion to be destructive
to Presbyteriall Government, the Directory of Worship, and the uniformity
intended according to the Covenant.

For the third Article delivered to us in these words. And for suppressing of
Schism and Heresies his Majesty is content and most willing that an effectual
course be taken by Act of Parliament, and all other ways needful and expedient
for suppressing the opinions and practices of Antinomians, Arians, Socinians,
Antiscripturists, Anabaptists, Arminians, Familists, Brownists, Separatists,
Independent, Libertines, and Seekers, and generally for suppressing all
Blasphemy, Heresy, Schism, and all such scandalous doctrine or practices as
are contrary to the light of nature, or to the known principles of Christianity
(whether concerning faith, worship, or conversation) or to the power of
Godliness, or which may be destructive to order or government, or to the peace
of Church or Kingdom.

As we do Approve of the Suppression of the particular Heresies and Schisms
ennumerate in his Majesty's offer; So we see not how it can be reconciled with
his Majesty's Message of November. 16. in which there was a concession to all
such as differ from Presbyteriall Government: And do further find the Article
dangerous and defective in omitting Erastianism, and other dangerous errors,
especially Popery and Prelacy, which may prove destructive to the Covenant in
ministering the occasion to Papists and Prelates to plead for a toleration,
although the Covenant bind us to endeavor the extirpation both of Popery and
Prelacy.

Having now discovered the snares and dangers, We shall in the next place most
humbly and seriously propose and recommend some wholesome seasonable and pious
counsels to all the members of this Church and Kingdom, especially to the
Honorable and High Court of Parliament, and to the Brethren of the Ministry,
which may also serve to express our sense concerning the whole matter
contained in that narrative, delivered to us in writing, so far as is competent
and fit for us to give any Judgment thereupon.

First to all, we exhort all and every one to make more conscience of
endeavoring a real Reformation of themselves and their Families, and of the
places in which they live, then ever yet they have done; to be more serious in
searching their hearts, considering their ways, and purging themselves from
all filthiness of the flesh and spirit to perfect holiness in the fear of God;
to oppose wickedness and profanesse, promote the power and practice of Godliness,
and to be deeply humbled before the Lord for neglecting these things so much,
and so long; with all employing and improving Christ's all sufficiency, and
striving to exercise faith in him for the grace of mortification and
sanctification, as well as for remission of sins and peace with God; that being
implanted and rooted in him, we may grow up as trees of Righteousness, the
planting of the Lord that he may be glorified; for without amendment of life,
and bringing forth of better fruit, the fierce wrath of the Lord cannot turn
away from us.

Secondly, as men desire they may not be led into temptation, but may be guided
in safe and right paths, in the midst of so great difficulties; Let them avoid
the company and council of the ungodly, whereby even good men, have been often
times most dangerously ensnared; Let all that fear God choose the Testimonies
of the Lord for their counselors, be much in prayer and searching the mind
of God in his word without leaning to their own understanding, or consulting
with flesh and blood in casess of conscience.

Thirdly, seeing it is no act of wisdom but of folly, so to shun one danger as
to run upon another as bad or worse; Let us therefore avoid enemies and beware
of dangers on all hands: We cannot see but the cause of God, the true Religion,
the Covenant, Presbyteriall Government, this Church and Kingdom, and whatsoever
is dearest to us will be in as great danger, if the Prelaticall party prevail,
as now they are into by the power and prevalency of Sectaries in England, who
have made the Covenant and begun reformation to be laid aside and hindered the
promoting thereof. So that there is a necessity to be apprehensive of dangers,
and attentive to remedies on both sides, and to beware of compliance with, and
connivance at Sectaries on the one hand, and Malignants on the other.

Fourthly, when we speak of Malignants, we desire that the distinction may be
remembered, which was mad in the solemn Warning to the Kingdom from the General
Assembly in Feb. 1645. viz. That the cause is in very great danger from two
sorts of Malignant Enemies: First, from such as have openly displayed a Banner,
or joined in Arms and professed Hostility against the cause, and such as
adheared thereunto: Secondly, from secret Malignants, Discovenanters, and
bosom Enemies. This second sort may by still known by some Characters, given
both at that time and before that time, As by their slandering or censuring the
Covenant of the three Kingdoms and expedition into England, in the year 1643.
as not necessary for the good of Religion, or safety of this Kingdom, or as
tending to the diminution of the Kings just Power and greatness, By their
confounding of the Kings Power and just Authority, with the pretense and abuse
thereof by Commissions, Warrants or Letters procured from his Majesty by the
Enemies of this cause and Covenant. As if none were Faithful and Loyal to the
King, who oppose such men and their ways; By their Spleen, Malice, and
callumnies against such as God has made eminently isntrumental in this cause,
and now resolve to be constant to the end in their first Principles, as if such
men were the Kings Enemies who are most zealous for the good and safety of
Religion; By their commending, justifying or excusing other known Malignants,
and by their conversing or intercommuning with excommunicate delinquents. Unto
which Characters time and experience give us, occasion to add some others, as
namely, The unwillingnesse and declining to reckon Malignants among the Enemies
of this cause from whom danger is to be apprehended, Their disjoyning and
dividing the duty of endeavoring the Kings Majesty's preservation and
restitution, from the duty of preserving, defending, settling and securing
Religion; As if we might and ought to pursue the former without the latter
while both are in danger; Their maligning of, and uttering malicious words
against faithful and Zealous Ministers, and against this meeting and
Judicatory, appointed by the General Assembly: Lastly, their crying up or down
of parties persons, and even of the Sectaries themselves according as they have
more or less hopes of advantage from the^ to their own designs. For it is not
long since such men made light account of any dangers, which were apprehended
from the prevalent faction of the Sectaries in England, There being then some
hopes of a compliance and combination between them and the Malignants: Which is
an infalible demonstration that such men's pretended Zeal against those
Sectaries now is not from the right Principle. Wherefore let all such dangerous
persons as we have here deciphered and be carefully observed and avoided, as
men would keep themselves pure, and free of snares: And let Presbyteries be
diligent to discover, try, and censure any of this kind in their bounds, that
they may be able herein to give a good account of their diligence; As also that
they be careful to discover, try, censure any trafficking Sectaries, and all
such as favor their opions and ways.

Fifthly, Though we esteem that prevalent faction of Sectaries with their
abbetters and adherents, Presumptious and malicious Eenemies to Religion, King,
and Government: Yet we hold it is our duty to labor to remove and prevent all
occasions of jealousies and suspicions betwixt the Kingdoms; and to do or say
nothing that may breed mis-understandings, break off correspondence, weaken
the confidence or infringe the union and peace betwixt the two Kingdoms so
happily established in His Majesty's presence, and with his Royal consent in
both Parliaments; A caution as necessary now as when it was given above five
years ago in a Warning from the Commissioners of the General Assembly, met in
this same place, Jan. 4. 1643. And Generally we desire that all the Articles
and clauses of the solemn League and Covenant may be kept inseperably and
inviolably linked together and that there may be great tenderness and care to
avoid every thing which may be interpreted as a contradicting or abandoning of
the former principles, proceedings, petitions, protestations, Remonstrances,
and Declarations of this Kirk and Kingdom in the pursuance of this cause; and
more especially to take good heed that Scotlands desires, do not mount higher
for the King, and fall lower in the point of Religion, then they were at our
first undertaking and engagement in this cause.

Finally, we do most seriously obtest all the people of God in this Nation, and
especially the estates of Parliament, by their love to the cause of God, by
their solemn Vows and Covenants, by their first principles and professions, by
their former zeal and sincerity, by the many blessings of God, and his great
works done for us when our zeal and integrity was greatest in this cause, and
by all the curses and judgments of God which his word denounces against
backsliders and Covenant-breakers, that they may all the days of their lives
continue firm, steadfast, and faithful in their Covenant with God, and one
with another, and make good their former professions in a time of tentation and
difficulty, without wavering or falling off to the right hand, or to the left,
and as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them and mercy, and
upon the Israel of God.

A. KER.

FINIS.

