ELISE, OR Innocence Guilty.

A NEW ROMANCE, TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH BY JO: JENNINGS, Gent.

DVM PR^MOR ^T^O^^O



LONDON, Printed by T. Newcomb for Humphrey Moseley and are to be sold at his
Shop at the Sign of the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1655.

TO THE Right Honorable, and truly Noble and most Virtuous Lady, FRANCES
COVNTESS of DORSET.
MADAM,
HAving by a strange fortune lighted on this Book, which to me appeared so
pleasing, and fit for your entertainment, in that your retired solitary life; I
think it cannot be displeasing to any, being raised with the glory of your
Name: that is, this History of Elise. In which, Madam, you shall find Virtue
suffering under the weight of afflictions, that end it; and an innocence made
guilty more by the inadvertencie of the Parties, then the malice of the Judges.

Yet it may be esteemed a Tragic history not so fit for your persent
disposition, to whom nothing ought to be presented but of pleasure and content.
But to judge so, is to be ignorant of your worth, which like the Dolphin is most
pleased in the roughest waters. And as nothing gives more content to those that
have passed dangers, then to speak of the perils they have been in both by sea
and land; who can better judge then you, that have found by experience the
truth of this saying of a grave Writer, That it is very hard amongst so much
malignity as has infected the world, to live under the support of innocence.
But when posterity shall read your history, which deserves the writing of the
most able and curious pen, they will then hold for a vanity that of the Romans,
which is a truth in your history, that has showed us a virtue without second,
in the first and most glorious from of our days; One may see a patience
without example, a mildness unbelievable, a fidelity inviolable, a chastity
invincible, and lastly a constancy founded on eminent piety, that can know
nothing greater then it self.

All this, Madam, is exempt from flattery; since as many places as the Sun
shines on, are as many Eccho's of your praises. But what eccho's or what voice
can worthily show your merits, being raised to that height, that they can no
way be presented but imperfectly; none can undertake without express boldness,
were they never so eloquent in language, to praise them but imperfectly. But as
our eyes have a natural sympathy with the elements of fire and water, which
proceeds from their composition, and make us willingly contemplate the bright
liveliness of the one, and the crystal running of the other: Even so I hope,
be it that your eyes descend to the reading of this Piece, or that your ears may
but hear it recited, your thoughts may meet with consolation; seeing in the
misfortunes of others a feeble Idea of these disasters, whose blackness will
raise the height of your glories, as the obscurity of the Night sets off the
brightness of the Moon, whose roundness is accomplished. It is for weak spirits
to faint at sight of one let blood; Generous hearts laugh at the attaints of
fortune; and how can they look pale at the reading of calamities, that have so
far surmounted the greatest? And then, Madam, the honor you have gained in
bringing to the world so many Males for the maintaining of the Honorable and
Noble house of the Sa^kviles, will inspire you with a new strength to pass over
without apprehension the sad and tragic events of this Deduction. Which has
no other end but to bring you some divertisement and consolation, and to let
you see the lively affection I have ever had to honor and esteem, according to
my power, so many Virtues as crown you, and tie me, Madam, to be ever

Your most humble and obedient Servant, JO. JENNINGS.

To the Reader.
THe little time I lived in France, and the small skill I attained in the
language, should have diverted me from the undertaking of a Transtation: but
the content I took in the reading of this Tragic History of Eliza, made me
rather venture the censure of Detractors, then not to publish a Story of so
much pity and example. In which thou shall see, that suffering is not always
for the offenders, as for the unfortunate; and that want of Consideration is
many times cause of as great accidents as Malice. It will teach thee to fear
God, and to think of thy ways, that is, to govern thy actions with wisdom and
circumspection.

Love and Death are the two principal Actors in this Scene, and as in an
Emblem they change their from. Thou will see strange effects of both the one
and the other: For certainly it is very hard in this lamentable Age in which we
live, as in that of the Prophet; and it may be said after him, That Murder and
Adultery make a prodigious inundation over the face of the earth and that blood
craves blood Who has ever heard that true Love was inconsistent with piety?
For truly, the profane and the virtuous cannot be joined with devotion, as
those that be governed by wisdom and discretion. As the contrary I know by its
opposite; even so how can I make known the beauty of the one, if I set not
forth the deformity of the other? and yet in so pleasing a manner, as may not
cause in the weakest Judgments any dangerous thoughts or strange elusions. But
as it is certain, that they are the wicked that give scandals by raising false
reports of others; so they are but the weak that apprehend them. I will not
touch the particularities contained in this following History, not to take from
thee the pleasure of the reading, desiring it may satisfy thy expectation. And
will rest thine in all love to serve thee,

JO. JENNINGS.

ELISE, OR Innocence guilty.
IN the beginning of the reign of that famous Henry, whose merits brought from
France, and seated in the throne of Poland, before a legitimate succession
placed the royal Diadem of St. Lewis on his head, it appeared the Golden age,
which is but a vanity bo^^ in the brains of Poets, yet seemed like a truth in
France. For Peace coming with golden wings, after the furious torments it had
suffered during the reign of generous Charles his predecessor brought the vessel
of this Estate within two fingers of her utter loss and destruction, but now
returned in all abundance of joy and tranquillity, contentment and all the
pleasures which are to be imagined. And truly this world can no way be pleasing
but in variety, nor harmonious according to the imaginations of the
Platonicians: As for example, we must yield that the darkness of the night
makes us think the day more fair; and as sad colors set off the light with
greater luster, and as the blacks and sullied colors contribute to the
sweetness and whiteness of the lilly, and as the thorns serve for an ornament
to the roses, as a calm appears never so pleasing as after a fearful tempest,
as wines are never so sweet as when the taste has somewhat of bitterness, or as
hunger and thirst makes one find those meats delicious of least savor; so
peace is never in its true luster but after a long and hard war, even such was
before the return of this bright Star; war had even rent this Monarchy in
pieces with dissentions uncivilly civil, that it appeared our Nation was become
a manicle, and took pleasure in opening her own entrails and to unrip herself,
more hungry then Saturn after the flesh of his own children. Naught was but
slaughter seen, whole fields being spread
With mangled trunks, and bodies of the dead.
Then appeared this Henry, which returning from one end of the world, leaving a
Country and Kingdom where he was adored, to give himself to this where his
birth and inclination called him, was welcomed like another Saint Elm, or if
you will, as a Neptune ferming the winds of seditions in their gale; and
calming with the Trident of his valor, prudence, and goodness, the mutinous
^lotes which beat the flanks of this great Bark, who quickly knew him for her
Pilot, and received him for her legitimate Prince: the sword was now no more
shaken over the heads of the Citizens; experience now had taught, that fire and
sword were needless threatenings to strike off the heads of the Hydra, which was
cause of all these mischiefs; the earth had drank the blood and wiped away all
remembrance from men, all tears dried, all displeasures forgot, peace and
quietness published this great Prince. Raising from war the Olive, which imparts
Trophies to Sciences, and the liberal Arts.
And then as the bitterness of gall makes us prove the sweetness of honey, so
contentment and peace unexpected ravished so the enjoyers, as it took away the
means to express their happiness. You would have said, it was a Solomon
peaceably succeeding a bloody David; that greatness whereof France is the Mine,
hiding in her own breast all her treasures, which now she set forth to show to
the face of the earth: The Court shined like the heavens, strewed with as many
stars as there were Princes and Lords; the King appeared like a Sun, not only
by his sovereignty which spread the beams of all his other greatness, but also
the merits of his person; for in his counsels he was wisest, at his exercises
the readiest, in arms the most valiant, amongst the gallants of the best grace,
in company the quickest-witted, amongst the braves the most agreeable, amongst
the well-spoken the most eloquent, with the devout the most religious, among
the rich and pompous the most magnificent; and wheresoever he was, he could
never be mistaken, nor take Alexander for Ephestion; for he held his Majesty
with so grave a sweetness, a face worthy of the Empire, as if appeared, showed
as if it had been written on his forehead and carriage, Behold the King. Yet
all these truths are so far from flattery, that one ought to have had but eyes
to see and swear that all came short that could be said of his heroic parts.
True it is, I may with more boldness proceed to set forth his praises by the
permission of the wisest of Kings: but in a time in the which one cannot
imagine any pretension of acknowledgment, being there remains none of his race;
for what recompense should one expect of a Prince, that after the having
possessed two great Scepters, has lain many years upon the earth deprived of
his last honor, his Sepulcher, remaining as the Poet sung of his time his and
his creature, Whose thunder-shatter'd carcass looked like just
Confused attoms, or an heap of dust.
And as to the sole image of his virtues it is that I give this due memory,
there was nevertheless this gracious difference between the Sun and this
Prince; that in the midst of his Court, that is, that in place of swallowing
the brightness of the smaller Planets, this great King on the contrary gave
such a luster to those that environed him, that without so sing any of his
pre-eminence, he gave them of his brightness; that made him respected of many,
and envied of others, for all birds bea^ not equally the brightness of his
favor. Verily one may say of the magnificence of this Prince, the same as the
Queen of Mid^ said of Solomon, That happy were his servants; for besides his
liberality to them, he was very courteous in the begi^ning of his reign; he
practiced many great things, and there passed so many wonders at Court, that as
there is no face without some blemish, so they were in greater pain to hinder
the profuse expenses of this great Monarch, then to praise his liberality.
Living thus happy, adored of his subjects, beloved of his neighbors, feared of
strangers, esteemed of all the world; when the heavens jealous to see so much
prosperity on earth, sowed emulation and jealousies among the great ones, that
have risen to those rays which we can no way express but with silence, being
it makes nothing to the History that I have now to write, the which tragical
misfortune happened during these great prosperities which I intend to paint
forth. Methinks it should be a presage without ills, this public happiness:
but as it happens at sea ordinarily, that certain white birds coming to sup at
the water, or sit on the ship, is a certain sign of the storm; so Innocence
made guilty and punished as a delinquent, as it shall appear in this following
story, was an augure, being born and fed as a canker in the fairest roses,
ought by miserable arts to cover this great Prince from (...) many black
calumnies, that his religion should be taken for impiety, and his piety for
irreligion, by those which ought to have been the trumpets of his glory, and to
be persecuted by those that should have been arches and tables of his authority
and of his Empire. But not to draw any harder this knot too delicate for my
rude hand, I will only content my self with this saying to come to my end, That
the heart of this good King was very open to all worthiness; many favorites he
had. Let us repeat again this little word of liberty, as I said, Favorites,
and in great numbers; and as it is impossible in a multitude there will not
multiply diversity of humors and passions, according to the diversity of
judgments, and as they are interessed, It happened that a Lord of great birth
and quality that had place in the Kings house, fell not altogether in disgrace,
but in disesteem with the Prince, by the artificious industries of a Favorite
that loved him not; and because it does concern me to conceal the names and
qualities of the persons in this history, by reason of the tragical events that
shows in the line of this deduction, we will hide them with so much art,
imitating the thunder that bruises the bones without hurting the skin, melts
swords and silver without hurting the seab^ard or the purses; being very
needful to gain profit by an example to know the particular circumstances of
the places of the persons and their titles, provided that that which is treated
of be truly, neatly, and clearly set down. We will do then as we behold the
Be, who draws the honey from flowers without any impression, she is content to
drink of the rose, and to draw the sweetness and the essence, leaving it as if
she had never touched it; so we hope to conduct the nib of our pen with so much
prudence and circumspection, upon the flowers bitterly-sweet of this field, now
white with innocence, now red with murders; and without offending the families,
or interessing the parties, we will discover the ray of this truth, learning
from a great Historian, that it is very dangerous amongst so many humane
errors, and amongst so many obscurities that darken the course of this mortal
life, to live only upon the support of his proper innocence. For as the sun, as
bright and splendent as it is, may be darkened with the clouds, or shut up by
the appearing of the moon, that his light is stolen away to our thinking; even
so the greatest purity may be soiled by a false accusation, and the greatest
whiteness blacked by calumnious tongues. This Lord then, the which we are to
speak of, and whose name we will shadow under that of Timoleon, seeing himself
deprived of that ancient grace and favor which he had been accustomed to
gather every morning like a sweet Manna on the visage of his Prince, was sad
and melancholy, because he could not know wh^^ malicious tongue had caused all
this woe. And doubting ^^at the inveterate hatred which was betwixt his house
(...) his of this new Haman's of whom he had no looks but (...) one side,
procured him these good favors toward his (...); he essayed, but in vain, by
means of an excelent Est^^ that then reigned, to make known to his Sovereign
his faith (...) services: What shall I say? he employed the credit of a
Barshe^^ to this great Solomon, that the^ had an ascendant power over his
judgment, without being able to find the calm now changed by the winds of
preoccupations of a favor that put him in disfavour. This is the sport at
Court; a perpetual putting our all Jacobs supplanters; on O^ean that has his
(...) and flows continually, their risings and f^llings (...) Sea of glass
shining, but brittle; and by how much the (...) it shines the brighter. He sees
the edi^ice of his fortune; that looks like an old building sustained with his
own proper weight; he sees his ruin threatened by a secret Mine that promised
nothing but to reduce him to powder, if he should think to countermine. Favor
is a torrent that overthrows all that opposes against his strength; he must
give way, make the place large, it were folly to think to stay his course; it is
a brawl that comes from a superior power, as speaking of the makers of laws; an
inferior authority cannot withstand those that fortune conducts to that point,
and makes them masters and possessors of the hearts and ears of Sovereigns.
These are the Heroes that have I know not what of half between the condition,
and those of personages redoubtable, that the Ancients called Demy-gods. In
vain our Timoleon wrastles against this spirit, no greater then his, but far
stronger; he must yield and become lame, without having had any victory, like
Jacob. The houses of this old Mordecai, and this young Haman, were not only of
one Province, but also very near: And as it happens ordinarily, that friendship
or enmities are in extremes between neighbors, hatred rather then friendship
had continued as an inheritance betwixt these two families, although much
unequal; for this of our Timoleon in the country held another sort of rank,
carriage and good fashion then this other, which it is needless here to name,
unless for a simple opinion. But since such are the variable changes of humane
States, that as the Proverb says, the servant has outrun the master, and is
arrived in the ^ists of happiness: For this same leaving behind him an obse^^^
posterity, that dares no more appear before this other then a small star of the
lower heavens to a great Planet; such are the changes of this world, and thus
God holds the balance in the hand of his justice, by ways unknown to us
raising one and throwing down another, making of the same clay like a judicious
Potter now vessels of honor, and then vessels of ignominy.

Thus our Timoleon was forced to yield under weight of his disgrace; and as
great courages are nourished with favors of their Prince, could not endure to
see they should be grown cold in their affection; nor suffer the rising of this
new star whose brightness seemed as the sun to dim the small morning-stars, to
affront and darken this bright light which had shined so clear, at least with a
jealous envy which did torment him pitifully. So that without staying for a
shameful leave, prevented his disgrace, pretending to retire, desired leave to
sell his place. The King being good, although cold toward him, as having his
thoughts occupied with opinions unworthy of his worth and true services, and on
the other side being a wise Prince, would not give him the discontent, put him
off disgracefully, was very glad that this demand came of himself; Timoleon
having read in his face, that his absence would be as pleasing to him, as his
presence unpleasing. But to enter the synagogue honorably, after having thanked
him for his services showed to him and to his Ancestors in his office, which
appertained to the conservation of their persons, having been executed by him
and his family to the Kings his predecessors with all loyalty that Sovereigns
could desire of faithful subjects; his Majesty, commended his resolution,
which was to retire from the unquietness of the Court, to enjoy toward the end
of his days in his house a quiet tranquillity, which could not be tasted in
the affairs of the world. And because the King desired this office should fall
into the hands of a Lord, kinsman to the same we have described, and one who
had followed him in his journey to Poland, he made it known to Timoleon it
would please him to have it conferred on him; and for a recompense, he should
receive such as he should hold himself very well satisfied, making a show to be
very sorry that his son was not of years to execute it, who was brought up in
Court with other Noblemens sons; promising to acknowledge it when it should be
time, with some dignity or place that should not be less in value. There was
enough said, and wisely spoken for a Prince, that ought to hold it for a maxim
inviolable, not to let any one leave him ill-satisfied. But it is ill done to
jest with his Master; for the ears of Kings ought not to be employed but with
things that are pleasant, and with sweetness and humility. Timoleon having ill
practiced these rules, will have much le^sure to repent him; for being of a
high courage, and according to the name we give him, Heart of a Lion* when he
felt his honor touched, let himself be carried with passion, passing the terms
of respect which he ought to have used to his Sovereign; and being in a humor
common to most of that Nation of his Province, to vaunt and brag of his birth,
and to es^ee^^ his services and those of his Ancestors, without considering
that good deeds reproached take the quality of injuries: And speaking further,
it seemed he taxed his Majesty the libe^allest Prince that could be of
ingratitude toward him; nay more, of violence to force him to render his place
to one of the creatures of his enemy, being he had a design to leave the
exercises of it to one of his own kinsmen, to have yielded to his son when he
should come to years to execute it. Upon which there slipped from him many
strange words, that the Kings patience too much urged changed into such extreme
choler,(anger of Kings the wise man compares to the fierceness of a Lion, that
makes all tremble that hear them) that he commanded him to void the Court
within three days, and to take his son with him, giving him his own country
for banishment, and his house for his prison, with an express command never to
present himself before his face. He would have answered, having suddenly
repented; but the King retiring, left him there like a man struck with a
thunderbolt, before having seen the lightning. Truly these indiscretions are
insupportable; for as we ought not to write against those we know can return it
again, so we ought never to contend with those that with a look are able to
confound us. Behold Goliath, behold the Colosses of Nabuchadnezar broken with
one blow of thunder, and a blow of one stone: here is a fortune overthrown for
want of consideration; and Timoleon reduced even to the terms of despair,
imploys both young and old to obtain that at first so courteously was granted:
but all his means and those of his friends were in vain; for the King being
full of rage and ill opinions against him, accusing him of Rodomontadoes and
insolence, would show him he was the Master; and thus imitating God, whereof he
was the Image, he knew how to raise the humble, and cast down the proud.

His Enemy which lost no time, believing that his expulsion from Court would
give a greater freedom to his fortunes, and that the lessening of this house
would be a means to raise his own, obtained his office for his kinsman; which
to satisfy the murmures and whispers, Timoleon was but too happy to receive a
sad recompense far off from that he might have had, if retiring in appearance
with the favor of his Prince, and with hopes of better for his son. Here are
dear bravings; this last makes all the sweetness of the Court bitter: yet
having been accustomed, he leaves it unwillingly and with grief; as slaves
accustomed to servitude, their liberty seems wearisom; the air of the Country
that is so sweet to every one, to him is unpleasing, because he comes to be
commanded by his exile; his house which he ought naturally (...) love, being
become his prison, to fulfill the proverb, appears to him dark and loathsome,
although it were fair and large; the which being seated upon one of the fairest
Rivers in France, which has the view of two of the principal Cities of this
Kingdom, we will take the liberty to call it Bellerive; and that which made
this place seem less pleasing, besides the remembrance in what manner he left
the Court, which made him a subject for the discourse of all tongues, which are
ever ready on these occasions to the ordinary humor of men to desire that
which is forbidden, and to hate that which is commanded. This is the solitude
of a sad widowhood, the which he finds he is reduced to in age so advanced,
that if he should attempt a second shipwreck, would be laid open to the
laughter of all the world: And although that at this time he had need more then
at any other of a wife to have care of his person, and to have comforted him in
the government of his estate, a thing of Courtiers but very ill understood for
the most part. And certainly it seems that which God in the beginning of the
world said of the first man, we may now say to the worldly man, That it is not
good for him to be alone: for why? in the paradise of delights where Adam was
created, he gave him a companion full of sweetness and beauty, to the end that
nothing should be wanting that he could desire in this happy estate of
innocence. Although the house of Timoleon were the fairest of the world, yet
coming from the most excellent conversations, with which the Court was as then
both famous and in its luster; this sudden change much astonished him,
principally when in this wearisom sharp solitude his many businesses which his
long absence had made very troublesome, began now to be shut from all parts,
having seen himself at Court much made of by his Master, cherished by the
greatest, honored by his equals, obliging the meanest at his pleasure, in a
place of great esteem; at a blow here environed with the meanest of Nobility,
which with the appearance to honor him come with hope to devour him. All this
displeases him strangely; all his comfort is in his son, a complete Gentleman,
and of so good a fashion, as that the most curious and sumptuous King of the
world had chosen him to be of his chamber. But as of one side this fair
presence gave him content, seeing himself to live again in this young branch;
on the other side the heat of the wounds coming from the same place of his joy,
in considering how by his own folly he had ruined the fortune of this child,
having frozen him in his flower and root; this put him in an extreme
melancholy, that cannot be expressed but by those whose passions are only for
the advancement of their posterity. But what, is there no remedy? it is a bone
of a horse broken, which there is no means to set again. Now all his thoughts
are to marry his son, yet thinks he is too young to put him to the yoke, and
yet too old to be reprehended; he considered it would be very necessary to have
a fair and good daughter in law, which would be a great comfort to him in his
age, easing him of those houshold-cares and businesses, which to a noble
courage are far more troublesome then affairs of greater import; even as Flies
are more troublesome then beasts of greater stature which are more hurtful, by
reason of their continual importunity. Many times he would say to himself that
which the most ingenious of Poets said of the Father of Daphne, desiring
infinitely that this maid should leave the company and delights of Diana, and
put herself under the laws of Hymen. Daughter, bring me a son, if thou would
have
My name immortal, and survive the grave.
And many times our Timoleon would suddenly say to his son, Bring me a
daughter, that I may resign
The house to her, who must keep me and mine.
But this young Lord, which we will call Philippin, without much disguising the
name he received at his birth, very near that of the famous Apostle which
converted the Eunuch of the Queen of Candace, applying himself to games and
pastimes conformable to his humor and his years, gave little attention to
these fatherly admonitions; for what can one ingrave upon a Mercury not fixed,
or upon a running water which is never firm? Hunting is the principal exercise
of this Adonis; for to what could this generous and noble spirit addict himself
better, then to this occupation which is in peace the lively image of war.
Timoleon goes sometimes, but rarely, and sometimes to those which had more
strength; for the benefit, or if you will, the ill effect of years began now to
make him unable for these exercises; he loves his stable better then the
following hounds, or the prey, then to hunt it: On the contrary, Philippin
delights rather in the pursuit, then to see it in the dish. The young
Gentlemen thereabouts came often to this young Lord, he is much made of,
honored and respected of all; as it is the custom of Courtiers to adore rather
the sun rising then the going down. Whilst the Father feasts it with the aged,
Philippin spits the woods in company of the youth: like that young Ascanio near
the Prince of the Poets of the Romans, full of strength and valor, he asks no
more but even to encounter some huge Bore or furious Wolf, or some old Stag, to
show his strength by the greatness of his prize. But after so many preys, he
becomes a prey; after so many prizes he himself is taken, and all his strength
thrown to the ground, not by the teeth of a cruel Bore, nor by the horns of a
Stag, nor by a ravenous Wolf, but by the glance of an eye worse then that of
Basilisk; for this glance is his death, and which is worse, a miserable death.

There was in a fair valley very near to Bellerive, a little house belonging to
a Gentleman that was Tenant to Timoleon, the situation of which shall be the
occasion to call it Vaupre, by reason it was environed with delicate meadows
and pleasant brooks, which made the seat very delightful and pleasing; you
would have said, having seen it, though little, but very well composed and
trussed together, that it showed like a nosegay in the midst of a garden of
sweet flowers. It was possessed by a Master, in goods of fortune poor, but of a
brave and resolute courage, which will be well known in this our history under
the name of Pyrrhe, without altering his own but in one letter. This same had
of children a son and a daughter, sprung from a mother generous in all her
actions, which we will name Valentine. So that as Eagles do not engender Doves,
these Children were nothing but courage and generosity: The daughter which we
must call Isabella, brought into this condition by her brother, which shall be
known under the name of Harman, leaving in her most tender years the
occupations ordinary to her sex, gave herself to exercises of arms and hunting
with such strength and address, that she was much admired of all the
neighborhood, and esteemed another Amazon. Her Father liking this humor in
her, was well pleased to see her ride a horse like man, to run at the ring, and
to vault, to fence, and handle a harquebuzer, and to these contributed his own
help and industry. The mother was not displeased, as judging there was no point
of honor lost, of which she was very jealous. So now as things strange and new
are most esteemed, so these qualities extraordinary gave such a fame to this
maid, that all the valleys did resound of nothing but her praises; and the
eccho's gave an envy to the hearers, to see this wonder to all those that heard
of her.

There was no assembly of hunting where she was not yet always accompanied with
either her father or brother: And as she was alone in her fashions, so she
showed with so much the more advantage, and always accompanied with so much
modesty, as her presence unaccustomed filled the hearts and eyes of the
beholders with admiration and astonishment: For she had been very well brought
up, very ready in any thing she undertook; she spoke with great discretion; her
actions were composed, and at pleasure detained, and although she gave some what
a lively natural liking to these exercises so far from her condition, yet
nevertheless it was with so much simplicity and so little vanity, as if malice
it self should have strove to have bit, she made herself not only
irreprehensible, but commendable. And would to God that she had either
continued in these terms, or that she had been retained within the bounds of
those exercises fitting her sex; we should not then see her defamed as she
will be, nor the only instrument of these tragic businesses, the which
bloodies the course of this History. The reputation of this Diana was not long
before it came to the ears of Philippin; the which more for curiosity then for
any affection he had ever experimented, desired to see her a hors-back, and
made this request to her father, whom he saw often, who would not deny so small
a courtesy to his Landlords son, and the which should one day be his chief
jewel. There is a match made for hunting the Stag; Pyrrhe and Herman bring
Isabella to the sport; who without any other design then that which all those
of her sex have, to seem pleasing to the eyes of those which did with
curiosity consider her, put herself in such order, as her natural graces not
being small, were much heightened with art, that it was very easy for her to
draw upon her the eyes of all that troop. I will not trouble my self with the
description of her form, nor of the habit: For although the picture of her
fashion might much set forth and beautify this discourse, being dressed; yet
nevertheless to show the beauty of virtue and deformity of vice, rather then to
present corporal perfections, it shall suffice me to show the cause by the
effect, in saying that fire takes not hold so soon of the Nap^h^ of Babylon, or
of the herb called Aproxis, as this of Love seized on the heart of this young
Philippin at the presence of this object, which appeared to him the fairest
that ever he had seen: The sight of his person was so ravished in this
contemplation, carrying such a dimness into that of his understanding, that he
lost both his liberty and the knowledge of himself; so as may be said of him
these words of an ancient Poet, His optick-nerves, when this star shined,
Were Planet-smitten, and turned blind.
This great blow struck him in such; sort, as he remained pensive and
astonished, all the time of the hunting; he did nothing but rub over again his
new wound, being more devoured in his thoughts then Actaeon was with his
hounds: His heart was of soft wax for the impression of this seal; and this
excellent form finding a soul as innocent as the whitest paper, drew a line so
strong that death it self defaced the character. Isabella employed in the
pursuit of the Stag, thought least of this new prize, not esteeming him coming
newly from a Court as full of rare objects as there are stars in the skies
shining in the night, would cast his eyes so low as on her rusticity, nor being
so presumptuous to raise hers so high as his with any design to make him her
captive, to whom she owed all sort of obedience. So that the heart of
Philippin, was a broken Looking-glass to receive the beams of this new light,
and hers a Glass embossed which threw beams of deep impression. Oh how happy
had she been still to have done so* an eternal blame would not then have
covered her memory.

The issue of the hunting had such success as one would desire; and when
Isabella had given good testimony of her skill in riding, and of her
understanding in this exercise, Philippin is returned to Beleriue, carrying to
his father the head of a great Stag, the which had given them great pain in the
taking; not without recounting the wonders of this Amazon with terms of that
advantage, that it was easily judged he had considered her with very much
attention; and yet he spoke not the half of what he thought, and yet enough to
make Timoleon desire to see this Damosel, that knew by skill to manage a horse
with as much skill as any Gentleman in these quarters. There is a new assembly
made for hunting, where Timoleon sees and admires her, wondering to see so much
strength and vigor in one of her sex, which usually have weakness and debility
for their part, and considering that all which is extraordinary has a kind of
excellence. I say nothing of her beauty, because I neither understand truly to
consider it, nor how to write of it; yet they say she past all mediocrity, and
being accompanied with so much grace and good fashion, that the setting surpast
the richness of the stone, and the fashion surpast the stuff. So that Philippin
is not only touched, but transported; for to him all was admirable in her. This
is not sure that huntsman which lately had nothing in his head but woods and
hounds; his imagination is so transported and filled with this new passion,
that there is hardly left place in himself for himself; for reason, that is
quite banished; this deity fills all his senses; he is become sad and
melancholy; and he that heretofore could not understand other passion then an
earnest desire to be riding and running, is now become grave and reserved, much
unbefitting his years; and losing no occasion of hunting where he thinks he may
be so happy as to meet her, who has thus taken him; on the contrary it is that
which he seeks, and with so much curiosity, that he seems rather to fly then
go; more lover then hunter in place of her, whose thoughts are more of her game
then any way touched with love. Thus he sees often Isabel, but speaks of
nothing less then of his passion, covering it with the excess of his gravity,
as there appears not so much as a spark in appearance. Wasting the precious day
and night, I move
In vain those motions of a fruitless love.
This Io is kept by two Arguses, which have their eyes as sharp as those of
Linx; this garden of golden apples is kept by two Dragons always waking for
their preservation. So that Philippin sees before his eyes The paradise, whose
wretched pleasure is
An hell of virtue, or a black abyss.


But who can carry fire in his breast long, says the wise man, without showing
some flame, or at least smoke? The continual praises of this Virgin, that like
lively flames came from the mouth of this young Lover from the furnace of his
heart, were testimonies enough to Timoleon, whom years had taught the excess of
this furious passion, and that the gentle fashion and beauty of this Maid were
fixed in the eyes of his son: For as Physicians will give strong and great
opinions of the indispositions of men by the sight of their tongues, even so
our own speech will betray our interior thoughts to persons of quick
understanding; and who knows not that the birds, and other beasts of the earth,
by their continual cries and stuttering make known to those that understand
them the heat which moves them when they are touched with the thing we call
Love?

At the first the good man disdained to give a remedy, esteeming it was but a
flame flying light, and might be extinguished with the blast of his word. But
his wisdom found himself deceived: for not having well practiced this precept,
That in ills of this kind we must at the beginning give remedies, Antidotes
late and out of season being improper to take away these inveterate
impressions. The whilst this little Butter-flie burns inconsiderately the wings
of his desire about this torch, which will be his end. Here is nothing but
visits to Vaupre, and matches for hunting; which he cares not much for, but as
Dido loved it for to see her Aeneas, without his Diana it is to no purpose:
Isabella is the star that lightens the darkest obscurities of the woods. When
they are returned, he cannot speak without protesting, that as she is the
honor of the Forests, so she is the fortune of their prize; he should say his
misfortune, as she will be one day the dishonor of his house. So that even as
that cunning Anne, sister to the Queen of Carthage, found that Dido was touched
with the perfections of her new guest whom the tempests had forced to land in
her ports, by the excessive praises which she raised of his merits, esteeming
him a man descended of the race of gods: even so this young bird began to
discover his note without shadowing his passion to the public knowledge of
men, and boasts of it. He is ordinarily at Vaupre, drawn by the invisible
chains of his affections; and when he is at Belleriue, he is there in his
thoughts: for why? the soul is more in the object beloved then in its own body
that keeps it. But because he cannot accost this beauty without being
acquainted with her mother Valentine, and her father and brother, he so
subtilises his passion, which is the mother of inventions, to win these three's
affections, which are very proud of these visits; and when they perceived what
he sought, they esteemed themselves as much honored, as the Match would be
advantageous for them. Already Pyrrhe, and Valentine feed themselves with smoke
of this great alliance; and Isabella, which was not made of brass, seeing her
self so religiously served and honored by this young Lord, foresaw things to
her highest hopes, let herself be carried away with a reciprocal liking; in the
which neither the one nor the other could have any blame; for almost their
affections had one end by that great Sacrament which our Lord Jesus Christ
instituted in his Church.

It is neither my humor nor my design to set down here what past in their
woing: for besides that I must either fain or divine; and although I should
know the truth, I esteem it not fit with such small entertainments to stay my
pen any longer, pretending rather to write of tragic actions then of affected
speeches. Well, our Philippin is very welcome, well received according to his
merit, and the quality of his person obliged his vassals of which he desired
alliance; all were content, as they say, without their Host. For Timoleon
perceiving clearly at length, that this affection took too great root in the
heart of his son; having once showed and admonished him that he should do
better to keep company with his equals, and not to be continually with his
inferiors; and that his too much frequenting of Vaupre going and coming, were
not pleasing to him. This was rather to augment his passion, then any way to
dissuade him from it: For in place of facility, the difficulty made him more
desirous and eager in this pursuit. Even as the fire in the forge is made more
violent rather then quenched by the often sprinkling of water; so this Father
of his being terrible severe, the least word of his being like a flash of
lightning which made his son tremble, he is become now more reserved in his
visits. But as fire shut up in a furnace is much more hot then when it is free
and in the air, so it is in the heart of this young Philippin. Letters, which
make absence present, are not spared: Isabella having permission of her friends
to entertain this match, is no nigard of her answers. And even as in those
Nations bordering upon France, where the women are kept in a continual prison,
and in so slavish a servitude as is impossible to be conceived, the least
action serves for a grant to those that seek them; it was so here; for at these
stolen visits, by a thousand arts which affection teaches, the protestations
of fidelity were so strong and vehement which Philippin made, vowing and
protesting that he could never be any others but Isabella's: This maid assured
for her part to this Lord, that she would never receive other affection but
his. Yet those enterviews being kept close from Timoleon, were nevertheless
always in presence of her mother or father, or at least her brother, as those
stampers in the golden mines; so that her honor could not receive the least
blemish, no, not so much as a thought.

Timoleon, which had his watchful spies upon the actions of his son, has some
notice of these secret meetings: which makes him raise his voice, and check his
son more bitterly for his disobedience, and with such threats which much
astonished the heart of this young youth, yet no way removed his love; but on
the contrary, like those rubies of Ethiopia, which being put in vinegar
redouble their luster, became more stubborn for these reproofs full of sharp
bitterness: And that which gave the most lively touch of his cruelty, was the
forbidding of Herman the conversation of his son, which was brother to Isabel;
for in the absence of the sister, Philippin took such delight in the presence
of her brother, that he could not be without him, and had as it were taken him
to be about him. This was a kind of an affront to Herman, and which offended
Pyrrhe; who, although the meanest Gentleman, yet had a courage such as could
not suffer of his Landlord, nor of a Prince the least word or action which
should not only hurt, but touch his honor. So that being touched with a kind
of revenge, after having made known his complaints to his neighbors of this
usage of Timoleon, he thought with himself to forbid Philippin his house, which
was to use as his equal his superior. Here is Herman, Philippin, and Isabella
in all the troubles of the world. Timoleon puts a man to his son, which should
have charge to look to all his actions, with an express command never to leave
him, or to be so much as a foot from him; leaving anything else to his pleasure
and free liberty, what he could desire. On the other side, Isabel is kept up
very strictly by her mother, nor ever gets leave to stir out of the house,
which is an impenetrable goal. Philippin gets no more access: Timoleon laughs
at Pyrrhe for having forbid him, being the greatest favor he could have done
him. There rests nothing but only their Pens, the which we give the name of
certain Birds, because they fly and enter every where. By this means they make
known their griefs; and this Danae complains of the cruelty of Acrise, which
augments the desire in him that seeks her to find the invention of Jupin. But
notwithstanding all this, his active heat which like thunder pierces and enters
all sorts of obstacles, in spite of all the watches of one side and the other,
shows them means to see and speak together. The extreme love and affection
that was between Herman and Philippin, the which had some resemblance of that
of David and Jonathan, brought forth this commodity. They meet at the hunting:
And as Philippin made his complaint to him whom already he esteemed as his
brother, of the extreme cruelty of Timoleon and of Pyrrhe, which in despite of
their worst nothing should alter him from the design he had to marry his
sister; Herman, who much pitied this young Youth whom he saw in so sensible
grief, gave him counsel to have patience, and to remit it to time, which might
change and give some ease to his griefs; and excusing his father who had forbid
him his house, that it was not for any malice to him, whom he extremly loved
and honored for the worthy seeking his alliance, but to let Timoleon know that
he ought not to use a Gentleman in that fashion, or to slight him so.

All this did not heal Philippin, who could no way admit of this long absence;
and in the impatience of his displeasure protested to dye a languishing death,
if there were no means for him to show to her which possessed him the assured
testimonies of his faith, either by verbal promises, or by writing, that might
tie him so to her, as it should be impossible to disengage them, in despite of
the cruel usage of their pa^^n^ts; and rather submitting themselves to all
sorts of misfortunes, then to fail in the least point of their resolution, even
where passion should go to the greatest excess of cruelty against their youth.
Herman, who passionately desired this alliance for his proper a advancement,
was easily persuaded to find commodity for this enterview, which was very easy
for him to find, his sister not being otherwise kept but within the closure of
the walls of Vaupre. He returns again to Philippin, and after having conferred
with his sister, told him he should come in the night, and promised him to
speak with his sister Isabella at a window in her house, provided that it might
be in his presence. The which Philippin, who had no ill intent, yielded to very
voluntarily. There is preparation for hunting the Bore: Herman is there in
company of a Gentleman of the Country, a neighbor which was invited by
Timoleon and Philippin. There are toils pitched in diverse places where they
think the horrible beast should pass; the word is given between Herman, and
Philippin for to retire themselves; they are trusted through many woods; at
last their hunting is ended, without ever once getting the prey into their
tolls. At their return Philippin is not to be found; they hold him lost in the
woods; but this cunning old man doubting of the cause of his absence, was very
angry with this old Gentleman whom he had commanded not to let him go out of
his sight, commanding him to go and watch all night at Vaupre, to see if he
were not gone thither: for if he were lost in the woods, it was an accident
which often happens to Huntsmen; but if he were in the place he had forbidden
him, he had prepared a rude reprehension.

He was but too good a Diviner: For Scipion (so was this Gentleman called which
had this charge of him) failed not to meet with the encounter: For coming to
Vaupre just at midnight, where the neighing of a horse gave him sufficiently to
understand there were Sentinels which watched without, he left his horse tied
to a tree far enough from being seen, and came himself stealing softly near the
place, and had the pastime to hear the discourse of this young couple, which
cut their own throats with their own knives. But he was most troubled to hear
the verbal contracts of marriage which past between them in the presence of
Herman, taking God and the heavens to witness of their constant resolutions;
adding to that by the hands of her brother he received promises reciprocally in
writing, to the end that the reproach of Infidelity might rest upon the
foreheads of those that should upon any occasion be the breakers; protesting
solemnly, that neither the violence of their parents, nor any other humane
power should ever break this knot, but it should be inviolably kept and
maintained just unto death: And after some rings given and received in sign of
this alliance, they parted with much joy of that which they had promised and
sworn, and with grief to break off this sweet company. A hundred times Scipion
was just at the point to discover himself to have broken this business, which
infinitely displeased him; but for fear to put this young Gentleman into a
despair, he durst not; for if he had found himself discovered, his love would
have kindled such a choler in him, as he would have killed this Spy in the
field, who rather chose to serve himself with the Foxes skin then the Lions,
esteeming that wisdom would find easier ways to remedy these follies then
force; certainly follies, by the fashion of their carriage, which were neither
unlawful nor dishonorable in their affections, all that was being in the
unequality of their conditions.

Timoleon is advertised of all this business by Scipion and falls into such a
fury, as he was very cholcrick; that there wanted not much, without saying any
thing else to his son, to have shut him up in a prison for a long time,
intending to use him so severely, as he would make him repent of his youthful
inconsiderateness. Besides, knowing that these secret promises are not to be
esteemed by divine nor humane laws, so as he jested at this, promising to break
them as chains of glass: but he means to teach this Gallant to play him no more
of these tricks in this kind. He comes home the next morning to Bellerive,
feigning to have been lost in the woods, and to have been all night on
horseback; and in that he spoke but truth.

But cunning Timoleon bridled his anger at his first sight, to the end to make
his correction more penetrating, being done in cold blood; and withal thinking
by deferring his displeasure, to get into his hands those writings which had
passed between them, which should have been returned of Herman, the which
Scipion had advertised him of. He corrupts all his sons Footmen, to the end to
discover this business, but in vain, for the business was already done: For at
break of day, Herman coming out of Vaupre, and having brought to Philippin that
of his sister, and receiving of Philippin his, which he would have signed with
his blood (an ordinary ferventness in young men in the like occasions) if
Herman had not hindered him.

In vain did Timoleon hope to surprise that which was already received. But
understanding by the treason of a Lacquay, that Herman and Philippin did meet
in many places, but with such artificious subtilty, as the eyes of Scipon were
still deceived: At this Timoleon lost all sort of patience; and taking his son
aside, after having dimmed his eyes with flashes of his own full of anger, made
him understand, and should feel the thunder of his threats, if he left not the
conversation of Herman, and the foolish love to his sister, so far unfit for
his quality. At which this young Courage was like to have fallen down at this
so sudden fright: For searching excuses the best colored he could, he found
himself so taken, that the more he sought to cover, the more he dishonored his
passion; and the more he spoke, the less made himself understood.

Timoleon judging by the often changing of his color, and alteration of his
discourse so far from purpose, the confusion of his thoughts and the
apprehension of his soul, yet redoubled this perplexity of relating the
particularities of these meetings with Herman, he found certainly, he was
betrayed. But more following this discourse, by discovering of his speech with
Isabella and Herman near the walls of Vaupre, the night he feigned to be lost,
with the same words and promises, and those also in writing which should be put
into the hands of his pretended brother-in-law; this frighted him in such sort,
as thinking for certain it had been his Father which had heard this Comedy, he
fell down at his feet, craving a thousand pardons, beseeching him to attribute
this to the excess of his passion, which may well bring Youth to these strange,
courses, being Age it self when it is touched, is subject to commit many the
like follies.

Timoleon made tender by these submissions, and believing he had applied the
iron to the fire of this ulcer in such manner as it was healed; promised him to
forget what was passed, so that hereafter he would carry himself, with
obedience to his commands and discretion in his actions, so that he might
believe certainly that arrow was out of his flanks, and this vain affection
quite removed from his heart.

But as youth is like soft wax, that receives all forts of impressions, and
keeps not one; so Philippin promises what one would have him, being resolved
not to maintain any thing that the apprehension of fear makes him say, his love
being far stronger then his fear. When retired from his fathers sight, like a
Criminal from the Tribunal of his Judge, it was then he blamed himself of
weakness and want of courage; and giving himself a thousand injurious names,
accusing his fearfulness, and protesting a new loyalty and service to this Idol
which swam in his fancy, he rubbed his sore, and invenomed his wound by this
constraint, disanuling all he had said in prejudice of his promise; he renews
his meetings and secret practices with Herman. But being sold by his Lacquays
in whom he trusted most, who for hansel of their treachery put many of his
letters and those of Isabels into the hands of Timoleon, by which he understood
that reciprocal promises had been given on both sides; which made him enter
into such an extreme choler, as he had never had the like, sometime threatening
to ruin Pyrrhe and all his house, and then to be revenged on his son for this
disobedience, as also to publish the shame of Isabella. Being transported to
these extremities by his choler, he calls his son the second time; and after
having reviled him with all the outrageous speeches that could be imagined,
esteemed this relapse worse then his first fault.

This young Lion having taken courage for the shame of his last flight, like
him which said of himself, If I fled at the first encounter, it was to return
the second time to fight with more resolution; setting aside those invective
speeches of his father, which his duty bound him to endure; after some holy
protestations of the honor and reverence which he would always give him, he
told him plainly, and in a fashion of that height more then the spirit of
Timoleon could endure, that he would lose a thousand lives rather then to fail
in the least point of his love; that his honor was engaged by word and by
writing, and that his soul should never receive other impression but that of
Isabella's; the which was a Gentlewoman, and of that birth, as she could
receive no reproach for her Nobility, having no other wants but the goods of
fortune; esteeming rather to choose a wife which had virtues and perfections in
abundance, then one with great wealth, which should have nothing more
unpleasing then herself; and that this affection of his was led rather by
reason then passion, honor and marriage having been the end of his
pretensions; and if there Were any thing worthy reprehension; it was his
carriage, not any thing in Isabella or Herman; and for himself, he was resolved
never to leave their friendships for all the violence could be used on him,
choosing rather to suffer the extremity of cruelty, and the worst of
indignities, which should be like flames to purify his fidelity to the proof:
And (as God lives) answered Timoleon, we will see whose head is best, yours or
mine: How now, Gallant! what, scarce born, and are you at your defiance with
me? I Will make thee as supple as glove, and to bend to my will, and break that
stubborn will of yours, though it cost me my life and goods, and yours too; I
will teach you the duty of a son, and the authority of a father, said he. And
so turning from him, he commanded to put Philippin in a chamber which served
for a prison, to the end to teach this young bird to sing another tune.
Philippin goes very joyfully contented, to give a testimony of his firmness and
constancy of his flames. But that which put him in an extreme agony, was to
hear that his father having searched his chamber, and his secret Cabinet
wherein were his sweetest ties, amongst a thousand Letters seized of the
Promise of Isabella, at which he made a trophie of mockery and laughter, and
would have made a sacrifice of it and of his choler to the fire. For now as
being transported, what says he not against his father and his ill fortune, and
against heaven? Truly those things, which ought not to be repeated, but
thoroughly blamed. Yet nevertheless comforting himself upon the word of his
Mistress, which he esteemed beyond all the writings in the world, he resolves
upon the common remedy of all the ills of the world, Patience: Not but that the
wearisomness of a prison was extremely sensible to this stirring spirit, active
and full of heat; yet in this extreme youth, which is nothing but fire and
life, the tediousness is redoubled by being deprived of news, which served at
least in this his constraint of liberty to diminish his flame. Before he hoped
all, and feared nothing; now fears all, and has no hope But in the faith of
the brother and sister. He fears that those Letters should come to the hand of
Pyrrhe and Valentine, they would not take occasion to ease their childrens ill,
His thoughts are so troubled, as when he rests in this prison he thinks he is
environed with a thousand thorns; he suspects all which come near him, as he
had reason, being made so many spies by Timoleon's means: He wants wherewith to
corrupt them; this metal which changes courages, fails him; and his servants,
whom his father had made his, dare not yield to pity this young Lord. He
thinks to entertain them with discourse; yet seeing pity dead in some, and
affection in others, refused all, to entertain himself with his own private
thoughts, the only recreation that accompanied him; which in stead of
diverting him, nourished his displeasures. It Is Music which has that
property, to make them merry which are content, and those which are sad more
melancholy: He plays reasonable well on the Lute, and sings well enough for a
young Cavalier, who was more given to violent exercises then to these sweet and
peaceable. One day, for to expel the grief he felt, in these words expressing
Hopeless and helpless in my sad distress,
I sink, my griefs admitting no redress.
Thus the imprisoned Philippin comforted himself the best it was possible: But
at last being not able to bear this weak and melancholy life, nor having any
with whom he might freely converse, his thoughts giving way to the vehemency
of his desires, he was constrained to yield himself to the mercy of a sickness,
which brought him so low as within a foot of his grave; had it not been for his
youth, good temper, and strong disposition, with the help of the Physicians and
good means applied, he was even at the last point to lose his life; and that
most affected the sad father, to see at point of death his only son. Knowing
the cause which brought him to this pitiful estate, he repented a thousand
times the cruelties he had used; an hundred times he promised him, but with
words far from the thoughts of heart, to give him Isabel to wife. At which name
this poor dying man seemed to enjoy new life; of such, strength is the empire
of Love in the most violent pangs of death. His soul took strength at this
feeble hope to encourage his body, and by little and little the hopes of life
came again, but yet so leisurely he recovered, as rather languishing then
living, they knew not what to do to restore him. Timoleon having many houses,
had him conveyed from one to another, to try if the change of air would give
him health: but it comes as heavy as lead, although his sickness came post;
certainly it is easy to descend, says the Poet, but very hard to get up. The
farther he went from Bellerive, the worse he was, because he was further off
Vaupre, where was the only remedy of his longings, and the only air that could
recover him.

The end of the first Book.
ELISE, OR Innocence guilty. The Second Book.
NOt far from the Pyrene Mountains, amongst many very pleasant habitations,
there is a little Hill, that for the beauty and fertility of it, the
inhabitants call Gold-Mount. Here Timoleon has a Castle, that has two
properties which lightly are not found together, being both strong and fair,
environed with a pleasant country, and accommodated with all the delights one
can desire in a Country House. He commands Philippin to be removed thither, and
accompanies him himself. But by reason they separated him from the Center of
his affections, all these sweet delights of this pleasant Country were to him
bitter and unpleasing: they are constrained to bring him back again to
Bellarive; where when as he began by little and little to get strength, helped
by the hope he had not to be any more crossed in his love; Timoleon having made
Scipion tell him, that now he thought no more of those promises which he had
made him, that he did it but to cozen his disease; he fell suddenly into such a
terrible frenzy, that whereas in his first sickness they thought only of the
loss of his life, this second they thought to take away his wits; for this
troubled him so strangely, and produced such unformed actions and fearful
words, as none had ever heard tell of the like raving. Here is Timoleon more
afflicted then ever; and the Physicians much troubled to find the cause of this
new disease of body, not any way considering the troubles of his mind, but only
by conjectures drawn from the sympathy of the two principal parts which
compose our being, they imagine that having been bred at Paris and at Court,
the air of the Country is not so natural as that of the Town for him, and that
his sadness causes these strange humors in his spirit. Timoleon is persuaded
the same, and resolves to bring him to a place where the frequenting of company
might divert him from these melancholy fits. Billerive is but a days journey
from one of the principal Cities in France, where he may go without passing the
bounds of his exile, which was not limited but within his own Province. There
are more store of Physicians and remedies at hand, and spiritual Comforters in
greater number. His rank and quality noted in the Country, made him at first
coming visited by many of the chiefest persons of remark. Time, which is the
great Physician of the affliction of the spirit, having drawn away the clouds
which suffocated the reason of Philippin, renders him now more fit for
consolation then he had been before; and this house in Town seeming more like
the life and air of the Court his first element, gives him some ease of his
many sufferings. Here of a sudden he is returned to his senses and perfect
health; yet nevertheless always his heart returns toward Vaupre, as loving
that side of the North. Many visits he has every day, as much for the respect
of his father, as for the sweetness of his own conversation. Though not quite
healed of his wound, nothing is so pleasing to him as to steal by himself
sometimes, to contemplate his thoughts in the object he could not see but with
the eyes of his understanding. As many men as attend him, are as so many
Watches; so that he might say as the holy Scripture says, So many domestics,
as many enemies.

Timoleon, which saw this fire was covered with ashes, not quite out; pressed
in part with desire to divert his son from this affection prejudicial to the
greatness of his house, and partly with desire to see him married, which of
necessity must be done; sometimes consulting if he should send him into Italy,
or to travel into Spain, or to employ him in the Town in those exercises which
young Noblemen ordinarily use. His friends counseled him not to send him into
those strange Countries so suddenly after his sickness; it is his only son, the
light of his eyes, the staff of his age; this changing of Country will not
change his affection, as marriage would. All conclude, that marriage was a tie
that would settle him in peace, and bring him comfort, and assure his house,
withdrawing him from all these youthful passions. Timoleon makes choice of
this, forced to it by his domestic necessities; for his so long having been a
Courtier, living at a great height of expense, had brought him much behind-hand
and in great debts, having been constrained to mortgage a good part of his
estate. A good portion would clear all this. This deliberation made known,
there would not need much time to find a fit Match for him, as being of so
noble a house; the best in that Town would be very proud of his alliance, to
match their daughter so honorably. A Magistrate of a sovereign Company,
wonderful rich, having but two Daughters, the eldest being married to one of
the Officers of this Estate, the second we will call Elise for two reasons; for
truly she bore the name of the famous Cousin visited by the Mother of our
blessed Savior, when she was with child of the Forerunner of Messiah; and
because methinks she has something in her innocence found fit to be compared
to the Queen of Carthage, whom the Prince of the Roman Poets, that pleasing
lyre, has taxed with having committed a fault with Aeneas, of which she is
revenged by those which have written the true history of her chaste carriage.

This younger was a Maid, although but indifferently endowed with the gifts of
nature in what concerns the face, in so much as she was judged better for a
Wife then for a Mistress; but on the other side she was so endowed with virtue,
and with that which most esteem, riches, that this abundance of gold was able
to make any one to think deformity it self fair. Timoleon sees this Maid for
his Son, and like him which more considered her wealth then her form, finds
that this great portion would quite clear all his affairs, and disengage all
his house. He speaks with Scevole (thus we will name this Magistrate, father of
this Gentlewoman) who is not slow in opening his eyes on this great alliance,
and promises to set all his rest, and to make Elise his absolute heir
universal, so it may be accomplished. To ask and obtain, is all one thing. She
is something elder then the Youth; but that is no matter, that is the least,
Timoleon cares not for that; he shall have crowns in abundance, and which is
more, an Officer which will maintain and govern all the businesses of his
house. He concludes it absolutely with Scevole, who doubts nothing of the
obedience of his daughter, though Timoleon cannot assure himself of his sons.
Yet resolved to employ his force where love could get no place, one day having
called him, makes a speech to him with all the sweetness he could borrow of his
pride and greatness of his spirit: He showed him the debts and necessities of
his house, of which the fall and ruin was at hand, if it were not restored by
some rich Match, and therefore counseled him to think seriously on it,
forgetting his unworthy thoughts of that Isabel which had almost lost him his
life and wits too, and to bestow his love upon some Lady of the City, without
thinking longer of this Country-wench. Does not he play the father of Sampson,
seeking to turn his son from the marriage of Dalilah?

His son finding himself used with all sort of sweetness, having heretofore
found nothing but rough carriage, found himself touched in the tendrest of his
affections. But as it is impossible that a new Vessel should lose the smell and
color of the liquor with which it has been first filled; he was in great pain
how to answer his father according to his desire: And yet not willing to set
him abroad to no purpose, he esteemed it better to direct his speech with that
government, as might not seem altogether to oppose him. He began to consider
the necessities of his house, yet not esteeming them other but that his father
might repair them with good husbandry. But when he was urged by his father to
seek a Match in the Town, after having excused himself of his tenderness of
years unapt for that; Timoleon having taken him at that word, told him he ought
not then to do it with Isabel. Sir, I believe it, replied he, that marriages
are made in heaven, and practiced on earth; and it is hard to resist the
influence of this cause, being concluded above to that point. And therefore he
besought him to pardon him, having received of God free will, and not of him:
Although the respect he ought him might hinder him from marrying, yet his
authority should not be so tyrannous as to make him take a wife against his
will: For hot being possible to have both, he could never be others then hers,
whom the heavens and his consent had first given him. Scarce had Timoleon
patience to hear his last word with a dying liberty, when putting himself into
his accustomed threats and revilings, yet withholding himself in the midst of
this torrent as impetuous as impious, for fear to put this young Lord into
those extremities which his violent cruelty had heretofore reduced him to. So
constraining his nature, he cast himself on rebellion and disobedience, and
ingratitude of children; saying they were accompanied with the pride of
liberty, that without any wisdom or experience they will make laws to their
fathers, and by their sottish love and particular fancies bring desolation to
their house. With this his choler made him utter many frivolous threats; as,
That if he did not marry, he would disinherit him, and give him his curse if he
should ever marry with his Vassal, reproaching him of baseness and poorness of
spirit; withal speaking many invective words against this Gentlewoman, by
reason of her skill in so many exercises, the rock and wheel being fitter for
her. To all which Philippin answered with silence; excusing himself, that
having given his word and promise in writing given and received, he could not
before God nor men take other wife but Isabel, without deceiving her. Hereupon
Timoleon consulted with Scevole; yet hiding most part of his displeasure, and
these denials of Philippin: This foolish Boy (says he) being abroad one day,
falls in love with a Tenants daughter of mine, a Gentleman here by, and so far
as he has promised marriage; Can this promise bind him? To which Scevole
answered, no; but that all these private contracts, secret practices and flying
oaths, promises by word or by writing, were as air or running water. Timoleon
joyed as if Scevole had given him life, goes and consults with the Theologians,
which teach him the same doctrine, the last Council of Oecumenie declaring null
all marriages clandestine.

He returns to his son, of whom he promised himself an assured victory: For
having demanded of him if he would submit himself to his obedience, if he did
show him that all his oaths and signings were worth nothing; now this youth
esteeming them in full strength, yielded to give him all honor and respect: He
brings a company of Lawyers and Divines to decide this difficulty before him;
but he esteeming it a trick, would not believe them. He gives him liberty to go
to any of the Town, to enquire himself; where having found conformity in all,
he was much astonished, finding himself taken by the nose, to the prejudice of
his affection. He must doubt no more. Whilst he strives to hinder these baits,
and to kick against the pricks, the more he fills his way, and puts himself
into blame and ill opinion of all, and encourages his father to use his
authority, who has no watch but on his goods. He is reprehended of rebellion
and disobedience: here is heaven and earth against him, stoned with the reasons
of all those which have no feeling or sense of his love. One day seeing himself
vanquished by his fathers propositions, which like a cunning Fencer pressed him
still further; after having put the shame in his face, and turned all the fault
on him; Sir, answered he, they which will ask a reason for Love, may as well
seek fresh water in the sea, or birds in the floods, and fishes in the air: For
the reason of Love is Love it felf, whose empire is so strong, as it maintains
it self good against our selves, forcing us to do that we would not, and making
us do that we ought not. It Is true, these promises by words or writing are
nothing in right, but yet in deed, for the one and the other are in being: That
which I received of Isabel, is in your power; but that which I writ and sealed,
is in her hands. I know not how to resolve my self of this shameful denial, as
long as these are in being firm; for they will serve for an eternal reproach of
my infidelity, which will be to my perpetual shame.

Is this the cause, quoth Timoleon, that withholds you from showing your duty
in obeying my commands? Why, whether Pyrrhe will or no, it shall be very easy
for me to break and make it of no effect. He suddenly dispatches Scipion to
Vaupre with the Promise of Isabel, to deliver into into the hands of her
father, and to demand that of his son; who was much astonished to hear this
news by the mouth of Scipion, with letters of credit from Timoleon: For as all
this business was practiced without his knowledge, he was much displeased that
his daughter durst proceed so far without his consent, fearing some further
business: but understanding of Scipion that had been an eyewitness of that
nights meeting, that all their discourse was performed according to laws of
honor, and in presence of Harman, who had received the promises in writing on
the one part and the other; he had reason to say the same which the despiteful
Juno said against the Goddess of Cypres, in the greatest of Poets: Thou have
acquired victory, whose fame
Shall add eternal trophies to thy name.
Fair Venus and thy Son, whose powers all do
Invoke with honor, and with reverence too:
If powerful Gods with subtilties do subdue
A woman in those arts she never knew.
For how was it possible that poor Isabella should not yield at the persuasions
of a brother, proposing the greatness of a Marriage, on which (said he) depends
the happiness of our house; besides, being pressed by his ardent affection to
Philippin, which in his person wanted not perfections to deserve the love and
service of all. Now Pyrrhe, although poor in the goods of fortune, was
nevertheless so rich in honor, that he would not by any unlawful means have
come to a better. Having then promised Scipion to give Timoleon all
contentment, and to employ his uttermost power for to return the Promise of
Philippin; he called aside his son and daughter in the presence of their
mother, and chid them sharply for their proceedings; telling them how he had
discovered from point to point (as he had heard from Scipion though not naming
him) their nights-meeting, their discourse, and promises given in writing.

You never saw any so astonished as Harman and Isabel were; who threw herself
at her fathers feet, asking pardon, excusing herself by the permission she had
to entertain this seeking of Philippin. But Harman more courageous, taking all
the fault on him, besought his father to excuse the innocence of his sister,
for whom he thought to procure a fortune very advantageous, nothing having past
in all their affections which might any way alter the reputation of their
family. But where is this Promise of Philippin's? quoth Pyrrhe. The which
Isabel, who carried it ordinarily in her bosom, gave freely into her fathers
hands to dispose of as he thought fit. They consuited with themselves, if they
should deliver it to the hands of Scipion, taking that which he brought, or if
Pyrrhe should go himself and deliver it to Timoleon? but found inconveniences
in both these propositions; yet the most assured was that they resolved: For in
the first there was bounty and generosity, and in the second more certainty of
reconciliation between the Lord and his Vassal, betwixt whom there was no small
hatred; and yet to trust Scipion in a business of that importance, under a
simple writing, was not fit. That Pyrrhe should go speak himself with Timoleon,
there was some danger to be feared, being both of a stout courage, and of a
Nation whose heads are very hot; falling to words, might produce some dangerous
effect. Harman is appointed to go with Scipion, to return this promise to
Philippin, and to bring back that of Isabel. But the brother and sister retired
into secret counsel, intending other proceedings; for Harman resolved to carry
the promise to Philippin to summon him to the effecting of it, which was not
according to the intention of his father. See but into what a labyrinth
disobedient youth thrusts it self. He returns with Scipion to the City, leaving
his sister to the mercy of a mother which torments and uses her cruelly: For
Valentine finding this action odious and dishonorable, had almost with her
extreme chiding brought her to despair.

But let us leave her between the anvil and the hammer, between these assaults
fatherly and motherly, refining the temper of her patience; to understand the
good operations of Harman; who being arrived, instead of exchanging Promises,
cites Philippin before the Justice, to acknowledge his Deed and Seal. Philippin
received this assault strangely; for he would have been very glad not to have
denied his hand, yet this form of proceeding a little altered him. As for
Timoleon, he was so enraged, that if he had met with Harman, he had torn him in
as many pieces as a furious Lion would a Goat. Scipion said, this was not the
command of Pyrrhe; but that he should render the Promise of the son, and
receive that of his daughter. Harman stood obstinately not to give it up,
desiring the advancement of his sister against the will of his father. The
displeasure betwixt Philippin and Harman came by reason of the strict watch
Timoleon kept of his son, so near, as he took away all means of communication,
or writing. This signification was made by Harman so suddenly, as it was done
without any consultation of Lawyer or other council; for having laid the
business on the Table before the grave and wise Judges, they told him it was a
simple part of him to undertake a business of that contestation. Scevole is
advertised of it, who assures Timoleon to break all this like a glass. Yet
Harman having spoken with Philippin, pursues his cause by the advice he had of
him; having received assurance, if it came to judgment, he would not detract
either from his word or writing. In the mean time Timoleon dispatches another
Letter to Pyrrhe, in which he tells him, That the Gentleman he had sent the
other times had brought other testimonies of his worth then his son made now
show of; and that if he were a man of his word, he should make Harman forbear
these proceedings, the success whereof would but turn to his confusion;
desiring him to come himself, or to send a testimony of his express will and
pleasure, that by that he might judge of his intentions; and that he would
still have him for his friend, if he would deal in that sort, that his daughter
might not pretend any alliance with his son.

At this news Pyrrhe fell into extreme choler against Harman; and getting on
hors-back, comes presently to Town: where no sooner arrived, but Harman retires
for fear of his displeasure. Pyrrhe desires to see the writings of the Process,
and takes forth Philippin's Promise, and with the same speed carries it to
Timoleon, and in the delivery gives braving words and ^odomontado's usual with
those of that Country. The subtle old man puts him off with fair words,
without any other answer, but only that Pyrrhe had just reason to be angry with
his son Harman, which had passed the command he gave him; and had reason like
an honorable Gentleman to disprove the proceeding of his daughter, who would
have seduced Philippin. At which word (seduce) Pyrrhe enters into a new fury,
which made him speak wonders. But Timoleon was so glad to have gotten into his
hands the Paper which so angered him, that he thought (as they say) to have the
Wolf by the ears: so that giving way to the passion of Pyrrhe to gather scum at
his pleasure, he was content only to answer him thus coldly, That he was
content to have him for his Vassal, but not for his Companion, and that he knew
the means how to humble him at his pleasure as time should serve; that for the
present he was content to return him the Promise of his daughter, counselling
him if he esteemed the honor of his house, to deal with her in that sort, as
that she should not be so liberal of her promises and writings, otherwise he
would hardly find her a husband. These words spoken with somewhat a satirical
tone, bit outragiously cruel our Pyrrhe, never answering but with taunts and
bravado's, making himself laughed at by those which heard him; for although a
Gentleman, he was nevertheless so inferior to Timoleon, as they were not to
measure their swords together.

The Promises rendered, there was no more cause of pleading: Pyrrhe gave a
disavow of what his daughter had done, and Timoleon the same for his son;
friends of both sides seek to make peace with the vassal and his Lord. Timoleon
for his part seems not unwilling: Pyrrhe, who knows of what importance it is to
him to be reconciled, lets himself be easily drawn: words of precipitation are
given in choler, they part friends. Here are all the strings of Philippin's bow
broken; what shall he do? he is like the bird tied by the leg, the more it
flutters, the more it is pinched, and more it strives, the more strangled.
Pyrrhe arrives, and keeps such a life against his son and daughter, such as one
may judge of a proud man having lost his pretensions, and being returned with
having engaged a piece of his honor. Whereas Timoleon triumphs on his side,
and tells of his intention to match his son with Elise; she was both virtuous
and rich, which are two qualities which both the world and reason esteem more
then beauty. He knew not how to withstand his father by contradiction; his
youth told him this was another Lea that they would put upon him instead of his
fair Rachel; for truly this Maid had not so much of beauty as to be esteemed
fair, and yet enough to warrant her from the title of being ilfavoured,
although she was so in the opinion of Philippin, not being fair; his thoughts
are continually occupied in the idea of Isabel, whose only name spoke beauty it
self, and was able to make the brightest star appear to him deformed. What
shall he do? for this grief is incident to all: He feigns to be touched in
conscience with many scruples; not contented with the restitutions of their
Promises, he will have an act of Justice for his justification. Timoleon
demands it of Scevole, who obtains it incontinently by his credit, and by
reason and justice. This is not enough, he says; it was their parents which
have made restitution of the Contracts, but he held not himself disengaged, if
first he saw not a writing of Isabel, by which she acquitted him of his promise
by words; esteeming that a man or worth is as much bound to preserve his word
as his writ; the writing being nothing but a visible testimony of faith given.
Said this young Lord to himself, Isabel will never sign to such a disavow, and
if she should, he might have just occasion to complain of her, and to accuse
her of inconstancy and aptness to change: Timoleon, who saw that this was the
last rampire of his sons obstination, having promised his father to think of
Elise, if this Disavow were but obtained; anew sollicites Pyrrhe, desiring him
to oblige him so much as to procure him a declaration from his daughter,
importing the return of his sons word given her, although it were no way
necessary but to satisfy the scruples of the conscience of Philippin;
promising to acknowledge this courtesy by those good offices, which should bind
him to believe their reconciliation was not fained. Pyrrhe, which saw himself
sought to by his Lord, and in a thing wherein he believed to return that which
he thought he had engaged his reputation in at their last meeting; promised to
Scipion incontinently, who was employed in this business, to give him that
which Timoleon demanded. But he counted without his Host, forasmuch as he found
more resistance in Isabella in this, then he had ever done before: For judging
well by this (as she was wise) that Philippin sought all possible means to
defer the marriage with Elise, of which she had already had news, being now
common in City and Country, she plainly showed her unwillingness, saying that
was unnecessary, and that she would not give a writing which might prove
prejudicial to her honor. But in the end Pyrrhe and Valentine her mother
threatened her so much, that having drawn from her many Letters which gave
testimony enough of her constrained writing to that effect, at last contented
themselves with this, where she seemed to open herself with more freedom and
liberty, addressing herself to Timoleon thus:

My Lord,
MY duty ties me to the obedience of my parents; I write to you by their
commands, to free my Lord your son of those scruples of conscience whereby he
might any way be touched for those Promises with which it pleased his affection
to overtake my credulity. My Lord, both he and I are so much theirs who have
brought us into the world, that it seems not only our lives, but also our
fortunes, our, wills and words depend absolutely on their authority. Methought
it had been enough to have rendered the promises in writing, without pressing me
any further to renounce by letter his protestations to me; the which I do for
your satisfaction and his, and to content my father who commanded me. This is
not to complain, but rather to give a testimony of joy that I receive in the
news of the marriage which I understand you, intend to imbark him in: I wish to
God it may prove as happy to him as I desire it. If I were free, and that my
presence might not bring any hindrance to your joy, I would be one in that
assembly, to raise by the shadow of my defects the brightness of this chain of
gold you will put about his neck. I believe the feast will be great, and will not
pass without those exercises, of which I promise my self I should give a
testimony of my skill and courage, which would raise me far beyond those of my
condition. But because this cannot be without troubling your content and his
conscience, I will give you a testimony of it by the freedom of this disavow;
That although I am not rich enough to be your daughter-in-law, I have yet
courage to disdain the quality, in leaving the possession to another, and
suffer without grief what my self has lost. Do not misunderstand me, that I
accuse you of rigor or cruelty, or my father of constraint, being you both do
me a great favor in breaking my bands and setting me in my first liberty; it
is a grace for which I ought rather to thank you, then to complain as of
injustice. All that angers me, (you will be pleased I may use the prtviledge of
my sex, my Lord, to speak freely to you) is a true report which has been
delivered me of some certain disgraceful words have slipped from your judgment,
prejudicial to my reputation: My Lord, you know my exercises, and that I carry
something else by my side then a Spindle to be revenged, and to prove liars all
those who would offend that which is dearer to me then life. I desire no other
testimony then your sons against you; of whom I did not entertain the love, but
by permission of my friends; as I now renounce, to show my obedience. It may be
some detractor has deceived you, making you believe otherwise of me then you
ought; wherein, when you please, you may confess your error. I must give thanks
to her whom you have made choice of for your daughter, to enter into your
alliance, having made me retire; for I would not have a father-in-law that
should esteem me other then what I am: If she be more noble in riches, I may
highly say I am richer in nobility; and if she be above me in rank, I am before
her in blood: Jealousy I have none for looks, being I esteem not the greatness
of persons but by their virtues and worth; it is not in a hin of gold that true
merit is measured; I care as little to yield to her in that, as I esteem to be
above her; that if you love her better for your son then I, I love her as well
for you as for your son. I wish you more happiness and content in this
alliance, then you have hoped for of mine; returning you by the commandment of
my parents all those Promises that I might have pretended of my Lord your son,
from whom I expect the same return, and in the same form as has fallen from my
pen. And for satisfaction of all these wrongs, I will but make a solemn
protestation to remain for ever your Servant, expecting a more happy condition
takes me from the quality of

Your Vassal.


This long Letter; conformable to the humor of Pyrrhe, and the generosity of
the Amazon, was delivered to Scipion: which he having given to Timoleon,
brought more subject of laughter then of choler. For boasting is so ordinary
with this Nation, as being their common discourse, joined with the quality of
the person, took away all occasion of having any feeling of this. It is showed
to Philippin; who knowing the hand, yet noting many places procured by
constraint, is nevertheless pressed by Timoleon to take this return for
sufficient, with command to pay her in her own money, which was in this manner
to Pyrrhe.

Sir,
I Have seen that which by your commandment your Amazon has written to my
father; worthy truly of her humor and courage, and all tissued with a high
style, and feathered bravely, as if she spoke a hors-back to an old man who is
resolved not to vanquish her but by courtesy. Of me she ought to expect
nothing but all service, and no oppositions against her pleasures: And would to
God she were as free, as she is in speaking; and that the duty which I owe to
those whom I owe all, did not force me to send back the gages of her Promises
solemnly sworn. But since the unhappy influence of our stars has separated us,
I am very glad she has first cut the knot, which I esteemed the only knife of
death to have served Alexander. I will not answer to her high words but with
humilities; since not having changed heart, I cannot change my discourse. If I
send back her Promises which she made me, it is not for disdain of having
received mine, but because she asking that which is hers, I cannot detain them
without injustice. I would not complain for the respect I owe her, and for that
which I owe to my own modesty. Of all these changes I neither accuse her
courage no^ yours, as I must entreat you neither to tax nor touch mine. I can
complain of nothing but my ill fortune, which permits me not to enjoy that I
desire, but carries me to that I fly, with a destiny inevitable. It Is in vain
to withstand a torrent; it is prudence to yield to a misfortune which we cannot
withstand; it is wisdom to render our arms when we cannot vanquish. She which
returns my word in calling her own, teaches me by wise obedience what emperie
Reason should have of Passion, and what an ascendant power Duty has of a
supple spirit. Having never seen but perfections in all her carriages, I will
from henceforth believe that Change is a virtue, since she puts it in practice.
Her action being then my rule, her example shall serve for my reason. Heaven
witness with me, it is to please her that I return that she will have, and
which I cannot keep against her will. Knowing well how much I ever honored
her, I could not better make show how I esteem her virtues, but in imitating
them; that if I be accused of inconstancy, shall I not have reason to call
this accusation unjust, that disproves in others that which they authorize in
themselves? I confess to you, Sir, that I have used all possible means to
preserve inviolable my bonds: but since they have broken my chains, I cannot
hinder them to tie me in another place, since my fortune and birth have made me
fit for servitude. It is not that I should not have honored your alliance, and
that I shall not try by all sort of services to give your house proofs of my
love: But since I must follow the course that first enchained me, I let my self
be carried by a stream of water which promises me nothing but a sea of
bitterness. I go then to put my will under those commands of my father; God
grant that my obedience make this sacrifice more happy then my augure tells me,
and bless you with as many prosperities as you desire.

He which shall be your servant, as long as he has life.


Timoleon found many things in this Letter contrary to his humor; nevertheless
was glad to draw what he could from this ill pair; and did not desire
altogether to displease this young man, in constraining him to write another
more conformable to his own fancy, being that in effect he had what he
desired, with the return of the word of Isabel; who had no sooner had
communication of this writing that Pyrrhe let her see, but left almost to live
with having ended the Letter. To tell you the raving and assault that this
wrought in her spirit, cannot be expressed but by silence: Yet nevertheless
being wise and discreet, at first, and before her father she strongly
dissembled the grief which pinched her very heart, showing so constant in
appearance, that you would have said this action of Philippin's was in different
to her. But when she was retired into her private Cabinet, and this retreat,
without testimonies, gave her liberty to recall her passion; saying those
words, and using those actions, which she ought neither to have done nor said,
if she had had but any reason left; there wanted not much that her soul had not
stolen from her in her abundance of tears, and that the sobs and sighs had not
stopped her breath. I will not with a lazy pen fill the pages of this book
with reciting the inutility of her complaints; we must leave them to the
divining of those souls outraged by feeling the like disgrace. How many
different projects rolled in her thoughts? Sometime she would, in a suit of her
brothers, go find out this perfidious Lord, to grapple with him like a Fury
revengetrix, and to cover him with reproaches of his weakness and inconstancy.
But as she was of a great spirit, the consideration of her honor held her
within the bounds of modesty, knowing well that such a habit would wrap her in
an everlasting infamy. But then shall she dye an obscure death, not only
deprived of enjoying her legitimate pretensions, but also of revenge? I assure
you, that between these two extremities her understanding was thrown into
strange convulsions. In this outrage she became environed with so strong a
melancholy, that she would neither see any, nor be seen of any; if she could
have separated herself from herself, she would willingly have done it. So she
fell into a profound slumber, forced by a thousand griefs, nor thinking of
ought but of displeasures which continually pelled her patience. Sad specters
did her soul affright
With the black horrors of the night,
Which through the casements of her eyes
Diffused a thousand jealousies:
So that the light being gone, her sense did fail,
Hope did expire, and her fear prevail.
A thousand thoughts of things transacted,
Of promises broke and kept, distracted
Her spirits so perplexed with grief,
Th'admitted not the least relief.
Which like the 'larum of a Watch did keep
Her mind in motion, and debarred her sleep.
These crimes which from the horror of a black
And clouded conscience all the senses rack,
Transcend those tortures which poor miscreants feel
In setters chained, or broken on the wheel.
Since crimes increase, and make affliction higher,
Like heaped fuel on a flaming fire.
Frighted with dismal dreams, she passes ore
The solitary night, and does deplore
Her pitteous state so, that her poor heart lies
Floting half-drown'd in the deluge of her eyes.
The sum of all her joys being but to think
Those joys are shipwrack't, and her soul must sink.


Thus the unfortunate Amazon tormenting herself without comfort, nothing
pleases her, being so displeased with herself: Nights are tedious to her,
having lost her accustomed repose; and Day as unwelcome, because it makes her
see too clearly her disaster. This is not that Atalanta that destroyed by her
valor the number of Bores in this our Thessaly. The horror of the woods, which
heretofore were so pleasing while the eye of day looked favorably on her, is
now become most fearful: She troubles no more the dark solitary Forests, the
assemblies of hunting are no more lightened with this star; and that which most
of all displeases, is, that every one spends their judgments and makes
discourses according to their fancies, of this her change of life and humor.
She hates the public light, but silence loves
And lonely shades of solitary groves.


Her parents, which knew the cause of grief, yet having no remedy, were much
affected; Valentine principally, which saw the flowers fade in the face of this
Virgin whom she loved so dearly, was excessively tormented, cursing the hour
that ever she knew Philippin. But Pyrrhe and Harman, who knew that this strange
manner of life gave occasion of talk to many men, are touched with a more
lively feeling. Poor men! if the thorns prick you being scarce shot forth, how
will you endure them when they become more hard and less corrigible? she will
be cause of your loss of life and honor.

But let us leave her desolate in her melancholy, to see what is done in the
City touching the marriage of Philippin: There he is imbarqued by the
commandment of his father in the research of Elise: But how can we call it a
research, which is already agreed on by their friends? Timoleon is agreed with
Scevole, who offers him a blank, promising such a dowry as should quite
disengage his house, making his daughter his universal heir, and putting her in
possession of more then he could imagine. Oraculons I dol! who does not adore
Thy shrine, and reverence the refulgent Oar?


He that said, Liberty is a blessing he would not sell for all the good in the
world, is deceived in more then the half of the just price; because in the
world there are as many and more chains of gold then of iron: For is it not
gold which makes the servitude of idols, against which the Apostle cries so
loud? Philippin goes to make experience, who marries more to satisfy the
covetous eyes of his father, then for his own desires; marries rather coffers
and wealth, then the person of a woman; nor does he go to this alliance but
with one wing, being there is nothing more displeasing then an affection
ordained for interest and good of others; Will being of a quality so free, that
commanded, it is to put it in a swound. Harsh law of that Authority which
restrains,
And binds our dearest Liberty in chains.
What? can we not defend our selves; but must
Submit to Tyrant-Duty, though unjust.
It Is sad! yet teaches that we should obey,
Where Rigor and Severity bear sway.


So Timoleon judged it would very hard to draw such lively flames as the first,
by the beauty of this second, makes Philippin take Elise as a sick man does a
medicine, and as Laban gave Leah to Jacob, without almost seeing her. Not that
she was unworthy to be considered, not being so unpleasing but she might
deserve the love of any: but truly, how she could be loved with the love of
friendship, I will not say; but very hardly by that of love, by a heart already
enjoyed, as was this of our young Courtiers. He nevertheless sees her, more
satisfied with her virtue, then amorous of her person; and entertains her like
a man whose affection is rather in his looks then in his heart: It is a simple
thing to make love by commandment; in the end he enters like a fish into a net,
even as forced, not having any will that the beginning should tie a knot of
necessity which could not be broken but with the sharpness of death, and with
all the repentings in the world could not be dissolved during life; for it is
not in humane power to disjoyn those which the divine has joined.

Elise, this innocent unfortunate creature, which is the principal person in
this tragic Scene which we present, was a Gentlewoman well born, endowed with
more chastity and virtues then beauty of face; for it appears in this our
lamentable age wherein we live, that beauty and virtue are enemies. Her mother,
wife of Scevole her father, shall be by us for her wisdom called Sophie: her
birth was not so illustrious, as she was full of virtues; for, Who in rare
manners has her sex outgone?
Next comes her daughter, and gives place to none.


She had brought up these two Daughters, which were all the children she had,
with much modesty and great fear of God; and as Elise had been longer under her
discipline then her sister Elinor, so she surpassed her in humility and
obedience. She was of more years then Philippin, but very few, being very
discreet and judicious, that nothing was wanting in her to make her an
accomplished mother of a family: Her virtue, sweetness, modesty, and the
extreme affection she had to her husband, was so great, that in the end he was
constrained by so many obligations of strong chains to love. You would have
said that she brought into the house of Timoleon the same qualities that Raguel
ordained in his daughter Sara in the house of Tobias. She was quiet and
pleasing to her husband, respectfull and serviceable to her Father-in-law, who
became almost her idolater, he was so much ravished with the good offices she
rendered him.

Philippin, who is not altogether insensible, is constrained to yield to so
much goodness; for there is no heart so hard, says an Ancient, which will not
give love not being constrained, for the only price of love is love; the charm
without witchcraft to make one beloved, is to love: And what appearance is
there not to love her, which loved but him; who loved not day but to see him,
nor breathed but to please him? He must be a rock that should not yield himself
to so just, so holy and legitimate a flame. For although his thoughts refused,
and his imagination filled with the consideration of another idea, not leaving
any void to imprint this new impression; yet his reason vanquished by so much
love, is constrained to acknowledge it by a mutual return of love. You would
say that as Isaac tempred the grief he had for the death of his mother, by the
coming of his wife; so our new Bridegroom forgetting altogether his first
furies, to range himself within the bounds of duty and obedience, wrapping up
these flying fires in the sacred and solid: marriage is a wise march, which we
ought to conduct with much temperance and good government. That husband which
expects so much seeking from his wife, is, as an Ancient says, no other but an
adulterer; those who mingle so much niceness and curiosity in this venerable
alliance, strengthening their valor and esteeming their dignity. This
Sacrament ought rather to be practiced by ripe and staid judgments, then by
heat and desire. Happy had Philippin been, had these considerations been
weighed in the other scale of his carriage: but his years too tender did not as
yet make him capable of these solid governments; but only necessity, the fear
of his father, and the strong ascendant power the virtues of his new wife had
gained in his judgment, held him within the bounds of duty, with much
admiration of all those which saw it, who would never have thought so happy a
beginning in marriage to have had so unfortunate an end, as this which I have
almost with Honor writ. Thrice happy Elise, as the Poet says of his Did^, if on
the borders of Carthage Aeneas had never arrived, than under a fain show of
being free and noble, hid falsehood and disloyalty. Elise was but too happy, we
may say of her, if her parents had not been blinded with the brightness of
immoderate ambition, bringing her to so great and illustrious an alliance, for
this height serves her but like that of the Tortoise, which is raised by the
Eagle to be thrown upon the rocks and broken (...) thousand pieces. If
resemblance of dispositions is the cause of the firmness of friendship,
equality is also the surest pillar of a good marriage: For disproportions in
birth or in faculties, early or late, brings always distastes and riots; these
are the seeds of divisions for the latter season. All this nevertheless appears
no more in the beginning of the marriage, then seeds freely sowed in the earth:
but such as you sow, such shall you reap.

Timoleon bring his son and daughter to Bellerive, so full of joy and
contentment to see himself freed of his debts, the business of his house in the
hands of one both wise and of authority, his son delivered (as he thought) of
his ancient passions, that there was not any of all those which visited him, to
which he did not show in his face and in his discourse the excess of his joy.
He was so carefully served, so religiously honored by his daughter-in-law,
that he esteemed by this fashion his life crowned with the happiest age
imagineable; he thanks of nothing but making good chea^, and running smoothly
the rest of his days. The care of his domestic businesses troubled him not;
for Elise, instructed in the knowledge of these things by her mother Sophie, in
her tendrest years, takes all this charge; and with such care and good order,
as nothing was wanting, all in abundance, every one content, and all the world
blessed them. What does not a virtuous and well given person, accompanied with
piety, perform? she inspires all the house with devotion; it is a salt which
seasons all things: she is Mary in her orisons, Martha in her solitude: you
would say by her vigilance and affairs, that she had no time for prayer; and
seeing her spiritual exercisc^, that she spent no time but in prayer; all
sweetness in her exterior, all fervor in her interior; the perpetual visits of
companies did no way divert her from the service of Godo It is wisdom in a
woman to be watchful in great things, without neglecting the least. Humble,
gracious, temperate, wise, advised, modest, pleasing, metry, the honor and
glory of her her race, and of all that country. How is not Philippin's heart
charmed with so much merits? he wanted nothing but a little more judgment to
esteem so many obliging qualities.

Among those which came to visit Timoleon and Philippin, to congratulate this
haypy alliance, Pyrrhe and Harman failed not, to which their neighborhood
obliged, as also their vassalage, There is no speech of what is past: Timoleon
keeps an open table; Philippin strives to oblige them a thousand ways. Our
young son is married; he has no more need of a Governor, having so good a
Governess. The exercises of hunting are renewed, which the Citizen understands
not so well as the Country wench: Elise understands nothing but what a woman
ought to know; Isabel is a soldier of the long robe. She hears by the mouth of
fame, not without jealousy, the income parable virtues of Elise; but when she
knew the pre-eminence of beauty she herself had of her, this temperated this
passion in her heart; she is resolved of a perpetual spining, and to spend her
days in the violent exercises of hunting, so fit for the preservation of
chastity. Was it despite, or a despair to reconquer Philippin, which had
healed her? it is so as she has ^ained her first air and fashion.

The Gentlemen thereabouts, to honor this new marriage of Elise, make meeting
at Bellerive, where many courses and tornies are practiced, and where Isabel is
in company of her father and brothers, and did perform wonders. She comes in
company of her mother Valentine, to see Elise and her mother Sophie, which came
to help her in her houshold-government. This visit filled all the neighborhood
with joy and content, seeing this quarrel alogether extinguished. There Elise
sees Isabel with the eyes of a Dove full of meekness, like Simplicity it self;
using her with those courtesies so extremely obliging, that showed plainly the
goodness of her heart. But the other more malicious, beheld her as one which
did robbed her of her treasure, dissembling nevertheless with much art the
thoughts of her heart, although she felt much grief within, distilling from her
lips a beam of enamelled words. O how contrary were the thoughts of these two
Rivals! the one full of virtue, admired and loved the graces which God had
endued her with; the other with a jealous envy consulted often with her glass,
to see what advantage her complexion had of that of her supplanter.

Timoleon, who fears from the eyes of this Basilisk to his son a new wound
worse the first, has always an eye on the actions of Philippin; who trembling
under the eyes of his father, like a scholar under the rod of his master, to
hinder all suspicion, governs his looks and discourse in such a fashion, that
he speaks but of ordinary things in the ears of all, nor beholds this object
but as a thing indifferent, nor seems too much reserved, nor to appear
artificious or constrained, but with a mediocrity of freedom makes them think
him without a design; thus he deceives the eyes of this Argus that watches
him. All this is but artificial within, although without he makes no show of
any thing but simplicity. But even as the fire of thunder, the more it is
enclosed in the clouds, the greater is the lightning it shoots forth; so the
more there was constraint, the more dangerously he lanched his looks on this
Amazon, heretofore so passionately desired; yet nevertheless he felt great
contention in himself betwixt reason and his desire: For when Reason was
mistress, favored by the absence of Isabel, and the sight of so many virtues
which shined in all the parts of his Elise, he tried with a sponge to forget
and deface the form of this Face, the idea of which tormented him. Sometime
being alone, to strengthen him in this just war of Reason against Desire,
animating himself to follow the part of virtue, by these fair words ensuing.
Most vain and fruitless are my long desires,
Fed and fomented by a world of fires
Which burn my soul; the air in which I breath
Rendering me like a sacrifice of death.
Desires in troops assail poor me oppressed,
And Viper-like feed on my tender breast.
Inhumane thoughts possess my soul, the high
And active flame of my great thoughts does f^ie
Beyond all fear, and through disdains wide gate
Transport my sense above the reach of fate.
Confirm that Object which you did first grace,
Help to conduct and guide him to his place:
And those disdains which with such joy abound,
May happily be returned safe and sound.
That with you that bright Shrine of her may go,
To whom such homage I did lately show:
Or let her stay, and be esteemed so foul
And loathsome, that the faculties of my soul
May abhor her best perfections, and contemn
The quite forgotten thoughts of her or them.
Poor Philippin, thou speak well, now that thy reasons are strengthened by
the services of thy Elise, which kept thee master of thy desires: but when the
law of sense rebels against that of thy understanding, sowing revolts,
seditions and contradictions in the city of thy exterior, it is then that losing
courage, thou returnest into thy first frensies: yet fight thy self, and thou
may become a reasonable vanquisher, vanquish thy passion.

The whilst these active visits passed under color of civility, being made
more frequent then Timoleon could have desired; the hunting served often for a
pretext, but another cause is the subject. The cunning old man intends to get
before this misfortune, and not to fall from a fever to a hotter ill, cut off
all new beginnings of loves. Although his son be not much advanced in years,
yet marriage having given him more liberty, it would be unfit to exercise upon
him the same commandments and rigorous cruelty which he used to him being a
youth. Remedy there is none better then that Physicians practice in the cure of
cathars and rheums, diverting them when they cannot dry them. We have said that
Monte-gold is a very fair Castle, and of strength and importance, which was
within three days journey of Bellerive, at the foot of the Pyrene mountains.
Under pretext to show it to his daughter-in-law, he brings all his train, and,
that of his sons. 'Twas Philippin who was disoriented, but more Isabella; who
at this last sight had so increased her flames, whether it were by temptation
or otherwise, that thus being deprived, it had almost cast her into her grave:
she judged this remove was caused against her; she knew no remedy but to fly
to patience. Philippin was somewhat astonished at first for this absence, and
remains sad and pensive some time. But this light fire which began to burn
about his heart, kindled by the sight of this object, this absence made his
relenting less: For as one wins by the losing of others, so there is no doubt
but absence revives, as presence kills. The holy and sincere love of Elise won
him so strongly, that his reason was quite renewed; for if Virtue, as an
Ancient says, would ravish altogether the heart, if it were but visible, why
should it not ravish his, showing so visibly in the person of the chaste Elise?

Oh if he had made in this time a happy provision of wisdom, or if he had
tasted seriously and solidly this butter and honey of discretion, which makes
one distinguish good from evil, he might well have known the extreme difference
which is between a virtuous affection just and holy, and a brutish passion
unlawful and dishonest: For in stead of the precious balm of this, as the
sweet smell of a flowery field pleasing both heaven and earth, God and men,
giving to those which, savoured as they ought a taste of the pleasures of
Paradise; the infamous exhalation of the other defames the proper authors,
scandalizes their neighbors, and makes them feel in its tyranny a forerunning
of the unquietness and torments of hell. If Philippin could but have conceived
to have received in effect this thought, we should not be in pain to find words
pitiful enough to express the calamities which drive him in consequences of
depravings insupportable. But not to make him unfortunate before his time, give
us leisure to consider him in this good hap, too great for him, if he could but
have known or comprehended it. For as if void, or at least exempt of the most
lively points of his first love which tormented him, he thought of nothing more
then pleasing his father, and full of desire to render himself reciprocal to
the tender affections of his new Bride Elise; passing in this fashion the most
quiet and tranquile life as may fall into humane thoughts, in ease, wealth,
pastime, and abundance, without solitude; all honor and invite him, rejoice
and are pleased with his fortune. Truly he enjoyed a happiness not common, and
which cannot be easily conceived but by those which know the difference of a
vicious frivolous love, and a constant and virtuous; for the glory of such
delights cannot be comprehended by all sorts of understandings. The sun never
shines on the earth, but it brings to these chaste Lovers some ray of new
favor; Night showed not so many torches in the deepest of the heavens, as they
kindled fires in their souls; their contentments not suffocated with their holy
and legitimate usage, finding as in heaven desire in society, because that
modesty held their sincere affections under the bridle of reason in such a
fashion, that being possessors of their desires, they seemed yet to desire the
possession, by a strange agreeing in hope of enjoying. It pleases me to paint
thus fair and pure, though soft and delicate, these marriage-affections;
because methinks one cannot set too high a price of that which is legitimate;
For why? all that is good, all that is holy and chaste, all that favors well
and which has renown of worthy, ought it not to be raised by a Pen, which has
no other end in that he writes but to honor virtue, and detest vice? Must we
always represent Antigonus with that side his eye was worst? shall we never
show draughts with our pencil, that we may show that side which is most
pleasing? Malicious pens will do wonders to set forth falsehoods with that art,
that it is uneasy to read them without being filled with ill suggestions; and
shall it not be permitted them which fight for chastity, to show the legitimate
enclosures in this sacred bond, or according to the Apostle, that their bed is
without stain, which is the true sign of Christianity? But alas, how fair
weather keeps least constantly his clearness; and how few days clear, but are
troubled with some clouds! Whilst Philippin makes heaven jealous of the
felicities he enjoys on earth, this fair day has his night; and as his
subjection was his happiness, his liberty was his ruin.

ELISE, OR Innocence guilty. The Third Book.
THe Sun was now the third time in midst of the course of his twelve houses.
Now the thoughts of his Idea Isabel was so weak in his soul, that he thought
not of her but as a thing indifferent; he sees but by the eyes of his Elise,
nor discerns nothing but by her judgment; so possessed by the object of so much
virtue, that vice could have no place in his soul. This Golden Mountain was a
hill of perfections; and for the temporal blessings and spiritual that God
showed largely upon this house, one might have called it a Mountain of God; a
mountain very fertile, a Mountain in which it pleased God to inhabit; God
filled it with his blessings in favor of Elise, as he did heretofore the house
of Laban in consideration of Jacob.

Timoleon seeing his hopes and desires surmounted by his prosperities; says
sometimes as Themistocles chased from Athens, That he had been lost if he had
not been lost; and his following of the Court would have ruined his house, if
his banishment from thence had not called him to its restoring. He sees himself
newborn in the beginning of a posterity; for during this time Elise was
brought to bed of a daughter, which Timoleon named by the name of his wife
deceased, which was that of the famous Penitent, which we will express by that
of Dalimene. He desires a son; there is great likelihood heaven will grant him
this grace; for Elise had some feeling of a second birth, when all of a sudden
a great outrage came and troubled these felicities, and to cover with thorns so
many roses. It was the unexpected and sudden death of Timoleon, who going a
hunting, fell from his horse coming down a steep place; and having much bruised
his head, a hurt very dangerous to old men, he yet had some time to think of
the health of his soul, and so yielded his breath to God; not having had
leisure to exhort his son, not to dispose of any thing whatsoever. They carry
home the body (for he dyed in the fields) in a blanket to Gold-mount. Which
poor Elise thinking had been the Stag which they had hunted, ran full of joy to
meet her Father-in-law deceased: which when she saw, it touched her so lively,
the passions of joy and melancholy meeting together in her heart, that fell
into a swound; and being in the estate she was, brought her almost to keep
company with her deceased father. But too happy, if this misfortune had but
fallen on her; for then this bloody tragedy would have ended, which we intend
to write; for after this, ill fortune never ceased to persecute her innocence,
even to make her guilty of death, without having committed any crime at all.
Injurious fortune, when will thou cease thus to persecute virtue? ill
encountered Cranker, must thou have still the fairest Roses?

Bellerive is the burial-place of the ancestors of Timoleon; the pleasure of
Gold-mount is turned into sadness by the accident of his death: This body must
be conducted to the sepulcher of his fathers. O Philippin, whither go thou?
must thou, to show thy love and duty to the dead, give death to thy Love? or
rather to light with those Funeral-torches the fearful brand of this Isabel,
which will reduce thee and thine honor into dust? Oh if the lips of Timoleon
could but speak, they would counsel thee from this journey: Oh if death would
permit him to make an oration to thee, with what efficacy of words would he
have dissuaded the meeting the first object of thy flames. Poor Butter-flie,
thou go to burn the wings of thy desires in a torch which will undo thee.
Love is that devil of the Evangel, which once returned into a house from whence
it has been banished, remains more strong then before, making those whom it
possesses more furious then ever. We must not set those which are full of rage,
in the presence of the beasts which bit them, they will but redouble their
torment; we must not approach a smoking torch with fire, if we will not have
it lighted. The greatest secret the Apostle knows to prevent fornication, is to
fly; those which love peril, will perish. Elise, why do not thou by thy
wisdom find some invention to prevent this disaster which thou go to gather
in this funeral-voyage? But when a misfortune will follow one, says a grave
Ancient, it seems his wisdom is shadowed, and his judgment blinded, not being
able to prevent his headlong ruin.

Being come to Bellerive, all the Gentlemen thereabouts, but especially those
which held of Timoleon as his vassals, came to render their last obedience to
the s^pulchre of their Lord. O dead ashes, is it possible that from the midst
of this coldness should come forth so many coals as to burn the heart of thy
miserable successor? The fair Amazon, now as free as a man, by the death of
Valentine which was gone to God during this residence at Gold-mount, being
become unseparable company to her brother Harman and Pyrrhe her father, came
with them to the funerals of Timoleon, which was her honor, and the happiness
of Philippin; for the appeared clothed in a mourning habit, so advantageous to
her natural graces, that one would have said, what she had done simply to
honor the funeral pomp, and wearing the mourning for her mother, made with
such art, seemed exceedingly to grace her. Mourning has the property to make
the fair appear more fair, and the unpleasing more deformed then they are.
Under these black vail^ Isabel lanched forth looks more shining then the
forerunner of thunder, lightning, sent from a dark black cloud: And for a
pitiful encounter, Elise, which had no beauty but in her virtues, showed with
an extreme disadvantage to her natural disposition under these mourning habits;
withal being much affected for the loss of her father-in-law, whom she
honored infinitely, and loved with an incomparable affection. Nothing defaces
so much the beauty of the face, as a true and sincere grief: For to appear fair
and pleasing, she must have been content too, and happy. So that just as the
bargain is half made with the second merchant, when we are displeased with the
first; the desires of Philippin revolted against reason by this enterview; of
which the one rubbed with the wings of sadness, has lost her ordinary effect
to draw the iron of his heart; the other armed with a thousand drawing spirits,
raised and transported him in a moment from his true being: Their looks,
messengers of their intentions, made their hearts speak, which were reduced to
ashes by these sparkles framed by this unhappy collection. The furious Lion
roaring and watching without cease to devour us; that Dragon that seduces us by
these artificious idea's, filling our thoughts with malicious illusions; that
Spirit sworn against our salvation, which loses no time to indammage us,
covering the eyes of Philippin with double deceit, made this illegitimate
object appear far more pleasing then she was; and on the other side made her
which he should and ought justly to have loved, appear hideous to him, that he
conceived a secret horror against her, not being able to comprehend with
himself how he had continued so long. And truly her grief, and the estate she
was in, which we hold will make the most fair seem unpleasant, with this habit
so little favorable to the mediocrity of the form of Elise, contributed to this
dislike of Philippin. The other strangely insolent by the knowledge of her
preheminences, like a Peacock, with her tail covering and crowning herself with
pride, throws shame upon other birds; glorying in her victory, and laden with
trophies of her new conquest, retires home triumphing, leaving Philipin in the
most strange unquietness that can be imagined. When we throw a stone into a
still water, it multiplies the circles infinitely: This sight forms a thousand
impressions in the soul of this young man, till now so peaceable and quiet. O
Philippin, it is here thou should resist this evil which fights against thee;
it is here thou oughtst to take antidotes against this poison, which slides
through thy veins, and will trouble the rest of thy bones and the health of thy
flesh. If thou dissemblest, thy intrails will become rotten and old; and the
spiritual gangrene giving death, grace is unavailable. But unfortunate, thou
flatterest thy misfortunes, and angrest thy ulcers with scratching. Prevent
these shelves, and fly that fatal shore,
Where naught has less of life, or of death more.
He will do nothing: his sickness pleases him better then his health, he
prefers a tempest before a calm, and death before life, the prison before
liberty. This Siren has sung him asleep in so deep a lethargy, as it quite
transformed him; although a captived will, yet voluntarily he yields to this
servitude, and holds it his greatest happiness. He foresaw many ills which
threatened this change, but he shuts the eyes of his judgment not to take
knowledge of them. What does comport with conscience, or comply
With honor, he disdains; whose thoughts grow high
By contradiction, while he will gainsay
That which he ought not, loathing what he may.


Thus the huntsman always altered with a new prey, leaves that which he had
already taken, to follow ^iercely that he has not. Here is this young Lord
respected like a new star rising in the horison of this Country: his Vassals
come to give him homage, whilst he meditates how to make himself Companion to
his Vassal. He appears free, and yet is more a slave then when he was under the
jurisdiction of his father; A horse broke loose without either bit or bridle, a
ship without a stern, a cloud full of black water; of blind passion blown by
the wind of covetous ills. Already he receives the innocent embraces of Elise
against his heart; and as sick men that loath the meats which they have been
greedy of during their healths, so that which was here to fore his contentment,
is now become insuppportable. His eyes armed with scorn, never looked on her
but to disdain her; her presence is odious, her prudence suspect, her care and
good huswifery avaritiousness, her modesty a beastly defect. And as all we see
through a colored glass appears of the same color as the midst that
deceives our sight; even so not considering her virtues, but on the contrary
judging by this secret change, which will shortly change into a formal hatred,
she appears odious to him like vice it selfs. Whose Beauty mocked his dreaming
soul, like Lies
Pourtraying Truth forth in a false disguise.
Already this Leah, although fruitful, is nothing to the imagination of
possessing a fair Rachel; all the honey that he had heretofore gathered in the
company of Elise, changed into bitter forgetfulness. Elise easily perceives
this coldness; but as she was good and simply discreet, she threw the cause
upon the death of Timoleon, which she thought affected Philippin, although her
grief were far greater then his for that loss, whose boiling heat of passion in
love was far from thought of sorrowing for the death of his father. The more
she thinks to comfort him, the more he is displeased; the more she courts him,
the more he seems to be importuned; and although she strives as much as may be
to cover with a false joy a true sadness, yet could he not hinder but his face,
his actions and words betrayed him, making it appear to those which had least
of apprehension, that there was I know not what in his thoughts which tormented
him. Elise sees this, and is in an agony inconceivable: She thought it was a
wrong to her husband to esteem he had any ill opinion of her; she is too
innocent to find in herself any subject of coffeehouse that she had ever
given him, and there is nothing she thinks less on then the true cause of this
alteration. Jealousy of Isabel she had none; for she believes that time has
healed Philippin of this old impression. But in the end the many matches made
for hunting, made her plainly see they were not without design; and the other
visits to Vaupre made her to know the fire by the smoke, the beast by the foot:
but so late, that the evil was almost without remedy.

On the other side Philippin was in extreme agonies; for the way of the
perverse is sowed with a thousand thorns: All seemed contrary to his desires.
The cunning Isabel which saw she had returned him into her net, and that she
held him in her goal by means as full of subtilty, as Elise was full of simple
innocence, who made as if she saw not that which she did but too well perceive.
Isabel seems not to take notice of that which does clearly appear; and by her
flying and fained retiredness adds desire in Philippin to see her. Industrious
Galatee, that drawest in flying, and hidest in showing thy self! For coming to
Bellerive to visit Elise, and then he seeing her at Vaupre, it was always in
the presence of his wife, or of her father or brother, that he spoke to her,
which was an extreme torment to this passionate. This damosel full of vanity,
took pride tormenting him, without giving him any hope to quench the least
spark of this great fire in his breast. Judge but the craft of this creature:
Here is a Tantalus dead with drougth in midst of waters; and like the Page of
Alexander, he is constrained in silence to burn. It serves him not to speak
with Eyes, language which she has heretofore well understood; now fains not to
understand, by a deafness as great and greater then that by which she is
beloved. The good of Philippin is his hurt: For this liberty to see that which
he desired, redoubled his passion, and makes him perish with a death and
languishing grief by the object which is the cause. All his study is to make
known to this malicious creature the renewing of his ancient flames; but that
in such a fashion, that neither Elise, Pyrrhe, nor Harman understood any thing;
yet all see clearly like Eagles. The jealousy of a wife is not to be feared:
The valor of Pyrrhe and Harman are not unknown to him; although his Vassals,
they are noble, and Gentlemen full of honor, and that rather then abate the
least point, would lose a thousand lives.

Oh how true it is, that evil men travel by ways stubled and full of stops and
difficulties, and attain much weariness in the end of their iniquities. If once
his courtings be but perceived by so many eyes as watch him, all is lost, there
will be nothing but tempests within, and shipwreck without. If he but consider
the end of his unjust pretension, it is but an assured loss of his reputation,
and may be of his life: For if Elise perceive it once, farewell friendship and
peace; but that is the least he thinks of: If either her father or brother
should suspect any thing, there is no more frequenting nor visits, no more duty
nor acknowledgment; A quarrel that would set all the Gentlemen upon him
thereabouts, and make him odious to Scevole and to all that knew the rare
virtues of his wife. And to revenge himself, there is no hope. He is too far in
the business; his passion holds his foot at his throat; he is fallen and lost,
he is altogether undone. To dissemble his ill he cannot any longer, he cannot
without death; and to dye without daring to complain or make known who is the
cause, he cannot resolve. Here is our Ixion on the wheel. It is most true that
a disordered spirit is his own hangman; he gets much by ruling his actions and
motions. He loses his countenance at the aspect of the Basilisco, whose sight
kills him. This moving he cannot hinder, betrays. He speaks to her enough, but
not enough; as much as becomes him, but not enough; for it is not that he would,
or cannot, or dares not manifest to her. She see^ him nevertheless, and seems
ignorant. (Learn the cunning of women by this same.) So that our passionate
Philippin dies of a sickness obscure and hidden, in midst of all these
commodities and remedies that opportunity seems to present him. In the end the
imposthume grows; That which he cannot entreat for with his tongue, he borrows
with his pen, being an interpreter of his thoughts which cannot blush. That
makes known to the artificious Amazon what she knew already; but as she loved
her honor, and was jealous of her reputation, she struck against the rock of a
chaste resolution these first points, making all these considerations recoil
before the impenitrable buckler of a holy cruelty. The glory of having captived
so great a courage, left not to flatter her; seconded with pride of a secret
joy, that she had in her hands the means to be revenged of Philippin for the
wrong she thought he had done her, in leaving her for one of meaner beauty. And
as there needs to infernal Archimedes but one point out of the earth, for to
raise all the earth; it was by this large gate of vengeance that he conveyed
into the soul of this maiden the Trojan horse, the funeral-torch that put all
her reputation in ashes. What do thou, Isabel? in stead of sending back his
Pacquets, thou receivest and concealest them, without giving any notice to thy
father or brother. Ha! this is not the course of a wise Maiden, which like the
Mother of Pearl ought not to open but to receive the dew of heaven; nor to
receive other courtings but those of a legitimate marriage, with the permission
of her parents. You will hide serpents in your breast, and then complain you
are stung very ill; you let in the thieves, and then complain of being robbed;
you put in fire, and then are astonished if it burn you. Where is your wisdom,
Isabella? I well perceive you are of that unfortunate band, that are not wise
but in doing ill; whilst you are parlied with, you intend to yield, you betray
your self in capitulating with a Traitor, as if you were agreed with him to
your own ruin. You help him to make to your parents invisible, that which he
will not have visible but to you. Poor Rahab, thou hidest the Spies that will
be cause of thy destruction and infamy. O daughters that have understanding,
learn by the fault of this miserable one, since ill examples engender good
manners; and refuse these little Letters, which are as so many chains to bring
your hearts into servitude; and hunt these foxes which break down those
enclosures that make you honored and esteemed. The abuser Isabel becomes
abused, and disadvisedly seduced; A just punishment of her craft and cunning.
She lends her ears; and consents to the writings and discourse of this deceiver
Philippin, and helps herself by her folly to weave the cord which draws her to
shame. She hears this charmer, which flatters so well, as he awakes in her that
which disdain had made but sleepy, not killed; covered, not quite put out. He
colors his courting with a mask of honor, to make her by this golden outside
better to swallow the pill of dishonor: Protests he esteems her his legitimate
wife; says he will declare that marriage with Elise null, as having but too
many proofs of the constraint of Timoleon, as to her that of Pyrrhe; that the
declarations contrary to their first promises were forced from their pens, not
from their hearts, and that violence was notorious. To these rays of apparent
reason Isabel lights her first heats, putting (as in the time of Nehemiah) fire
in the oven: Those Philter-charms of Love did re-inspire
Her breast inflamed with a vigorous fire.
Greatness flatters her courage, which is high; Honor, which she conceives by
a just alliance, moves her strangely; and in the end Love wins her absolutely:
For although she dissembled, a property common enough to all her sex, the
impression of Philippin had never been quite defaced in her soul; neither for
despite, her affection having still been stronger then the outrage, nor for
another object; for after having failed of so high a design as the first, all
other Matches were displeasant to her, and her universal disdain had lost her
many fortunes; nor for absence, for amongst the divertings of her many
exercises, always this Idea swam in her imaginations. So that it was easy for
him to persuade her, her own inclination importing her belief. Painting cannot
last long; the first sweating, it falls off a face that has been daubed with
it. The fained despite, the apparent cruelty, the artificious disdain, the
affected scorn of this Damosel, cannot be maintained long; for that which is
counterfeited has no solid substance, it is as snow before the sun. After
having kindled the fire of Philippin by a thousand reproaches, there flew up a
sparkle from so many coals that lighted in her own heart, and burned herself.
It happens ordinarily, that those which shoot artificious fire are burnt first;
and desiring to endammage other, lose themselves. The Be never stings, but
leaves the sting in the wound; and in losing her sting, remains wounded to
death. The fire of love is of that nature, that those which will give love are
taken; it is a game, in which who will take, are taken. This place so full of
danger, Lovers, fly;
Under fair flowers the foulest serpents lie.
It is hard to give love, without receiving; it is so fine gold, as it remains
always between the fingers of those which distribute it. Men's hearts are as dry
as kixes to take fire; and the greatest courages are soonest cast down under
this violence, which has his greatest strength in his sweetness, and makes us
find nothing so sweet as this strength. It was very easy for Philippin to
deceive the eyes of his wife, Pyrrhe and Herman; having this intelligence with
Isabel, he thought himself above the clouds, being plunged into a foul
quagmire. This proud Maid loved honor, and would never yield but with the hope
of a future marriage. He importunes her, forced by the vehemency of his
infamous desires: But on the other side she earnestly pressed him to break with
Elise, otherwise he should not hope any thing of her but cruelty and disdain.
Here is Philippin in strange convulsions: How shall he break this sacred knot,
to satisfy his unbridled appetite, and the tyranny of this imperious
Mistress? This Mine must play by a prodigious clap. He yields extraordinary
submission to her, and seems an Idolater; for all that she comes no forwarder:
He swears, protests and promises; but the second oaths are refused by the
example of the first. He passes to promises in writing; Isabel receives them,
but for all that he gets no forwarder in the ground of her honor. What shall
he do to this inflexible creature? He resolves to come to the worst of
extremities, and to repudiate Elise, sending her shamefully from his house,
breaking violently the laws of friendship, and brutally lets himself be carried
by the torrent of a passion that will precipitate him blindly in a misfortune
irremediable. He sees Isabel every day; and with so much cunning of this false
female, that her parents see their discourses and meeting, without perceiving
their practices, confounding by their artificious carriages this word of the
Oracle of truth, That he which does ill hates light; for in the face of the sun
and sight of men they dissembled their ill doings. But blind and cruel
Philippin began to use with much inhumanity the innocent Elise, that his
insolences and indignities are no more supportable by a woman of her worth and
quality. She desires to know the subject of a usage so rude as this was; but
the more she enquires, the more he hides it from her. All she can do to give
him content, displeases him; her presence is so odious, that he can no longer
suffer her. They say the Tygres, at the hearing of music, become more cruel.
Philippin is of that humor; the sweet harmony of the virtues of his wife makes
him more savage and cruel: He now makes her to understand that he acknowledges
her for no wife of his, having been constrained by the violence of Timoleon to
marry her: that he had nothing to do with her riches, she might take them and
be gone, for his house was great enough without her help: He reproaches her
with her birth unequal to his, the baseness of her parents, her ill fashion, he
calls her Courtesies cosenings. To be short, he nourishes her with gall, and
gives her vinegar to drink. Upon these subjects of nothing, he puts himself
into excessive choler, and threatens to kill her if she consent not to the
divorce.

Imagine you if Elise, as wise and discreet as she was, had patience to suffer
so many affronts. She is his companion, and he uses her as his slave; she has
raised his house with her wealth, and is told she is the ruin of it. Her
estate of being great with child, does it not make you pity her? She endures
nevertheless these taunts, these injuries, these threats, with a prodigious
constancy, without answering so much as one word; not to throw oil on the fire
by contesting, desiring rather to quench it by the water of silence. Nor does
this appease this barbarous man, (for how would you have me call this obdurate
Philippin?) He torments her horribly, being like a domestic Fury tied to the
neck of this Innocent. In the end affliction, that gives intelligence to the
deafest ears, and like a biting powder or strong water breaks open the
strongest lets that stop its passage, opens the secret of this mystery to her,
and makes her penetrate into the chest of darkness and into the counsel of
perverse hearts, the cause of her misfortune. She enters into herself, visiting
her interior Jerusalem with a lamp, that is, a serious Examen; and not finding
herself guilty of any thing, she sees this change of Philippin is cause of all
her trouble; but considers not till it be too late the practices of Isabel. She
complains to Scevole and Sophie of the usage of her husband, that could not
longer be suffered; she advertises Pyrrhe and Harman underhand to look to the
carriage of this Maiden. Pyrrhe declares this advice freely to Philippin; who
knowing from whence it came, laughed and mocked at it before her father, saying
that was the jealousy of his wife, that every shadow frighted. But he
conceived such a hatred, and was in such a fury, as finding here a thing
unworthy of a Lord of his quality, that he basely struck her, after having
vomited all the outrageous speeches his passion could suggest against her.
Which so seized this poor Lady with grief, as she thought presently to have
dyed there. Too happy if it had so happened, she had not then been reserved sor
an end more tragic and shameful.

In the mean time Isabel triumphs over all these debates, these being combats
which promised her the victory. Miserable she, that sowes seeds of discord in
this loyal marriage, troubling the highest serenity can be imagined. One thing
troubles him, which is, the advertisement Elise gave to Pyrrhe and Herman;
which makes them more attentive on the carriage of Isabel, whereby she suffers
strangely, they watching her so nearly, fearing she mould escape them, as
seeing her equipages too knightly for a maiden, intend to send her far enough
from Vaupre, to one of her Aunts, a woman much more severe then Valentine,
where she should not have that liberty she had in her fathers house. This makes
her hasten the end of her design; and press the divorcing of Elise; to which
Philippin by her persuasions is absolutely resolved. Why do I spin so long this
mournful cord? let us hasten to this ill step. She advertises Philippin that
they will remove her far from him; a journey which she esteems the tomb of her
contentment, and the ruin of her pretensions. He conjures her to come to
Bellerive, for her coming to him would be the expulsion of Elise, whom he will
send to her friends with a bill of divorce; so that declaring his marriage
null, he will never have other wife but her. This damosel opens her ears to
these persuasions; and banishing reason from her without shame, and making
bankrupt her honor, she thinks of nothing but to triumph on the ruins of
Elise, upon the exile of whom she pretends to erect the trophie of her
contentments.

That which is feigned by the greatest of Roman Poets touching the hunting in
which the Queen of Carthage consummated hymeneal rights of marriage with the
fair Trojan, is true in this our History: For there is a match for hunting the
Stag, where Philippin took a prey, letting himself be taken Stag and Slave of
his foul desires. This is the plot: Isabel loses herself in the woods, and
doubly lost both body and honor. But Philippin finds both the one and the
other, and are lost both in finding. This day first put the preface to their sad
Mishaps, and period to those joys they had.


Herman who had the conduct of the assembly, troubled with this, judges it
cannot be for any good. At their return she is chidden: But she more fool then
ever in the love of Philippin, being so far engaged as she must either dye in
this pain, or end the marriage, without declaring to her brother her fault,
tells him openly her intentions she had to marry with Philippin, after he had
broke his marriage with Elise. Herman showed her it was a simple folly to think
of that, all the ceremonies required for a legitimate marriage having been
observed, and which is more, consummated, so as Elise has a daughter, and is
great with another. He conjured her to put these thoughts out of her head, but
it was too late; for this sister of his stopping her ears at this wise counsel,
like an asp, vows she must either die, or end it.

Herman seeing her so wilful, fearing somewhat else might happen, presses his
father to send away his sister to his aunt, without telling him why, but rather
casting this advice upon the too frequent visits of Philippin, which could not
be hindered by reason of his quality, and would make the world talk. Pyrrhe
resolves, and commands his daughter to prepare her for the journey, alleging
some other slight considerations. But she goes to make another: For one night
being got on hors-back, she got to a place where Philippin stayed for her, who
conducted her like a triumph to Bellerive, putting her in the same possession
of his house that she had of his heart. In the morning Pyrrhe went to her
chamber to dispose of her parting, Herman being destined to conduct her, having
all things in readiness. There was much to do when they found her not; they
know not what is become of her; Harman doubting, told his father freely, he
thought she was gone with Philippin. What alarms were there in this house! what
an assault to the heart of her father! He tore his beard, and called himself
unhappy to have put such a daughter into the world, esteeming them happy which
are not charged with these merchandises so difficult and hard to be kept. He
will not be comforted in his grief for his loss; for he fears to find her
without honor, rather then without life.

This conjecture of Herman proves but too true; Isabel is at Bellerive in the
hands of Philippin. It is the abominable custom in France, and in all this
Province of which I speak, for the least wrong in the world that happens
between Gentlemen, to call one another to the field. Without being otherwise
informed of the particulars of this business, Pyrrhe sent by Herman a challenge
to Philippin, to meet him in the field with his sword in his hand, to do him
right for having stolen his daughter, and to bring his second, he having his
son. Philippin for the first Present of his new marriage receives this bloody
Paper; his courage commanded him to go, but his conscience which gnaws him
gives him fear. The Amazon has the news, who offers (impudent and unnatural as
she is) to second Philippin against her own father and brother, if there be
occasion; So true it is, that one forgetfulness brings on a hundred. But
Philippin more reserved then she forgetful, being touched with a secret horror
of this proposition, answers Herman, That he pretends not to keep Isabel in his
house as a Concubine, but as his legitimate wife, being resolved to send away
Elise, and to declare his marriage null with her; beseeching Pyrrhe to appease
his choler, and consider that that which he esteemed a dishonor to his house,
was the greatest and the highest advantage he could hope for his family; and
that he would not upon a sudden ligntness bloody his hands in the blood of him
which honored him already as his father-in-law: And embracing Herman in
quality of his brother, so flatters him, as he returns him to Pyrrhe with these
protestations. Who, furious like a Tygre that has lost her whelps, could not
at first taste these excuses; demands his daughter, promising to give him her
when the divorce of Elise was authorized by Justice, and his marriage declared
illegitimate and forced. Herman returns to Bellerive: but Isabel will not hear
of this return, so that the fault was all in her; her father and brother are
forced to mitigate their coffeehouse against Philippin, the rape having been
voluntary on his daughters part.

But whilst they temporise with their Lord, what becomes of poor Elise? Without
attending to be more outragiously commanded, she intends to depart. For as one
cannot serve two masters, much less can a man have two wives. The Angel and the
Dragon cannot endure together: The adulterer and the legitimate cannot be
associates in the kingdom of the voluptuous.

Here is the contrary of Jacob and Esau: The reproved supplants the rased;
darkness overcomes light, and vice triumphs proudly over innocence; Sarah and
Isaac are banished his house by insolent Hagar. At last Elise by an unheard of
cruelty, without having leave to give her last farewell to her dear Philippin,
s;aw herself with her daughter Dalimene shamefully sent from Bellerive, and
conducted roughly by the Officers, executors of her husbands passions, into the
place of her birth, where full of grief she flies into the arms of her parents.
Here we see fulfilled that verse in the Psalm, Whilst the proud exalt
themselves, the poor are in affliction: whilst innocence is on the rack, the
guilty are in their pride; and whilst the Dove suffers, the Eagle ravished
skips in the air of her vanity. Isabel (as the Queen of Carthage) being
returned from hunting, goes no more meditating with Philippin for their stolen
meetings; making defense of her confusion, she calls this ilformed practice
Marriage, entituling with the honorable name of Wedding the miserable torch of
her impurity. Philippin himself would have it so, and calls her his wife.
Marriage, that last left refuge, justified,
And former failings did obscure and hide.
And to accomplish the measure of his insolence, and to load with calamities
the innocent Elise, he strives to cover his doings with a cloak of equity. He
publishes every where how he was constrained to marry her, and by consequence
the nullity of the marriage: For if will be forced, it is n^^ free will; and if
free consent ties this knot of marriage, who knows not, or who sees not that
which seemed marriage, and is not? These are the apparent reasons with which
this young Lord flatters himself, injured by this new passion that governs him.
He imploys Herman's testimony of his first Promises, to break the second. In
which the brother of Isabel seems very careful, who looks not so much to the
advantage of the match, as to the conservation of the honor of his house; for
his sister had inconsiderately laid open the way to her shame, and permitted
that which was neither lawful nor honest, but when a marriage is solemnly
contracted in the face of the Church.

But the wise Scevole, who has all prudence and right in his thoughts, and is
for his sufficiency of much esteem and great authority in his company,
understands well how to undo this web, in sustaining the honor of his daughter
and his house; making it appear both by the spiritual and temporal Justice,
that the first Promises of Philippin and Isabel were unlawful and of no
effect, their Restitutions valuable, their renouncings authentical, and the
marriage of Elise and Philippin validly contracted, and also the little
Dalimene, with that she went with, legitimate heirs of the one and the other.
By these sentences irrevocable, by these decrees of heaven and earth, Herman
remains confused in this pursuit; Philippin deceived of his unjust pretensions;
Isabel mocked and become the fable of all the Country. Pyrrhe seeing that by
this lightness of his daughter, his house heretofore, although not rich in
goods of fortune, yet rich in pride, was now all covered with shame and
ignominy, not being able to contain his choler by his patience, resolves to
take out this shameful spot which dishonours him, in the blood of the
Accomplices; and calls Philippin the second time to fight, but sees himself
disdained as his vassal, and his quality of Gentleman rejected with an affront
altogether insupportable to a great heart as his was. The affronted Isabel made
hard by impenitence, defends her fault, and rejoices in her evil, imputing the
cause of the loss of her cause not to the justice of Elise, but to the favor
and authority of Scevole. She makes herself be called by the title of the house
of Philippin, who commands his subjects to esteem and honor her as his wife.
Thus is verified the word of Truth it self, that the impious being arrived at
the depth of his malice, disdains both honor and laws. Pyrrhe outraged cruelly
for the disdain of Philippin, and for the insolence of his daughter, and scorn
and mockery of all their neighbors, not being able to digest all these
indignities, falls into a terrible rage, and determines rather to lose his
life, then to draw it out with shame and ignominy. Philippin stands upon his
guards; and being much assisted according to his eminent quality, laughs at
these poor Gentlemen, who do nothing but watch near about his house to do him
some mischief; as a great mastiff disdains the barking of little dogs about
him. But being advised by some of his friends to beware of a surprise, or of
some treason, that being master of the life of the greatest Monarch in the
world, who will disdain his own; not willing to live any longer amongst these
thorns and agonies, resolves to change the air, and to carry Isabel to
Gold-mount. It is a sure hold, a seat far off; he thinks to s;pend his days
with more tranquillity. But as those that are sick at sea, it avails them
little to go from one ship to another; or he that has the fever in his veins,
changes beds to no purpose; even so an ill conscience carries always terror
about him, fear and defiance follows him like the shadow the body. The guilty
may well be in places of security, says a wise Ancient, but not in assurance;
for they always see the knife of vengeance divine or humane hanging and shaken
over their heads; their sleeps are troubled with a thousand fearful visions,
as if they had drunk the juice of the herb called Ophinsa. Their own thoughts
serve them for a hangman, to torment them with horror of their faults, that
they enjoy no quiet, but it passes suddenly from them. This far remove has not
appeased the rage of Pyrrhe and Herman, seconded in all his designs by him,
which would not be appeased; these are the importunate stingings which shout
threats and invective speeches in the ears of Philippin, These angry elfs which
promise nothing less to themselves, prick him to death, esteeming they had
reason to take the life of him that had ravished their honor; they make about
Gold-mount a thousand secret meetings, accompanied with strangers, resolving to
spend the remnant of their fortunes in this quarrel. To the greatest the least
enemies are redoubtable; there needs but a little Viper to pluck down a great
Bull. If they would but have retired, he would very willingly have made them a
bridge of gold; but they cruelly desirous of his bloo^ would not be satisfied
but with his life, which he is not reso^^^ to abandon. O how great are the
multitude of evils which inviron the tabernacle of the sinner! This miserable
man sees himself possessed within with a domestic devil, so much the more
dangerous, that he esteems her an Angel of light, adoring his prison and his
shackles; and besieged without by these furious revenges, which are as sowed to
his choler, of whom he thinks to have always their knife in his throat. See
what it is to serve strange gods, and to abandon himself to unlawful passions,
which make continual wars without truce, and give no rest night nor day. O how
pitiful and bitter a thing it is to forsake the way of virtue; and how
assured he is of shipwreck, that loses the Tramontane of the grace of God. His
case is desperately forlorn,
Who laws of GOD and Church does scorn,
And to his own will does confine
The laws both moral and divine.
Vast seas of trouble do surround
His soul, whose joy in grief is droun'd.
Though outwardly he surfeiteth in bliss,
Within, the Chaos of a black abyss
And blacker Conscience worm-like gnaws and bites,
Imbittering all his pleasures and delights.
Conscious of odious crimes, he dares not stare
On the bright Sun, o're-clouded with despair;
Which racks his soul so hourly, that each breath
Presents pale horror, and eternal death.
Nor pomp nor power, nor prowess can withstand
The stroke of vengeance, or the dreadful hand
Of Heaven: where it is his pleasure to decree,
Or doom us damned, who can pronounce us free?
Where conscience does accuse, our Crimes there do
Appear both Judge, and Executioner too.


What can one hope for but disasters? Would you not say, that the mercy of God
shining upon the lines of his justice calls him by these ^^rplexities in which
he now finds himself? But this Pharaoh ^^dned by all these wonders, is not
converted; but persevering in this abominable train, he dies in his sin,
precipitated into the red sea of a bloody trespass. Yet nevertheless he obtains
some respite to accomplish the measure of his pain, by the excess of his fault:
For, after hiving besought the Justices of those places to deliver him from the
pursuits of the father and son, which had conjured his ruin; by the same arms
he would have employed for his defense, he feared to have been taken; forasmuch
as Scevole seemed to favor the party of Pyrrhe, counselling him to declare he
had no intent against Philippin as for his Concubine, which he would retire as
being his daughter, to take away the scandal and shame of his house.

Thus Philippin saw himself in midst of his enemies, and that justice on his
shoulders which he had besought for his defense. Who sees not in this a just
judgment of God? only this blind Lover takes no knowledge of it; so strong are
the enchantments which which Isabel charmed him, that besides the despite to
see herself pursued and so shamefully qualified by her father, losing all
respect and natural love both to father and brother, counsels Philippin to make
an assembly of his vassals and friends, and to cut all his enemies in pieces.
But as an ancient Consul said to an Emperor, It is more easy to commit a
murder of an adultery, then to defend it: These crimes are not so easily
justified, as they are practiced; there are few friends that will venture their
lives, goods and honors, in hazard of so vile a business; when it comes in
question to set upon the justice of the Prince, they will think thrice: Other
crimes being more particular, are more easy to obtain pardon; but that which
is public and lesae majestati^, according to the rules of the best Politics,
ought to be irremissible; it is a baseness which it were impiety to pardon or to
pity, those who commit it ought to perish for an example: Nor is there one of
the neighbors of Philippin that will second him in an enterprise so
unreasonable, so dangerous, and full of ruin. On the contrary they complain of
his cruelty, and lament the misery of Elise; detesting Isabel as a monster,
cause of all the misfortunes of this young Lord, and the ruin of his house. By
the impossibility to revenge himself and withstand, he shrinketh; and doubting
that this quarrel being in the heat, Scevole should take occasion to persecute
him, he sees himself brought to a shameful capitulation, coming again to
^^^ers and submission to Pyrrhe, promising that he would di^^ndamage him of all
his pretended wrongs; having been bea^^n, and forced to pay for his amendment,
and to procure the advancement of Herman: protesting to appeal to Rome the
sentence which had confirmed his marriage with Elise, and to employ his
uttermost means to break it; swearing never to have other wise but Isabel, whom
he esteemed his legitimate Bride, ordaining his subjects to hold and esteem her
by that quality. He sees Herman in secret, upon whom he has same kind of
power, helped by the tears and supplications of his sister; he wins him so, as
he brings his father to this agreement; who upon hope to cover his honor
somewhat by this promise, returns to Vaupre, leaving Philippin in peace at
Gold-mount. But we shall find in the end it was but a peace dissembled,
according to the speech of the wise man which says, Peace, peace, where there
is no peace.

The whiles this miserable Lord respires, if a man troubled with a thousand
fears within can have any repose, although freed of outward combats. We will
take this time to go to the Town, to see what Elise does; also the long
ceremonious formality of the Ecclesiastical justice in these appeals, by reason
of the distance of places, does give us leisure. She living retired with her
father, under the wings of her mother Sophy, with as much will and obedience,
as when she was a Maid. Oh if she had not tempred the rage of her fathers anger
against Philippin, what would he not have done to have brought this deboist
son-in-law to his duty and obedience? See but what a good disposition she is
of, to procure all good to him which had used her so cruelly, and so shamefully
sent her away! But it may be her goodness was not commendable in this, for
hindering the course of justice, which reduces sometime to good the most
desperate, for fear of punishment. So that being patient, and hoping that this
foolish love would be past over quickly out of the fancy of this cruel man,
whom though lost as he was, she loved as her life; she inspires patience into
Scevole, although he had much ado to suffer these outrages.

We have told you how she was great with child; and because she did not nourish
the fruit in her body but with bread of grief and ^ink of tears, we must not
wonder if brought to bed before (...) time, a son came into the world without
life, for grief had stifled it in his mothers womb, Philippin being both its
father and deaths-man. This pitiful creature thought to carry with herself
that she had brought forth, into the sepulcher. Too happy Elise, if dying thus
thou had not been reserved to a trespass unworthy thy fair life! I will leave
take to speak of her excellent virtues which she practiced during this horrible
travel, which she thought should have put her in her grave: what holy and
Christian thoughts sustained her courage during these assaults? She receives
all the Sacraments of the Church, with that devotion, that edified all those
which saw these actions; they thought their hearts would have cleft with pity.
She asks a thousand pardons of her parents, filled with grief to see her in
this estate: Committing to her sister Leonore the pardon she demanded of
Philippin, whose cruelties she even honored in this extreme agony. She lost so
much blood, as she thought verily to have rendered up her soul by this flux, the
Physicians believing no less. But as this languishing death is rather tedious
then violent, leaving their judgments, with a great clearness and
understanding, she had leisure to write this Letter in her extremities, which
she would have subscribed with her blood, to touch with pity the insensible
heart of her welbeloved Adversary; We will report it thus.

NOw that this soul of mine is ready to leave the miserable body that could
never find grace before your eyes, and being now at point to fly into the arms
of the welbeloved, heavenly Bridegroom: Permit, thrice beloved and most lovely
Philippin! to this wretched Elise to open her heart unto thee, which has
always been entirely and invariably thine; that in taking of you and of the
world my last leave, I may present before you for my farewell these dying
words; since after so many sweet testimonies of friendship we must part, the
remembrance of which is death in the most cruel death it self, that I should
prove change in a courage which had promised me never should be capable of
infidelity. It is long since I would have left my life, if the laws of God had
not forbid my passage, which I go to free with as little grief, as life (being
deprived of your favor) is pleasing to me. Alas, must I, for having honored
^^u so religiously, endure that usage more fit for an infidel? I will not
contest with you, if it be with reason that I have f^^ the effects so contrary
to their cause: For your will being my rule and my reason, makes me against my
judgment believe, that all you have done to me rigorously, I feel is full of
equity and justice. So that examining my conscience upon the duties I was bound
to give you, and finding my self not guilty of any thing, I think that for a
punishment of my other sins God has permitted you to take my respects for
wrongs, and my humilities for outrages. Had I been treated in the form of
offenders, I should have understood the cause of my punishment, before
undergone: But I was struck with thunder before the lightning appeared, and
sooner condemned then heard. The which I say not to complain, for fear to turn
this complaint into an offense, to hurt you in thinking to s;atisfie you;
humbly asking pardon for all I have failed in to your service. For although my
duty and condition bound me to give you all sort of obedience and fidelity, it
is true, I was more carried by my love then for any other consideration of
civil respect, I think (without vanity) being the creature in the world which
has best loved you, and which thinks not to have given other subject to offend
you, but the excess of her ardent affection.

But almost the perfection of love is in excess: who sees not but this fault
carries its excuse in its accusation, and if blamed is commendable. It may be
if she had not been so fervent in affection, you had esteemed her more; but her
extremity made you less accept it; so that you have no way heretofore
comprehended it, but like a weak vapor dispersed as soon as risen, since in a
moment it is dead in your remembrance. Alas, what is become of that happy time,
in which not having other care but to please you, you seemed to study nothing
but to content me, in yielding me love for love, in which consisted the feast
of our felicities! Whither are those fair days gone, in which you received no
contentment but by my me, nor did any thing but by my counsel; as I lived not
but for you, nor breathed not but to please you! Times and days too happy, and
whereof the sweet enjoying is converted for a fault to my memory. Alas! must I
for having been invariable, be so lightly changed! and a fading beauty, with so
little consideration, be preferred before a solid goodness! But why do I lose
my self in this complaint, having had a des;ign to s^^ther it in my soul, for
fear to offend you? All I fear is, that this Letter should trouble, by pity,
the repose my ashes desire to contribute to your new flames. Happy beyond my
merit, if I may do you service by my death, by making the unjust legitimate. Of
all my ills I accuse my ill fortune, not attributing them to any but to my own
faults; not deserving of you but that just hatred with which you have pursued
my indignities. That which comforts me in the griefs that bury me, is, that the
cause of my sufferings lightens my grief. I apprehend only that this paper
soils not with some shadow of reproach, and with some touch of ingratitude, so
many perfection as I have always loved and honored in your person, for which
the least supportable rigors have seemed not only tolerable, but sweet, my
affection sweetening their bitterness.

I will not represent the pains I now endure, being they sever the miseries of
my soul and body: but I assure you they seem far lighter to me then those I
felt, when by your command I was separated from you; and then I had more
understanding to feel it, then now to express it. It Would be to offend their
extremities, to think to speak them: And if they might be resisted, I would
not; for that being of a nature communicable, their contagion might pass into
your soul by conpassion; and I desire that my death may be a subject of
rejoicing to you. Permit me only to qualify all the injuries the world esteems
you have done me, with the title of good; renouncing the reward due to all the
services I have rendered you; so that satisfying my passion in serving you, I
have contented my self: it lies not in me that you lose not the remembrance; if
it troubles never so little your joy, if my humilities are of any consideration
before you, methinks they will deserve the credit to be forgot. So much I fear
(as nothing more) that the image of my imperfections should again trouble your
fancy: For I believe, if there rests any feeling in bones laid in the tomb, the
tranquillity of mine will be troubled, if I thought that pity might find place
in your heart, which I have experimented so void of love; what a pain would it
be to me, if I believed only that you would grieve for having killed me? For
although I ought not to desire a fairer monument then the thoughts of your
soul, yet acknowledging my unworthiness, I dare not apprehend so stately an
enclosure, because I know I should not rest without causing your unquietness.
I Will content my self with the glory that I die for you, if I dare say for you;
for since that I lived but, for you, is it not giving you that which I owe,
that I render you my life? Nor is this death presented to tax you, or to
change into wrong to you, that which to me is a high degree of honor; only I
show you with all kind of humility, that if in honoring you I have been so
unhappy to displease you, I have not been so miserable to offend you. Your
opinion shall be such as you please; but it shall be permitted me to believe,
that as I could not address my avows to a more accomplished subject, perhaps
hereafter you may more acknowledge: And although this effect has not seconded
my intention, my intention has had nevertheless its effect, which had no other
design but to testify my fidelity. I know well, that in all I have done but
what I ought: but as I think not to have failed, so it must be confessed, that
giving all I ought to whom I ought all, is no little proof of zeal. Happy if I
had showed by the loss of my life, that of the holy affections which you have
sworn before God and his Angels. Be happy at least in my disaster, to have
endured without desert that you would have me suffer. Live from henceforth free
by my death; leaving me this contentment in my misery, to believe that it
brings you comfort. I will endure it, in honoring you: All that comes from
your hands, cannot but be received by me. I adore the hand of God, which
corrects me by yours; which mingles gall with that too much honey I tasted in
possessing of you, and severs me from all delights of the world, to make me
aspire to the eternal. At least, dear Philippin, acknowledge my fidelity in this
sincere testimony that I render you, To honor even your cruelty to the last
period of my life, and to cherish your disdain in the midst of the pangs of
death.

I ought to do it, since I confess I did not deserve so great an alliance as
you, I was not worthy but of your refuse. I had consented to my repudiation, if
the Christian laws in this case were not inviolable, espousing a Monastery to
leave you at liberty in your desires; but honor and justice have withstood it,
nor could I obtain of my father to give you this contentment to the prejudice
of me and my fame. If I did presume in taking that great honor to be your
Companion, not deserving the title of the meanest of your servants, think but
with your self what command my friends might have of me a Maiden, since your
father (the memory of whom is a blessing to me) had so absolute a power on your
will. This is to the end you may excuse not so much my presumption, as my
obedience; and amongst the illustrious dignities which honor you, and of which
I participated, you know I never did forget my self, nor have thought to be but
what I was. From henceforth I quit this place too great for me, to that happy
Creature which possesses you. I am not to acknowledge her merits, yet esteem
your judgment in your election; not only excusing your change, but approving
it: For although I yield to her all the preheminencies of grace and beauty; as
long as I live, I will never yield either to her, or to any person in the
world, that of affection; that if she be better beloved of you then I was, you
shall never be by her, as you have been and are still by me, now that death
breaks our first bonds, rendering the second as I desire them more pleasing; the
splendour of this fair day will shine brighter, after the obscurity of my night.
My will would have procured you this marriage during my life, to have pleased
you, and have been a purchaser of my own ruin, by soliciting it against my
self. But it is in vain for us to wrestle against the laws of God.

All that tears sighs from me, and troubles the clearness of my constancy in
these extremes, is the loss of this poor Infant; which as fruit disgraced, is
fallen by the wind of your anger from the arch which bore it; seeing it could
not ripen under the rays of your favor, it has seen the night of death before
the day of life, being deprived of the light of the star, which only could have
illustrated his darkness. But that most afflicts me, is this little innocent
Dalimene, which I leave on the earth the subject of your disdains. For Gods
love, dear Philippin! let not the indignity of the Mother prejudice the fortune
of this poor creature; since heaven would, to show you how strongly your idea
was graven in my heart, that she bears in her forehead the lively image of
those graces that nature has stamped on yours, not having any sign of those
defects which have deprived me of the happiness of your love. Let her childish
voice move you to pity; and since she is blood of your blood, in her have
compassion, not of her, nor me, but of your self.

And lastly I conjure you by all that is most holy in heaven and earth, to have
at least as a Christian some feeling of chari^y for my soul; praying that the
mercy of God may open heaven to it, and that earth may be light on my ashes.
Cruel, and yet welbeloved Philippin! at least love me being dead; since that
sacrificing to you my life, I give you the most pleasing service that I have
ever given you. I am wea^ier of life then of writing. O my dear Lord and
husband! my soul is going, content, if thou permit it to draw with its last
ascent this free sigh:

'Since my vowed Faith here cannot make the least
'Impression on thy unrelenting breast;
'Lo, I my Soul do cheerfully resign
'To Death, who has more charity then thine.


She thought to have le^t her life, ending her long Letter: For grief and love,
two strong passions, with the extreme pain which affected her body, made such
an impression as she thought verily to have lost her senses with her blood. But
by her youth and good constitution, the care of her parents help of physicians,
and perfections of remedies, the great Conductor of the world which reserved
her for a more sad spectacle, preserved her for this time.

The End of the Third Book.
ELISE, OR Innocence guilty. The Fourth Book.
WHen this writing, subscribed with the blood of this languishing creature,
came to the hands of Philippin, he felt in his soul strange convulsions; as
what Tygre had not been moved at so much sweetness and humility? For comparing
in his memory the paradise of tranquillity passed, with the h^ll of unquietness
present, he grieves for her being dead, whom he had afflicted living. But these
touches were like the weak pushes of those which wake out of a sound sleep; but
being drowsy, fall incontinently down upon their pillow, from which they
cannot raise themselves but with great pain. His heart was so glued to his
present voluptuousness, that he had almost forgot the remembrance of his past
happiness; the clouds hindered him from knowledge of the brightness of this
virtue, that like a torch casts greater flames, by how much the more it draws
near the end. Even as an Ancient said, We slight a present good; so Virtue most
in sight is hated, but adored when lost.
If she court us, we fly; and grown more coy,
Disdain those pleasures which we most enjoy.


These characters imprinted some kind of pity in this courage, before deaf to
all that could be said, and drew some tears from his eyes: but those small
drops falling on his hard heart, did no more penetrate then rain falling on
rocks; on the contrary this water, like the flood of the Sycionians that dries
the wood, seemed to redouble his obstinacy, and to produce the same effects as
the small showers that the vehement heat of the sun draws from the clouds in
the hottest of summer, which rather burns the leafs of plants, then any way
refreshes them. For fearing his compassion should give jealousy to Isabel, or
shadow her with some doubt of his affection, he is angry with his pity,
holding cruelty for a great virtue.

Proud Isabel, at the report of the pitteous news of Elise's death which the
messenger assured her, thought she should have swouned with extreme joy and
contentment, esteeming that this obstacle being removed, nothing could hinder
Philippin from healing the shame of her love by marriage. She gives thanks to
heaven, as if it had been guilty of her fault, and bound to repair it by so
bloody a means; by which you may note the humors of these creatures, that are
many times so impudent to mingle divinity with their misdeeds. Pyrrhe is
presently advertised at Vaupre, who much rejoices for the ensuing wedding of
his daughter; and the house of Philippin in stead of wearing blacks for the
decease of their Mistress, are employed in feasting and joy of a nuptial pomp,
to honor a marriage with small honor consummated.

Philippin receives a double joy by this death, seeing himself delivered of
her, which he could not have been but by it; and in possession of her, which he
could not make his legitimate wife as long as Elise had lived. He saw himself
possessed with great wealth by Scevole, by the means of Dalimene; which if he
should have restituted or been deprived of, would have been his utter ruin. He
imagines to be gotten above all his pretensions: And as the loadstone has no
force to draw to it that iron that is rubbed with garlic, even so his heart
environed with the stinking garlic of dishonest voluptuousness, cannot be
moved to any pity toward poor Elise, whose love trains her to death. Accursed
be the flames and plots of those
Projectors, who so fruitlesly expose
Themselves to plots so abortive and forlorn,
They die before they are begot or born.


For as they were preparing for these nuptial feasts with great diligence, news
came to them of the recovery of Elise, which turned all their joy into smoke,
and buried all their designs. Oh how vain and light is humane understanding!
Philippin hates the life of her, whom he lamented being dead: Isabel is in
despair, Pyrrhe in fury, and Herman afflicted, all deceived, because prevented
of their hopes and pretensions. Certainly God would have it so, and reserve
Elise for misfortunes more cruel, to make his glory shine on the depth of an
apparent ignominy.

But the rage of Philippin rests not there: For being pressed by Pyrrhe to keep
his word with him, having removed his Appeal to Rome to make that sentence void
which had confirmed his marriage with Elise; he imploies his uttermost means to
remove all lets and hindrances to prove it of no effect, not forgetting any
diligence or earnestness in the pursuit thereof. But if he were a violent
undertaker, he has to do with a better defendant: For Scevole being upheld by
the most equitable right in the world, knew better how to handle these
Process-weapons then himself. This hinders not nevertheless but this labyrinth
of contestations ingenders a mavelous long proceeding, during which years
slide away. Philippin is always in possession of Isabel, by whom he had some
children, which were brought up as legitimate. The whilst he is lost in his
debauches, and by these ill proceedings offends again with new outrages the
goodness of the chaste Elise; which cruel persecution carries him to an action
more inconsiderate then malicious, and which will cost him his life.

You must understand, that Elise being a Maid had been sought in marriage by a
Gentleman well qualified, and of a reasonable good estate; whom we will call
Andronico, for some reasons which make this name proper to him, of which this
is the principal, that among his qualities he had one which drew his title from
the Apostle who was brother to S. Peter; with this being very valiant, having
had many encounters in which he was still victorious; this name methinks agrees
well, to make all these things darkly understood. This young Andronico, after a
long pursuit, because of a secret dislike Scevole had of men of the sword, not
willing to give his daughter but to a son of his own gown, as he had done
before his eldest; being now at the point to obtain his desire, the
dispositions of the parents of Elise gave him hope of a happy success, his
virtue and perseverance having won them. Now Timoleon coming on these terms,
and offering to Scevole Philippin his son, an alliance so great and high, this
of Andronico vanished like a star before the sun. Andronico digested this
bitterness with a patience which may be better praised then expressed: He makes
great complaints, which the wind blows away. Challenge Philippin he cannot; for
why, the greatness and authority of Timoleon threw too much dust and powder
before his eyes, and it would have been to set a Wren against an Eagle. An
honorable retreat seems more advantageous then a needless contestation. Well,
he retires to his house, not without leaving Elise in some kind of sorrow,
which under the permission of a just research, was far advanced in her favor,
and could not be left without grief. Yet Andronico having at first sought her
for the respect of wealth, had now by long frequentation observed in her many
virtues, and lodged them deeply in his heart, letting her gain much in his best
affection. I will not spread my self too far in the patticularities of their
mutual loves, not to take from this History its brevity. So it is, Andronico
yields where he could not dispute with the greatness of his Competitor; and
Elise instructed by her mother to have no other will but that of her parents,
yields to the marriage of Philippin, rather for obedience then any inclination;
and Scevole imitating the dog in the fable, leaves a small body for a great
shadow, losing both the one and the other; so weak and feeble is our humane
wisdom.

Elise being Philippins, giving him her body, and with it her heart absolutely
to love him, as an honest wife ought to do a husband, blotting from her
thoughts all the impressions she had of Andronico; and he having lost all hope
to enjoy her, lost also the design of pursuing any further. But as a man
sleeping is not dead, nor a fire out that is covered with ashes; even so this
love rejoiced to awake and lighten in these young hearts, which a holy amity
had heretofore tied in a mutual bond. Elise being thus separated from Philippin
(as you have seen) and returned to her parents; Andronico, who was ordinarily
in the town, expecting some good match, sees her at her fathers, where his own
worth gave him free access; at which sight he feels some sparks of his first
flame. At first it was without design, and rather for a kind of civility then
otherwise; yet he after continues his visits by inclination and pleasure that
he takes in the conversation of this creature; of whose pitiful misfortunes he
conceives as much compassion, as he had heretofore been passionate for her. And
because love enters not into the soul by any gate so wide as that of
condolence, the extreme misfortunes of poor Elise made and ample breach in the
heart of this young Gentleman, who doubtless loved her truly, yet with all the
honor and respect that might be desired of a man which made profession of
virtue. But this entertainment went so far, that Elise lets herself be carried
to yield to the entertainments of Andronico, being also much pleased in his
conversation, which was full of discretion and modesty, example of his ends and
pretensions, that renders rather marcenarie then true these worldy friendships.
They lived like brother and sister, enjoying a pure and perfect union. And as
there is nothing so precious in a great affliction, as to find a confident
friend, in whose breast one may impose their griefs, and which partakes of our
ills by an unfeigned charity; Elise esteems it her happiness to have met with
Andronico, to whom she communicates her griefs with a holy and innocent
confidence; and he on the other side took such part, that Elise receives a
mavelous consolation; for by his words and reasons he tempred the sharp
points which augmented the smart of this disaster, withal having a certain
grace in his speech that made his counsels and consolations very commendable.
If Elise complain of the rigorous usage of Philippin, his fierceness and
cruelty; Andronico blames this fierce cruelty, and judges him unworthy to enjoy
so great a goodness as hers; saying that the love of Elise was too sincere for
a subject so full of ingratitude; and that if she had not yielded to him so
much, he would have more respected her, and not given her this ill usage.

I shall never have done, if I should undertake to represent their discourse
and entertainments, which made them esteem the hours as short as minutes, in
which they were present one with the other; and a moment of absence seemed
infinite ages. Thus by little and little the sympathy of their dispositions
made them find themselves tied in knot indissoluble, without ever passing in
this their frequentation (which was always in the presence of either Sophie or
Scevole) any action, word or thought, directly or indirectly contrary to purity
and honesty. Their eyes were of doves, washed in the milk of innocence and
whiteness; their lips bound with a scarlet ribbon, so full of purity was their
discourse; with hands full of myrrh (preservative against corruption) were
exempt of impurity; their hearts and bodies breathed nothing but modest. How
often both Scevole and Sophie, seeing this commendable amity, grieved they had
not joined them in marriage according to their first intent! But repentance
came too late, the dice are thrown. We must with patience, more or less,
Sustain those wrongs we cannot redress:
Impatience is afflictions son,
And breeds a thousand plagues alone.


The whilst these unadvised parents considered not they threw oil on the fire
that their youths kindled, though she covers it with a vail of chaste modesty;
this gave liberty to Elise to desire Andronico, if she had been free from the
slavish tyranny of Philippin: she reproves often the ambition of her parents,
who had been cause of her fall by an ascent too high; how much more sweet
appears a mediocrit fortune, then those so eminent, which like the fate of huge
rocks are sooner struck thunder then the humble valleys; considering What
trouble and distraction's there, where Power
With Love's Corrival and Competitor.


Andronico gathers these plants as pearls from roses, for he was not without
tears, making ruddie the plants of his desires, and cursing his ill fortune,
which made them acceptable now out of season, and were refused when receivable.
Till when, says he, O confounder of virtue, and my sworn enemy! will thou
persecute me? Remorseless Fate then merciless will move
In opposition to impede my Love.
But then coming to himself, and seeing that under these fantastical names of
fortune and destiny he taxed the divine providence, under whom slides the
thread of out days, and which holds our being in his hands; resolves to adore
rather then to outrage; and full of confidence, flatters himself with some
aerie hope by these words: If Heaven on my forsaken head
The influence of his Grace shall shed,
In melting showrs, and once more shine
Upon this drooping soul of mine:
From gray I shall grow green; each night shall bring
The morn, and turn my winter into spring.
But why do I delay so long to let you see the rock of precipitation, the end
of scandal, and shelf of shipwreck of these souls, in effect innocents, yet in
appearance will become horrible guilty. Alas! the bird which produces the
feather is taken; and the Eagle oftentimes furnishes the feather which makes
the arrow that wounds her to death. After they had long fighed in one another
ears their griefs, and cursed their miserable condition which had hindered their
being one another; after having many times desired that Philippin had been
Isabels, and Andronico Elise's; the laws, which are not always conformable to
the desires of Lovers, were found to contradict these alliances; for the knot
which God ties, cannot be cut but by the axe of death. After many reciprocal
words of good will, followed with a thousand protestations to enjoy one another
in marriage, if death in punishing the perfidies of Philippin would give way to
their loves; after many Letters which contained the same language, coming so
forward, falling by little and little into pits, which in stead of snaring drew
them out at length to strangle them; that they made reciprocal promises one to
the other, which could have no other ground but the death of Philippin; which
neither the one nor the other had any thought to procure by any way, but to
attend it by the hand of God.

Here is all their fault: And certainly it is true, virtuous Elise, that by a
vain assurance of fidelity, which will be as strongly tied to your heart as to
the paper, you put in great hazard both your honor and life. This was the
highest degree and end of Andronico's designs; for he knew too well the humor
of Elise, to pretend of her any thing which was not honorable; nothing passing
between them of that which this honest wife ought to her legitimate, although
barbarous husband; for she had her purity in such a recommendation, that
modesty ruled not only her actions and words, but also her thoughts. O must
she, to prevent the title of ingratitude, which could not have been given but
by the mouth of Andronico, fall into such an imprudence, which will make her
die in the sight of all the world in quality of an infamous adulterer and
bloody homicide of her own husband, although in effect or in will she was no
ways guilty.

Thus a sparkle sometime blown far, increases to a great fire; and a small hurt
neglected, becomes an incurable ulcer; a little spring increasing to a flood,
runs with a large compass into the salt sea. But how shall this Promise be
discovered, which should not see the day, but when the sun should leave to see
Philippin on earth? Yet you will understand it by a means, that will force you
to cry with the great Apostle, O height of riches of the wisdom of God, whose
judgments are incomprehensible, and his ways unsearchable! The whilst
Philippin is at Gold-mount, in Possession of the body of Isabel, with whom he
consumes his days in abominable and unlawful delights, gilding his evils with
the fair name of marriage, and by a false malicious conscience esteeming her
his wife: Andronico is in the town in possession of the heart of Elise, who
laments no more the absence of Philippin, by enjoying the presence of
Andronico; their conversations all pure and spiritual, have nothing that the
most severe censurers can justly blame; and living under the eye and discipline
of a Sophie, who trusted not so much her daughter, as that she had not always
an eye on her conversation.

Thus whilst the Process of Philippin for dissolving his marriage is drawn out
still longer, ('it is a web cannot be untangled) Pyrrhe enraged by these dalays,
murmurs and threatens to kill Philippin, if he pursues it not to an issue, as
he had promised him. So that the solicitation of this business calls Philippin
to town, having many points in his cause which could not be decided but in his
presence, besides that he could have no better Solicitor then himself. Being
thus employed, in all companies wheresoever he came, he was still speaking
invective words against Scevole and his daughter, which made him odious to all
that heard him: For, wronging her whom all held his wife, was it not to gather
filth to cover his head, and to throw hot burning coals in his own face? He was
then doubly blamed and mocked of those which knew the integrity of the father,
and worth of the mother of virtuous Elise; who attributed all these words to
the lightness of his understanding, nourished in vice, and rotten in his
debauches. But when many times his wisest friend would reproach him with his
inconstancy, presenting to him the ill opinion which was spread in the world
of this vile life he lived with Isabel; in stead of taking these admonitions
with the right hand, he receives them with the left, is displeased with these
truths, or turns them to laughter, rejoicing in his misfortune and vice, and
glorying in his ills. For many time in the company of Ladies, where he was for
this most persecuted, in a vain humor he describes the graces of his Diana,
and deciphers (what shall I say?) rends the ill form of poor Elise. He makes
them see that all the precepts of the art of well-speaking, have nothing that
gives greater eloquence then passion: For as love made him fruitful in one
subject, hatred makes him as wild in the other; having a voice equally strong
to praise and blame, excessive in both.

Andronico frequents, as well as he, these companies, welcomed wheresoever, for
being full of worthy parts that made him commendable; which he accompanied with
as much wisdom and staidness, as Philippin showed lightness. He hears sometimes
recited the indiscreet discourse of this Lord, who spoke without punishment
what he pleased: And being pricked in the tendrest part of his affection,
knowing the virtues of Elise, could not suffer they should be so cruelly
defamed by the tongue of Philippin. But as then fearing to discover his love in
sustaining this innocence, finds himself reduced into strange agonies:
Nevertheless at the assault of these reports, which took him sometimes on the
sudden, he could not contain himself from replying as sharp and biting words
against Philippin, as he received sweet from Elise: sometime accusing him of
backbiting and indiscretion, and often of falsehood, saying that Scevole wanted
not friends to sustain the contrary of that he so unworthily sought to advance;
sometimes affirming it was a shame for a Cavalier to have to do with one of the
Gown, and more to tail against a Woman, who had no other arms but her tears;
many times for mirth makes Satyrs of Isabel not only to his nose, but also with
the pen: He Writ certain verses against her, and long ones; but because they
were too biting, I would not black this paper with then. Often in defending
Elise, he publishes her worth and patience, saying that Philippin abused her
goodness, was not worthy of such a wife; for in following the dissolution of his
marriage, he sought his own ruin and shame: His ruin, for without the wealth
of Scevole his house remains engaged without hope of recovery; his shame, in
having married one he covers with infamy and dishonor. And for the
insupportable disdain that pride drew from the spirit of Philippin against the
family of Scevole, he said that the inequality in condition made him not less
noble; Justice being during peace, that which Military art is during wars: That
if Nobility were drawn from its first and most just measure, which is Virtue,
it would be found greater of the fathers side then of the son-in-law's: That
according to the course of the world, a new Nobility accompanied with great
riches, ought to be in as great esteem as an ancient boasting under miserable
poverty. As the wind carries often a small sparkle here and there, which at
length is cause of great flames; so there want not in the world reporters,
which like Smiths bellows serve to light and kindle cholers, and to put fire
into men's courages. The speeches of Andronico come by these means to the proud
ears of Philippin, who at first began to carry himself with threats, appearing
as a cowardly dog that barks more then bites. It was true, that for antiquity
and greatness of descent, Andronico was much the inferior; yet was he a
Gentleman, and of a descent too good to endure any thing unworthy. When
Philippin spoke of a cudgel, he replied he would answer him with a blade of
steel; and being born a Gentleman, might measure his sword with any man that
wore iron at his side.

By an ill encounter they met in a company; where at the first sight, after the
lightning of looks, succeeds the thunder of words, and had come to the hail of
blows, if they had not been by the multitude of their friends parted. Andronico
not having lost any thing in this encounter, retains himself within modesty;
but furious Philippin foaming with rage, challenges him with as much noise, as
small effect: For it was never in their powers to meet; the Justice having set
guards on them, and the Governor desirous to agree them, had straightly forbid
them fighting. The whilst Philippin, besides the spite to see himself braved
by a man he thought not worthy to be his servant, redoubling his injuries not
only against Scevole and Elise, but also against Andronico; obliges his
patience to return sharp replies. Philippin enquires from whence this humor of
Andronico's should proceed, to sustain so ardently the cause of Elise: And
having learned his ordinary frequenting the house of Scevole, with some
addition by the calumnious reporter, as it is ordinary, adding something to
flatter his passion; we need not ask if he added to the letter. As those which
are ill, think all are like themselves, he accuses her of dishonor, who was as
innocent as he guilty; calling ordinarily Andronico, in mockery, the Squire of
Elise; a word in appearance simple, but furred with black malice, and to be
understood as sharp as it appeared subtle.

The courteous Andronico turning to laughter these mockeries, said, his madness
made him spit at heaven, and his own filth returned on his head. Which was
true: for if Elise had been such as Philippin had described her, and his
marriage with her not yet declared null; who sees not that that which he said
to dishonor her, returned infamy on himself? But in that he shot his arrow at
a rock, which returns to hurt him that shot it. And Andronico, to show he
wanted not wit nor spirit to defend himself with a tongue, more then the other
that assailed him; would say, that if he had lived in the time of the ancient
Palatines, which made profession to revenge the wrongs done by the strongest to
the weakest, as also to defend the afflicted innocent, and principally to
vindicate the honor of Ladies, he would easily have been drawn to the field as
Elise's Knight, to make known by a victory the justice of this Lady, so
unjustly accused and unworthily used by her barbarous husband.

But since they were so strictly watched that they could not join, and the use
of those ancient Combats abolished; accommodating themselves according to the
time, bear patiently the yoke the laws had imposed, and observing the customs
of the place they live in, all these contestations of words seemed like storms
and thunder, which after much lightening in dark mists of rain and noise, leave
no sign of their passage but only darkness: For after these reports and
bitings, all these bravado's end in air, which filled with filth the authors
themselves, as snails which soil themselves in their own scum. But at last as
lightning is ordinarily followed with thunderclaps, even so choler passes
ordinarily from the tongue to the hand.

A Gentleman of Philippin's, whom we will call Valfran, mad to see his Master
could not be revenged of a meaner then himself, resolves on a base and unworthy
act, which was to shoot a pistol at the head of Andronico. He takes his time,
and as day was shut in, (for these shameful actions require darkness) having
learnt he was in a company where he passed his time in hearing a pleasing
Consort of music; he sent to him by one of his Lacquays, saying he was to
speak with him from the Lord Philippin, and would attend him at the chamber
door. The Lacquay tells his Master secretly; who full of the furious courage of
our French Nation, that esteems most valor in single Combats, although it be
nothing but brutality; and dead with envy to see this Rodomonts sword in his
hand, hoping to abate his pride, and make his day by his death to the promise
of Elise, steals subtly from his company, as if he would but go into another
chamber; and stepping to the door, he no sooner appeared, but the traitorous
murderer which attended him with his foot firm, without saying any word,
presents his pistol to his head. Andronico slips quickly aside, and so happily,
that the blow given with a noise (such as you may judge) against the door,
burst it like thunder. Hereat all the house and neighborhood is in alarms; the
Consort ceases, and yields to this hellish music. The murderer would have
drawn his sword; but Andronico throwing himself resolutely upon him, rolls him
down the stairs. Above and below were many blows given; the Lacquays cry
murder; all run to the rescue of Andronico; but the place was so strait, that
the sword of Valfran was of no use. Andronico is altogether unarmed; who
perceiving the murderer sought his poniard to offend him, having more strength
gets it, and holding it to his throat, says, Remember thou mist me, but I will
not fail thee; and strikes it twice or thrice into his body. The murderer cries
out fearfully: He would have ended him; but desirous to know from whence this
should come, he leaves him yet with some part of life. Andronico's friends came
with their swords in their hands, and thinking this enterprise was followed,
run up and down the streets to find out the Accomplices of Valfran: but finding
none, the Justice is sent for, into whose hands the Traitor is remitted; who
confessed in the place, that he was incited to this base act (unworthy a
Gentleman as he was) because he saw his Master could not meet Andronico to end
their quarrel; and that he could not endure that a meaner then his master
should resist him so strongly.

Philippin advertised of this accident, loving Valfran as much as he hated
Andronico, knows not of which side to range himself: For if he sustain the
traitor, he covers himself with shame and infamy, and although he protest, will
be thought partaker in the treason; and to renounce him, would be to embrace
the cause of his enemy, and abandon his friend. But honor bears him above
friendship; and blaming this way as altogether shameful and illbecoming a
generous courage, he disavows Valfran, yet beseeches the Justice to content
themselves with his wounds, without putting him to a shameful death. But they
were found such, as they prevented the punishment of justice; for three days
after he dyed: God, by a secret pity, giving him that time to acknowledge his
faults, which he did, demanding a thousand pardons of Andronico for his
attempt; and understanding the disavow of Philippin, which had left him in the
point of his greatest necessity, cries, O how great is the ingratitude of
worlings! how frail their strength, whose amity is enmity to that of God's!

This death showed the justice of God, which leaves no evil unpunished,
increased justice in men, satisfied Andronico, purged Philippin; and by this
example teaches us the truth of the celestial oracle spoken by the mouth of
King David in his Psalm, Lean not on th'arm of Princes, nor rely
On sons of men, or humane policy:
From whom no succors can arrive or come,
Which can anticipate, or divert thy doom.
When the contracted breath does upwards draw
And like some exhalation fly away,
The body suddenly returns to earth
To take her burial, where she took her birth:
Leaving all empty projects far behind,
Like atoms scattered in the fleeting wind.


All that Philippin could protest against Valfran notwithstanding, in the
opinion of the world this shameful stain rests in his forehead, that he was
not only cause, but also consenting to this abominable act, for the fault of
the servant is often thrown on the master. This raised marvellously the
estimation of Andronico; who was quitted for stabbing of Valfran. Oh how much
did Elise find herself bound to him for all this! how much love did she protest
to him, and to keep in her memory an eternal acknowledgment! For Andronico was
not content to employ his tongue in the defense of her honor in all companies,
but vowed he would expose his life a thousand times for her protection. She
must have been insensible to have neglected so many obligations.

Philippin pursues still his first point, to be disengaged in marriage from
Elise; persevering in his ordinary mockeries, and calling Andronico his Rival,
(for so he had been, when he first knew Elise, being then a Maid) and wondering
he should contradict him in this separation, which he esteemed ought to have
been sought by Andronico, if he had any design to marry her. Thus into what
strange speeches was he not transsported! saying, he should but be too happy
being refused; and was very glad to yield him a good, as he was sorry to take
from him: And full of many other nipping taunts, which I will leave to the
conjecture of a good judgment, rather then to soil the whiteness of these pages.

Amongst all these small riots there was great hatred, and almost all the Town
took part with the one or the other side. Those which held with Philippin,
trumpeted every where the violence Timoleon had used on his will to make him
yield to this marriage: And Scevole being rich, wanted not enviers, which
rejoiced to see these troubles in his family. But this party was least: For the
insupportable insolence and pride of Philippin, in his words and actions, made
him odious to those which had no interest in his cause. So that justice and
virtue fighting for Elise, made the side of Andronico much more strong and
puissant. His modesty and discretion contributed not a little to the good will
that was borne him by many: There was not any that esteemed not Elise to have
been happier being his, then Philippin's; for contentment having been preferred
before wealth and riches, it is not to be doubted she should have enjoyed as
much in the company of this mean Gentleman, as this great Lord, which uses her
with so much cruelty and disdain.

As things were in this estate, there happens to be a marriage not far from
Philippins lodging, which are common friends to both our Opposites. They are
both invited to the feast; but besought with all affection not to quarrel
there, for not hindering a Company that was assembled to be only merry and make
good cheer. Which they both solemnly promise to those that invite them, in so
free a planner, that their inviters hoped I know not what of reconcilation. But
here is a strange web made. For you shall know that Pyrrhe weary to live so
long, without seeing the issue of his daughters process; and not able to
support seeing himself the shameful proverb and object to all his neighbors,
by a secret suggestion of the devil (as it is to to be believed) lets himself be
led by the spirit of vengeance, esteeming Philippin dealt underhand with his
adversary, to abuse his patience and the honor of his daughter, holding his
reputation in suspense during the length of this pursuit. He could not come to
his ends of Philippin at Bellerive, nor at Gold-mount, because in the Country
he always went so well accompanied in time of his defiance, that he had no
means to approach him. He imagines, that walking the streets without suspect,
it would be easy to surprise him, and take the life of him that had made him
lose his honor, stealing it traitorously as he had ravished and stole his
daughter.

Ill designs are as soon taken as thought on, and pernicious counsels as soon
followed as proposed. For at first discovery he made to his son Herman, he
offers to execute this enterprise; and Pyrrhe himself would be of the party;
but Herman conjures him to keep his house for the conservation of his goods, to
the end that if it should come to be discovered after the blow, he might
(having passed the Alps, or crossed the seas) be assisted by his means in
Italy or in Spain, Pyrrhe, though with much pain yields to this advice to: And
having, acquainted an ancient Servant whom, they trusted, stout of his hands,
whom we will call R^boaldo, he is ready to assist Herman in this enterprise.
They come to the town well mounted, with arms necessary to execute it; and
being hid in the day, not going out but by night, hoping to entrap Philippin
returning from some company, the occasion of this Wedding-supper seems fit to
b^ing to pass their vengeance. Whilst Philippin and Andronico are in feasting,
dancing, mirth and joy, with pleasant jests and gallantries, their looks are
always at'on'side, not speaking but with eyes whose sparkles in stead of love
threaten death; yet do they contain themselves, to maintain their promise. Not
but that they said what they pleased; for in those corners separated it was
impossible to join, not holding themselves to have power to speak without being
moved, and once moved, to strike; it was very hard to discourse, and not betray
their passions.

Here are wars made at Philippin upon the subject of his Amazon: but he raises
her merits with such art, as his eloquence blinds the judgments of all those
that hear him; and those who accused him in the beginning, excuse him in the
end. At another corner, Andronico being persecuted in jest and sport as Elise's
Knight; what says he not in the praise of this virtuous woman? And that he says
in honor of her, could not but turn to the disadvantage of him that used her
with so much in justice. And as he was founded in a truth, he he sustains it
with so good terms, that there was not any of those which heard him that had
not their eyes fixed on his good fashion, and ears on his tongue. Many times he
unfortunately happened to say, That if Philippin were dead, which might shortly
be expected by the justice of heaven, he would esteem himself much honored to
marry Elise, as widow to a Knight, and one of the honestest women on earth. But
Isabel could not say so much: For if Philippin lived, she was dishonored; He
being dead, she durst not appear in the eyes of the world.

From thence his passion carried him to say, that Elise deserved better fortune
then Philippin; who (in truth) without the express commandment of her parents
would never have married him. And after this falls to other particularities,
which had not fallen to the ground, though they had not been gathered up by the
ears of Philippin. Many times those which heard them speak so disgracefully one
of the other, would fain have broken off this discourse: But as there is
nothing that tickles the ears more then detraction, by a natural malice which
inclines us to ill, all give way to their discourse. And that which at last
lost Andronico, was a word that slipped from him unawares, as reproaching
Philippin of the assassination of Valfran, although he were innocent by the
oath of the delinquent. It might have been easy, and it may be permitted (says
he) by the course of the world, to return a treason by another; but I hate too
much such base unworthiness. Andronico, this will cost you very dear.

It is now time to conduct the new married pair to bed; where being arrived,
all this fair company are separated. In the great number of Caroches and horses
which waited at the gates, it was easy for Herman and Roboald to stand in the
darkness of the night amongst this press; from the midst of which comes
Philippin slightly accompanied, and on foot, by reason of the neerness of his
lodging. As he drew near Roboald, who stroke down the Page that carried the
torch, Herman on horsback comes upon Philippin like thunder, presenting the
mouth of his pistol to his forehead with a steel-bullet, which strikes out his
brains on the stones. Philippin seeing him come, believed it was Andronico; and
cried, O Traitor! O Elise! thou make me be murdered! And so dyed. After this
blow, Herman and Roboald retire by favor of the night to their lodgings, from
whence they went next morning by break of day; arriving at Vaupre with an
assurance as if they had done nothing, for they were certain not to have been
perceived.

But let us return to the City, where in an instant all was in rumor and alarm:
Many fled; others more valiant, went to behold this tragic spectacle of
Philippin spread stark dead on the pavement. Andronico, who was no way guilty,
comes on hors-back with others. He laments, as Caesar did Pompey, the death of
his enemy; nevertheless with a certain fashion mingled with joy, which gives an
entrance to suspision if it were not himself, that after so detestable a deed
comes to counterfeit the innocent. Many circumstances seem to accuse him; as
the discourse he had held in the Wedding-hall, and 'twas a man on hors-back
that killed Philippin. Many said aloud, that if he did it not, he had made it
to be done; which he denies with as much constancy, as truth. There were other
testimonies of some that had seen him take horse at the very time that
Philippin was shot, giving assurance that he could not have committed an action
so base; but that he was of the plot there was place for suspicion, leaving all
these groundless reports. He raising his head, strengthened with his own
innocence, retires confidently to his house, believing already to be in
possession of his Elise. Who had no sooner understood the bloody murder of her
husband, with this miserable circumstance of Andronico's being suspected; but
changing the love she had for Philippin into pity, and the good will so worthy
which she had born Andronico into a mortal hatred, she takes this conjecture
for a truth, and upon this first impression no way doubts it; whether it was to
have her in possession according to the promise she had given him, or to be
revenged for the attempt of Valfran, he had done this base act himself, or made
it be done. And even as that friendship which is grounded on virtue, swouns
before its contrary; the same does charity in the soul, encountering vice; like
the stone called Prassu^, that loses its luster at the approach of any poison.
Here is she for the loss of Philippin filled with grief not to be comforted;
her affection is redoubled by this cruel and dangerous trespass; and so void of
good will for Andronico, that she has his name in horror, and the thought of
him is an abomination insupportable.

Philippin is conveyed to Bellerive to the sepulcher of his fathers, whither
courageous Elise had the strength to accompany him. Her mourning and tears, as
sincere as her love was true, moved more pity in those that saw her thus
living, then for her dead husband. For all saw by the misgovernment of this
young Lord a just punishment from heaven; the hand of God lay heavy on his head
that had been dashed in pieces: according to that word of David, A perfidious
man given to flesh and blood, never sees the days of half the course his life.
Scevole, a man of great understanding, accompanies his daughter, as Dowager to
the house of Philippin, to these funeral rights; with his Grandchild Dalimene,
as she that was now universal heir by the declaration of the validity of the
marriage of Elise and Philippin, whose rightful succession none could
withstand.

But this is not all in question to dislodge the Amazon out of Goldmount. For,
not to speak of the complaints of this desperate Lover, and the furies that
seized her at the receipt of the news of his death, then when she hoped to have
come to Town to have married him; who being the corrupter of her integrity,
ought to be the repairer of her renown. There wanted not much, being filled
with a rage full of blindness, that she had not killed two miserable children
which she had by Philippin the time they had been together; and for to have
kept them company, have pierced herself with the same blade that had murdered
them. But the inspiration of her good Angel was stronger in this assault then
the suggestion of the ill; who raises for a time the impious above the cedars
of Libanus, for to throw them in the end into the deep pit of despair. At
length she resolves on an enterprise as foolish as hardy; (but on what does one
not think in extremities?) which was, To make herself Mistress of the Castle of
Gold-mount, and to keep it by force of arms, to which her courage and ordinary
exercises had incited her. For to return to her father was a thing she could
not hear of, doubting the ill usage and indignation of Pyrrhe, and after so
much greatness and magnificences that she had tasted in the house of Philippin;
could not reduce herself to the poverty of the paternal, that she knew for the
subject of her ill life was become altogether incommodate.

But Scevole having had the wind of this design, goes strait to Gold-mount; and
authorized by the Justice of the Country, assembles by the Provost all the
Commons, and begirts this Warrior in her Castle; who having made more provision
of men then victuals, was delivered by those that ought to have defended her,
into the hands of Scevole, who was pleased to remit her into those of her
fathers, that fains to be ignorant of the death of Philippin; he receives her
alone, refusing to meddle with her children, which Scevole takes charge of as
descended of his son-in-law, though illegitimate. When Isabel saw herself in
Vaupre shut up in a dark prison, it was then she had occasion to curse her
faults passed, and to acknowledge that these tribulations were the least that
she deserved. We will leave her to suffer under the hardness of her irons, and
such barbarous usage that I abhor to write of, to come to Scevole, who returns
to the City triumphing in the execution of this justice mingled with so much
mercy, for he might have used a more exemplary punishment on this criminal
rebellion. He again confirms the marriage of Elise with Philippin, and anew
declares Dalimene heir, and her Mother dowager and governess. Elise shows in
her face the signs a widowhood full of grief and bitterness; her voice is like
the turtles, nothing but solitude is pleasing to her.

Andronico; which could not think the ill usage of Philippin could have begot
so strange a mourning, believes some art, where there is nothing but
simplicity. He intends to visit this desolate Lady, to contribute, at least for
complement, some image of consolation to this grief that he esteems ^ained. But
finding her so much changed in her self, and for him, that she was to be
misknown in face, and more in her understanding; At first aboard he esteems
that the goodness of her nature had renewed her ancient love by the pity of so
mournful an accident, which was cause of all this wildness. And desirous,
pressed by his own affections, to give her some comfort; as he thought to have
drawn her aside, she prevents his design by her sudden retiring, which gave him
no means of speech but before Sophie, his discourse being no other but that is
accustomed in the like occasions. But at last Sophie being called into another
place, left Elise (as formerly) in conversation of Andronico. But she turning
her back to him, as if she had seen a serpent or fearful dragon, follows her
mother, and leaves him not only as an indifferent person, but as a detested;
which was greater in the heart of Andronico then either spittle or shame; for
such an outrage in the lightning of her eyes threatened a horrible tempest.

The troublesome confusion to see himself left, now when he thought to be most
favorably received of this woman, having given her so many testimonies of his
love, and honored her so respectfully; puts more colors in her face then we
see in the Rainbow that proclaims a storm. And truly, being this man is
innocent, let it be permitted us to say this word in his defense: O Elise, you
will have time to repent you, to have condemned one before hearing him, and to
have so soon given belief to a light conjecture. There is nothing ordinarily
more false then the reports of the Town; for fame increases not but for the
most part with lies; the diverse reports and conjectures are but dreams of men
waking. You will ruin your own happiness; and for a slight disdain you make
this generous heart feel, it will cost you your life; you wrong your self more
then him, and lay a foundation of dislike which will be your common loss. Who
is not astonished at your inconstancy? to see her which in her greatest
adversities showed more strength then a man, for a vain shadow show weaker then
a woman; like a Rose-tree that bends with the smallest wind? who can justify
your ingratitude, or uphold your forgetfulness, in but thinking of the good
offices this young Gentleman did you, when exposing himself to so many quarrels
and hazards to maintain your honor, and the validity of your marriage, against
himself and his own contentment? You permitted him to love you, when there was
no hope to see the fruits of the flowers of his affections; and now that the
day of hope begins to appear, you cover him with a night of despair, not only
forbidding him to love or seek you (the lawful gate being open) but also to
see or speak to you. As great a heart as a woman shows in the most fearful
accidents, she returns always to her own nature, and many times in the smallest
encounters makes known her great weakness; like the captive King that wept not
seeing his son slain, and yet shed tears at the death of his slave. I have much
ado, Elise, that I accuse you not of lightness, and esteem you worthy of the
pains you go to suffer, forgetting the grief I felt in reciting what you have
suffered. For is it not like the Prince of Israel; to hate so unworthily those
that love you, and love unjustly those that hate you? I see you are like the
sick, that have their taste so changed, that those meats they held delicate
being well, go against their stomachs in their indisposition: For this sincere
affection which you have had to this Gentleman, is converted into hatred. This
change cannot but be extreme, the effect being ordinarily compared to its
cause. She is like the fi^s of the Prophet, either perfectly good, or extreme
ill; and like delicate bodies which turn sooner to corruption, by how much they
have been tenderly nourished.

Andronico retires by this blow, with a thousand diverse thoughts that troubled
his very soul. Not able to rest all night, being so afflicted with different
passions, he does nothing but search in himself, and plunge into the secret
corners of his soul, to find in what he had failed in duty to his Love, to be
used in this sort: And after having turned often in this labyrinth, from whence
he still came forth by the gate of innocence, thought it was for the small
assistance he had given to Scevole and Elise in their journey to Bellerive and
Gold-mount, where he thought he should have testified the fidelity of his
courage. Sometime he was persuaded, that Elise much grieved, consolation
displeased her; being there is nothing that displeases more in tears then
music, though in it self most pleasing: But to think that she grieved for the
death of a man that had so wronged her during his life, and of whom she had
complained a thousand times to himself; it was a thing he could dot admit into
his belief.

What shall he do amongst these perplexities? He writes; but his Letters
heretofore so well received, are rejected with a fashion that testified a
coffeehouse, and no small one. This affront seems very sensible to his
honor: Many times despite counsels him to raze it, as not to the purpose to
suffer this indignity, if he were to live with her, as he desires and hopes. He
hopes it; for his love, of more strength then this outrage, makes him wave all
these punctual considerations: He desires it, because this Match will be
extremely advantageous to him. And esteeming it sure, being founded on her
strong promises; not able to resist the fierce assaults of his passion, nor the
disdain received, nor to forget his pursuit, or resolve on patience,(that so
sovereign herb in all the troubles of our thoughts) he is resolved, on what
price soever, to accost Elise, with opportunity, or by importunity. For to live
longer in this incertitude of the cause of his disgrace, is impossible; and
impossible it was for him to find the occasion; for what prayers soever he
make, this favor is denied him, without other reason but a furious
indignation. He prevails so much with Sophie to whom he addresses himself, that
he obtains permission to speak with Elise, but in her presence; yet
nevertheless apart, and in that fashion, as she might not heat any thing of
importance which he had to communicate to her. Sophie according to her promise
commands Elise to hear Andronico; wondering much from whence this sudden change
should proceed toward this Gentleman, that had given her so many testimonies
of his love, and done her those obliging services, the conversation of whom had
heretofore been so pleasing to her. For although this soul report came to her
ears of the suspicion for the death of Philippin, nevertheless she was a woman
so wise and so advised, that without harkening to these Town-reports, she chose
rather to believe her eyes, which made her see many virtues in this honest man,
then to incline too lightly to a flying murmur that entered her ears. She had
much ado to make Elise yield to this enterview; and demanding the reasons of
this difficulty she made, thinking it had been some one of those gentile
repulses or amiable ^iots that engender ordinarily between those that love
dearest. Elise besought her not to press any further on that subject, which was
dangerous, and would draw blood of the nose of her child with often blowing.
Yet nevertheless as she was humble and submissive, putting her will under the
obedience of the commandment of her mother, she consents to this meeting: but
being in presence one of the other, their contrary passions were so vehement,
that the words they had purposed to say, die in the utterance, resting a long
space without preferring one word; An evident sign of the troubles of their
thoughts. But oh how different were they! For Elise's were of hatred and
disdain, and those of Andronico of love and grief. It Is true, a mean grief may
be told; but an extreme, astonishing the understanding, surmounts the power to
express it. At last, as the fear of the death of Craesus untied the tongue of
his son being born dumb; even so the fear to lose this fair occasion that he
had purchased with so much pain, drew from the mouth of Andronico, rather dead
then living, these words drawn from the essence of the same displeasure:

Madam, My grief is such, that if it would but give me the means to present it,
I should diminish the infinity of it, as I advance in terms that will rather
offend the greatness; then any way decipher the least part thereof; it would be
too weak, if it gave not leave to the sighing of my complaint. All that
comforts me in this mortal distress, is, that I suffer for your occasion; so
that the excellency of the cause eases the rigor of the effect: For it is so
much honor for me to suffer for you, that for so worthy a subject, there is no
sort of torment, which, in stead of offense, is not held by me for a recompense.

At these doubtful words, Elise suddenly judged he was guilty of the death of
her husband; but the biting of his conscience made him fearful, and therefore
strove to cover it with these artificious words; searching excuses to make him,
if not pardonable, less odious. Which made her return him this sharp answer:
Content yourself with my silence, Andronico, and convert not my patience into
fury, for fear my forbearing lightens not from the just feeling of my wrong.
Content you to have reduced me, by your execrable vileness, to the highest
period of grief that a soul can feel, that loses the half of herself in the
loss of her husband.

Madam, replied Andronico, I easily pardon the grief your good nature feels for
the death of him, to whom the law of marriage had tied you in a strait bond;
for I know how strongly you loved him, notwithstanding the ill usage by which
he violated your constancy: but I cannot conceive what grief should make you
call me vile and execrable; accents so far different from so many other sweet
names that I have heretofore seen you choose to favor me; titles so far from
those that your courtesy not long since did oblige, not my desert, but my
fidelity; that I am forced to tell you, that as the be which makes the honey,
is that which stings the most sensibly; and as honey so sweet in the mouth, is
most sharp to wounds; and as there is nothing more scalding then oil, when it
is hot; so these outrages coming from your mouth are so much more grievous, by
how much I have received consolation and gratification. Must I be so unhappy to
see the fire of my wounds come from the place from whence I expected my
healing? Is it possible after such a metamorphosis, that you retain the name of
that Elise that professed so much love to me then, when it was less lawful to
love me? of that Elise which I so devoutly honored, and against all these
contradictions I cherish yet more then my proper life? I cannot tell more how
to name you, nor know not what term to find expressing enough in any idiom,
that can set forth as it ought such an inconstancy. At least, Madam, let me
know the reason that has caused so long time your pity to be deaf at my
prayers; and after this knowledge, let heaven cut my life by the knife of your
cruelty, when it pleases him. This is the smallest favor I may hope of you,
seeing I can draw so much from cruelty it self; there is nothing more just then
to make known to an offender the cause of his suffering, nor any thing more
unjust then to conceal it from him.

If a small cloud can take from our eyes the sight of the sun that is so great,
replied Elise, it is easy with a small fault to shadow out one of a greater
importance. But that God that sees all, and which knows the secrets of hearts,
and dives into the dark corners of our reins, that is served with things of
smaller appearance to make known the most covered, and which can draw the light
of the truth from midst of the thickest obscurities of falsehoods; will also be
served with my goodness, and the consideration of that love which I have
heretofore born thee, for to give thee means to shun a shameful punishment,
and to withdraw thee quickly from this place, where it is wonder that thou caus^
have so much assurance, having committed so great a fact; my silence and thy
retreat will be more safe, then my discourse and thy stay. I would to God you
had not done that which I dare not tell you, because I have not forehead enough
to blush for the loss of thine. Content your self, that my honor being ti^d to
your life, not to lose the one, I will conserve the other; although the one is
as precious to me, as the other is detestable.

In all this there was much said, yet nothing of what should have been said:
And what is he that would not wonder at these delays, and at the length of
these circumlocutions? For since Passion is a labyrinth, it is no marvel if it
have many turnings. Andronico having had some feeling of the reports which ran
to his disadvantage upon the death of Philippin, doubts it might be about this
accusation; comforts himself in the hope to see an end of this Mine, that
threatened a great descent after it had taken wing; being founded on the truth
of his innocence. So that for fear to anger this woman, knowing there is
nothing more fierce then a Be when it is moved, which puts her life in the
wound she makes, and never stings that she rests not wounded to death, he fains
to be ignorant of the end of this her fury, in saying to her, That when one
endures a pain deserved, it is made so much the more tolerable; that one
believes to extinguish a sin, is to suffer without desert; it would be hard,
but more insupportable to suffer innocently, and again in being ignorant of the
cause of his sufferance. And then kneeling down at the feet of Elise, with a
voice something higher then before, or then the place where he was, and the
presence of Sophie, although not near, seemed to permit him. Madam, says he, I
will die here, or learn from your mouth what can be the cause that puts me into
so fierce a disgrace; nor will I ever leave you till you give me this
satisfaction, to let me know of what death I shall die; for I take heaven to
witness, I find not my self guilty of any thing that may be prejudicial to you.
I beseech you not to give way to calumnies and reports, to the prejudice of my
sincerity.

Elise surprised to see him in this estate, and before her mother, did not know
on what side to turn her: wherefore entreating him to rise, which he refused to
do, she says to him softly, Content yourself, that I cannot speak without
offending mine honor, and your life: And that in the midst of the hatred with
which I detest your vileness, I reserve this spark of my ancient affection for
the conservation of them both; to which I found my self bound, not so much for
any good I wish you, but for the respect I owe my modesty. Madam, replied the
unfortunate Andronico, this is not to give me light, but to plunge me into a
new obscurity: I beseech you discover these riddles, and not to tell me again
in other terms the same thing you have already told me; for what can he fear,
that doubts not death? but on the contrary, if I lose your favor, I desire it
to free me of a life which will be more troublesome then it, being deprived of
your love. All that astonishes me, is your honor, which you say is engaged to
my conservation; and in that it may be you have said better then you think: For
when the purity of my intentions shall be known, the greatness of my
affections, the sincerity of my soul, and how many dangers I have run to give
you proof of my service, and that you have recompensed me with despair that
will take my life; it will be hard for you to remove this stain of ingratitude,
which like an eternal infamy will remain on the pureness of your understanding.
If ever it happen, not that I attempt, but only think any thing that might
never so little prejudice your honor, for the conservation whereof I Will spend
a thousand lives, I desire that the heavens never pardon me any fault. May I be
raised by fortune, or cast down
By fate, being object of thy smile or frown:
Though the disastrous destinies should combine
To annihilate and ruin me and mine,
Naught can divorce my affection, or divert
Th'unfain'd devotion of a faithsull heart.
It will be easy for me to resolve to die, after being deprived of that I held
dearer then life. What do I say? Truly it will be harder to me to resolve to
live, or rather to outlive such a loss; yet to lose my life without knowing the
cause for which I die, this is that I cannot resolve on, if I do not bury my
self with the quality of the maddest of all humane creatures. Wherefore I
entreat you to permit me to press you with all sort of importunity, to declare
to me the ground of my condemnation; otherwise I shall believe that the words
you have given me, and those promises you have made me, even by writing, as I
can easily testify, proceeded not but from a changeable humor, incident to
your f^x, and of which I ought to expect nothing but pure inconstancy.

At this Elise was touched to the quick, and (as they say) in the ball of the
eye: Who cutting off suddenly this long discourse, all inflamed with spite,
and red with choler, answers him, What do you upbraid me with my words, and
tax me with promises, to draw me into your crime, and to match with the
murderer of my husband God will not punish my disloyalty, although thy
falsehood. Go traitor! and the most soiled with infidelity that earth ever bore!
Do thou in this sort wrong my easy belief and simplicity, to make me
guilty, although innocent of the bloody falsehood that you wrought in your
thoughts? Go crocodile, that weeps before me to devour me, and to ravish mine
honor with my life. It was not on the miseries that I suffered then, that thou
contributedst thy tears, but on the ill fortunes thou preparest for me. Oh, I
will never trust on the faith and words of any man; or let heaven punish me
with all griefs that are to be imagined, if it happen to me again to let my
self be cozened.

At these words, uttered in a fashion that testified that the excess of
indignation had made her beside herself, Andronico knew clearly the truth of
her distaste. Of which much joyful in himself, because the testimony of his
conscience made him unblameable; in stead of excusing this invective with sharp
words, being wronged, smiling as it were, and sweetly blotting out this error
which seemed pleasing; well, Madam, replied he, if I should have committed this
crime of which you accuse me, what had I done but rendered Philippin that he
would have given me by the attempt of Valfran? But I have not so base a courage
to give such commission to others, nor so traitorous to execute them my self. I
often desired to see him with his sword in his hand, without other advantage
but my courage, and the justice of your cause; but we were hindered in this
design by our friends. But when I should have thrown him where his misfortune
has cast him, what had I done in it but the office of the divine justice, which
vanquished by his unworthiness was forced to extermine him off the face of the
earth, where he led so infamous and shameful a life. And to you, Madam, what
service should I have done you in breaking the bands of your slavery, and of
the hardest tyranny that was ever proved? But as I do quit the thanks you
should owe me, if I had done you that good office; so you ought not to accuse
me of a fact I have not committed, but (to confess to you ingeniously) many
times thought. For why should I not desire the death of him that had conspired
against my life? and of him that in possessing of you, ravished me barbarously
of the dearest pretension I had in the world?

By these words Elise believes assuredly Andronico had at least caused this
murder to be committed; which made her thunder in these words full of fury and
indignation; Ah disloyal^ thou art not contented to confess thy fault, but to
glory in it too, esteeming it not only worthy of thanks, but of praise; not
willing to sin with imputation, but with reason; and for to imbarque me in the
vessel of thy shame, and to carry me with thee into the certain shipwreck of
thy honor, thou would cover me with thy infamy. But know, cruel, that
although Philippin was severe to me, he never had a soul so base and traitorous
as thou. But this shall not rest so: for in the place where thou would offer
mine honor to thy passion, thy own life shall be offered.

She uttered this discourse so loud, as she made Sophie run to her; for with it
she cried out, as if Andronico had pressed her with some unjust matter. To whom
she said, Look you, dear mother, to what you have reduced me by your
commandment, to entertain the murderer of my husband! Should you have tormented
me so much, to make me hearken to this Brutal; who not satisfied with the blood
of Philippin, will also by a certain art, as abominable as malicious, ravish
the honor of his poor wife! And judge if I had not reason to shun with all
care this rock so dangerous: Not only he confesses his crime, but boasts of it;
and what is the end of his vileness, but only to entangle innocence in guilt
with him? He thinks by the help of a certain Paper which his artificial
importunities have torn from my simplicity, to make me consenting to this
homicide: Of which if ever I thought, I desire the justice of heaven nor of men
may ever favor me.

If Sophie were not amazed heading this language, I leave it to you to judge.
And during the astonishment that seized her, Andronico had time to say to
Elise, Madam, you have many other ways to be rid of my life, if you had but
employed that of your cruelty, without casting also mine honor into the depth
of shame, which is unsupportable to me; that is also to break violently the
laws of friendship, as barbarously as those of courtesy. But I would have you
know, that as I have loved you honorably and virtuously, these two props
failing, my love goes to ruin. I honor love when it has virtue for its
principle; but I love honor by a singular preferance it has before life, and
all things. Those that touch mine honor, touch the sight of mine eyes; for
that was the only thing I could prefer to your love. But since that love will
become ruinous to mine honor, I must protest I hold it for enmity, and mortal
enmity; for never any of what quality or condition soever shall attempt on mine
honor, whose life I will not take. Pardon me in losing the duty I owe to love,
being you are grown bankrupt of fidelity. And truly, if I say that it is false I
confessed to be guilty of the murder of Philippin, of which I detest the author
and the action as much as you can do with all the cunning of your ceremonious
mourning; it is certainly not for the loss of that man that hated me, but that I
have in abomination a murder so detestable. You might have contented you with
your falsehood, and to have broken your oaths, and the writings of your
promises, without seeking this odious pretext by which you conspire the loss of
him that has offered his blood for the sustent of your honor. But as God
lives in heaven that reveals the secrets of all hearts, and the seals most
dark, I will turn these evils on your own head. And to the end you may know it
was love, and not interest which made me seek you as long as I esteemed you
virtuous; from henceforth renouncing the words you gave me, and writings I have
of yours, I will make it appear in the face of Justice and of all the world,
that I am innocent of the crime you would impose on me, and that you are guilty
of the most noted perfidie that was ever acted.

With these words Andronico goes out, leaving the mother in extreme
perplexities; and the daughter in an anger that cannot be conceived but by a
woman outraged with the like affront, by a man that had always honored her
with all respects.

The End of the Fourth Book.
ELISE, OR Innocence guilty. The Fifth Book.
MEan while Elise tells her mother, this business is of that consequence, as
she thinks it fit to make it known in the presence of her father. They go to
the chamber of Scevole; to whom Elise, accompanied with Sophie, recites all
that had passed between her and Andronico during the life of Philippin, the
promises they had made both by word and writing; upon which she lays a strong
conjecture, that Andronico had murdered her husband, which himself came to
avow, but in such doubtful and covered terms, that although he did not
expressly confess the crime, nevertheless it was easy to judge he was
consenting: For her self making those promises, she had never thought of other
death to Philippin then natural, having never had any design against his life
by any bloody means, nor poison. Wherefore she besought her father to help her
in the pursuit she intended against Andronico, being there was nothing more
just for an honest wife, then to seek by justice revenge for the murder of her
husband.

Scevole was much surprised to understand all this; and as he was wise and
judicious, judged this business was very doubtful. He takes his daughter
aside, promising her all assistance; but conjured her not to imbark herself in
so dangerous a navigation, without a firm biscot of innocence and patience;
prays her to tell him freely, as to her father that would hide her faults with
his cloak, and save her life as by his own, if she had never had any words with
Andronico against the life of Philippin, for that the quarrels they had gave
some shadows thereof? Elise assures him that there had never been any; and if
she did not find herself entirely exempt of guilt, she would not attempt so
dangerous a design.

Upon this Scevole made her see her great indiscretion in the promise she had
made in writing, during the life of Philippin; saying that it was the rock on
which Andronico had made shipwreck; and although she were innocent in effect,
nevertheless the world would esteem her the cause: So that if Andronico had
killed him with the sword, she had killed him with the pen, forasmuch as it
appeared she had given the cause of the execution. So that one may sing of her
that which the most ingenious of Poets engraved on the tomb of the Elise of
Carthage: By her own hand unfortunate Elize
Expired, and fell a fatal sacrifice;
Though there Aenaea's rigor did exceed,
And was the occasion of so dire a deed.
I Will tell you, daughter, it is lawful for a wife during her marriage to
promise to Jesus Christ to take him for husband, if she outlive her husband. It
was a council that the ancient Origin gives to married women, which make a
particular profession to embrace piety; and 'twas that vow that the jealous
Ter^nllian desired so earnestly of his wife. But to promise marriage to another
man during the life of her first husband, it is an action not only forbidden by
the laws, but which gives an evident conjecture of adultery and murder: And as
the concealer and the thief are subject to the same punishment, even so those
that in consequence of the like promises give occasion to those that seek them
to execute so villainous a deed. Daughter, here is in this more difficulty then
you think on; and though your innocence be justified by justice, your honor
will always rest with some flaws in the opinion of men, and especially by those
that are jealous to see wealth and dignity in our house, who will esteem that
my credit and authority has rather saved you then your innocence. If you will
take my counsel, I would have you hold on the defensive, without undertaking to
accuse Andronico, except you had stronger proofs; for God in time will bring to
light the truth, not leaving unpunished so vile a fault.

To which Elise replied; But (father) would one have a more evident proof then
his own proper confession? I am assured that if he were called in question, his
conscience would constrain him to fly, and would make guilt appear to the day;
for his denial before my mother is a great sign of ac^usation, being there is
nothing that one denies with so much ardor, as a fault one finds themselves
guilty of, seeing there is none will publicly open his own dishonor: And is
it possible that the common report has not made you know there are great
suspicions against Andronico, which will become clear convictions by the least
examination of Justice? Daughter, replies Scevole, I am of the trade; and you
must know that that which we think many times the most notable, grows so
doubtful by the proceedings, that it is like a spring clear where it rises, but
becomes troubled and muddy in its course; many times innocence suffers for the
guilty, and those are lost that maliciously plead to lose another.

O Elise, if thou had received these paternal words as oracles, thou should
not then for thine own feminine wilfulness have been precipitated in the misery
whereinto thou go to plunge thy self, in answering him thus. Sir, I owe you
my life, but I owe my self the conservation of mine honor. I am a widow, and
enjoying my rights; it is not that I would take my self from the submission I
owe you, nor draw my self from your obedience; but I humbly beseech you to
permit to my just grief, that in revenging the death of my husband, I make lie
and give death to this Traitor; who not content to have deprived him of life,
would also rend mine honor from me. I hope to make it appear that he is only
guilty both of his death and my surprise.

She goes out from her father, and resolves to accuse Andronico. But ^^son had
no sooner returned the day, but she sees herself prevented (...) her adversary
in this enterprise; for he cited her to appear before the Official Court, to
acknowledge her promise of marriage, and to bring his own. This citation is
told to Scevole, who goes quicker to work; for he causes Andronico to be cast
into the bottom of a prison, acousing him in the name of Elise for the murder
of Philippin. Andronico has kindred in the Town, as also in the body of the
Justice, where Scevole holds a principal rank. They go as suddenly to visit him
in prison: where he having protested to them his innocence, saying it was an
artificial trick of Elise's to deny her promise by this false accusation; Look
you, says he, how she cuts her throat with her own knife! For if I had done
this act, which can never be proved nor found by me, it must be by her
persuasions, and by the instigation of her promises. Upon this, the friends of
Andronico present a request against Elise, obtaining of the Justice that she
might be in prison to justify herself of the same crime. Scevole, who is
confident of the innocence of his daughter, and the strength of his authority,
and being just and a man of conscience; although he feels a contradiction in
this action that appears not very honorable; nevertheless pressed by Elise
herself, who runs voluntarily to yield herself prisoner, so much she is
encouraged to be revenged of Andronico, whose ruin she holds assured, he
contents to this imprisonment.

Here are our Lovers enemies in separated places, running with the bridle on
their necks to their loss, by the way of a reciprocal hatred. Andronico sees
himself accused of a murder he never so much as thought; and pursued by her of
whom he hoped the greatest felicities of life: And Elise sees herself accused
as consenting to this death, bye him that she thought certainly had procured
it. At last their innocence is ecclipsed in the shadow of these dark dungeons,
where they learned to their cost, that prisons are like quagmires, which one
gets not out of so easily as they slip in. Andronico being examined, denies
absolutely to have done, or caused this murder. But having to do with so able a
person as Scevole, who knew so exactly to gather all these particularities that
might make him guilty, at last all the world seemed to conjure his death: For
all the words, his threats, his quarrels with Philippin are examined; his
frequenting the house of Scevole with Elise; this Promise, which she
acknowledges to have been forced from her simplicity; showing reciprocally that
of Andronico's which he had forced her to receive, signed with his blood, the
presage of his hellish enterprise. And not to make here a procedure of a
process in law; all the circumstances and conjestures of the time of the
assassination of Philippin, with his last words at his death, that seemed to
accuse Elise to have made him be killed by the hands of Andronico, whom he
called t^rritor. All this makes him guilty in that sort, that the Judges
following that which was produced and proved, in the end the opinion of all
being changed by the prod^cing of this Promise of marriage, went all for death;
there rested nothing but to confront him with Elise. Now as there are many
forms of contrary qualities in a cloud, that produce the thunder that breaks
all to powder the places where it falls: Even so in this enterview, after a
thousand flashes of lightening, sparkling no more of love, but of hatred that
fl^w from their eyes; the thunder of their words was understood, that broke in
a thousand pieces both their reputations and lives. For Andronico having heard,
that after this confrontation he must lose his head; carried by despair,
resolves to draw into his condemnation her that accused him with so much
injustice, and turning his ancient affection into a mortal hatred, it resolved
to have for company in death, her that he could no more hope for in life.

So that being in presence one of the other, as Elise did represent to him what
he had said to her at her fathers, where it seemed he accused himself in terms
obscure. It is true, answered Andronico, with a tone furious, and a look on one
side, that I did desire the death of Philippin, and I have sought it; and it
does not anger me to have done it, so that it were according to the rules of
honor that are observed amongst Gentlemen. It displeases me, that being dead
as he is, I am charged to have killed him thus; but if that were, it had not
been but by thy persuasion, ungrateful Elise! For who knows not but it was for
thee that I had quarrels with him; that it was to deliver thee from tyranny,
that I have exposed my life to h^zards? How often have thou sighed in mine ears
the grief of thy ^^r^^^ude? and wherefore, but only to inflame mine anger by
the pity of thy disaster, and to b^ing me to this shipwreck by (...) ^eceiving
song, O disloyal Syrene! My Lords, says he to the judges, full of despair; if
you find me guilty, behold the ca^^^ of my evil, showing Elise; for if I
killed, or made Philippin be killed, it was this Fury made me do it.

Elise finding herself innocent, laughs at this accusation; but the judges told
her there was rather occasion to weep; for the strongest proof that was against
Andronico, being founded on the promise that he had drawn from her to marry him
after the death of Philippin, was not the same presumption as great against
her, that had received from the hands of Andrinico a writing of the same
effect? They find these accusations so connext, that they cannot condemn nor
absolve the one without the other. Elise may weep and protest her innocence;
Andronico has struck a stroke that will bring them both to death. As much as
Scevole understands in this science, he finds himself swallowed in this
business; his credit nor his authority cannot stay this torrent, that will
overwhelm the honor of his house. His prophecies prove true, to the great
grief of Elise, who repents (although too late) to have preferred the violence
of her unjust anger before the wholesome counsel of her father.

To end quickly this troublesome passage, she finds herself innocent to be
condemned as an infamous adulteress, and as a cruel murderer of her own
husband, to lose her head with Andronico, as complice of his dishonesty, and
murder of Philippin. It is a sovereign decree, that excepts no appeal; being
pronounced in the morning, it is executed at night; where these unfortunate
Lovers serve for a tragic spectacle to all the Town. Scevole not able to drink
of the bitterness of this chalice, nor support the indignity of this affront,
absents himself; his wife Sophie took such grief to the heart, as in three days
death lays her in her tomb. Elise abandoned of the world, has no more recourse
but to heaven. She Is now come into the high sea of grief, where a tempest
promises her an assured shipwreck. She hears her sentence, which brought
thunder with lightning; and struck with an assault so little looked for, and so
suddenly her understanding, that she swouns with the horror, and thought to
have dyed for fear of death. Happy in her pitiful misfortunes, if this death
had anticipated her shame! Returning from this swoun, her face painted with the
colors of death, her eyes sunk and heavy, her lips pale, and with a voice
trembling and mingled with a thousand sighs, she breathed forth her sad
complaints. Who has done this impittiable duty, to recall my soul into this
miserable body, to make it retire by a second separation more hard and cruel
then this first, as more ingenious and less infamous! Who has ravished the
peace I felt in this sweet languishing, for to draw me an innocent offering to
the war of a sacrifice as bloody as unjust! O Elise, must thou be the scandal
of thy blood, the dishonor of ancestors! What is become of thy pomps, thy
greatness, and honors? O my dearest Philippin! was it not enough that I lost
thee, without seeing my self not only accused as the cause of thy loss, but
condemned as guilty of thy death? Ha cruel Andronico! that the honest respects
thou have heretofore offered me, are become now hurtful; and that thy
conversation heretofore so sweet, is changed into cruel bitterness! O how
dearly do I pay the interest of my simplicity and inconsideration! Ah
barbarous, thou know well the contrary of thy accusation: But thou wast not
satisfied with the life of the husband, if thou do not quench thy enraged
thirst with the blood of his wife. Yet if thou had done to me as to my
husband, thou might make me lose my life, without tearing mine honor from
me, but thou must needs add this to the measure of thy insatiable cruelty. Ah
Judges! why can you not see into my innocence? One day, but it will be too
late, the just heavens that see the outrage your injustice does to me, breaking
the vail of a false accusation, will let you see it; and then you will render
to my ashes the honor that you now ravish from me.

We would pursue further the end of these complaints, yet more pitttifull then
they can be imagined, if we did not fear to beget pity in these dungeons where
inflexible cruelty makes its eternal residence. The presence of a Dominican,
(for the religious of this order, as they are in great esteem every where, so
principally in this City where this sad adventure happened) tempering by his
words the extreme grief of her who complains thus without comfort, brought her
in small time to acknowledge that this disaster was not happened to her without
some secret providence of God, which could not turn but to her greater good; so
that she did not take that on the left, which should be on the right; nor
seized not the brand there where it burned most. Good Father (quoth she) it is
not death that I fear; knowing that is the end of all humane miseries: On the
contrary, I have desired it heretofore with no less impatience against the
outrages of my ill fortunes; and if the laws of God did not forbid to have
recourse to a voluntary trespass; I should have fled it it as to a safe port.
But that this death makes me run a double infamy, crimes of which I am accused,
although I be exempt both of the one and the other stain. This is it that makes
my griefs unconsolable, and hinders me to frame in my soul a good resolution.
And that which is hardest to me, is, that the shame of this stain reflects on
so many persons of quality to whom I have the honor to appertain in this
place. For to speak truth, the grief of the death of my body is nothing
comparable with this bitterness that assails at once all my understanding.

Madam, replied the religious man, If it be the cause that makes the martyr,
and not the pain; if you are innocent of that that is imposed on you, you ought
not to fear the loss of your honor, nor any shame; for he that draws light
from darkness, knows well a time that his providence has determined to make
known your justification to those very same that have condemned you. The
disciples of an ancient Philosopher grieving to see him condemned innocently,
Alas my friends, said he, would you have me die guilty! That which you esteem a
high point of desolation, ought to be according to my judgment the strength of
your consolation. If you but cast your eyes upon the Example of Christians, the
Savior crucified, is there anything comparable to Innocence, that defies all
the most mortal enemies to reprehend it with any fault? And can there be any
grief equal to his suffering? What his adversaries had procured to obscure his
glory, proves the height of his greatness; and the gibber of the Cross before
so ignominious, is now the most precious ornament of crowns and diadems. The
judgment of men should not trouble you; it is God that judges you, and them and
their judgments too: They are ordinarily false in their balances; but the time
will come that the hidden secrets of the dark shall be revealed, and the
thoughts of all hearts manifested; and then every one shall be praised or
blamed according as they have truly deserved. Mean while, Madam, employ this
little time that remains to you of life, not in inutile complaints for the
cutting off your days, not in protesting your innocence, nor in exclaiming
against your ill fortune, nor in reprehending the sincerity of your Judges that
have condemned you according to their laws, that make the rule of their
consciences; since the Lord, before whose tribunal you are going to appear,
will that we be at peace and accord with our enemies whilst we are in the way
of this life; otherwise he will not be pleased with the sacrifice you go to
offer him of your heart and body. Take heed you harden not your heart to day,
when you hear the voice of the heavenly Bridegroom that knocks at your ears by
my tongue; for it is written, that those that have their hearts hardened will
make an ill end.

This discourse was preferred with so much devotion by this good Friar, whom we
give the name of Symphorian, that the courage of Elise strengthened on the one
part against the assaults of death and ignominy, was also sweetened on the
other toward Andronico, ready to pardon him her death, without considering
that she was more cause of the loss of this Gentleman's life, then he had been
of hers. After having discharged her conscience in the ears of this good
Father, and protested before God and that tribunal of penitence, where it is a
fault inexpiable to lie unto the Holy Ghost, that she was not any way
consenting to the murder of Philippin; yet nevertheless adores the will of God,
to whom she submitted herself with all her heart, as to the rule of all
justice. She embraces the cross of him, that would die on the tree dishonorably
for her salvation.

The whilst Elise is thus disposing herself, Andronico is brought to the same
point of resignation and reconciliation by a venerable Priest, whom we will
name Cyrille; who having seen that this Patient drew no other consolation of
his death, but the pleasure to be revenged of his enemy; after having plucked
from his heart this malicious humor, with which if he should have dyed, it had
endangered his loss eternally. Why but, Father, do I ill to rejoice to see that
this unworthy Elise is fallen into the pit she had prepared for me, and that
herself is brought into the precipice where she had plunged my innocence? To
which this worthy Churchman answered, That it was the work of a good and true
Christian not to render evil for evil, but good for evil; by the example of him
that being cursed, cursed not again; but being unjustly persecuted, presented
his che^k to blows, his face to be spit on, and his body to the murderers,
without making more noise then a tender lamb whose throat is cut. And that he
must be more spa^ing of the time that was left him to acknowledge his faults.
That it was question of a minute, whereon eternity did depend: That it would be
less judiciously done to los^ a Kingdom that has no end, for a moment of
ransom; that it was better to swallow this draught of bitterness as a man of
courage, and not with cowardly fear; and that it was the greatest of all
baseness of the heart, not to pardon an injury; that revenge was the mark of a
faint heart, and effeminate; a dangerous ulcer which invenomed his soul, and
made him bring forth a mortal canker.

Having now won thus much on the great courage of Andronico, to pardon her his
death that was the unjust cause of it; it was easy for him to purge this soul:
which free, noble and open of his own nature, gives free passage to penitence,
which made an operation of a mavelous conversion, a true change unto the
right of God. He confesses his sins with great compunction, discovering all his
heart with an extreme freedom; adoring the hand of God laid heavy on his head,
and humbly kissed the rod that chastised him, to the end it might serve him for a
rod of direction to bring him to the kingdom of God. This worthy man pressed
him hard to award this fault before that tribunal, where falsehood is a
sacrilege; and not lose himself in the way of C^in, that denied the murder of
his brother. For as S. Peter said to Ananias, one may easily deceive men by
falsehood, but not God.

Yet still he firmly denies to have given any advice, or had any design on the
life of Philippin. This at first aboard astonished Cyrille: who carried by the
vulgar opinion, and violence of the conjecture, doubts that an attempt so
dishonest had hardened his heart by a foolish shame. He gives him many examples
on this subject. But seeing on the one side his extreme earnestness in the
accusation of the rest of his faults, and a strong perseverance in the denial
of the same, he began to be persuaded he had not committed it. Having then
purged sufficiently his thoughts of his offense by a good absolution, and
having made him perform diverse acts of contrition, humility, resignation, and
of renouncement of the world, and submission to the will of God; of patience,
hope, faith and confidence in the goodness and mercies of God; he raises him
thus by little and little into the air of divine love. Even as the heat of the
fire loosens the flesh from the bones; even so death that heretofore appeared
so terrible to him, seems now a sure and pleasing port, where he may enjoy the
eternity of peace which passes all understanding.

When these two hear to thus dissposed came to meet in the Chapel of the
Prison, whither these poor Patients were brought attending the hour of their
suffering; we must not marvel if their ancient loves were renewed, being they
were not only prepared for pardon, but also to charity, which is no other thing
but the ^ame dilection all cordial and sincere. The Confessors, after they had
reconciled them to God, reconciled them one unto the other with great facility.
For as the iron flies unto the loadstone as soon as the garlic is removed; the
presence of the diamond is taken away, that gives it liberty to carry it self
to that straw that draws it to it: Even so those souls being delivered of the
stinking garlic of hatred, and the hard diamond of obstination, were easily
drawn to these acts of humility; that without the assistance of grace, one
might rather desire, then have hoped this condescension; and to see their tears
mingled, whose blood must shortly be mingled upon a shameful scaffold. Here
Elise confessed aloud, that she had no other proof against Andronico for the
death of Philippin, but the common report, and conjecture that the promise she
had given in writing had brought him to that attempt to enjoy her in marriage.
There Andronico professed openly, that as he had never so much as thought of
that murder, nor had ever been incited to it by Elise; but only his despair had
forced him to avouch this crime, seeing he could not shun his punishment: so by
the same despair he had accused Elise to be guilty, to make her perish for his
revenge.

Some of the beholders esteemed these excuses as fained, as they were most
true. And the Judges, those inflexible Radamanthes, mocked at these denials out
of season: The irrevocable sentence is pronounced by their mouths; they have
given it according to their consciences, and conformable to the law: Their ears
are so accustomed to hear these excuses of offenders, that they are to them as
unnecessary songs; for it is the custom of men to say they are innocent,
considering only their witnesses, not their own consciences. They imagine that
this miserable pair being resolved to lose their lives, intended to preserve
some vain shadow of honor, in saying they were innocent of so odious a crime;
but that being on the scaffold at the last hour of their death, which is the
rack of racks, they would then declare all to the discharge of those that had
judged and condemned them.

I will not here present the griefs of these two spirits, being I think they
cannot be comprehended, nor express their complaints; seeing their innocence
was made guilty more by their inconsideration, then by their malice: Nor can
describe their displeasure, finding they were cause of one another loss. You
may judge that their griefs, their complaints and displeasures were as
pitiful, as their affections were now sincere; for in these extremities there
is no more dissimulation, no faining nor art, and less color; it is no more
but a plain simplicity. Elise desires many times to take her last farewell of
her parents: But having heard that the news of her condemnation had caused her
father to retire into the Country, not being able to support the sight of so
tragic a fortune, of which there was no remedy; And that the grief of this had
given such an assault to the heart of Sohpie her mother, that she was in bed
sick unto death; she obtains permission to write to them, to make known unto
them in these last words the feeling she had of their sorrows, which was more
incomparably then what she had of her own.

SIR,
I Complain not to see my self abandoned by you in an instant, where the only
hope consists in not expecting any. I not only approve your retreat, but should
have counseled it, if my advice had been demanded; since that the vail of
absence is altogether necessary to a Father, that knows his daughter is
sacrificed innocently. I say innocently, Sir; and in this word I beseech you to
take part of the only consolation that accompanies me in the loss of my life.
It is now time to speak truth, or never; seeing I am going before the tribunal
of him that will condemn all those that prefer falsehood before truth, and who
will not acknowledge for legitimate children those that do not fix their eyes
upon the light of truth. God, under whose providence run all the moments of
this mortal life, permitting that at this present my innocence shall appear
guilty, yet will make known in another season this imaginary guilt to be
apparently innocent. And I conjure you by the agonies of any death, to prolong
your life until that happy time; by which the honor of your house that appears
now to suffer some stain, shall flourish more then ever.

I must confess, that after the death of my husband, from whence all my
calamities have drawn their original, nothing has so much afflicted me as the
pain I have seen you suffer for my occasion. For since death had made me widow
of the most noble Alliance I could have hoped for in the world, I intended to
have died to the world, and to all the pomps thereof, and to have confined my
self to a Cloister, there to have ended my days. But since it has pleased the
divine wisdom to dispose otherwise, be it that I live, or die, so I appertain
to him for ever, I pass not; be it for ignominy or for reputation, so I attain
unto the celestial glory, it is indifferent to me. I believe now that Andronico
is innocent of the crime which I accused him of, more by suspicion then any
firm ground I had; and it may be God permitted I should be wrapped in the same
condemnation, to punish my disloyalty, tha^ broke the right of a friendship as
holy as it was virtuous; for I desire not heaven to pardon me, if even there
passed between us other but that was worthy and honest or if in the writing
that my facility drew from my hand, I ever thought to prejudice Philippin in
his honor or life. The secret judgments of God are mavelous, which sounds
the depths of all secrets, and by the greatness and majesty of him you will
know in the end how the murder was done; for God is too just to let this deed
go unpunished. For my self, I repent me to have accused Andronico, of whom I
beseech you to love the memory as mine own, and not to bear any hatred against
his parents: I am as much and more cause of his death, then he of mine. We have
demanded pardon one of the other, and pray all the world to pardon us: We remit
our honor, as out lives, into the hands of God; sacrificing both to his
greatest glory. I beseech you, Sir, to implore his misericordia on our souls by
your prayers; and to ^ake care of little; Dalimene, since blood and nature
require it of your fatherly goodness. Farewell my dear Father! Oh refuse not
your holy benediction to this miserable creature that demands it at the last
minute of her death; being she is innocent of the cause of her condemnation,
which for the love of God she goes freely to suffer.


With the same hand and heart she drew these other lines for Sophie.

MADAM,
MUst; my deplorable misfortunes bring death into the breast of her that gave
me life! Must I, like a Viper, open the bosom of her that gave me my being! And
must fortune, insatiable of my miseries, direct the stroke of my trespasses on
the body of her, that is as innocent of my faults, as I am of that which causes
my death by a secret judgment of God, which I adore, although ignorant of.
Madam, the sharp cutting sword that is to sever my head from my body, and my
body from my soul, will not be so sensible to me, as the feeling of the grief
that has laid you in your bed for the sorrow of my loss and shame: The
compassion I have of your heart, is more incomparably grievous then the pains I
am to suffer. If I might die often, to deliver you from the torments and pains
wherein your own goodness throws you; if I should measure the grief you have to
lose me, by the dear affections you have alwais showed me, I see nothing so
extreme as your unconsolable displeasures. For knowing how tenderly you have
brought up this wretched creature, and how highly you esteem your honor, I
know not how to express nor conceive with what air you can support the loss of
both.

Just Heaven! which permittest crimes, and hindrest them: if thou suffer
that I die without being able to justify my self of these two false infamies,
Adultery, and cruel murder of my husband; at least yet, Thou that declarest
things that are most dark! make for the consolation of my dear mother, that
from the midst of my ashes may arise the light of my innocence; without
suffering that truth should not only be detained prisoner by injustice, but
also stifled with falsehood.

Madam, I desire not you should take pity of my suffering; but to cast your
eyes on my innocence. I have no other justification then my protestations; which
I make in a point, where falsehood trains after it an eternal ruin. You will
not be so cruel and severe to me, as my Judges: And although an Adulteress and
a Murderer cannot be purged by oaths, yet I think you have had so long
knowledge of my soul by my carriage, to believe me in this truth which I
profess with a dying voice: I die innocent of the crime that is imposed on me,
as God shall love and save me. Live, Madam, even till that day that he makes it
appear in evidence from the midst of the clouds that hinder this clearness. I
have no more to add, but to demand your motherly blessing; which I ask with
joined hands for the last favor from you; and ask it by your intrails that
bore me, and by the mercies of that good God in whom I put all my hopes.
Farewell my dearest Mother! And remember in your prayers this poor Elise, that
will have no period to her trespass of more sweet imagination then the memory
of Sophie, as of the best mother in the world.


Time with an insensible course advanced with great paces the hour of execution
of this Innocence guilty. Our Lovers are brought to the place with as much joy
and gladness, as if it had been to their wedding. When they appeared on the
bloody Theater, they were beheld with many eyes, yet very different: For many
had compassion of their miseries, by a natural feeling that touches the hardest
hearts; Others had them in horror, not so much for their faults, (for to sin is
a thing humane) but because they published so loud their innocence, this
displeased them, like Bats to whom light is unpleasing. Strange quality of
confession, that makes the innocent guilty.! The resistance that our Patients
made in not avowing that which truly they had not committed, made them odious
in the eyes of the malicious world, that esteemed them so much the more guilty.
Neither their youth, quality, blood, freedom and courage, nor the other
testimonies of piety that they showed in this action, was capable to draw any
sorrow from the spectators; but all gave blessings on the Justice that purged
the world of such plagues. The Confessors employ their utmost endeavors to
draw this thorn from their hearts, by their mouths; and used the most pressing
and earnest reasons they could from divine inspiration. But how could that come
from their mouths, that was not entered into their thoughts? They died praising
God, that was pleased to draw them to him by so rough and hard a way. The
whilst the world enemy to heaven, and father of rash judgments, curses them,
God blesses them in giving them an invincible courage, and fearless in this
inevitable danger. Elise pardons all the world; and asking a thousand pardons
of Andronico as cause of his suffering, her head flew off in uttering these
words, Jesus be with me, Lord Jesus! And Andronico incontinently after, with
these words that his Confessor put in his mouth, My God, I remit my spirit into
thy hand.

The opinions upon this Execution were very different: The Judges themselves,
whilst the world praised their equity, were not well satisfied in their souls,
although their hearts felt nothing. So much force has truth, that those that
see it not, are nevertheless constrained by a secret virtue to have a feeling
of it. But as the Seed-corn thrown into the earth, that one would think should
rot, is nourished, and taking root raises his head laden and crowned with
fruit out of the earth; even so this innocence for some time hidden and lost by
death, having gotten the victory by suffering, shall appear like a Palm so much
the more strait and high, by how much it had been overcharged; it will come
from the midst of hot burning coals, as pure as gold from a furnace.

But Sophie, in stead or being comforted by the Letter of her daughter, finds
herself so full of grief, that not being able to support the greatness of her
sorrow, she was constrained to yield to her tomb that which all flesh owes it;
which she did three days after the death of her daughter; for to outlive such a
disgrace, was a thing impossible to her: Scevole being in the Country, assailed
with this new grief for the death of his wife, experimented the proverb that
says, One misfortune goes always accompanied with another. The Town begins to
be odious to him as a prison, or rather the sepulcher of his honor and glory.
This solitude appears a paradise to him of sweet repose; How late (said he)
have I known thee! The sweetness of this tranquile life begins to flatter his
thoughts, and to resolve him to quit the inseparable unquietness of affairs and
businesses; which are so annexed to great dignities, that it is not without
reason they are called Charges; under which lies many times the rack, and makes
the strongest judgments suffer. He will deliver himself from the torment of
Ambition, and make himself invisible to the eyes of Envy, that does nothing but
murmur at his great wealth. And what shall he do in a place where all present
him with the infamy of his house by the death of his daughter, and its
desolation by the loss of his wife? He goes meditating of the Country-solitude
of the ancient Courtier called Similis; who of an hundred years of life having
passed fo^^ in the Country, made it to be written on his ^omb, That he had
lived but time happily that he had been delivered from the troubles of Court.

The Muses came to receive Scevole, and to sweeten this solitary residence.
S^udy is all his ente^tainment: Those Verses that Socrates loved even to his
death, recreate him, and much please him to recite thus. Scevole, thou must
shortly (...) the Stage
Of humane frailty, since incroaching Age
Insensibly appears t'eccli^se thy light,
And masque thy ^ay up in ^ie^nal (...).
Have thou not see on this vast Se^^'^h' world,
How Life's poor Barque to (...) est-^ost and hurled?
O gu^de her sted^y then, if thou (...) steer
By J^ys true Compass, and cast anchor there.
Frail is the bliss of Fort^^^, which still s^ands
On slippery ^ills, like h^uses buil^ on (...);
Their h^ighth procures their greater ruine^ tall
And ^owring Cedars have the sadder fall.
Great Fortunes are unsafe; proud Palac^s find
A dangerous fate; and the l^nd blustering wind
Confronts high hills, whi^st valleys safely stand
Free from the fury both of sea and land.
Most blessed is he that can blot out the story
And shorthand character of all humane glory:
That can retire from the tumultuous crowd
Of business, and in a calm air uncloud
His earth-ecclipsed mind, and thence dispose
His soul to the solace of a sweet Repose.
He like to some Recluse will strive to bless
His soul with silence of an home-recess,
Having (...) long a follower been of those
Vain empty G^gas, which so discompose
And mock our sense to which they appear, like Apes
Dr^st and disguised in their ^^tick so apes.
What Ptots are Envy proof which undermines
The low'st foundation of the highest designs:
And as the smoke, so flits Earths proudest Power.
The hottest Sun shine's subject to a shower;
And those fair Springs the Gardners hopes confute,
Which pay him blossoms, where they promised fruit.
Sweet Innocence! which from the least degree
Of popular greatness is secure and free.
Vales, Rivers, Rocks, with the blessed shades appear,
And whisper solitude in my slumbring ear.
You that have seen my Affliction, come and raise
Your selves as witness of my better days.


Whilst Scevole goes tempering his afflictions by these sweet entertainments,
and conforming himself to the examples of so many great and grave Personages
that crowned a fair course of life by a sweet and happy retreat; seeing the
Emperors, Dioclesian among the Pagans, and Charles the Fifth among the
Christians, retired and did prefer a Rustic life to their Crowns Kingdoms; and
so many more of all sorts of eminent qualities had so followed this happy
trace, as much for that they were out of all necessity, as not to commit any
thing willingly, in an age so advanced as his; He pretends to leave his Office,
although he was solicited from diverse places. Happy in leaving this trouble,
if he had with full sails arrived at the Port of peace now met withal, in
saying with an Ancient, Fortune adieu! All worldly hopes surcease,
I Am anchored now in the harbor of true Peace.


But it will take him as the Mariners, that are accustomed with the tossing of
the sea and breaking of the waves, and to long navigations; yet in horrible
tempests they commend the firmness of the earth, and tranquillity of the port;
but no sooner arrived, but it is tedious to them to stay in this place of
assurance. The whilst he thus goes temporising, he was called to end his days
in troublesome affairs, as you shall hear.

After than Elise and Andronico, more unfortunate then malicious, had been
punished for a fault they had not committed, as the Psalmist says, Paying with
great extortion and rack-use,
What they never truly borrowed with abuse.


Pyrrhe and Herman esteemed that the death of these innocents would be a
satisfaction, and covering to their fault; lived, though not with interior
assurance, (for an ill conscience serves for a Judge and Hangman to it self) yet
at least with an exterior safety that promised them an apparent nonpunishment:
For they were not only exempt of the accusation of this matter, but also of
suspicion to have attempted any thing against Philippin. Pyrrhe repairs in part
his honor by the ill usage wherewith he treated the miserable Isabel, making
it appear by it that her ill life had been extremely unpleasing to to him.

And this Maid being fallen from this high fate of prosperity where she had
seen herself in the company of Philippin, and now reduced to a prison, in which
besides the deprivation of liberty she experimented excessive cruelty; not
knowing where to find more patience to sustain the force of so cruel a
persecution: I will not fill these leaves with the multitude of her complaints
with which she filled her dark cabin, that less deaf to her complaints then
the ears of her father, seemed to suffer at her pains by its echo and ^ound.
And I believe if Pyrrhe had heard them, he must have been of marble, or have
had pity to have produced in the world a creature so miserably unfortunate.
But not content to stop his ears at her dolorous griefs, and to the
protestations she made to live better hereafter, and to give him as much cause
to love her in her repentance, as she had given him to hate her for her
dissolute life. Nor would he that his eyes should see the pitiful estate she
was reduced to, for fear to have had some compassion on her.

An hundred times he had murdered her with his own hands, if nature had not
strongly resisted against such a crime, and if the force of blood had not
withstood so bloody a design. But he believed that this perpetual imprisonment,
and the barbarous usage he exercised on this miserable Caitiff, would in a
short time deliver him of her, whose life was as odious, as her death desired.
And it may be God, who hates hearts that are hardened and unpittifull, already
displeased with the murder of Philipin, throws on the heads of Pyrrhe and
Herman a judgment without mercy, because they had been without mercy. Although
the Israelites among the Egyptians committed great sins, and were carried to
detestable idolatry, for which the yoke, of a cruel slavery fell on their
heads; yet in the midst of their wickedness calling on the mercy of God, his
eternal goodness hears their cries, and hasted to their deliverance. Achab and
Manasse were evil Princes; but their prayers drawn from their hearts by the
strength of their tribulations, made incontinently their peace with God, which
inclined their aid.

It is true, that Isabel cannot be excused in having stained the honor of her
family by her ill carriage: But it may be that being converted to God in midst
of her fighs, he heard favorably her complaints, and resolved to pluck her from
this chain; to the end that being delivered from the hands of this tyrant, she
might give herself to his service in the quality of a Nun, to serve in holiness
and justice at the foot of his Altars even to the last hour of her life. Now I
desire that we should remark, admire, and adore this divine Conductor, who
brings her to this end by mavelous turnings, and sweetness incomparable.

We have seen in the course of this history, how Herman was induced by Pyrrhe
to the murder of Philippin, and how he was assisted by Roboald, an ancient
servant of their house, in this homicide; and it was by this Roboald, that love
made trai^o^ to himself, that this crime is discovered, which forgetfulness
seemed to have wrapped up in a perpetual silence. But how enters love into this
heart? it was by the gate of pity; false gate, that deceivest ordinarily the
most wise! Pyrrhe discharges on him the keeping of Isabel; O it is an ill
charge for a man, a fair Maid! Yet in the beginning he executes with fidelity
the commandment of his master, which was, To shut her up straightly, to feed her
poorly; in brief, to exercise on her all kind of cruelties. But in the end the
water of the tears of Isabel pursue this heart of stone; and the Lover with the
beauties of her face draws this breast of iron to a yielding condescension.
Such strength has a pleasing form, of which all the force is in the sweetness,
but as much loved as it is pleasing. Beauty has an ascendant power, and
invitable on the fiercest courages; the most cruel Tygres may be tamed and made
familiar by an amirable conversation.

Isabel, in the beginning of her imprisonment, by a high and arrogant humor,
contributed much to the ill usage that Roboald made her feel: For there is
nothing more odious and less insupportable to God and men, then pride and
cruelty.

But when experience, Mistress of the least advised, had taught her, that as a
bird taken in a snare, the more it strives, the more it fastens the knot; and
the more she desired to be free, the stricter she was kept; and that her
despite drew on her a more severe punishment; she begins to change her battery,
and to spin fine, and to sow the skin of the Fox to that of the Lion. Her vain
threats had served her to nothing; it may be her smiles, and the charms of her
conversation would get her more advantage. Of an angry and disdainful, she
becomes plaintiff, and a suppliant: So that changing the fashion of her
carriage, she makes tender by little and little this savage courage, that
begins to use her with more sweetness, from that to hearken to her, then to
behold her. At last, as a Man that cannot be always a Wolf to another Man, but
has a secret advocate in his humanity that persuades him to mildness, lets
himself be taken by the ears, and sees his heart ravished by the eyes.

For both pity and beauty gave such assaults into the thoughts of Roboald,
that forgetting the faith he had sworn to his Master, he esteems it would be
impiety to obey him any longer in so savage and unnatural a commission, to the
prejudice of so many graces that appeared in the face of this fair Prisoner.
And certainly the advantages that affections of Love have of those of
Friendship, are such, that those that are touched with the one make more
difficulty to prejudice the other; even till their faults seem not only
pardonable, but commendable, and rather worthy of glory then of blame.

Roboald flatters himself with these vain hopes, and resolves to oblige this
Maiden to love him by all kind of good offices; and to deceive in that the
intention of his Master, that had put her into his keeping, but to use her with
all hardness and cruelty.

The End of the Fifth Book.
ELISE, OR Innocence guilty. The Sixth Book.
ALready the cunning Isabel feels some sweet liberty that she has gotten in
ties of ^his new slave, and that her beauty has penetrated his eyes. Upon this
foundation she builds her hopes (and not without reason) of effecting her
deliverance. She is cunning in the art of this Passion that inchants men, and
makes them supple to the wiles of those they love. She blots out the ma^ks of
despair settled in her face, and her f^esh color returns with joy; she hides
her strong griefs in the smoothness of her forehead.

Why do I defer to tell you that Roboald is taken by his prisoner, that he is
Captive to his Captive? (fals^^ying the proverb) He finds nothing so fair nor
pleasing as his prison. He that heretofore beheld her with an envious eye,
beholding her now with pity, begins to take part of her pains; and approving
the complaints she made of the cruelty of her father, he repented to have been
the executor. If she entreat him to be a means to make her peace with her
father, or for some comfort in this her cruel usage, he promises it, but
suddenly recants; for, says he, if he perceive that I lend an ear to your
prayers, he will suspect me, and think that I plo^ your liberty; and taking you
from my keeping, it may be will put you into their hands that will be more
rigorous to you. And this was, because being pricked by the interest of his
passion, he feared that the deliverance of this Maid should take away the
empire he had of her body, although she had a far greater on his heart.
Nevertheless to give her some testimony of his good will, he makes her hope her
delivery on what price soever, though with the loss of his life.

Already crafty Isabel knew by the sighs and eyes of this new Lover, that he
was in the toils she had pitched for him; he has no pleasure but in her
conversation, nor no contentment but when she speaks to him. But he speaks not
to her of love, nor of any thing near it; for he knew the high courage of this
Dame, that beheld him always as a servant; and as subject as she was to his
government, used him nevertheless as an imperious Mistress: besides, to cast
his eyes on the daughter of his Master, he cannot but expect punishment for so
insolent an attempt; and a disgrace that will bring his fortune into a ruin
irrepairable.

Isabel, that knew by this change of his face, and the variety of his
discourse, the troubles of his heart and confusions of his thoughts; although
she had in horror this presumption, and hated the authority of this Jailer,
(for it is natural to hate those that tyrannise over our liberty) yet her
cunning made her seem ignorant of that she was clearly certain of; and although
she lightens love in this heart, she fains to see nothing but pity: And
demanding of him if he grieved not to see her reduced to so pitiful an
estate? I would to God, Madam, (quoth he) that One had as much pity of my
passion, as I have of compassion!

It was enough said to an understanding so quick as that of Isabels. Who
knowing the greatness of this flame, and heat of this spark, and as much
inflamed with despite to see how high the insolence of this Fellow was
mounted, and being troubled that he had given too evident a testimony of his
love; she mocks at this discourse by a subtle quickness: How now (said she)
Roboald! you are then taken with this furious passion that has caused me so
many misfortunes: Truly I will from henceforth promise not only some comfort in
my miseries, but also some excuse for my errors, if you are touched with this
sickness that made me run so foolishly after the just promises of marriage,
which only the death of Philippin has annulled. For besides the natural
inclination I had to love him, his carriage being accompanied with so many
graces, augmented by so long conversation that made so pleasing his lawful
seeking me in marriage; what Maid had not been conquered by so many charms of
greatness and good fashion, accompanied with an intended wedding? I am
astonished that my Father allows not something to the weakness of my sex, and
the strength of my affection; seeing that in the beginning of this young Lords
seeking me, he permitted me to love him, and to receive his service; it was
himself that brought me into the folds, from whence after it was not in my
power to return my self.

Roboald approving these excuses, accuses afterward the unreasonable cruelty
of his Master; and finding himself taken by the beak, without denial that he
loved her, he tries to hide at least the cause of his flame, although he had
unwisely discovered the effect. This was to throw a little water on a great
fire; and in flying, to make himself be followed; and to stir the curiosity of
this Maid, by the protestation that he made to die, rather then to discover the
object that held him in a trance. Crafty Isabel, that had had leisure enough in
her prison to consult with her glass, to learn in this faithful glass the
force the fire of her eyes had; being much pleased to torment this Jailer, and
to make his fire so much the more scorching, as it was covered with the ashes
of silence and modesty; this proud Captive intended to melt the wings of this
new Icarus, hiding under a fained appearance of sweetness a despitefull disdain,
armed with indignation not to be matched against the insolence of this fellow,
that had dared to raise his eyes to her, prepares in deceiving him to draw
herself out of prison and slavery, and to leave him covered with scorn and
shame. At one time her fierce and high heart was combated with two passions
very different, of love and liberty, and of hatred to him that should be the
author: For it seems that the succor she thought to receive of this man to get
out of this misery, would be a kind of obligation to love him; and on the other
side, she could not endure to let her thoughts fix on a servile object. She
loves almost as much to remain a slave of body, and free of this obligation, as
to see herself at liberty, and tied by the bonds of duty to a man she hated in
her very soul. So that if she could have found any other means to draw her from
misery, she would certainly have passed it, rather then to make herself
beholding to Roboald. But necessity (that savage and cruel mistress) made her
resolve, after having consulted some time in herself, to take this occasion by
the lock, reserving after the recovering of her liberty the punishment of this
madness, even with the sword, if there were occasion, and to purge him by this
means of his error and folly. And as she was practiced in the arts of love,
knowing well how to counterfeit the person of a Maid that is easy to be won;
Roboald imagines he may win her heart, and make himself (as well as Philippin)
possessor of her body. He flatters her and speaks of love, but in such general
terms, that he left always place to some exception, and made as if he sighed
for an object absent; but she sees well that it was her presence that drew
these sighs from his breast.

Here are two cunning Gamesters that play who shall be cozened. Roboald
protests he would not entertain her with so ill discourse as that of his
affections, if they were not sincere and legitimate: But it being the greatest
comfort one can have in their sorrows, to communicate them to a faithful
friend; and he thinking she had felt for Philippin all the stings that this
passion is accustomed to incite in their hearts that receive it. Thy counsel
can assuage my swelling grief,
And to my sufferings give me some relief.


It is true, replied Isabel, that I might give some sort of remedy to your
wound, if I knew the particularities: but there is nothing more needful to a
singular evil, then general remedy; for according to the circumstances, it
changes ordinarily the face of the business. Roboald besought her to excuse him
that he could not declare to her the cause of his unquietness, for fear to be
held too presumptuous; that would would plunge him rather into despair, then
any way bring him consolation, esteeming it less worthy of healing then of
blame.

Isabel, whose eyes were so piercing as they saw into his darkest thoughts, and
into this breast covered with the cloud of dissimulation, excused herself also
to give remedy to an evil she was ignorant of; and complains on the other side,
of the small confidence Roboald had in her; draws him insensibly to discover
his design: just as when the birds are in love, it is then they are taken with
more ease; for by the different notes they warble to one another, they make
themselves fall into the nets and pits, finding the end of their lives where
they thought to meet and enjoy their pleasures; it will take Roboald even so,
who by an undiscreet love goes to twist a cord to strangle himself. It is not
without reason that the Ancients heve painted Love naked, by reason it can
conceal not secret from the thing beloved. Who knows not how the perfidie of
Dalilah, by the sweet violence of love, drew out the secret of the strength of
generous Sampson, whom she brought afterward to his fall and ruin? You will
understand in this history something like that; for Roboald, in imitation of
Sampson, after having given some fained excuses to Isabel, desiring to make her
believe that he loved the daughter of a Gentleman, a neighbor there by,
without da^ing by any demonstration to make show of his thoughts, resolves
rather to die an obscure death, then to make known a design so presumptuous.
Isabel that saw well that her fained neighbor was meant by herself, hiding a
profound fury in the depth of her soul, comforted Roboald the best she could;
as thus, that being all-inflamed for and object of merit, he should not be
astonished if it rise high; that it was a mark of the goodness of his courage,
in which he was more commendable for generosity, then blameable for
presumption; and that although he were not born a Gentleman, it was a title
that rather depended on fortune then desert, and that he was not the first of
mean birth that had der^d to set his affections on a Gentlewoman; that true
nobility was in valor, and in that he would not yield to whatsoever Gentleman;
and that she knew well that there was not any business in which he would not be
led by Pyrrhe with as much affection as Herman himself would be, for the
ancient servants in a house held the quality of children: That the inequality
of conditions should not disparage him; that since she had dared to lift her
thoughts even to Philippin that was her Lord to whom she ought homage, he might
well raise his to Gentlewoman; and that a faithful Lover ought to promise
himself all things happy, since hope was the wings of love, and that love
equalized Lovers; that Kings loving their subjects, have submitted their
scepters to their affections; that according to her judgment, there was not a
more eminent greatness in love, then love it self; and the greatest amongst
Lovers, he that loves most. Imagine if this discourse cast not oil into the
fire of Roboald, in a Country where Cobblers make themselves Gentleman, and the
Gentleman Princes, by an humor that Nation has. But when she added, that if
she knew that Gentlewoman, and had but liberty to speak to her, there was no
sort of good offices she would not do for Roboald to favor his design;
honoring his passion in another subject whereby she would esteem herself
honored. It was now that this saucy Jailer touched the stars with his forehead,
promising to his presumption all that he had heretofore desired rather hoped.
Methinks I see the picture of the feeling of this soul swelled with vanity of
his own desires, well represented in the the rich Verses of one of the
Mistresses of the Muses of our France. Knowing my flame is aerie and divine,
I can love nothing but what Gods incline:
With courage I Will pursue my enterprise;
And if I fall, from heaven shall be my rise.
No more on Earth shall flourish my desires,
I higher will enhance my love and fires;
I Will Eagle-like rather by thunder die,
Then from some ^ur receive my destiny.
While I do soar so high, no rocks I fear,
Nothing shall make me cowardly retire:
That for a bridle which does serve to some,
Shall unto me a golden spur become.
I love my aim, although by Fortune crossed;
The harder is the task, the more I Will boast.
Things easy to obtain, have small desert;
Honors on hard designs use to revert.


Although this man had presumption enough to dare to love a person more high
then his duty could permit him, yet the same love that gave him courage to fix
his affections so eminently for his condition, took from him the daring to
discover it, retained by that respectful fear that ordinarily accompanies this
passion; fear that proceeds of the apprehension of despairing of the object
beloved. He seeks in the corners of his fancy some artificial invention, to
tell her that he durst not utter, and to make her understand that he durst not
speak.

But the more he troubles himself to meet with it, the less he finds it; the
confusion of his thoughts being a Labyrinth from whence he cannot get out; His
desire is like quick silver, the more he presses, the less it is kept; the more
he would gather, the more it disperses it self. All know the combat of the Wind
and the Sun, who should despoil man; at last the sweet rays of the Sun did that
the blustering blasts of the other could not. The more Isabel importunes Roboald
to discover his affection with confidence, the more he hides it, and the more
he enters into distrusts: yet when she presses him least, he burns with
impatience to manifest it to her, not being able to die of a silent grief,
being so near his remedy. Love, whose attempts are not so hard, but as quick as
those of necessity, subtilsied his spirit, and gave diverse means to make known
to this Damosel that which she knew but too well already, but fains to be
ignorant of by an artificious countermine.

It is reason that Verses, symbols of this passion that touches the heart, and
Poesy, daughter of this affection, come to the relief of Roboald, He is
acquainted with ^imer that would furnish him with Madrigals; which he lets
often fall as by negligence, but with design, in the chamber of this prisoner.
She reads them, and laughs; and to let him burn in a little fire, and take her
vengeance in this love by a new industry, she makes no show to understand these
Enig^a's nor did they say any thing in particular. Such is the folly of this
childish passion, which is not fed but with follies, nor employed but in
thoughts as frivolous as the hunting of Butterflies. And to let you see the
impertinencies of Roboald, behold his folly in these three scrolls, of which
this is the first. It Is harder not to love, then be denied
By such a look, who being deified
Does with the wound it gives my panting heart
Both joy and pleasure to my thoughts impart.
When silent grief of sweetness is so full,
I thousand deaths had rather on (...) pull
Thou not to yield to an attempt so fair,
Where hope's to be preferred before despair.
Happy is he can love, and hide his flame;
Suppress affection, and conceal Her name:
Who can in midst of anguish pleasure find,
And hug his passions, though she prove unkind.


Here is the second, that seems to cherish the folly of the first. Nor do I
here present it in this place for any thing of worth, but to make known clearly
how hard it is, yea impossible to be wise, and love, at once; and as shadows
serve to pictures, even so the follies of some to raise the wisdom of others.
From thence it comes that Cato said, that the wise learnt more of fools, then
fools did of the wise. But let us hearken to our Rimer, What rigor is it for to
be a Lover,
And not to dare his passion to discover?
So pale and dropping is my physnomie,
That every one, I am in love, may see.
Now, if my soul be in such agonies,
Who can obstruct or blame my plaints or cries?
To be severely punished, is a grace,
When one attempts an Angel to embrace.


At last to throw the third scroll, was the accomplishment of his impertinence;
for it is the end of presumption, always to rise. He says, Dear origin of all
my fears and fires!
Not knowing the extent of my desires,
Must I thus perish, and yet dare not say
It Is you who does my soul and passions sway?


But why do I stay in reciting his idle thoughts, which would be better buried
under silence, then raised upon this paper? But to imitate the fashion of
Painters, that set off the features of a fair face by an extreme deformity; as
also to throw confusion in the face of those that in their follies commit these
extravagances. I follow expressly in this the imitation of Nathan, that
threatened David to manifest to the light of the sun what he had committed in
darkness, and to cast his shame on his face, if by a confession unfeigned and
healthful penitence he had not prevented the publication. Even so the Savior
of the world threatened to make be preached in the public places the evils
committed in the most private chambers, when the secrets of the dark should be
manifested, and the counsel of hearts given to iniquity. And who knows not that
shame and disgrace is the certain recompense of vile Love?

Thus Roboald seeing that all these small lights gave none to Isabel, to make
her know that herself was the idol to which he offers his thoughts; languishing
with a silent grief so near his remedy, and such a remedy as seemed should
yield to his mercy with much facility; yet durst not promise it himself,
however resolves to attempt by an art, after which he thought that necessity
would break for him, as to the son of Craesus the obstacle that hindered his
speech. One day as Isabel pressed him on this subject, which was their ordinary
entertainment, (for from the mouth proceeds the abundance of the heart) you
will not believe, said he, to what extremity has brought me, shall I say my
affection, or my folly? to an evil so extraordinary, having sought all the
strangest remedies that humane thoughts can devise.

The curious Maid conjures him not to hide his means, being they gave no
knowledge of the cause. Roboald, that strove always to oblige her, and to make
this obligation more precious, made himself to be prayed earnestly for a thing,
of which he had more desire then his suppliant herself. And to cherish this in
her, You press me (quoth he) to discover a means that you lead as by the hand
in the sight of the subject of my passion; and then my secret will be no more a
secret, nor my own; being disclosed not only to another, but to a woman, as
capable to contain it under silence, as a sieve is to hold water. At which
Isabel makes a thousand protestations of fidelity and silence; but they were
oaths as light, as if they had been written on the sands, or drawn on the
waves. At which Roboald fained to yield, and to remit his life with his love
into the hands of this gracious prisoner. If your oaths, quoth he, should not
bind you with chains as strong as they seem holy, the interest you have your
self will bind you to conceal that I shall manifest unto you; for the part you
have in heir whose face I will let you see, is such, that you will be
constrained to confess to me when you have seen it, that you have not a better
friend in the world.

You must know then, that having been just to that point to consult with a
Magitian of this Country, who as yet has promised nothing good of the issue of
my design, but on the contrary threatens me that the hope of a Nuptial bed will
be the grave of my desires; yet I have taken his prophecy as coming from the
father of lies; so that as the ancient Oracles, I have believed one may better
judge of his truth by the contrary. And indeed I have already known by some
hopes, that if I persevere to love with fidelity, there is nothing comes sooner
to its end then a constant love: For, Love uses to exalt the mind, and make
The Lower lofty things to undertake.
The Body from the Soul receives its flame,
And Love's the Torch that does the Soul inflame.


Without then caring for these Funeral-predictions of this Sorcerer, I desired
him to give me a glass like to that wherein he had showed me many wonders; and
in which I see, when I please, her whom I honor, in the same fashion and
place, and in the same conversation that she shall be when I would look to see
her, as much to comfort my self by this false good of her image in absence,
which is the most cruel torment that a soul can suffer that loves as mine does,
that is to say extremely; as also to learn by her carriage if my perseverance
may one day find some favor before her eyes, though not obtained without much
difficulty, and with a thousand oaths not to communicate this secret to any.
You must therefore dispense with me, courteous Isabel, if I show you not this
glass, for fear to be forsworn, or it may be to take away the effect which is
so sweet to me, and the only consolation of my eyes, if they should be deprived
of the object that is most pleating to them. For what do I know if the verity
may not vanish at the same time that I should make another participant of this
sight; or if this may be disclosed without some misfortune? or how shall I know
that this Creature will have the belief that my extreme love has given me for
to see this face, that is not better presented in this glass then in the
affections of thy heart. And then there are certain barbarous words written on
the backside of it, which must be pronounced before one can enjoy the sight of
this spectacle: And who can promise to a woman the courage to pronounce them
without trembling and a secret horror?

All this might plead my excuse to you and should persuade you not to attempt
so bold an enterprise; Let me die by little and little secretly; I am to my
self a theater ample enough; it is glory enough to me to have aspired so high,
and to see that in falling, it is from heaven I am precipitated. Fearfulness is
incident to women; but we may say that their curiosity is far stronger then
their apprehension; for to satisfy this desire, we know they renounce all
fear. Such appears Isabel; for although a secret fear incited a panting of her
heart, on the imagination that some devil should do her hurt in being curious
to penetrate into this secret; yet shutting her eyes at these considerations,
she left not importuning Roboald show her this glass, assuring him she had
courage enough to look into it, and faith enough to pronounce the doubtful
words.

Now you must know that all this imaginary fortil^ge was but a pure invention
of this man, to show to this Damosel the form of her proper face in this
ordinary glass, desiring to let her know by that, that all the charms of his
heart proceeded from the beauties of her form. Now after many conju^ations, and
so strong, that there was no more place of resistance without angring the
spirit of (what shall I say?) curious, or furious Isabel; drawing out of his
breast the glass, of which the luster reflected on eyes of this impatient Maid;
faining that it would have no effect if she were not alone, and he to be
retired. A certain terror seises her, fearing to be without help in the company
of Devils; the first which figures a thousand forms flying about her: which
made her earnestly conjure Roboald to stay, or else to take again his glass;
for already cold fear began to seize her.

I doubted this, replies this man, that you would not have courage enough; and
if you want confidence, how will you have belief enough? But here I dispensed
with all by your self, that ought to content you with the testimony of my good
will.

Isabel never saw herself in the like agony: For on the one side pressed with
the vehemency of her desires, and on the other retained by an extreme fear,
she sees herself like the Child in the Emblem, raised by one wing, and stayed
by a stone. A relenting stays her in midst of her course of this she had so
ardently pursued. Stay here a little, says she, O Roboald, to the end that I
may regain my spirits, and have more assurance. I cannot stay, replied he, and
give you the satisfaction you desire in this glass. Which he said to make her
more eager, to affirm his assurance, and to escape; not esteeming he could
obtain so much of his own courage, he shrinketh enough to sustain in her
presence the discovery of his design. They capitulated, and agreed, that
Roboald should stay in the next chamber, whilst Isabel pronounced the unknown
words, and looked in the glass; and if any extraordinary terror seized her,
Roboald, should come at her cry, and give her all sort of assistance.

He goes out; she takes the glass with one hand trembling, where not seeing
other but her face, she feared it was for want of not having pronounced the
words written on the backside. With a faint voice she tries to utter them, and
suddenly turns the glass; and seeing but herself, thinks she has pronounced
them imperfectly. Being now more courageous, she recites them neatly, and
clearly distinguishes the syllables and letters. But yet she sees nothing but
her face. She knows not what to thing; but then perceives some Verses written
round about the chafing of it, that said thus: This Glass presents the shape of
her Perfection,
That is the Shrine of my most true affection.


This does not yet satisfy her, till she read on the circumference of the orb
these same: Could she but see my heart as pure and faithful,
(SY ABELLE)
As she sees herself beautiful!


For, this Anagram was the little key that opened to her all this secret; it
was choler that unsealed her eyes to penetrate into the art of Roboald; for
that the last writing in form of numbers described her name. But as there is no
deafness worse then that is counterfeited, so there is no stupidity more gross
then that that is fained, not to understand that she knows very well. She calls
Roboald, but with a tone and voice that had no feeling of haste or
astonishment, and gives him his glass: Go, go, said she; all your Devils are
liars, which give nothing but elusions for truth: I have spoken the barbarous
words with as much attention as was possible; and yet I have seen nothing in
this glass, but that I see in that comes next to my hands; and then you add
belief to this sorcery.

Madam, replied Roboald, and it may be it is want of belief that makes you fail
of that you seek for; and you had without doubt perceived it, if you had as
much faith as I have to see the fair effect of so fair a cause. Truly, replied
Isabel, it is here I see that Lovers are not only fed with dreams in sleeping,
but with falsehoods in waking; leaving solid contentment, to follow vain
shadows. Go, go feed on these spirits and images as much as you please;
methinks you wrong credit, and for a small matter. Verily if you were an
Idolater, I would freely say, If Pagans with dead Statues were in love,
Resembling Gods and Goddesses above;
Who can blame me to love a living Saint,
And her effigies in my heart to paint?
But being a Christian as you are, I am astonished to see you led after these
superstitions so vain and ridiculous. But, Madam, replied Roboald, is it
possible that fortune has so blinded you, as it has hindered you from seeing
any thing in that Glass, after having uttered that fearful words? Those words
that are to me as disdainful, as you esteem them venerable, answered Isabel,
have no way sealed my eyes, nor have showed me in that Glass other then what I
see ordinarily in my own, that is, my own face. And to let you see I have
looked into it not fearfully, but attentively; it is true, it is one of the
finest and cleerest that I ever looked into.

Yet said Roboald, you are some other thing then nothing; and you have not
altogether lost your time, in that you have contem^plated your self so well. I,
but that is not all I sought, continued Isabel; for I have a glass of my own
that does me that office at my pleasure, without art or enchantment. Many times
it happens by the strength of charms, replied Roboald, that we see that we
thought not to see, and see not that we thought to have seen, that is, an
elusion, and the strangest that can be told. For my self, every time I look
into that Crystal, I cherish the object I bear stamped so profoundly in my
soul; I feel my affections renewed and augmented, the excess of my passion
redoubling the excess of my fever.

If this glass be so hurtful to you, give me leave that I may break it, says
this Lady; otherwise I shall think you are of intelligence with your enemies in
the conjuration of your own ruin. I beseech you, said Roboald, not to commit
such a sacrilege, to break that that has received so noble an impression; for
since it had but the honor to represent your self, it deserves to be eternally
preserved; and my ill is so precious to me, that that which other sick men do
to be healed, I do for conservation of my sickness. But is it possible that
this Glass, from whence comes the fire that consumes me, has not inflamed you
with love of your self? Can it be, that your sight that gathers all splendour,
has not incited in your soul the effects of a burning glass? You are far from
the fortune of Narcissus, that became taken with his own form presented in a
Spring, that served him for a tomb: yet Love of it self is natural to fair
Maids, witness the continual traffic they have with their Glasses. Roboald,
said Isabel, you would by these jests flatter my miseries, and sweeten the
rigor of my prison, in which it is as hard to find me fair, as merry; for
nothing alters, nothing so much changes beauty, as sadness and melancholy.
Which like some cruel tempest does (alas!)
Blast those fair stowry blossoms of the face.
And as had kills the sprouting flowers, so grief
Distorts my troubled breast without relief.


It to not that I do not much love my self; for it is a thing so natural, as it
is very hard to hinder, if one be in a high degree of perfection. But truly I
am not yet arrived at this period of folly, to love my self in a Crystal, not
to sigh for an object I carry with me, and is as much mine as I am mine own.

But when Narcissus loved, replied Roboald, lie took his own Arm for that of
another; and in loving, thought of nothing less then to love himself: So that
destroying by his own dilection with too much loving, he hates himself: And
even like a torch that turned down, goes out With the same wax that gave it
life; so this fabulous youth in seeing himself, though yet he saw not, was so
possessed with his own raving, as he had no place in himself for himself. Let
us leave these fables, said Isabel Yea, but fables, replied Roboald, hide many
times under their shadows the cleerest truths: And what truth can be drawn out
of these ravings? The strongest that ever mounted into the brains of Poets.

If ever Roboald were pressed to cast off the vail of his fears, it was here:
For Occasion showed him the lock of hair on his forehead; and he thinks if he
let it slip by his negligence, her despite against his baseness would never
show him so favorable a face again. Therefore searching in his thoughts the
subtilest inventions that his passion could produce; and to imitate the nimble
Galataea that the Poet speaks of, which threw Apples in flying, and would hide
herself artificiously after having been discovered; He leads this Damosel by
the clue of his tongue into a labyrinth of so many winding discourses, biassed,
covered, double and of diverse senses, that now saying, and then unsaying, he
enters, and goes out; he is enclosed, and again loosed; and still fains not to
say that he would say; with an eloquence, of which the art is not known but to
those that love, and dare not discover their affection.

Now if the Assailant were quick, the Defendant was not less cunning. For
crafty Isabel seeing this beast taken, and struggling in her toils, this Spider
wrapped up in its own web; faining not to comprehend these dissemblings, took
an admirable pastime: for it was a pleasure incomparable, that she saw him now
pale with fear to have manifested himself too much; now red with shame to
unsay; anon inflamed with desire to pull off the mask of his discourse; and
then to withhold himself by the apprehension he had to displease her; changing
color as often as a Camelion, his forehead being ashamed of the variety of
those that make the Aurora so appear agreeable.

At last having pursued this Stag, and brought her to a stand, keeping the
change notwithstanding all these hoverings, she pressed him in such sort by her
questions, and the passion of this man brought him to that point, as he was
forced to let fall the color of his art, and to take off the vail of his
dissimulation, confessing there was no other enchantment in his glass but that
of art; that he served himself to make known to this Maid, to herself, and in
herself, the subject of his bold affections. A Criminal that the torture has
made confess his irremissible crime, attends not with more certainty the
sentence of his death, then lost Roboald that of the condemnation of his
presumption. But the strong and cunning Amazon could not forbear blushing at
this declaration; yet knows with so much art to color her colors, that that
which came with an inflammation of despite and shame to see herself beloved by
a subject unworthy of her, was taken by this abused to promise him that he
hopes by an inclination of good will.

Thus he flatters his hopes by this cozening appearance. And although she were
as full as a Be that has lost her sting, yet this Maid hides the tempest that
invaded her soul under the calm of her eyes, which she had cleared on purpose
to deceive this presumptuous fellow, making appear by this faining some sort of
joy in the midst of despair and shame that began to seize on the heart of
Roboald; who made bold by this easy acceptance that hid disdain under a sweet
countenance, begins to persuade himself, that since the water carries the
stone, his perseverance and fidelity might soften this courage, and make her
condescend where his quality and birth hindered him to hope.

This conjecture became a certainty in his thoughts; when dissembling Isabel
made show she held for an honor; that which in her soul she held for an
affront and disgrace, to be so religiously and respectfully adored by a subject
whose merits she esteemed; faining to be angry to have been the cause of all
his pains passed; excusing herself on the innocence of her ignorance, not being
able to divine that which was unknown to her, yet what she had but too
cunningly perceived almost from the beginning. Will you then trust the apparent
simplicity of women, that under a seeming childishness deceives the subtilty of
the most cunning?

In following this point, to bring this Jailer yet more forward into the snares
where he was already altogether engaged, and to draw the liberty of her body
from the slavery of this heart, not only the testimonies to have his service
agreeable, but also to hold for an advantage this Match, although she had it in
horror. Raising his virtues above the defects of his birth; esteeming herself
more happy to marry one ignoble, that loved and honored her, then one noble,
that after the life she had led with Philippin, could not have her but in
disdain and outrage.

Imagine you what Lover had not been easy to be deceived with these words so
dissembled; and if the courage of Roboald were not disposed to belief of that
that was so advantageous to him, and let himself transported by his passion;
since his interior inclination had intelligence with the treason without, to
lessen his ruin. All he can do, is to praise the bounty of Isabel, in raising
her even to the heavens, where his forehead touched already by the hope to see
his pretensions succeed, plunging into the center of the earth by the words of
submission and humility of a shadow, with which he veiled the arrogance of his
design. But Isabel faining to find so many difficulties in this enterprise,
that it almost appeared impossible; it was now that he makes her to understand
that there was nothing impossible to a Lover; that huge mountains became plains
to a courage lightened with this passion, that made valiant the most fearful,
and that all that opposed his desire would easily be surmounted by his valor
or industry. Alas, said this cunning Amazon, I neither doubt of your
understanding nor strength: but how will the inheriting pride of my friends
suffer you to match with me, if they could not suffer to see me live with
Philippin, who never possessed me but as his wife?

At which Roboald proposes to her to fly on the other side the Alps, and into
the Countries so far off, that neither Pyrrhe nor Herman should have either
wind or mark of their retreat. Love, replied Isabel, ought not to have his eye
so hard tied, as not to take heed to his course; otherwise he will be subject
in this blindness to fall into great and horrible precipices. Do you not see
that it were to ^ast our selves in trust into calamities and miseries the most
extreme that can enter into humane thoughts, and be lost in thinking to be
safe. I appeal to your passion and judgment: The prison in which I am, of which
your courtesy tempers now the rigorous cruelty, is more supportable then a
calamitous liberty, full of infamy.

To which Roboald answered, But (Madam) if I disclose the means that you may
live the only Mistress of your goods and house, will you promise to honor me
with the quality of your Husband, and not to pay with base ingratitude the
service I shall do you. At these words a secret horror seized the heart of this
Maid, esteeming that this barbarous Roboald would propose to her some parricide
either by sword or poison: Oh, said she, what do you tell me here! I will
rather rot and die in prison, then go forth with so abominable enlargement; I
will not like a Viper draw my life by the death of those that have put me into
the world.

Madam, replied Roboald, you take on the left that which I intend on the right:
I am not so unfortunate as you think, nor do I believe you so unnatural. It is
a means that I know, by which not only your father and brother will give you
liberty, but will have nothing in more horror then this house, nor any thing so
dear as to seek their safety by their flight, and to leave it free to your
enjoying. It is then by some trick, answered Isabel; but if it be as vain as
that of your Glass, I perceive nothing of all this but laughter and misery; for
if my father but perceives that you use me not with all the cruelty he
commanded, I fear he should put me into their hands that are worse then yours,
and put yourself in prison, or discharge you from his service, and so your
assistance in the one and other fashion become inutile.

Madam, quoth Roboald, there is no more enchantment in the secret I have to
discover to you, then in my Glass; and yet the effect is as assured as that,
where without sorcery you have seen that you desired to see. I have only to
manifest a truth to you, by which you will remain Mistress of your house; and
without chasing or violating your Father, he shall depend on your mercy. I
cannot comprehend these riddles, said Isabel. But then vile Roboald, to put her
out of pain, puts himself up to the throat, as you shall see by the tragic
history that follows. It was in manifesting the murder of Philippin committed
by Herman, by the persuasion and following the commandment of Pyrrhe; denying
expressly that he assisted Herman and was Complice of this attempt, saying he
was only testimony of this treason, of which he fained not to have been any way
advertised.

What became this woman when she heard this news? what hatred was not formed in
her heart against her Brother, and against her own Father? measuring it by the
extreme love she bore to Philippin. Suddenly like a Fury she threatens their
trespass, resolves to disclose it to the Justice, and to satisfy at once to
her revenge, to the hands of her Lover, the innocence of Elise and unfortunate
Andronico, and to render by this means the honor to Scevole, making him of an
enemy her protector against the insolent solicitations of Roboald, to whom she
fains to be much bound for the revelation of this secret: She promises him that
she means not to hold; knowing, that will being forced is no will; and that the
oaths of Lovers and Prisoners do not serve but to deceive.

Methinks I see in this History that of Sampson renewed by the treachery of
Dalilah; which had no sooner discovered the truth in what consisted the
strength of this inconsiderate Amorous, but she advertises the Philistines his
enemies, who came upon him and bound him, covering him with a thousand
reproaches. For, faining she would give an affright to her Father and brother,
to the end that thinking of their flight, they might leave her at liberty and
in full possession of their lands; she finds means by the diligence of Roboald,
that like another Vriah carries the packet of his own death, to write to
Scevole this Letter.

GOD which draws the light of truth from the thickest darkness of calumny, and
that imploys things most dark to bring the most hidden to evidence; is served
with the darkness of my dungeon, to make you know how much unjustly the honor
of your house has been engaged by a shameful suffering. And although
innocence hardly appears in the deep blackness of a prison, yet it is so that
that of your Elise shall come forth of mine, if you please to take the pains to
inviron this house by the authority and hand of Justice, where you will find
(as in the depth of a Well) the light of a truth that will be as pleasing, as
falsehood has covered you with sadness. The recovering of your honor will be
worth the pains you shall take in causing to be apprehended the true Murderers
of Philippin; which will justify the innocence of Andronico and your Daughter,
falsely made guilty. For recompense of this service I ask you but my liberty,
and your protection, in quality of

Your Servant.


This writing found Scevole retired in his solitude, and plunged into the
profoundest melancholy that he had ever felt. For on one side, the dishonours
of the world made the sweetness of this life unpleasing; on the other, the
tediousness began to take him; for there is nothing so sharp as idleness to him
that had always spent his days in the managing of business. It seemed, when he
saw these lines, that it was some Letter fallen from heaven for his
consolation, and for the reestablishing of his fortune: And then returning into
his memory the furious assaults and long pursuits of Pyrrhe and Herman against
the life of Philippin; the pain he had to dissolve those clouds, and to defer
their revenge; at last having long consulted with himself, he thinks it fitter
to receive then to neglect this advice, doubting that this smoke could not be
without fire. He assembles the Provosts, and in a fair night invirons the house
of Vaupre.

The Break of day, forerunner of the Sun, had no sooner discovered to the world
the diverse colors of his breast, when Pyrrhe and Herman saw themselves
besieged and summoned to yield. They, whose consciences served for a thousand
testimonies, and as many hangmen, believed themselves accused and condemned;
and resolved rather to bury themselves under the ruins of their Castle, then
to dye shamefully on a Scaffold. At this their refusal Scevole conjectures them
guilty; their rebellion accuses them, and makes them doubly Criminals, and as
Murderers and revolted against the Justice of the Prince, a crime irremissible.
This Castle is weak, and rather built for the pleasure of the eye, then for the
shot of Cannon. They are charged on the sudden, unprovided of provisions
defensive and offensive; the gates are broke open, and what shall two men do
against so many? for Roboald and the rest of the servants were rather a
hindrance then any assistance. In the end they are taken; Herman being sore
hurt, and shot through the side with a bullet. Pyrrhe uses his sword with
incredible valor; crying, So strong is the love of a father, that they should
pardon his son being innocent, he only being guilty of the death of Philippin.
Wounded in diverse places, he is rather seized and oppressed by the multitude,
then vanquished.

Scevole having that he desired, makes their wounds be dressed, which were
found not mortal. Pyrrhe tells freely all, excusing his son as much as it was
possible for him. Roboald is accused as having been an actor, and sees himself
bound with his masters, and conducted to the prison of the City. Isabel the
Accusatrix is in full liberty: Scevole takes her with him, in taking on him her
protection. The process was soon ended, for the guilty confessed their fault,
without other rack but their consciences. Roboald, which saw clearly the act,
and could not deny it, repents too late to have trusted this secret to a woman:
His marriage-hopes are laden with a funeral-despair, and his love rewarded
with a shameful death. For his two Masters being condemned to lose their
heads, after having made an honorable amends publicly to the memory of
miserable Andronico and unfortunate Elise; He was condemned to lose his life on
the gibbet, seeing himself bound and drawn by the neck rather for a punishment
of the folly of his tongue, then the excution of his hands; for he had not lent
to Herman in the murder of Philippin more then his presence, being he was shot
on the ground ere he had need to give any help to his Master. Thus God,
admirable in his judgments, punishes this Traitor by the same treason he
designed for his masters; and gives him his end under the ruins of a house of
which he intended to be master: like Icarus and Phaeton in the fable, which
made their fall more heavy, as their flight had been presumptuons.

It is not my design to relate the particularities of this Execution, which may
make all the world admire the height and depth of the judgments of God, which
had permitted that Innocence made guilty suffered a death undeserved, by
reasons unknown to humane understanding; and then that investigable truth had
brought the guilty to the same place where innocence for their misdeeds had
suffered the grief of a shameful pain. The honor of Scevole is seen entirely
restituted, the memory of Elise honored, as also that of Andronico. Scevole
returns to the exercise of his charge. Pyrrhe and Herman amidst their
sufferings testified so much of repentance and resignation, that all were
edified at their end, and praised God, that can so wisely bring all unto their
end, drawing from the evil of pain the health of him was hurt, as the theorick
of the serpent.

Isabel sees herself at liberty; but by the confiscation of their goods
despoiled of all means to live, and reduced to an extreme misery. And here the
piety and pity of Scevole shows it self, that with a courage worthy of his
name and truly Christian, having already taken the Children she had by
Philippin during the repudiation of Elise, takes also the Mother into his
house, promising to use her not as an enemy and one that had been a flaw to his
house, but as his own daughter, and to give her a portion as rich and more as
her father could have done, in case any occasion did present it self suitable
to her condition. Which made Scevole esteemed of all the world, and almost
adored by Isabel; who coming to herself, and considering with how many murders
she was soiled, her ill life having made void the earth not only of Philippin,
but also of innocent Andronico and Elise; and which was more, her unnatural
accusation had brought her own father and brother to an ignominious death, that
made her, besides her own carriage, infamous for ever: Touched with a just
grief and lively repentance, she renounces freely the world, wherein she had
known so many miseries, experimented so many outrages, to retire to the
tranquile port of Religion, which was into a Monastery of the Repentants, where
she is confined; interring alive her beauties under a vail, consecrating her
eyes to continual tears, her body to healthful mortifications, her breast to
perpetual strokes, her mouth to sighs, her tongue to confession of her faults,
and to ask pardon for them of God. There of a falling stone full of scandal,
she becomes a stone of edification, making appear the abundance of grace where
sin had abounded; there she spent the rest of her time religiously, there she
dyed holily. The mercies of God are pleased to be magnified in the conversion
of sinful souls, that fly for refuge to the haven of grace, and assured port of
a healthful penitence.

FINIS.

