THE Church OF England TRULY Represented, According to Dr. Heylins History of
the Reformation, In Justification Of her Royal Highness the Late Duchess of
YORKS Paper.

Induantur qui detrahunt mihi, pudore: and operiantur sicut diploide confusione
sua,

Psalm. 108. v. 28. LONDON, Printed for the Author, and Sold by Matthew Turner
near Turn-stile in Holbourn, 1686.

THE Church Of England TRULY Represented, etc.
THe Ignis Fatuus of Reformation struck by Collision out of the lustful and
violent desires of King Henry the Eighth, and the opposition made to them by
the Pope: Heylin in pref.
The Riches of Abbeys and Monasteries, still administering new matter unto it
all the reign of that unhappy Prince; grew to the Prodigy of a Comet in the
immature years of his Son King Edward the Sixth, by many Acts of Spoil and
Rapine even to a high degree of Sacrilege on Chanteries, page 131
Bishoprics, Hospitals and Churches, and wandering as in Exile all the time of
Queen Mary, about Zurick, Basil, Geneva, but chiefly about Frankfort; is thus
again ushered into the Land by that great Luminary of his Church Dr. Heylin to
be refined of the filth it had drawn unto it from the Lakes in the Alps, and
to be new molded and formed into a Church by Queen Elizabeth to make good here
Legitimation.

page 275
She (says he) knew full well, that her Legitimation and the Popes Supremacy
could not stand together, and that she could not possibly maintain the one
without a discarding of the other. And what follows, we more feelingly know
than Dr. Heylin, viz. That the Answer of the Pope according to his accustomed
vigor: That the Kingdom of England was held in Fee of the Apostolic See; that
she could not succeed being Illegitimate; that he could not contradict the
Declarations of Clement the Seventh, and Paul the Third; That it was a great
boldness to assume the Name, and Government of it without him, was not only the
foundation of the Church of England, but also of all the Distractions and
Miseries this poor Land has suffered from that day to this. And all this upon a
frivolous account of a pretended Donation of this Kingdom to the Pope by King
John the usurper; which had been equally frivolous, had he been never so
lawful a King.

But! what a Bottom is this to build a Church upon? And to forsake the
Communion of a Church professed so many hundreds of years, and established by
so many Laws in the Nation; because forsooth the Queens Legitimation, and the
Pope's Supremacy could not stand together? We read, that the Gates of Hell
shall never prevail against the Church of Christ: But had the Pope, and the
Queen, known how to have adjusted their differences, this Ignis Fatuus had been
extinguished in the Lake of Geneva, and the Church of England had never been
seen, nor heard of in the world. And will any man in his wits repose his hopes
of salvation in a Church, that came from so bare an accident, so mere a chance
as this, midwived into the world by a Maiden Queen to make good her
Legitimation?

Moreover, we read, that Christ will be with his Church to the end of the
world. But (I pray) when did he begin to be with this Church? was it when the
Queen had made good her Legitimation? She has not done it yet. But, (as Dr.
Heylin well observes) Bacon was not to be told of an old Law-maxime; That the
Crown takes away all defects: Which, it seems, in the language of the Law, was
a Tantamount to a Legitimation; and on this Tantamount was first erected the
Crown, and on that the Church; as though the Lawmakers ever meant, that that odd
scrap of Law should be extended to Legitimate, whom the Law had illigitimated;
which, if so, might as well have legitimated the Rebellion of Oliver Cromwell,
(had he clapped the Crown on his head,) and made him a lawful King, tho he had
been a Bastard into the bargain. And now, I think, here is enough said of the
fundamental and final Cause of the Church of England, viz. The Pope's
accustomed Rigor, and the Queens legitimation. I will now proceed to consider
the Embryo of this Church in the rest of her Causes, according to Dr. Heylin,
and then I hope I shall have truly Represented her according to her best, and
most beloved Historian.

I find no greater Enemies to Reformations, than Reformers; each Reformer, like
the Ape in the story, thinking his own Brat the fairest, would have no
Reformation stand good but his own; and therefore reviles and flouts at the
rest as whimseys and phancys; as indeed they are no better, nor his own
neither. Who ever saw more bitter scolding, than between the Lutherans, the
Zuinglians, and the Calvinists? the worst of men cannot be represented greater
Villains, than they represent each other; and, if a man considers them rightly,
he will find no other truth but This in all their Volums; and yet some of them
are very voluminous too. In like manner does the Presbyterian revile and flout
at the Church of England in his Cobbler of Gloucester; and serves Her up to his
Readers in whole Cart loads of debauched Ministers and profane Bishops: But
indeed the Church of England reviles and ridicules the Presbyterian with much
more wit and far greater civility in her Hudibras: But, with too much Rigor
too: For she will not allow Sow-Gelders when they wind their horns to geld a
Cat, to cry Reform: Nor an Oyster-wench to shut up shop, and trudge about to
cry no Bishop; as though Sow-Gelders might not as well cry Reform the Church of
England, as a pack of Laymen in Parliament, cry, Reform the Church of Rome; or
as though an Oyster-Wench might not as well cry No Bishop, as Queen Elizabeth cry
No Pope. How can it enter into the head of an Episcopal man, that a Church of
so long standing, as the R. Catholic Church had been of continuance in
England, and backed by so many Old Laws, could on a sudden be laid aside, with
all her Doctrins, and a new one foisted into her place with new ones, without
either Patriark of the West, Primates of the Land, or Bishops at all to it.

This is the case of the Church England, and Dr. Heylin makes it out as clear,
as ever the sun shined at noon day. He tells you, that in the beginning of that
Parliament, 1. Eliz. Which Parliament made, and established the Church, that the
Oath of Supremacy was tendered to the Bishops; upon the refusal whereof, they
were cast out of PARLIAMENT, all but Bishop Kitching who took the Oath, but
never was PROTESTANT notwithstanding. Then it is evident, that the old Bishops
were not in Parliament at the devising and making of this Church. He begins the
2 d. year of Queen Elizabeth with the consecrating of the new Bishops, Parker
and the rest; then they were not in Parliament neither at the devising and
making of this Church: for the Church was made and established in the first year
of Q. Elizabeth, and the Church to this day dates from this first of Elizabeth,
as Rome did formerly ab urbe condita: And therefore my Lord Chancellor Finch in
an eloquent speech to the Parliament, learnedly declared unto them, that she
was a Church now of above a hundred years standing, meaning from this first of
Elizabeth: Then you see that Dr. Heylin has made it as clear as the sun, that
there were no Bishops at all at the making of this Church.

Men of the Gospel, now tell me, Are not Bishops of the Essence of God's
Church? no Episcopal man ever denied it. And men of the Law, tell me, Are not
Bishops so of the Essence of this Government, that there can be no Parliament
without them? no Lawyer can deny it. Then here is a Church set up in spite of
God, and in defiance to the fundamental Laws of the Land. And this forsooth is
your Church by Law established! Established! with a non obstante to the very
Essence of the Government by Bishops, which God set over his Church; and to the
Essence and foundation of the Government of this Realm: So that, unless the
deserting of one Church for lust, spoil, rapin, and sacrilege be the setting
up, making and establishing of another; there has been neither Church made, nor
settled, nor established since the defection from the Church of Rome in England
to this present time.

Then is it not severe, that after all this ado and noise of a Church,
Articles, Tests, Laws penal and sanguinary to compel men from their
consciences, there should not be the least semblance or shadow of a Church to
invite them unto: Nor had the Queen with her Lay-Parliament any more Power or
Authority by the laws of God, and his Church founded on Episcopacy, to make,
alter, or establish a Church, than has the Parliament of Women, and the poor
man that cries it up and down the Town, Power, or Authority to make a Religion,
and establish it when he had done, by crying it about the streets: Nor do I see
how it is possible for any Episcopal man to have confidence to pretend the
contrary.

With good Reason then did the late Duchess of York of happy memory declare,
that instead of satisfaction in the History of the Reformation recommended to
her for that purpose, she found nothing, but the description of the horridest
sacriledges in the world; and could find no Reason why we left the Church, but
for three the most abominable ones, that were ever heard of amongst Christians.
First, Henry 8 th renounces the Popes Authority, because he would not give him
leave to part with his wife, and marry an other in her life time. Secondly,
Edward 6 th was a Child, and governed by his Uncle, who made his estate out of
Church Lands, and then Queen E. who being no lawful Heiress to the Crown, could
have no way to keep it, but by renouncing a Church, that could never suffer so
unlawful a thing to be done by one of her Children. I confess, I cannot think
the Holy Ghost could be in such Counsels.

The Church being thus truly represented, and showed to be nothing; it must
necessarily follow, that her Bishops and Priests are likewise nothing, as to
any Power or Mission, they can pretend to: And how shall they Preach, unless
they be sent? For in a Bishop, is required not only Ordination, but also
Spiritual Jurisdiction and Mission, and both these are derived not from Kings,
or Queens, but immediately from Christ by succession from the Apostles: Then
the Church of England being nothing, and in Communion with no other Episcopal
Church; by what succession will her Bishops derive their Powers from the
Apostles? Do they think the Church of Rome sent them to Preach the Doctrine of
the Thirty Nine Articles? No, it cannot be so imagined; and therefore the
Presbyterians derive their Mission extraordinarily from God by the Spirit: well
knowing, that it were impossible for them to derive it Ordinarily, by
succession through the Church of Rome from Christ and his Apostles. So that
it is a clear Case that the pretended Bishops of England have no Mission nor
Power at all, to do what they do, but from lay Authority.

But, indeed, as to the Ordination, it is quite an other thing: for the Arian
and Donatist Bishops were true Bishops as to Ordination, tho by Apostasy and
Heresy they had lost their Mission. And Dr. Heylin pretends the like of the
Bishops of the Church of England: and to clear all doubts to the contrary,
tells us, that the story of the first four Bishops of his Church being merrily
ordained at the Naggs-head Tavern in Cheapside, page 294
was but the invention chiefly of one Neal, once Hebrew reader in Oxford, and
Chaplain to Bishop Bonner, and Dr. Sanders; and thus like an erudite
Protestant, learnedly and compendiously confutes them both: Sanders he calls
Slanders; and as for the other, it is enough that he was once Chaplain to
Bonner, and so their business is soon done.

He also tells us, that George Abbot, Archbishop of Canterbury, caused several
Priests and Jesuits, then Prisoners in the Clink to be brought before him: Who
being brought to Lambeth the Twelfth of May, 1613. were suffered in the
presence of diverse Bishops to peruse the public Registers, and thereby to
satisfy themselves in all particulars concerning the Confirmation and
Consecration of Archbishop Parker. Dr. Heylin is indeed a very punctual man;
you see he sets down exactly the day of the Month, and the year this happened,
viz. The Twelfth of May, 1613. But Bishop Parker was consecrated in the second
year of Queen Elizabeth, 1559. Then where were these Registers all this while?
Dr. Sanders, Dr. Harding, Dr. Stapleton, even in the time of Archbishop Parker,
and to himself called his Consecration in question, and denied it, without any
Reply either from himself or any body else in his behalf. Then where were at
that time these same Registers?

But suppose these Registers true, and that the Consecration was at Lambeth,
and the Consecration-dinner only at the Naggs-head, did not multitudes of
people flock to see the great solemnity of Consecrating the first four new
Bishops of the Novel Church? and was not the Dinner well attended on by
multitudes both of men and women (for they are also curious, especially in
Church affairs) and were all these men and women dead on a sudden, that none
should be left alive to witness against Neal and Sanders, that they saw Parker
Consecrated at Lambeth? Or could so great a man as Dr. Sanders have the
confidence to broach such a Tale (as Dr. Heylin calls it) when multitudes of
eyewitnesses were alive to give him the lie? Had those Registers been found
out in any competent time, and flapt in the faces of Neal and Sanders, and the
rest who reproached the Church with her Naggs-head Consecration, they might all
have been justly called Slanderses; but instead of finding such Registers, the
Church and State politickly combined to renew the statutes against Tellers of
false news, that a poor Papist if he passed through Cheapside, durst not so
much as look toward that side of the street, where the Naggs-head stood, for
fear of being punished as a Teller of false news: for the looks of a Papist in
those days boaded false news; as a Wash-ball in his pocket of late boded (...)
firing of the City.

And indeed, to produce these Registers Fifty four years after the time, and
not before, when Neal and Sanders, the Vintner of the Naggs-head, his wife,
drawers, and all were dead; was to as much purpose, as if they had left them at
Salamanca in Dr. Oats his Library to be brought over with the Forty Thousand
pilgrims, 1678. September, the Lord knows when; for Oats did not confine
himself to a day as Dr. Heylin, and Mason the forge^^ of the Registers did. But
Dr. Heylin treats of this matter here en passant only, and refers his Readers
for their further satisfaction to the beginning of his eight and last book,
where thus he tells his own Tale worth any man's reading.

Nothing remains, but that we settle the Episcopal Government; and then it
will be time to conclude this History. And for the settling of this Government
by as good Authority, as could be given unto it by the Laws of the Land, we are
beholding to the obstinacy of Dr. Edmund Bonner, late slaughter-man of London.
By a statute made in the last Parliament for keeping her Majesty's Subjects in
due obedience, a Power was given unto the Bishops to tender, and receive the
Oath of Supremacy to all manner of persons dwelling and residing in their
several Dioceses. Bonner was then prisoner in the Clink or Marshalsee; which
being in the Borrough of Southwark, brought him within the Jurisdiction of Horn
Bishop of Winchester, by whose Chancellor the Oath was tendered unto him: on
the refusal of which Oath, he is indicted at the Kings Bench upon the Statute:
to which he appeared in some Term of the year foregoing, etc. The second
Principal Plea was this, that Horn at the time the Oath was tendered, was not
Bishop of Winchester, and therefore not empowered by the said Statute to make
tender of it by himself, or by his Chancellor. And for the proof of this, that
he was no Bishop, it was alleged, that the form of Consecration of Archbishops
and Bishops, which had been ratified by Parliament in the time of King Edward,
had been repealed in the first year of Queen Mary, and so remained at Horn's
pretended Consecration. The Cause being put off from Term to Term, comes at
last to be debated amongst the Judges at Sergeants Inn, by whom it was finally
put upon the Issue, and the Trial of that Issue ordered to be committed to a
Jury of the County of Surry: But then withal, it was advised, that the
decision of the point, should rather be referred to the following Parliament,
for fear that such a weighty matter might miscarry by a Country Jury, of whose
either Partiality, or Insufficiency, there had been some proof made before
touching the Grants made by King Edwards Bishops, of which a great many were
made void, under pretense that the Grantors were not Actually Bishops, nor
Legally possessed of their several Sees.

According to this sound advice, the business comes under consideration in the
following Parliament, which begun on the Thirtyeth of September, where all
particulars being fully, and consideratly discoursed upon, it was first
declared, that their not restoring that book to the former Power in Terms
significant, and express, was but casus omissus; And secondly, that by the
Statutes Fifth and Sixth of Edward the Sixth, it had been added to the book of
Common Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments, as a Member of it, or at
least an Appendant to it; and therefore by the first of Elizabeth was restored
again, together with the said book of Common Prayer, intentionally at the
least, if not in Terminis. But being that the words of the said Statute were
not clear enough to remove all doubts, they did therefore revive it now, and
did accordingly Enact, That all persons that had been, or should be made,
ordered, or Consecrated Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, Ministers of God's Holy
Words, and Sacraments, or Deacons after the form and order prescribed in the
said book, be in very deed, and also by Authority hereof declared and enacted
to be, and shall be Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, Ministers of God's holy
Words and Sacraments, and Deacons rightly made, Consecrated and ordered, any
Statute, Law, Canon, or any thing to the contrary notwithstanding.

A bold Parliament indeed, that thus generously bids defiance to all Laws and
Statutes ever made in the world, to all Canons ever made in God's Church, and
to every thing else whatsoever. To good purpose then did Saint Gregory the
Great, and Bishop Lawd after him, declare that they gave the like credit to the
first four General Councils, as to the four Evangelists; when an English
Parliament shall come and enact and declare Bishops in the form they please
with a non obstante to all the Powers of Heaven and Earth, or any thing to the
contrary notwithstanding, i. e. of Hell too.

But being that Dr. Heylin tells us, that this business, was only fully and
considerately discoursed upon in Parliament; it may I hope yet bear a further
discussion and canvassing. You see, here were many doubts whether these Bishops
were rightly consecrated or not.

First, Because the Form of Consecration made in King Edwards days, was
declared void and null in the first year of Queen Mary; and as yet has never
been allowed in the Church of Rome.

Secondly, Because you see, there was a Casus omissus, and the Form of King
Edward was not restored in Terms express and significant, which is requisite in
Law.

Thirdly, To talk of a Statute once made null and void, intentionally is
nonsense: For Intention will not make Law; neither is it in Church affairs,
nor indeed, is it any where else, as it is in England, where there are
definitive Interpreters of Law, and no Law Text, and where there is Gospel and
no definitive Interpreters of the Text.

Fourthly, Because, the words in the said Statute were not clear enough to
remove doubts: Then it is clear that there were doubts.

Fifthly, Because the Doubts were so many, that the whole Power of the Kingdom,
Queen, Council, Church and State, durst not venture a trial against a poor
Prisoner, (notwithstanding that the business was ordered for a trial by
Sergeants Inn) to see it fairly decided, whether the Doubts could be removed or
not, for fear such a weighty matter might miscarry by a County Jury, as though it
had not been in their Power to make what Jury they pleased.

Sixthly, Bonner though a Prisoner, enjoyed his Revenue all this while by dint of
Law, that is, from the first of Eliz. to the eighth of Eliz. because Horn in
all this time could not prove himself a Bishop: Then the Law did not look upon
them as yet Bishops. But, all the Bishops were made in this time, and all that
pretend to be now Bishops are derived from them; Then how sacrilegious were
those Bishops that administered the Sacraments and conferred Orders, whilst so
many Doubts remained. Whether they were truly ordained, or had any lawful
Jurisdiction or not. And of this there can be no question, nor can any man deny
it.

But now comes the Parliament, the Doubts are removed and Horn gets his Cause;
But how? were both Parties heard? No; nor durst the Parliament hear what Bonner
could say for himself, nor what his Lawyers could say for him neither, who were
Eminent Men, as Dr. Heylin tells us, Wrey, Lovelace and Ployden; nor is it to
be imagined that such Eminent Men would have undertaken so invidious a business
to Church and State, unless they had foreseen, that the Cause was sure enough
in their hands. It is a received Maxim throughout the world, that Qui judicat
causa inaudita altera iniquus est Iudex; He that judges without hearing both
Parties is a wicked Judge. But this Parliament judged without hearing both
parties: then this was iniquum Parliamentum, iniquus Iudex; a wicked
Parliament, wicked Judges: then what are the Bishops, who are no otherwise
Bishops, than by verdict of such Iniquity? But this is not all.

Either those Bishops of whose Consecration there were so many Doubts were in
this Parliament or not? Of right they could not be there until the Doubts were
removed: But either they were, or they were not? If they were, can any thing be
more pleasantly ridiculous, than to see the very men in question whether
Bishops or not, sit judging in Parliament, and voting themselves to be in very
deed, and also by Authority hereof (that is, of themselves) declared and
enacted to be, and shall be Archbishops, Bishops, etc. rightly made,
consecrated, and ordered; any thing to the contrary notwithstanding. This is
far worse, than ask my Brother if I am a Thief. In fine, it is so ridiculous,
that for soberness sake, we will suppose, that those pretended Bishops did not
sit in that Parliament. Then was the Parliament but a pack of Laymen; and what
have such to do with enacting or declaring of Bishops? Bishops derive their
ordination and the power that follows it, immediately from Christ himself by
succession from the Apostles, (as I said before) and not from King nor Queen;
It is a thing purely spiritual, and therefore cannot fall under the cognizance
of any Temporal Power: So that the pretended Bishops were no more Bishops for
this Act of Parliament, than they were before: For such a Parliament neither
had power to enact them Bishops, nor to declare them such? so that all the
former Doubts yet remain, and reach our present pretended Bishops equally, and
as much, as they did the former. But it is Sacrilege for any pretended Bishop
to offer to administer the Sacraments, and confer Orders, when but one Doubt
remains, whether he be rightly in Orders himself, or have Authority to do it;
Then greater is the Sacrilege, when men offer to administer the Sacraments and
confer Orders, when so many Doubts remain whether they be in Orders, or rightly
authorized to do such Acts.

And now to conclude, how came Dr. Heylin so well acquainted with Bishop
Bonner, that he should know which were his chief Pleas, or what he would
chiefly have insisted upon, had the weighty matter been suffered to have come
to a hearing? Did he think the story of the Naggs-head less known to Bonner,
than it was to Neal and Saunders? or can any man in his wits believe that the
whole Power of the Realm, Queen, Church, Parliament, Council and all, were in
earnest afraid the weighty matter might miscarry by a County Jury, either by
Partiality or Insufficiency? Was it impossible for the Queen and Church to have
found in the whole County of Surry, twelve men according to their own hearts?
And could not they have instructed them as far as they pleased, that there
could not be any fear of Insufficiency? And could not they have made them
wholly their own, that there could be no fear of Partiality, at leastwise
toward Bonner? And if all other means had failed, could not they have bribed
and suborned them? A more necessary Policy then, when the weighty matter was at
stake, than ever there was occasion for the like since. And does Dr. Heylin
call the declining of this Trial sound Advice; Certainly, when this question
was started, Bishops or not Bishops? And that the Cause, debated amongst the
Judges at Sergeants Inn, was finally put upon the Issue, and the Trial of that
Issue ordered to be committed to a Jury of the County of Surry, it was
necessary the world should be satisfied. But the Queen and Church did foresee,
either that such things would be brought upon the stage, as would be very
dishonorable to both, or that the pretended Bishop Horn would be cast. And
then whither would her Majesty have sent for Bishops to Consecrate her new
Elects? The Catholic Bishops would not do it, and of that she had a Trial in
Kitchen. The Lutherans would not do it; for Dr. Heylin tells us, that they
would not receive English fugitives in Queen Mary's time, and that they called
such as dyed here then, the Devils Martyrs. So that the Church of England must
even have been an Episcopal Church without Bishops. And that had not been more
ridiculous than it was infamous, and Scandalous to have declined the Trial.

That my Reader may the better remember, what has been said; I thus in short
Recapitulate it. The first beginning of Reformation was founded on lust, it
increased by Spoil, Rapine and Sacrilege; it was at last new molded, and
formed into a Church to Legitimate the Queen, when nothing else could do it; it
was made and established a Church by a Power, that had no more Authority to
make, and establish Churches, than has the poor man with his Parliament of
women, which he cries about the streets, Authority to make and establish
Religions. The pretended Bishops of this pretended Church are no Bishops at
all; or at the best, they can but pretend to be Bishops with many doubts on
their backs, whether they are Bishops or not; and consequently must lie under
the guilt of Sacrilege for Administering the Sacraments, and conferring Orders,
those doubts still remaining unclear'd, nor possible now ever to be so. For no
ensuing Parliament can ever do it: nor if it could, were it ever possible for
them to prove by what Lawfully Authorized Successor's of the Apostles, they
were sent to Preach the Doctrine of the Thirty Nine Articles.

Thus is the pretended Church of England truly represented throughout all her
causes, except her Material ones; and those I omitted, because she has none:
being only made up, but of No's and Negatives, of which hereafter. In the mean
time I defy any man to show me, that I have Slandered her with the least
untruth in the world. Had not then the good late Duchess of York just Reason
to confess, that she could not think the Holy Ghost could ever be in such
Counsels?

FINIS.

