A LETTER, FROM THE COMMISSION, OF THE General Assembly, OF THE CHURCH OF
SCOTLAND; Met at Glasgow, July 21, 1699.

TO THE Honorable Council, and Inhabitants, of the Scots Colony of Caledonia,
in America.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by GEORGE MOSMAN, and are to be sold at his (...)

(...) Pavement of that most Glorious City; And after all the Acquisitions of
this World, what is a Man Profited if he lose his own Soul?

Let such as are yet Strangers to Christ, Repent of all their Sins, committed
in Scotland, or since their Arrival In their new Dwellings, and consider with
Astonishment, with Gratitude, with relenting Sorrow and Shame, how many hundred
of Leagues they have been carried safe, through the Vast Abyss, when there was
but the thickness of a Plank betwixt them and Death, and consequently between
them and Hell; How near they have bordered, upon the confines of Eternity; and
how dreadful it will be at last. if the Waves and Billows of Divine Wrath shall
go over their Souls forever. This is the Doom that every Sinner must undergo by
himself, if it be not taken off by his Surety; and such as fly not to the
Gospel-Sanctuary, and Refuge, their Sin will surely find them out, wherever
they go.

We do most earnestly Entreat and Obtest You, the Honorable and Worthy
Persons, in whose Hands the Government is Lodged, That ye not only be shining
Patterns your Selves, in all Sobriety, Holiness and Virtue, But that, with the
outmost Diligence, and vigilant Care, you procure, that the Deportment and
Behavior, of all under your Authority and Influence, be such as becomes the
Gospel; by Commanding every one to do their Duty, by enacting strict and
wholesome Laws, and Executing those Laws impartially, and speedily; That no
Wickedness be Countenanced, or in the least connived at; For why should you
bring Wrath upon your selves, and the Land, and provock the Holy God to blast
all your Undetakings? And why should you Forfeit His Blessing and Favor,
promised to Righteous Rulers, and make your Selves Partakers of other Men's
Sins? For whatever is committed through your Forbearance, and Remisness in
Government, is justly Chargable on you: Every Man is Guilty of that Sin which
he Reproves not, which he does not Testify against, which he can, but neglects
to hinder in another; But most of all, such as are Rulers of others, and must
give an Account of them to God, as well as of themselves. Thou shall not hate
thy Brother in thy Heart, thou shall in any ways rebuke thy Neighbor, Lav.
19.17.
and not suffer Sin upon him: And in the Margin it reads, That thou bear not
Sin for him: This is a Law given unto all; But the peculiar End of Magistracy
is, to be a Terror unto Evil doers, and for the Praise of them that do Well; To
set their Eyes of Favor upon the Faithful of the Land; and to cut off all
Wickeddoers from the City of the Lord.

There is yet a special Obligation upon you, in the Planting and Erect^ng of a
New Colony, to take Care, that Religion and Virtue be planted and thrive in it.
Owe you not this Return to God, who has brought you thither, and who preserves
and prospers you? Owe you it not to your Selves, least you Forseit His merciful
Kinduess, and turn it to bitter Displeasure? Owe you it not to the Nation you
are come from; to the Gospel you have Received, and Professed, and to the People
you are come among: that they receive not Scandal, and ground of Offense
against Christianity, form the ungodly Lives of Brofessed Christians? Have you
not Advantages, beyond the Government of your Native Land, or any other of a
long continuance where there are so many Corruptions, and rooted Habits of
Vice, among the people to be eradicated? Your Commonwealth is in its Infancy;
you have in your Hand the first Forming of it: your People yet but few, in
Comparison, and their Hearts, we trust, yet tender, under the sense of Divine
Goodness, as well as the Apprehension of yet impendent Dangers; and so more
easily formed into Obedience and Virtue. Are ye not all persuaded, that, as
Righteousness exalts a Nation, Prove. 14 34.
and Sin is the Reproach of any People; So it must be verified in a very
special and emment manner upon you, That there is a Just and Righteous God, who
will call every one to a Reckoning, both for their Personal and for their
Stational Actions? Are you not Convinced that Sobriety, Temperance, Diligence,
and all other Moral and Christian Virtues are truly your Temporal, as well as
your Etern^l Interest; that your Worldly Affairs cannot thrive without these;
That these are true reason of State, by their propitious Influence on Society;
and true point of Honor, preventing the Baseness and Infamies of Vice, and
rendering the Righteous Man more Excellent than his Neighbor, solidy Brave,
Generous, and Great? Have you not before your Eyes, Fatal Examples of the sad
Effects of Immorality, and Debauchedness in other Colonies, some of which,
instead of Propagating the Gospel, are become Nurseries of Scandal to Infidels;
and have drawn down many formidable judgments on themselves? Has not the
Dissolution of Manners weakened, enervated and broken some of your Neighbors
and rendered them an easy Prey to their Enemies, and the Objects of Divine
Vengeance, for their Corruptions, and their Cruelties.

We beseech you, for the Lords Sake, for your own Souls sake, and for the sake
of your Country, and of your Posterity, for all that is, and ought to be
Sacred, and Dear to Christians, or to Men, that you withstand, and prevent the
Corrupting of your Infant Colony, that you Oppose and Stop the first
Appearances or Occasions of Vice amongst you People; and keep them close to the
strict Rules of Christian Morality, and a Gospel-adorning Conversation.

Can any think, but the Divine Majesty will resent, and Avenge the Hellish
Unnatural, and Uncreaturely Pre^hanation of His Dreadful and Holy Name, (a Sin
void of Tentation, and full of Horror) or that ever the Heathen, will be
induced to Adore that God, whom His own Worshipers Trample upon. and Contemn by
profane Swearing? And, whereas Oaths, amongst all Nations, are and ought to
be, esteemed most Sacred and Binding; What Veneration, or Credit, will they
give to the Oaths of those, who Prostitute them, though it were but in trivial
Occurrences of Law, [a sad abuse of Judicatories, in many Countries, which we
with you to avoid] much less, when they are made the miserable Blemishes, and
Stains, of Common Discourse.

(...) your People and spoil all honest Commerce, and manly Conversation, and
prove an inlet to all Mischief? A temperate People are Bold and Adventuring,
Wise and Curagious, and attended with many temporal Blessings of an outward
prosperous and flourishing Condition; while Drunkenness besots, dispirits,
befools, and wastes a Nation. Let this Vice be curbed among you in its first
beginning: And that vile and wretched Custom detested, that has unhappily
obtained here, of doing all Business over a tippling Bottle.

Let all Uncleanness be abhorred: Pollute not the Temples of the Holy Ghost,
which your Bodies are, Consecrated to him in Christian Baptism; 1 Cor. 6.19
but let every one possess his Vessel in Sanctification and Honor; 2 These. 4.4.
lest the Place of your Settlement be defiled, and the Land Spue you out, as
Canaan did its Inhabitants. And let Interest oblige you to extraordinary
Caution, and Watchfulness over the People, with respect to the Natives, in this
matter; least their Resentment prove a Mean of your Ruin, and, if they should
be provoccked to avenge Indignities done them, and Injuries of this kind, your
fall could not but prove Disgraceful and Unpitied.

Let your Laws strike severely against Idleness, and want of Employment, the
Parent of much Mischief and Beggary. Idle People are not only Useless, but
Burdensome in a Common wealth, Sowers of Sedition, Discontented, and seldom
better exercised, then to find out base and dishonest Ways, whereby they may
be maintained, in pampering of sloathful Lusts Let Industry be reputed
Honorable, and Diligence in Employment a Character of Virtue, worthy of the
highest Respect: Let not the foolish Notion, ever get Footing with you, which
has been one great Cause of the Poverty of Our Nation at Home, and our
Reproach among the Rich, and Trading Nations Abroad. That it is below a
Gentleman to follow Trade and Employment.

Let not only all Falsehood in Words and Actions, be severely punished, as what
is inconsistent with Humane Society, and Enervats and Destroys Trade, (Faith
and uprightness in Dealing^ being the Life and Soul of Commerce, and the best
Foundation of Success, Prove. 10.92
For he that walks uprightly walks surely) But likewise Discourage and
Disgrace Self-seeking, and Narrowness, to the prejudice of the Public: Let not
every one seek his own things, to the Detriment of his Neighbor, but every one
the good of others, and common Benefit, for in the Interest of the Public,
and Prosperity of the Commonwealth, that of each particular Person consists,
and is best secured. Especially this is to be looked to, in the beginning of a
Settlement, and Infancy of a Government, where Publick-Spiritedness and Self
denial, as they are Gospel-preceepts, so, will be found best Principles of
Policy; whereas Self-seeking has ever been the Bane and Ruin of many
promising Undertakings.

We cannot forget to Recommend, to you Brotherly Love and Concord, and that you
Live in peace and Unity among your selves; a thing no less Profitable to you,
than Pleasant to the God of Peace, and suitable to the Christian Name; This is
our Lords new Commandment, left by Him in Legacy to all His Followers, John
13.34.35.
that they Love one another: By this even the Heathen. Nations shall know that
you are the Disciples of the Prince of Peace. We need not tell you, what is the
Common-remark, on these of our Nation, that, however Hasty, Impatient and Warm,
they may be in their Debates, while at Home; yet they are Noted as Exemplary to
others, in an Affectionat Concern in Sympathy with, and close Adherence to one
another, when Abroad. We heartily Wish* this may be Verified of you, now when
you are far removed, from your Native Land, and placed amidst envidus
Neighbors. who are waiting for your Halting. and would make it their Work, to
Improve to your Hurt, any Difference that might arise among you.

Let Righteous Judgment be Execute betwixt Man and Man; for the Judgment is
the Lords. Let it be done Impartially; without vexatious Quibbles or dilatory
Forms, and Dispensed either Gra^^^, or upon a public Salary; so as no
Magistrate may Gain by Fines of his own Imposing; a Practice most hurtful in
your Native Land; whereby the Covetous are Tempted to Squeeze and Oppress, and
those of a more honest and free Disposition, to become over Slack, least they
should appear gripping for their own Interest. And in general; whatever
Scripture or solid Reason, has discovered to you to be Wrong or of ill
Consequence, in the Customs you have seen at Home, or elsewhere, and in the
Errors of other Plantations, let these things be carefully Avoided in your new
Government.

The Eyes of God, of Angels and of Men are upon you; The World begins to take
notice of you, as a most hopeful Colony, to the Envy of your Enemies, and the
Joy of your own Country and Friends, Remember, as you are People of great
Expectation, and of great Advantages; So your Honor and Renoun, your Temporal
as well as your Spiritual and Eternal Gain shall be great, if you improve your
Talent, and Manage the Price put in your hands, wisely and well: but if
otherwise, your Reckoning must be sore and heavy, and your End Inglorious.

We again repeat our most earnest Entreaties unto you, our Dear and honored
Friends, that you be very exact; vigilant, and conscientious in Modeling your
new Colony to all virtue, and Godliness, especially in the first beginning,
which is of vast importance in all great Undertakings; And a due care of which,
will render all after proceedings easy, pleasant, and successful, That you
bond your outmost endeavors, both by Example and Law, to make Righteousness,
Sobriety, and Godliness appear in the Eyes of others. as they are in themselves
Amiable and Honorable; And all Vice and Impiety, detestable and infamous: So
as a vicious person may look like a Monster, and Object of Horror amongst you;
Thus, Religion and Virtue will Incorporate into your very Customs and
Constitutions, and your Laws and Persons will be venerable, without the
grievous necessity of being severe; and God will Bless you, and delight to
dwell among you; and your Land shall be called Hephzi-bah, (...)
and the name of your place Jehovahshamniah, the Lord is there. But if any will
do wickedly, Ezekiel. 4
if Men will be foolish and froward, your duty to God, and Mercy to the
Community, calls for speedy and Exemplary Justice, that you may put the evil
away from among you, and others may hear and fear.

As we recommend unto you, a just and Christian regard to all Gospel
Ordinances; So in particul^r, a Religious Observance and Sanctificacion of of
the Lord's Day, the neglect of which, will ly heavy on Governors the, command
being peculiarly given to them, as Persons that must Answer for their Children
and Servants, and for the Stranger that is within their Gates, as well as for
Themselves: If the Sabbath of the Lord be Profaned, He will cause your Land to
Enjoy its Sabbaths, by Desolation. But if you Sanctify the Holy Day of Rest
unto the Lord, Lev. 26.43.
He will procure and Maintain Rest for you in your Land.

And as we are hopeful of your Just and Faithful Dealings, with all Men whom
you may have Occasion to Negotiate, and Trade with; So we Recommend, not only
Equity and Justice, but also, Obligeing Kindness toward the N^tives; That your
People may not only have their Conversation Honest, among the Gentiles, but
Winning and Engageing, by Beneficence; That they, beholding and enjoying the
Benefice of your Good works, may glorify God in the Day of your Visitation. If
you partake of their Temporal Things, are you not of bound to Minister unto
them of your Spiritual Things? Verity, their Debtors you are; And not only is
it the Interest of your Trade, and your safety, to keep good measures with
them; but it is your positive duty, for which the Lord seems in a peculiar
manner to have designed your Plantation, as its most glorious End; To propogate
the Light of his Gospel amongst them, and that Heavenly Wisdom, which is more
precious than all Riches, and whose Merchandice is better than the Gold of.
Ophir or Darien: It Is by their consent, that God confirms your Right, therefore
cherish them as your Brethren, of the same Blood, and Kindred in Adam, And
endeavor, that you may them have also your Brethren in Christ; not only, let
no Stumbling block or occasion of Offense, be laid before them, but all due
Encouragement given them, to Embrace the Everlasting Gospel. Let them see what
Veneration, and Regard you pay to your Ministers, as the Servants of the most
High God, who must Labor amongst them; and to the Ordinances of Jesus Christ,
as the Common Means of your and their Salvation.

It will be needful you study their Genius Well: For some of these Nations are
Naturally more Sincere, and Simple; Others more Subtle, and Treacherous; But,
generally, all of them, especially in the beginning, Suspicious and Jealous,
Credulous, and Apt to take ill impressions, and not easy to quit them; Also
most Revengeful and Cruel, where they can be Masters, upon the Apprehension of
the least Injury done them, to which they have got too many Irritations, by
other Europeans, who have come among them. Therefore, there is need, you be, in
the midst of them, Wise as Serpents, and Harmless as Doves; You are always to
be very Watchful, and upon your Guard, that you may prevent Surprisals, and be
alile to defend your selves, if they should take up any prejudice, and
irritation groundlesly, against you: Be very concerned to see that none of
yours Injure, or Disoblige them in the least, without due and speedy
punishment, and that more severely inflicted, than for these Injuries done by
any of you against another of your Selves. And beside the punishment you may
find just and necessar to Inflict, be sure any Damage they sustain be repaid,
though it should be done by the Public, when the offending party is not able. By
any means, by continual converse, endeavor to Civilize them, and cultivat any
Principles of Natural Understanding, and Reason, they have which will indeed
require great Prudence, and Dexterity in the Management: And when they see
^iety, sincerity and Equity flourishing among you; it will be the most
effectual, and endearing tie to knit them to your Interest.

Be careful in doing Justice betwixt Masters and Servants: Let their Service be
a reasonable Service, and time allowed them for their public and private
Worshipping of God, for they are your Brethren: And when their time expires;
let them meet with such encouragement, as may always engage them to continue,
and settle among you: whereby, from time to time, you will be strengthened, and
increased, and others encouraged to come unto you.

If you shall have Servants for Life, or Slaves of other Nations; (for the
Natives of Darien, we consider as your Confederats and Allies) as we wish you
to be Tender, both of their Souls and Bodies, and to enc^urage their Conversion
to Christianity, by all proper means; So we do not urge that their absolute
Liberty, and Freedom from their Service, should, as in some other places, be
made the immediate reward of their professing to receive the Gospel: For this
has tempted Masters to withold them from the means of their Conversion* lest
they should be indammaged by the loss of their Service, and has occasioned the
Slaves to make Counterfit Professions, to gain their Liberty. But we recommend
a Gentle-rule, a Mild Treatment, and that full Access and Time be allowed for
their Christian Instruction, and let such Rules be agreed on, as that these at
least of them, who shall not only profess the Christian Religion, but have such
a Gospel Adorning Conversation, as may recommend them to the Consciences of the
Godly, as Christians indeed, may have their f^ll freedom by such Terms, as may
be Safe and Advantageous, both to their Masters and them. Immortal Souls are of
great value, and the Blessings of these, who are ready to Perish are not to be
despised.

We shall in the next place particularly Address our selves to you, that are in
Military Charge, and have command over the Soldiery, whether by Land or Sea:
It Is on you, Honored and Worthy Gentlemen, that a great Share of the Public
Safety lies; you are, in some respect, the eyes and hands of this Infant
Colony; Many of you have been lately engaged in a just and Glorious War, for
Retriving, and defending the Protestant Religion, the Liberties, and Rights of
your Country, under the Conduct of a Matchless Prince. And now, when through
the Blessing of the Lord of Hosts. His and Your Arms have procured an Honored
Peace at Home; You, and others with you, have, with much Bravery, embarked your
selves in a Great, Generous, and Just Undertaking, in the remote parts of the
Earth, for advanceing the Honor and Interest of your Native Country. If in
this you acquit your selves like Men and Christians; Your Fame will be Renowned
both Abroad and at Home. We cannot foresee what Opposition you may meet with
from the Malico of Men, who env^ the Prosperity of others, and seek to enhance
to themselves that part of the World, whether you are going, which may justly
oblige you anew to the trial of your Arms: And in that case, you are called to
use your Valor, and Courage, but not to lean unto it, nor trust in the Arm of
Flesh. Seek to have the Lord going before you, Isa. 52.12.
and the God of Israel to be your reward. And remember what is given in charge
to the Armies of Israel, when the Host goes forth against thine Enemies, Deur.
23.9, 14.
then keep thee from every wicked thing, lest the Lord, seeing Wickedness, and
Prophanity in your Camp, be provoked to turn away from you. How reproachful
would it prove to the Profession of Christianity, if, by the lewd practice of
any among you* the Pagan-Nations should have ground to apprehend, that you
entertain that hellish and false Maxim of the Atheistical Debauchees of this
Age, which even the refined Heathen abhor, that it is a point of Gallantry, and
a necessar qualification in a Soldier, to cast off all thoughts of God, of his
own Soul, of Heaven, and Hell; As if these, who are conversant in the Jaws of
Death, were less concerned, than others, to mind their suture State; or that
Wicked, and Profligate Men, could adventure to encounter with Death, which to
them is a King of Terrors, with that holdness and sixed Resolution, in lawful
and allowable War, that is to be found with the Upright Man, who can encourage
himself with the thoughts of this, that his Latterend will be peace? Do not
Pagan, as well as Christian, Histories, furnish sufficient instances of the
Noblest Hero's, and bravest Commanders, who were themselves Paterns of Virtue,
and a Terror to the Vicious, and Profane? And, sure, the most eminent of
Saints. Recorded in the Holy Scriptures, have been most Courageous Warriors,
and the best of Soldiers. Let us therefore earnestly entreat, and obtest you,
who are Commanders and Officers, to go before your Soldiers, in all manner of
Holy Conversation. The Characters you bear, by the stations you are placed in,
the Respect you owe to the Honor, Credit, and Welfare of your Native-Country,
and that New Part of it, the Colony you are now going to, your own Temporal, as
well as Spiritual interest, and the Happiness of these under your Charge, do
all call aloud on you, to use your outmost endeavors, for Curbing, by
Exemplary Punishment, and marks of Disgrace, in any of your Soldiers, who may
be guilty of them, the horrid Wickedness of Profane Swearing, Uncleanness,
Drunkenness, Profaning the Lord's Day, Neglect of Gospel Ordinances,
Falsehood, Treachery, Oppression, and Idleness the Mother of all Wickedness,
and other Enormities; the suppressing of all which we have already Recommended
to the Honorable Council of the Colony: Nor shall we need to enforce this on
you, so far as your stations call for it, with any other Arguments, than what
we have offered to them, which we entreat you seriously to mind. And, for the
Encouragement of all under your command to carry as becomes
Christian-Souldiers, in the way of Well doing: their due allowance be
punctually given them, Preferment, and Reward, impartially, and readily
bestowed on the best deserving of them: That Wickedness being Disgraced, and
Banished, Piety encouraged and flourishing in your C^mp^^^ you may have
confidence toward God, that the Lord will be your protection, and will delight
to go forth in the midst of you.

Though much of what we have written be Addressed principally, to the
Governors and Magistrates of the Plantation, and others bearing Office among
you, yet it does likewayes concern every one of you, Our Beloved Friends, and
Dear Countrymen, for whom the desire our Souls, and Prayer to God is, that you
may be saved, that God may Countenance, and Bless your Undertakings, and crown
them with success, that ^is Almighty Tower may be a Wall of Fire about you. But
above all that his Gracious pretense, in his Ordinances, may be the Glory in
the midst of you, and that your Souls may prosper, until you be transplanted
into the better Mansions above, that Kingdom which is beyond the ^^j^^ies of
Envious Enemies, a Kingdom that cannot be shaken, and whence you shall go forth
no more.

We have found it necessary, from a sense of our Duty before God, and our
tender regard, both to your Souls, and your outward Welfare, to lay before your
Governors the indispensible Obligations of their Station, as Christian
Magisirates, to set up, and maintain a Holy Righteous Government over you and
to suppress, and punish all Vice, with the greatest, and most impartial
severity. And this is absolutely requisite to the very Civil Subsistence of
your Colony, so we hope it will not be grievous to any of you, and that there
is not one Soul so degenerous, and dissolute in your Society, as, but to wish
for a connivance to any immoral or profane practice. And, if there be such a
Person is a Burden and Plague to the Rest, that deserves to be cut off l^st the
Body be infected, and the heavy Judgments of God be pulled down on the
Community. We are therefore confident, that you will Obey, not only for Fear,
but, for Conscience Sake, and for our own interest. That you will pay all
Submission and dutiful deterence to your Rulers. That you will, with Patience
and contentment bear the Toil and Fatigues of your first Settlement, not
Murmuring, for what Uneasiness may as yet be in your Circumstances, but waiting
upon the Lord, in an Humble, and diligent Application to your present Work,
till he in his infinite Mercy, give you a confirmed Rest in the Lord, For, though
you do not find such Fruits attending your present Labors, as may Answer all
the Expectations you had, yet Patience Diligence and Industry, will overcome
your first Difficulties, and through the Blessing of God, you shall find the
Promise made out to you, That the Hand of the Diligent makes Rich.

And We Obtest You, by the Mercies of God, in Jesus Christ our Savior, that in
your several Stations, you Walk worthy of the Lord, unto all Well-pleasing;
that you give no Offense to the Gentiles, but be exceeding Wary and Tender of
whatever may Scar them from Christianity, or doing any thing unbecoming the
Church, and Members of Christ; That you be Blameless and Harmless, the Sons of
God, without Rebuke, shining as Lights in the World; That you be Diligent and
Faithful Sober and Loving, among your selves; and Obsequious to them that are
over you, whether in Matters Religious or Civil; And that you be every one
Exemplary, Encouraging, and Edifying to one another, in Godliness, and in
whatever Tends to Common-good,

Finally, Brethren, whatsoever things are True, whatsoever things are Honest,
whatsoever things are Just, whatsoever things are Pure, whatsoever things are
Lovely, whatsoever things are of good Report, of there be any Virtue, and if
there be any Praise, think on these Things.

And, particularly, We Recommend unto You, Frequency and Fervency in Prayer,
both apart, and in Christian-Societies, or Fellowships together. It Is God most
High, who performs all things for You, on whom you must Depend, for all your
Mercies, and all your Hopes: And therefore, from the uttermost Ends of the
Earth, lift up your Cry unto Him, who is the Hearer of Prayer, and you shall
not seek his Face in Vain.

That we be not further Tedious to you, hoping, our dear Brethren, the
Ministers we have sent to Labor among you, in the Work of the Lord, shall be
Furnished by their Great Master, so as to afford you, from his Holy Word, such
Instructions and Directions, from time to time, as your Case shall require, to
whom we entreat you to Hearken, that you may be mutually Encouraging to one
another in the Lord your God: We only Repeat these Memorable Words, which we
wish may be indelibly Engraven on your Hearts, The Lord is with You, while You
are with him; and if you seek Him, 2. Chron 15.2.
he will be found of you: But if you forsake Him, He will foresake you: and all
your foreward Expectations, and Blooming hopes shall be Blasted and Wither, and
your Colony laid Desolate, your Names, instead of Honor and Renown, shall be
branded with Infamy, Hissing and Scorn, and your Blessings turned unto Curses,
and the Lord shall Pluck you up, and not Plant you, And shall separate you unto
Evil, after he had said, he would do you Good,

But, Beloved Brethren, We are persuaded better things of You, Deuteronomy. 2^ 21.
and things that accompany Salvation, tho for your Warning, we thus Write, And
that the Lord will Preserve you steadfast in Holiness, and Faith, and will
Plant you in that Place destinate for you, and make you a Name of Joy, and
Renown among the Nations.

Now, to Conclude, We Recommend these few Words of Exhortation, proceeding from
a most Tender, and Affectionat Concern, for your Good, to your most Serious
Consideration, and to the Blessing of God. To Him we Recommend all of you, and
to the Word of His Grace, which is able to Build you up, and to give you an
Inheritance among them that are Sanctified, through Faitb that is in Christ: To
whom be Glory, For Ever and Ever Amen.

FINIS.

