A FORM OF Thanksgiving To be Used In all Churches in and near about London,
immediately upon His Majesty's Return, and to be continued till the Day of
Public Thanksgiving.

By Her Majesty's special Command.

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb, deceased;
Printers to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's. 1691.

Whitehall October 17. 1691.

IT is Her Majesty's Pleasure, That this Prayer be Printed and used.

Nottingham.

Instead of The Prayer for the King, while His Majesty was abroad in the Wars,
This following Thanksgiving shall be used in all Churches in and near about,
London, immediately upon His Majesty's Return, and be continued till the Day of
Public Thanksgiving, which will shortly be appointed.
ALmighty and most gracious God, we bless and magnify thy great and glorious
Name, for thy late Mercies to us of these Kingdoms, in raising up thy Servant
King WILLIAM to be a Deliverer to us in the day of our Distress, and to rescue
us from Popish Tyranny and Superstition and all those Miseries and Calamities
which were ready to break in upon us. We also acknowledge with all thankfulness
the wonderful Success which thou have been pleased to give to their Majesty's
Forces in Ireland, even to the entire Reducing of that Kingdom. More
especially, we bless thee for thy merciful preservation of the King from the
great and manifold Dangers to which his Royal Person was exposed during his
late Expedition; and that of thy great goodness thou have been pleased to
restore him to us in safety, to the great Comfort and Joy of thy People: Humbly
beseeching thee still to continue their Majesty's under the watchful Care of
thy Providence; and to protect their Sacred Persons from all secret Practices
and open Violence, that no Weapon, no Design formed against them may prosper:
And to make them at last the happy Instruments of Establishing that great
Deliverance which thy Providence by them has wrought for us in so visible a
manner, that all the World may see that Thou art our Savior and mighty
Deliverer: Which we humbly beg for thy Mercies sake in Jesus Christ, our
Blessed Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

FINIS.

