A SERMON PREACHED AT EDINBVRGH, In the East-Church of St. Giles, upon the 30th
of January, 1689.

Being the Anniversary of the Martyrdom of KING CHARLES the First.

By JAMES CANARIES D. D. and Minister of the Gospel at Selkirk.

EDINBVRGH, Printed in the Year, 1689.

Advertisement.
NOt being able in so little Time, as is usually allowed to Sermons, to go
sufficiently through all the Points of this; I was forced, when I preached it,
to touch severals of them but very lightly. I was therefore desired by some,
who have no ordinary Influence with me, to Write out the whole to a full and
proportionable length, and then to publish it. Yet I have not altered any thing
I had in my Papers, before I went to the Pulpit: Having only added what I
thought most requisite to clear the Subject I was handling. I confess it has
swelled to a Bulk I did not foresee, even when I gave the first Sheets to the
Press. But I shall be content that the greatest Censures fall upon this. And I
doubt not but many will be satisfied to see this Text so fully discust. Neither
am I the first that has converted a Sermon into a Book: Witness the famous
Doctor Barrow; besides several others. Whatever faults the Style and
Contrivance are guilty of, must in some part be attributed to my want of Health
all the time I was writing it; and so to its going by Peice-meal to the
Printers, as my convenience would allow me to have it ready for them. Its other
escapes must also in some manner be imputed to my not being at Home, where one
is wont to have more composed Thoughts, and some Books also. I know it may be
asked, why then should I have thus adventured upon it? But I ask also, whether
or not every man knows how long it shall please God to preserve him in Health?
And whether or not some Exigencies do not admit of common delays? However I
fear not to stand by its fate. Only I must earnestly entreat, that none would
pass their Judgment upon any Part or Sentence of this Discourse, till once they
have seriously read it all over; that then they may consider what relation and
dependence is betwixt one Part and another, and betwixt all the Parts,
severally taken, and the Whole together. What else I would say by way of
Preface, will be found in the Body of the Discourse it self.

ROMANS 13. 5. Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for Wrath, but also
for Conscience sake.
IT is the peculiar Excellency and Perfection of the Christian Religion, beyond
any other Institution that was ever set up in the World, that, whatever corner
of it we shall turn about, it does still show it self to be of a piece, to be
thoroughly adapted for rendering Mankind completely happy, both as to this life,
and as to that which is to come. For Peace and Felicity are but two different
words for the same thing; as might largely be demonstrated throughout all the
several instances that relate to the diverse Aspects of it under those two
denominations: And our most holy Religion does not only secure to us the peace
of our Consciences toward God, and the inward peace of those Powers and
Faculties that are lodged within our Beeings amongst themselves; but also that
outward peace and tranquillity, whereby, as we are Members of Societies and
Commonwealths, we are Cemented together, are Incorporated into one
accomplished Body and Constitution. So that whoever frames himself according to
the Genius of true Christianity, cannot but be at peace with his God, with
Himself, and with all Men too; and so of necessity he must be entirely happy
and blessed also.

This indeed is the great and noble design of our Reason. And whatever that
has suffered since the Fall, yet it has always preserved so much strength as
was sufficient to pursue, in one degree or other, such an Universal Peace. And
therefore, in order to that end, some kind of Religion has ever been retained
in all Ages, and by all sorts of Men; as the only Mean immediately Dictated by
the Light of Nature to compass it. For the apprehension of some Supreme Being
never failed to possess their Minds, nor some secret pangs and horror upon any
vicious Neglect or Performance to cruciat and torment them; nor yet the
jealousy of Private Security in a Commonwealth, out of which none could live,
to molest and disquiet them. And so they always found Religion to be the only
way to appease their God, to calm and compose their Consciences, and to settle
their Interest in the World. And upon that account the design of Reason and
Religion has been still so much of a side, that, as God had blended these two
together in the first Composition of our Nature, so whatever progress the one
made, the other followed closs upon it. And hence also it has come to pass that
nothing was ever Adopted to be Religion, even by the wildest Salvages, which
attempted to set loose the old Chaos upon the World, as if to recover its
ancient Spoils; or to involve all Mankind into Discord and Bitterness, Wrath
and Violence, both toward themselves, and toward all other Beeings whatsoever.
An Hobbesian state of Nature it may perhaps be dreamed to be. But as it acts
the Giant against Heaven, and the mad Dog against it self; so it does the Wolf
and the Tiger against its Fellows. And consequently the best Character it ever
attained to, went no higher, than to be construed, as well as called, Impiety,
Fury, and Cruelty. Such ingenuous and proper accounts of things has the very
remotest, the very obscurest instinct of Religion, that is essentially
interwoven with the Reasonable Minds of Men, obliged them, notwithstanding all
their acquired fierceness, to entertain. Wherefore as innocent Nature shrinks
even at the apprehension of all manner of ungodliness, insobriety, and
unrighteousness; so no spurious or pretended Religion can be more convincingly
upbraided as such, than when it is redargu'd of owning any such Principle or
Tenet as in its consequence introduces any of these; or when it is hissed off
the Stage for maintaining what at long run comes forcibly to contradict the
most Vulgar Notion, that ever was imagined of Religion by any of the Sons of
Men.

Yet nevertheless it cannot be denied but that such has been the degeneracy
and corruption, and such the odd mistakes and fond delusions of the most part
of Mankind, that in stead of performing those suitable Duties which are
incumbent from Religion, when they said, and it may be thought too, that they
were going about them; They have made the very Name of Religion to truckle to
the ugliest Profaneness and Vice, to the most infamous Barbarity and
Wickedness; and have perverted it unto a Mask, to serve the turn of those
Designs that thwarted most the signification of it, and cast the fulsomest
Scandal even upon Humane Nature it could be reproached with. But no more can be
gathered from this, but that there is no small inconsistency betwixt the Reason
and Frailty of Mankind; and that things may be employed in a Relative Sense,
when they cannot in an Absolute one. For however much men may swerve from the
Native Dictats and Suggestions of their own Souls, when they are to reduce them
to practice, yet nothing can be more certain than that none ever promiscuously
used, either the Titles, or the Conceptions, they had of Religion, with those
they had of Sacrilege, Debauchery, or Murder, as both Religion and they are
viewed in their Genuine Colors.

But as on the one hand, there has ever appear`d such a Dawn, and Sparkling
Glimmerings of Religion among Men; So on the other, they have never been able
so to come up to the most resin'd and sublimated Notion of it, but that they
have bungled extremely in their most elabourated Contrivances, and have sadly
blurred over that Copy, they endeavored to draw from so Divine an Original.
Their nearest Resemblances were still Faint, and the liveliest, vividest
Representations they could form, bore but rudly the Picture of the Beauty of
Holiness. As their thoughts were narrow and cloudy; so their Religion was
always puddled and impersit; it savoured more of the polluted Subject, than of
the brightest Object of one; and at best, it was but the Dwarf and Abridgement
of their own Aims. Their Fears prompted them to snatch hold of the first
Crocodile they could get by the Tail, to be the Divinity, which they should
adore, Their Shame chiefly restrained them from those outward Enormities, which
raised Vermilion, and the Blush in a Modest Face; And it was mostly their
Interest, that mounded them within certain confines they saw were not to be
transgressed without engaging a Pother about their ears. And thus all the while
their Devotion was really, but the result of an Adventure; their Virtue the
limits of a moderat Extravagance; and their Humanity and Alledgance the Police
of Craft and Suttleness. And even as to all this they had no solid ty upon
them, no sufficient Basis upon which to setle their Model: Nothing was wanting
to make them over-leap all the bounds of their Religion, but only such
convenient occasions, as the Secret Benfil of their Appetit, was constantly
springing out after.

It is true, the Jews had a Religion, which, having proceeded from the Almighty
himself, could not but have many such Polished Strokes in it, as did abundantly
attest by whose Finger it was fashioned. But as they were a rugged and peevish
People, so there was a certain exigence, that their Dispensation should be
calculated, and proportioned to the grain of their Temper. And therefore, as
their Worship of the Deity was heavily loaded with a crowd of carnal
Observances, and as the Defilement that had crept over their hearts, was much
to be purged away by bodily ablutions; so their Kindness to all the World:
besides those of their own Nation, was shrivelled up into a very little Sphere;
and the Obedience they were to pay to their Governors (as that Word is to be
taken in the General, for all those under whose Yoke they should happen to
fall) was but built on Wrath, on that dastardly awe which the dread of Temporal
Punishment compels unto; they having no special Obligation upon their
Consciences from any Law, that particulary related to that Duty.

Wherefore it was by the Divine Providence reserved to our Blessed Savior, to
bring from Heaven with him, the exactest Form that could best qualify Mankind
for that Fellowship with God, with the Holy Angels, and among themselves, which
is to make up the Glory of that Place. And the fullness of time, at which he
took upon him the form of a Servant, was little less so upon the account of our
need of a Preacher of Righteousness, than of a Redeemer to be crucified for our
sins. Then were we instructed to worship God in Spirit and in Truth, to cleanse
our selves from all filthiness both of flesh and spirit, to follow peace with
all men, and to be subject, not only for wrath, but for conscience sake.

I had not insisted so long upon that eminent advantage our Religion carries
over any other, either Profession, or Religion, that ever went before it; nor
had so fully run the parallel betwixt those two Branches of it, that relate to
our God, and our Selves, and That which concerns our Neighbors, and our being
Subject to a Supreme Power; but that thence I have laid much of the Foundation
of what I intend by this Discourse. And certainly such a Subjection as is the
Drift of this, and all other Texts in the New Testament to this purpose, cannot
but be highly endeared to us Christians, by its being so very peculiar to that
Holy Faith upon which we rest all the Hope of our Immortal Souls, as to have
kept an equal pace with all those Fundamental Excellencies of it, which raised
it so far above, either the attempts of the greatest Philosophers, that shone
most conspicuously in the Heathen World; or even those Sublimer Communications,
that God himself conveyed to his chosen People, by the Administration of his
grand Prophet Moses.

But now I come to speak more closely to the Theme of my Text. And therefore I
shall, through the assistance of God, show

First, That the Christian Religion does, not only engadge us to be subject
unto Sovereign Authority, but also enforce it by the most prevalent Motives,
that can work upon the Minds of Rational Men. Secondly, That those Motives by
which it recommends such a Subjection unto us, do fix the most immovable
Hinges, upon which any Government can sureliest turn. Thirdly, What the Nature
and Extent of that Subjection is. Fourthly, What are those Errors which stand
in the directest opposition to the design of our Savior, and his Apostles in
their enjoining of it. And Lastly, I shall apply all to the occasion of this
Day.
To begin then with the first; Were there no more in all the New Testament but
this Text, and the four foregoing, with the two subsequent Verses, to devolve
the obligation of this Subjection upon all Christians; none of them would ever
find a shift whereby to divert it, unless they should furnish themselves at the
same time with such a store of Evasions and Subterfuges as might quite baffle
and evacuate the entire scope of the whole Book. For what can be more pat and
express for any thing, than is here the Apostles command for this Duty? Not
only does he directly condescend upon the Matter it self, be subject to the
higher Powers; Not only does he spread the Bond of it over the whole Race of
Mankind in whatever condition or circumstances, let every soul be subject; Not
only does he back his Command with the most irrefragable Arguments, for there
is no Power but of God, the Powers that be are ordained of God: whosoever
therefore resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God; Not only does he
declare the end for which these Powers were appointed by God, and consequently
press home the Reason why we should be subject to them, for they are the
Ministers of God to us for good; and bear not the Sword in vain, but as
revengers to execute wrath upon them that do evil; Not only does he thence
infer the Title that these Powers have to our Subjection even upon the point of
the strictest Justice, Render therefore to them their dues, for they are Gods
Ministers, attending continually upon this very thing; Not only does he animate
all with the most cogent Peswasives, they that resist shall receive to
themselves damnation, wherefore he subject, not only for wrath, but also for
conscience sake; But does also in the most peremptory terms show from all this
the absolute and indispensible necessity of being subject, wherefore ye must
needs be subject. So that we shall hardly find any other Precept in all the
Christian Law, either more particularly determined, or more earnestly imposed,
than this of being subject to the Higher Powers.

But that God, who attests all his Works toward Mankind even with a Cloud of
Witnesses, has by his Providence ordered that to the Apostle of the Gentiles,
that of the Jews should be joined in laying on this Duty of Subjection. And he
has no less punctually set it forth in his first Epistle and second Chapter,
and 13, 14, 15, and 16 Verses, Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for
the Lords sake; whether it be to the King as supreme or unto Governors, as
unto them that are sent by him for the punishment of evildoers, and for the
praise of them that do well; For so is the will of God, that with well-doing ye
may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men; as free, and not using your
liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, but as the servants of God. These words
of St. Peter are so very plain that scarcely any Comment upon them could make
them more so.

There could have been but one step more; namely the immediate Confirmation of
our Lord Jesus Christ himself; which in all matters depending so much upon his
Authority, as this does, gives the last touch and finishing to them. And this
too we have so fully, that He, not only made a peculiar Response on the Head;
but also, which was a signal Accession, set all his Followers an Example, as
much fraughted with his Doctrine, as this was with his Divinity. The Rise then
he got to the first, was when the Herodians upon a very insidious design asked
him, St. Mark chap. 12. ver. 14. Is it lawful to give tribute to Caesar, or not?
shall we give, or shall we not give? And for answer; He first calls for a piece
of their Money, that by their acknowledging, from the Image and Superscription
it carried, that the Original was their Caesar, their Sovereign, he might out of
their own Mouths establish their being Subjects unto him: and then he tells
them they should render to Caesar the things that are Cesars, and to God the
things that are Gods; as if he had said, whatever belongs of right to your
Prince by the Laws of his Dominion over you, be sure to detain nothing of it
from him; and therefore if upon this respect you owe him any Tribute, forbear
not to pay it to the last Farthing. So that our Savior proposed to them the
general Principle of Subjection according to his Gospel; and left no more to
them to do, but only to subsume and infer in a Case that admitted of no doubt
or scruple. But it is further observable, that he subjoyns these words, and to
God the things that are Gods; as to let them understand that no obedience to
their Caesar ought to entrench upon that which God exacts of them; So to state
the Comparison betwixt the Obligation from his Doctrine to perform their
bounden Duty to Caesar, and that from Religion in the general to be subject unto
the Rights God has over his Creatures. For the whole complext of the Sentence
imports, that they were no less conscienciously to acquit themselves in all
respective points to the Former, than they were to the Latter: since such an
immediate Position of any like two Clauses together, naturally suggests, a
mutual reference of Analogy from each other, where the Matter can bear it.

And what he taught, he examplified in an instance so very decisive, that if
any thing of that nature can be allowed to Preach, it cannot be denied a most
eminent share of that. And this was when he himself paid the Tribute-money,
lest he should have offended the Governors that were then in the Land, Matthew.
chap. 17. verse. 27. He reasoned the Case with St. Peter about the privilege
and exemption of the freeborn Subjects; Strangers being then only obnoxious to
that Taxation. And tho none could have a better title upon which to plead his
liberty from it, than he had; yet He rather choos'd even by a Miracle to
satisfy the utmost exaction that was imposed upon him, than to give any ground
for jealousy unto the Government under which he was living, as if he had in
any manner of way seemed to have called the Power of it in question. But
whoever shall consider the whole Series of his Conversation among men, will
find the most perfect Pattern of Submission to the higher Powers, that the very
nicest fancy could imagine to it self: So that these must not at all be
acquaint with the mere History of his Life and Death, who are yet to learn any
thing in that point. And, as he came to fulfill the Law, by undergoing all the
external Purifications of it, tho he had no Sin; So, tho he had all Power in
Heaven and in Earth given to him, yet he never stepped but one Hairs-breadth
beyond the borders of that private Station, as a Subject, he had restricted
himself unto: not meddling so far with any thing that looked like Civil
Authority, as even to umpire a small Contest betwixt two Brothers, Luke 12.
ver. 13, 14.

Thus we see, both how very positive the New Testament is in binding this
Subjection upon us, as well by Precept, as by Example; and also that to all the
Obligations to it, either from the Law of Nature, or the Policy of an
established Commonwealth, the Christian Religion superadds that of Conscience,
and of obeying for the Lords sake. I might bring down the Argument to the Lives
of the Apostles, and to the Doctrine and Practice of the first and purest
Lights of the Christian Church throughout those Centuries, wherein our Holy
Faith flourished in its greatest glory and perfection. But that were to launch
out into an Ocean too vast for a Volum, and much more for a Sermon. And
besides, if what I have alleged already be not sufficient to convince any
Mind, that is not hardened into Marble by its Obstinacy, and then not I, but the
Grace of God, must deal with it; I know not what else I could say, would do
that. I have purposely forborne to take notice of those excentrical Debates to
my Subject, that are eagerly bandied by some, as naturally arising from those
Texts I have cited: Since my present business calls for no more, but only to
clear the Point I have in hand from express and uncontrovertible Scripture.
Neither have I taken to Task any of these exceptions that men of several
Persuasions offer to those Quotations; because it cannot yet appear whether or
not they meet with that Sense and Meaning of these, which I am persuaded is the
only true one; and because too it were an endless labor to answer all the vain
Quirks and Whimsies that Prejudice thrusts into an easy Brain. Wherefore I go
on to the second thing proposed;

That the Obligation from Conscience to be subject to the Supreme Authority,
lays the surest foundation that can be for supporting the whole weight of
Government from crumbling down into pieces. It is the very Rock upon which the
House is built; whereas all other engagments are but the rolling Sand, which
every Wind of Tumult, and every Flood of Rebellion, drives from under the
tottering Fabric that leans upon it. The Law of Nature indeed were fully
sufficient to consolidat the whole Structure; were it now capable to exert that
entire vigor which is originally entwisted with its very being. For that Law
is sober and unbiased Reason, suggesting all requisite Means toward our
Preservation and Felicity: And all Governments owe their first rise, to such an
end; and are only yielded unto, as the most universal way to obtain it. And so
wherever the unadulterated Principles of pure Reason were exactly observed,
there would be no possibility there for any such Invasions upon the Government,
as would in the event come to subvert it. Because every individual Member of it
acting rationally, and therefore conform to the Genuine Designs of his own
Interest, all would unanimously conspire in promoting what all were equally
concerned in. But however much these plausible Schemes may tickle and please
the Fancy, when they are only considered by a Speculative Mind; yet they are no
sooner applied to the Matter of Fact of all the present Governments in the
World, than they vanish into mere Plat-forms for an Vtopian Commonwealth. Then
they are found too Thin and Aerial to underprop so huge a Load as is the whole
bulk of a Government. And we may think as soon to rear a Castle upon our
Summers Breath, as to put the stress of Government upon the Reason and
Ingenuity of Mankind in that depraved estate it now wallows in. I told you
before how much the Reason of Man is dimmed and weakened since Sin got the
Ascendant over it; and how little competent Forces it is endowed with for
atchieving so great an Affair, as is the settling the unalterable Poles of
Government. And I presume I need not tell you too, how much the whole Herd of
boisterous and unruly Passions grazes upon his Soul, and almost devours all the
remaining Sprouts of Reason in it, that still are growing up, tho leasurly, in
spite of every Tusk that would grubb it out, and every Hoove that would
trample it under. What haughty and aspiring Ambition puffs up the lofty
Imaginations of some People so, as nothing can put a stop to their climbing
Designs, till either a Crown, or a Halter do it? What sour Malice, What
cankering Envy, Levelled, either at a Disappointment from the Throne, or the
swollen Courtship of a happy Competitor, so embitters the Gall of others, that
nothing can allay its Venom, but the Swilling up the sweet, because satiating
Blood of those from whom such an offense took its Birth? What unbounded Avarice
and Covetousness so Widens the desires of others, as nothing can tollerably
fill them, unless it be the whole Revenue of a Kingdom, and the expectation of
what can be squeezed from the Subjects to Boot? And what Meddling and
Pragmatical Humor so busies the Vanity of others, that their Volatile and
Mercurial Disposition can never be fixed till it be tempered with the Gold of
the Diadem, or the Lead upon the Block? Would to God this day had never proved
the fatal Demonstration how sadly such unweildy Passions can triumph and vapor
it over all the Rational Powers of Mankind! But I am not to forestall the
allotted part of my Discourse to this. Only how feeble were the Sinews of that
Government, which derived all their strength from such a defeated, such a
baffled, such an emasculated Reason?

And as these fiercest Passions do thus transport the Olivers, the huge
Leviathans that swallow up the Sovereign Power: So do they furiously set a-work
these Underling Scramblers, whose only Game it is to Angle in troubled Waters;
Whose condition is already so low, that any Revolution may happen to improve
it, but which none can render worse; Or whose Piques and Animosities against
their Neighbors are so inveterate, and yet so cowardly, that, as it is only in
a Confusion they dare give the Stab, so they never fail to thrust it home when
they can have That; Or yet whose Itch and Affectation of being men of Intrigue
and business makes uncessantly to gape after Changes and Novelties, that may
afford Employment enough to their restless, their impatient Fingers. Now when
the Mobile, when the unthinking Multitude, is either put on the Wheels, and set
a-going by those more designing Statesmen, who take advantage of its Temper,
to bring about their own Turn; or else when it breaks out of its own accord
into Sedition or Rebellion, and involves all a-round into almost unquenchable
Combustions: Then must the Government, not be disturbed, not shaken, nor
endangered, but wholly un-hing'd and overturned; Unless that God who calms the
roaring Billows of the raging Sea shall lend his Omnipotence to rescue the
sinking State. And thus Reason is always at such a loss in all kinds of men,
that a Supreme Power that would lean upon it, would find it that bruised
Egyptian Reed, which at once disappoints, and wounds too.

Shall we then think that the terror of Civil Sanctions can do the Feat? It Is
true indeed that few considerations seldom constrain our obedience more, than
those apprehensions and fears which the grim Aspect of Death, of Poverty, or of
Infamy, shoots into us: As also, we are not much wont to be allured unto our
Duty by any Bait so forcibly, as by the Prospects of Honor and Riches. And so,
the Supreme Governors having all these, as well on the one side, as on the
other, much at their Disposal; they may be probably enough concluded to have
such a hank upon our hands, as will sufficiently keep us within a full
subjection to them. And the preference we daily give to the enjoyments of this
World before our biggest hopes of all that Eternity can bestow upon us, does
not a little confirm it. But yet, as you have freshly heard, the Passions of
Men are violent and headstrong; and like some Rapid Torrent, can overflow all
Banks, and impetuously bear down all the Obstacles, even of Danger, or of
Interest, they shall find in their way; but especially when Both is but at the
Venture, and This at a certain Remove has a more promising countenance than
their present Possession makes a show of. There are besides so many strange
Vicissitudes and Alterations incident to Humane Affairs, as frequently afford
occasion to those who are lying in wait for it, to set their forethought
Conspiracies a-work, and to burst out into all the Insolence that is needful
for, first disturbing, and then overturning, those who are above them. Now the
secret Thoughts, and underhand Clubbings and Caballings of Men, are not
immediately exposed to the Lash of the Law; and all the Insurrections in any
Nation spring from Plots and private Intrigues. Wherefore, as there will ever
be those whose Passions will instigate to mischief, and whom favorable
Conjunctures will invite to it; So that Government can never be sufficiently
provided for, which has not Shakles upon the very Minds of Mankind, as well as
upon their Hands, and Locks no less to the Doors of their Retirements, than to
those of their Prisons. And therefore unless a Civil Constitution could reach
further than the Public and notour actions of Men, it must be acknowledged to
come vastly short of what we are seeking. Add to all this, that every villainy,
every stroke at the Government, would be no less lawful, than it was
prosperous. And so nothing could Cajole and Flatter to the hope of Success, but
what would proportionably encourage the blackest designs and undertakings.

Wherefore without Conscience all must depend upon a mere May-be, and good
luck. But that once concurring with the Law of Nature, and that of the
Government, the Hell it self within us must break forth, and its Furies carry
along its Confusions with them, before ever the Sovereign Power can be shaken,
and far less trip'd up. For Conscience makes us content in every Condition, and
not to be still at Grasping more than is convenient for that Station Providence
has assigned us. It ingadges us to put off all manner of Wrath, Anger, and
Malice, to forbear one another, and to forgive our very Enemies, to do good for
evil; And so Transforms us from the Vulture to the Dove, sets our over-boiling
and fermented Blood into an orderly Motion, and Suppresses all those Storms
within us, that are so apt to bluster out in Tempest and Thunder toward
others. It teaches us not to care for the morrow, and to take no thought what
we shall eat, drink or put on; and thereby contracts those desires which push
us on to the most irregular Methods for satisfying them. And it confines us to
our own business at home, that we be not Bussie-bodies, or medale in other men's
affairs; And therefore checks all those first inclinations to vanity, that turn
us out a rambling, and let us seldom return, till we have gone about some
hazardous Exploit or other. And thus it prevents the earliest beginnings of
those Passions, that are wont to shock Commonwealths; and upon that account, it
gives more security to These* than any after Remedies can well be supposed to
do.

But it is also Conscience that penetrats into the very inmost corners and
recesses of our hearts; that not only Prescribes to, but also over-awes all
our thoughts, and most obscure Actions. And therefore it straitens us so, that
we must, either manage our selves according to the Rules set to us by our
Religion, and so according to the Eternal Measures of Justice and
Righteousness; or else desie God Almighty, and all the Devils in the
Bottomless* pit too. And however many Men may dare to out brave the utmost
Vengeance that can threaten their Bodies from the torturing Instruments of an
Executioner; Yet few are to be found of such a Sanguine Temer, but that the
fearful expectation of Judgment from Heaven upon their Souls, will Damp and
Appal them, will make their honest Blood to shiver, and shatter all their Bones
upon one another; provided their carreer be not so very Furious, as not to
allow them one moment for a Serious and Sedate Reflection. Now the great
business of all Supreme Power, is to procure Obedience and Submission; and the
great Springs upon which that moves, are Hope and Fear: And consequently that
will always prove most effectual to all the Designs of Government, which
proposes the most transcendent Rewards, and Punishments; and which extends
those most to all the Capacities we possess, as to all the Faculties by which
we can either Merit, or become Guilty. And so when Conscience obliges to no
more, but a short, and yet peaceable and quiet life, in all godliness and
honesty, under those whom Providence has placed over us; and when it ensures a
Crown of Glory afterward, for an orderly Subjection here, and a Lake of Fire
and Brimstone in the World to come, for having embroiled and confounded the
Affairs of this; when, I say, Conscience does so, what can be more proper to
answer the end of Government, than it is? In a word, by Conscience our
Alledgance is equally secured to our Sovereign, and to our God; and we cannot
Rebel against the Powers on Earth, but we must Fly in the Face of Those in
Heaven also. Our Souls are the Pawn of our Subjection; and we cannot incroach
upon This, but we must forefeit That, with all the Felicity we can ever lay
claim to, when this World, and all the Glory of it, has drawn its Skreen upon
us. And beyond this, the Wit of Man cannot invent any more pressing, and
inviolable^^ty. But as Conscience does thus restrain us from all Assaults upon
the Sovereign: So when one has fortuned to prevail over him, to Justle him out
of his Rightful Possession, and to usurp all the Power himself; even then
Conscience will attack him. It will force the Scepter from that hand, that has
unjustly snatched hold of it, that it may be returned to the true Owner. At
least it will convert that Scepter unto a Mace of Iron, to break his Sleep who
violently retains it, to powder his pleasantest Dreams, and to crush his quiet
in pieces. And this was the Fate of that horrid Usurper Oliver Cromwell, after
he had Seized the Inheritance of the Royal Martyr of this day. For it was
observed by all about him, especially that year before his death, what
Quackings and Convulsions he suffered in his Conscience, and under what
dreadful terrors he labored; doubling and re-doubling his Guards, as if he
had felt himself under Cains fears, that every one that should find him, would
kill him. And such Palpable Indications there were, that the Worm that never
dies, had already begun to gnaw upon his soul, to torment him before hand; That
our most extended Charity toward him, will allow him no milder thoughts, than
that his Resigning the Power he had Sacrilegiously made himself Master of on
Earth, was at once to leave it for him to whom it did justly belong, and to
undergo the Slavery of another Region, more suiteable to his Crimes, and to his
Genius too: This, I say, we must conclude of him; unless that Mercy, which is
infinite, did vouchsafe such a Wretch Repentance, like that of the Theif upon
the Cross, to prove a second evidence what Mercy can do, and how Hell when it
gapes widest can be frustrated. And hence Conscience stricks as much against
all the flattering hope of Success, and even Success it self; as against any of
those unlawful Passions, which either prompt, or carry foreward the Attempts of
Rebellious Subjects upon their Sovereign. And so it secures the Government on
all hands; because it universally reaches everything that may execute a Design
against it, or even may keep it under, when it has unfortunatly come to be so.

Wherefore it was the Policy, tho not the Religion, of Numa Pompilius, that
made him lay the first Stones of his Empire upon the belief of the Gods. And
Matchiavell himself could invent no more suitable Maxim for the security of
his Prince, than Si vis decipere Plebem, finge Deum. And upon this account it
was that Maximilian the first, was once of the design to have added the Papal
Miter to the Imperial Diadem. Therefore also did Mahomet render it Sacrilege
to attempt the Throne, and entail his Paradise upon those who should enslave
themselves to it. And hence it is, that the stoutest calumny that was ever fixed
upon Conscience by those that had gone farthest into Athiesm itself, never
mounted higher, than that it was but a certain Tool and Wheedle for advancing
the Interest of the State; all kinds of Men, however familiar they made
themselves with Conscience, being still conscious of it is Subserviency to the
Commonwealth.

But here it must be observed, that what I have said of Conscience in the
general, must be understood of such a one, as is only founded upon a true
Religion. I deny not that a blind and false Zeal may produce the same Effects
for a while, which the most well grounded Conviction can do. Yet, if the Bottom
be weak, the Superstructure cannot be strong. And a false Religion is so far
from being a sufficient security for any Government, that it is the only wonder
why it does not always redound to the greatest prejudice to it, that it can
suffer. For nothing bolsters up any Religion that is not true, but, either
Ignorance, or Passion. But the first step from being deceived in any thing, is
to learn that we were so: and we can no sooner do this, than we must reject and
cast off that. Passion also is but the sudden Flash of an unsteady Mind, and is
as liable to vary, as the Wind is to vere about from all Quarters* And so that
Religion which goes no deeper than these two, may indeed chance to continue a
long time; but if it do so, it is only by Chance that it does it. And therefore
all Governors whose Subjects were in a wrong Persuasion, had need in time to
cast about for some other more permanent Basis upon which to build their
Security, than the Consciences of their People in that estate could afford.
And, unless upon the very first detection of the Error, the Truth shall also be
discovered; and it is many an odds to one if it happens so; the having been
cheated by a pretended Religion were enough to make all those Bonds it imposed,
as well as to the Magistrate, as to any other Being, be flung away* and not
without a certain disdain and rage for having ever been so miserably gulled and
befooled. But whatever a false Conscience can do, yet it can never be
controverted but that a True one can do as much, and something more too.

I might now from all this draw several Inferences, which tho a little out of
my Road, might not be thought wholly impertinent* I shall only mention this
one; That therefore it is the Interest of all Government to settle and
establish the true Religion by the most sacred and inviolable Laws that
possibly can prove effectual to such a purpose. And tho there were nothing of
Interest in all this; yet by the very Rules of Justice and Gratitude no less
could be returned by any Government to that which tends so much to uphold and
preserve it; unless it should not do, as it is done by. And this I leave to the
Sense of all the World.

But now an Objection to what I have been saying, and which lies heavily upon
the Minds of many, offers it self in our way. And it is, That indeed this
Draught about Conscience is very agreeable and taking; But yet nevertheless,
when all the Constitutions in the World are impartially viewed, it appears that
there happens as few, and as little strange Revolutions in those, who either
have no Conscience at all, or at best but a very Erroneous one, whereupon to
settle their Foundations; as among us, who make the most Flourishing and
Splendid Pretentions to the best Form of Religion, that ever went under that
Title.

I must confess that our Christianity has been so ill abused by us, that
instead of our being conformed by it, to the Image of its Blessed Author, the
event has rather Metamorphos'd us to that horrible Shape, which ends in a
cloven Foot. And thus, tho none have ever gloried more in any thing, than we
have in our Profession; yet were our Lives and Practices thoroughly Examined by
any Stranger, they could not but be a shrewd Temptation to him to conclude,
that all the glittering show our Religion makes amongst us, serves only the
most sinistrously to guild over as ill, if not worse Vices, as the very
Heathens are blackened with. And no doubt it will the more Amazingly confound
us one day, when we shall be so far from having those excuses, the Pagans will
then have, to shroud ourselves from the Dregs of the Cup of Wrath and
Indignation; nay when the Hills and Mountains will not cover nor shelter us
from them.

But however, nothing follows upon all this, but that our Religion,
notwithstanding all its intrinsecal perfection, has not yet prevailed over that
stubborness of our Nature, which, not Religion, but Miracle, can only overcome.
And of all the fallacious consequences imaginable, none can be more unworthy,
than those by which the genius of Principles is inferred from that of Practice.
Upon whom ever then the reproach lies, sure it is, the least Umbrage of it can
never reach our Christianity. And this, as I have shown, is so fully
accommodated to settle the Interest of Government upon the most unmovable
Foundations, that it fears not to be outvyed by any other Scheme the greatest
of its Enemies can set in competition with it. And since the thing is
sufficiently accomplished for such an end, who knows how soon it shall please
God, in his infinite mercy, to make it take effect upon our most Reluctant,
most Obstinate Hearts and Temper. But I am not a little afraid, that the
greatest of all our mischiefs, have took their Rise from the mistaken design of
our Religion in some, and the perverse Interpretation of it in others. What if
the Supreme Powers should have ventured too far out upon the Confidence of that
Doctrine about Subjection, which perhaps was scru'd up by some till it left
Christianity to become a Complement? What if too many Subjects have so pared
and minced their Subjection, as hardly to have retained the very Name of it;
And even set up Religion itself, as the great Warrant to baffle the Speculation
of it, and the no less ground of Quarrel to do so with the Practice of it too.
Must true and undefiled Christianity be accountable for all this? Or shall Men
be so disingenuous as to cropped the ears of some of their own kind, because an
Ape has done some trick or other? shall they be-spatter Christianity, because
the Mis-representations of it have occasioned such wrong Steps? But that
Objection will best be unravelled by what I am further to say. And therefore I
proceed to the third Particular of my Design.

We have seen how peremptorily our Christian Religion obliges us to be Subject
to the Higher Powers; and also how very much the Obligation from it is
necessary to any solid being and subsistence of Government. It cannot then but
nearly concern us rightly to know what the Nature of this Subjection is, and
how it is justly to be limited, for answering the end for which it was
appointed.

But before I can enter upon this, I must first tell you, That our Blessed
Lord, foreseeing what vast Confusions any Alterations in any of the Governments
in the World would produce, did attemperate his Religion, so to all of them,
that none could have but reason to thank him for that Great Accession to all
their former Constitutions, which the Obligation from Conscience added; and as
few could have pretense to blame him for any innovation he had introduced upon
the Ancient Terms of Subjection, whereby each individual Form subsisted before.
We all know that the matter of the Angelical Hymn at his Nativity was Peace on
earth, and good will toward man. And this was so true, even in that sense which
most obviously suites the present purpose, that, as I told you in this
beginning of the Discourse, there never was any Institution so thoroughly
accommodated to the Peace of the World, as that Religion which he imparted to
Mankind. But if he had taken upon him to change the External Forms and Polities
of civil Governments, he had done a thing so far from establishing Peace on the
Earth, that he had intentionally done what was to be but an accidental event of
his coming* he had sent fire on the earth; had not given peace on earth, but
rather division, had not sent peace, but a sword. For if the Christian Religion
had invaded the Rights of the Supreme Powers, had curtailed any of those
Royalties that were inherent in their Crowns, by the Laws of Nature, as they
were Sovereigns, or by Those of the Nations over which they ruled; Then it
could not but have given such Scandal and Offense to all the Princes of the
World, as had no less inevitably, than Literally, made them upon that very
sense, accomplish that of the second Psalm, The Kings of the earth set
themselves, and the Rulers take counsel together, against the Lord, and against
his Anointed; saying, let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their
cords from us. Because, as all men are wont to the utmost of their Power to be
tenacious of their Rights; so none have more reason to be so, than those who
have them in the Title of Soveraignity. On the other hand, if Christianity had
entrenched upon the Rights and Privileges of the Subject, or had imposed
Slavery, where there was no more but Subjection, Then had it given so much
prejudice to, and raised such an excusable aversion in all those, whose Lot had
been so good, as not to be sunk into the lowest condition Mankind can be
depressed into, and yet so moderat, as to be inviolably bound to aninferior
Station, that Chains, and It had been equally inviting to them. Since there are
such Charms and Allurements in the very remissest degree of Liberty and
Property, that no consideration can be able to dull or blunt them, but of that
Necessity, which is only tolerable, because it cannot be resisted. Our Savior
therefore (as the excellent Doctor Sherlock says in his Case of Resistance,
Page 46.) Left the Government of the World, as he found it: he has indeed given
such admirable Laws, as will teach Princes to govern, and Subjects to obey
better; which is the most effectual way to secure the Public Peace and
Happiness, to prevent the Oppression of Subjects, and Rebellion against
Princes: but he has not interposed in new Modelling the Governments of the
World. And so he did no more but enforce that obedience to Princes which was
antecedently due by the Law of Nature, or the Civil Constitution of the
Commonwealth, by the prevalency of Conscience; without laying any further tie
upon Subjects, as to the Matter of their Duty; the Motive to it being the only
thing he was concerned in; as not sustaining the Person of a Temporal, but only
of a Spiritual Prince.

Neither is there any thing to the contrary in all the New Testament, either
from any Sentence our Savior is recorded to have spoke, or any Action he did
that is transmitted unto us, or yet from any Doctrine his Apostles ever Taught
or Practiced; as will appear to every one who shall most narrowly go over that
Book. And if a Negative Argument can have any force at all, it must undoubtedly
be allowed to have it here; when it can never be supposed that an Affair so
very important to the World, as would have been the setting a new Pattern for
Government upon the Obligation from Conscience, would have been past over in
silence by those inspired Writers, who were only so, to leave sufficient Rules
for every thing that concerned the substance of our Religion.

Nay, there are great hints toward the Positive; as is manifest by that
forecited Passage touching our Saviors answer to the Herodians: And I shall
not need to say more to it upon the present occasion, than what Doctor Sherlock
inferrs in his lately cited Book, Page 55, 56. First, says he, That our
Savior did not intend to make any alteration in the Rights of Sovereignty, but
what Rights he found Sovereign Princes possessed of, he leaves them in the quiet
possession of; for had he intended to make any change in this matter, he would
not have given such a general Rule, To render to Caesar the things which are
Cesar's, without specifying what these things are. Secondly, And therefore he
leaves them to the known Laws of the Empire to determine what is Cesars Right.
Whatever is essential to the notion of Sovereign Power, whatever the Laws and
Customs of Nations determine to be Cesars Right, that they must render to him;
for he would make no alteration in this matter. And Thirdly, That when our
Savior joins our duty to our Prince, with our duty to our God, he excepts
nothing from Cesar's Right, which by the Laws of Nations is due to Sovereign
Princes, but what is a violation of, and an encroachment on Gods Right and
Sovereignty. Now what he says here of the Rights of Princes, is by consequence
the same, as to the Rights of Subjects. For, as he himself, Page 45, reasonably
concludes, our Savior could not alter the duties of Subjects, but he must
alter the Rights of Princes too: And therefore in the Reverse, he could not
have diminished or aggrandiz'd the Rights of Princes; but he must have done so
with the Duties or Rights of Subjects also; the Rights of Princes and of
Subjects being Correlatives to one another. This also will be found evident
enough by any who shall impartially consider the answers our Lord gave Pilate
when he was arraigned before him.

This then, as it is a general Principle about our Saviors Doctrine concerning
Subjection, is quite out of doors as to any debate, either among the Divines of
our own, or among those of our Neighbor Church. And from this Principle the
Nature and Extent of Subjection is to be deduced. So that now the only
difficulty consists in drawing such plain and natural consequences from it, as
easily flow without any force or compulsion.

First then, all Subjects are upon their Conscience to yield their Sovereign
all those Rights and Dues which by the peculiar Constitution in which they
live, He can Legally exact of them* Otherwise our Savior had Abridg'd the
Rights of the Supreme Powers. On the contrary, the whole Body of the Subjects
is not obliged by Conscience to give the Sovereign more than what by the
established Form of the Government he has a just Title to; all that is more
than this being wholly left to their choice and discretion; I mean that since
they are not obliged to more upon the point of strict Justice and Right, so
neither are they upon the point of Conscience by any tie from the Christian
Religion. Otherwise our Savior had encroached upon the Rights of the Subject.
I said The whole Body of the Subjects; because no private man has any Right by
virtue of the Constitution of the Government, but only as he is a Member of the
Commonwealth, under that Reduplication; and so it is properly and originally
the whole Body only in which any single Subjects Right is lodged.

Secondly, The Sovereign is, either invested with such an Absolute Power, as
leaves the whole Body of the Subjects no Right at all, nothing that is further
their own than as he pleases; Or he is not, and the Subjects have an entire and
uncontrovertible Right to such and such things as by the Constitution of the
Government are reserved to them so, that the Fundamental Constitution must be
violated by every attempt the Sovereign makes upon them. If the former; then
Subjects are not to deny their Sovereign any thing, but what interferes with
the duty they owe their God; And by Conscience they are bound to this. If the
latter, then there must be fixed and settled Laws whereby the Rights betwixt the
Sovereign and the Subject are contradistinguished from each other; and these
Laws must be mutual evidence of the Rights of both; so that so long as they
stand in force and unrepealed, neither the One, nor the Other, can transgress
them, without invading the opposite Right. For where there is no Law, there by
the common Law of Nations all falls to the Sovereign; as where there is Law,
the Rights are divided betwixt him and the Subject. Now the Subjects are to
learn their Rights from the Laws of the Land wherein they live; nothing else
being competent to afford them instruction in that matter. And what these Laws
bind them to, they are upon their Conscience to perform. But if more be
required, they are not obliged by Conscience to yield it; according to what I
showed before.

Thirdly, There must always be some kind of undefineable Power lodged in the
Sovereign, which no Laws can express, but which only certain extraordinary
Emergencies in the State can bring out. For it is quite impossible for the
greatest and most combined Wisdom, that is but Humane, to provide sufficiently
for all that may happen. And therefore the exertion of that Power must in the
construction of the Law be interpreted to be legal, when those Occurrences that
call for it, do in a just Analogy to the whole Body of the Law, sufficiently
appear to be such, as presumably would have been determined by the Law to have
required such an interposition of the Sovereign, had they been thought upon
when Laws were a making. And even as to this the Subject is tied by Conscience
to submit. Since otherwise the obligation from it would directly contradict
that Trust, or essential ingredient of the Sovereignty, which the not
prognosticated exigencies of the Commonwealth do render necessary to be
reposed, or involved, in the Supreme Power. But on the other hand, there is
something included in the Liberty of the Subject that fully corresponds to that
Prerogative Power in the Sovereign. For wherever there are Laws, there is a
mutual Right betwixt the Sovereign and the Subject; else why a Subject, and not
a Slave? according to the immediately preceding Point. When therefore that
eminent exercise of the Subjects Liberty happens to become indispensable,
unless he should suffer himself to degenerate below that Title; Conscience does
not interess it self to restrain him from his native Privilege. Otherwise the
Obligation from it would plainly contradict that Right he has to the end of the
Government, or to the Laws settled by it; and so our Savior had innovated upon
the Subjects Right. And indeed whenever the Prerogative is stretched so far as
to be made a Pretense for overturning the Subjects Right, or introducing such
an illimited Power in the Sovereign as wholly evacuats the Property and
Privilege of the Subject, so as upon the matter to change his state of
Subjection into that Slavery; Then, if the Constitution under which the Subject
lives does allow it, the Subject may by all the just Means he can be master of,
vindicate his own Right, and ridd himself from all those incroaching
usurpations upon it, which give him sufficient ground of being allarmed. It
cannot indeed be easily conceived how the Subject can have Right in the Laws,
and not have Right to all those necessary Means by which he can secure his
Right in the Laws. For otherwise his Right in the Laws were essentially
frustraneous; since every End is so, that cannot be attained by any requisite
Means. And so it were the same thing upon the event to him, whether he had any
Right in the Laws, or not; as seems palpable. But whatever be in this,
Conscience is not at all concerned since it lays no check upon the Subject from
making use of that Civil Right he can claim by the Laws of that Government of
which he is a Member. In short then, whatever Subjects can lawfully do by
virtue of the special Constitution in which their lot is cast, that Conscience
permits unto them, without any restriction or limitation.

Wherefore Fourthly, Those Subjects who have Right in the Laws, have also Right
to be Judge when their Laws are attacked; or when the Sovereign is embarked in
a Design to enslave them. Otherwise all their Right in the Laws, and all their
Right to Means whereby they may possess themselves of what the Laws provide for
them, were necessarily incapable of bettering their estate, more than when they
were under the most absolute and illimited Government. Because Right without a
Judge, to determine where, and when it belongs, and when it is violated or
invaded, is all one as no Right at all. Since before any Right can take place,
there must be the Decision of a Judge that it ought to do so. And consequently
where there can be no Decision in the Case, there the Right must absolutely be
ineffectual; that is, it must be the immediate consequent of mere Slavery, or
an empty sound without any import or signification. Now there can be no other
Judge had in this matter, than the Body of the Subjects; as is clear. For there
is no other that could be so, but the Sovereign; and it could not be expected
that he would condemn himself; and besides, if to pass the Judgment were
referred to him, he would no less be Judge in his own Cause. The advantage then
that here the Subject has over the Sovereign, is founded in the original end of
the Government; which is the Right and Property of the Subject; who can have no
benefit by either, unless in such an extraordinary case he could be his own
Judge; as is just now showed. Neither can the Sovereign be justly aggrieved
hereby: since, as to point of Conscience, his Subjects must first attempt God,
before they can him, without just ground; and without Conscience nothing but
mere Force and Power can preserve him at all, and so long as he has this, he
can be in no danger at any rate. But in all this we must not forget that it is
only the whole Body of the Subjects that is to be understood. Now Conscience
does not meddle further as to this, than only to in fluence the Subjects, that
neither Passion nor Interest act them, when they are constrained to Judge, when
the Sovereign has broke through all the Hedges whereby their Liberty was
preserved; and that they should deal impartially, as those* who must one day
answer before the Tribunal of the Judge of the Quick and the Dead, for what
they have pronounced in an affair of the highest concernment and importance.
For they had need to observe a due Caution; and they ought still to choose the
safest side, and that too with such a latitude as does not manifestly infer
some most considerable prejudice to the primitive design, why the Government
was so or so constituted at first: So that when the Prerogative is exerced, the
Subject must not without great ground pretend that it goes without its Sphere;
and when the Subjects Liberty takes place, he must not without certain, and
imminent, and extraordinary danger threatening him, adventure to assert it.
Since by Conscience the Subject is obliged to be submissive to the Higher
Powers; and in so nice a business it is but to fall over the Precipice, to ride
closs upon God Almighties Marches.

Lastly, I shall add as a certain Conclusion from what has been Discoursed,
That where the Subject has any Right, or is necessarily required, either as a
Condition, or a Constitutive Part, to the making the Laws; so that both the
Prince and the People have a Negative Vote upon each other: There the Supreme
Power, in the utmost extent of that Term, is only lodged in the Prince and
People together, as composing that entire Body from which the Sovereign
Authority does flow; the Princes Sanction being materially no more but the
expression of his Consent. For if the Subject has right to the Laws, either it
lies in his option to consent to the cancelling and abrogating them, so that
they cannot be really annulled without he himself shall Vote for the annulling
of them; or else his Right in them would be but a Sham one, and he needed
expect no further Protection from them, than what, and so long as the Princes
Humor should list* and so in effect he were but a Slave, whatever pretense he
had to be a Subject. Supposing therefore that, neither old Laws can be
repealed, nor new ones made, without the consent of the Subject; It is evident
that, whatever eminent Power the Prince is invested with, yet that which is
entirely Absolute and Supreme, in the present Sense, does not wholly reside in
his Person. Otherwise, why were the Subjects Consent so indispensaby necessary
in the most important matter that concerns the Government? and why would not
the Princes mere Arbitrary Will be as valid, as the most solemnly approved Laws
can be? The great difference then between a limited and an illimited
Sovereignty is, that in the former the Prince has no more but a certain share
of the Supreme Power, whereas in the latter he has it all solely to himself;
and in the former the Prince and the People together have but just so much
among them as in the latter the Prince has alone. But tho such a limited Prince
can claim but partially the Supreme Power, as to the abrogating or making of
the Laws; yet as to the putting those that are made in Execution, the whole
Supreme Power may be in his hands; and is actually so in those of the most
Princes that are undenyably under Limitation upon the other respect. It being
essential, at least very requisite to the Being of a Monarch, to have the
Government to depend so far upon him, as his being invested with this Power
implies it should. Yet notwithstanding, the Exercise of this Power ought to be
regulated and measured according to the Laws; so as that whenever it tends to
subvert the Constitution, and trample the Laws under-foot, and consequently to
assume to it as Absolute a Power in Making Laws, as it self is in Executing
them; then an obsequiousness to it is not so incumbent upon the Subject, but
that he may assert his own Right and Property the best way he can. Otherwise a
limited Monarch were a mere contradiction; and what he wanted in the one hand,
he would have fully recompensed in the other; And therefore, according to all
said before, he could not have Subjects, but only Slaves. Now what Conscience
obliges unto, with relation both to the Legislative Power, and to the
Executive, needs not any further be told.

Thus I have endeavored to resolve the Point of Conscience in this Affair
about Subjection. And, as far as I could, I have only carried along with me the
Thread of those Consequences which freely arise from that general Principle
told you before, and which is acknowledged by all; together with what is
obviously suggested by the common Dictates of our Natural Reason. I have not
presumed to condescend upon the particular Constitution of our own Nation; that
being none of my Province, and not thinking it pertinent at this time to mingle
the Minister and the Lawyer together. Nevertheless it may be easy for every
body concerned, to compare what has been said with our special Form; and so to
satisfy their Consciences as to all the Rencounters they may meet with upon
this head.

I shall now show, First, That this Doctrine is so far from being derogatory to
any Prince, that it serves mightily to Enhance and Aggrandize all, and
especially those who are so, over Subjects, and not Slaves; Secondly, That it
is consonant to the design of my Text, and those other Scriptures that I
adduced for proving in the general, that our Religion imposes upon us the duty
of Subjection to the Higher Powers; And then, That those Exceptions that may be
made to it, are founded upon sad mistakes, both as to the intention of our
Savior and his Apostles, in commanding that Duty, and as to the nature of the
thing it self.

First then, If any Prince be an illimited Sovereign, what can redound more to
his Glory, than to have a whole Empire of Slaves cringing to his nod, more
because of the impulse of Conscience, than of Fear and Awe? But a King that
rules over Subjects and Freemen, cannot but gain proportionably more by their
being obliged from Conscience to pay their Duty to him; than can the Great Turk
or Mogull, by having such a tie upon their Slaves, tho they have all to expect
that perhaps their Caprice can demand. For then an Emperor and his Slaves makes
the nearest resemblance to a Shepherd and his Flock. They look like two
different kinds of Creatures; and are driven assunder to the utmost Extremes:
So that the pleasure of the Government must be derived from some thing else
than Reason; it must be the necessary result of a blind Ambition, of an
extravagant Humor and Vanity. Neither can there ever be those franker
communications betwixt such a Prince, and such a People, which might treat him
with the satisfaction of a Man, and rationally sweeten all the Cares that
attend a Scepter. Besides, there lies no fewer nor lighter burdens upon the
Conscience of such Slaves to choke and stiffle it, than there does upon
themselves, to bear down and suppress those Inclinations to Liberty, which are
inseparable from all men, that had ever the least glimpse of what it was. And
therefore, tho they are bound by Conscience to obey; yet, considering that
Oppression makes wisemen mad, and that our frail Nature seldom bears much and
long out against violent Temptations, even when it is assisted by all the
forces of Conscience; considering this* I say, that Government must be but
weakly supported, which has but so little of Conscience in it to Cement its
Foundations; as will not be questioned by those who have given an impartial ear
to what was said on the second Head of this Discourse, or who shall peruse the
History of the Turkish Empire. But when we turn over the Medal, then do we see
the best Land-skip of Heaven that any thing on Earth can afford. A King seated
on a Throne among Subjects, that want only Sin enough to be Kings themselves;
that at once Love and Adore Him whose Commands are their Glory; that envy Him
nothing but a share of his Troubles by the Crown; and that have their Lives and
Fortunes, not only a readier, but a surer Sacrifice to be offered up to His
Service, than are those of the profoundest Slaves, whose eyes dare not look
above the Footstool of their Sovereign. It were easy for a florid and
pathetick Eloquence to set forth this Subject with such lively, but deserved,
Charms, as might enamour the most obstinate hearts against Monarchy with it,
and ravish their Admiration, and their Affection too, in spite of all their
Reluctancies and Prejudices. But if the very nature of the thing be so
enticeing; What must it be when Conscience improves all? When Inclination has
it to second its influence? And when it has no just provocation to graple with
it? Let the most Speculative Wits, let the best contrived Romances, now
compear, and in their highest Vies, show us any thing, that can make a King so
truly Great and Splendid. Wherefore it is a King of Men, and not of Cattle; a
King that has free Subjects left to the swing of their Conscience, and not
Slaves, in which hardly the Embers of Conscience can sparkle through those
Ashes of Illimited Power by which it is smothered; It is only such a King that
has the justest claim to so proud, so pompous a Title. And hence it has
frequently come to pass that those, whose first Right to it was only that of
Conquest, have been so sensible of this, that they have voluntarily granted to
their People such Rights and Privileges, as might elevate them to the Degree
of Subjects, above that most contemptible Depression of Slaves. And this they
sound the properest method to promote their Glory, and settle their Interest;
reckoning it below their Generous Minds to trample upon the Necks of those who
could willingly crouch to the Foot that did so; and too ticklish for their
security to vapor it over those who could not. For whatever they saw was to be
reposed in Force, and Conscience, when abstractly viewed; yet they concluded it
was much more safe to take off all those weights from their power by which it
was most grievously felt, and not to load Conscience too heavily with Rigid and
Arbitrary Impositions; when these are so very irritating to flesh and blood, as
the practice of the World goes.

And we have an eminent instance of this in the Emperor Theodosius, Cod. Lib.
1. Tit. 14. Leg. 4. Digna vox est Majestate regnanis, legibus allegatum se
principem profiteri. Adeo de authoritate juris, nostra pendet authoritas: and
revera majus imperio est submit^ere legibus principatum. Et oraculo praesentis
edicti, quod nobis licere non p^tiniur, aliis indicamus. As, Leg. 8. Humanum
esse probamus, si quid de caetero in publica privatave causa emerserit
necessarium, quod formam generalem and antiquis legibus non insertam exposcat,
id ab omnibus antea tam proceribus nostri palatii, quam gloriosissimo ^aetu
vestro* Patres conscripti, tractari: and si universis tam judicibus* quam vobis
placueri^* tunc legata dictari: and sic ea denuo collectis omnibus recenseri:
and cum omnes consenserint, tunc demum in sacro nostri numinis consistorio
recitari, ut universorum consensus, nostrae serenitatis auctoritate ^i^metur.
S^itote igitur, Patres conscripti, non aliter in posterum legem a nostra
clementia promulgandam, nisi supradicta forma fuerit observata. Been enim
cognoscimus, quod cum vestro consilio ^uerit ordinatum, id ad Beatitudinem
nostri Imperii, and ad Nostram Gloriam redundare.

It is therefore the advantage of all Supreme Powers, to understand that their
Humor is not to be their Law; and that they are never with a sufficient Ray
about their Heads, nor have their Thrones fastened with Chains enough Adamantine
for their establishment, but when their Subjects Rights are as Sacred to them,
as is their own. Neither have ever any Vermin holl'd the Throne more, than
these flattering Parasites, that, contrary to the inward Sentiments of their
own Minds, contrary to the Dictats of their Consciences before God, and as much
contrary to the true Interest of the Monarch, as of the Subject, have laid
themselves most out to infuse the biggest, the most swollen thoughts of the
Sovereign Authority into his Imagination who possessed it. And the experience of
all Ages furnishes us with sad attestations to this. But to make Religion a
pretense for all, and under the color of it to steal in the deadliest Poison
into the heart of a King, is to vouch Wickedness by Almighty God, and to injure
Heaven as much as Earth: Besides that, Religion is one of those Strings, which
too much bending will crack; and besides too, that nothing gives a more amazing
disappointment, than when a stress was put upon some fond Excess of Religion,
and all other things failing, that begun most totally to do so. By this time
then, I hope none will think that those Measures to which I have fixed our
Subjection upon the point of Conscience, are not fully more Loyal, because more
solid; than the highest Stretches ever were, or ever shall be made, by the most
sneaking Sycophants for insinuating themselves upon their Princes Favor.

Now that These are not the design of my Text, or any other in the New
Testament, needs not much pains to be made clear. For it is palpable by what S.
Paul says in those preceding and following verses, and by that Passage I
cited from St Peter, that the Question among those to whom they Wrote was not,
Whether or not Subjects were bound by their Consciences to be subject to the
Higher Powers beyond those Limits which the Constitution under which they lived
set them; but only, Whether Christianity loosed all the bonds of Subjection
from those that professed it, and proclaimed to them an absolute and universal
Liberty from all submission to those Powers that Governed at the time?
Otherwise S. Paul had argued very impertinently, when he endeavored to
persuade the Romans to Subjection, because Rulers are not a terror to good
works, but to the evil; Will thou then not be afraid of the Power? do that
which is good, and thou shall have praise of the same; For he is the Minister
of God to thee for good; But if thou do that which is evil, be afraid; for he
bears not the sword in vain; for he is the Minister of God, a revenger to
execute wrath to him that does evil. It were to suspect a strange want in my
Hearers, to offer at any more, besides the repeating these Words over. Saint
Peter also had struck very wide, had he intended to exhort unto such a
submission, when he gave no other reason for That he was pressing, than that
the Governors are for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them
that do well; and therefore no liberty was to be used for a cloak of
maliciousness. The truth is, the most probable Conjecture that can be made of
the occasion, why these two Apostles wrote upon this Point, is, that the
believing Jews, who were mingled among the Gentile Converts, had made it their
business to draw over These to that Doctrine concerning Subjection to the
Supreme Powers, which themselves, when Jews, had been trained up in, and which,
now when they were Christians, they had not abandoned, nor laid down. We are
not ignorant, how tenacious that People was of every Circumstance, every
Punctilio of their old Religion, that was not Diametrically opposite to the
bare Profession of the Christian. It was therefore a most peremptory Maxim
among the Jews, that their Government was an immediate Theocracy; and that,
since Gods Exchequer needed no Tribute Money to be paid to it, they were not
to condescend to such an exaction by any other Power, but because such a Force
lay on them, as they were not able to resist. And so we may rationally
conclude, that they had set about the perverting their fellow Proselyts to the
same Belief, and the prevailing with them not to yield any further to the Roman
Yoke, under which they were then, but in so far as they could not with any
tolerable safety help it: And that these Apostles, foreseeing how injurious
such a Tenet was to the true design of Christianity, and what sad consequences
it might be the source of to those who should embrace it; did vehemently use
their Authority, to stiffle it in the Bud, and to reason those out of it, whom
it might have tainted. Neither shall we find many Texts that do more palpably
suggest the circumstances in which they were written. Nay further, S. Paul
seems directly to touch this by the first, and so most apposite Argument he
employed, for there is no Power but of God, and the powers that be are ordained
of God, whosoever therefore resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of
God: As if he had said, All that stumbles you is, because you think no Power
can be lawfully submitted to, but the Power of God; Why then do you refuse
Subjection to Higher Powers, for there is none of them, but whom God has
Authorized in their Office, and invested with Power by his Sanction.

However, it is manifest to the half of an eye, that no such Subjection can be
meant by those Apostles, as is inconsistent with those Rights the Subject has
in virtue of that Constitution in which he lives, as they are considered
antecedently to any Obligation from Conscience. At least those who will be of
the contrary Opinion must first prove that Our Savior did really alter the
Rights of Sovereigns and Subjects, and make all Those unboundedly Absolute
Powers, and These entirely and irreservedly Slaves. For the Word Subjection, or
that Submission, or that Resistance, is too General and Equivocal to infer any
such thing of it self; especially when it is to be Interpreted only with regard
to the Correlative Matter to which it is applied. And if such a Subjection had
been then in either of these Apostles view, they had certainly been more
Express and Particular in Determining the Extent of it; Since it would have
been a thing wherein the whole Body of Mankind could not but have been most
nearly concerned; and which all would have expounded in the most favorable
Sense that could have been contrived, and that even when the most punctual
caution had been used, to render the odious one beyond the hazard of being
controverted.

Yet I know there has no small pretenses been made to the contrary. And first
it is said, That the very notion of a King does especially imply such an
Absolute Power, as is quite irreconciliable with any other Obedience in the
Subjects, than what is such, that the greatest wrongs they can suffer, can
never justify their not behaving Passively at least: And that therefore Our
Savior, and his Apostles, could not but mean such a Subjection, when they
recommended any at all. To this I answer, That it is plainly false that the
Notion of a King involves any such thing, as the Word King, is generally taken;
unless it shall be granted, that there is no possible distinction upon the
Matter betwixt a subject and a Slave. And it is an infinite Error for one to
let his thoughts pore constantly upon the Notion of a King, without allowing
some cool ones to reflect what kind of Creatures a King is to Rule over. If
therefore it shall not be denied, that Subjects have a true and real and
practical Right in the Laws, and not only such an Imaginary and Speculative,
and Ineffectual one, as some please themselves with; Then either a King may
have a limited Power, or, if it must be so, none is a King, but who is it at
the rate the Grand Signor is so. And yet if that be only to be a King, those
who are mostly Kings, because over Subjects, need not grudge Him the Monopoly
of the Title; and whatever other they shall assume, as their peculiar, will
sound as much more big, as its being Special to them, will render it more
deserving that it should. Wherefore there was no necessity upon Our Savior to
calculate the Measures of Subjection unto this Notion of a King.

In the next Place, it is Alleged, That without an absolutely irresistible
Power in the Sovereign, the peace of no Nation can be preserved; Because no
Government can be so very exactly well balanced, but that there will always be
many discontented Persons under it, either because things do not answer their
own expectations, or because of those other Passions which are wont, not more
to ferment Men's Minds, than to raise Commotions in the Commonwealth. And
therefore, if Subjects had the Liberty to start a Quarrel with their Sovereign,
and then to Judge of the sufficiency of that themselves, and after all to frame
a new Model after their own Humor; there could be no settled quiet in any State
at all, but one Confusion would still succeed upon the neck of another, and
nothing could put an end to them, but that which would do so to this World. Now
Our Savior must needs have, either done very little or no good to Mankind, by
all that he taught concerning Subjection; or else laid bonds upon all Subjects
to carry patiently under all the injuries they could suffer from their Princes,
this being the only way possible to prevent such disorders, and perpetual
Insurrections. But still I answer, That this* either proves that a Subject and
a Slave is the very same thing, or else it proves nothing at all; as is
manifest by what was said in these Inferences, by which I deduced that, against
which this Objection is Levelled, upon the mere supposition of a certain Right
and Property lodged in the Subject. Therefore I doubt not, but all will
acknowledge that, if it proves a Subject to be the same with a Slave, it proves
too much* and this ends in a short way of Arguing. But not barely to cut the
knot; It is not every Picque or Grievance that will infer such a wrong from the
Sovereign, as can justify so high a Redress. And I told you before, that the
Subjects are obliged by Conscience not to bestir themselves till a most
important and impendent Danger should threaten the Subversion of the Government
it self. And since the Laws of a Nation, and the Essentials of its
Constitution, are patent to every body; It is not morally presumeable, that the
most considerable Part of the Subjects, will in spite, not of their Honor,
but their very Consciences, concur in an attempt, where the mistake cannot but
be as evident, as they must know it will be fatal, tho none but God should
punish it. Where ever then Conscience gets freedom to work, it will undoubtedly
secure the peace of any People, whose Sovereign has not been so excessively
unjust unto them, that if a storm falls upon him, he has only himself to blame
for it. And that Our Savior, should have raised such a Fence about those, who
could so little merit it at his hands (when they must first violate their
Consciences, before they can give any provocation of that nature to their
Subjects, by endeavoring to tyrannize it over them); were too odd to imagine
of him, who was the Preacher of Righteousness. Besides, if Conscience cannot
keep the Peace of a Nation, when there can be no just temptation to break it;
certainly it would far less do so, when the instigations that flow from
Self-preservation would drive on our depraved Natures to gagg it for a while,
till we should put our selves in the condition of being more at Gods mercy,
than at Man's. For the greater the Temptations be, the less proportionably of
vigor and force has Conscience in the most part of men. And when there would
be so great a struggle to be made by Flesh and Blood, against Violence and
Oppression; Conscience would much sooner succumb and quite the Field; Than when
we were only to deal with those impatiencies and frettings, with this ambitious
temper, or that sour thought, which we could not but be ashamed of, when ever
we returned again to our selves. And upon this account Our Savior has better
consulted the Security of Kings, and the tranquillity of Subjects: than if he
had carried the Obligation of Conscience to such an unmeasurable length, as
some would be at thinking it should go to. For if we were implicitly upon all
emergencies to submit, 'twere many to one, but that at long run, we would come
to be so despaired of our estate, as rather to choose once for all to give our
Conscience a pull, and to attempt a Freedom, which needed not occasion its
being so troublesome to us any more. And we know already what a sandy
Foundation the best formed Government would have, if Conscience did not Support
it. It is true, God in his Providence does sometimes permit a Nation to be its
own Scourge, by persecuting a Prince which is its Glory and Happiness; and
needlessly, nay wantonly embroiling it self, when it wallows in Plenty and
Prosperity. And this day furnishes us with as deplorable an Instance of that,
as ever any other day did any other Nation. But as that is owing to a Peoples
own Sins; so as they would never repeat the Mischief, let them beware not to
reiterate the Causes of it* And at least this advantage may be gathered from
it, that the most foreward and heated People have an example before their eyes,
how much Conscience can be trampled under, and how much the most sober
Principles can be misapplyed and abused. But I shall have occasion afterward
to speak somewhat more to this.

But further it is Objected, That a King may be any thing else, if he be
inferior to his People: And if he be their Superior, then it is manifest that
he cannot be accountable to them; it being repugnant to the very being of a
Superior, to be subject to those, who are subject to him. And therefore a King
is loosed from all Laws; neither can any bind him; These being his Laws, and
appointed only for tying the Subjects. And hence our Savior must, either have
not understood the Power and Dignity of a King; or else designed to oblige all
Subjects to what That imports. But still the Subect and the Slave are
confounded, and mixed together. However, I ask those who depend upon this,
whether or not the Subject has such a Right in the Laws, that the Prince cannot
make, or repeal any without him? If he has, as he must have, if he be a
Subject; then the Laws are not so entirely the Kings, but they are the Subjects
too. It is indeed the Kings Glory and Advantage to Rule his Subjects by Laws;
But it is also the Subjects Privilege and Security to be ruled by them. And if
the eminency of Splendour, which redounds from the Laws, falls to the Kings
share; and if also That be sufficient to sound the common denomination of
Property: Then no Subject can reasonably envy his Sovereigns ascribing the
Property of the Laws to himself. Yet I doubt if there will many be found who
shall willingly acknowledge, that the Laws are so much the Kings, that he may
make, and un-make them, at his pleasure. This then being without question, it
naturally follows, according to the Consequences I drew before, that the
Subject may justly vindicat his Right in the Laws, if it be attempted. Tho then
the King be Superior to the whole Body of the Subjects, when he Rules
according to Law; Since both he has a transcendent kind of Power in the making
of the Laws, and an entire one for putting them in Execution: Yet when he
deserts the Laws, and takes up his own Arbitrary Will in lieu of them; then the
Subjects may look to themselves, whatever be in the Character of his being
King, to state them as his Inferiors. So that a Limited Monarch, is but a
Limited Superior. And they, who drive any issue of the Matter upon a King's
being Superior over his People, seem only to be fondly possessed with the
abstract Notion of Superiority, without considering that his Power, whom they
style Superior, is really confined within certain bounds. It must nevertheless
be confessed, that a King is so far above the Laws, that his Person ought always
to be Sacred to his Subjects. The cutting off the very Skirt of a Kings Rob,
wrought a very sensible remorse upon the Man after Gods own heart; for his
heart smote him for it, 1 Samuel 24. ver. 4. 5. And it is the duty of every
Subject to say with him, verse. 6. The Lord forbid that I should do this thing
unto my master the Lords anointed, to stretch forth my hand against him, seeing
he is the anointed of the Lord. And there is still such a silial regard to be
had to the Person of a King, that nothing less than the Barbarity, of which a
Son that would cut his Fathers Throat could not but be horridly guilty, could
suffer any Subject, to put hand in the Father of his Country; however much he
had forefeited that Title, by the violent Invasions he had made upon his own
Children. And in this sense only, can the Solutus Legibus, that is so much
talked of, be understood; unless it shall only be appropriated to those
Monarchs, who have formed their Copy after the Model of the East.

To all this it is added, That if the whole Body of the Subjects can oppose
themselves to their Prince, can rise up against him, and assert their Right in
the Laws whether he would or not; Then every single Subject is hereby allowed
to resist his Sovereign, whenever he is unjustly attacked by him. For all the
Individuals of a Commonwealth have apart as much Right in the Laws, as the
Whole has; and on the other hand the whole Body can never combine together
against the Sovereign, unless the particular Members shall in their private
capacity work the Design against him. And of how pernicious consequence this
were to any State, is easy to be told? Neither could any Subject be justly
brought to Punishment for entering into Conspiracies against the Government, if
he could make it appear that he was only endeavoring to free the Subjects from
Tyranny and Oppression. So that our Savior must either have thought that every
private Subject might thus preserve himself, or else have intended that his
Doctrine should Militate against such a method when used by the Whole. But it
is still forgot that therefore every Subject must reckon himself to be even
naturally a Slave. Nevertheless I answer directly, That indeed no private
Subject ought to resist the Government under which he lives, even when he
suffers the most injuriously by it; provided there be no more but a mere
transient and private Act of Injustice in it, without tending to the common
prejudice of the Government, or to the Subversion of the Right of the whole
Subjects in the Laws. For, tho he has Right in the Laws, yet his whole Right in
them is founded in his being a Member of the Commonwealth* as I told you
before. And therefore he has no other Right to the Means whereby he ought to,
or can justly assert his Right in the Laws, but only in so far as the whole
Commonwealth is concerned: Since in the first constitution and end of all
Commonwealths the Public Good is chiefly aimed, and the Private comes in only
by way of Result; And therefore no Means can be Legittimate to any individual
Person, that can clash with the general interest of the whole Body; And
consequently the Means that any single Subject can pretend to for making his
Right in the Laws to be effectual to him, must have a special regard, in the
very nature of the thing, to the public advantage of the Commonwealth. Now
when, as things stand in the World, it is absolutely impossible for Subjects to
Cope with their Sovereign, without the greatest danger to the Common Good of
the Commonwealth: every single Subject that meets with an injury, however
atrocious, is obliged by his being a Member of such a Body, not to attempt any
thing, because of his own private concern, that may set his whole
Fellow Subjects and the Sovereign by the Ears together. And the hazard of the
Public Damage, does sufficiently preponderate all the wrong that he can
actually suffer; to wit, as he is comprehended in the Original Design of the
Society. Indeed if he shall lay aside his Title to his own Preservation, upon
the Principles of being a Member of the Common wealth, it is palpable, that if
any other ground justify him to shift the best way he can for himself, he must
do it, not as a Subject, but merely as a Man. And then the case becomes quite
impertinent to our Affair. But notwithstanding all this, there must other
thoughts be taken up, when the Subjects Right in general is Invaded, and the
Injustice reaches the Public Interest of them all. Then every particular
Subject not only may, but, by the terms of his being a Member with the rest of
the Subjects, ought to do whatever he can contribute to the relieving the whole
Subjects Right in the Laws, from that Tyranny and Oppression it is falling, or
fallen under* Otherwise it were nonsense and contradiction to say that
Subjects have Right in the Laws; Because, according to the ground this
Objection went upon, the whole Body of the Subjects can never, Morally
speaking, jump out at once into a common Vindication of their Right, without
matters had been previously concerted by single persons. It Is true, if a
private Subject be of a public Spirit, he must do it at his peril. And there
were no glory nor merit in the thing, if he did it not so. And tho his best
intentions should happen to be defeated, and he to fall in the hands of the
Prince; Yet then, if the Prince be a good one, and can be prevailed with to
mend what has been done through mistake, or by evil Counsel; he will be so far
from looking upon such a man as his enemy, that he will reckon him amongst his
sincerest friends, for having given him occasion to understand that the true
interest of a Monarch, is not to suffer such a diminution of his Character, as
the violenting his Subjects Rights carries along with it. And supposing the
Prince to be engaged in a desperate resolve to break through all difficulties,
rather than not possess himself of an, as mistaken, as illimited Power; and so
that he who was endeavoring to stand in the way of it, must suffer as a
Traitor and a Rebel; Yet in the sight of God, and of all honest Subjects, his
reputation will be as much without stain, as his Conscience will be without
guilt; and his Death, when the most cruel, will be so much the more glorious
Martyrdom for his Country. And the Providence of the great Disposer of all
men's lives, must be reverenced in all. I confess that the evidence of
Oppression had need be very great and common, before one apprehended in any
design against the Sovereign, can be presumed to have been about the Public,
and not his own Private, Concern. Otherwise this would never fail to be
perverted unto a pretense for the most villainous and wicked Plots against the
Government, that the most furious Traitors can Embarque into. Wherefore I must
here again inculcate, that all along in what I have been saying upon this Head,
I have walked upon this supposition, That the Princes invasion of the Subjects,
strikes manifestly at their Right in the Laws, and does visibly appear to the
World to be a robbing them of their Privileges as Subjects, and an enslaving
them to all the miseries of an Arbitrary Power. For when the wrongs done by the
Prince amounts not to this, and when the evidence of these wrongs is not
without question; then all must go in his favors, and the Subjects Conscience
must quitt the cost.

But now in fine, all these, and other Objections of this nature, can never
come home to the main Point in hand. For in so far, as they proceed upon
Reasons of an antecedent consequence to the Institution of the Christian
Religion, they cannot be brought against this Principle, That our Savior never
meant by his Doctrine about subjection to alter the Rights of Sovereigns, or of
Subjects, as they are stated by the several Constitutions of different Nations.
And in so far as they leave out the consideration of the Subjects Right in the
Laws; they are impertinent against this Supposition; That he has really such a
Right. The only thing therefore that such Objections ought to be adduced for,
is, That whoever is a Monarch, cannot but be Invested with such an Absolute and
Illimited Power as the Great Turk enjoys: And that there can be no Real
Subject, but that all under any Sovereign Power whatsoever, are effectually
Slaves. Truly, if there could be a middle Estate found out betwixt such a
Subjection, (as envolves the Right, I have inferred all I have spoke from,) and
Slavery; it may be that hitherto I have been talking in the Air. But if men
have strength of thought enough to search into things as they tend to Practice,
and the event; and shall not amuse themselves with empty sounds of Words, or
Metaphysical Speculations, and abstract confused Ideas: They will send, after
an impartial enquiry, that* Contradictions, and Subject and Slave, do equally
admit of a Mean betwixt them.

I am not ignorant that there is a Salve offered, whereby a limited Monarchy,
and Subjection without such a Right, as I have ascribed to it, may be
reconciled together. It is therefore said, That a Slave is the Correlative only
of such an Absolute Monarch, as is under the Government of no Law; but a
Subject is of such a limited Monarch, as has his Sovereign Power regulated by
known and standing Laws, which indeed he cannot make nor repeal without the
consent of the People. And tho the People are tied to mere passive Obedience,
even when he breaks these Laws, and Governs by an Arbitrary and Lawless Will;
yet they are not to be accounted Slaves, there being notwithstanding a vast
difference between an Absolute and a Limited Monarchy. For first, a Limited
Prince, tho he may make his Will a Law to himself, and the only Rule of his
Government; yet he cannot make it the Law of the Land: he may break Laws, but
he can neither Make nor Repeal them; and therefore he can never alter the Frame
and Constitution of the Government, tho he may at present interrupt the Regular
Administration of it: and this is a great Security to Posterity, and a present
Restraint upon himself. Secondly, It is a mighty uneasy Thing to any Prince,
to Govern contrary to known Laws. He offers as great and constant Violence to
himself, as he does to his Subjects. The breach of his Oath to God, and his
Promises and Engagements to his Subjects, makes the Exercise of such an
Arbitrary Power very Troublesome; and tho his Subjects are bound not to Resist,
yet his own guilty Fears will not suffer him to be Secure. Thirdly, Tho
Subjects must not Resist such a Prince who Violats the Laws of his Kingdom; yet
they are not bound to Obey him, nor to Serve him in his Usurpations; as being
only bound to yield an active Obedience only according to Law. And it is a
mighty uneasy thing to the greatest Tyrant, to Govern always by Force: and no
Prince in a Limited Monarchy can make himself Absolute, unless his own Subjects
Assist him to do so. Hence it is dangerous for any Subject to serve his Prince
contrary to Law, all the Ministers of a Prince being accountable; and therefore
all of them are wary how they serve their Prince against Law. Fourthly, It is
the greatest Temptation to a Prince that is but Limited, to do all he can to
make himself Absolute, when he knows that his Subjects pretend he is
accountable to them for any wrong Administration of the Government. And
therefore it is the surest way for Subjects to preserve their Liberty, to be
tied not to attempt any thing against their Prince, even when he sets himself
most to Invade it. Lastly, It is the Interest of the Commonwealth, rather that
Subjects should patiently endure the greatest Outrages of a Tyrant, than be
engaged in a Civil War. And tho a People should prove Fortunate against their
Prince; yet even then the Inconveniences of the Commonwealth, would be so far
from being redressed, that on the contrary, all would be exposed a Prey to
Factious and Designing men: and then Divisions, and Sub divisions would harrass
all, till either the Strength of the whole Commonwealth were so exhausted, that
the extremest Misery should only give Quiet and Peace to it; or else till some
Foreign Power should take Advantage of such Intestine Bustles and Confusions
to bring it under a heavier Yoke, than that it had shook off. Thus Doctor
Sherlock, Case of Resistance: from Page 207, to 217.

But all this is so far from militating against what I have said, that it
really supposes it. For the first is express, that the Subjects have an entire
Right in the Laws. And all that I infer is, that a Right in the End, without a
Right in the Means, is a ridiculous Right. And there can be no Security against
any interruption the Prince shall make of the Regular Administration of the
Government, unless that Security be founded in such a Right in the People as is
manifest. The second must suppose, that all the uneasiness a Prince may meet
with in ruling contrary to the Laws, flows merely from his being conscious
that the People has Right to vindicate their Right in the Laws. For what else
should trouble him, more than the Grand Seignior? Besides the Question is, what
the Subjects may justly do for themselves, when a Prince breaks through all the
reluctancies of his Conscience, and his Honor, and falls headlong upon the
Rights of his People. The third also does yet more directly show the Subjects
Right. Otherwise why should there be such Bonds upon the Ministers of State?
But when a Prince gets himself furnished with such Parasites, who will not
stick upon any Considerations to embark their whole Fortunes into that Bottom
wherein their Princes is Aboard; Must therefore all the Right of the Subjects
ly as so much dead unactive Lumber beside them? Moreover, such corrupt
Ministers will endeavor to make Hay while the Sun shines, and therefore will
put all to the hazard, rather than not see that Government entirely Subverted,
which they have so great reason to be afraid of; that the People may have,
whatever Good Will they please, but not withal Teeth, to bite them. The fourth
likewise goes upon the same Foundation on the one hand, since why should the
Subjects be obliged to such a politic Method, as not to own their Right to
preserve themselves from Tyranny, if they had not such a Right? And on the
other hand it supposes such an Ambition in all Princes to be Absolute, as may
rather provoke all Subjects to Assert their Right to the utmost of their Power,
than not to express their Sentiments about it. And it is worth Consideration,
whether it is not a more forcible Temptation to any Prince that can aspire
after an illimited Power, to adventure upon Subjects that he knows before hand
will go like Sheep to the Slaughter, than to assault those who he is sure will
use all just means to secure themselves? And the last only poizes the
Inconveniences of Tyranny and of a Civil War together. But Subjects may think
upon that accordingly as they see their Circumstances. And it is only Prudence
then that is to manage their Business. For as to point of Right, they may
choose as they please which side appears most convenient for them, and the
public Interest of the Commonwealth. But I am not to answer for what factious
and designing men may do, and occasion. It is only those that are guided by a
true and sincere Conscience, that I am concerned in. And as a virtuous and
conscientious Prince needs never fear those; so a Commonwealth can never
suffer by them. Now when Doctor Sherlock has not said more on this Head, it is
not like that more could have been said on it. And so I go to what comes nearer
to the purpose.

And that is, That Our Saviors Example does expound his Doctrine, in a Sense
very contrary to what I have given it. That he might have, not aspired unto,
but obtained the universal Monarchy of the World, none can doubt, who
confessh^^ was God Almighty, as well as Man, like unto us in all things, sin
only excepted. And therefore he checked St. Peter, when officiously interposing
in his Quarrel, with this, Think thou that I cannot now pray to my Father,
and he shall give me more than twelve Legions of Angels Math. 26. verse. 53. But
let him be suppos*d to be quite stripped of his Omnipotency, and shrunk into as
much mere Humanity, as the whole tenor of his Life made a show of. Yet still we
shall find he lacked only Ambition, and not Opportunity, for possessing himself
of the whole Power of his Nation. The groanings of the Jews under the Roman
Yoke, then vyed with their languishing pantings after their Messiah, to restore
the Kingdom again to Israel, even in their own fulsome sense. Nothing therefore
was more acceptable to them, than was He, who, by the many Signal Prodigies he
had wrought, and the no fewer palpable accomplishments of Prophesies in his
Person, had gain*d so far already, either upon their Understandings, or their
Inclinations, that numbers of them began to aver, he was the Prophet that
should come into the world, John 6. verse. 14. And all of them had done so, had
he but bestowed that single instance, of pretending to the Crown, to have
vouched himself according to their earnest expectation of the Man they imagined
should be that second Moses, greater than was their First. For then their
affairs was in such a posture, that, as well their Necessity, as their Temper,
prompted them to discard the Roman Government, and re-establish their own
ancient one, wherein they might have had a King who was their Brother; Deuteronomy.
17. verse. 15. And all things concurred so mightily for an Universal
Insurrection from the Highest to the Lowest, from the Priests to the Pharisees,
and from these to the very meanest of the People, that there was no more
needful for it is violent eruption, but such a plausible Head, as sparkled all
around with the most refulgent Marks of their longed for Deliverer. Hence it is
manifest, that Our Savior would have had but to lay hold on those Importunat
Invitations, wherewith he was daily thronged, for mounting the Throne of his
Royal Ancestor, David. And yet we know that he stole away from the Multitude,
that would have made him King; John 6. verse 15. And as solicitously declined
the Highest Elevation among Men, as others Court and Fight for it; Nay, as he
himself was preparing immortal Crowns of Righteousness, for all those that
should walk in those Paths he had so clearly chalked out unto them. Besides,
his interest among the People was such, that, not only the Priests at several
times durst not set upon him, for fear of them; but even when he was in their
Clutches, when Pilat had him at his Mercy, he was in a capacity of getting
himself rescued, and that by ordinary means: If my kingdom were of this World,
said he, then would my servants fight, that I should not be delivered to the
Jews, Joh. 18. verse. 36. So that if he had thought it lawful for Subjects*
either to shake off their Governors, or to resist them, when they fall to
oppress them* he had never cast such a Copy to his Followers, who could not but
be presumed not to follow the Actions of their Master, as much as his Words.
Yea further, He not only would not suffer St. Peter to defend him in an hostile
manner, but also up-braided the rashness of his undertaking, with this smart
rebuke, Put up thy sword into his place; for all they that take the sword,
shall perish with the sword; Mat. 26. verse. 52. And thus he did at once condemn
the Doctrine of its being lawful for Subjects to resist the Supreme Authority*
even when they suffer the most unjustly by it; and also furnished us with the
most eminent Instance of non-resistance, that the violentest Attack could give
us occasion for.

But, however much this has been urged, I would fain know whether or not our
Savior designed by such an Example to entrench upon the Right of the Subject.
Yet to answer by piecemeal; I say to his refusing to be King, That then Jacobs
Prophecy was fulfilled, and the Scepter was departed from Judah, because Shilo
was come. And so that Constitution which was appointed by God to be peculiar to
that People, was then expired: And the Romans were become their lawful
Governors, not only by their right of Conquest, but even by their own
Solicitation of the Protection of their Power, as Josephus reports. Unless
therefore it could be made out, that the Romans were then usurping over them,
by violating the fundamental Constitution of their new Government, our Savior
acted but conformably to the Principles I have laid down about Subjection;
neither would he have yielded to the desire of the People to be their King,
without overturning those Measures and Rules of Government, which were then
established both by the Law of Nature, and of Nations. Yet moreover, it was
totally inconsistent with our Saviors design, to have ever assumed any other
Principality to himself, but what tendered him to be the Prince of our Peace
with God his Father, and the Captain of Eternal Life and Salvation unto us. And
when he only departed alone into the Mountain, to escape the design of making
him King, without reproving it of injustice, as wronging the rightful
Sovereign; there are thoughts suggested thereby to us of a far different nature
from those, in behalf of which such a Passage is alleged. For he who taught
openly in the Temple those things that were most distasteful to the Jews,
cannot reasonably be construed to have dared in the Mountain to have exposed
such a wicked Error, as the People then show they entertained. It seems then
that it was sufficient to his Purpose to let them understand, that whomever
they designd to make their King, it is like (because of the Oppressions they
were lying under), he was not the Person that could embrace it, his Errand to
this World being only to dispose them for a Kingdom in that which is to come.

Then, as to our Saviors Behavior in the Presence of, and Answer to, Pilate,
He both show* he was not to go over the limits of that Private Station he had
confined himself unto; and that he had not set up for any Temporal Monarchy;
his Kingdom being a Spiritual one, that involved quite other Rights, than those
that were repugnant to the Subjection, he as a Member of the Commonwealth, was
obliged to pay. Wherefore, tho nothing could have been more barbarous and
unjust, than was the Treatment he met with, first from his Accusers the Jews,
and then from the Governor Pilate; yet, in the capacity of a single Subject,
he reckoned it unlawful to gainstand such an act of Oppression, as extended
not, immediately in its own nature, to endanger the Commonwealth; but only fell
heavily upon his individual concernment. But there is something shrewdly
imported in these words, then would my Servants fight, that I should not be
delivered to the Jews. For it were blasphemous to think that our Savior, under
any kind of Supposition about himself, would have given his Verdict to what in
it self was unjust and unwarrantable.

And as to the Reprimand St. Peter got, it is palpable that our Savior only
intended by it, to show, that although the Sword was lawful against the Assaults
of private Invaders; since he had given Commission even to barter ones Garment
for one upon that account: Yet no private Quarrel was sufficient ground for
drawing it against the public and lawful Authority; and that neither He
himself, nor his Doctrine, however sacred both were, was to be defended against
Persecution by such carnal Means. It is also observable, that the Verse 54, But
how then shall the Scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be? denotes that
there was something particular in that whole Affair relating to his Person; and
that in a certain Subordination to the End why he took our Nature upon him, he
was necessitated to submit to the Governing Power that then was in the Nation,
notwithstanding it was infinitely abused in its management toward him. It
cannot indeed be denied but that St. Peter, in his first Epistle, Chap. 2.
Verse 21. tells us that one end of his suffering was for our Imitation; having,
says he* suffered for us, to leave us an example that we should follow his
steps* But then our Sufferings must resemble the Motives and Limitations of
his* And it were very odd to Dream, unless it were by Dreaming indeed, that the
Copy ought to contain more than was in the Original. But where our Saviors
Doctrine and Example obliges us to suffer, will more fully appear in the
ensuing fourth Part of this Discourse. And now I am naturally brought to it;

Namely, I am to take notice of those Errors that most commonly ^pp^s^
themselves to our Christian Doctrine about Subjection, and which do little
better than entirely evacuate the whole design of it.

And First, There want not those who pretend to such Original liberties from
the Lawof Nature, as upon every disgust they conceive at the Government,
affords them some title or other for rising up against it.

But, to go to the bottom of this, tho I should repeat something I have said
before; It is certain that by the Law of Nature there is not one special Form
of Government constituted, more than another. For that Law does not infer any
dependence of one man upon another, or of a whole Body of Men upon one single,
or more Persons; but in so far as the Relation betwixt Children and their
Parents is considered: Since all men are of the same Kind, and are consequently
equal in all respects to each other. Whence it is that all Governments arise,
either from a voluntary concession of one Parts natural Right over into the
hands of the Other; or from the One Parts having by force wrested that Right
which the Other had by Nature. For now there is no immediate Appointments from
Heaven: And as the World is stated at this day, the Paternal Right for that of
a Monarch, is but an empty and Chymerical Notion.

For all men, ever since the Fall of their first Fore-father, are overruled
with such devouring Passions, as render them dangerous Neighbors to one
another: and Self-preservation is the immediate offspring of their Reasonable
Natures. That therefore they may be able to resist all violence endeavored
against them; and to secure themselves in the possession of those things which
may at once preserve their lives, and make them as comfortable as the present
condition of Affairs will allow: They have been warranted by that God, from
whom they derive their Beeings, and the rational consideration of their own
interest has also prompted them, to enter into mutual Compacts and Agreements;
The one part resigning up such a proportion of their Primitive Right to the
Other, as may sufficiently empower this Other to adjust all matters of
difference that shall break out among them; and this Other Part, upon whom such
a Power is devolved, promising faithfully to discharge the Trust committed by
the Other, and never to invade that remanent Right which they have retained to
themselves. Now when any Government takes Birth upon these Terms, there are
Laws condescended to by both Parties, as the Articles of Engagement between
them. And these Laws are on the One hand so many Abridgments of the Natural
Liberty of that Part which is subjected by the Constitution; and on the other,
are so many Securities of the Rights which they have not delivered up. And
whatever is not contained in those Laws is essentially presumed to continue
still with the Subjects; but in so far as it is indispensably requisite to the
very being of that Sovereignty which is transferred by them. Because no man
can be justly construed to have denuded himself of any Right, unless a positive
evidence to the contrary be produced: And also, there is always a necessary
construction of the direct and unforced Consequences, wherever there is that
Principle from whence they do spring. All then depends upon the entirely
voluntary consent of every one of those Persons who are concerned in that
Government so framed.

The other Model goes upon the Right of Conquest. And even this falls at
long-run into a voluntary condescension; tho at first not so absolutely so, as
when there is no other constraint in the case, than what the necessity of
Humane Affairs does occasion. For when one by a prevailing Power overcomes
another, the competition that he, who is worsted has to make his choice in, is
whether or no he will loss his Life for good and all, or have it vouchaf'd him
upon those conditions his Conqueror is pleased to prescribe. It is indeed a
hard pull to have nothing else but Slavery to exchange for ones Life. But yet
when one values his Life so much more than his Freedom, that he will purchase
the one at the total expense of the other; he cannot have him to blame who
accepts of that which is least dear to himself, but only because he put him in
a condition, wherein he could not refuse both. It Is true, such a rigorous
measure will provoke one to retrieve his liberty too, when ever he shall have
it in his Power to do it. And if Providence shall favor him with an
opportunity for that end, before that which is an oppression in his Conqueror,
has by time grown to be a Right; I cannot blame him, if he make the best use of
it he can. For the Law of War denies nothing to the Man that has Power enough,
but only the not managing it according to the Rules of Honor, and Honesty. But
when once such a long fruition of that Soveraignity, that even is so illimited,
as to have nothing but Slavery below it, comes up to a Prescription; Then by
that very tract of time, in which it has endured, from a questionable Title, it
advances to the contrary. And also those who have trudged under the Arbitrary
Nod of it, have either, like those Gally-Slaves, who have declined a
manumission when it was offered them, found satisfaction in their Chains, and
therefore have, with a resolute acquiescence in their Lot abandoned all further
pretense to liberty; or else are justly to be reputed, not to deserve that
greater Enlargement, which their Courage and Conduct was not for many Ages able
enough to procure them. And thus by the Law of Nature it self, which binds
every man to what himself has consented to, or which bestows not that upon him
whereof he is unworthy; the Title of Conquest upon the Event, is no less good
and valid, than that of Compact.

There may also be a mixed Government as to its Original, tho as it actually
stands, it differs not much materially from the former of these two. As when a
Conqueror, either thinks it his Glory, or his Security, to Restrict himself in
that Power which he has acquired by Force, and to grant such Rights and
Immunities to the People he has overcome, as may make them Love, when they
would only Fear him; according to what I said before. Then such a condescension
is to be Interpreted a voluntary yiedling of that Right which by the Law of
Arms was obtained. And therefore, tho such a Sovereign might at first have
triumphed over his People as Slaves, and kept them under the Terror of that
condition; Yet now he ought not to treat them but as Subjects, and to let them
possess those Freedoms, which himself was content they should enjoy. Only
whatever is not included in the Laws, that are made between them, that is to
remain with him; since all was his before: And so without a positive Evidence
that he past from it, his Title thereto must still continue valid. Yet it lies
always at his door, to prove the Conquest, even as to this; because a Natural
Right cannot be taken away, without a Positive One be brought against it, And
these Subjects, who are thus gainers by this Constitution, cannot but be
thought to have given a hearty consent to it, and that they have reckoned
themselves obliged by their Prince when he dealt so generously with them.

Wherefore, now to return to the matter in hand, it is palpable that nothing
can be brought from that Prior Estate to any Positive Constitution, wherein Men
are by Nature, to overturn This, or That Government. Because every Man has full
Right in that, which another, who had Right to it before, tranferr'd the Right
of to him: And because no Right can more validly pass from one to another, than
when he who acquires it, has it by the Consent of him that transmits it. Now
the Law of Nature oblidges every body to make good and effectual, as far as
they can, that Right which they bestow. And therefore the Law of Nature, or of
Self-preservation, can never take place in any Government, till once the very
Fundamental Constitution of that Government shall be attacqued by him, to whom
the Consent of being Sovereign was yielded. However then it shall be pretended,
that the Constitution of any Government contradicts the Law of Nature: Yet
(since it must necessarily contradict that Law, in as much as it puts Bonds and
Restraints upon the Natural Liberty, and Right of the greatest Part, and
proportionably increases That of the least) nothing can be gathered from
thence, but that the Subjects were perhaps Fools, that at first submitted upon
such or such Terms, and that now they are to keep themselves to their bargain.

And were it otherwise, no imaginable kind of Government could be Long-lived,
or Lasting. Because every man almost has a Peculiar Inclination after this or
that degree of Liberty; and what has a strong Inclination to back it, seldom
fails to be resolved into a Right by Nature; and so there would be as many
Systemes of Laws of Nature in a Nation, as there would be Heads in it. And
consequently nothing could terminate those discords, but a mere State of
Nature, wherein every Individual Person were to shift for himself. At this rate
therefore the very design and end of Government would entirely be defeated, and
none could be kept under, further than as there were an over-awing force
hanging over them, to compel them to their Duty; and the bare principle of
fear, without some other of a more ingenuous kind, uses not to hold out long,
and even when it does it, all things are necessarily in a posture of War. So
that, if pretexts from the Law of Nature, could justly take effect, all
Government were really but a Sham; and the common honesty of the World, which
Nature dictates to reasonable Creatures, were but of the same Stamp. For the
first Obligations from Consent could be retracted when the Consenters humor
took them; and every new Caprice would beget a new Mutiny, whereby Government,
and no Government, would become the very same thing. Now all that can be
objected to this will come more pertinently afterward to be considered.

Whence it was that Our Apostle enjoins Subjection, because all powers are
ordained of God; That is, God confirms the Titles which Sovereigns have to rule
over their People, and sets his Seal to those Consents upon which all
Government at first took Birth; so that none can resist the Powers, but he must
receive to himself damnation, but he must have the Almighty to revenge those
injuries which he shall be guilty of toward them. It is also remarkable, that
Our Savior, when he ordered the Herodians to Render to Caesar the things which
were Caesar's, made no search at all in the Right that Caesar had to Rule over
the Jews; but supposed that, whether it was by Compact, or Conquest, yet it was
a good Right, not to be quarrelled by those who were now Subjects to him. The
same does in like manner flow from St. Peter's Words, as any that shall consider
them will see. Wherefore the Christian Religion heightened Consent unto
Conscience. And that was the great advantage that all Governments received from
it.

But there is another Error much more pernicious than this, which has, alas!
sadly prevailed over the most part of the Christian World. An Error that has
Sown more Serpents Teeth in Christendom, than ever the Sons of Draco did in
Thebes, after his defeat by Cadmus. An Error that has been the Source of more
mischief to the Christian Religion, than all the Heresies that it was ever
pestered with could have been, without it. An Error that has more served the
Devils turn to ruin Christianity, and to Act his Master-Plot against it, than
any other Engine that Infernal Fiend ever did, ever could, employ. An Error
that has at one dash sent hundreds of thousands to their Graves in the most
Barbarous manner, and has hallowed, has christened Murder, Parricide,
Sacrilege, Massacre, Treason, Rebellion, and what not? And an Error that by
the Effect, tho it should not by the Principle, has filled Hell with more
Christians, than ever it was so by Witchcraft, Adultery, Drunkenness, or those
other Sins of the Flesh, that abound most among Men. These sure are Lineaments
of the Picture black enough to make it be understood. And now the Art of
Limning is more accomplished, than that we need Paint A Satan over the Head of
what naturally resembles one. Yet if we must needs have the Name of a thing
told us, before we can learn what it is, however genuinly it be painted forth;
It is that Error by which it is thought lawful to spue out the most furious
Zeal, not only against all that shall be reputed Heretics, but even against
all those Magistrates, and Sovereign Princes, that shall not give full scope and
range to whatever shall be pretended to be for God, and for Religion, or for
holy Church.

Now that it is as repugnant to the genius of our holy and peaceable Religion,
as any thing can be, will appear, tho we should only carry the matter home from
that Principle that was laid down before: Namely, That Our Savior never
designed that his Religion should create disturbance in the World, or should
deprive Princes of those Rights which belong to them by the Civil Constitutions
of those Nations over which they Rule. But if he had Authorized his Followers
to assert their Religion, perchance Whimsies, by the Sword, to propagate their
Faith by Carnal Weapons, and to invade Sovereigns when they would not comply
with them; Then had he made the most intolerable encroachments upon the Rights
of Princes, that possibly they could have suffered. For whenever any Cluster of
Subjects should be gained to an Opinion, however absurd and monstrous, the
State would then be obnoxious to be embroiled, and to be hurried into Confusion
and Tumult; the Prince would either be constrained to defend himself against
the growing Insolences of a Party so principl'd, or else to espouse its
quarrel, and swear to its Dictats; and thus upon every Wind of new Doctrine
(which never fails to justify its Title, by its sudden going to and fro, so
that none can know when it shall arise, nor how long it shall continue) he
should be blown, either from the Rational Liberty of every Man's Soul in
choosing a Religion, or else from the Throne he sits on. But to endeavor to
discourse this, were to suppose that we were living sixteen, but especially
six, hundred years ago; and that we were only to talk of the natural tendencies
of things, without reflecting upon what has happened in the World, with so much
Noise and Thunder, that no Ear could now be one, and yet not have been almost
deaf^ed with that too. And therefore, if Our Savior had allowed Christians so
to maintain, or to ab^^ their Religion, he had Acted the highest contradiction
possible to himself, when he commanded all manner of Subjects to be submissive
to their Sovereigns, without disquieting them in the just Possession of their
Rights and Prerogatives. Neither shall any be able to show us what could more
effectually shake all the Monarchies on Earth, than this damnable Principle, of
sighting merely for Religion, has done.

It is indeed pretended, that since Subjects are not allowed to assert their
Right in the end of the Government, but when they are to deal Conscientiously
with the Higher Powers; and are not denied to lo^k to their Interest, when they
Act at that Rate: So if Conscience be permitted impartially to govern Men,
there can be no hazard of such disturbance to the Government; tho Subjects
should have the Liberty to compel the Magistrate both to profess the true
Religion himself, and to encourage the profession of it in others. For there
being only but one Religion that is not false, there can no more prejudice flow
from the Subjects being permitted to assert That, than from their freedom to
vindicat the Right they have, as they are Subjects. So that the same things may
here be Argued, if in stead of the Word, Right, that of, Religion, shall be
used. Especially when the true Religion is as obvious to every Body, as the
Constitution of this or that Nation is; Since the Holy Scriptures are
acknowledged, by all Protestants, to be both a plain and a sufficient Rule of
Faith; and no Laws are more, as to any special Constitution whatsoever: And
when it is chiefly upon Conscience that all Government does depend; and no
Conscience is absolutely sufficient for that end, but in so far as it is
^ottom'd upon the true Religion. And thus the true Religion being the best
Means to secure the Government, the Subjects, by their having Right in the End
of the Government, have also Right in the surest Means that can advance it. It
seems therefore consequentially to follow, that Our Savior, by settling the
sixtest Foundation of Government, and not prejudging the Subjects Right in the
End of it, did, in pursuance of his Design, lay a necessity upon all Princes,
either to Resign their Thrones, or embrace his Religion, whenever their
Subjects should once do it.

This I think is the most that can be said in behalf of this Plea. But yet
there are several things to be urged against it. As first, That the whole
Scheme of it is founded upon this supposition; That the Bible being a plain and
sufficient Rule of Faith, there is therefore as little reason to suspect that
Men, notwithstanding the present depravation of their Nature, will mistake or
err in Matters of Religion, as there is, that they will be deluded in things
relating to the Constitution of a Nation. It is easily yielded that the
Scriptures are clear and perspicuous in all necessary Points of Faith, to every
sober and ingenuous Enquirer. But when the Doctrine of the Cross is so expressly
set down in Scripture, as shall by and by be showed, and yet nevertheless is
controverted so vehemently on all hands; Is it not a shrewd indication that
the plainest things about Religion are not, cannot be, so very plain, but that
they may be called in question? And this were enough, were there no more to
demonstrate what is the influence of Education, or Prejudice, or Bigottry, or a
Maggot, or Interest, etc. when there is only palpable Evidence to ly in the
other scale against them. It were not pertinent here thoroughly to unravel this
Mystery of ungodliness; or to show why it is that the most of Men are so
seduced, so bewitched and infatuated, as in spite of the brightest Light, to
bewilder themselves in the gloomiest Shades, and to love darkness rather than
light. It shall suffice to tell you, that the Articles of our Religion are of a
Speculative and Abstruse nature; and principally do employ our Faith, and not
that practical Knowledge, which we use to have of those things that concern the
affairs of this life. And how sadly That can be imposed upon, the World is not
now, after so much experience, to learn. And in contemplation of this it was,
that Our Savior foretold, that Heresies mustneeds come. But the case alters
quite, when we are to take up measures about the Constitution of a Government.
Since there is no People in the World, but can make the distinction between
their being Subjects or Slaves: And whosoever are the former, do at least
understand so much of their Constitution, that they cannot but be sensible,
when, and when not, there is a certain and great and imminent danger of their
being robbed of their Freedom, and reduced to Fetters. For the Legal Security
that Subjects are wont to have for their Religon, their Lives, and Liberties,
never was yet but so manifest and conspicuous, that the very Understandings of
Men must lose their Names, before any consideration whatsoever can prevail over
them in such a point. And tho that all this can be said in favors of Religion
also; yet the difference is, as to the Constitution of a Government, that This
is no more obnoxious to be mis-construed; than is the common Transactions that
ordinarily pass betwixt Man and Man. And therefore, when the Event is the thing
mainly aimed at, it is very fallacious to argue from the Evidence it self that
the Scriptures give us of the true Religion, to that which Subjects have of
their Constitution. It Is indeed not to be denied, but that those who most
unjustly clamor out against the Government of any Nation, never fail to Load
it the most heavily with Tyranny, Oppression, and Arbitrary Power; and have
still such a store of Grievances hanging at their Tongues End, as if the
Constitution were Violated, and all the Rights of the Subject broke and
overturned. And we have a fatal example of this from this Day. And so it would
seem, that even the Constitution of a Nation is as liable to be made serve the
factious Designs of ill Men, as the most difficult Points of Religion are. The
truth is, nothing can be so ingenuously done by the best of Governors, but
there will always be some found to Calumniat and Wrest it. But yet when those
who do so, fall in the hands of Justice, the Defenses they use to make for
themselves, do sufficiently betoken the guilt that hovereth over their
Consciences; and they do seldom die, more regrated by all good Christians, than
the worst of Criminals are wont to do. And even when a powerful Party gets the
uppermost, and God permits them to scourge a People, yet all their Arguments
depend upon their Swords; and, however much they may force Men outwardly to
assent to the Justness of their Cause, yet all the Violence wherewith they can
harrass them, reaches not the inward thoughts of their Minds, and they will
there condemn what elsewhere they must approve. And hence it is, that the
Administration of the Government can never be so unjustly complained of, but
that the eyes of all the World will be open to the wrongs it shall sustain. But
you may also remember what was said as to this already.

The only difficulty therefore that arises from this Competition, is, That
Conscience is still but a crazy foundation for any Government, when the true
Religion is so ready to be worsted by Passion and Interest. But all that I have
alleged upon this Head, goes no further, than that in the nature of the thing
it self, nothing can be so proper for the security of any Government, as
Conscience rooted in the true Religion; And that Subjects must first be, either
Heretics, or Debauchees, before their Prince can have ground to misdoubt them;
And consequently that, since the true Religion has all the Evidence for it that
can work with sincere and rational Men, it highly concerns all Princes to use
their utmost endeavors that Prejudice, or Superstition, or the Designs of this
World, do not prosper too much in the hearts of those over whom they Reign; as
on the other hand it is the interest of the Subjects to do all that can be
lawful for them, to prevent that their Sovereign be not gained over to a
Religion, from whence they cannot reasonably expect that full security to
themselves, which the Profession of the true Religion would afford them. So
that happy is that people whose God is the Lord. But that Providence, without
which the smallest hair of our heads falls not to the ground, is mostly to be
looked to, and depended upon, in all this. And in this matter, neither the
Prince, nor the People, can be too cautious in what they undertake; lest a
wrong step in the Means, bring on an End of Ruin and Confusion.

But, waving all this; If Christ had allowed Subjects to force their Prince,
either to lay down his Crown, or to profess that which they should think to be
the true Religion, even when they should not be deceived in it; Then he had
manifestly made an alteration in the Rights of Princes. Because now they were
not to hold their Dominions upon the ancient terms of the Constitutions of
their several Nations; but also upon this new supervenient condition of being
of the true Christian Religion. And there is nothing more clear, than that his
Right is invaded, who cannot justly maintain it, without performing more, than
what by the first Articles of obtaining it, he was obliged unto. None will
doubt but that our Savior might have laid this new tie upon all Sovereigns, if
he had pleased: and thereby have made Infidelity, or Heresy, a sufficient
ground for their Orthodox Subjects to Depose them. But then he had assumed to
himself a Civil Power and Authority; and had new Modelled the Governments of
the World; contrary to what I showed before, and to what this Objection I am
Answering presupposes.

Wherefore in the third place, tho our Savior did not meddle with the Civil
Rights of Subjects, yet he bestowed no such Right upon them as might overturn
that of their Sovereign. And so, however much the true Religion contributes to
the advantage of the Government; yet, since it cannot be imposed upon the
Prince without encroaching upon his Right, no warrant can be presumed from any
thing our Savior ever taught, or did, to dethrone Princes merely for the sake
of their Religion. Besides, Religion is no Civil, but only a Spiritual Mean,
for promoting the Interest of the Government. And therefore it cannot accresce
to the Subjects Right in the Means requisite for that end. Otherwise it might
as well be said, that Subjects have Right, that the Grace of God should work
powerfully upon the Soul of their Prince, that he never but act conscientiously
in his administrating the Power he is vested with. And thus we should fall into
that old exploded opinion, That Dominion is founded in Grace. No Subject
therefore can have reason to complain, as if our Savior had not dealt kindly
enough with him, because he has not put a Sword in his hand, whereby to rob his
Sovereign of his Crown and just Right. Certainly all Subjects owe him the
humblest resentments of gratitude, that he settled all the Governments in the
World more firmly upon their wonted Pillars and Foundations, than ever they
were before; Tho he did not interweave his Religion with their Political
Constitutions and Establishments.

But, last of all, Subjects must cease to be Christians before they can think
upon Fighting at any rate for their Religion, merely as it is such. For,
whether the Doctrine, or the Example, of our Savior be considered; It appears
manifest to all sober and unprejudiced men, that nothing can be more repugnant
to the design of the Christian Religion, than that it should be fought for, as
if it were some Prize or Booty. And as to the former, What can be more
express, Than, Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness sake;
for theirs is the kingdom of heaven; Blessed are ye when men shall revile you,
and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my
sake. Rejoice, and be exceeding glad; for great is your reward in heaven: for
so persecuted they the Prophets which were before you: Matthew. 5. verse. 10, 11,
12. I say unto you, that ye resist not evil; but whosoever shall smite thee on
thy right cheek, turn to him the other also; verse. 39. I say unto you, love
your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and
pray for them that despitefully use you, and persecute you; verse. 44. Judge
not, that ye be not judged; For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be
judged; and with what measure you mete, it shall be measured to you again;
Chap. 7. verse. 1, 2. Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves;
be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves; Chap. 10. verse. 16.
You will be delivered up to the councils, and they will scourge you in their
synagogues; and ye shall be brought before governors and kings for my sake;
and the brother shall deliver the brother to death, and the father the child;
and the children shall rise up against the parents, and cause them to be put to
death; and ye shall be hated of all men for my Names sake; but he that endures
to the end shall be saved; but when they persecute you in this city, flee ye
into another; the disciple is not above his master, nor the servant above his
lord; it is enough for the disciple that he be as his master, and the servant
as his lord; if they have called the master of the house Beelzebub, how much
more shall they call them of his household? Fear them not therefore; and fear
not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul; but rather
fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell; whosoever
therefore shall confess me before men, him will I confess also before my Father
which is in heaven; but whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also
deny before my father which is in heaven; from verse. 17. to 33. Whosoever will
come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me; for
whosoever will save his life, shall lose it, but whosoever shall lose his life
for my sake and the Gospels, the same shall save it; for what shall it profit
a man, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul. Mark 8. verse.
34, 35, 36. If any man come to me, and hate not his father, and mother, and
wife and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea and his own life also, he
cannot be my disciple; whosoever he be of you that forsakes not all that he
has, he cannot be my disciple. Luke 14. from verse. 26. to 33. And in
consequence of this Doctrine, he severely rebuked the two Disciples, James and
John, when they would have had him command fire to come down from heaven to
consume the greatest Heretics and Schismatics that were then in the Jewish
Church, and who denied him entrance in their Village, and would not receive
him, because his face was as though he would go to Jerusalem; Luke 9. verse. 51.
to 54. Telling those Apostles, verse. 55. Ye know not what manner of spirit ye
are of; for the son of man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them.
Therefore also did he use the gentlest method of enforcing his Religion upon
his Followers, If any man will be my disciple; If any man will come after me.
And when the Jews did persecute him, and sought to slay him, (John 5. verse. 16.
and forward), He took no other course to oppose them, but only to justify
himself by the most convincing Arguments and Demonstrations, from the Power of
working Miracles that was so visibly lodged in him, from the excellency of his
Doctrine, and from his having accomplished the Prophesies that the Scriptures
of the Old Testament contained of the Messiah to come. Thus the Apostle St.
Paul recommendeth to the Galatians, Chap. 6. verse. 1. To restore those that
have been overtaken in a fault, in the spirit of meekness; considering
themselves, lest they also be tempted. But we shall hardly cast up any place of
the New Testament, even at random, but we shall find something to this purpose;
there being nothing that goes more universally through the whole Doctrine of
Christianity (as a Gold Vein does through the Ore), than that Christians should
suffer any thing for their Religion, before they should take up Arms in defense
of it.

Yet lest Precept and Teaching had not been enough to have born in this
Christian Duty upon us, we have the most uncontrovertible Pattern set before
our eyes, that can possibly take with those, who are not resolved, in spite of
all the methods of Conviction, to stand out in behalf of their own Opinion and
Humor. And whatever has been said hitherto of our Saviors Example, does in an
eminent manner speak to the purpose in this place. And here the only proper and
true gloss can be given of those words, which were before cited from St. Peter,
For even hereunto were ye called; because Christ also suffered for us, leaving
us an example that ye should follow his steps; who did no sin, neither was
guile found in his mouth; who when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he
suffered, he threatened not; but committed himself to him that judges
righteously. St. Peter 1 Epist. Chap. 2. verse. 21, 22 23 Neither can any
tolerable Sense be put upon that Rebuke this Apostle got, for offering to
defend his Master by the Sword; nor upon that Answer our Lord gave Pilat, My
kingdom is not of this world, etc; Unless, besides all the respective
Circumstances our Savior stood in, it shall further be granted, that he was
bound up by the very tenor of his own Religion neither to call for Legions of
Angels, nor yet to command Troops of his Servants, to fight in his defense. For
it is quite unaccountable, how one that can rescue himself by a proportionable
force, can with any justice yield up himself to a cruel and barbarous
Execution, tho inflicted by the Magistrate; if there were not some other more
sacred tie upon him to do so, than what can flow from the Civil Constitution of
any Nation. And there is as little ground to think that the Son of God would,
merely to undergo a Death for Mankind, have choos'd to do it in a way, that had
made it look so much like a Self-Murder, that the most ingenious Wit of this
World could not have even plausibly excused it from being one; without his
Sufferings had at once been in conformity to his Religion, and to set a Copy to
his Followers too. Wherefore, as he submitted to an unjust Sentence, because he
would not step out of the Circle of his Private Condition; and as at that time
he did this to fulfill the Scriptures; So that which then rendered this to be
lawful in him, was only the Doctrine which himself had taught, the suffering
for Righteousness sake. And tho the great Errand for which he came into the
World, was to redeem the Inhabitants of it, and so to die for them; Yet all
things relating to his Crucifixion were so brought about by the Providence of
God, that the King of Kings died as a single Subject, and the Author of our
Faith, as a Christian. And thus his not resisting the most violent Oppression
and Tyranny that ever was acted upon the Earth, when it was in his Power to
have done it; became to be lawful in him, or rather to be agreeable to that
Holiness which was essential to his Person; tho otherwise we had been left,
either to search out an Apology for it, but in vain; or else profoundly to
adore those hidden Counsels, which Angels could never have pryed into. And
certainly either of these, seems not well to quadrate with those Scriptures
that have been Cited, and many others also, which are obvious to every Body,
that is but moderatly conversant in the Volumn of them.

Nothing then can be more contradictory to the true Spirit of our Christian
Religion, than is that fierce, that virulent, that furious, that persecuting,
that destructive, that exterminating, that barbarous, that assassinating, that
bloody, and that hellish zeal, or rather rage, whereby some men are egged on to
the greatest Villainies and Cruelties, both against their Neighbors, and their
Sovereigns also, merely for Conscience sake, falsely so called. But, I shall
conclude this (it being a Matter so fully handled by the ablest Pens, and which
I had not said so much to, but that my Text obliged me to it, and that it
requires Preaching in season and out of season as much as any thing can do so)
in the words of the never enough admired Doctor Tillot son, Vol. 3. of his
Sermons, Page 15. The Christian Religion, says he, does as plainly teach the
contrary as it does any other matter whatsoever; and it is not more evident in
the New Testament that Christ died for sinners, than that Christians should not
kill one another for the misbelief of any Article of revealed Religion; much
less for the disbelief of such Articles as are invented by men, and imposed as
the Doctrines of Christ. Now if the hands of all Christians be so tied up, when
Religion only is the Quarrel; What kind of Christians must those Subjects be,
who think they do God good Service, when they Rebel against their Sovereign,
merely because he will not, both profess himself what Religion they would
prescribe to him, and suffer them to overturn the whole Commonwealth, that
they may get such a Religion, as humors them, introduced into it? Certainly
they can be of no other Rank, than were those, of whom our Savior foretold,
that they would value themselves upon that score, for having savagely butchered
his own Apostles, and those who were entrusted by him, to preach his Religion
to the Infidel World. And hence, tho the Story of Mahomets Pigeon had been
true, yet it had been as much discovered to be a Trick and Imposture, by fixing
upon the Pommel of his Sword, as by picking Pease out of his Ear.

It is therefore quite another thing for Subjects to vindicate the Legal Right
they have to profess their Religion, from their sighting for it purely upon its
own account. For as Religion is the thing in the World that men ought to be
most concerned in; so none can doubt, but that it is very just and lawful for
any People, to place the liberty of professing and owning their Religion, among
the first and most Essential Privileges, they as Subjects, are to derive from
the Constitution of that Government under which they live. And indeed when any
Government is a constituting, nothing can be more incumbent upon the Subjects,
than to provide sufficiently for the free exercise of their Religion: As when
it is constituted, they ought not to be wanting in all the due and lawful means
they can employ for securing that to themselves by Law. Hence the Religion of
no Subjects that is established in this manner, can ever be invaded, without
the Constitution of their Government to be so too. And so the suffering merely
for Religion, can only be in those Nations, where it is not the Subjects Right
to profess their Religion, in the virtue of their Constitution. And in those
Nations, where the Religion of the Subjects is fenced by the Law, however much
they shall be persecuted for their Religion; Yet, besides what the Prince is
guilty of upon this account as a Persecutor, he must also be so, upon that of a
Tyrant and Oppressor; in as much as he must break through all the Boundaries
betwixt him and his People, before he can trouble them because of their
Religion. So that the Subjects have equal Right to vindicate any encroachments
attempted upon their Religion, when the Profession of it is embodied with their
Constitution, to that they have to assert their Lives and their Fortunes. And
in this case Religion is only to be considered as it has become a Civil Right
and Property; being here no more, formally, but a thing wherein the Interest of
the Subjects is most deeply engaged.

But it must not here be pretended, That no Government can be erected upon such
a Constitution, as does not interpretatively at least, leave Subjects Right to
exercise their Religion: Because, forsooth, all Government owes its Institution
to Almighty God; and therefore cannot be reputed to have any other Sphere
wherein to exert its Power, but what he has chalked out unto it, first by the
Law of Nature, and then by those Revelations he has been pleased to impart to
the World; and consequently must always act in a subserviency to the promoting
that great End and Design for which he created Mankind, and Government among
them too; which the Profession of the true Religion is. And thus the Subjects
must always be presumed to have reserved to themselves the Right of Professing
that Religion, which they shall think to be true; since, neither it lies at
their door to transfer any such Power upon their Governor, as shall contradict
that Right which essentially belongs to them, as they are the Creatures and
Servants of God; nor yet can any Monarch assume to himself a power, which the
Sovereign Lord of Lords has originally precluded him from in the first
Ordination of Government. This, I say, is not to be alleged; Because, we have
seen already how expressly God has revealed himself upon the point of assertng
the Christian Religion by Arms. And what the mind of God was in the first
Appointment of Government, we can only learn from the nature of the thing, and
from those lively Oracles which are the only Standard of his revealed Will
toward Men. None will deny that no Magistrate can justly persecute any People,
merely for their Religion, provided it include nothing that tends to the
disturbing the Government, and to encourage those Moral Vices which are a
Scandal to all Religion, because so to Humane Nature it self; and that by no
Compact made betwixt him and them, he can lawfully compel them to violate any
of the Laws of God, whether they be dictated by Nature, or by Religion. And so
upon this respect it must be granted that Subjects have a certain Right founded
on their dependence upon God, to do nothing but what is consonant to the Laws
of Nature and Religion. But yet this Right is only Equivocal to That, which we
have all along been discoursing upon: Because it does not but remotely regard
the Political Constitution of Government; in so far, that the primary design of
this goes no further, than where mutual Com-propromises and Agreements are
settled between a People and their Governors, for their public safety and
peace, in the enjoyment of those things, which they condescend upon, as the
matters they are especially concerned in. And such Compacts being necessary
that Men should live together like Men, and not like Beasts in a Wilderness;
God by instituting Government, ratified them, and gave his Sanction to that
Politic Right, which both the Prince and the People do obtain by them. But it
is a great fetch to draw in other things to those Rights, than were at first
presumed to be involved in them. For thus there would be, upon the event (as
the World now goes) an Arbitrary Power lodged in the Subjects; whereby upon
every Caprice about the Law of Nature, or the true Religion, the whole
Settlement of the Government would be subverted; since still it might be
pretended that, tho such and such things had been at first agreed upon at the
establishing of the Constitution, yet it was not in the Subjects Power to
divest themselves of such a Right, nor in the Sovereigns to receive it from
them; as was sufficiently demonstrated before in this Head upon which I now am.
Wherefore all the interpretative Right that Subjects have upon the account of
their Constitution, must only be so, as it bears a full Analogy to the very
Being and Nature of the Constitution it self; as you see those things this
Objection goes upon cannot do. God therefore, for the security of Government,
has not allowed Subjects to vindicate any other Rights, than what they possess
in a just conformity to the Constitution in which they are; and has obliged
them to suffer patiently, and with a Christian Spirit, whenever they shall be
persecuted by a lawful Authority (tho then acting unjustly) because of not
compliance with those things that he has commanded the contrary of; promising
to all that shall do so in obedience to his will, that all their light
afflictions in this life, that endure but for a moment, shall be recompensed
with an eternal weight of glory. And I doubt not but all those, who use
seriously to think two or three consequences off, will find, that nothing can
be a sufficient foundation for any Government, but mere Force and Power; unless
those Principles, I have been refuting, be once disowned; as being of the most
dangerous tendency to shake all Governments loose, that any can be.

Yet we must carefully observe, That all Subjects are notwithstanding bound,
both by the Law of Nature, and of Religion, not to concur actively with their
Prince, when he would be at persecuting any of his People, for not doing those
things that are forbidden by these Laws. For in all cases whatsoever God is
rather to be obeyed, than Man: And such an obedience to a Princes command, is
so far from being Legittimated by the Shroud of his Authority, that it shares
the Guilt betwixt him that performs it, and him that enjoined it. However there
is great circumspection to be used even as to this; that a Princes Commands be
not wholly frustrated by groundless pretensions of their being unjust; and so
that the whole end of the Government, which depends entirely upon these, be not
evacuated and disappointed. And every man is to be guided here by his
Discretion, and Conscience; and that at his utmost hazard, both as to this, and
the next World; according to what has been said already in the foregoing Head,
and This.

Having thus abundantly cleared this matter about fighting merely for Religion;
there remains now for me only to lay the charge of the contrary rebellious
Doctrine to their door, to whom it does justly belong; I mean those of the
Church of Rome. I am sensible enough how very invidious it may be thought in
me, to fall upon them at this time, and especially for such a Tenet. It Is true,
I was laid aside from my Charge, from February 1686, to December 1687; merely
for Preaching from this Pulpit a Sermon against Popery; and how all that while
I was treated, the whole Nation knows. And so I may be reputed to vent those
resentments, which before I durst not adventure upon. But I bless God, I can
heartily forgive my greatest enemies. And tho the malice of the Papists have
harrass'd me as much, as with any tolerable countenance they could put a face
upon it; Yet the utmost of my revenge goes no higher, than that it may please
God in his mercy to them, and to me, to bless my poor endeavors so far, that
they may prove effectual to their Conviction, and so to their abandoning those
Errors, that must be Errors, if Christianity be not one. And it is my nature,
to hate more to insult over misfortunate Adversaries, than to be oppressed by
them for a thing that becomes a man to do, to own his Religion* Neither have I
any design, as God can bear me Witness, to expose them to those severities from
the Government, which, if they were not at the mercy of Protestants, they might
perhaps justly enough be afraid of. It is not the person of any man I have a
quarrel with. And the more I labor to discover any man's mistakes, the more
thanks he owes me. But I am not the first that has been accounted an enemy for
telling the truth.

But in the mean time, it cannot be construed impertinent to the present
occasion, to Stage the Popish Religion for such mischievous Principles; when it
is considered, that it was only a Popish Interest that prevailed for getting Du
Moulin's Book suppressed; and when several Memoires and Collections shall be
impartially looked into. And I doubt if the Papists of that time, could (were
they yet living) cleanly wipe off the guilt of King Charles the First's
Troubles and Murder. It is indeed the highest calumny to say* that all of that
Profession had an accession to them. No certainly; there was many, whose Honor
and Humanity was too strong for the Bigottry of their Religion; and who
therefore show as redoubted a Fortitude and Honesty, in their Masters behalf,
as they were of a Religion, that in it self was base and treacherous. And if
any thing could justify men against the violation of what was so Sacred, as is
the very Name of Religion; These deserved to be Crowned with more immortal
Laurels, than ever Encircled the Heads of such, as had their Religion, and
their Duty and Generosity, of a side. And this, I say, not to detract from
their Personal Worth, but only to put us in mind what bad influence so ill a
Religion can have upon the best Actions; when They must degenerate, by their
very cohabitation with That. But still they were Persons of the best Quality
and Rank that withstood, that overcame the Dictates of Rome. And we shall not
need to multiply Figures for the whole Number of Priests and Jesuits, that
owned any further concernment in that Royal Martyr, than as the Conjunctures
gave them a favorable Prospect. Thus the men that had that Religion mostly for
their Trade, and their Temper too, made the best advantage they could of all
our confusions; hoping in the event to manage them so, that out of a blind zeal
for Protestancy, Popery should spring forth. And upon this account, neither
King, nor People, was Sacred to them, but in as much, as they saw Holy Church
was to result from their Ruins. But still I will say with Cicero (tho adding a
word to him), Me Natura misericordem, Patria and Religio severum, crudelem nec
Religio nec Patria nec Natura esse voluit.

Wherefore I shall only let all Papists see, that by the very Tenor of their
Religion, they ought to be of such a damnable Opinion, as leaves nothing, no
Prince, inviolable, when Popery comes in Competition. I know it were needless
to run to the Practice, and Bulls of their Popes; to the Doctrine of their
greatest Doctors; to the Books of their Cannon Law; or even to the Decisions of
their Councils, for proving this. For a Courtly sort of Papists set up in
France and Britain within some years ago, have made it their great business to
contradict these with a downright impudence, as manifestly, as they use to do
Sense and Reason in the point of Transubstantiation. Had there been no more
writ against them, than what the Bishop of Lincoln has done, one would think,
that either such Principles must be rejected by them, or else Popery it self.
But some People know how to be Proof against all manner of evidence. Peter
Welsh has indeed writ well against that Doctrine, tho not against that Bishop.
He has clearly made it to appear, that by universal Tradition, nothing ought to
be admitted by Christians, that savours in the least of such a Treasonable
tendencie: As Mr. Allix has demonstrated, that Transubstantiation was not the
belief of the Romish Church before the Council of Trent. And the great thing I
admire in the Man, next to his ingenuous following the Truth in it self, is,
that he never understood he was pursuing a Protestant Tenet, upon a Protestant
Principle. And I Will engadge to refute all the Heresies of the Church of Rome,
as effectually as he has done That one of it, by the same method he has taken
in this affair. And when he has, for upwards of sixteen years, been
excommunicated by the Pope for such pranks, we may look upon him as a Man of
any other Religion, rather than the Popish, even when he stretches himself most
to vindicat it from the most absurd, and most gross of its Errors; as you shall
just now see by what I am to say.

It is then a short course I am to take with them; being to Argument ad
hominem. And so in the first place, I lay down this general Principle of
theirs; Namely, That there is no Salvation out of the visible Communion of the
Church of Rome. I need not offer to prove that they own this. For if they deny
it, Mr. Nicol may put up his Pen; and I Will ask no more for overturning St.
Peter's pretended Chair. But none can be in visible communion with the Church of
Rome, but these who are in visible Communion with the Pope. Because, according
to the Papists, the Pope is the Vicar of Christ, and so the Head of the
Catholic Church, and the Center of Catholic Unity. Hence the common
definition that their Divines give of the Catholic Church, is, That she is a
Society of Men joined together by the Profession of the same Faith, and by the
Communion of the same Sacraments, under the Government of their lawful
Pastors, and especially of the Roman Pontife, Christ's only Vicar upon Earth.
And it were wholly unaccountable how the Pope could be Head of the Church; and
yet one might not be in visible Communion with him, and nevertheless in visible
Communion with the Church; that is to say, in visible Communion with the Body,
and not in visible Communion with the Head of that Body, which is so
indispensably its Head, as that it could not be a Body, unless it had that
Head. I love not always to reproach the Papists with Transubstantiation. But
bating that, I know few contradictions they could be more coursly guilty of,
than they would be, should they attempt to defend, that one might be in visible
Communion with the Church of Rome, and yet not in visible Communion with her
Head, the Pope. But further; all Papists must either understand by that
governing Power, which, they say, is inherent in the Pope, as he is Pope; as
immediate a Jurisdiction over the whole Catholic Church, and all its Members,
as any particular Bishop has over his own Diocese; Or else they must
acknowledge him to be no more, but only a certain Patriarch at best. And I
would fain have any Papist state me any Middle Power of Primacy and Head-ship,
betwixt such a Jurisdiction, and such a Patriarchal Priority. They must speak
sense closely to the point, and not mere words. But why am I pleading only for
an equal Jurisdiction in the Pope, over the whole Church, to that which private
Bishops have over their respective Flocks? For that of Primacy must go much
higher. And if his Holiness be a Holiness at all, he has committed to him the
Superintendency of the Faith and Manners of the whole Church, not only in as
immediate a manner as any other Bishop has of that special portion of Christians
which is alloted to his Care; but also with a more Authoritative Force,
suitable unto such a transcendent elevation, as is the Papacy. Because (not to
speak yet of any infallibility residing in him, when he Acts under the full
extent of his Character) he who can immediately command, both those whom
another commands, and that other too, who commands them, can much more
powerfully by himself immediately command them, than can he who is also subject
to be commanded by him. As the Authority of a chief Stewart is much more
prevalent, than is that of those Inferior ones, who, tho constituted also by
the Master of all, are yet accountable to that grand Fellow Servants. And all
this is manifest from the Popes assuming a Power to hear, and Judge all Causes
Originally; and his reserving many Cases to himself, which the Ordinary dares
not meddle with. Now it is without all doubt, that any ptivate Bishop may, in
virtue of that Power he has over his Diocese, not only inflict Censures upon
the Persons of those who broach, or maintain things prejudicial to the Faith;
but also condemn, or approve Propositions, as contrary to, or consistent with
it; and annex Anathema's to those Definitions, so that thereby they become
Terms of Communion with him. And this is the known Practice of the Bishops
throughout all the Roman Church. And whoever conforms not to their Definitions,
are actually excluded Communion with them, and are no more Members of that Body
(namely their Diocesian Church) of which they are the Head. From all which it
is easy to infer, that the Pope may, and does, deal so as to the whole Roman
Church; and that those who do not submit to his Definitions, are consequently
exterminated that visible Communion with him, which is as essentially necessary
to the being a Member of that Church, as visible Communion with an inferior
Bishop, is to the being a Member of his particular Church. And this was very
palpable in the fate of the Jansenists, who were forced, either to renounce and
abjure those Propositions which the Pope had condemned, or else to suffer the
infamy, and other Punishments, which the Church of Rome uses to pour out upon
all those she calls Heretics. Hence the Popes Faith must, either be the chief
standard of the Faith of that whole Church; or else (contrary to what I have
now so irrefragably proved) one may be formally a Papist, or in visible
Communion with the Roman Church, and yet not in visible Communion with the
Pope. Because, if what the Pope has defined, may be rejected and laughed at,
without breaking visible Communion with that Church; one may be out of visible
Communion with her Head, and notwithstanding in visible Communion with her
self. And that in plain terms is, to be a Member of that Church, and not a
Member of her; since according to the Power, (all Papists contend) is in the
Pope, it is absolutely necessary for being a Member of her, to be in visible
Communion with him. Or, God would require a condition of being a true Member of
that Church, which, that one might be so, he were obliged not to perform; to
wit, in case the Pope should define contrary to the true Faith; which
undoubtedly he can do, if he be not infallible: Since even then, one were
obliged to be a Member of the Catholic Church; But he could not be that,
unless he were in visible Communion with the Pope; But now he could not be in
visible Communion with the Pope, and a Member of the Catholic Church too;
because, if he were in visible Communion with the Pope, of necessity he must
outwardly profess a Doctrine inconsistent with the true Faith, and so with
being a Member of the Catholic Church; And consequently, contradictory
obligations were exacted of all Christians, if the Pope could be fallible in
his Definitions; and if a necessity of conforming to them were requisite for
being in visible Communion with him; and visible Communion with him, were
essentially necessary for being a Member of the Catholic Church. All Papists
therefore must acknowledge that, either the Popes Definitions are universally
to be acquiesced in, or that the being in visible Communion with him, is no
Essential Constituent of being a Member of their Church. And if they cannot
deny the latter, as certainly they cannot; then it evidently follows, that his
Authority is infallible, in deciding any thing he shall take under his
cognizance; and that all his Thunders are the Thunders of Heaven indeed.

It is therefore undeniable, that every Papist is bound by his Principles to be
of the Popes Faith; and to Pin his Salvation upon his Holinesses Sleeve.
Neither can any thing be objected to the least Sentence of all this; unless it
be, That, since private Bishops are not infallible, tho they Excommunicate with
an Anathema; so the Pope may be both fallible, and yet have Power to
Excommunicate with such a heavy Curse too. But there is a great disparity
between the case of private Bishops, and that of the Pope. For however much
they may be in the wrong, there is always Redress, and place for an Appeal. And
before one, or his Doctrine, be condemned by the Supreme Judge, tho that
private Communion were broke, yet the Catholic would be entire. And God has
not absolutely required the one, as he has done the other. So that the Argument
I have here adduced, depends upon no more from the case of private Bishops,
than this; That, as they can condemn Propositions, and therefore all those in
their Diocesses, who do not embrace their Condemnation, becomes formally
thereby to be excluded visible Communion with them; so it fares betwixt the
Pope, and the Roman Church in general. And I did not infer, that, as therefore
those Bishops ought to be infallible, the Pope is so too. For the consequence
of that Antecedent from which this last Consequent is brought, is altogether
false. But the Popes Infallibility is deduced as a Result from these three, the
first, that as private Bishops can exclude from Communion with them, those of
their Diocese who submit not to their Definitions, so the Pope can do those of
the whole Church; the second, that it is essentially requisite for being a
Member of the Catholic Church, to be in visible Communion with the Pope; and
the third, that it is absolutely necessary to the having of the true Faith to
be a Member of the Catholic Church. Now it not being so requisite for being a
Member of the Catholic Church, and so for having the true Faith, to be in
visible Communion with any private Bishop; the Popes Infallibility can never be
denied, because no private Bishop pretends to it, whatever Power of making
Definitions he is invested with: since thus one part of my Argument is only
considered, without reflecting upon the rest. And here I defy the whole
Papists in World to give me any solid Answer to it.

What else then remains for demonstrating that all Papists, either are, or
ought to be, of that Opinion, whereby it is held lawful for the Pope to
Excommunicate all those Princes he shall reckon for Heretics, and to loose
their Subjects Oaths of Allegiance to them, etc; But only to make it manifest,
that the Pope, and the Court of Rome, has declared, that the contrary Tenet is
Erroneous and Heretical, and robs him of that Power, he, as Christ's Vicar, has
bestowed upon him? Now what Popes have done, and what Style they have used in
their Bulls toward Princes, since Pope Hildebrands time, all the World knows:
As also how Cardinal Bellarmine treated our Countryman John Barclay, as a
Heretic, for maintaining the Interest of Princes against the Usurpations of
the Sea of Rome; and how this poor man's Circumstances obliged him to Retract at
Rome what he had Printed at London, and that in as public a manner, if a
Preface to his Paroencsis can be accounted to be such. But I shall only Appeal
to all those Witnesses by which the Matter of Fact of this can be Attested. I
my self indeed have been called a Liar to my Face for having said, last when I
preached in this place, That the Pope is as tenacious of this Doctrine as ever
he was. I shall say no more, but that I might have been allowed as much common
Honesty at least, as not to be thought impudently to Averr those things in a
Pulpit, which all that have ever been at Rome cannot but understand, if they
can understand any thing there at all. And truly, the very nature of the Tenet
renders it a matter of such Vulgar knowledge, that it cannot be less notour at
Rome, than the great Points of Treason are here; it being as hazardous there to
question the Popes Power over Kings, as it is here to question the Kings just
Power over his People. One therefore might with equal Confidence Averr at Rome,
that Scotland has no other Government than what is Democratical; as he might
pretend here, that the Sentiments of the Court of Rome are, that St. Paul's
Sword as well as St. Peter's Keys, was delivered over into the Popes hand, if
they were not truly such. And whatever is of such a Consequence, as these
things are, use still to be no less public in their respective places, than
are the Churches and Crosses that are mostly so in them; the great danger of
controverting them, rendering them to be so. And the fear of the Inquisition
had made me learn so much when I was at Rome, tho nothing else had done it.
Wherefore, tho the Credit of Travelers is sometimes wont not to be too much
leaned upon; yet it must have sunk to a very low Character, if what they say
shall be disbeliev'd, merely because they say it. And my Assertion neither
needed to, nor did actually, depend upon my Testimony. There are Histories, and
Bulls enough extant to clear the business. Neither is the Holy League, nor the
Gunpowder Plot forgot; not to speak of so many horrid Massacies as the Popes
Fingers were not clean of. And we are not ignorant how the present Pope has
resented the late Decisions that were made against him by the Clergy of France,
at that Temporal Anti-Popes, its Kings Command: besides what has been Father
Maimbourgs case. So that it must be desperata causa Papatus (as indeed it is
however), if this Affair can make no other Shift for it self, but to set up
upon such a downright brazen Face, as the denial of the Matter of Fact will
amount to.

I shall now only, as humbly, as earnestly recommend to all of the Church of
Rome, that are especially Persons of any Quality, (for perhaps their Clergy
will think themselves obliged by what I have advanced, to prove the Pope
Infallible, according to the Principles of the Popish Religion) seriously to
consider upon what Bottom they have settled themselves. I am very much
persuaded that many of them have naturally so much Honor, and such a generous
Sense of things, that they would not like their Religion the better, that it
obliges them to such rebellious, such destructive Principles, and (unless they
be Atheists, which God forbid I should think any of them is) to Practices too
consonant unto these. If they will but impartially lay to Heart what I have
said, I doubt not but they will find that their Pope is as absolute and
illimited a Monarch in Religion, as ever was any Grand Signior in Turkey. And I
have much better thoughts of them, than to imagine, that they look upon
themselves as mere Arbitrary Slaves to the Pope, as to their Religion. But the
great mischief of most men's Errors, proceeds from their not pondering
sufficiently, what Consequences the general and confused Principles they
entertain, are originally the Source of.

But, whatever Papists have done, or may do; Would to God that many who have
called themselves Protestants had not writ too much, and too frequently after
their Copy. And would to God that none of these, for the like Principles, could
be charged for being the Executioners of the Martyrdom of this Day. And so
(having fully discust all that chiefly concerns this famous Text, I thought
most suitable to be pitched upon on such an occasion) my next work is to speak
to the Text of the Day.

But first, I must tell you, that I doubt not but my Discourse hitherto will by
some be thought to be like a Quarter-Staff, that strikes at both ends; and by
others to be exact Trimming all out; to wit, as they stand, who look upon it.
But that has ever been, and ever will be, the Fate of all those Truths that
happen to be owned, first after they were prevailed over by those Errors that
were of the utmost contrary Extremes. And I thank God I have endeavored as
much, as I could, to exercise my self, as to all I have said, in a Conscience
void of offense, both toward God, and toward all men. Neither have I suffered
my self to fall under any bias or prejudice from the Writings of other men;
having only made use of the Great Doctor Sherlocks Book of the Case of
Resistance to the Compiling this Discourse; and never having in all my life
read any of those Authors that are commonly said to be of the Republican Stamp.
So that the only Guide I have followed is the Holy Scriptures, together with
those Suggestions of my own Reason, that needed little or no pains to force
them out. All the favor then that I crave is, that none would make any
Application of the least Syllable I have spoke, but in so far as I have done so
my self. For I have uttered absolute Verities absolutely; without designing to
touch any of those Persons that may be concerned in them, but in as much as the
Tenor of my Discourse did oblige me to it. And if Intention comes to be
quarrelled, I cannot see how others can better judge of mine, than my self. And
having thus a little obviated those Calumnies that none can promise he shall be
secure from, I proceed in my Design.

But now a Subject offers it self to me, that requires such equal and suitable
advantages, as I dare not presume to think I am sufficient for handling it
with. Now I should lay forth the Perfections of a Man; that Heaven had resolved
should be more than a King, a Martyr, both for his Religion, and his Country
too. Now it lies upon me to expose the greatest Villainy, and Wickedness, as
well in its Formalities, as in its Substance, that ever the Sun beheld: For its
Creators Sufferings made it shrink in its Head; and here it had also done it,
but that there was such a distinction to be made by it, when, not the God of
Nature, but the best King in the World, was Butchered by the bloody hands of
impious Men, or rather incarnate Furies. And therefore now I must draw a
Curtain over that, which I have not skill enough to adorn, with the liveliest,
with the most deserved, Colors. And it is only EIKON BAZILIKH that is most
proper to make us understand both what that King was, and how barbarously he
was treated by his ungrateful Subjects.

Wherefore I shall only in a few words, put you in mind, that in King Charles
the First's case, the Constitution of our Government was infinitely broke on the
Subjects side; And that it was they which, in the most unjust manner that was
possible, did Invade the Rights and Royalties of that King, and not He that did
so with theirs. For so many of both Nations have already been so much before
hand with me, as to this point, that for me to go particularly to task with it,
were to suppose we had all been sleeping these 50 years bygone. And besides,
the unanimous Laws both of Scotland and of England, have not left us the power
of doubting what the nature of that Rebellion was. Neither can I perswad my
self that there is any hearing me, who will not readily assent to the justness
of them. I take this then for a thing so universally granted by all the World,
that it were as much to bewray my self, as to encroach upon others, should I
any further attempt to prove it.

Perchance it will here be said, That it was the Body of the Nation that rose
against that King: And that, since the Body of the Nation was the only
competent Judge whether or not he had malverst, and violated his original
Contract with his People; Therefore, they having Judged him to suffer justly,
He must needs have done so. But we all know against whom it was alleged, We
have a Law, and by our Law he ought to die, ( Joh. Chap. 19. Ver. 7). And this
was the only one instance wherein these words could have been more unjustly
applied, than they were against our Royal Martyr. Neither will any ever pretend
that the Body of any Nation is infallibly just, when they oppose themselves to
their Prince. Otherwise all Rebellion were but a mere Chymera, a thing
absolutely impossible and contradictious. Since no kind of men will ever be so
infinitely gross, as to act at that rate against their Prince, without some
Varnishing Colors to what they do. At least nothing were Rebellion, unless
there were no more but such or such a proportion of the Subjects concerned in
it. And then adieu to all the Rights of Princes. But, if you will reflect upon
what I said before, you cannot but necessarily see, That God sometimes permits
a People to scourge themselves for their sins, by scourging their Prince; And
that even then the injury they do him, is palpable and manifest. And indeed in
the present case, not only was the King acquitted from those aspersions that
had been cast upon him, and the Rebellion against him condemned as such, by the
unanimous Vote of the most solemn Representatives of both Nations, after they
had been, first wearied with the misery, and then remors'd for the guilt, of
their Error: But also we may sufficiently remember by what steps and degrees
that Rebellion came to its height and full pitch; and that the Redress of a few
imaginary Grievances began that work, which the too great confidence the King
placed in his Subjects on the one hand, and their no less ungenerous
insolences (which proportionably swelled as the Kings good nature was
expressed) on the other, brought to such an end as happened to it. I must needs
confess that his circumstances had looked somewhat ill favored, had these
Nations on the sudden broke out universally against him, For then there had
been so much of a Moral Evidence in the matter, as presumably could not have
fallen out, without some correspondent ground in the Object it self. But that
nothing such was then, I referr to the Matter of Fact, as it is to be canvass'd
by their own Memories who were then, and are yet, living; and by the Histories
of that time, by those who have only grown up to be men since. Yet after all, I
am not to deny, but that King was so much a Man, and not an Angel, as to have
had his own infirmities, and been of like Passions with us. But still I Will avow
that he had only so much of our frail temper about him, as was necessary for
leaving something for Heaven to do on his account; and that we must go there,
before we can find a greater Saint.

But when the King of Heaven has, by his Providence, so visibly interposed
himself to justify that as holy a King as ever swayed Scepter upon Earth,
against the malicious slanders of his enraged and treacherous Subjects, that we
must either make no Arguments from Providence at all, or else be convinced by
those which here are manifest and irrefragable; When, I say, God has taken the
vindication of that quarrel upon himself, we must have, as little Religion, as
Sense or Reason, if we shall any more be to seek in this matter. Now it is the
observation of the Great Doctor Tillotson, upon that Text, Righteousness
exalts a Nation: That National sins are only punished in this World; Because
they must either be so, or not at all; Since in the World after this, there
will be no Nations, or Bodies and Corporations of Men. It is also the
Observation of all Divines, That God does frequently accommodate and proportion
his temporal Judgments to those Sins that provoked him to pour them out; so
that face uses not more to answer face in the water, than the one does the
other. And thus Adonize* besek had his great Thumbs and Toes cut off, because
he had dealt so with Seventy two Kings. If therefore we have felt great and
remarkable Judgments; and if these have traced the very footsteps of those
iniquities we were guilty of toward that Royal Martyr: Must we not conclude
that he, who does all things in number, weight, and measure, has been
displeased with us, because of those very sins which then we committed; and
that our National Punishment reads to us a Lecture of our National Wickedness.

And that thus it has been with us, not only much in Cromwells time, (tho I
fear too many look upon that Usurpers Loins, as lighter than the little finger
of the gentlest Monarch,) but even in these last days, is but sadly palpable to
all considering Men. And I shall only instance it in the first considerable
assault we made upon the Majesty of Our Royal Martyr; which was, because of his
endeavoring to set up that Worship in his Chappel-Royal here, which from his
Infancy he had been inured unto. And for this, that Church whereof he was so
zealous a Member, was branded as a Limb of Antichrist; and he himself was
clamoured against, as, either down right Popish, or else very much inclined to
be so; and to have lanched forth into a design of introducing that Religion
into this, and all his other Kingdoms. But have we not had the most Pompous and
Magnificent Preparations made for the Mass it self, in that very place where we
would not suffer the Ordinances of the Protestant Religion to be celebrated
with a decent Solemnity, as little Popish, as the Fury that rose against it was
the contrary. Nay; has not the Mass it self been as public, in spite of our
Noses, as Sermons even from this Pulpit have been. Whereas, never Man did more
firmly, or with greater Constancy and Christian Resolution, adhere to the true
Protestant Religion, than Our Glorious Martyr did to his last breath: And
whereas too, that Church, to which he wished ours to be conformed, has always
proved to be the Bulwark and just pride and glory of the whole Protestant Side.
Neither has ever any Protestant Church in the World been so much the Envy of
the Church of Rome, as that of England has been, and will ever be, if our
repeated, resolute Provocations, do not at last overcome that Mercy, which
hitherto has preserved her in so much Purity and Splendour. And even the most
bigoted Enemies she was wont to have, do now by the public acknowledgements,
all Protestants owe to her Bishops, (that have born an eminent Testimony to the
Protestant Cause, and have been vouchaf'd upon these dreggs of time, to
preserve us from utter darkness, both here and hereafter) confirm that there
was never a Church less infected with Popery, nor more genuinly Christian. And
who were the Men that these four years by gone have so demonstratively baffled
all the Champions and Emissaries of Rome; that, as never was there any Truth
more triumphant, than in that time the Protestant has been over the Popish
Religion, so never was there greater advantage obtained over all the subtilties
of those cunningest Sophisters, than themselves were forced, only not to
confess? Surely none other can lay the remotest claim to this, but the Divines
of the Church of England. And all this, we all know; we have all magnified and
extolled, with raptures, not altogether unproportionable to the Merits that
extorted them from us. God grant that we may never afterward prove so unjust
and ungrateful, as to undervalue or despise that Church we have so loved, so
much admired, for the benefits we have received from her, when we shall come to
think that we stand not so much in need of her assistance. However, let the
occasion of this Day make us, Remember Lots wife. In the mean time, has not
God, no less Particularly, than Sufficiently, revenged those injuries that
Church has suffered from us, and those our Royal Martyr did for her sake?

It is but too easy to draw a further Parallel. And therefore let me ask you,
if you think God is an idle Spectator of all Humane Affairs? Or that when such
sins went before, and such Judgments followed after; there was no more but
mere Chance in all this? Or shall we fondly imagine, that the Fates and
Revolutions of Nations are matters so very triffling, that he concerns not
himself in them, without whose special Providence a Sparrow is not sold at such
or such a price in the Market? We must then conclude that the Nation was
horridly guilty in what they did toward this Royal Martyr, were there no other
thing to make us do so, but such a comparison of what he suffered from us, and
what we have suffered by the permission of God since.

These things indeed are become now to be in the mouths of all Men. But, alas!
they are as little considered as they ought to be, as they are much talked of.
And we rather seem to be itched with them, because of their oddness; than to
make that Spiritual Improvement of them, which, as we are Christians, we
should, and which God expects we will, and for which we must one day be
answerable before his Tribunal. What! Is our conversation so little in heaven,
that the greatest of its Providence work no Heavenly Impression upon us? Or
are we so engrost with the interests of this World, that we cannot spare one
sober thought to reflect upon those of that to come? Good God! Is it possible
that rational men, who believe they have immortal Souls within them, can so
squander away such excellent Beings in the drudgery of low and vulgar
considerations, as not to make the least suitable regard of thy most signal and
extraordinary Dealings toward them? But I leave this to the Consciences of all
Men, as they shall find themselves able to be accountable to that Vicegerent
God has planted in their Bosoms.

Since therefore the Rebellion against King Charles the First has been
condemned by the greatest Authority, both in Heaven, and in Earth; let us now
lay the Line to the Plummet, and measure how heinous the Sin of it was in it
self. And this we cannot better do, than by making a serious review of the
foregoing Parts of this Discourse. And first; If Subjection to the Higher
Powers be so directly commanded in the Scriptures: then must not Rebellion be
the most contradictory thing to them imaginable? Secondly, Did our Savior lay
the surest Foundations for Government upon the Principle of Conscience; must
not therefore the tearing up a Government by the roots in despite of him, in
the very face of Conscience, be an iniquity not to be thought of without
horror and detestation? Thirdly, Has our Savior been so very careful of the
Rights of Subjects, as to leave them entire without any the least encroachment
made upon them; Are not then the violences of Subjects against their Sovereign,
aggravated by all the black circumstances that can render Rebellion abominable?
Surely, it is a thousand times more intolerable for Subjects, whose Rights are
not invaded, and who consequently enjoy all the advantages of Humane Life that
the state of this World can allow; I say, it is infinitely more inexcusable for
Subjects to run headlong upon such a Wickedness, than it can be for Slaves to
do it; these having all the Temptation possible that Reasonable Creatures can
have, for prompting them to rise up against that Power, by which they are
depressed. And Lastly, Has our Savior superadded the Obligation of Conscience
to that of the Law of Nature, in repressing Subjects from disturbing the
Government under which they live, upon the account of that innate Freedom,
which afterpretences would strive to Assert; Is not therefore a Rebellion
founded on imaginary Complaints about the Subjects Right by the Law of Nature,
equally against all the Natural, and Revealed Religion in the World? And has
our Religion bound us up not to think it strange concerning the fiery trial, as
though some strange thing happened; but to rejoice in as much as we are
partakers of Christ's sufferings (1 Pet. chap. 4. verse. 12, 13.); And is not a
superstitious rebelling for this or that Pin of the Tabernacle, the most
repugnant Sin to the nature and genius of Christianity, that can be next to the
shaking it self off for good and all; nay, in a manner worse, by how much to
act with the greatest contradiction possible to a fixed Principle, is more
impious, than first to believe nothing, and then to do every thing? And does
the Doctrine of Overturning States and Empires, of Deposing Sovereign Princes,
etc, merely for the sake of Religion, owe its original to the Popes and Church
of Rome: And can there be any more insufferable Scandal upon Protestants and
the Protestant Religion, than to outdo Popery in its livelyest Colors, and
when it acts most like it self, and to play the Boute-feu and Incendiary more
violently, than ever the Consistory inspired its Votaries to be? I know I need
not tell you that the Rebellion against our Holy Martyr, had all these
malignant Ingredients in it, to enhanse it unto as terrible a Crime as ever a
Nation was guilty of.

But if our Sin has been great, let our Repentance be no less. We may flatter
our selves with the vain imagination that now we are not concerned in what was
done almost in our forefathers days, and by a few leading Men, that then had a
private Interest to promote. But you have heard how God has made it a National
Quarrel with us, and has to this very day been resenting it as such. It is
remarkable that the Angel commanded St. John, Rev. 3. v. 19. to tell the Church
of Laodicea, that as many as God loves he rebukes and chastens, and therefore
all should be zealous and repent. We have been sadly rebuked; God has given us
great and manifest Warnings; and has not only tried what our Ingenuity, but
what our Fears can work upon us. And that, not only because we have not
thoroughly enough laid to Heart how unworthy we showed ourselves to be of so
good a King, and so great a Christian; but also because our temper, as to our
Religion, has been but Laodicean, but lukewarm, neither hot nor cold. And
indeed we have served our Designs much more with our Religion, than our
Religion with our Designs; and it must be confessed, that either Pique, or a
certain mistaken Point of Honor, or this or that Interest, has been the great
Springs upon which the Religion of the Nation (as to the universality) has
chiefly moved, ever since the late Troubles began. I say God has sufficiently
rebuked us for this. But if now we shall not be truly zealous and repent, we
may expect the Chastening is yet to come; and that God will not be mocked any
longer with us, but will either give us up to that reprobate mind we seem so
much to court, or else to pour out Plague upon Plague upon us till we shall be
utterly destroyed, and become a hissing to the whole Earth.

But now to conclude, Let us learn from this Day to beware of rebelling against
those lawful Princes whom God places over us. We have a sad Example before our
Eyes, and sad Judgments too. And if we love our Peace and Felicity, our
Religion and our Conscience, and so our God and our Savior, let us never bring
a Disgrace and Reproach upon our Holy Profession, by doing those things whereof
the Heathens are ashamed, and which are the foulest sulliage and pollution upon
Christianity that it can be profaned with; I mean, let us always be subject,
not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake.

Now unto the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; unto him by whom Kings Reign,
and Princes decree Judgment; be all Praise, Honor, and Glory, from this time
forth, and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

