A FORM OF PRAYER To be Used Next after the Prayer in the time of War and
Tumults; throughout the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of
Berwick upon Tweed, in all Churches and Chapels, at Morning and Evening Prayer,
as often as there is Divine Service, during the time of His Majesty's Absence.

By his Majesty's Special Command.

London, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceased, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1697.

A FORM OF PRAYER To be Used Next after the Prayer in the time of War and
Tumults; throughout the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of
Berwick upon Tweed, in all Churches and Chapels, at Morning and Evening Prayer,
as often as there is Divine Service, during the time of His Majesty's Absence.
O God, whose Providence extends to all, even the meanest of thy Creatures, but
is most Illustriously Visible in Watching over the Persons of Kings and
Princes, the great Instruments of Good to Mankind; We give thee most hearty
Thanks and Praise for the many Gracious Deliverances thou have hitherto
vouchsafed to thy Servant King William; and we beseech thee still to continue
him under the merciful Care and Protection of thy good Providence. Preserve him
from all Secret Treachery and Open Violence; Prosper all his Affairs both at
home and abroad; and bring him back in Safety to our Comfort. We also Implore
thy Blessing upon Those whom he has Entrusted with the Administration of the
Government in his Absence, and grant that all their Counsels may tend to the
Glory of thy Name, the Honor of his Majesty, and the Welfare of thy People.
Turn, we pray thee, the Hearts of his Enemies, and give us all Grace under him
to lead Quiet and Peaceable Lives in all Godliness and Honesty, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Amen.
FINIS.

