A FORM OF PRAYER To be Used Next after the Prayer in the time of War and
Tumults, throughout the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of
Berwick upon Tweed, in all Churches and Chapels, at Morning and Evening Prayer,
as often as there is Divine Service, during the time of His Majesty's Absence.

By His Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceased; Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1696.

A FORM OF PRAYER To be Used Next after the Prayer in the time of War and
Tumults, throughout the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of
Berwick upon Tweed, in all Churches and Chapels, at Morning and Evening Prayer,
as often as there is Divine Service, during the time of His Majesty's Absence.
O God, whose Providence Extends to all, even the meanest of thy Creatures, but
is most Illustriously Visible in watching over the Persons of Kings and
Princes, the great Instruments of Good to Mankind, We give thee most hearty
thanks and praise for the many gracious Deliverances thou have formerly
vouchsafed to thy Servant King William; and more especially for thy late great
Mercy toward him, in discovering the Designs, and disappointing the Attempts
of Malicious and Bloody Men. We beseech thee still to continue him under the
merciful Care and Protection of thy good Providence. Preserve him from all
Secret and Treacherous Practices, and cover his Head in the day of Battle. Be
thou graciously pleased to go forth with his Fleets and Armies, and to bless
them, and those of his Allies, with good Success in all their undertakings.
Bring him back in Safety to our Comfort; and make him in thy good time the
happy Instrument of establishing Peace and Truth in these and our Neighboring
Nations. We also humbly implore thy Blessing upon those whom he has Entrusted
with the Administration of the Government, during his Absence, and grant that
all their Counsels may tend to the glory of thy great Name, the honor of his
Majesty, and the welfare of thy People. Convert the hearts of his Enemies, and
give us all grace, under him to lead quiet and peaceable lives in all godliness
and honesty, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
FINIS.

