TULLY's MORALS.

TULLY's Three Books OF OFFICES, In ENGLISH.

With NOTES Explaining the Method and Meaning of the AUTHOR.



LONDON: Printed for SAM. BUCKLEY, at the Dolphin, in St Paul's Churchyard. M
DC XC IX.

TO Mr. Will. Bedingfield, AND Mr. John Wallis.
I Beg leave, Gentlemen, to prefix your Names to this little Treatise about
Moral Duties, which the wise Author of it thought fit to recommend to his own
Son, and which has usually been looked upon as one of the perfectest and
compleatest in its kind. It has altered its Dress indeed since it came under my
Hands, and I am afraid, may-have suffered very much by the Alteration: however,
as to the Body and more substantial Parts of it, I hope it is still the same,
and worthy of that Opinion, which the Author himself had of it, That 'twas a
very good Present, if made such Use of, as the Nature and Importance of its
Argument required. 'Twas at first designed for a Person in your Circumstances,
a Student in an University, a young Gentleman of great Hopes, one from whom his
Country did expect to receive Benefit, and his Friends no small Comfort and
Satisfaction: I thought I could not do better therefore, after once I had
resolved to Translate it into English, than Dedicate it to You, who have so
good a Title to it, as well upon this as upon some other Accounts. The Honor
and Happiness I have in being appointed the Director of your Studies, the many
Favors and Obligations I have received upon that account, together with a
great many other Inducements arising from so close and endearing a Relation,
almost forced me to make this public Acknowledgment. And I confess I was
desirous my self of doing it, both that it might serve for a Testimony of that
Value and Esteem which I have for you; and that I might oblige you by it, in
some measure, to read these Precepts, when you are gone from under my Care,
which most People in those Circumstances are but too ready to forget. You will
find here all the more useful Parts of Virtue so clearly set before you; the
Excellence and Importance of it so judiciously enlarged upon; the Necessity of
it toward the procuring a Reputation, toward the meeting with Encouragement and
Success in our Undertakings: and, in a word, toward the obtaining any tolerable
degree of Happiness, in whatever State of Life, so abundantly made out; that I
hardly know of any thing (relating to mere Morality) that could more fitly be
recommended to Persons in Your Circumstances, by one in Mine, than this
excellent Treatise. It Is true you have read it in its Original Language, and my
Request to you is, that you would continue to do so; the Design of this
Translation being not to exclude, but to assist the Latin: which if it may but
do in any tolerable manner, so as to help toward the Understanding of such
excellent Rules of Living, I have obtained my End.

Such as it is, Gentlemen, I heartily present it to you; wishing that it may be
in some measure serviceable to those Ends, for which it was at first designed;
and that all, but especially Men of Estate and Fortune, and such as are likely
to make some Figure in the World, would be persuaded to learn even from an
Heathen Writer, That there is no true Profit or Advantage, no solid Reputation
or Honor, and, in short, no real Happiness any where to be found, except in
the Practice of Virtue and Honesty. I am,

GENTLEMEN, Your most affectionate humble Servant, T. C.

ERRATA.
P. 129. l. 23. r. any by-ends. p. 161. l. 22. r. filed off. p. 204. Note h. r.
six Books. p. 281. l. 14. for now living, r. lately dead.

THE PREFACE.
THE turning into English so excellent a Discourse as this is, I suppose, will
hardly stand in need of an Apology: But the attempting it after so eminent a
Person as Sir R. L' Estrange, perhaps will hardly admit of any. I do not design
to spin out a long Preface, in making Excuses for so bold an Undertaking; much
less in finding fault with the Performance of that Gentleman: I have more
regard to the Reader's Patience than to do the former; and am too sensible of
His great Worth and my own Miscarriages, to be guilty of the latter. I shall
only beg leave to assure the Reader, That this Translation was well-nigh
finished, before I saw the last Edition of Sir Roger's, in which he has
corrected some very notorious and palpable Faults, that were in all the former.
I hope therefore it could be no Presumption in me to think his Translation
faulty, since he himself by this late Alteration, has in effect acknowleg'd it.
I might, it is true, have suppressed my own Work, when I saw he had corrected
those Mistakes and Oversights I had formerly found in his, and which first put
me upon making this new Attempt: But beside that all Men, when once they are
pretty far advanced in any Business, (as I then was) are naturally unwilling to
have it taken out of their Hands, and desirous of going on to see an end of it;
and beside that, I think there are still some places, in which he has
mistaken, or not clearly enough explained, the Meaning of the Author: I was
always of Opinion, That there would be something further necessary, before
Tully's Offices could be thoroughly understood; and that a bare Translation, and
especially so close an one as Sir Roger's is, could never give the Reader a
View of the deep Sense, and sometimes intricate Method of that Book. I resolved
therefore to go on with my designed Translation of it, and to add such things
to it by way of Explication, as seemed necessary or convenient for the better
understanding the Design, Meaning and Method of the Author. Those People
therefore, that can understand Cicero by Sir Roger's Translation, may still
make use of it if they please, notwithstanding any thing I have said to the
contrary, and I hope there is no harm done: and for those that cannot, I have
attempted this new one, which I hope may be in some measure serviceable to that
End.

The Author of this Book is so well known, that 'twould be altogether needless
to give any Account of him in this place: As for the Book it self, it has
always been looked upon as one of the perfectest Pieces of his Writings, and
one of the noblest Systems of Moral Precepts, that have ever been left us by
the ancient Heathens; and not without reason: There appears all along in it so
great a Love and Concern for Virtue, which he recommends to his Son with all
imaginable Earnestness; so deep a Sense of the Obligations to Honesty, and
Aversion for every thing that is contrary to it; such an admirable Inclination
for the Virtues of Plainness, Truth and Sincerity, and such a generous Contempt
of all shuffling, mean and underhand Dealings; such Piety toward his Native
Country, and hearty Concern for the Calamities it groaned under, and withal so
much Hatred and Detestation for those Men, who had been the Causes of its
Misfortunes; and, in a word, so many excellent Rules of Life, with reference to
our Duty either to God or Men, and to those in their several Capacities and
Relations, whether of Kindred, Friends or Benefactors, as have justly
recommended it to the Esteem of all the World, and given it the first place
among the eminent and most celebrated Writings of this kind. The Scope and
Design of it in his own words is, To lay down some Directions and Precepts of
good Living, according to which upon all occasions Men ought to govern their
Lives and Actions; so that whatever State of Life a Man is in, whether Public
or Private, of Governor or Governed, of Prosperity or Adversity, old Age or
Youth, he will here find Rules how he ought to demean himself in any of those
Capacities; and will be told what that is, which the Dignity and Excellence of
his own Nature requires in regard to himself; and what the several sorts of
Alliance or Society among Men demand, in relation to other People: So that
while other parts of Learning and Knowledge are most times confined either to
certain Ages, certain Times, or certain Places, this is of general and
universal Use; it is (as our Author says upon another Subject) necessary for
Youth as well as old Age; it directs in Prosperity as well as in Adversity;
it is a Delight to us at home, and a Companion for us abroad; Pernoctat
nobiscum, peregrinatur, rusticatur.

'Twas principally designed for the Use of his own Son, whom he had sent to
Athens for the benefit of Study, while all things were in Disorder and
Confusion at Rome, after Pompey's Defeat in the Pharsalian Field: But he tells
us he has purposely framed it in such a manner, as that it might be equally
serviceable to all other People. The time of its writing was after Caesar's
Murder, when Mark Anthony and his Adherents had got the Power into their
Hands, and Cicero (as he complains at the beginning of the third Book) was by
wicked Arms driven away from the City, and forced to betake himself to his
private Retirements. At this time he thought to have gone to Athens to his Son,
and was accordingly on his Journey, when he was called back again by the loud
Cries of his Country, as he intimates in the conclusion of this Discourse, and
explains more at large in the beginning of his first Philippick. He returned to
Rome upon this Recall, but found things very different from what he expected,
when he came thither: Hereupon he withdrew himself to his Houses in the
Country, resolving to wait for some fitter Opportunity of being serviceable to
the Republic. From this Retirement he sent these Precepts in writing to his
Son, which he designed to have given him by word of Mouth, had he arrived at
Athens. The Method he proceeds in is this which follows: After a short
Discourse by way of Preface to his Son, and fixing the right Notion of the
Subject he is to treat about, he endeavors to beget in him a Love of Honesty,
by representing it as amiable and commendable in it self, and agreeable to the
Nature and Reason of Mankind. He divides it into four Parts or general Heads,
Prudence, Justice, Fortitude and Temperance, which are usually called the four
Cardinal Virtues, and Discourses in order upon every one of 'em, with all their
several Species or Branches, and the Vices that stand in opposition to 'em. And
this he does, not in a dry and scholastical Manner, by enquiring nicely wherein
the strict Nature of the several Virtues consists, and which of their opposite
Vices they are nearest to, (which my Lord Bacon somewhere very ingeniously
observes, is like a Master's setting a Boy a Copy to write after, without ever
showing him how he should make his Letters) but by laying down such Rules under
each of these Heads, as may direct Men in the Practice of the Duties required
of 'em. Afterward he compares them with one another, and shows in what Order
they are to be performed by us: As, Justice, for Example, before Knowledge,
Fortitude, etc. All these Virtues, when taken together, make up the general
Notion of Honestum; and when taken separately, are so many Branches or distinct
Members of it.

But seeing something else beside Virtue or Honesty is necessarily requisite,
or at least useful and convenient, for our well-being here; such as are the
Comforts and Conveniences of Life, viz. Riches, Glory, Honors, Success in
Business, etc. which are all comprehended under the Notion of the word Profit:
therefore in the second Book he endeavors to show how these are to be
obtained: And having made it appear, That all the Advantages Men enjoy, and the
Evils they endure, are principally owing to Men themselves: From thence he
infers, That the Way whereby we may obtain the former, and avoid the latter, is
to procure the Endeavors of Men on our side, so as to have them ready to
assist us upon occasion. This he shows can be done no other way, than by
performing those Duties which Honesty requires of us: viz. by Prudence and
Wisdom, by Justice and Integrity in our Words and Actions, whereby Men are
drawn to place their Trust and Confidence in us; (where also he particularly
shows, that Pretending and Hypocrisy can never get a Man any lasting Honor)
by Kindness and Beneficence, Courtesy and Affability, which beget in Men a
Love and Affection toward us: and lastly, by Fortitude, Contempt of Money, etc.
which are Virtues that draw Men to Wonder and Admiration, and make 'em think us
Persons that really deserve to be promoted.

But because Riches, Honors, Power and the like, which seem to be a Profit and
Advantage to us, may often interfere with Virtue and Duty, which really are
such; therefore in the third Book he endeavors to show, How a good Man ought
to carry himself in such a Case; and makes it appear, That Riches, Honors,
Kingdoms and Empires are far from being truly an Advantage to any Man, whenever
they are gotten by unlawful means; and that no Honest Man would do any thing
that is contrary to Conscience or Honesty, though sure to obtain even the whole
World by it. All which he builds upon this Foundation, That the Goods of the
Soul, viz. Virtue and Honesty, are, if not the only, yet infinitely the
greatest Goods; (which is a Principle allowed of by all the wiser Philosophers)
from whence it must follow, That whoever parts with these upon the account of
any Riches, or other seeming Advantage, be it never so great, must needs be a
Looser; for he forfeits a greater for the sake of a less Good, and in hopes of
getting a seeming, deprives himself of a real Interest. Here he goes over each
of the Virtues mentioned in the first Book, and proves that nothing can be a
Man's true Profit, though it should bring him all the appearing Advantages in the
World, and though he were sure to keep it secret from the Eyes of all Men, and
even the Gods themselves, that is contrary to the Duties of Prudence and
Justice, of Fortitude and Moderation. In a word, Here are Rules for the
Government of our Lives in relation to God, our Neighbors and Ourselves, such
as are deservedly admired in a Heathen, and might have well become even a
Christian Writer: He tells us, That to procure the Favor of the Former, we
must live a religious and holy Life: That, as to the Second, there is an
Alliance or Society between all Mankind, whereby each Particular is obliged to
do his best, toward promoting the Happiness and Welfare of the whole Body, and
rather to die than do another any Injury: That, as to Ourselves, we should
always consider the Dignity and Excellence of our Reasonable Nature, and take
care that we never be guilty of any Action, that may any wise stain or unbecome
its Honor: This, as he goes on, will quickly teach us, how base a thing it is
to dissolve in Luxury, Softness, etc. -- Thus have I endeavored to present the
Reader with a general View of this incomparable Treatise: should I proceed to
tell him, That some of the most eminent Writers in the World have owed great
part of their Credit to it: That the Sandersons, Grotiuses, Pufendorfs, etc.
are particularly obliged to it for their Skill in determining Moral Cases,
perhaps he might think me rather zealous, than impartial, in my Account of it:
Though I can assure him it is no more than what is strictly true. The first of
those great Persons (as the Writer of his Life tells us) had it all by heart;
and how much Use the two latter have made of it, I leave those to judge who
have been conversant with their Writings --. But the Book can much better
recommend it self by its own true Value, than I can do by any thing I am able
to say of it: thither therefore I shall refer the Reader for his further
Satisfaction, after I have told him, in a few words; what has been attempted in
this new Translation.

I have endeavored to express what I conceived to be the Sense and Meaning of
the Author, in as full and comprehensive words as I was able, attending all
along to the principal Scope and Design of his Discourse, rather than to the
particular Words and Expressions. I have taken care however to let none of his
Words escape, without giving the Sense of 'em in our own Language: So far from
that, that I rather expect to be condemned, on the other hand, for explaining
some of 'em a great deal too much, and spending a Line perhaps, or more, in
that, which the Author expressed in but one single Word: But whoever considers
the Nature of the Latin Tongue, and our Author's Way of Writing, especially in
this Book, will easily perceive that 'twas necessary for me to do so, otherwise
the English would have been almost as hard to be understood, as the Latin: For
the Truth of which I refer the Reader to Chap. 35, 36, 37. Book 1. not to name
innumerable other places. I have had a peculiar Eye all along to the Method of
the Discourse, and the Connection or Dependence of one part of it upon another;
which because it is oftentimes very obscure, I have generally added the
distinguishing Terms of first, second, etc. and where that could not be done,
have sometimes added a Line perhaps, to show how he passes from one thing to
another: But this I have generally told the Reader of, or else have printed
what is so added in a different Letter; as may be seen at the beginning of
Chap. 6, and the end of Chap. 7. Book 1. As to some things, that are of little
or no consequence toward understanding the Author, as if I have translated
Caena Dinner; Hominis honorati and principis, a Gentleman, or a Person of
Honor; Convivium, sitting at a Table, and over a Glass of Wine, etc. or if in
a philosophical Discourse as this is, I have sometimes made use of an unusual
Word; I suppose they will be counted not unwarrantable Liberties, but such as are
commonly taken by Translators. If in the main I have hit upon the true Sense
and Meaning of my Author, and expressed it in such clear and intelligible
Terms, as may make the Reader see what is the Force of his Arguments, the
Reasonableness of his Precepts, the Fitness of his several Illustrations and
Examples, with those other Virtues which have rendered this Book so deservedly
Famous; I have obtained what I principally designed by this Attempt.

The Design of the Notes is chiefly to point out the Author's Method, and
explain some Passages in him that seemed more obscure than the rest: If the
Reader find fault, that some of 'em regard rather the Latin than the English;
and others seem trivial and inconsiderable: I desire he would take notice, that
I would not have the English thrust out the Latin, but rather promote and
facilitate the Reading of it; and that I did not design to make Notes for Men
of Learning, (by whom I am fitter to be taught my self) but rather for the
Young and Less-knowing sort of People.

I have gone according to that Division of Chapters, which is usually received,
because the Book has been quoted according to it, and to have made any
Alteration would but have bred Confusion; though otherwise I think it is the most
ignorant and ridiculous one that was ever made, except in some other of our
Author's Writings. I have put before each Chapter a Summary of what is
contained in it: and to the whole have subjoined an Index, referring to all the
principal Matters that are mentioned in the Book. In a word, I have not
wilfully omitted any thing, as far as was possible in so small a Volume, (for I
did not design to write a large Commentary, or play the Critic upon my Author)
that seemed necessary or useful toward a full Explication of this excellent
Discourse. I have made some use of Sir R. L'Estrange's English, and especially
Mr. Du B.'s French Translation; which I gratefully acknowledge. I have followed
that Sense which to me seemed most agreeable to the Author's Design, without
finding fault with the Interpretations of other People, or speaking Ill of
those who have not been of my Mind; and if I have been mistaken my self in any
thing (as I don't question but I many times have) I desire the Reader to use
the same Candor and Forgiveness toward me: that as, I think, I have given no
body any just Cause of Complaint, so I may not have any my self from other
People. In fine, I am sure my Design was commendable; the Success of it I must
leave to the Reader's Judgment: I shall only say, That as I look for no Honor
from any thing I can do, more especially of this nature; so I hope that however
I may expect a Pardon.

TuLLY 'S OFFICES.
The First Book.
CHAP. I.
Cicero exhorts his Son, a young Student at Athens, not to forget his Latin,
though he was in a Greek University: but to mix the Studies of both those
Languages, and also learn to Write both as a Philosopher and an Orator. To this
purpose he advises him to read his Works, as having equally written in each of
those kinds, which none of the Grecians had ever done. But he modestly adds,
That he thinks they could have done it, but that they applied themselves wholly
to one of them.

Dear Son MARCUS,
Though after a Year's Study under The most noted Peripatetick Philosopher of
that Age, a familiar Acquaintance of Cicero's, and by him often equaled to the
greatest of the Ancients. He was of Mytilene the chief City in the Island
Lesbos, and there taught for some time. Afterward heremov'd to Athens, where
Cicero among others entrusted his Son with him. See Famil. Epist. Lib. 16.
Epist. 21.
Cratippus, and that at such a Place as The famousest City in the World for
Politeness and good Literature; whither all the great Men of Antiquity resorted
for Learning; where Plato, Aristotle, Demosthenes, Sophocles, and innumerable
others the greatest Wits of the World in old time flourished: therefore by our
Author in his first Book de Orat. chapter 4. called, The Inventress of all Arts.
His Son then being at such a place, and under such a Master, he expects he
should have made a suitable Improvement.
Athens, you cannot but have abundantly furnished your self with Knowledge in
the Doctrins and Rules of Philosophy; having had the Advantage of so eminent a
Master to supply you with Learning, and a City that affords you such excellent
Not of Persons then living only, but of those also that were dead and gone:
nothing so bringing to our remembrance the Virtues and Learning of great Men,
as being in the Places where they once-flourish'd: which is one great Advantage
of a Public Education.
Examples: Yet I should think it convenient for you (which is a Method I took
for my own profit) always to mingle some Latin with your Greek, in the Study of
Eloquence as well as Philosophy; that you may be equally perfect in both
Utriusque orationis, may mean either the two Languages of Latin and Greek, or
the two kinds of Style that are proper, one for the Bar, and the other for
Philosophical Discourses. I have taken both Senses into the Translation.
those ways of Writing, and make your self Master of either Language. For the
furtherance of which, I am apt to imagine, I have done no inconsiderable Service
to our Countrymen; so that not only those who don't understand Greek, but even
the Learned themselves will confess, that, by reading my Works, they have
mended their Styles, and somewhat improved their Reason and Judgments.
Wherefore I am willing, it is true, you should learn of your present Master, the
greatest Philosopher of this Age, and learn of him too as long as you desire
it; and so long I think it is your Duty to desire it, as you find your self
sufficiently benefited by it: But withal, I would have you to read my Writings,
which very little differ from those of the Peripateticks; for So I understand
the word Utrique to mean both the Academicks of whom Cicero, and the
Peripateticks of whom Cratippus was. These two Sects at first were almost one
and the same, as appears from several places of Cicero; [See Book 3. chapter 4.]
Xenocrates, the chief Author of the former, and Aristotle of the latter, being
each of them Scholars to the incomparable Plato, who was Hearer of the wise
Socrates. The Academicks therefore and Peripateticks were both of them
Followers not of Socrates only, (for that almost all the Philosophers were)
[See Cic. de Orat. 3. 16, 17.] but of Plato too, and so were very nearly allied
to each other.
both we and they profess our selves Followers, not of Socrates only, but of
Plato likewise. As for the Matters contained in them, use your own Judgment
with Freedom and Impartiality, for I lay no manner of Restraint upon you: your
Improvement in the Latin is what I chiefly desire, which I am confident must
follow from a careful Perusal of 'em. Nor let any one think that I am Vain or
Pretending when I speak thus: For, allowing some others the precedence in
Philosophy, should I assume to my self what is the Part of an Orator, viz. to
speak Apt, distinct, etc. The word Apt properly denotes the Conformity of
our Style to the Subject we are handling, and is called by our Author in other
places Apt ad rerum dignitatem dicere; and he tells us, that those Men may be
said to speak apt, Qui it a mother antur Orationem, ut rerum and personarum
dignitates ferunt, which I think answers to our English word suitably.
Distinct refers to the Method of a Discourse, and is opposed to Confusedness:
Ornate to the Figures and Ornaments of Rhetoric. So that the three words seem
indifferently well to comprehend the whole Business of an Orator; which is,
Invenire praeclare, inventa disponere, disposita exornare; To invent what is
suitable and proper for the Subject, to put it into a good Method, and to give
it the Ornaments of Eloquence, etc.
suitably, methodically and handsomely upon any Subject, seeing I have spent my
whole Life in that Study, I think it is no more than what I might reasonably and
fairly lay claim to. I cannot but very earnestly desire you therefore, my dear
Cicero, to read my Books with care and diligence; not my Orations only, but
these Pieces also that concern Philosophy, which are now of a bulk almost equal
to them: For though in the former there is more of the force and power of
Eloquence, yet is the smooth and even Style of the latter by no means to be
neglected. And of all the Grecians I find not one, that has employed his Pen in
both these kinds; and been at once successful in the Language of the Bar, and
this other more gentle and easy Style of Philosophical Discourses: Unless A
Peripatetick born at Phalerum, a small Town on the Seacoast of Attica, from
whence he had his Name. He was ten Years Governor of Athens, in which time he
was honored with 300 Statues. Being afterward driven our by Demetrius
Poliorcetes, Son of Antigonus, Alexander the Great's Captain, he fled to
Ptolomy King of Egypt, by whom he was set over the famous Alexandrian Library,
which contained in it (as some write) 700000 Volumes. He persuaded that Prince
to get the Old Testament translated into Greek, which is what we now call the
Translation of the Seventy. Most of his Works are lost.
Demetrius Phalereus may be reckoned for one, who is subtle enough in his
Disputes of Philosophy, but methinks in his Oratory, wants that Spirit and
Vehemence that is requisite; however, has so much of Sweetness in him, that one
might know he had been A noble Philosopher of the Peripatetick Sect, Scholar
first of Plato, and afterward of Aristotle, whom he succeeded in his School.
He was Son of one Melantes, a Fuller, and born at an obscure Place of the Isle
Lesbos, named Eresus, whence he himself is called Eresius. His first Name was
Tyrtamus, that of Theophrastus being afterward given him by Aristotle for his
Divine Eloquence. He was mightily admired by Cicero, who used to call him his
Delight, and is often commending him for the Sweetness of his Style. Several of
his Works are still remaining, one of the chief of which is his Characters.
Theophrastus's Scholar. Whether I have had any better Success in both these
ways, must be left to the Judgment of others to determine: I can only say that I
have attempted 'em both. And it is my Opinion, That if ever An incomparable
Philosopher, born at Athens, who traveled over great part of the World for
Knowledge; He is often mentioned, and in several places translated by Cicero,
who follows him very much in his Philosophical Writings. His Works still
remain, which are so excellent, as to have justly got him the Name of the
Divine Plato.
Plato had undertaken to plead, he would have been a most copious and powerful
Orator; and if The most famous Greek Orator that ever was, Son of a Blacksmith
in Athens, and Scholar to Plato. His Works are still extant. See his Life in
Plutarch.
Demosthenes had studied and discoursed of those things, which he learnt of
Plato, he would have done it with a great deal of Ornament and Majesty. The same I
think true of Isocrates was a notable Teacher of Rhetoric, and Aristotle a
most eminent Philosopher in the famous City of Athens: both of them very well
known by their Works, which are still, the greatest part of them, remaining.
Isocrates and Aristotle; each of which, pleased with his own way of Writing,
That is, Isocrates never tried how he could succeed in Philosophical
Discourses, nor Aristotle in Orations.
neglected to cultivate and improve the other.

CHAP. II.
The Reasons why he Writes upon this Subject. The general Use and Importance of
it. All Philosophers have handled it; though some, by their false Notions of
Happiness and Misery, utterly pervert it. What Sects they are, that have a
Right to lay down any Rules or Precepts concerning it. He designs in this Work
to follow the Stoics principally. The Subject of a Discourse ought first to be
defined, before we begin to say any thing upon it.

BUt having resolved to write some thing at present, and a great many others
hereafter to you, I thought I could begin upon no better Argument, than that
which is fittest for your Age, and most becoming my Authority as a Father: For,
of all those useful and important Subjects, which Philosophers have handled so
largely and accurately, the Precepts they have delivered about Officium in our
Author, which I beg leave to render either Office or Duty, signifies especially
two things; Sometimes the Duty or Obligation it self, as when he says,
Peregrini Officium est, It Is the Duty of a Stranger, i. e. He is obliged to do
so, or so, etc. At other times, the Action whereby that Duty is performed, as
when he divides Officia, Virtues, into media and perfecta, ordinary and
complete ones: so Officia Justitiae, liberalitatis, etc. are the Actions of
those Virtues; which may be worth observing through the whole Work.
Offices or Duties, seem of the largest extent and comprehension: For they take
in every part of our Lives, so that whatever we go about, whether of public or
private Affairs, whether at home or abroad, whether considered barely by our
selves, or as we stand in relation to other People, we lie constantly under an
Obligation to some Duties; and, as all the Virtue and Credit of our Lives
proceeds from the due Discharge of This, so all the Baseness and Turpitude of
'em results from the Non-observance of It. Now, though this be a Subject which
all Philosophers have busied themselves about, (for, who ever dared to assume
that Name without laying down some Instructions about Duty?) yet have some He
means chiefly the Epicureans, who made Man's Happiness to consist in Pleasure,
and his Misery in Pain, which is indeed to subvert the very Foundations of
Honesty. For seeing there is nothing that Men will not do, for the obtaining
their chief Good, and avoiding the greatest Evil; it necessarily follows, that
(as long as they act consistently with their Principles) these Men will betray
their Friends, break their Oaths, or do any thing in the World, rather than
forego any Pleasure, or endure any Pain. Therefore he has reason to say, They
can never do the Duties of Friendship, etc. For certainly, if I count Pleasure
my greatest Good, I shall rather part with my Honesty than that; and if I
reckon Pain the greatest of Evils, I Will rather lose a Friend, be Unmerciful, or
Unjust, than ever undergo it. The same may be said of those that place their
Happiness in Riches, Honors, etc. and their Misery in the contrary. See Tusc.
Quest. 2. 6.
Sects of 'em given such accounts of Man's Happiness and Misery, as destroy the
very Being of Virtue and Honesty. For he that makes any thing his chiefest
Good, wherein Justice or Virtue does not bear a part, and sets up Profit, not
Honesty for the Measure of his Happiness; as long as he acts in conformity with
his own Principles, and is not overrul'd by mere Dictates of Reason and
Humanity, can never do the Offices of Friendship, Justice or Liberality. Nor
can he be ever a Man of Courage, who thinks that Pain is the greatest Evil; or
he of Temperance, who imagins Pleasure to be the Sovereign Good. Which things
are all so obvious and plain, that one would think they could never stand in
need of a Dispute: however, I have largely discoursed upon them in His Books De
finibus Bonorum and Malorum.
another Work. These Sects therefore, unless they are resolved to be
inconsistent with themselves, ought wholly to abstain from speaking any thing
about Duties: Nor indeed can any constant, unalterable, It Is a Stoical
Principle, That the Happiness of Man consists in acting agreeably to his
Nature; by Nature, understanding nothing else but Right Reason, whereby Man is
distinguished from all other Creatures. By conjuncta naturae, therefore in this
place, I suppose he means, such as are agreeable to the Dictates and Rules of
Right Reason, i. e. Rational.
rational Rules of them at all be given, unless it be by those who go upon this
Principle, For if any thing else may be desired more than Virtue, I may part
with my Virtue for obtaining of it; and by consequence cannot observe any
settled, unalterable Rules of Duty.
That it is Virtue alone, or at least That chiefly, which ought to be desired
for its own sake. So that only the Who held that nothing was good or desirable
for its own sake, but Virtue or Honesty.
Stoics, Who denied there was any such thing as Certainty, and were not tied
to any particular Opinions, but always followed what appeared most probable;
though generally inclining to the Peripateticks. See Book 2. chapter 2. Book 3. chapter 4.
Academicks and Who held that Virtue was the chief, and abundantly most
desirable Good, [See Book 3. chapter 3.] but yet allowed the Name of Good to some
other things, viz. Riches, Friends, Health, etc. which the Stoics did not.
Peripateticks, have a Right to lay down any Rules upon this Subject: For as to
the Opinion of These three Philosophers were of different Opinions about Man's
Happiness; Aristo and Pyrrho making it consist in Virtue alone, with a perfect
indifference as to every thing else, such as Health, Riches, Honors, etc. [See
Cicer. de Fin. Book 4. chapter 16. Acad. Quest. Book 4. chapter 42.] Herillus made it
to consist in Knowledge, with a like indifference. Though they did disagree
therefore in their Notions of Happiness, yet they were all agreed in what
Cicero here taxes them with, viz. taking away all delectus rerum, difference,
or power of Choosing, between things: by which means they left no aditus (as he
speaks) ad inventionem Officii, no way of finding out what is our Duty. For how
can that Prudence which is seen in wisely choosing one thing before another,
have any place, if all things are equally in themselves indifferent? And if
there be no difference between Sickness and Health, Riches and Poverty, and
it is as good for a Man to be in one, as the other of these, this takes away all
obligation of assisting those, who are in Sickness or Want; seeing, according
to this Opinion, they are not any wise in a worse condition, than the Healthy
or Rich: and by consequence all Justice, Charity, Bounty, etc. must fall to the
Ground. This is what Cicero often objects to them, That they did Virtutem
ipsam, quam amplexabantur, tollere; take away and ruin, by just consequence,
that Virtue, in which their Opinion made Happiness to consist. See Cic. de Fin.
Book 2. chapter 13. and several other places.
Aristo, Pyrrho and Herillus, that has been exploded a good while ago; who
might have claimed a Privilege to treat about Duties, as well as the former
three, had they but left a possibility of Choosing, and allowed at least so much
Difference between things, as to put us into a capacity of finding out our
Duty, and distinguishing it from that, which is not so. I shall For being an
Academick, he was not tied to any Set of Opinions, but allowed to choose that,
which he thought most probable; whether Stoic, Peripatetick, or any other.
follow therefore at this time, and on this Subject more especially the
Stoics; not as a bare Translator of them, but (according to my usual Custom)
shall take out of their Stores so much, and after such a manner, as in my own
Judgment I shall think most convenient. Seeing then the whole of our following
Discourse is designed to be about Offices or Duties, I think 'twill be
necessary for me in the first place, to The word definire does not necessarily
signify to define, in the strict acceptance of that word; but in a larger
sense, to set bounds to the meaning and signification of any word.
determine and fix the Signification of the word Office, which I cannot but
admire to find omitted by An eminent Stoic, Scholar of Antipater Tarsensis or
Sidonius. He writ three Books concerning Offices, which Cicero follows in this
Work. He was a Rhodian by birth, and greatly admired for his Learning and
Wisdom by the second Africanus, and the wise Laelius, etc. Gicero often makes
honorable mention of him, calling him. One of the greatest of all the Stoics,
and worthy of that Familiarity with those two great Men.
Panaetius: for every clear and rational Discourse upon any Subject, ought
first to begin with an Explication of that Subject, that so we may have a
distinct Conception of what we are afterward to discourse about.

CHAP. III.
The whole Subject of Duties consists of two Parts. Ordinary and perfect
Duties, and what they are. Panaetius made but three general Heads of
Deliberation, to which Cicero adds two more. The general Method he designs to
take in the whole Work.

The whole of Morality consists of two Parts; in one of which, it is inquired,
What the Happiness or chief Good of Man is: in the second are laid down some
Rules of Action, by living up to which he is to obtain that Happiness. Of the
former he has discoursed in his Books de Finibus: the latter makes the Subject
of his present Enquiry.
THe whole subject of Duties then, in its greatest Latitude, comprehends under
it these two Parts: The first is taken up in explaining what is Good, and what
our greatest Good. The second in certain Directions and Precepts, according to
which, upon all occasions, it is our Duty to govern our Lives and Actions. To
the first Part belong such Questions as these, Wnether all Duties are perfect,
or not? And, Whether one can be greater or less than another? With several
others to the same purpose. Not but that Such are the Actions of Justice,
Temperance, etc. the performance of which tends directly to Man's Happiness,
though they immediately relate to the Conduct of his Life.
the Duties of this second Part, the Rules and Precepts of which are laid down,
have some tendency and relation to our chiefest Good; but only it does not so
plainly appear, because they seem to concern more immediately the Government of
our Lives, and Regulation of our Manners: and these are they I design to
explain in the following Treatise. There is also another Philosophers usually
reckon three Degrees or States of Virtue; The first utterly imperfect, before a
Man has gotten an Habit of it; which is rather an Entrance into, than a State
of, Virtue, therefore not mentioned here by our Author. The second more
perfect, when a Man has got a Habit of it, but yet may sometimes fall into
Vice; such was the Virtue of Cato, Laelius, and other wise Men. The third
absolutely perfect and complete, by Aristotle called Heroic, and by the
Stoics, The State of Wisdom: When a Man has perfectly got the mastery of his
Passions, and with all the Powers and Faculties of his Soul, from a perfect
Habit of the truest Wisdom and Prudence, does nothing but what is wholly
agreeable to right Reason. An Office or Virtue of this third kind the Stoics
called (...); and the Man that does it a wise Man, such a one as (by their own
confession) never was in the World, but only in Idea. A Virtue of the second is
called (...), which I have Englished Ordinary, which does not require a perfect
imaginary Wisdom, but is such as ordinary Men are capable of in the Affairs of
Life. See Book 3. chapter 3, 4.
Distribution of Duties, some of 'em being called Middle or Ordinary, and
others Perfect or Complete. To the latter, I think, we may give the name of
Right or Strait, which sort by the Greeks is called (...); as the former
ordinary one (...). By that which we have called Right or Strait, as they
explain it, is meant a Virtue, That is wholly Complete in all its Parts,
without any manner of Flaw or Imperfection; and by that, which we have called
Ordinary, such a one, as, A fair and reasonable Account may be given for the
doing of it. I have enlarged a little upon our Author here, to make his Sense
more plain.
Now these fair and reasonable Accounts are all to be drawn from several Heads,
which are by Panaetius reduced to three, and may be called general Heads of
Deliberating or Doubting concerning any Action, whether it should, or should
not be done. The first is when it is consulted or doubted, Whether the Action,
that is under Consideration, be Honest or Dishonest; in which Enquiry Men are
often divided between several Opinions. The second is, when it is enquired and
consulted, Whether the Action, that is under Deliberation, will supply us with
the Pleasures and Conveniences of Life, furnish us with Plenty of outward
things, such as Riches, Honors, Power, etc. which may put us into a capacity of
doing good to our selves, and to all those for whom we are more nearly
concerned; all which Enquiry comes under the general Head of He comprehends
then under the Notion of Profit, not only Riches and Honors, but all the other
Conveniences and Pleasures of Life; such as Health, Strength, bodily
Pleasures, etc. And an Action that will supply us with any of these, is what he
calls by the name of a profitable one.
Profit. The third Ground or Reason of Doubting is, When that thing, which He
says seems to be, because however it may supply us with the Conveniences of
Life, yet it is not really, but only seems to be profitable, if it thwart
Honesty. For Honesty being the greatest, if not only Good, as he before laid
down, whatever takes away our Honesty, must needs be unprofitable for us, though
it should supply us with all the Pleasures and Glories of the World, as he
shows at large in the third Book.
seems to be profitable for us, comes into competition with that which is
Honest: For then our Interest drawing us one way, and Honesty pulling us back
another, the wavering Mind is, as 'twere, toru in sunder between the two, and
is racked with doubting and anxious Thoughts. There Is no greater fault in any
Division, than not to take in all the several parts of the Matter to be
divided; and yet two are omitted in the now mentioned one of Panaetius. For Men
not only consult and deliberate, whether such an Action be Honest or Dishonest;
but also, Of two Honests, that are both proposed to 'em, which is the most so;
and, in like manner, Of two Profitables, which is the most profitable. From
whence it appears, That what he thought was contained in three, ought rather to
be divided into five Heads. Having thus laid down his five Heads of
Deliberation, he tells you in what Method he designs to discourse of 'em. In
the first Book he will handle the two about Honesty: First, Whether an Action be
Honest or Dishonest? to chapter 43. Secondly, Of two that are both Honest, which is
the most so? to the end. In the second Book he treats of Profitable, enquiring,
First, Whether an Action be Profitable, or not? to chapter 25. Secondly, Of two
that are both Profitable, which is the most so? to the end. The whole Subject
of the third Book is the fifth Head, When a seeming Profit interferes with
Honesty, how a Man should do to know what is his Duty? I have added something
to the Text here, to make the Method more plain.
We must then, in the first place, discourse about Honesty, and this we shall
do under these two Enquiries; Whether the thing proposed be Honest or
Dishonest? And, Of two that are Honest, which is the most so? which will make
up the Subject of our First Book. We shall treat in our Second of Profit or
Interest under the same Heads. And lastly, in our Third, we shall endeavor to
show, When a seeming Advantage and Honesty come into competition, how a good
Man should determine his Judgment.

CHAP. IV.
The Excellence of the Nature of Man, above that of Brutes. How the several
Virtues, Prudence, Justice, etc. are agreeable to its Dictates, and result from
'em. Wherein Honestum in general consists.

His Design he has told us is, to treat of the Means for attaining Man's
Happiness. Now the Happiness of any thing is the highest Perfection of its
Nature, which consists in acting most agreeably to its Dictates: as that is a
perfect Horse or Dog, which does those things best, which are most according to
the Natures of those Animals. The Duties therefore, of which he is to treat,
since their Design is to bring Men to Happiness, must needs be such as are
perfective of, and consequently such as are agreeable to, the Nature of Man.
And to show that they are so, and how they are deduced and derived from it,
'twas necessary for him in the first place, to show wherein the Nature of Man
consists, and how it differs from that of other Creatures; which is therefore
the Design of this Chapter. See his de Fin. Book 2. chapter 14. and Book 5. chapter 9,
10, etc.
THe first thing then to be taken notice of is this, That every Creature does
by Nature endeavor to preserve its own self, its Life and Body; and to shun
and avoid those things which appear prejudicial and hurtful to it; but to seek
and procure whatever is necessary for the support of its Being, and advancement
of its Happiness, such as Food, Shelter, and the like. There is likewise common
to all sorts of Animals, a Desire of Copulation, for the continuance and
propagation of their several Species; together with a Love and Concern for
their young Ones. Now there is this special Difference between Men and Brutes;
that the latter are governed by nothing but their Senses, never look any
farther than just to what strikes and affects 'em at present, and have a very
little, if any Concern for what is past or to come: But the former are
Creatures endowed with Reason, which gives 'em a power to carry their Thoughts
to the Consequences of Things; to discover Causes before they have yet produced
their Effects; to see the whole Progress, and even the first Seeds, (as it
were) and Appearances of 'em; to compare like Occurrences with like; and by
joining what is past, and what is to come together, to make a just Estimate of
the one from the other; whereby they are able at once to take a View of their
whole Lives, and accordingly make provision for the Necessities of 'em. How
Justice, or the Virtues relating to Human Society, such as Liberality,
Goodnature, Gratitude, etc. are agreeable to the Dictates and Principles of
Human Nature.
And the same force of Reason makes all Men by nature to Love one another, and
desire an Intercourse of Words and Actions. It begets in 'em likewise That is,
Much greater than that which Brutes have for their young Ones: one is the
Effect of only natural Instinct, the other of Reason together with it: the one
lasts but a little while, till the Young is able to shift for it self, the
other till Death: the one prompts Brutes only to take care of the Bodies of
their Offspring; the other, Men to take care of the Minds of theirs, by
instructing 'em in Principles of Virtue and Honesty, etc.
a somewhat extraordinary Love and Affection for their own Children, and
strongly enclines 'em to frequent Public Meetings, and keep up Societies one
amongst another. For the same Reason also they are very industrious, to provide
for the Necessaries and Conveniences of Life; and that not only for themselves
in particular, but for their Wives, their Children, and others, whom they have
a Kindness for, and are obliged to take Care of; which Concern is very proper
to rouse up the Spirits, and make 'em more vigorous and active in Business.
Prudence, or the Virtues relating to Truth, such as Wisdom, Knowledge,
Plainness, etc. agreeable to Nature.
But of all the Properties and Inclinations of Men, there is none more natural
and peculiar to 'em, than an earnest Desire and Search after Truth. Hence it is
our Minds are no sooner free, from the Thoughts and Engagements of necessary
Business, but we presently long to be either seeing, or hearing, or learning of
something; and esteem the Knowledge of things secret and wonderful, as a
necessary Ingredient of a happy Life. From whence it appears, That nothing is
more agreeable and suited to the Nature and Minds of Men, than undisguis'd
Openness, Truth and Sincerity. Next to this Love and Affection for Truth How
Fortitude, or Greatness of Soul, is agreeable to Human Nature.
, there follows in the Soul an impatient Desire and Inclination to Rule; so
that whoever has the genuin Nature of a Man in him, will never endure to be
subject to another, unless he be one that instructs, or advises, or is invested
with a just and lawful Authority, for the Benefit of the Public. From whence
there arises a Greatness of Soul, For this desire of Rule, and being subject to
no body, makes a Man scorn to be a Slave either to his own Passions, or
Inclinations; or part with his Liberty to any one else, for the sake of Honors,
Preferments, etc. See chapter 20.
which sets it above all the petty Concerns, and trifling Enjoyments of this
present World. It Is another, and that too no mean Prerogative of our reasonable
Nature, Decency, Modesty, etc. derived from the Dictates and Principles of
Nature.
That Man alone can discern all the Beauties of Order and Decency, and knows
how to govern his Words and Actions in conformity to them. It Is he alone, that
of all the Creatures, observes and is pleased with the Beauty, Gracefulness and
Symmetry of Parts in the Objects of Sense; which Nature and Reason observing in
them, from thence take occasion to apply the same also to those of the Mind;
and conclude that Beauty, Consistency, and Regularity, should be much more kept
up in our Words and Actions; and therefore command us, That nothing be done
that is effeminate or unbecoming; and, That so strict a Guard be kept over
every Thought and Action, as that no Lust or Filthiness be either conceived or
practiced by us. From these Inclinations and Instincts of Nature, arises and
results that Honesty then in general is nothing else, but the acting according
to the Dictates and Inclinations of Nature or Right Reason; and consists of
four general Virtues, Justice, or the keeping up Society and Intercourse among
Men; Prudence, or the Contemplation of Truth; Courage, or Greatness of Soul;
and Temperance, or the Virtues of Decency, Modesty, etc. of each of which he
discourses afterward in particular.
Honestum we are seeking for; which however little valued and esteemed it may
be, is nevertheless virtuous and aimiable in it self; and which we may justly
say, though 'twere commended by no one, is yet in its own Nature truly
Commendable.

CHAP. V.
The admirable Beauty of Honesty. Four general Heads of It, from which all the
several Duties arise; and what the Object of each of 'em is, about which it is
employed.

THus, Son Marcus, have I given you a rough Draught, and just the Outlines, as
it were, of Honesty; which could she be seen in her full Beauty with mortal
Eye, would make the whole World (as Plato has said) be in love with For what
else is it but only Wisdom, that leads us to the attainment of Virtue and
Honesty? Or rather indeed what else is Wisdom, but Virtue and Honesty it self?
He therefore that can behold the glorious Beauties of Honesty, must needs fall
in Love with Wisdom; which indeed is nothing but Honesty it self; it being
impossible for any One to be Wise, that is not at the same time Virtuous and
Honest; Knavishness and Roguery being always the greatest Folly.
Wisdom. Now whatever's contained under the Notion of Honesty, arises from one
of these four Heads; First, A sagacious Enquiry and Observation for the finding
out of Truth; which may be called by the general name of Prudence. Secondly, A
Care to maintain that Society and mutual Intercourse, which is between Men; to
render to every Man what is his due; and to stand to one's Words in all
Promises and Bargains; which we call Justice. Thirdly, The Greatness and
unshaken Resolution of a truly brave and invincible Mind; which goes by the
name of Magnanimity or Fortitude. And, Lastly, A Keeping of our Words and
Actions within the due Limits of Order and Decency; under which are
comprehended He does not therefore restrain Temperance, as Aristotle did, and
we in our Language do, to observing a Mediocrity in Eating, etc. but makes it
belong to all the other Virtues, and set 'em their Bounds, which if they pass
they degenerate into Vices. It Is the business of Prudence, for instance, to
Search out Truth; but this may be done intemperately, i. e. too much, etc. It Is
the Work of Temperance therefore to determine, how far, and after what manner,
it ought to be Sought for; in which sense the Word's to be understood, as also
proportionably its opposite Intemperantia, in other places of this and other
Authors: So Intemperantia Pausaniae, is his Pride and Insolence, in Corn. Nep.
Temperance and Moderation. Now every one of these several Heads, though they
This is true of the Virtues in the State of Perfection: for he who is virtuous
to that degree, must have a perfect Prudence, [See Note 3. chapter 3.] and by
consequence must act prudently, i. e. virtuously, as well in one, as another
case. As we know whoever is Honest out of a Principle of Conscience, will be
Honest in every thing; and will not think it enough to be Just and Bountiful, but
will also be True, Sincere, etc.
all have a mutual Connection and Dependence on one another, has yet its
particular Classis (as it were) and respective Set of Duties arising from it.
From that, for example, which is mentioned first, and under which Prudence and
Wisdom are contained, arises the Duty of Seeking, Contemplating and Finding out
of Truth, which is the proper and peculiar Business of those Virtues: For it is
then, and then alone, that we justly esteem a Man prudent and wise, when we
find that he is able to see and discover the Truth of things; and of an active,
vigorous and piercing Mind, to give an account of the Reasons of 'em; so that
it is Truth that is the proper Object of both these Virtues, and that about
which they are See Note 4. chapter 6.
only concerned. The other three Heads more peculiarly belong to the active
Life, and their Business lies in procuring and maintaning what is useful and
necessary for the preservation of it; as in keeping up mutual Love and
Correspondence among Mankind; in an elevated greatness and strength of Mind;
which appears, as in getting things profitable and pleasant for our selves and
Dependants; so more especially in despising and being above 'em. Then as for
the last, viz. Order, Uniformity, Moderation and the like, it is plain they
belong not only Not but that they are seen in Contemplation too; for there is
such a thing as Moderation to be observed, even in our Searches after Truth;
but they are seen more especially in our outward Actions.
to Contemplation, but have also a respect to our outward Actions; since from
keeping of these within the bounds and limits of Order and Moderation, we are
said to observe what is virtuous and becoming.

CHAP. VI.
Prudence or Contemplation of Truth, the first of the general Virtues, is the
nearest allied to the Nature of Man. Two Cautions concerning it. It ought to
give place to the Duties of the Active Life. What it ought especially to be
employed about.

I have added something to the beginning of this Chapter, to make the Connection
with the foregoing plainer.
HAving thus explained how the whole Nature, and Power of Honesty, is deduced
from some one of these four Parts, we are now to discourse of 'em each in
particular. And, first, Of Prudence, which is wholly taken up in the knowledge
of Truth, and has the nearest Affinity of any with the reasonable Nature of
Man. For how are we all of us drawn and enticed with the Desire of Wisdom? How
noble and glorious a thing do we imagine it to excel in Knowledge? And how mean
and reproachful do we count it on the other hand, to slip, to be in an Error,
to be Ignorant, or to be imposed upon? In gratifying this so natural and
virtuous Inclination in the Mind of Man, there are two grand Faults to be
carefully avoided: The first is an overgreat Hastiness and Rashness in giving
up our Assent, presuming that we know things before we really do so. Whoever
desires (as I am sure all ought) to avoid this Error, must in all his Enquiries
allow himself time, and diligently consider the Matter with himself, before he
proceeds to pass his Judgment upon it. The second Fault is, That a great many
Men bestow abundance of Study, and a world of Pains, upon very difficult and
obscure Subjects; and such as perhaps, when they are found out, are of but very
little, or no Concernment. Would Men but be careful to shun these two Mistakes,
whatsoever Study or Pains they might spend upon virtuous, worthy, or profitable
Subjects, 'twould not without Reason be highly commended. Thus C. Sulpicius
Gallus, Praetor of Rome, an U. C. 581, and the Year after, Tribune of a Legion
under P. Aemilius, in the Great Macedonian War; where, by his Astronomy, he
foretold to the Roman Soldiers an Eclipse of the Moon, so that they were not at
all disheartened; whereas the Enemy, who knew nothing at all of such an
Appearance beforehand, were extremely terrified at it. Livy, Book 44. chapter 37.
Plutarch's Aemilius. Cicero often mentions him.
Caius Sulpicius was heretofore praised for his Skill in Astronomy: Uncle to
Pompey the Great; several times mentioned by our Author, for his great Skill in
Geometry, Philosophy, and the Civil Laws.
Sext. Pompeius, since my memory, for his in Geometry: Many have been famous in
the Study of Logic, and more in that of the Civil Laws: the The immediate end
of all these Sciences indeed is Truth, not but that they may any of 'em be
applied to Action; as Sulpicius's Astronomy, for example, was.
more peculiar Business, of all which parts of Learning, is the finding out of
Truth. No Man however should be so taken up in the Search of Truth, as thereby
to neglect the more necessary Duties of the Active Life: For, after all is
done, it is Action only that gives a true Value and Commendation to Virtue. Not
that we are able to be always a doing without intermission, but often retire
from Business to Study; beside that the Mind, What great Use might be made of
this continual Activity of the Soul, if instead of spending it (as too many do)
upon frivolous, useless and wicked Subjects, 'twere constantly employed upon
some virtuous, useful or necessary Enquiries?
which is in perpetual motion and agitation, of it self will supply us with
Study and Thinking, whether we set our selves to it, or not. In a word, The
general aim and design of our Thought, and application of Mind, This is no more
than the ordinary School-division of the Understanding into Practical and
Speculative; The former considers things in order to Practice, as, whether Good
or Bad, Honest or Dishonest, tending to a happy or miserable Life: The latter
only in order to Knowledge, whether they are True, or not True, without any
direct tendency to Practice at all. The former is only Prudence, and the latter
Knowledge: By which it appears in what Sense he takes the word Truth, when he
says, It Is the Object of this Virtue, viz. not only for Truth, as opposite to
Falsehood in Speculation; but as comprehending under it that which is truly Good
and Honest, as opposite to Vice and Dishonesty.
is either the attainment of such things as are Honest, and tend to a virtuous
and happy way of Life; or else the improvement of our Reason and Understanding
in Wisdom and Knowledge. And this may suffice for the first of our general
Heads of Duty.

CHAP. VII.
The second general Virtue, which consists in maintaining of Human Society. Two
Parts of it, Justice and Liberality. The first Duty of Justice. All things at
first common. The Original of Property. Men are born for the Good, etc. of one
another: whence arises the second Duty of Justice. Two sorts of Injustice, the
one of Commission; the other of Omission. The Causes of the first sort of
Injustice; First, Fear: Secondly, Desire.

OF the other remaining three, Which may be called Justice in a larger
signification of that Word, as it takes in all the Duties Men owe to one
another, which is the second general Head he mentioned; and comprehends under
it Justice strictly so called, and Liberality or Kindness one to another; of
which he begins to treat, chap. 14.
that which consists in upholding Society, and keeping up mutual Love and good
Nature amongst Mankind, seems of the largest and most diffusive Extent. It
comprehends under it these two Parts: First, Justice, which is much the most
glorious and splendid of all Virtues, and alone entitles us to the Name and
Appellation of Good Men. And, Secondly, Beneficence, which may also be called
either Bounty or Liberality. Now the first thing that Justice requires of us is
this, That no one should do any Hurt to another, unless he be necessarily
driven upon it for his own Security: The word deinde does not denote a second
Duty of Justice, but only the second Part of the first Duty, of, Doing no
Wrong. The meaning is, That of things which are common, he should content
himself with his reasonable Share: and those which are appropriate to
particular Persons, he should suffer to remain in the State they are without
disturbance. The word suus signifies here, as in many other places, the same
thing with proprius.
and whatever belongs either to all in common, or to particular Persons as
their own Propriety, should not be altered, but made use of accordingly. Now no
Man can say that he has any thing He supposes all things at first to have been
common, like the Room in a Theater, or other such place; and, as in these, he
who first gets a Place has a Right to it, and cannot be fairly turned out of it;
so he imagins it to have been in old Time. Not that the Seizure of it self
gives a Right, but the tacit Agreement amongst Mankind, That what any Man had
first possessed himself of, should be his own Property. See Grot. De Jure B.
and P. Book 2. chapter 2.
his own by a Right of Nature; but either by an ancient immemorial Seizure, as
those who first planted uninhabited Countries: Or, secondly, by Conquest, as
those who have got things by the Right of the Sword; or else by some Law,
Compact, Agreement, or Lot. It Is by some of these means, that the People
inhabiting Cicero himself was born at Arpinum, a mean place in Italy; hence, by
his Enemies in contempt, called Arpinas. He had a noble Country House at
Tusculum, another Town not far from Rome, whither he often retired, and where
he wrote five Books of Philosophy, thence called his Tusculan Questions. He
therefore uses the Examples of these two Places, because his Son was acquainted
with 'em.
Arpinum and Tusculum came to have those Lands, which are now called theirs;
and Descriptio, signifies a Draught of any Land, or the like, in order to every
Man's having his due Share: The meaning is, that private Men came to their
Estates, by the like sort of Distribution or Allotment, as Towns and Cities did.
the same may be said as to private Men's Estates. However, since at present, by
some of these ways, each particular Man has his personal Possessions, out of
that which by Nature was common to all, it is but reason that each should hold
what is now his own; which if any one endeavor to take away from him, Quicquid
jure possidetur (says Quintil.) injuria aufertur; Whatever any Man is in the
rightful Possession of, cannot be taken from him without Injustice: Since every
one then has a Right to that, which is now his own, though 'twere originally
common, no one without injuring him can dispossess him of it again.
he directly breaks in upon common Justice, and violates the Rights of Human
Society. But seeing (as is excellently said by Plato) we are not Born for our
selves alone; but that our native Country, our Friends and Relations, have a
just Claim and Title to some part of us; and seeing whatsoever is created on
Earth, was merely designed (as the Stoics will have it) for the Service of
Men; and Men themselves for the Service, Good and Assistance of one another: We
He now comes to the second Duty of Justice, which is, To do all the Good we
can; as the first was, To do no Wrong.
certainly in this should be Followers of Nature, and second her Intentions;
and by producing all that lies within the reach of our Power for the general
Interest, by mutually giving and receiving good Turns, by our Knowledge,
Industry, Riches, or other means, should endeavor to keep up that Love and
Society, that should be amongst Men. Now the great Foundation of Justice is
Justice is the rendering to every Man his due; which no one can do without being
true to his Word, and conscientiously performing all Promises, Oaths, Bargains,
etc. For he that Promises, etc. to another, makes himself a Debtor of something
to him, which he may demand as a kind of Due. It Is the business of Faithfulness
to see this paid; so that Justice is, as 'twere, built upon Faithfulness, as
its Basis and Foundation.
Faithfulness, which consists in being constantly firm to your Word, and a
conscientious performance of all Compacts and Bargains; whereupon for this
once, let us venture to follow the Opinion of the Stoics, those mighty
Admirers of Derivations, and believe that Fides [Faithfulness] is so called,
(though perhaps it may seem a little too far fetched) quia fiat quod dictum est,
because what was promised is performed. The Having laid down the two great
Duties of Justice, and the Foundation of it; he now proceeds to its opposite
Vice, Injustice, (of which there are two sorts) and the Causes of it.
Vice that is opposite to Justice is Injustice, of which there are two sorts;
the first consists in the actual doing an Injury to another; the second in
tamely looking on while he is Injured, and not helping and defending him, though
we are able. For he that injuriously falls upon another, whether prompted by
Rage or other violent Passion, does as 'twere leap at the throat of his
Companion; and he that refuses to help him when Injured, and to ward off the
Wrong, if it lies in his power, is as plainly guilty of Baseness and Injustice,
as though he had deserted his Father, his Friends, or his native Country. The
Causes of the first sort of Injustice, viz. Of Commission: First, Fear. Not but
that it is lawful, if I see another taking up a Sword, and plainly perceive he is
going to Stab me, to Stab him beforehand to prevent my own Death, if I cannot
possibly escape any other way. But this must be very certain and apparent; a
bare fear or suspicion that another designs me an Injury, not being a
sufficient Reason why I should do him one.
Now that former Injustice, which consists in the wilful and actual Wronging
another, has oftentimes no other cause but Fear; when he, who designedly does a
Man an Injury, is afraid least himself should be forced to undergo one, if he
does not secure himself by doing it beforehand. But generally speaking, the
great source and fountain of all such Injustice is A second Cause of this
Injustice, The satisfying some irregular Desire; as, First, That of Money; of
which in the next Chapter.
the satisfying some irregular and exorbitant Appetite; and in a more especial
manner, the desire of Riches: of which we shall therefore say something in
particular.

CHAP. VIII.
The Desire of Riches, which is one Cause of Injustice, whence it proceeds.
It Is allowable enough so long as it does not draw Men to the Injuring of
others. The Desire of Honors, etc. another Cause of Injustice. It usually is
found in Men of the greatest Minds. There Is a difference to be made between
those Injuries, that are done hastily and in a Passion, and those that proceed
from premeditated Malice.

RIches then are most commonly desired, either to supply us with the
Necessaries of Life, or furnish us with the Pleasures and Conveniences of it or
else, as it often is observed to happen in Persons of great and aspiring Minds,
as a means of obtaining an Interest in the Public, and a Power of Obliging and
Gratifying one's Friends: to which purpose was that Saying of the late A noble
and wealthy, but very covetous Roman, twice Consul with Pompey the Great, whom
Vell. Patenc. calls Invictum par Consulum. He was made Proconsul of Apulia,
where he quelled Spartacus, Ringleader of the Slaves, and put an end to the
Servile War. At last he, with Pompey, and Caesar, divided the whole Roman
Empire between 'em, and made the first Triumvirate. Here the East falling to
his share, he made War upon the Parthians, out of a Desire of Money; but was
conquered and slain by 'em and had melted Gold poured down the Throat of his
dead Body. His Life is writ by Plutarch.
Marcus Crassus, That whoever designed to be a leading Man in the Commonwealth,
ought never to think he had Estate enough, till he could maintain A Roman Army
was four Legions, each consisting of six Thousand Foot, and three Hundred
Horse; two of these Legions were given to each Consul every Year. The monthly
Pay of an Army came to about 25000 Pounds: By which it appears what an Estate
Crassus desired, to keep 'em a whole Year.
an Army with its yearly Revenue. Others take pleasure in Splendour and
Magnificence; in a handsome, noble and plentiful way of Living; All which things
have begot an insatiable Greediness after Money, without which they can never
be supported and maintained. Not but that a moderate Desire of Riches, and
bettering a Man's Estate, so long as it abstains from oppressing of others, is
allowable enough; but a very great care ought always to be taken, that we ben't
drawn to any Injustice by it. There Is another A second Desire, that is very
often the Cause of Injustice, is, That of Honor, Glory, etc.
Desire that makes Men as apt to be forgetful of Justice, as that after
Ricfies; the Thirst, I mean, of Empire, Glory, Honors, etc. For that Saying of
A famous ancient Latin Poet, born at Rudiae, a Town in Calobria, thence by our
Author called Rudius homo, in his Oration pro Archia. He was very familiar with
Africanus Major, the Wise Laelius, Cato Censorius, etc. which last brought him
first to Rome. His Works are lost, except some Fragments preserved by Cicero,
and others.
Ennius, There Is no inviolable Faith or Friendship in the Matter of a Kingdom,
though applied by him to that one case only, is yet full out as true in a great
many others; for wherever the Subject of Contention is such, as that only one
Party can meet with Success, and the rest must fall short of what they desire;
things are usually carried to so great a height, as that it is very difficult
not to break in upon Faith and Friendship. This has appeared but too
manifestly of late, in that rash and most impudent Attempt of Julius Caesar,
who, ambitious of the Empire, raised a Civil War against the Senate and Pompey
the Great; whom he conquered in the Pharsalian Field. See an Account by himself
in his Commentaries.
Caesar's; who has broke through all those Ties and Obligations, that either by
Gods or Men could be laid upon him; for the compassing and getting of that
Empire to himself, which he vainly proposed in his depraved Imagination. But in
this case, it is one very great unhappiness, that the Thirst after Honor,
Empire, Power etc. falls most upon Men of the greatest Souls, and most exalted
Natures; wherefore the For we should increase our Care according to the
greatness of our Danger; and where we are likely to be most violently
Assaulted, there we should place the strongest Guard.
greater care ought to be taken, that nothing of Offense be committed in this
kind. Now it makes a great difference in all Acts of Injustice, whether they
proceed from some violent Passion, (which is for the most part of short
continuance) or are done with Design and previous Deliberation: For those that
are the Effects of a sudden gust of Passion, ought not to be esteemed of so
heinous a Nature, as those that proceed from premeditated Malice. And this may
suffice for the first sort of Injustice, which consists in The actual doing of
Wrong; and the Causes of it.

CHAP. IX.
Injustice of Omission, and the Caused of it Those: are guilty of it, who spend
their whole Lives in Study and Contemplation; as some Philosophors have done.
Justice ought to proceed from Choice. Those who mind nothing but their own
Business are guilty of this Injustice. Self-love hinders Men from seeing their
Duty. An excellent Rule for the avoiding of all Injustice.

AS for the He comes now to the second sort of Injustice, that of Omission; the
Causes of which are, first, Fear of giving Offense, of Charge, etc.
second, which only consists in seeing another Injured, and being wanting to
our Duty, by not defending him; the Causes of that are wont to be several. For
some are afraid of offending others, or of bringing a trouble and charge upon
themselves: Others are negligent, idle, or mean-spirited: And a third sort
there is, who are so taken up with their own Concerns, that they have no time
left to regard the Oppressed, whom yet it is their Duty to save and protect. I
am therefore of Opinion, that Plato's Consequence will hardly hold good, where
speaking about the Philosophers, he says, They are wholly taken up in the
seeking out of Truth, and perfectly neglect and make light of those things,
which the rest of the World are so eager after, and so contend about; and that
therefore they are just. This, I say, I am afraid is a bad Consequence; for
though, it is true, In Chap. 21. he puts two Cases, wherein he thinks these Men
may be excusable: 1. If their Genius lie very much toward Learning, etc. 2. If
they are of weak Constitutious, so as to be unable to meddle with Public
Affairs; as, Scipio's Son was.
they keep the first sort of Justice, inasmuch as they actually do no Wrong;
yet they run perfectly counter to the other: for being engaged in their
Learning and Studies, they abandon their Friends to be injured by others, whom
in Justice they ought to have protected and defended. So that it is believed,
they would hardly ever trouble 'emselves so far, as at all to inter-meddle with the
Business of the Public, if it was not altogether, as it were, forced upon
them. But 'twere a great deal better would they do it voluntarily; for an The
Moralists make a distinction between doing an honest Action, and doing it
honestly, honestum and honest agere. He that pays another his due, does an
honest Action; but he does not do honestly, if against his Will, and by
compulsion of Laws.
Action, though Honest, is not therefore truly virtuous, unless it be done out of
Choice, and with a Good Will. There are Another Cause of this sort of
Injustice, a morose unsociable Temper, etc.
others yet, who out of a Desire of improving their own Estates, or else a
morose and unsociable sort of Temper, cry, They meddle with Nobody's Business
but their own, that so they may seem to be Men of strict Honesty, and to Injure
Nobody: and they do indeed avoid the one sort of Injustice, but directly run
themselves into the other; for they desert the common Good and Society of
Mankind, while they bestow neither Study, Pains, nor Money toward the
Preservation of it. Thus have I laid down the two sorts of Injustice, and
pointed out to you the Causes of each; and have also endeavored to explain the
true Nature and Extent of Justice; from all which Account 'twill be easy to
judge, unless we are extremely fond of our own Ease, what those several Duties
are, which at several times are required of us. I say, Unless we are fond of
our own Ease; for the truth on it is, it is a troublesome thing to be concerned
in the Business of other People; however old Terence's Heautontimoroumenos,
Act. 1. Sc. 1. Chremes expostulating with Menedemus for working so very hard,
the other asks him, What he has to do to meddle with another's Business: to
which he answers, Homo sum, humani nihil (...) me alienum puto; I am a Man, and
accordingly ought to be concerned in whatever relates to the Welfare of any
Man: Which good-natured Sentence, St Austin tells us, was applauded by the
whole Theater. We are all Fellow Members, and (as was observed, Chap. 7.) born
for the Service, Good, and Assistance of one another, it being the fundamental
Principle of the Law of Nature, That every Man should seek the Good and Welfare
of the whole Society, and every Member of it, as well as his own private and
particular Interest: Omnis homo est omni homini proximus, nec ulla cogitanda
est longinquitas generis, ubi est natura communis, says the forecited Father.
Chremes in Terence thinks, That he ought to be concerned for the Good of all
Men. But be that as it will, forasmuch as the Success of our own Affairs,
whether Good or Ill, more nearly concerns us, and makes us more sensible, than
that of another's; (which appears to us small, as a thing at a great distance)
therefore we pass a quite different Judgment upon the one and the other. And,
upon this account, it is a very good Rule that is given by some Men, That we
should never venture upon any Action, of which we doubt whether it is Honest or
Dishonest. For Honesty quickly would show it self by its own native Brightness;
and the Doubting about it is a plain Intimation, that at least we suspected
some Injustice when we did it.

CHAP. X.
Justice is altered upon an Alteration of Circumstances; and what was our Duty
in one Case to do, in other Circumstances it is our Duty to avoid. Promises are
not to be stood to in several Cases, as, If they are Prejudicial: If made through
Fear, etc. A close adhering to the words of a Law, or Bargain, is a means of
being Unjust; Craft in such cases to be diligently avoided.

BUt here it is observable, Having given an account of the Nature of Justice,
and Injustice, with the Causes of this; he proceeds to show, How, in several
Cases, that which is usually a part of Justice, upon an alteration of
Circumstances, becomes the contrary. For as a thing may be pleasing to the
Palate, or healthful to the Body in some Circumstances, which is not so
absolutely; as a Cup of bad Water to one in extreme Thirst: So may an Action,
which generally speaking is vicious and unreasonable; as the breaking of one's
Promise, or the like; in some certain Cases become honest, and agreeable to
Right Reason.
That the Limits of Justice are not so fixed, but that they may be altered upon
an alteration of the Circumstances; so that what at one time appears to be the
Duty of an honest and good Man, at another is altered and becomes the quite
contrary: To deliver up a Trust, for example, or perform a Promise, and other
things relating to Truth and Faithfulness, are Duties which Justice it self
will allow us, in several Cases, to The Word migrate signifies transitively
here, as in some other places of this Author: So migrare communia jura
signifies to transgress or violate 'em.
neglect or omit: For respect must be had to those general Rules we before laid
down, as the Ground and Foundation of all Justice, First, That no Injury be
done to any other. And, Secondly, That we make it our earnest Endeavor to
promote the Good and Interest of all Mankind: So that our Duty is not always
the same, but various By ea tempora, I suppose, he means those Cases or
Circumstances; for so he often uses the Word in this Work. He had just been
saying, That nothing must be done contrary to the two great Rules of Justice
before given: And then he adds, Ea cum tempor'd commutantur, that is, When the
Case is such, as that the keeping one's Promise, or the like, would be acting
contrary to one of those Rules, (that is, would be a great Injury to him that
made it, or him to whom it was made, as he explains himself afterward;) then
our Duty is altered, and we are bound not to keep it; because, if we should,
'twould be a Breach of the fundamental Rule of that Virtue. This is the first
Case, wherein a Man is not obliged to be as good as his Promise.
according to the variety of Circumstances. There may be a Contract or Promise,
for instance, the performance of which would bring very great Damage, either to
the Person himself that made it, or the other Party whom it was made to. Thus,
had See chap. 25. Book 3.
Naptune not granted what he promised to Theseus, Theseus had not suffered the
loss of his Son Hippolytus. For (as the Story goes) Neptune having granted him
any three Wishes, for the third, he once in a very great passion, desired the
Death of his own Son; by obtaining of which, he was afterward brought into the
greatest Afflictions. Such Promises therefore are Because the keeping of 'em
would be an Offense against the first Rule of Justice, Not to do any Wrong: and
if may be supposed the Person, to whom they were made, had he seen such a
Mischief ensuing, would not have demanded it. See chap. 24, 25. Book 3.
not to be kept, as will but bring a Mischief on him they were made to; Because
it is presumed the Person, who made such a Promise, had he thought of such a
Damage likely to come of it, would not have made it. We promise as Men, who
aren't infallible, and cannot provide against every thing that may happen;
wherefore we are supposed not to promise any further, than what we now know;
and should any extraordinary thing happen in the mean time, it is to be taken as
a thing, which we tacitly excepted. But here we must proceed very warily and
cautiously: this will hardly hold good in the case of a Promissory Oath, where
God himself is called to witness. See Grot. de Jure B. and P. Puffendorf, etc.
upon this whole Subject.
no more are those, which tend to the Damage of the Promiser himself, more than
to the Profit of him they were promised to. Again, Another Case wherein a Man
is dispensed from keeping his Promise, is, when some greater Duty requires his
Attendance in the mean time.
even Justice it self requires us to perform a greater before a lesser Duty:
You promise, for example, a Friend of yours, to assist him in a Cause that he
has depending, but your Son grows dangerously sick in the mean time; here
'twould be no Because to take care of a Son's Life, is a greater Duty, than to
assist a Friend; and therefore ought to take place before it.
breach of Duty in you, if you should not make good what you promised to your
Friend; and he himself rather would be much to blame, should he complain of
being disappointed by you. Further, Another Case wherein a Man is not obliged
to perform his Promise, is, when he was forced to make it through Fear, or drawn
to it by some Deceit. See the forecited Authors.
it is plain to any one's Sense, that such sort of Promises can never be
binding, as are made by People over-awed by Fear, or overreach'd by Deceit;
most of which are void by the The Laws being delivered only in general Terms,
and not being able to descend to all particular Cases, 'twas in the power of
the Praetor, or Judge, to supply that Defect by his Edicts and Authority.
Praetor's Edicts, and some of 'em even by the Laws themselves. But another
great Spring from which Injuries arise, is some Quirk or Cavil, and an
over-subtle and malicious Interpretation of the Laws; from whence that Saying,
Summum jus summa Injuria, The height of Justice is the height of Roguery, is
now become a daily and common Proverb among us. There are frequent Examples of
this to be met with in our Public Transactions; as that of Him, for Example,
who concluding a Truce with the Enemy for thirty Days, made continual
Incursions into their Territory by Night; because, forsooth, the Truce was not
made for so many Nights, but only so many Days. Just such a crafty and pitiful
Trick (if the Story be true) was that notable Cunning of Quintus Fabius
Labeo's; (or whoever the Man was, for I have it only by hearsay) who being by
the Senate appointed Arbitrator, in a Difference between those of Two Cities in
Italy, about fourteen Miles distant from one another.
Nola and Naples about their Bounds; when he came to the place that was
appointed for the Treaty, took aside the Commissioners of either Party, and
exhorted 'em privately, Not to be too eager and greedy in their Demands, but
rather to take up and content 'emselves with less, than pretend to any more
than what was honestly their Due. Both Parties did so according to his desire,
so that a good quantity of Ground was left between them; this he even goes and
adjudges to the Romans, leaving that to each Party, which they 'emselves had
demanded. And is not this now to Deceive and Cheat, rather than to Judge? In
all cases therefore such subtle kind of Tricks should be diligently avoided.

CHAP. XI.
Justice to be kept toward all sorts of Men. Bounds to be observed in
Punishing those that have Injured us. Laws of War to be strictly observed. Two
sorts of Disputing, by Reason and by the Sword: The latter is allowable, when
we cannot obtain what is our Right by the former. What ought to be the End of
making War. How it should be carried on. The Strictness of the old Romans in
observing the Laws of War. A Story of the Elder Cato to that purpose.

THere are certain After having discoursed of the Nature of Justice, etc. he
proceeds to show, That we ought to practice it toward all sorts of People; as,
First, Even toward those who have wronged us.
Duties or Offices also, to be strictly observed, even toward those that have
injured us; for we ought not to go beyond such and such Bounds, in exacting
Revenge and Punishment of another: in which particular it may perhaps be
enough, to make him that has wronged us repent of the Wrong done; so that he
himself may abstain from the like, and others take warning from his Example,
for the future. There are certain peculiar Laws of In the second place we ought
to show Justice to our Enemies: First, By not entering upon a War, but upon very
just and good Grounds. Secondly, By carrying it on fairly, and being ready to
accept of a reasonable Peace. Thirdly, By showing Mercy to the Conquered, after
we have gotten the Victory. The Words therefore, Inter arma silent leges, must
be taken in a very restrained Sense, so as to mean the Civil and Judiciary
Laws, not those of Nature, and Justice toward Enemies. See Grot. Prolegom. ad
Lib. de Jure B. and P.
War also, which are of all things most strictly to be observed in the
Commonwealth: For there being two sorts of Disputing in the World, the one by
Reason, and the other by open Force; and the former of these being that which
is agreeable to the Nature of Man, and the latter to that of Brutes; when we
cannot obtain what is our Right by the one, we muste'en of necessity have
recourse to the other. It Is allowable therefore to undertake Wars, but it must
always be with design of obtaining a secure Peace. And when we have gotten the
better of our Enemies, we should rest content with the Victory alone, and show
our selves merciful and kind to 'em afterward; unless they are such as have
been very Cruel, and committed inhuman Barbarities in the War. Thus our
Forefathers took into their City the Several little Nations in Italy, all
conquered by the Romans.
Aequians, Volscians, Sabines, and others, whom they had subdued; whereas The
former a City in Africa, the latter in Spain; both taken by Scipio Africanus
the Younger.
Carthage and Numantia they entirely destroyed. I could wish I might not add A
famous and rich City in Achaia, placed exactly in that Neck of Land, which
separates Peloponnesus, or the Morea, from the rest of Greece. Hither St Paul
writ two of his Epistles. 'Twas taken by Mummius, the Roman Consul, and rased
to the Ground, because of some Affront the Corinthians had given to the Roman
Ambassadors.
Corinth too; but I believe they had something in their Eye when they did it,
and that more especially the Situation of the Place; which being so very
convenient as it was, they were afraid least it might be, at one time or other,
an Encouragement to a Revolt. In my Opinion it is always our Duty, to do what we
can for a fair and safe Peace: in which thing if People would have In the Civil
War between Caesar and Pompey, Cicero always labored for a Peace and Agreement
between the Parties; but to no purpose.
hearkened to me, we might at this time have seen the Republic, though, it is
true, I cannot say in a flourishing Condition; yet certainly not, as at present
we perceive it, entirely subverted and fallen into Ruins. And as we are bound to
be merciful to those we have actually conquered; so should those also be
received into Favor, who have laid down their Arms, and thrown 'emselves
wholly upon the General's Mercy; and that even though the Breach be made in their
City Walls. Our good Forefathers were most strictly just as to this
particular; the Custom of those Times making him the Patron of a conquered City
or People, who first received 'em into the Faith and Allegiance of the People
of Rome. In short, The whole Right, and all the Duties of War are most
religiously set down in the The Feciales were a sort of Priests or Heralds
among the Romans, established by Numa, whose Business it was to determine all
Cases about the Lawfulness of War; about Leagues, Ambassadors, etc. They were
sent to demand Satisfaction of the People that had offended; they denounced or
proclaimed Wars; and, in short, nothing of that nature could be done without
their Advice. Cicero gives us an account of their Duties in his De Leg. 2. 9.
Faederum, pacis, belli, induciarum judices Feciales sunto, etc.
Fecial Laws; out of which it is manifest, that never any War can be justly
undertaken, unless Satisfaction have been first demanded, and Proclamation of
it made publicly beforehand. Poppilius was Commander in one of the Provinces,
and Cato's Son a young Soldier under him; and Poppilius thinking fit to disband
one of his Legions, it happened to be the same in which the young Man was, who
therefore was dismissed among the rest of the Soldiers: But having a mind to
see more of the War; he notwithstanding this, continued still in the Army.
Hereupon old Cato writes a Letter to Poppilius, and therein desires him, That
if he suffered his Son to remain in the Army, he would give him his An Oath
that was given to the Soldiers, when they went out to War, (called Sacr
amentum) by which they were obliged to be faithful to their General, etc. See
the Form of it in Livy.
Military Oath again; for as much the former being void by his Disbanding, he
could not any longer fight lawfully with an Enemy: So religiously careful they
were in those Days, of doing nothing that is contrary to the Laws of War. There
is extant still an Epistle of Cato the Father's to his Son, in which he tells
him, That he had heard of his being Disbanded by the Consul, when he was a
Soldier in Macedonia, in the War with The last King of Macedonia, beaten and
led in triumph by Paulus Aemilius, the Roman Consul, about the Year of Rome
586. See Plautarch 's Life of Aemilius.
Perseus: and therefore he advises him not, by any means to intermeddle in a
Battle; because, he says, it is unlawful for one, that is no longer a Soldier,
to engage with the Enemy.

CHAP. XII.
The Civility of the old Romans toward their Enemies, in giving 'em the
mildest Names: Some Wars are only for Empire, others for Safety: Difference of
Conduct to be observed in each. A noble and generous Saying of King Pyrrhus.

ANd here I cannot but observe moreover, That he who is properly called
Perduellis, [a stubborn Enemy] had by our Ancestors the name of Hostis given
him; the gentleness of the Word somewhat lessening the foulness and odium of
the Thing: for Hostis [an Enemy] among them signified the same thing, that
Peregrinus [a Stranger] does now amongst us; as appears from the The Body of
the ancient Roman Laws, which were gathered from the wisest Laws of all the
Grecians, by the Decemviri created for that purpose, about the Year of Rome
301. See the History of 'em in Livy, Book 3. chap. 33, 34. where he calls 'em
the fons omnis publici, privatique Juris; and our Author in his first Book de
Orat. prefers 'em for Wisdom before whole Libraries of Philosophers.
Laws of the XII Tables, and therein such sort of Expressions as these, These
are the Words of two Laws, taken out of the XII Tables; See Charondas de Leg.
XII Tab. The Meaning of the first, is, That whoever has got any Business at Law
with a Stranger, shall appoint a Day for the Decision of it beforehand, that so
he may have time to make his Appearance. Of the second, Tho'a Stranger had
possessed a Man's Estate never so long, he should have no Title to it by way of
Prescription; but the rightful Owner, after never so many Years, should have
Authority and Power to demand it of him again.
Status dies cum host; and, Adversus hostem aeterna auctoritas. What greater
Courtesy could be shown than this, to call even an Enemy by only the softest
and most obliging Names? Though the Word is now altered, I confess, from that
mild to an harsher Sense, Custom having changed it from what it first properly
signified, a Stranger, to denote such a one as bears Arms against us. We have
told you In the foregoing Chapter.
already what previous Causes and Conditions there should be, before any War
can be lawful and just; the same are required even in those Wars also, which
are undertaken merely for Glory and Empire: But then all Contests of this
latter sort, should be carried on with less Heat and Animosities; for as in the
Differences that happen among Citizens, we make a distinction between a violent
Enemy, and a generous Rival; (in one case nothing but a Title of Honor, in the
other our Lives and Reputations being concerned) so did our Ancestors do in
their Wars. That which they waged with the A barbarous and savage Nothern
People, who made an Inroad into Italy, and put the Roman State into a very
great Fear; but at last were routed by Marius and Catulus. See Plut. Life of
Marius.
Cimbers and A valiant and hardy People, who from that part of Gaul which was
called Celtick, near the River Ligeris, went into Spain, and there settled upon
the River Iberus; whence called Celtiberi. Numantia was their capital City.
Celtibers, was managed as with hateful and implacable Enemies; the Question
then being, not whether of the two should remain a Conqueror, but whether
should remain a People at all: Whereas those with the Latins, Carthaginians; A
King of Epirus, who made War upon the Romans, and routed 'em several times, for
the sake of the Tarentines, who called him to their Assistance. His Life is
writ by Plut.
Pyrrhus, etc. were only Quarrels about Honor and Dominion. The Carthaginians
were perfidious and treacherous; Hannibal their great Commander Cruel; but all
the rest more Faithful and Merciful. That Speech of Pyrrhus is indeed very
extraordinary upon restoring the Captives, when he says, This is quoted out of
the Poet Ennius.
I neither Gold of you nor Price demand:
Nor will I chaffer, but fight out the War:
Let Steel, not Gold to each their Fate decide.
Whether to you, or me Dame Fortune will
The Victory grant; or what the Chance of War,
Shall Courage try. And this I add withal,
That freely I their Liberties restore
To these brave Men, whose Lives the War has spared.
Freely I give; do you as freely take,
In The name of the mighty Gods.
A truly Royal and Princely Saying, and worthy of the glorious Family of the
The Descendants of Aeacus, one of the Judges of the Dead; whom the Poets make
Son of Jupiter, and Father of Peleus, who was Father of Achilles; from whom
this Pyrrhus of Epirus was derived.
Aeacidae.

CHAP. XIII.
Particular Persons bound in Justice to keep the Promises made to an Enemy. The
Example of Regulus. The Story of ten who did the contrary: How punished by the
Romans; particularly one, who thought to have escaped by a Quirk. A noble
Instance of the Roman Justice to King Pyrrhus. Justice to be kept toward the
meanest Slaves. Two Ways whereby Injuries are done, Fraud and Force. Fraud the
more odious. To be a Rogue under the Mask of Honesty, the greatest of Villainies.

It Is also the Duty of Thus far in general of public Justice to an Enemy: He
now proceeds to say, That Justice obliges particular Persons too, if at any
time they have made any Promises to their Enemies, afterward to perform 'em
faithfully.
particular Persons, if at any time, forced by the necessity of their
Circumstances, they have made any Promise or Oath to an Enemy; afterward to
see that they perform it faithfully. Thus See Book 3. chapter 27.
Regulus was taken in the first Punick War by the Carthaginians, and sent by
them to Rome, about an Exchange of Prisoners, upon solemn Oath given that he
would return to 'em again: as soon then as he was come to Rome, he first
advised the Senate against making such a Change, and when he had done it (though
begged on to stay by his Friends and Relations) rather returned to a certain
Punishment, than his Oath should be broken, though made to an Enemy. But Hannibal
in the second Carthaginian War, after our fatal Defeat at A little Village in
Apulia, where the Romans, under the Conduct of Paulus and Varro, were
Overthrown by Hawnibal, the Carthaginian General.
Cannae, sent ten to Rome under the same Obligation of returning again, unless
by their Interest they could prevail with the Senate to redeem their Prisoners;
who were all by the Censors deprived of their Privileges as Freemen, and tied
to pay such and such Duties to the Public as long as they lived, for not being
true to their Oaths and Obligations. There was one of 'em thought by a Trick to
have eluded the force of his Oath, but was nevertheless punished for all that:
His Shift was this; Hannibal had let 'em depart his Camp upon the Condition
afore-mentioned; when therefore they had gotten a little way out of it, what
does he do but come back to it again, under color of having forgot to take
something (I know not what) with him: And then away he goes out again,
discharged (as he thought) from his Obligation of Returning. And so, it is very
true, he was in Word, but not in Reality; for in all such Oaths we aren't to
attend to the mere Form of Words, but the true Design and Intention of 'em. But
the greatest Example of Justice to an Enemy, was shown by our Ancestors toward
King Pyrrhus: See Chapter 4. and 22. of Book 3.
There came a Deserter out of Pyrrhus's Camp, and offered the Senate to
dispatch him with Poison; which they and Fabricius were so far from accepting
of, that they gave him up again as a Traitor to his Master. Thus we may see,
that they would not allow of any unjust way of Dealing, tho for the Death of a
powerful and invading Adversary: And so much for the Duties required in War.
There is one part of He has shown there are Rules of Justice to be observed,
toward those that have injured us, and our very Enemies: Here he proceeds to a
third sort of People they are to be observed toward, viz. Slaves.
Justice remaining behind, and which ought by no means to be forgotten by us; I
mean that toward the lowest and meanest sort of People: And these are more
especially those we call our Slaves; in relation to whom, it is a very good Rule
that is given by some Men, That we should use 'em no otherwise than we do our
Day-labourers, Make 'em first do their Work, and then pay 'em honestly what
they have earned. In fine, To close up this Discourse of Justice, There are two
Ways or Methods, whereby one Man may Injure or Oppress another; the one is
Eraud and Subtlety, the other open Force and Violence; the former of which is
held the part of a Fox, and the latter of a Lion: Both of 'em certainly very
unworthy of a reasonable Creature; though Fraud, I think, is the more odious of
the two. But of all Injustice, theirs is certainly of the deepest Dye; who make
it their Business to appear honest Men, even whilst they are practicing the
greatest of Villainies.

CHAP. XIV.
Of Liberality, the second part of general Justice. Three Cautions to be
observed concerning it. It Is not Liberality, to bestow upon one, what is
wrongfully taken from another; nor what ought to have rather been given to our
Relations; nor to give out of Vainglory. Bounty should be proportioned to the
Merit of the Receiver, which is of several sorts.

WE have now gone through with the Subject of Justice, it In Chap. 7. he divided
Justice, taken in its largest Extent, into Justice strictly so called, and
Liberality: Having now finished his Discourse upon the former of these, he
proceeds to the latter in this Chapter, about which he first lays down three
Cautions.
remains in the next place (to go on according to our Method proposed) that we
say something likewise of Bounty and Liberality, than which there is nothing
more nearly allied to the Nature of Man. But then we must observe these
following Cautions: First, That we take care in all Acts of Bounty, that they
ben't As those who lend or give Money to young Spendthrifts, to help 'em
forward and encourage 'em in their ill Courses, or the like; which is really a
very great Injury to 'em.
prejudicial to those we would oblige by 'em, nor to any other Body. Secondly,
That we don't in our Bounty and Liberality go beyond our Estates. And, Thirdly,
That we duly proportion our Kindness, according to every Man's Merit and
Deserts. Having laid down his three Cautions, he proceeds in order to say
something upon each of 'em. I take the Id enim therefore to referr to his first
Caution, That our Bounty ben't really a Prejudice to any one; for to do no
Wrong he laid down before, [chap. 7. and 10.] as the first fundamental
Principle of Justice. His Caution was, that our Bounty should not be Hurtful,
and here he gives his Reason for it, Id enim, etc. i. e. For not to Hurt or
Injure any body is the first and fundamental Rule of Justice, which Justice
ought to be the Measure of Bounty; nothing being Liberal (as he afterward
observes) but what is agreeable to the Rules of Justice.
And first of the former, which is grounded upon the great and fundamental
Principle of all Justice, to which this Duty in all its particular Instances
should be referred. For he who pretending to do one a Kindness, does that which
is really a Prejudice to him, is indeed so far from being Kind and Obliging, as
that he ought to be counted a most pernicious Flatterer: and to do any manner
of Injury to one, that you may show your Generosity and Bounty to another, is
just one and the same sort of Roguery and Injustice, as to Enrich your self by
the Spoils of your Neighbor. Yet this is the Fault of a great many People, and
especially those who are desirous of Glory, to take away from some that which
justly belongs to 'em, that so they may have to bestow upon others; and they are
apt to think 'emselves extremely bountiful, if they Enrich their Adherents by
any manner of means. But this is so far from being a Duty of Liberality, that
nothing in the World can be more contrary to it. It ought to be therefore our
first care in Giving, That what we bestow be a real Advantage and Kindness to
our Friend, and no ways an Injury to any third Person. That Action therefore of
The first after he had conquered Pompey the Great; and the second after he had
conquered Marius in their Civil Wars.
Caesar and Sylla's, in taking away Estates from the rightful Proprietors, and
giving 'em to others who had nothing to do with 'em, ought by no means to be
accounted Liberal; for nothing can ever be truly such, that is not at the same
time Just and Honest. A Here he comes to his second Rule to be observed in
Giving.
second Caution to be observed was this, That our Bounty ben't suffered to
exceed our Abilities; for they who give more than their Estates will allow of,
are, in the first place, For it is our Duty in the first place to provide for
our Relations, and those who more immediately depend upon us. See the latter
end of Chap. 17.
injurious to their own Relations, by spending that Wealth upon other People,
which should rather have been given, or left to them. Beside that this
overgreat Bounty in Giving, is usually accompanied with an answerable Desire
and Greediness of Getting; which often proceeds even to downright Oppression,
that so Men may have wherewithal to supply this extravagant Humor. One may also
observe in a great many People, that they take a sort of Pride in being counted
Magnificent, and give very plentifully, not from any generous Principle in
their Natures, but only to appear Great in the Eye of the World; so that all
their Bounty is resolved into nothing but mere Outside and Pretense, and is
nearer of kin to Vanity and Folly, that it is to either Liberality or Honesty.
The third Caution to be observed in Giving, The Merits, etc. These are to be
judged of from four Heads, which he treats of in order.
The third Caution was, That our Bounty should be proportioned to the Merits of
the Receiver: In judging of which, we are first to confider the Man's Honesty
or Manners; secondly, the Good Will he bears toward us; thirdly, the nearness
of Relation, or Society that is between us; and, lastly, the Benefits we have
formerly received from him. It Is desirable that all these Inducements might
concur in the same Person; but when they do not, we should bestow our Kindness
more especially on him, in whom we find the most, and weightiest of 'em.

CHAP. XV.
Honesty, the first sort of Merit. We aren't to expect we shall find perfectly
good Men. Modesty, Temperance, etc. more especially to be regarded. How we
should judge of Men's Good Will toward us. Gratitude a most necessary Duty: We
should imitate fruitful Fields, by returning more than we have received. How to
judge of the Value of any Kindness: Those to be least esteemed that are done
rashly and inconsiderately. We should do most for those that stand in greatest
need, if they are otherwise deserving.

The first thing we are to judge a Man's Merits by, is his Honesty or good
Manners; in which particular we aren't to stay, till we find perfectly Good, or
Wise Men.
NOw seeing we don't live amongst such as, are perfectly and fully Wise, but
such as are thought to have done very well, if they are but, as 'twere, the
rough Draughts of Virtue; we ought to consider, I think, in the first place,
That no one should wholly be neglected in this case, in whom there appears any
shadow or resemblance of real Honesty; but that those Men ought to be
principally regarded, who excel in the quiet and more peaceable Virtues of
Modesty, Temperance, and especially this From Chap. 7. He takes Justice here,
as in several other places, in the larger Sense, as it contains Liberality,
Gratitude, etc.
Justice, of which I have now been discoursing a great while. This he gives as
a Reason of what he just now said, That Modesty, etc. should be most regarded.
For most times Greatness of Spirit and Courage, unless it be in those who are
perfectly Wise and Virtuous, is something too hot and apt to boil over; the
others are the Virtues, which seem more peculiarly to constitute a Good Man.
And so much for the first sort of Merit to be considered, viz. The Manners or
Honesty of the Person we would be Kind to. The Here he proceeds to the second
of his four Grounds of Merit, The Good Will, etc.
second was, The Good Will which he bears toward us; as to which it should
always be our principal care, to do most for him, by whom we are most beloved:
Now in judging of the Good Will that any one bears us, we are not to consider
(like Boys and Children) any sudden flashes and heats of Passion, but rather a
constant and well-setled Affection. But if a Man, This is the fourth thing to
be considered in judging of a Man's Merits, The Benefits, etc. He discourses of
this in the third place, because (I suppose) the next will take up so much
room, that if this had come after it, 'twould have looked too far distant from
the other two foregoing.
in the next place, has done us any real Service, so that our part is to make a
Requital, and not first to lay an Obligation upon him, it is then our Duty to
take some greater care; for of all the Virtues, there is none we are more
necessarily obliged to, than Gratitude. If then, according to An ancient Greek
Poet, born at Ascra, a Town in Baeotia, thence called Ascraeus Senex. Some
think he was older than Homer, though Paterculus makes him a Hundred and twenty
Years younger. His Works are still extant.
Hesiod's Rule, even that which was nothing but barely lent us, is, if
possible, to be returned back with Interest again; what abundant Returns should
we make to those, by whom we have been freely and generously Obliged? What less
can we do than be like fruitful Fields, which produce, beyond comparison more
than was thrown into 'em? And if we do Services even to those Men, from whom we
hope afterward to receive any Favors; ought we not much more to do the same
to those, from whose forward Kindness we have already received 'em? For the
Virtue of Liberality containing under it these two Parts; in the first place,
The doing a Kindness to any one; and, secondly, The requiting it when done to
us; whether we'll perform the former or not, is altogether left to our own
Choice; but every Good Every Good Man's obliged to be Charitable too, according
to his Abilities, as well as Grateful: but with this difference, That he can
choose whether he will bestow his Kindnesses upon this, or that, or the other
Person; but he is bound to return 'em to those very Men, by whom he was obliged.
Man's obliged to the latter, when e're he can do it Otherwise not: nothing
being Liberal in this sense of the Word, as it comprehends Gratitude, that is
not Just.
without Injustice. But then we are to make a distinction between Benefits, and
are there bound to make the most ample Returns, where the Obligations we have
received are the greatest. And to judge of the Merits of any Kindness, we are
chiefly to consider in what manner it was done; as whether freely,
considerately and from a Principle of Goodnature. For several People do many
things Rashly,. and with a blind sort of Impulse; throwing away their Favors
upon all without distinction; being hurried about, as it were with a Tempest,
by every mad and frolicksome Humor, and every sudden or impetuous Passion. A
Benefit therefore, when received from such a one, is not to be esteemed of an
equal Value, with those that proceed from a settled Judgment and due
Consideration. But our principal Duty both in doing of Kindnesses and making
Requitals, is, To do most for those that stand in greatest need of it,
supposing all Circumstances else to be equal: the contrary to which appears
plainly in the Practice and Actions of the most part of Men; for, People choose
to bestow their Favors, upon those from whom they expect to receive the most
Benefits, though the Persons perhaps don't at all stand in need of 'em.

CHAP. XVI.
We should be most ready to give to those, who are most nearly allied to us.
The first sort of Alliance is that between all Men in general. The Bond of it,
and Duties resulting from it. We Are bound to do for any Man what will be a
Kindness to him, and no Prejudice to our selves; but with this Caution, That we
don't thereby make our selves unable to assist those, who are more nearly
allied to us.

THe He now proceeds to the fourth, but third placed [See chapter 14.] Ground of a
Man's Meriting of us, The Nearness, etc. I have added some Words to the
beginning of the Chapter, to make the Connection with that foregoing appear the
better.
fourth Inducement remaining to be spoke to, is, The nearness of Relation, or
Society that is amongst Men; for the maintenance of which, we cannot do better,
than to give most to those, that stand nearest related to us. But that we may
consider, with greater distinctness, the natural Principles of Human Society,
we shall here trace it down from the Fountain head. The first thing then to be
taken notice of is this, The first and most comprehensive Society, is that,
which is between all Men, considered barely as they are Men: By which we are
obliged to all those things, which we call Acts of mere Humanity; such as doing
good to another, when 'twill be no prejudice to our selves, which by the
Moralists are called, Res innoxiae utilitatis, of which he gives several
Instances in this Chapter.
That there is such a thing as a Fellowship or Society between all Men in
general: The Bond or Cement that holds this together, is Reason and Discourse,
which by Teaching, Learning, Communicating one with another, etc. easily make
Men agree together, and unite 'em all in one natural sort of Conjunction and
Community. Nor does any thing set us at a greater distance from the Nature of
Beasts: for we oftentimes talk of the Courage of them, such as Lions and
Horses; but never a word of their Equity, Justice or Goodness; And why is this;
but Reason and Discourse are the Bonds of Society: where they are wanting
therefore, there can be no Society, and by consequence no Justice, Equity, etc.
which are the Virtues that consist in preserving Society.
because they are destitute of Reason and Discourse? This is then the largest
and most comprehensive of all Societies, being made up of Men considered barely
as such, and so taking in even the whole Race and Kind of 'em one with another:
the The Duties incumbent on us by virtue of this Society are, First, To let
every one have a share in those things, which by Nature are common; and what
these are, he tells us immediately. Secondly, Not to break in upon another's
Property. Thirdly, In those things which are made our own, and become a
Property, to be communicative, etc. What he means by E quibus ipsis, etc. I
confess I don't very well understand, neither do any of the Commentators tell
me; but I take the meaning of it to be, as I have translated it: so that quibus
should relate to quae descripta sunt legibus, the things that are every one's
own by Laws: Concerning which his first Rule was, That we should not break in
upon another's Right; and then as to all other cases about 'em, he only puts us
in mind of the Greek Proverb; the meaning of which is, That we should all count
our selves Friends to one another, and practice accordingly.
Duties of which are, To let every one have a share in those things, which by
Nature were produced for the common Advantage and Benefit of all; To let what is
already determined by Laws, and civil Constitutions, remain as it is, without
breaking in upon any Man's Right; as to which things however we should remember
a Rule, which is now among the Greeks become an usual Proverb, All things in
common amongst Friends. But perhaps you may ask, what kind of things we suppose
them to be, which ought to be common to all Mankind: Ennius has given us one
Instance of 'em, which may easily be applied to a great many others: He who
directs the wandering Traveller,
Does, as 'twere, light another's Torch by his own;
Which gives him never the less of Light, for that
It gave another.
By this one Case he sufficiently teaches us, That whatever Kindness can be
done for another, without any Damage or Loss to our selves, it is our Duty to do
it, though to never so much a Stranger. From hence have arisen those general
Maxims and Principles of Humanity, Not to deny one a little Running-water; or,
The lighting his Fire by ours, if he has occasion: To give the best Counsel we
are able to one who is in Doubt or Distress; which are things that do Good to
the Person that receives them, and are no Loss or Trouble to him that confers
them. Such things therefore, being by Nature common, should accordingly be kept
open for the free use of all Men: And of those which are our own we should
always be giving something, that may contribute to the Benefit and Welfare of
the whole. He puts in a necessary Caution about Giving, and letting our Things
be in common; which he would have us carry no further than Ennius's Rule
prescribes; that is, We should not be so Communicative and Open-hearted to all
in general, as to impoverish our selves, and put it out of our Power to assist
those, who are more nearly allied to us. We must light indeed another's Candle
by ours, but not so as to lose our own Light by it. Here we must proceed by the
Measures of Prudence and Charity.
But because the Revenues of Particulars are small, and there are infinite
numbers of those that Want, therefore is Viz. That of always Giving something
out of what is our own, for the general Benefit.
this universal Bounty to be kept within the Limits prescribed by Ennius, It
gives him never the less of Light; that so we may have it within our Power, to
be Liberal to those that are more nearly allied to us.

CHAP. XVII.
Several other Degrees of Relation, less extensive than that mentioned in the
former Chapter. That of Friendship the most closely knit. The Ground and
Foundation of true Friendship. The Relation arising from doing Kindnesses to
one another. The Love a Man has for his Native Country swallows up all other
Loves whatever. Which of the several Relatives we ought to prefer, in our
Liberality and doing Kindnesses. A Description of Friendship; and of all
Friendships, which is most pleasant.

He now proceeds to reckon up the several Degrees of Nearness or Relation among
Men; that so we may know to whom we are obliged to be most Liberal, upon this
last account of Merit, viz. Nearness of Relation.
BUt there are several Degrees of Society and Fellowship amongst Mankind; for
to take now our leave of that general and universal one already mentioned,
there is a nearer among those who are all of the same Country, Nation or
Language; than which, nothing more knits and unites Men to one another. There
is a closer yet among those, who are all of the same City; for a great many
things are in common to Fellow-citizens, such as Markets, Temples, Walks, Ways,
Laws, Privileges, Courts of Justice, Freedom of Votes, besides common Meetings
and Familiarities, and abundance of Business and Intercourse with one another.
But there is a stricter Bond of Alliance still, between those who belong to the
same Family, as taking into it but a very small part of that vast and immense
one of all Mankind. For there being by Nature implanted in all things a certain
Desire of Begetting their Like, the closest and nearest of all Societies is
between Man and Wife; then follows that between them and their Children* and
afterward that of the whole Family, who inhabit together, and have all things
in common; which is, as it were, the first beginning of a City, and Ground or
Seed-plot of a whole Commonwealth. Next to this comes the Bond of Relation
between Brothers; as also between first and second Cosins; who growing too
numerous to live in the same House, are sent out to others, as it were into new
Colonies. Next after this follow Marriages and Alliances, and so a new Stock of
Relations that way; from whence comes a new Propagation and Offspring, which
serves to give rise, as was said, to Commonwealths. Now that nearness of Blood,
and the natural Love which arises from it, cannot but endear Men to one another,
is past all doubt; it is a very great matter to have the same The Images, etc.
of their Ancestors, which were kept for the Honor of all the Family, into how
many Branches soever divided.
Relics and Monuments of our Ancestors; to make use of the same Private
Sacrifices or Ceremonies belonging to such or such Families in particular,
which the Public in general was no ways concerned in: Cui praeter cognatos and
affines nemo interponebatur, says Valor. Max. Book 2. chapter 1. And Livy speaks of
a Statum Genti Fabiae Sacrificium, a solemn Sacrifice belonging to the Fabian
Family, Book 5. chapter 46.
religious Ceremonies, and be laid after death in the same place of Burial: But
of all the Societies and Unions amongst Men, there is none more excellent or
more closely knit, than when such as are Men of real Virtue and Honesty, from a
certain agreement and likeness of their Manners, contract a Familiarity and
Friendship one with another. For Virtue and Goodness (as we often observe) of
necessity moves us wherever we see it; and makes us all have a Love and
Respect for that Person, in whom we discover it. And as every Virtue thus wins
upon our Hearts, and even forces us to Love those we take to possess it; so
more especially do Justice and Beneficence. But when Every Man has a Kindness
for himself, and is in some measure pleased with his own Qualities and Way of
Living; when therefore he sees another with the same Qualities, and that
follows after the same Way of Life, he presently conceives him as it were
another self, and is accordingly pleased with him too; which seems to be the
Reason why Like (as we say) loves to join with Like. When several therefore
have the same Virtues and Perfections in 'em, every one is pleased with all the
rest, as with himself, and they all become (as it were) one and the same
Person, which is what Pythagoras thought the Perfection of Friendship. See
Aristot. Eth. Nichom. Book 8. chapter 4. from which this seems to have been taken.
several Persons are all like one another in Honesty and good Manners, then no
Society can ever be more loving, or more closely united. For where there are
many of the same Humor, and same Inclinations; every one sees, in some
measure, his own self, and is accordingly delighted, in the Person of another;
and that is brought about, which Pythagoras thought the Perfection of all
Friendship, That a great many Severals are made into One. There Is another
remarkable Fellowship or Community, arising from an Intercourse of doing and
receiving Benefits; which while it is kept up by a mutual Gratitude and Kindness
of all the Parties, cannot but occasion a firm and very lasting Agreement
between 'em. But when we have gone over all the Relations that are in the
World, and thro'ly considered the Nature of each, we shall find that there is no
one of greater Obligation, no one that is dearer and nearer to us, than that
which we all of us bear to the Public. We have a tender Concern and Regard for
our Parents, for our Children, our Kindred and Acquaintance; but the Love which
we have for our Native Country swallows up all other Loves whatever; for which
there is no honest Man but would Die, if by his Death he could do it any
necessary Service. How detestable For the greater Obligation they had to their
Country, the greater their Wickedness was in Destroying it.
then must the Wickedness and Barbarity of those People be, who have mangled
and rent this their Native Country by all manner of Villainies; and He means
Julius Caesar.
have made it their Business (nay, and Marck Anthony and his Adherents.
still do so) to bring it to Ruin and utter Desolation? Having thus laid down
the several Relations, that we have in the World, he proceeds to show how we
should carry our selves in 'em; by giving the Preference to our Country, etc.
Now if there should happen any Contest or Competition between these Relations,
which of 'em should have the greatest share of our Duty; we should pay the
first Regard to our Before even our Parents; for the Welfare of these is
contained in, and depends upon that of our Country; which should it be ruined,
our Parents and every thing else must of course follow after it.
Country and Parents, from whom we have received the most endearing
Obligations; the next to our Children and Family, who all have their Eyes upon
us alone, and have no Body else they can depend upon; next in order to these
come our Kindred and Relations, whose Fortune is generally the same with our
own. To each of these therefore, whom I have just now mentioned, we most of all
owe what is necessary for their subsistence: But then, as for Living and Eating
together, for mutual Advising, Discourse, Exhortation, Comforting, and
sometimes (if occasion serves) Solomon therefore incomparably well, Prove. 27.
v. 6. calls Rebukes, The Wounds of a Friend; which he says are faithful; while
the Kisses of an Enemy are full of deceit.
Rebuking, Friendship is the properest Soil for them; and of all kinds of
Friendship, there is none so pleasant, as that which is cemented by a Likeness
of Manners.

CHAP. XVIII.
In Liberality the Necessity of the Person is especially to be considered. Some
Kindnesses due to some Relatives more than to others. Rules signify but little
of themselves, unless they are confirmed by Practice and Exercise. Greatness of
Soul, the third general Virtue, most glorious and splendid of 'em all. Is most
of all praised, and its contrary disprais'd among Men.

He has shown toward whom and how we ought chiefly to exercise our Liberality;
but because particular Circumstances may make some alteration, he gives us a
Rule or two for our Direction about them.
BUt in all these Duties of Beneficence and Liberality, one principal thing to
be taken notice of is, What Necessity the Person we would be Kind to lies
under, and what he is able or not able to do, without our Assistance: So that
in some cases, the present Posture and Circumstances of a Man's Condition,
ought more to prevail with us, than the Degrees of Relation. Again, There are
certain particular Offices, which are more peculiarly owing to some one sort of
Relatives, than they are to another: In the Business (for Example) of getting
in his Corn, it is our Duty rather to assist a Because getting in of Corn is a
thing that more peculiarly seems to be a part of Neighborhood; and has nothing
to do with Friendship and Kindred, etc.
next Neghbour, than either a Brother or familiar Friend: but if the Business
be a Case at Law, then a Kinsman or Friend must rather be defended, than only a
next Neighbor. These things therefore, and such like Circumstances, should be
well considered, in the Practice and Exercise of every Virtue; and our Minds
should be brought to a kind of Acquaintance and Familiarity with them; that so
we may be quick at the Accounts of our Duty, and able by casting up all things
together, to see at last what the Remainder is, and know what we owe to the
several sorts and conditions of Men. For as a General, Orator or Physician,
however well skilled in the Rules of his Art, can never be perfect without the
assistance of Practice and Experience; just so it is in the Case now before us:
Many have laid down the Rules and Precepts of Virtue and Good-living; (as I my
self am doing at this very time) but there is moreover required to a due degree
of Height and Perfection in it, that one accustom himself to the Exercise of
'em. And thus have I shown how Virtue and Honesty (from which all our Duty does
immediately flow) are deduced from those things, which concern the Society and
Good of Mankind; which was the second General I proposed to discourse of.

Having finished his Discourse about Justice, the second; he goes on to
Fortitude, Magnanimity, or Greatness of Soul; the third of his general Heads of
Virtue; Of which he observes in the first place, That it is more glorious and
splendid in the account of the World, than any of the rest.
It is to be observed, that whereas there were laid down four general Heads,
from which all Virtue and Honesty is derived; whatever proceeds from a brave
and exalted Mind, that is raised above Fortune, and all the little Chances and
Accidents of the World, is usually made most account of amongst Men. Hence in
Reproaches we find there is nothing more common, than such things as these: For
shame! young Men, and yet have Women's Hearts!
While this brave Woman plays the Man --
Or something like this, Dear Salmacis was the Name of a Nymph, presiding over
a Stream, which was said to soften and effeminate those, that washed in it.
[See the fourth Book of Ovid 's Metamorph.] These Words are spoken by way of
Reproach to some Coward, and mean no more, Than that he is for no Spoils but
only those of Women, that cost no Wounds, etc.
Salmacis give Spoils, that cost no Sweat or [Blood! Whereas on the contrary in
Praises or Panegyricks, those things that are done with a bravery of Mind, and
have something of extraordinary Courage in 'em, (I know not how) we commend in
a nobler and loftier Strain, than we do any thing else. Hence Places where the
Grecians, with a great deal of Courage, conquered mighty Armies of the
Persians. See Corn. Nepos 's Miltiades. Plutarch 's Themistocles and Aristides.
Marathon, Salamis, Plateae, etc. are so common a Field for all the
Rhetoricians: Hence our The Names of several extraordinary Romans, who by their
Courage contributed much to the Raising of that Empire: and therefore were very
much applauded by Posterity.
Cocles; hence the Decii, the Scipio's, Marcellus, and a great many others; and
especially the People of Rome it self is particularly famous for Greatness of
Courage. But the Value that is set upon Military Glory appears from this, that
almost all Statues are done in the Habit and Garb of a Soldier.

CHAP. XIX.
Courage is not truly a Virtue, unless it be accompanied with Justice, Truth,
etc. An excellent Definition of it given by the Stoics. An admirable Saying of
Plato to the same purpose. Men of great Souls are apt to be Ungovernable and
Ambitious; which prompts 'em to Injustice. A Man of a truly noble Spirit never
Injures another, but Protects from Injuries; scorns Applause, and the Voice of
the ignorant Multitude.

BUt that sort of Fighting stoutly, and undergoing Dangers, is not enough to
give a Man the Name and Reputation of Valor, unless he do it in a good Cause,
by fair means, etc.
Courage which is seen in the Dangers and Fatigues of War, unless a Man be
governed by the Rules of Justice, and fight for the Safety and Good of the
Public, and not for particular Ends of his own, is altogether blamable; and so
far from being a part of true Virtue, that it is indeed a piece of the most
barbarous Inhumanity. Fortitude therefore is very well defined by the Stoic
Philosophers, when they call it, It Is not true Courage therefore to be bold in
Sinning; nor is a sign of a faint-hearted Spirit, to be afraid of committing
what indeed is a Fault: There are some things (as Aristotle well observes)
which a Man of true Courage ought to fear, and it is a shame for him not so do
it. 'Twere well if this could be considered by some Men, who think it a brave
and heroic piece of Greatness, to live in open Defiance of the Laws, and let
the World see they arn't afraid of the Gallows: who defy Heaven out of a mere
Bravado, and affront the Almighty, that they may not seem such Cowards as to be
afraid of Hell. The truth on it is, there is hardly any thing occasions more Evil
in the World, than Men's having false Notions of this Virtue; and would they
but take this Definition along with 'em, they would not talk so much of being
Courageous in Wickedness, nor call others, Men of low, mean and pitiful Souls
for being afraid of Sinning.
A Virtue contending for Justice and Honesty. No man therefore by Baseness and
Treachery has ever got the Name and Reputation of true Courage; for nothing can
ever be Virtuous or Credible, that is not Just. To which purpose, that of Plato
was admirably well said, As that sort of Knowledge, which is not directed by
the Rules of Justice, ought rather to have the Name of Design and Subtilty,
than Wisdom and Prudence; just so that bold and adventurous Mind, which is
hurried by the Stream of its own Passions, and not for the Good and Advantage
of the Public, should rather have the Name of Foolhardy and Daring, than
Valiant and Courageous. The first thing therefore I Would have in a truly
courageous Man, is, These Words must be taken in a limited Sense, not as though
Cunning and Stratagem were unlawful, but only as exclusive of Perfidiousness
and Treachery.
That he be a Follower of Goodness and fair Dealing, of Truth and Sincerity;
which are principal and constituent parts of Justice. But here it is one very
unhappy thing, that most times these great and exalted Minds are naturally
ungovernable and desirous of Rule: So that what Plato observed of the Spartans,
That all their Customs had no other Aim, but to get the Superiority, may fitly
enough be applied to these Persons: for the more any Man has of this Greatness
of Soul, the more eager he is of being a Sharer in the Government, or rather of
obtaining it wholly to himself: And it is no easy matter to be fair and
equitable in all one's Actions, (which is the proper and peculiar Office of
Justice) while one is endeavoring to make himself uppermost. From hence it
comes to pass, that they will never be conquered in any Debates, or overruled by
the Laws and Constitutions of the Public; but make it their business by
Factions and Bribery to get a strong Party and Interest in the Republic; and
rather choose to be Uppermost by Force and Injustice, than Equal to others by
fair and upright Dealing. But the difficulty of it can only serve to make it
more Honorable, I have added these Words to my Author, because the Sense seems
plainly to require 'em, or something like 'em. He had just been saying, That
Men of great Souls are naturally apt to run into Jnjustice, for the raising of
their Fortunes; and that it is very difficult for 'em not to do so: But fearing
lest this should be urged as an Excuse for 'em, he takes care to prevent it by
saying, That the Difficulty of it enhances the Credit; and then adds, Nullum
est enim, etc. which words seem to give a Reason why the Difficulty of adhering
to Justice in this case, will by no means serve to excuse Injustice: For, says
he, no sort of Case, etc.
but never its contrary more Excusable: For no sort of Case or Circumstance
whatever, can excuse any Man for being guilty of Injustice. Those are therefore
your truly brave and courageous Men, not who Rob, Plunder and Injure others,
but those who Secure and Protect 'em from Injuries. But that Greatness of Mind,
which is truly such, and under the direction of Wisdom and Prudence, makes that
Honor and Credit, which we naturally desire, not consist in the outward
imaginary Applause, but in the real intrinsic Goodness of its Actions; and is
not so eager of appearing to be greater and better than others, as of really
being so. For he that is so mean as to depend upon the giddy and ignorant
Multitude, ought never to be accounted of a truly great and exalted Spirit:
Besides that, there is nothing so easily draws Men to Acts of Injustice, as a
Loftiness of Mind, when joined with this foolish Desire of Applause. That is,
He that has gotten this Loftiness of Mind, is in very great danger of being
desirous of Applause, (very few being otherwise) and by consequence, of falling
into Injustice: and therefore he ought to be the more careful as to this
particular.
This is indeed a very dangerous Place, and requires our greatest Concern and
Watchfulness; because you shall hardly find any Man, that, when he has gone
through Labors and Difficulties, does not expect this Honor and Applause, as a
kind of Reward for his Courage and Achievements.

CHAP. XX.
Wherein true Greatness of Soul consists. An excellent Description of it. It Is
an Enemy to Covetousness, to the Desire of Applause, and of Power. Produces a
calm and unpassionate Mind. The Desire of this Calm and Tranqullity of Mind,
has made some Men retire, and separate 'emselves from public Business. In what
a perfect Freedom consists.

NOw all true Courage and Greatness of Mind Having shown in the former Chapter
what the Requisites of true Courage are, viz. Justice, Truth, etc. that it is
opposite to Ambition, Vainglory and Ungovernableness, etc. he goes on now to
show wherein it consists, and what those things are, which it is concerned about.
is more especially seen in these two things: The first is a generous Contempt
or Disregard of all Such are Riches, Honors, Commands, etc. which it is the
part of the greatest Soul not to be a Slave to. We call a Soul either great or
little, according to the things which we find it affected with; there being
always a proportion between the Faculties and the Object. Thus Children that
have gotten but little Souls, are concerned about little and trivial Objects;
which afterward, as their Faculties enlarge, they come to leave off and despise
by degrees. He therefore is a Man of true Fortitude and Greatness of Soul, who
is concerned about none but the greatest Objects, viz. Virtue and Vice,
Happiness and Misery: who is above all lesser Concerns in the World, such as
Pleasure or Pain, Riches or Poverty, etc. and never suffers himself so much to
regard 'em, as either to be puffed up at the one, or dejected at the other. Hence
he is never disquieted either with fears of Evil, hopes of Good, or any other
Passion; but however the World goes, can always keep an even Temper of Soul.
From hence result Uniformity and Consistency or Regularity in his Life, etc.
outward Goods, proceeding from an Opinion, That it is unworthy of a Man to
admire, or wish for, or endeavor after any thing, unless it be that which is
Honest and Becoming; to make himself subject to any one's Will; to be a Slave
to his own irregular Passions; or any ways depend upon the Capricio's of
Fortune. When he has gotten such a Temper of Mind as I have now been
describing, then the second thing is, That he This is not necessary to all
Fortitude; for if it were, then those Men who live a Life of Retirement, could
never be said to have that Virtue: which yet he affirms afterward.
perform such Actions as are glorious and profitable, but withal very full both
of Labor and Difficulty; and extremely dangerous to his Life it self, as well
as to those things that are requisite for its Preservation. Now It Is the doing
of great and profitable Actions, that makes a Man glorious and splendid and
useful to his Country: but it is that firm Temper and Resolution of Mind, which
is the cause that makes him venture to do such Actions; which he therefore
calls the causa and ratio efficiens magnos viros, which has something more in
it than Groundwork and Foundation.
all the Luster and Dignity of these two parts, nay and I add all their
Usefulness too, is lodged only in the latter; but the Groundwork, as 'twere,
and Foundation of all true Greatness, is laid in the former. For in that are
contained those generous Principles which exalt Men's Minds, and raise 'em to a
Contempt of all worldly things. But that former it self is made up of two
parts, The first is an Opinion that nothing is truly and really Good, but only
what is Honest: The second a Freedom from all sort of Passion or Disturbance of
Mind. For what can more discover a Man of a brave and heroic Spirit, than to
make no account in the World of those things, which seem so glorious and
dazzling to the generality of Mankind; but wholly to despise 'em, not from any
vain and fantastic Humor, but from solid and firm Principles of Reason and
Judgment? Or what can more show a robust Mind and unshaken Constancy, than to
bear those heavy and numerous Calamities, which are incident to Mankind in this
Life, with such a firm Temper and Fixedness of Soul, as never to offend against
Nature and Right Reason, or do any thing that is unworthy the Dignity and
Character of a Wise Man? Now 'twould not at all be consistent or agreeable,
that he who bore up so courageously against Fear, should be afterward unable
to resist Desire; or that he who could never be conquered by Pain, should
suffer himself to be captivated by Pleasure. These things therefore should well
be considered, and of all Since Fortitude in great measure consists in a
freedom from the Passions, of which Desire is one; from hence it follows, that
whoever is taken with an overgreat Desire of any thing, offends against this
Virtue. For this reason he advises here against the Desire of Money, Honor,
etc. as Vices opposite to Greatness of Soul. He brought 'em in before Chap. 8.
as Causes of Positive Injustice.
Desires, that of Money should be avoided; for nothing's a greater Sign of a
narrow, mean and sordid Spirit, than to dote upon Riches; nor is any thing on
the contrary more Creditable and Magnificent, than to contemn Wealth, if you
have it not; and if you have it, to lay it out freely in Acts of Bounty and
Liberality. The Desire of Glory (as I before observed) ought also to be
avoided: for it For who are greater Slaves than those who stand for Places? Or
what Servant more depends upon the Beck of his Master, than the ambitious Man
upon the Humor and Good Will of the Multitude?
robs a Man wholly of his Freedom and Liberty, which generous Spirits ought of
all things in the World to maintain and defend. Neither ought Places of Power
to be sought after; but at some times rather to be refused when offered, at
others, be laid down if they can conveniently. We should free our selves, in
short, from all vehement Passions and Disorders of Mind, not only those of
Desire and Fear, but also of Sorrow, of Joy and Anger; that so the State of the
Mind may be calm and undisturbed, which will make the whole Life become
graceful and By Constantia here, as in most other places, he does not mean
that, which we commonly call Constancy; but that which the Poets call
Consistency in a Character, i. e. an Uniformity or Agreement between all the
Parts of it, so that one does not thwart and contradict another: which can
never proceed from any thing else, but a perpetual Subjection of the Passions
and Appetites to the Commands of Reason. For the Passions are irregular and
inconsistent with one another; sometimes up and sometimes down; sometimes
hurrying a Man this way, other times that. See Note 2. on Chap. 29.
uniform. Now there both are and have been many, who to gain this Repose of
which I am speaking, 'Twas before observed, That this Virtue consists chiefly
in Freedom from the Disorders of Mind, etc. This leads him to discourse of the
several Ways Men have taken for the obtaining this Repose; which are two, 1st,
A retired and private Way of Living. 2dly, A Greatness of Power and Authority.
The former is either of Philosophers or private Gentlemen; and this last is
either of War or Peace. So that according to our Author's Sense, we may make
four sorts of Fortitude, or rather four ways of Life in which this Virtue
appears. The first we may call Contemplative or Monastic, which consists in
Contemplation, and a bare Conquest of the Passions. The second Rustic, in
managing one's private Estate well. The third Civil, in wisely and prudently
Governing the State. And the fourth Martial, in Fighting bravely and
well-carrying on the Business of War. He gives Rules about each of 'em in the
following Discourse.
have betaken 'emselves to a Life of Retirement, and wholly withdrawn from all
Business of the Public. Among these the noblest and most eminent of the
Philosophers; and some Men of rigid and severe Lives, who misliking the Manners
of the People or Governors, have gone and withdrawn 'emselves into the
Country, pleased with the Management of their private Fortunes. These Men
proposed the same End to themselves that Kings and Princes do, viz. The Living
so as to Want for nothing, to be under the Power and Control of none, but to
enjoy a full and perfect Freedom; which consists in living so, as one's These
words must be taken in a limited Sense; not as though by Pleases were meant what
our Passions or Fancy may suggest, but what our Nature or Reason commands. We
ought to be Governed and Ruled by this, and not by our Lusts and sensual
Appeties; true Freedom consisting, not in our being exempt from Law, but in our
being a Law to our own selves; as a great Author speaks.
self best pleases.

CHAP. XXI.
Those who live a Public and a Private Life aim both at Freedom. Their Lives
compared: the former more useful, the latter more safe. In what Cases a Man may
be excused from serving the Public. Those ought to serve it who are qualified
for the Service. Greatness of Soul more necessary for those in a public, than
retired Life. Two or three Rules to be obser'd before a Man enters upon
Business.

THis then being the common Design and End of 'em both, those who are ambitious
of Power and Authority, think to obtain it by enlarging their Fortunes and
Interests in the World; but these whom I have mentioned as Men of Repose, by
contenting themselves with their own Condition, though but humble and mean. In
which they are neither of 'em wholly in the wrong; but the Life of the latter,
I mean the retired, is both easier and safer, and begets less of Trouble and
Disturbance to others; whereas that of the former, who give 'emselves up to
Affairs of State, and the Management of great and important Concerns, is more
adapted to the Benefit and Good of Mankind, and the getting of Credit and
Reputation in the World. Having said there are two kinds of Life, viz. Public
and Private, wherein Men endeavor to arrive at this Virtue, and compared 'em
one with another; he shows that all are obliged to the former, as more useful
to Mankind; except in some cases mentioned.
Those People therefore are perhaps excusable, who being of Parts and
Capacities for Learning, give 'emselves wholly to the Study of it, and never at
all meddle with Public Business: and so are those also, who being disabled by
Sickness and Infirmities, or on any other good and allowable Account, have
separated 'emselves from the Administration of Affairs, leaving the Power and
Reputation of it in the hands of others. But as for those People, who have none
of these Reasons, and pretend to despise those Commands and Honors, which most
Men admire; I am so far from thinking it a Virtue in 'em, that I rather esteem
it a very great Fault: Thus far, it is true, one can hardly condemn them, in
that they despise, and make little account of Glory and Applause; but their
true Reason seems to be rather this, That they don't care to suffer the Labor
and Fatigue of 'em, and are afraid of encountering with Rubs and Repulses, as
things that are attended with some Shame and Dishonor. This he adds as a
Reason of the Words immediately foregoing: He had just been saying, That
retired Men did well in despising and neglecting Places of Honor; but that
withal they were afraid of Shame and Disgrace, which a Man of a great Soul
ought not to be. This might seem odd, That one who despised Honor, should yet
be afraid of a little Disgrace; to confirm it therefore, he presently adds, For
you shall, etc.
For you shall often find there is a great many Men, who are very inconsistent
with 'emselves in things of a contrary Nature: as for Pleasure, they despise it
with all the Severity of a Stoic; but yet are so effeminate, as not to be able
to bear the least Trouble; are mighty Contemners of Fame and Applause; but
extremely concerned at any thing of Disgrace: Viz. For a Man to despise
Pleasure, and yet not be able to bear Pain; or to contemn Applause, and yet be
afraid of being a little Ill-spoken of.
which are things that don't very well agree together. Those People then, whom
Nature has endowed with Abilities for that purpose, Gentlemen therefore, and
others, who have Parts and Abilities for that purpose, should not think they
are born for themselves alone, but to serve their Country, Friends, etc. See
chap. 7.
should forthwith endeavor to procure 'emselves Places, and manage the
Business of the Commonwealth: Otherwise how should the City be well governed,
or the Greatness of their Endowments be made known to the World? Having said
that all, who are qualified for it, should serve their Country, and endeavor
after the public sort of Fortitude; he lays down some Rules in common for all
those, who take upon 'em any public Trust, whether Civil or Military; such as
are, To be free from Passion, to see that what they undertake be Honest, etc.
But that Greatness of Soul, and Contempt of all Human things, (which we have
often mentioned) together with that Calmness and Serenity of Mind, is requisite
in those of a public Station, as much, if not more than it is in Philosophers,
if ever they hope to be free from Anxieties, and arrive at any Steadiness or
Uniformity in their Lives. Now these things are easier to Philosophers, than to
them; for as much as their Lives, being led in private, require for their
support a less number of things, and have fewer within the power and reach of
Fortune: and if any ill Accident should befall 'em, it is impossible their
Sufferings can be very considerable. Those Men therefore that are in Public
Stations, Our Passions are apt to rise in proportion to their Objects:
Philosophers therefore, and those who live quiet and retired Lives, having very
little Business or Concern in the World, can have nothing so great, as very
mightily to move either their Hopes or their Fears, etc. But your Men of
Business, being concerned in the Affairs of a Kingdom or State, must needs be
more liable to the Insults of these Passions.
having things of more weight and importance to be taken care of, must in
reason be supposed to lie much more open to the Assaults of the Passions, than
those who spend their Days in Privacy and Retirement. Upon which account they
should take the more care, to fortify themselves with this Greatness of
Spirit, and to free their Minds from the grievous Torments and Disturbances of
'em. But he who takes upon him a Public Trust, should not only look that the
Business be Honest, but that he himself be qualified for the Management of it.
In considering of which there is a double Extreme to be carefully avoided, That
he neither Despair through a mean Cowheartedness; nor yet be over Confident through
Eagerness of Desire. And lastly, in whatever he sets about, let all things be
diligently and carefully put in order, before he goes on to the execution of it.

CHAP. XXII.
It Is no less great and commendable to Manage Affairs of Peace, than of War.
Several Examples to prove this. Arms useless abroad, without Civil Prudence at
home. Cicero 's eminent Services to the Republic: A Saying of Pompey the
Great's to him upon that Subject.

BUt seeing most People are apt to imagine, that it is greater and more glorious
to Manage Affairs of War, than Peace; Before he lays down any particular Rules
about the several sorts of Fortitude, he compares the Civil and Military
together, and gives the Preference to the former.
I shall endeavor to lessen this general Opinion. For the Greatness of that
Glory, which is given to Warriors, has made many People, for no other reason,
desirous of Quarrels; especially Men of the greatest Parts and most aspiring
Minds; particularly if they are qualified for a Soldier's Life, and their
Disposition carry 'em to the Profession of Arms. But if we would make a just
Estimate of the case, we should find both greater and more glorious Actions
done by Wisdom at home, than by Arms abroad. For what though A famous Athenian
General, by whose Prudence and Conduct especially, the Greeks conquered Xerxes
in that great Battle at the Island Salamis. See his Life in Plut. and Corn. Nep.
Themistocles be deservedly Commended, and his Name more Illustrious than that
of An eminent Philosopher and Lawgiver of the Athenians, one of the seven Wise
Men of Greece, who is supposed by some to have first instituted their great
Council of Areopagus. His Life is written by Plut. Aristotle indeed, and some
others, tell us, That he did not first set on foot, but only confirmed the
Council of Areopagus, whereas he abolished most other things in the former
Constitution. For which reason Langius will have Cicero mean by the Word
instituit here, no more than stabilivit or confirmavit, confirmed or
established.
Solon? And though Salamis be brought for the proof of a Victory, which is far to
be preferred to the Wisdom of Solon, in constituting and settling the Senate of
Areopagus? Yet in truth ought this to be judged no less great and extraodinary
than that: for Themistocles's Victory was only a Kindness to the Commonwealth
once; but Solon's Counsel will be so for ever: Seeing it is by this that the
Laws of the Athenians, and Constitutions of their Ancestors are kept up and
maintained. Beside, Themistocles can name nothing in the World, wherein he
assisted the Areopagus: but Solon on his part may truly say, That he, by his
Wisdom, was assisting to Themistocles; for the War was carried on by the
Directions of that Senate, which he by his Prudence at first appointed. The
same may be said of Two famous Spartan Generals, who got several Victories over
the Athenians and Persians, and made Lacedaemox the Empress of all Greece. See
their Lives in Corn. Nep.
Pausanias and Lysander; for though by their Valor they are thought to have
enlarged the Dominion of the Spartans, yet it is by no means at all to be
compared with the Laws and Discipline of the wise A Noble and most Wise
Lawgiver of the Spartans, who, as long as they lived up to his Discipline, were
one of the bravest Nations in the World. His Life is at large in Plut.
Lycurgus: beside that to nothing but these Laws, and this Discipline, they
owed all the Courage and Obedience of their Armies. I, for my own part, was
always of Opinion, That An excellent Roman, Cos. about the Year of Rome 632,
and afterward Censor, about the time that Cicero was Born. He was Father of
that Scaurus, whose magnificent Aedileship he mentions afterward. He was of
great Credit and Authority in the Senate House, and is commonly called,
Princeps Scuatus, commended by all for his Gravity, Abstinence, etc.
Marcus Scaurus, when I was a Boy, was by no means inferior to One who though of
mean Parentage, yet by his Valor and Courage raised himself to be seven times
made Cos. of Rome. His Life is in Plut.
Caius Marius; nor There were two of that Name, Father and Son, very
particularly Famous, and often mentioned by our Author, for their Learning,
Wisdom, Eloquence, etc. See his De Oratore, Brutus, etc. The Father was Cos.
with Marius, An. U. C. 651; and the Year after being Proconsul, shared with him
in the Victory over the Cimbri. At last he was killed by his cruel Orders in
the Year 666; Cicero being but twenty Years old: So that he must here mean the
Son, who was Heir to his Father's Virtues, Cos. with Lepidus, An. 675. Our
Author in his Brutus, ranks him in praesidiis reip. among those who by their
Wisdom supported the State.
Quintus Catulus, since I meddled with the Republic, to Pompey the Great, who
held the Civil War against Caesar, and was beaten by him. All the Historians
are full of him.
Cneus Pompeius; for Armies can signify but little abroad, unless there be
Counsel and wise Management at home. Neither was the Rasing and Destroying of
Numantia, by that incomparable Person, and brave Commander the Second
Africanus, a greater and more signal piece of Service to the Republic, than
the Murder of Tiberius Gracchus by P. Scipio Nasica, Grandson of him, who by
the Senate was judged to be the honestest Man in Rome; who while Gracchus was
persuading his pernicious Laws, and the Consul slack in endeavoring to
suppress him, rose up in the Senate, and bid all those who were for the Good of
the Republic follow him: which several doing, they went and killed Gracchus
presently.
Nasica, though a mere private Citizen at the same time. It Is true, this Action
had something of the Soldier in it, as being done by Force and downright
Violence, and so does not wholly come under the Notion of Civil Concerns:
however, I have brought it as an Instance of these, because 'twas effected by
this Civil sort of Prudence, and without the Assistance of a Military Power. I
cannot but therefore still extremely approve of that Saying of mine, which I Am
told some malicious and envious Fellows most mightily carp at, Let warlike Arms
give place to the peaceful Gown,
And to the Statesman's Praise the Victor yield his Crown.
For not to say any thing of other People, when I my own self sat at the Helm
of the Government, did not Arms then give place to the Gown? By the Conspiracy
of L. Cataline, a Noble and Valiant, but Wicked and Debauched Roman, who,
together with some others that were like himself, formed most pernicious
Designs against the Empire; which were defeated and brought to naught by the
Vigilance and excellent Conduct of Cicero then Consul. For which extraordinary
Service, he was by common Vote styled, Father of his Country, an Honor which
he is frequently boasting of in his Writings. See the whole History at large in
Sallust.
Never was the State in more imminent Danger, and yet never were things better
and more happily quieted. Thus by my Prudence and careful Management, the most
impudent and audacious of all the Citizens let, as 'twere, their Arms fall out
of their Hands. What Action then was there ever performed in War like this? Or
where is the Triumph that can be compared to it? For I think I may venture a
little to boast before you, Son Mark, whose Happiness it is to succeed in the
Glory, and whose Duty to imitate the Excellence of my Actions: This I am sure
of, even Pompey himself (a Man the most famous for Martial Achievements) did
me that Justice in the hearing of several, as to say, That his returning home
with his third Triumph, had been to but little or no purpose, unless my
Endeavors and Services to the Republic had preserved the City for him to
Triumph in. I conclude therefore, from what has been observed, That that sort
of Courage which is seen in the Management of Civil Affairs, is no less
deserving than that which consists in the Business of Fighting; and the former
requires more Pains and Application to be perfect in it, than the latter does.

CHAP. XXIII.
The Body ought to be so far taken Care of, as that it may be able to bear
Fatigues. But it is the Mind that truly makes Great Men. War should be
undertaken only for the sake of Peace. The Difference between a Great Soul and
a Great Understanding; and the Duties of each. Fighting one of the least parts
of Courage.

NOw it is certain that Virtue, which consists in Greatness and Elevation of
Soul, and makes up the Subject of our present Enquiry, is obtained by the
Strength of the Mind, not the Body. However the Body ought not to be neglected;
but by Exercise brought to such a Frame and Condition, as that it may obey the
Prescriptions of the Mind, in performing that Business and bearing those
Fatigues, which are required of it. But still the Nature of the Virtue we are
seeking for, consists in due care and application of Mind; in which particular,
the Public receives as much Benefit from Gownsmen, who manage and take care of
its Civil Concerns; as it does from Soldiers, who are Generals of its Armies.
For they by their Prudence have often either hindered the breaking out of Wars,
or else have occasioned their speedy Conclusion; and sometimes too have been
the cause of their being Undertaken: as the third with Carthage was entered into
upon the Advice of The Elder Cato, who was Sirnam'd Censorius, from his
Severity when Censor. He was always persuading the Romans to Destroy Carthage,
which they did under the Conduct of the Younger Scipio; but not till two or
three Years after his Death.
Cato, whose Credit and Authority prevailed in that Case, even after he was
dead. Wisdom therefore, and Skill in determining Civil Affairs, is more to be
desired than Courage in Fighting: But then we must always be careful in this
Case, that our Design be not the avoiding of War, but the being more useful and
serviceable to the Public. Having determined the Question, Whether Civil or
Military Conduct be better; he now proceeds to give some Directions about the
latter; That we should never undertake War but for the sake of Peace: Not be
cast down at Misfortunes, etc. to the end of the next Chapter.
And as for War, it should never be undertaken with any other Aim, but only
that of obtaining an honorable Peace. It Is the part of a brave and unshaken
Spirit, not to be disturbed under any Misfortune, or suffer it self in disorder
and tumult to be thrown off the Saddle (as we usually speak;) but always to
keep such a Presence of Mind, as to be able to consult upon every Occasion, and
be hurried on to nothing, but what is agreeable to Reason and Discretion. And
as this is the part of an exalted Spirit, so is what follows of an elevated
Understanding; to discover Effects even while they are yet in the Wombs of
their Causes, and consider beforehand whatever may happen on either side, and
accordingly what is to be done when it does happen; that so he may never be
taken unawares, and brought to that lamentable shift of crying out, I never
once thought of it. These are the Duties, as of a truly Courageous and Lofty,
so of a Wise and Judicious Mind; but rashly to run and lay about one in Battle,
and come to Wounds and downright Blows with an Enemy, is but a savage and
brutish kind of Business: However, Necessity so requiring, a Man should Fight,
and choose rather to part with his Life than his Liberty, or be guilty of any
base or dishonorable Action.

CHAP. XXIV.
The Duty of a truly Courageous Man, after he has conquered his Enemies. Cool
and Deliberate Counsels to be preferred before Heat and Boldness. Nothing more
foolish, than to expose one's self to unnecessary Dangers. It Is a Duty rather
to expose one's self, than the Public Affairs. They are to blame, who rather
venture the loss of their Armies, than their own Reputation. The Folly of
Callicratidas and Cleombrotus in this. The Wisdom of Fabius Maximus in doing
the contrary. Men should speak what they think for the Good of the Public,
without regarding what Offense it may give to others.

IN the Business of Having shown in the former Chapter what should be the
Motive of, and how a Courageous Man should carry himself in War: In this he
lays down some Rules for his Carriage after he has gotten the Victory, viz. To
show nothing of Passion, Cruelty, etc.
Razing and Plundring Cities, there ought to be taken a very especial Care,
that nothing of Rashness or Cruelty be shown; and all true Greatness of Spirit
obliges us, having first considered things calmly and maturely, to Pardon the
Multitude, and Punish those only that were principally Faulty; and in every
State and Condition of Fortune, to observe the just Medium of Virtue and
Honesty. For as we have already observed of some, that they count it more noble
to manage Affairs of War, than of Peace; so you shall find there are a great
many others, who imagine, that hot and adventurous Undertakings have something
that is greater and more glorious in 'em, than wisely cool and deliberate
Counsels. Now as no Man ought, by too warily avoiding of Dangers and Labors,
to get himself the name of a Faint-heart and Coward; so, on the other hand,
Care should be taken, that we thrust not our selves into Hazards and
Difficulties, where there is no manner of occasion for it; than which there is
no greater Folly upon Earth. It Is a Duty therefore, in Attempts of any Danger,
to imitate the Practice of skilful Physicians, who always to light and
inconsiderable Diseases, apply none but easy and gentle Remedies; but in
desperate Cases are forced to have recourse to desperate Cures. It Is a madness
therefore, while all things are calm and in a peaceful State, to desire a
Storm; but to keep off the Mischiefs of it when it does happen, is the part of
a Wise and a Prudent Man; and so much the more, if the Good to be obtained by
getting well rid of it, out-balance the Evils you may be brought into by the
Attempt. He has done with those Rules, which concern a Man's Carriage in Wars
and Dangers; but because there are several sorts of Dangers, he proceeds to
show, which a Man should rather choose. When Fabius, for instance, was Roman
General; should he Fight with Hannibal, the whole Republic; should he not, his
own Reputation was in danger. 'Twas then his Duty rather to hazard the latter,
than the former.
The Danger of some Actions only relates to the Person that undertakes 'em, but
that of others to the whole Republic: And again, A Man's Life is endangered in
some, in others his Reputation and the Good Will of his Citizens. It Is our Duty
then, Viz. When the Danger on one hand concerns the State, on the other only
the Person himself.
in the former Case, more willingly to expose and endanger our selves, than the
whole State; and Viz. When on either side the General only is endangered, in
his Life, Reputation, etc.
in the latter, to fight for our Glory and Reputation, more readily than any
other Conveniences whatever. Yet the That is, They Will rather venture the
Interest of the Republic, than their own Honor; as Callicratidas and
Cleombrotus did; which is contrary to the Rule he has just now laid down.
contrary to this appears plainly in the Practice of a great many Men, who are
willing to spend their Estates and Lives for the good of their Country; but
will not bear the least Diminution of their Honor, though the present Occasions of
the Republic require it. Thus Callicratidas, Admiral of Sparta, in the
Peloponnesian War, after he had done many signal Services, at last was the
occasion of Ruining all; for when he was advised to Retreat with his Navy from
Two or three little Islands adjoining to the lesser Asia, between that and the
Isle Lesbos; where the Athenians, under the Conduct of Thrasibulus, gave a
mighty Overthrow to the Lacedaemonians, who were led by Callicratidas; himself
being slain in the Action. See Book 15. of Diod. Sicul. who says, 'Twas the
greatest Battle that ever was fought between Grecians.
Arginussae, and not venture giving the Athenians Battle, he utterly refused
it; and told his Advisers, That if this whole Navy should chance to be lost,
the Lacedaemonians could rig out another; but that he for his part could never
fly, without an irreparable loss of his Honor. And here the Lacedaemonians had
though a great, yet a tolerable Blow; but that At Leuctra, a Town in Baeotia,
where the Spartan Army, under the Conduct of King Cleombrotus, and Archidamus,
was entirely routed by the famous Theban General Epaminondas; Cleombrotus
himself being killed in the Battle.
other was Mortal, and put a full period to the Spartan Greatness, when their
Leader Cleombrotus, only for fear of being somewhat Ill-spoken of, unadvisedly
ventured to fight Epaminondas. How much better did Fabius being made General
against Hannibal, would not come to a Battle with him, but endeavored to weary
him out by Delays; for which he was called Cunctator, the Delayer. At first he
was abused and called Coward for this; but afterward 'twas found by Experience
to be the best Course; and then no one was so much commended as he. See his
Life in Plutarch.
Fabius Maximus do? Concerning whom Ennius has these Words: One Man our State
has saved by wise Delays:
For he regarded not the foolish Prate
Of idle People; but the City's Good.
Therefore his growing Fame now flourishes
More, when his Deeds are past.
By this Step he passes from the Rules relating to Military Fortitude, to those
which relate to Civil; of which he gives several: as, First here, To speak
one's Mind freely, etc. Secondly, in the next Chapter, To observe Plato's two
Rules, etc.
The same kind of Fault should also be avoided in Civil Administrations; for a
great many Men are afraid to speak out what they really think, though perhaps
it is for the best, for fear it should give any Offense to others.

CHAP. XXV.
Two Rules of Plato 's to be observed by those who Govern the State. The Good
of the Governed ought to be their sole Aim. An excellent Description of a good
Minister of State. Ambition very destructive in a Government. A good Saying of
Plato 's to that purpose. Men should carry themselves civilly toward those,
who are of an opposite Party in the State; and not count 'em their Enemies. The
Example of Scipio and Metellus. Anger toward an Adversary no part of Courage.
Affability, etc. requisite in a Statesman. Severity and Chastisements sometimes
necessary; and Rules to be observed about 'em. Nothing can be well done, that is
done in a Passion, Rulers should be like the Laws themselves.

THose who design to be Partakers in the Government should be sure to remember
these two Precepts of Plato: First, To make the Safety and Interest of their
Citizens, the great Aim and Design of all their Thoughts and Endeavors;
without ever considering their own personal Advantage. And, Secondly, so to
take care of the whole collective Body of the Republic, as not to serve the
Interest of any one Party, to the Prejudice or Neglecting of all the rest. For
the Government of a State is much like the Office of a Guardian or Trustee;
which should always be managed for the good of the Pupil, and not of the
Persons to whom he is entrusted. And those Men, who, whilst they take care of
one, neglect or disregard another part of the Citizens, do but occasion
Sedition and Discord, the most destructive things in the World to a State: From
whence it comes to pass, that, while some take part with the Popular Faction,
and others make their Court to every Great One, there is but very few left, who
are concerned for the Benefit and Good of the whole. From this Root have sprung
many grievous Dissentions amongst the Athenians; and not only Tumults, but even
deadly Civil Wars in our own Republic: things which a worthy and truly brave
Citizen, and one who deserves to hold the Reins of the Govenment, will shun and
detest; and will give himself so to the Service of the Public, as to aim at no
Riches or Power for himself; and will so take care of the whole Community, as
not to pass over any one part of it: Such a one will scorn, by the mean Arts of
Calumny and a false Accusation, to bring others into Hatred and Disrepute with
the People; but will always adhere to what is Just and Honest, and never be
drawn from it, whatever Offense may be taken by others; nay, will rather part
with his Life it self, than do any thing that is contrary to the Virtues I have
mentioned. Eager Ambition, and contending for Honors, is, of all things, most
ruinous and destructive to a State; concerning which, Plato has said admirably
well, That for Men to contend and fall out with one another, about which should
be Chief in the Management of the State, is just as if the Ship's Crew should
go the other by the ears, about who should be Master or Pilot of the Vessel. And
the same Philosopher has given us this for a Rule, That only those Men should
be reckoned as Enemies, who have taken up Arms in opposition to the Republic;
not those who would govern it after their own Schemes. The Quarrels between
Citizens are of two sorts, 1. Civil, when each desires the Good of the Public,
but take several ways of arriving at it; such was this here mentioned. The
other Hostile, when one endeavors to Ruin, the other to Uphold the State;
such was that between Cicero and Catiline.
Such was the Dissension between P. Africanus the Younger, and that Metellus
who was sirnam'd Macedonicus, from his Conquest of Macedonia. They always
rivall'd and opposed one another in the Affairs of the Public, but never so,
as to become inveterate Enemies.
P. Africanus and Q. Metellus, without any great Bitterness or Animosities
between 'em. Some People think it the part of a brave and heroic Spirit, to
show heat of Anger and Passion against an Adversary; but what they say is by no
means to be regarded: for it is certain on the other hand, nothing's more
laudable, nothing more worthy of a great and brave Person, than Clemency,
Meekness and Gentleness of Spirit. In Cities that are Free, and where all Men
in common enjoy the same Privileges, Courtesy and Affability, and that which
they call altitudo animi, a calm and undisturbed Temper of Mind, are peculiarly
requisite: For to fret upon every unseasonable Visit, or at every impertinent
and troublesome Petitioner, makes a Man sour and morose in his Humor; which as
it brings no kind of Good to himself, so it gets him the Hatred and Ill Will of
others. But though Meekness and Clemency be laudable Virtues, yet no further,
than as they leave room for a just Severity, whenever the Occasions of the
Public require it; without which a City can never be well governed. Now He had
been saying, a Governor should be Meek and Courteous, but not so as to exclude
Severity, when occasion requires it: This naturally brought him to discourse,
How Criminals should be punished; which he does by laying down several Rules;
as, First, That no ill Language be given 'em, etc.
every Reproof and Chastisement, in the first place, should be always free from
contumelious Language, and not inflicted for the sake of the Person chastizing
or reproving another, but the good and advantage of the whole Republic.
Diligent care should be taken, in the next place, that the Penalty be
proportioned to the nature of the Crime, and that some don't pass without ever
being questioned, while others are punished for the same Misdemeanors. But of
all things, Anger should be excluded in Punishing; for whoever comes to this
Work in a Passion, will never observe that due Mediocrity, which equally
abstains from too much and too little, so strictly required by the The
Peripateticks hold, That the Passions, viz. Anger, etc. are in 'emselves
neither Good nor Bad, but accordingly as they are made either good, or ill Use
of; and that they are given us by Nature for very good Ends and Purposes, if we
don't let 'em get the upper-hand of our Reason, but reduce 'em to a certain
Mediocrity and Temperament. But the Stoics, whom Cicero follows in this Book,
said the Passions were absolutely in themselves evil, called 'em Diseases and
Infirmities of the Mind; and commanded their Wise Man, not to moderate, but
wholly to root out all Anger, Joy, Compassion, etc.
Peripatetick Schools: And they have very good reason indeed to require it; but
then I cannot but wonder they should commend Anger, and say, Nature has given it
us to good Ends and Purposes: For that in truth ought in no case to be allowed
of; and 'twere heartily to be wished that the Governors of a State, would, in
this particular, be like the Laws themselves, which punish Offenders according
to Justice, without being any ways guided by Passion.

CHAP. XXVI.
Greatness of Soul commands an even Temper, free from Haughtiness in
Prosperity, and Dejectedness in Adversity. Phillip greater than Alexander, in
bearing his good Fortune with an even Mind. The Higher Men are, the more care
they should take of being Humble and Moderate. An admirable Saying of Scipio to
this purpose. In Prosperity we should especially consult our Friends; and have
a care of Flatterers. Greatness of Soul seen often among the Philosophers, and
those who in private manage their own Estates. How an Estate should be got,
improved and used.

ANother great Duty of The Rules which follow, equally concern the Civil and
Military sort of Fortitude, Not to be puffed up at the good Success of our
Affairs, or dejected at the ill, etc.
Fortitude is, not to be Haughty, Disdainful and Arrogant when Fortune favors
us, and all things go forward according to our Wishes: for it shows as much
Meanness and Poorness of Spirit, to be transported with good, as it does with
ill Fortune: whereas, on the other hand, nothing's more brave, than an Evenness
of Temper in every Condition, and (as is reported of Socrates and Lelius) a
constant retaining the same Air in one's Countenance, without ever seeming
puffed up or dejected. I find that The second of that Name, Son of Amyntas,
whom he succeeded in the Throne. A Cunning, Valiant and Ambitious Prince. He
conquered the Thebans, Athenians, and other neighboring Nations; till at last
he was made Generalissimo of all the Grecian Forces. He laid the Foundation of
that Empire, which Alexander the Great, his Son, brought to its Hight. See 'em
compared together in Justin, Book 9. chapter 8.
Philip; the King of Macedonia, was inferior to his Son in the outward Glory
and Splendour of his Achievements, but very far above him in good Nature and
Condescension; therefore the Father kept always the Character of a Great
Person, whereas the Son often was As in the Murder of his Friend Clitus,
Callisthenes, etc. See Q. Curtius.
guilty of base and dishonorable Actions. It Is a good Rule therefore, I think,
which is given by some Men, That the higher our Station in the World is, the
more care we should take of our Lives and Actions, that they be kept within the
compass of Lowliness and Humility. Panaetius tells us 'twas an usual Saying
with his Scholar and familiar Friend Africanus, That Men who give the Reins to
their vicious Appetites, and are high and presuming upon the Greatness of their
Fortunes, should be dealt with like Horses, when grown fierce and unruly by
frequent Engagements: for as these are delivered to Breakers to tame and be
made fit for riding; so those should be brought within the barriers and limits
of Reason and Philosophy, to teach 'em the Uncertainty of all Human Things, and
the great Volubility and Changeableness of Fortune. We should also in
Prosperity more especially make use of the Counsel of our Friends, and pay more
Respect and Deference to their Advices, than we were wont to do. At the same
time also we should take a great care, that we don't give overmuch ear to
Flatterers, nor suffer our selves to be wheedled and imposed upon by their
deceitful Words. For there is nothing wherein we are more apt to be mistaken,
than in this particular; every one having such a fond Conceit and Opinion of
himself, as to think he deserves those Applauses which they give him. Hence
spring innumerable Errors in our Lives; whilst Men, puffed up with a vain
Imagination, and mistaken Notions of their own great Merit, are exposed to the
Railery of all the World besides. And so much may suffice upon this Head. From
what has been said we may easily gather, That those who are over Affairs of the
Public, do the greatest Actions, and such as express the most Bravery of Mind;
their Business affording 'em more Opportunities, and there being more Men who
are concerned in this, than in any other Method of Living whatever. Having done
with the public, he comes now to the private Fortitude. Of this he omits the
former Branch, viz. The Contemplative, having discoursed of it already in Chap.
6. Of the latter, which relates to private Gentlemen, managing their own
Estates, he gives a few Precepts; as, First, That their Estate be well gotten,
etc.
But after all, we cannot but acknowledge there are, and have been a great many
noble Spirits, even in a Life of Retirement and Privacy; who being sequestered
from the Business of the World, have given up 'emselves to Enquiries after
Truth, and the great Concernment of the Practice of Virtue: Or else leading a
Life in the middle, as it were, between the Statesman and Philosopher, have
been delighted with the Management of their own private Fortunes; not scraping
up Money by all manner of ways, or hoarding it so as to make no Body the better
for it; but parting with it freely for the sake of their Friends, or to serve
the Republic, when occasion required it. Now this private Estate I would have,
in the first place, to be honestly come by, not by any base, scandalous or
invidious way of Gaining: then let it be distributed to the Uses and
Necessities of as many as is possible, provided they are worthy and deserving
People; and let it be increased by such ordinary Methods of Saving and good
Husbandry, as are agreeable to the Dictates of Reason and Prudence: and lastly,
let none of it be spent in Debauchery and luxurious Living, but in Acts of
Munificence and Liberality toward others. Whoever observes these Measures laid
down (let his way of Life be either public or private) may perform all the
Duties of Magnanimity, Constancy and Greatness of Soul, as well as of
Sincerity, Fidelity, and doing Good to Mankind:

CHAP. XXVII.
The Virtues contained under the fourth Head of Honesty. Whatever is Honest,
and nothing else but that, is becoming a Man; Honesty and Decency being really
the same thing, and distinguished only by an Act of the Mind. Two sorts of
Decorum, and what the Nature of each of 'em is.

WE are now in the next place to speak of the fourth, and only remaining part
of Virtue or Honesty, under which are comprehended Bashfulness, Temperance,
Modesty, Government of the Passions, and the observing a just Order as to time
and place in our Words and Actions; from all which arises By these Words I
would express our Author's quasi ornatus quidam vitae, by which it is likely he
might mean the same, which the Greeks did by their (...) or (...), which
Aristotle comprehends under the Virtue of Temperance. It Is that which gives a
Luster and Ornament to Virtue, like the polishing of a Diamond, which makes it
more pleasing and valuable than when rugged, though then it exceeded all other
Stones. Thus we see some have a way to set off and recommend their Virtue;
while others by their too great Severity and Rigidness, for want of this
ornatus, which he here mentions, render both it and themselves Distastful.
a certain engaging kind of Beauty and Gracefulness, which serves to set off
and adorn our Lives. Under this Head is contained that Becomingness [Decorum,
as we call it in Latin] which among the Greeks has the name of (...); which is
in its Nature so closely united and riveted to Honesty, that there is no way
left of pulling 'em a sunder: for whatever is Becoming is likewise Honest, and
whatever is Honest is likewise Becoming. The Difference between 'em is so very
small, that we may better conceive what it is, than explain it; for That is,
Honesty is as it 'twere the Foundation of Decorum, which it is built upon; it
being impossible for any thing to become, unless it be first Honest. I could
wish however our Author had endeavored to explain the Difference he understood
between 'em, and not contented himself with saying in general, That it might
better be conceived than in Words expressed. The Nature of Honesty seems to
consist in the Conformity of our Actions to the Judgment of Right Reason, as
the Rule or Measure which a reasonable Creature ought to walk by: But that of
Decorum, in our Actions being answerable to the Dignity and Excellence of Human
Nature, as a Character which we ought to live up to in the World. Now nothing
can be so, that is not first supposed conformable to the Dictates of Reason:
and whatever is conformable to the Judgment of Reason, must of consequence be
worthy of a Man. For what can be worthy of a reasonable Creature, but to live
according to that Reason which God has given him? From hence it follows, that
Decorum does as 'twere result from Honestum, as Light does from the Sun; or (to
give our Author's own Explication of it) as Beauty and good Color in the Face,
does from a good Constituon of Body.
whatever Becomingness there is in any Action, it immediately arises from the
Honesty of it. From hence it appears, that Becomingness does not peculiarly
belong to this one part of Honesty, whereof we are now undertaking to
Discourse; but shows it self also in each of the three former. He shows in
particular, how Decorum is seen in the three former Virtues, Prudence, Justice,
Fortitude.
To Reason, for instance, and Discourse according to the Rules of Prudence; to
go about nothing but after due Consideration; and on every occasion to be quick
at espying and defending the Truth, are things that are Becoming: whereas to be
deceived, to be in an Error or Mistake, and to be imposed upon, are very
Unbecoming, as well as to be mad or beside one's self. So again, all Actions of
Justice are Becoming, but those of Injustice are both Scandalous and
Unbecoming. The same may be said as to the Actions of Fortitude; whatever is
done with a manful Courage and bravery of Mind, as it is worthy of, so it
becomes a Man; but whatever on the other hand shows any Cowardice or Meanness
of Spirit, is as contrary to Becomingness, as it is to true Virtue. I conclude
therefore, That the Decency whereof I am now discoursing, appertains to each
of the four parts of Honesty; and so appertains, as not to stand in need of
any mighty reach of Understanding to perceive it; but is easily discoverable at
the first view: for there is something of Becoming contained in the very Notion
and Idea of all Virtue, from which it is distinguished by the Mind alone, and
not by the Nature of the thing it self. Just as the Beauty and good Color of
the Countenance, can never be separate from the Health of the Body; so this
Becomingness, of which we are speaking, in it self is all one, and, as it were,
incorporate with Virtue and Honesty; but may be distinguished from it by
Thought and Imagination. Now there are two kinds or sorts of it; the one This
is that we have spoken of in the Note above, which is the immediate Offspring
of, and necessarily results from the Nature of Honesty in general.
Universal, which belongs to the Nature of Honesty in general; the other
particular and contained under this, which belongs to the several parts of it.
The former is used to be thus defined, Decorum or Becoming is that, which is
congruous or agreeable to That is, His Reason; it being impossible for any
thing to become a Man, but that which is agreeable to the Rules of Right
Reason: and whatever is reasonable does at the same time become him, in this
first and largest acceptance of the Word.
that excellent part of the Nature of Man, by which he is distinguished from
the rest of the Creation. As for the latter, which is contained under this,
it is most commonly made to consist in that, which is so agreeable to the Nature
of Man, as There are two things then, which constitute and make up the Nature
of this Decorum: 1st, An Agreeableness to the Nature of Man; and so far it is
the same with the former universal one: But then it adds to it, 2dly, A
Moderatio, etc. something that is gentile, handsome and engaging, which may serve
to recommend it in the Eye of the World. See Note 1. on this Chapter.
withal to show something of Temper and Moderation, with a certain sweet Air of
Gentility and good Manners.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Poetical Decorum what it is, and how differing from that we here speak of.
Nature has given us a Character of Reason, etc. which we ought to live up to.
Nature teaches us to have a Respect for other Men. Proportion, Regularity, etc.
please, wherever they are found. We ought to be concerned about other
People's Opinion of us. How the Duties of Justice, and those of Modesty,
Decency, etc. differ. We should live agreeably to Nature, which will always
lead us right. Decency relates both to the Actions of the Body and Mind. The
Nature or Mind of Man consists of Sense and Reason. The former of these ought
to obey the latter.

THat this is so, will more plainly appear, if we consider that Decorum or
Convenience of Manners, which the Poets aim at in all their Writings;
concerning which were it anywise necessary to my present Purpose, I might
largely discourse. Suffice it at present for me only to observe, That the Poets
are then said to keep this Decorum, when each of their Persons is brought in
saying and doing those things, which are suitable to the Character he bears in
the World: Should Two of the Sons of Jupiter, supposed to have been very Just
and Good Men; therefore, after their Deaths, made two of the Judges of Hell.
Aeacus, for Example, or Minos say A Verse out of Ennius, often quoted by our
Author.
Even let 'em hate me, whilst they dread me too: Or, A Verse which the Poet
Accius puts into the Mouth of Atreus, who had killed the Children of his
Brother Thyestes, and served 'em up to him at a Banquet. See Seneca's Tragedy
of Thyestes.
The Child's entombed in its own Parent's Bowels. 'twould be an Offense against
the Rules of Decency; because they pass in the World for Men of Justice and
Honesty: But let the same be said by a cruel Atreus, and the whole Theater
shall clap and applaud it; because it is a Saying very agreeable to his
Character. There Is a difference between the Poetical and Moral Decorum: The
Poet himself can give such or such a Character, (a vicious one if he pleases)
and his Decorum consists in the Person's speaking and doing what is agreeable to
such a Character. But Nature (i. e. the God of Nature) has given one to every
of us, by making us reasonable understanding Creatures. As therefore a poetical
Person must speak and do what is suitable to his Character; so are we bound in
all our Thoughts, Words and Actions, to follow the Dictates of Understanding
and Right Reason; in which consists the Nature of universal Decorum.
Now the Poet can judge what is becoming and convenient for every Person,
according to the Character he himself has fixed on him; but Nature has fixed
one on every one of us, by giving us that Nobleness and Excellence of Being,
whereby we are set above all other Creatures. The Poets then, there being so
great a variety of Characters, can see what is becoming and convenient for all,
even the most Vicious: but we have got only one Character to live up to, I mean
that which is assigned us by Nature herself; a Character of Temperance and
Modesty, of Constancy and Moderation. And the same Nature having also taught
us, That we ought to be careful of our Carriage and Demeanor toward the rest
of Men; from hence it appears of how large an Extent that Becomingness is,
which belongs to the Nature of Which consists in living up to that Character of
Temperance, etc. which Nature has given us.
Honesty in general; and also that other, which is seen in the Exercise of the
Which consists in being careful of our Carriage and Demeanor toward the rest
of Men, which the same Nature has taught us to be; in giving no Offense to any
one, etc.
several kinds of it. For, as the Beauty and Comeliness of the Body draws the
Eyes to it by the fit Composure of all its Members, and pleases us only upon
this account, because all its Parts correspond with a kind of Proportion and
Harmony: So this Decorum, which gives a sort of Luster and Grace to our Lives,
engages the Approbation and Esteem of all we live with, by that just and due
Order, Consistency, and Regularity, which it keeps and maintains in our Words
and Actions. Men ought to frame and compose their Actions, not according to
their own private Will and Fancy, but according to the Prescriptions and
Manners of those, with whom they converse; so far as is innocent and not
contrary to Virtue; to be easy and compliant in Things indifferent, and by a
civil, gentile and affable Deportment, endeavor to oblige and win the
Affections of all Men. And he that will follow his own Humor, without caring
whether he pleases or displeases Men, where he might innocently do it, is
deservedly censured for a proud, arrogant and unmannerly Fellow.
We ought to have therefore a certain Respect and Reverence for all Men, and
desire to be approved not only by the best, but by all the World: For not to
care a farthing what it is People think of One, is a sign not only of Pride and
Conceitedness, but indeed of having perfectly abandoned all Modesty. Modesty,
or the second sort of Decorum, consisting (as is said) in our due Carriage
toward other Men; and Justice also in another manner doing the same: he here
shows wherein they differ, and what the distinct Duties of each.
But here we must observe, there is a great deal of difference between that
which Justice, and that which this Modesty, Respect or Reverence demands, in
relation to other People: It Is the Duty of Justice, not to injure or wrong any
Man; of Respect or Reverence, not to do any thing that may offend or displease
him; wherein more especially the Nature of that Decorum we are speaking of
consists. These things then being thus explained, I suppose it may clearly
enough appear, what that is which we mean by Becoming. As for the Duties
prescribed by it, the first thing to which it conducts us is, To demean our
selves suitably and agreeably to our Nature, and do nothing that may any ways
stain or deface it: for whilst we take this for our Guide and Conductress, For
Virtue it self consists in acting agreeably to the Dictates of Nature, i. e.
Reason: in following her therefore we shall but go in the Way of Virtue, and
consequently can never be in the wrong.
it is impossible we should ever go out of the way; but by her shall be led
thorough all the Paths of Wisdom, Truth and Understanding; of Justice and
Benificence toward the Society of Mankind; and of true Magnanimity and
Greatness of Soul. But the Nature of Decency is more peculiarly seen in the
fourth part of Honesty, concerning which we are now discoursing; and relates
not only to the Motions of the Body, but more especially to those of the Mind
also; each of which are approved and becoming, when they are such as are
suitable to Nature. Since Decorum consists in acting suitably to Nature, and we
must first know what Nature is, before we can tell what is suitable to it;
therefore he here tells us wherein it consists.
Now the whole of the Nature or Mind of Man, is made up of only these two
Parts: The first consists in the sensitive Appetite, which by the Greeks is
called (...), by the blind and extravagant Impulse of which, he is hurried and
transported from one thing to another. The second in Reason, which shows and
instructs him in the way of his Duty, telling him what he should do, and what
not do: From whence it follows, That it is Reason which ought to be the
governing Faculty; and the Appetite subject to the Commands of it.

CHAP. XXIX.
Our Actions should neither be Rash nor Careless, etc. How the Sensitive Part
should be subject to the Reasonable. Passion disorders the Body, as well as
Mind. Watchfulness and Consideration necessary for the subduing of the
Passions. Men were not designed by Nature for Jesting, etc. but serious
Studies. Several sorts of Jests and Diversions. Measures to be observed about
'em.

EVery Action therefore should be free, as from Precipitancy and Rashness on
the one hand, so from all Carelessness and Negligence on the other; nor should
any thing be done, for which we cannot give a sufficient Reason, which is almost
the very Definition of Duty. In order to this Since God has endowed us with the
Faculty of Reason, to show and instruct us in the Way of our Duty, What can be
more either Sinful or Unbecoming, than to stifle the Sparks of it by Negligence
and Heaviness? Or what more unnatural, than to make what should be our Guide
and Directress, become a Captive and Slave to our irregular Passions? For God
has given us that Divine Faculty to no purpose, if afterward we refuse to be
Guided and Conducted by it. The great and fundamental Duty therefore in this
place, is, To do nothing but according to the Directions of Reason, to assert
her Sovereignty, and never suffer her to be captivated by any vicious Principle
or inordinate Lust.
the Passions must be brought under the power of Reason, so as neither through
Hastiness to run before its Orders, nor through Coldness and Heaviness to
disregard 'em when given; but all their Motions must be so quieted and so
restrained, as to bring no Uneasiness or Disturbance to the Mind. And from this
calm and peaceable State of the Soul arises that Constancy and Moderation we
have mentioned: For when once the Passions grow unruly and extravagant, and
refuse to be guided in their Desires and Aversions by the Rules of Prudence,
For nothing is so wild and ungovernable as the Passions, when they have
overpowered and got the mastery of Reason. And how then can there be any
Regularity, Temper or Decency in that Life, which is under the Government of
such blind, inconsistent Masters? Distrahuntur in contrarias parts impotentium
cupiditates, (says our Author in another place) cum huic obsecutus sis, illi
est repugnandum.
they will run without question beyond all Bounds and Measure; for they abandon
and cast off their Allegiance to Reason, which they ought to obey by the
Constitution of Nature. By this means are all things turned topsie-turvy, and
not the Mind only, but even the Body also, put very much into Disorder and
Confusion. Do but mark those, who'r enflamed with a vehement Anger or Desire;
who'r transported with Fear, or an overgreat Joy; and you will see an alteration
in their Countenances, Voices, Gestures, and all their Actions; which
sufficiently gives us to understand (that we may return again to the Duty now
before us) how necessary it is to restrain and give check to the Movements of
the Appetite, and to be always Watchful and standing upon our Guard, that so we
may neither be Careless and Inconsiderate, nor do any thing Rashly and at all
Adventures. Since Reason (as was shown) is the governing Part of Man, and he is
bound to act according to its Precepts; certainly it must follow, That to spend
his time in Idleness and Sloth, in foolish Playing and impertinent Jesting, is
contrary to his Duty, as being unworthy of that excellent Nature, which God has
bestowed on him. This brings him to discourse, How far these things are
allowable. As first, as to the Measure of Jesting, it must not be excessive: As
to the Matter, it must not be immodest, or abusive, etc.
For Mankind were never designed by Nature, merely to sport and idle away their
Time; but to follow after grave and serious Studies, and Business of greater
importance than Play is. Not but that Jesting and Diversion are allowable,
provided we use 'em but only as Sleep, and other such necessary Refreshments of
Nature, viz. after the discharge of our serious and more important Duties. And
even then we must see, that our Jesting be neither excessive nor immodest, but
such as is handsome and becoming a Gentleman. For as Boys are allowed, not all
kinds of Sports, but only such as have nothing that is vicious or ill in them;
so in this Jesting we should allow our selves nothing, but only what is
agreeable to Honesty and Good-manners. We may therefore observe, that Jesting
or Merriment is of two sorts, the one clownish, abusive, scandalous and
obscene; the other handsome, gentile, ingenious and truly pleasant. Of this kind
are several Instances to be met with, as in our A famous Latin Comedian, very
well known by his Plays, which are still extant. See his Character in the
Preface to three of 'em, which are turned into English; and the Commentators on
Horace de Art. Poet. v. 270.
Plautus, and the Old Old in opposition to the New. There were in all three
sorts of Comedy among the Athenians: The first in the strictest sense Old, the
Authors of which took true Stories for their Subjects, and exposed Men
publicly by Name, though they had otherwise a great deal of handsome Wit: This
being forbid, the middle Comedy succeeded, wherein they still took true
Subjects, and exposed Men as formerly, but under borrowed Names: (these are
both of 'em often, and I suppose here, comprehended under the name Old.) This
was followed by the New, wherein they only used feigned Subjects, and forbore
to abuse. See Horace Sat. 4. Book 1. and Art. Poet. verse. 281. and the
Commentators upon him.
Greek Comedians; so in the Writings of the Socratick Philosophers; to which we
may add the ingenious Sayings of several Men, such as are collected by the
Senior Cato, and usually go by the Name of Apothegms. There is no great
difficulty then to distinguish between a gentile and a clownish Jest; the one,
if brought in at a seasonable time, and when a Man's Mind's disengaged from
Business, is becoming for a Gentleman; the other, for no Man at all indeed,
when base and unhandsom things are dressed up in filthy and obscene
Expressions. Having done with Jesting, he now proceeds to Plays and other
Recreations; concerning which almost the same Rules are to be observed: They
must not be excessive, unhandsom, etc.
Our Plays and Recreations must also be kept within their due Bounds; and care
should be taken that we don't run out into great Excesses, and suffer the
Pleasure, which we take in them, to carry us into any thing that is Base or
Unbecoming. Hunting, and the Exercises of the A Field just without Rome, where
the Youth used to perform all their Sports and Exercises.
Campus Martius, supply us with Examples enough of creditable and manly
Recreations.

CHAP. XXX.
The Excellence of Man's Nature above that of Brutes, necessary to be
considered. Wherein it consists. Some are really Beasts under the shape of Men.
Sensual Pleasures, Effeminacy, etc. unbecoming Man's Nature. Beside Reason,
which is the common Nature of all Men, each Man has his particular Nature or
Genius. The difference of Men's particular Natures or Dispositions, shown by a
large number of Examples.

BUt in all Enquiries concerning what becomes us, it is of very great moment to
be To the end that we may perceive the Nobleness and Excellency of the one
above the other, and make it our. Business to live accordingly. This will show
us (as he goes on to observe) how mean and unworthy an Employment it is, for a
Man to wallow in Lust and Sensuality; how inconsistent with his reasonable
Nature; and how much more agreeable to Goats and Swine.
constantly reflecting, How much Man's Nature excels that of Beasts and
inferior Annimals. These have no taste or relish for any thing, but the
Pleasures of the Body, toward which they are carried with a great deal of
Eagerness: whereas nothing's more agreeable and nourishing, as it were, to the
Mind of Man, than Learning and Contemplation. Hence he is always a-seeking or
contriving of something that is new, and is greatly delighted with seeing and
hearing, for the increase of his Knowledge. And if there is any one too much
addicted to sensual Pleasures, unless he is transformed into a mere Brute; (for
some such there are, who are Men in Name, and not in Reality) but if, I say,
any one is too much addicted, and suffers himself to be conquered by Pleasure;
yet, for very shame, he will hide and conceal his Propensions toward it, as
much as is possible. And what is this now but For what else should be the
reason, why Men are ashamed to discover their Desires and Inclinations for
bodily Pleasures, but only a sort of natural Consciousness, that they are not
answerable to the Dignity of their Nature?
a plain Indication, That sensual Pleasures are unbecoming the Dignity of a
reasonable Creature, and ought to be despised and rejected by it? And whoever
sets any Value upon them, should be sure to take care, that he keep within the
Limits of Reason and Moderation? From hence it follows, that we should not have
any respect to Pleasure, but only to the preservation of our Health and
Strength, in our Victuals, Clothes, and other Conveniences belonging to the
Body. And does not the Consideration of the same Dignity and Excellence of our
Natures, plainly inform us, how base and unworthy a thing it is, to dissolve in
Luxury, Softness, and Effeminacy? And how brave and becoming it is, on the
other hand; for a Man to lead a Life of Frugality and Temperance, of Strictness
and Sobriety? Having shown what the true Notion of Decorum is, and hinted at
the Duties of it, as it is drawn from the Nature of Man in general; he now
proceeds to a second sort of it, taken from each one's particular Nature. We
should not only live so, as is Consonant to our general Character, Right
Reason; but every one should endeavor to follow what is agreeable to his
particular Inelinations, provided there is nothing in 'em vicious or
unreasonable. For nothing can ever be handsome or becoming, that is contrary to
the tendency of a Man's own Genius; for whatever is strained and forced (as all
such things are) must consequently be undecent. Here therefore he begins to
discourse of Men's various Dispositions, etc. some are naturally Witty and
Merry, others Grave and Serious, or the like: And it is impossible one of these
should ever sustain the Character of the other, but he must come off very
aukwardly and unhandsomly.
And here we must observe, that Nature has given us, as it were, a double Part
to be acted in the World: The first is extended to all Men in common, forasmuch
as we are all Partakers of Reason, and that Prerogative of our Nature, whereby
we are exalted above other Animals; it is this that conducts us in the finding
out our Duty, and from it all Honesty and Becomingness arises: The second is
appropriate to each in particular; for as there is a great deal of difference in
Bodies, (some being nimble, and proper for Running, others more lufty, and
fitter for Wrestling; some of a noble and majestic Air, others of a sweet and
engaging kind of Beauty;) so there is no less, or rather a far greater Variety
in Humors. Thus A famous Roman Orator, one of the Interlocutors in our Author
De Oratore, where may be seen enough of his Character; particularly, an
admirable Account of his Death, chap. 1. Book. 3.
Lucius Crassus and L. Marcius Philippus a great Orator, and Cos. of Rome, An.
Urb. 662. Our Author calls him magno virum ingenio, Book 2. chap. 17. and
mentions him in several places of his Works.
Lucius Philippus were Men of a great deal of Wit and Pleasantry: Brother to
the Elder Catulus, whom we spoke of chapter 22. He is often mentioned by our Author
for his Wit; particularly very much in his De Oratore, and chapter 37. of this Book.
Caius, the Son of Lucius Caesar of more than they, and a great deal more
studied. Whereas the young M. Livius Drusus, an excellent young Roman
Gentleman, Tribune when Philip was Cos. See his Character and Death in
Patercul. Book 2. chapter 13, 14.
Drusus and There were several Noble Romans of that Name; one M. Aurelius
Scaurus was Cos. and slain by the Cimbri, when they broke into Italy. It Is
likely he means here M. Aemilius Scaurus, whom he mentioned chapter 22.
Scaurus at the same time, were Men of extraordinary Gravity and Severity He
was sirnam'd the Wise, whom he makes speak in his Book de Amicitia.
Laelius had abundance of Mirth and Gaity; his Familiar The Younger Africanus.
Scipio much more Ambition, and greater Austerity and Strictness of Living.
Amongst the Greeks, Socrates is said to have been one, that was of a very easy
and facetious Humor; that always loved to be Merry and Jesting, and was a
mighty Artist at hiding his Meaning under witty Ironies and drolling
Expressions (which sort of Men are by the Grecians called It Is plain, from what
he has been saying, that this Word is taken here in a good Sense. Not for those
roguish Dissemblers called by that Name, and described by Theophrastus in his
Characters.
(...);) whereas The former a famous Athenian General and Statesman; of whom
see Plut. and Thucid. The latter an eminent Philosopher of the Isle Samos,
Founder of the Pythagorick Sect.
Pericles and Pythagoras got 'emselves Credit, by being of exactly the contrary
Temper. Hannibal among the Carthaginian Generals, and amongst our own Fabius,
was Crafty and Subtle; one that knew how to disguise his Intentions and keep
his Counsel; that could make show of one thing, whilst he was really designing
another; of exquisite Skill for contriving of Stratagems, and preventing those
laid by the Enemy against himself. In this kind, the Grecians give Jason So
called from Pherae, a Town in Thessaly, where he Reigned. He was one of the
greatest Captains of his Age, and chosen General of all the Greeks to make War
upon the Persians. He was Father-in-law of that Alexander Pheraeus, whom he
mentions chapter 7. Book 2.
the Pheraean, and Themistocles the Preference before any others; and there is
one thing of Solon's which shows he had his share of this Cunning and Subtilty,
The Athenians and Megarans had been at Wars a great while for the Isle Salamis.
At last the former grew weary of it, and made a Law, That whoever proposed
fighting for it any more, should lose his Life. Solon once, finding the Place
might be recovered, but fearing to speak because of the Law, feigned himself
Mad, that under that Disguise he might speak what he would: and coming into the
Assembly in a strange Garb, etc. he repeated some odd Verses about Salamis; and
by degrees brought it about, that the Athenians resolved to try again for the
Isle, and recovered it.
when he feigned himself Distracted to save his own Life, and withal to do a
good piece of Service to the Public. There are others to be found of just an
opposite Humor, who think it unlawful to do any thing by Stratagem and
underhand Dealing, but are all for Simplicity and Plainness in their Actions;
Lovers of open and undisguis'd Truth, but Haters of any thing that looks like a
Trick. There are some that will undergo any thing in the World, fawn and crouch
to any manner of Person, if they can but obtain their own Ends and Designs by
it; as Marcus Crassus we know did to Sylla. Of which sort of crafty and
complying kind of People, Lysander the Lacedaemonian is said to have been
Chief: whereas Callicratidas, who was Admiral of the Navy next after Lysander,
was quite the contrary. Again, There Is as great a variety in Men's Ways of
Discourse as in their Humors and Complexions; some, who are able to speak very
nobly, can yet suit their Language to the Humors and Capacities of the
ignorant Vulgar; as I remember Catulus, Father and Son, as also Mutius Mancia
could do; and I have heard old People relate the same of Scipio Nasica: But his
Father, on the contrary, he who, by slaying Tiberius Gracchus, put a full end
to his ruinous Attempts, had none of that affable, familiar way of speaking. No
more had An eminent Philosopher, Born at Chalecedon, Scholar of Plato, and
Founder of the Academick Sect. He is frequently mentioned by our Author.
Xenecrates, the most rigid and severe of all the Philosophers; and for that
very reason was Noted and Eminent. In short, There Is almost an infinite number
of these different Natures and Characters in Men, not one of which is But only
if it be applied to ill Ends and Purposes.
in it self to be condemned.

CHAP. XXXI.
Every one should follow his own Genius, so far as it is innocent. Uniformity or
Consistency most becoming a Man, which cannot be kept if we run counter to our
own Natures. The great force of this Difference in Men's Natures. Custom of the
Actors on the Stage. Several other Rules relating to the same.

THe more easily then to arrive at that Decorum, of which we are speaking, let
every one stick to his own peculiar Character and Humor, provided it has
nothing that is Vicious in it. I say provided it has nothing that is Vicious in
it; for we should always take a particular care to do nothing that is contrary
to that Viz. Reason. See Note on chap. 29.
universal Character, which Nature has imprinted on every one of us: but,
saving the Reverence we owe to that, then to live according to our own
particular one; so as to follow after that kind of Study, and apply our selves
to that course of Life, which is most suitable and agreeable to our own
Inclinations, though others perhaps may be more useful and important: For it is in
vain to struggle against the Bias of your Nature; or at first to set upon that
sort of Business, which you can never arrive at any perfection in. From what
has been said it more fully appears, what that is which we call He means that
which results from one's living up to his particular Character; not that
general one, of which we have spoken before.
Becoming; since nothing can be such, that is done (as we say) in despite of
Nature, i. e. contrary to the bent and tendency of a Man's Genius. Now it is
certain if any thing in the World is Becoming, it is a constant Uniformity in
our whole Lives, and particular Actions; Because it is impossible wholly to
conquer our Nature and Inclinations; so that though we should, by Custom to the
contrary, make shift to keep 'em under for some time, yet they will certainly
break out again, and so spoil that Uniformity which is required in our Lives.
which it is utterly impossible we should ever maintain, so long as we run
counter to our own Inclinations, and foolishly follow after those of other
People: for as we should use our own Native Language, which all are supposed to
understand best, and not lard our Talk (as a great many do) with Expressions
out of Greek, who are therefore deservedly laughed at by others: So we should
keep to one constant Tenor, and regular Conduct in our Lives and Actions; so
that nothing may be in them, which is not well suited and of a piece with the
rest. And this difference in the Characters or Natures of Men is of so great
moment, as that in consequence of it, one Man may be obliged to make away with
himself; whilst another, though like him as to all other Circumstances, may be
obliged to the contrary. He that was sirnam'd Uticensis, because he chose
rather to kill himself at Utica, than yield to the Power of Julius Caesar. He
was Great Grandson to Censorius. See his Life in Plutarch.
Cato, for instance, and those Viz. Lucius Caesar, Considius, etc. See Comment.
de Bell. Afric. chapter 11.
who in Africa surrendered 'emselves to Caesar, were all of 'em under the same
Condition; and yet any of the rest might perhaps have been blamed for it, had
they murdered themselves so as Cato did; because they were Men of less
strictness in their Lives, and less severity in their Manners. But Cato was a
Person, whom Nature had endowed with incredible Firmness and Strength of Soul,
which he had augmented by perpetual Constancy, and unalterably adhering to his
once undertaken Designs and Resolutions: This might be true enough, if to kill
himself were a lawful Action, and had nothing in it that is contrary to the
Universal Nature, of which he spoke at the beginning of this Chapter. Cicero
here supposes it lawful (though in other Places he talks against it) as following
in this Work especially the Stoics, who held that Life and Death were things
indifferent in themselves, and that in several cases a Wise Man might, nay and
ought too, to make away with himself. Hence we hear 'em so often talking, of a
Door's being always open to Liberty, whatever Misfortunes should befall 'em,
etc. See Lips. Stoic Philos. Book 3. chapter 22.
It became his Character therefore to Die, rather than to see the Face of the
Tyrant. How many things did Ulysses undergo in his tedious Wanderings, when he
was forced to be at the Pleasure of Women, (if A notable Sorceress, that by her
Enchantments turned Ulysses's Men into Swine, Goats, etc. but at last restored
'em to their former Shape upon his Entreaties. See Homer 's Odysseis.
Circe and A Nymph that Reigned in the Isle Ogygia, whither Ulysses was driven
in his long Wandering, etc. She kept him there seven Years.
Calypso may be called Women) and by fawning Words, and fair complaisant
Speeches, wheedle himself into the Favor of all he met with? How did he bear
the contemptuous Usage of his Servants and Maids, even in his own Palace, that
at last he might arrive Viz. To kill those who courted his Wife in his absence.
This he could not have done had he discovered himself; therefore he came in a
Beggar's Habit, and was contemptuously used by his own Servants.
at his wished for End? Whereas One of Homer's chief Heroes in the Trojan Wars;
of a haughty and proud Spirit, that scorned to yield and give way to any one;
and disdained to submit himself to any thing low or mean.
Ajax, according to the Character we have of him, would rather have died you a
thousand Deaths, than ever have submitted to such mean Compliances. These
Observations should teach us all, to look carefully every one into himself, and
consider well what is his peculiar Genius, and endeavor to make the best use
of it he is able; and not to be foolishly trying Experiments, to see how he can
succeed in what is another Body's Talent: For it is certain that nothing becomes
a Man so well, as that which is best suited to his own Inclinations. Every one
therefore should inform himself thoroughly which way his Humor and Genius lies;
and be severe in examining what he is well fitted, or not fitted for; otherwise
the Players may seem to be wiser than we are; for they, when they pitch upon
what they will Act, don't always choose those Parts that are best, but those that
are best suited to their Humors and Abilities. They that have the ablest
Voices, for instance, A Tragedy of Euripides, or, as some think, Sophocies, so
called because it treats of the second Theban War, which was managed by the
Children of those who died in the first: The Word in Greek signifying
Descendants or Children. 'Twas translated into Latin by Accius.
Epigoni or The Son of Medea, the famous Sorceress, who when his Mother had
fled away upon the Clouds, went all about the World to seek her; which is the
Subject of this Tragedy. 'Twas written by Pacuvius a Latin Poet, Nephew to
Ennius.
Medus; they that have most Action, Sister of Antiope, Queen of the Amazons,
taken Prisoner by Hercules, but ransomed by Antiope with his Armor and Belt:
Upon which Accius made this Tragedy.
Menalippa or Wife of Agamemnon, notorious for her living with Aegisthus while
her Good Man was at the Trojan War; and for Murdering him by his help as soon
as he came home. This was one of Accius's Tragedies.
Clytemnestra; Rupilius, whom I remember, always had Wife of Lycus, King of
Thebes, whom Jupiter fell in Love with, and begat on her Amphion and Zethus.
Antiopa, and A famous Actor at Rome, of whom Cicero is said to have learnt
Pronunciation. He was grave and sedate in his Action, and so unfit to represent
the Violence and Transports of Ajax.
Aesop very rarely Ajax. And shall Actors observe this in choosing their Parts,
and Wise Men not do it in choosing their Business and way of Living in the
World? We should therefore apply our selves especially to that, which we find
most agreeable to the Bent of our Natures; but if we should chance to be driven
upon any thing, which is not so proper for our Parts and Talents; we should
make it our Business, by Care and Application, if not to go through with it, the
most perfectly that is possible, yet at least with as few Faults as ever we are
able. And let us rather labor to avoid those Vices, which we are naturally
inclined to, than try to arrive at those Excellencies and Perfections, which we
were never made for.

CHAP. XXXII.
Duties arising from Men's several Stations, and Professions in the World. They
whose Fathers have been Famous, imitate their Virtues, or add to 'em. The
Choice of a Profession very difficult. Prodicus 's Story of Hercules. What
usually determines Men in their Choice of a Way of Life.

BUt beside those two Parts, which I have already mentioned, Having done with
that Decorum, which consists in acting according to Universal Nature, or
Reason; and the second, according to our own particular one: He comes now to a
third, which arises from Acting agreeably to our Place, or Station in the
World. Now this Station we may have two ways, either from Fortune, or our own
Choice. To be a Prince, for instance, a General, or the like, are things of
Fortune: but to be a Lawyer, a Philosopher, or Tradesman, of Choice. It always
becomes us, whatever Character we bear in the World, whether of Prince or
Peasant, Soldier or Gownsman, to do those things which are suitable to such a
Character.
there are still two others remaining behind: The one is allotted us by Time
and Chance: The other we our selves choose voluntarily to our selves. To the
first appertain one's being a King, a General, or a Magistrate; coming of a
great Family; having Riches and Power, together with the Contraries of all
these: which are all of 'em things that depend upon Fortune, and alter
according to the difference of Times. As for the second, it is altogether left
to our own Choice, what sort of Calling we have a Mind to be of: accordingly
some choose to study Philosophy, others the Civil Law, and a third sort
Eloquence: and of the Virtues themselves, some are desirous of being Eminent in
one kind, and some in another. The Decorum he is going to speak of consisting in
doing that which is agreeable to one's Station and Way of Life in the World;
this brings him to discourse of the Methods People take in choosing their Ways
of Life; as some endeavor to follow their Fathers, etc.
Now those Men, whose Fathers or Ancestors have been eminent in any one kind,
for the most part endeavor to excel in the same: as Q. Mutius Scaevola, who
was Augur, and Son-in-law to the Wise Laelius, whom he mentions at the
beginning of his Book de Amicitia, to whom his Father recommended him for the
Study of the Civil Law: He was Cos. with L. Metellus, An. U. C. 636. There was
another of this Name at the same time, who was Pontifex maximus.
Quintus the Son of Publius Mucius did in the Civil Law; Scipio Africanus
Minor, who was Son of Paullus Aemilius, but adopted by P. Scipio, the Son of
Africanus Major.
Africanus the Son of Paullus in Martial Achievements. And some, not content
with the Glory of their Ancestors, have added something else of their own to
it: as that Africanus, whom I just now mentioned; who beside his great Fame for
Military Exploits, made himself noted for his Learning and Eloquence. The same
did Two famous Athenian Generals. See the Lives of 'em both in Corn. Nep.
Timotheus the Son of Conon, who was equal to his Father in the Glory of War,
and obtained that of Learning and Ingenuity besides. But it happens sometimes,
that, omitting to tread in the Steps of their Fathers, some take new Methods
and Designs of their own; which, generally speaking, is the case with those,
who are born of mean Parents, and propose to Rise, and make their Fortunes in
the World. Each of these things should be thro'ly considered and revolved in
our Minds, when ever we deliberate about what will become us. The first thing
then to be determined is, what sort of Men we design to be, and what course of
Living to take to in the World; which is a case of all others the most
hazardous and difficult. For when People are young, and consequently most
foolish, they generally pitch upon that way of Life, which then best pleases
their unexperienced Fancies; so that they are fixed and engaged in a certain
Course, before they have the Judgment to discern what is best. Prodicus was a
Sophist in the Island of Cos, one of Euripides's Masters; who in a Book of his
concerning Hercules, brings in this Story, as Socrates tells it in Xenophon's
Memorab. Book 2. chapter 1. therefore he calls him here Herculem Prodicium.
Prodicus indeed (as I find it in Xenophon) tells us this Story concerning
Hercules; That when he was a Youth, (which is the proper Season allotted by
Nature for choosing a Way of Life) he withdrew himself into a solitary Place,
and there having found out a couple of Ways, the one of Pleasure, and the other
of Virtue, he sat musing and considered a while with himself, which of these
two he had best to follow: Such a thing as this might happen to Hercules, a Son
of Jupiter; but it is not for us to expect the same, who each of us take whom we
please for our Patterns, and suffer ourselves to be drawn any whither,
according as they lead us. We have most of us Principles instilled by our
Parents, and follow their Customs and Manners of Living: others are guided by
popular Opinion, and like that best, which takes with the most. However there
are some, whether it be out of mere good Fortune, or an happy Temper and
Disposition of Soul; or lastly, by the Care and Instuctions of their Parents,
that pursue right Methods and Ways of Living.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Few so happy, as to consider thro'ly what Way of Life they should choose. The
principal thing to be regarded in Choosing, is one's own Genius: Next to that
one's Fortune in the World. After a Man has chose, he should stick to his
Choice, without great Reasons to the contrary. How a Change should be made. Two
Cautions to be observed about Imitating our Ancestors. Those Men whose Nature
is not capable of some, should take the more care that they have other Virtues.
The best Inheritance a Father can leave his Son, is the Fame of his Virtues.
It Is a mighty Shame for a Son to be unworthy of the Fame of his Ancestors.

BUt those of all are the most difficult to be found, who having sufficient
natural Parts, or sufficient Improvements of Learning and Education, or both
these together, have withal had due time to consider with themselves, what is
the best Course of Life they can follow in the World. Two things which ought to
be carefully considered by us in Choosing our Calling: First, Our natural
Disposition and Capacity for it. Secondly, Our Fortune and outward
Circumstances in the World.
Now in this Deliberation, the principal thing which we ought to regard, is
each Man's peculiar Nature and Genius. For since the Decorum of each particular
Action, as before was observed, is taken from the Disposition of the Person
that does it; sure that Disposition should be carefully consulted, before we
determine upon our whole Way of Living; See Note on chapter 31.
it is otherwise impossible we should keep a due Tenor and Consistency in our
Lives, and not sometimes faulter in the Performance of our Duty. But though
Nature in this case has much the greater sway, yet Fortune comes in for a share
next after her: both of 'em therefore should be duly consulted in making choice
of a Calling, but more especially Nature: For Fortune's unconstant and often
changing, but Nature is firm, and will always abide by us; so that for the
former to oppose this latter, is like a mortal Power's contending with an
immortal. After the Rules about choosing a Calling, he proceeds to show, what a
Man should do after he has chosen: Should not be eager to change, etc.
That Man then, who has chose a Way of Living that is suitable to his His
particular Nature or Genius.
Nature, (provided that Nature be no ways vicious) should make it his next care
never to alter it; for nothing's less becoming than a Humor of Changing. But
if upon trial he should find that he was mistaken in the choice of his Method,
(as it is possible such a thing sometime may happen) there is no way left but to
unravel again what is already done. If the Times themselves favor the making
such a Change, it may be the more easily and conveniently done; but if not, it
must be brought about gradually and insensibly: according to that Rule which is
given by Wise Men, When ever you design to break off any Friendship or
displeasing Acquaintance, you should loosen the Knot by little and little, and
not try to cut it asunder all at once. And when by this means we have changed
our course of Life, great care should be taken that we may seem to have done it
upon very good Reasons. But having before recommended the Imitation of our
Fathers and Ancestors, I must here interpose an Exception or two: In the first
place then, we should take great care, not to follow 'em in any thing that is
vicious or blamable. Nor, secondly, should we attempt it, when we find our
Constitution wont carry us through with it: Thus, for instance, the Son of the
former Africanus, (who adopted this latter being Son to Paullus) by reason of
the weakness and indisposition of his Body, could not so well tread in the
steps of his Father, as his Father had done in those of his P. Cornelius
Scipio, a famous and valiant Roman, who, together with his Brother, bravely
defended Spain, while Hannibal was in Italy, routing the Carthaginians in
several Battles. At last they were both Slain, and young Scipio, who was
afterward first sirnam'd Africanus, succeeded 'em.
Grandfather. But then if a Man be in such a condition, as that he is unable to
plead at the Bar, to harangue the People, or conduct an Army; Those who, for
any of the forementioned Reasons, relinquish the Public, must not think
'emselves immediately excused from serving it in their proportion, and in the
way they are able. The most solitary Life should do some Good, and Retirement
should not minister to Luxury or Idleness, but to Virtue and Sobriety. Those
that cannot show their Valor, Eloquence or Policy for the Public, may however
their Modesty, Liberality, Fidelity, etc. in Retirement.
he should take the more care that he do those things, which are in his Power;
such are the Duties of Justice and Fidelity, of Modesty, Temperance and
Liberality; the performance of which may serve to make amends for his want of
the others. Now the noblest Inheritance that can be left by a Father to his
Son, and far exceeding that of Houses and Lands, is the Fame of his Virtues and
glorious Actions: and for a Son to live fo as is unworthy of the Name and
Reputation of his Ancestors, is the basest and most abominable thing in the
World.

CHAP. XXXIV.
The respective Duties belonging to each Age. Old Men should have an Eye upon
Youth. Vice is doubly Evil in Old Men, because of the ill Example given to the
Young. The Duties of Magistrates, private Citizens, and Strangers. Nothing more
becoming in all sorts of People, than Consistency and Regularity.

ANd since each Age has its respective Duties belonging to it, and the same
things become not both Young and Old, Another sort of Decorum consists in
Acting agreeably to one's Age; in Youth's doing what is proper for Youth, etc.
I must add something also upon this Distinction: It Is required then of the
younger sort of People, that they pay due Reverence to those that are Old, and
choose out the best and most approved among 'em, by whose Counsel and Direction
they may steer their Lives. For indeed the Unskilfulness and Ignorance of
Youth, does stand in some need of the Prudence of Old Age, to be its Guide and
Director. This Age especially should be kept from all loose and effeminate
Living, and be enured to Labor, and enduring. Hardships both of Body and Mind:
that so they may be able to bear with the Toils and Fatigues of Business,
whether in Peace or War. And if they do at any time slacken their Minds, and
give 'emselves up to their Pleasures and Refreshments, great care should be
taken that they exceed not the Limits of Temperance and Modesty: And in order
to this, 'twould be very convenient, if some aged People would keep a constant
Eye upon their Sports and Recreations. So much for the Duties of Youth; he
proceeds now to those of Old Men.
As for old Men, it is their Duty to lessen the Labors of the Body, and employ
more frequently those of the Mind; and make it their Business, by prudent and
wise Counsels, to do what Good they can to the younger sort of People, to their
Friends and Dependants, and more especially to the Republic. And Old Men of
all things should especially be careful, not to languish out their Days in
unprofitable Idleness. Luxury and Riot is unbecoming in all, but is perfectly
scandalous and intolerable in Old Age: but should Lust and Wantonness come into
the bargain, those who are guilty of it are doubly faulty; For, first, they
bring a Shame and Disgrace upon themselves, and withal make the young Men more
shamelesly Wicked. Beside these Duties already mentioned, it may not be amiss to
say something of those, which peculiarly belong either to These he brings in,
as it were, by the Bye here: th^^ they might, I think, have been put under the
third sort ^^ Decorum, Living according to one's Station and Character in the
World. See chapter 32.
Magistrates, private Citizens, or Strangers. First then a Magistrate ought to
consider, that he does in his Person represent the whole City, and
accordingly's bound to maintain the Credit and Dignity of it: that he is to
preserve the Laws, and see that all People have their due Rights; remembering
that these things are committed to his Trust, which he is bound to render up
faithfully and honestly. 'T^ the Duty of those in a private Capacity, to live
a^ the rest of their Citizens do; neither debafing themselves below their just
Height, nor endeavoring (...) raise 'emselves up above it; and to follow those
things which are honest and peaceable in the Commonwealth: these are they, whom
we usully call and account Good Citizens. And lastly, for Strangers and
Sojourners in a place, it is their Duty to follow their own Business, and not
intermeddle with any Body's else; not to take upon 'em in what no way concerns
'em, or be curious in prying into the Secrets of a State, which they have
nothing to do with. By observing these Rules we may, generally speaking, be
sure to find our Duty; whenever it is inquired what is suitable and becoming for
such a Person, such a Time, or such an Age: I shall only add, that in all our
Designs and all our Undertakings, nothing's more becoming than Constancy and
Regularity.

CHAP. XXXV.
Decorum shows it self outwardly in three things. Rules of Modesty, taken from
Nature in the Frame of our Bodies. Obscene Talk discovers ill Inclinations. The
false Reasoning of the Cynicks, and some Stoics upon this Subject. Rules of
exterior Decency in our Carriage, Postures, etc. The great Care the old Romans
took of Modesty.

BUt seeing this Decorum, of which we are speaking, is seen more especially,
and discovers it self, in our Having discoursed of the several sorts of
Decorum, he proceeds to speak of the several things, in which it appears: They
are, 1. Our Actions. 2. Our Words. And 3. Our bodily Carriage, Dress, etc. He
discourses therefore of each of these.
Actions, our Words, and our Carriage and exterior Ornaments of the Body; and
consists in one of these three things, What Formositas, Ordo and Ornatus mean,
in which he makes Decorum to consist, is more difficult to understand, than
it is to express; and Commentators cannot agree about it. Not to trouble the
Reader with their several Opinions; by Formositas (I suppose) may be understood
the natural Beauty of the Body, and natural Clearness of the Voice; and by
Ornatus the acquired or adventitious; of which 'twill appear he discourses in
the four next Chapters: By Ordo, a due timing our Words and Actions; of which
chap. 40.
in a certain kind of natural Beauty and Comeliness; in Pertinence and
Well-timing our Words and Actions; and such other kind of Ornaments and outward
Embellishments, as are proper for the Business one is going about; (things
which it is no easy matter to express, but I hope I am understood, and that is
sufficient;) and seeing that See Note on chap. 28.
Care which we ought to take, of making our selves agreeable to those we
converse with, consists in a due Regulation of Viz. Our Words, Actions, and
Carriage of Body.
these; I shall proceed to discourse of 'em each in particular. He begins with
the last of those three things, in which Decorum shows it self, viz. Bodily
Carriage, Dress, etc. of which in this and the next Chapter.
In the first place then it may be worth our observing, how much Care and
Concern has been shown by Nature, in ordering the Frame and Constitution of our
Bodies: Those Parts, which were handsome and agreeable to the sight, she has
placed in view; but those which could not be so handsomely shown, and were only
given to serve certain Ends and Necessities of Nature, these she has been
careful to conceal and cover. A Sense of Shame and Modesty in Men has seconded
this her Diligence in framing their Bodies; for all, that aren't wholly
bereaved of their Reason, keep those Parts hidden, which she has concealed; and
are always as secret as they can in those Actions, which natural Necessity
forces 'em upon: Neither do they call by their proper, and broad Names, the
Parts that are given to serve such Necessity, nor the Uses of 'em; and Modesty
forbids us to mention those things, which may be done very honestly, provided
it be in secret. Therefore the plain and open Prodit mores plerumque oration,
(says Quintil.) and animi secreta detegit; nec sine causa Graeci prodiderunt,
Ut vivat quemque it a etiam dicere. Unwholsom Waters argue the Fountain, from
whence they proceed, to be unwholsom too: and when People can delight in such
fulsom, lascivious, unbeseeming Talk, it is a certain sign their Inclinations
are vicious, and their Hearts tend very much to Lewdness and Debauchery; since
from the abundance of these (as the Scripture assures us) the Mouth speaks.
Talking of those things, as well as the plain and open Acting of 'em,
discovers immodest and wanton Inclinations. The An ill-natured Sect of
Philosophers, Followers of Antisthenes, that loved to Talk and Act in
opposition to the rest of the World; and to be Snarling and Biting at every
Body and and every thing; whence they had their Name, the word in Greek
signifying Dogged or Currish. These People holding, that nothing is commendable
but only Virtue, nor any thing blamable but only Vice; and some of the rigider
Stoics with them, cast off all Modesty and such kind of things: Not being
ashamed of doing any thing in publik, though never so Unbecoming, nor speaking of
it openly, provided 'twere an Action that was not Dishonest or Vicious in it
self. But our Author here advises us, with very good Reason, to disregard what
they say; and rather choose Nature for our Guide and Directress, than any of
their vain and frivolous Reasonings. For, Est aliquid quod non oportet, etiam
si licet, as he tells us in another place; some things there are lawful enough
in themselves, which yet. Modesty and Civility oblige us to abstain from.
Cynicks therefore are wholly to be rejected, and some of the Stoics little
better than Cynicks; who laugh at, and blame us for calling those things by
their proper Names, which are really dishonest and scandalous in themselves;
while we count it a shame to speak plainly of those, in the doing of which
there is no manner of Dishonesty. To Rob, for Example, to Cheat and Whore, are
Actions in themselves the most shameful and scandalous, and yet it is not
counted immodest to name 'em; whereas to make one's self a Father of Children,
is an Action that is honest and creditable in it self, and yet, forsooth, must
not be plainly mentioned, for fear of its giving Offense to chaste Ears. This,
and much more to the same purpose, they commonly urge against Modesty and
Bashfulness: But let us follow where Nature has showed us the way, and whatever
may offend either the Eyes or Ears, that let us shun in our Carriage and
Conversation. In all our Postures and Gestures of Body, such as standing,
walking, sitting and Accubitio signifies the Posture they used in Eating, viz.
Leaning on one side upon a Couch, which they called Lectus, set round about
their Tables.
leaning; nay, in our very Countenance, in the cast of our Eyes, and motions of
our Hands, we should be careful to keep and observe what is Becoming: in which
there is a double Extreme to be avoided, that of too much Niceness and
Effeminacy on the one hand, and that of mere Clownishness and want of Breeding
on the other. Nor let any one imagine, That these things do well in an Actor or
Orator; but that we are left free to observe, or not observe them. The Actors
indeed have had always so much regard for Modesty, as that, time out of mind,
it has been their Custom, never to appear upon the Stage in public, without
something on to conceal those Parts, which ought to be kept secret; for fear
least their Clothes being opened by any Accident, something might be seen,
which Modesty bids 'em hide. And our common Custom forbids the Son, when grown
toward Man's Estate, to Bathe with his Father; and likewise the Son-in-law with
his Father-in-law. We should therefore take care to be strict Observers of
these Rules of Modesty, especially being such as even Nature herself has
directed us to.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Two sorts of Beauty, one proper for Men, the other for Women. Men should avoid
Niceness, etc. Nothing affected can Become. Rules about Clothes, Walking, and
outward Ornaments. Outward Carriage discovers the inward Dispositions of the
Mind. More Care should be taken to keep Decency in the Motions of the Soul. How
this may be done. Two sorts of Motions in the Soul, the sensitive Appetite and
Reason. How each should be managed.

BUt since there are two sorts of Beauty in the World, to the one of which
belongs Prettiness or Neatness, to the other Comeliness and Majesty; the former
of these should be left to the Women, and the latter only be thought proper for
the Men. From hence it follows, that these should avoid all unmanlike Ornaments
and Niceness in their Habits, and the same in the Motions and Gestures of their
Bodies. For all People hate the Palaestricimotus. The Palaestra was a kind of
Dancing-school, and Place of Exercise, where People were taught to move
gracefully and agreeably: whence the Word is often opposed to clownish
Carriage, and, motus habens Palaestram aliquam, is a gentile becoming Motion in
our Author de Perfect. Orat. But sometimes, it seems, People learned to be
affected and foppish in the Palaestra, as they do now in ordinary
Dancing-schools among us.
affected Motions and Carriage of those, who would be taken for Masters of a
gentile Air; and your Actors on the Stage have a great many foolish impertinent
Gestures, which are very displeasing and offensive to the Spectators: and in
each of these kinds what is simple and unaffected, is always best liked of and
approved by the World. If you would have a true Comeliness, you must endeavor
to keep a good Color in your Face, and the way to do that, is to use frequent
Exercise. Nor do we forbid Men the use of all Ornaments and Graces to recommend
'em, but only of those that are too exquisite and affected: so far they are
allowable, as they are necessary to keep a Man from being thought a Clown, and
from showing a Disrespect for the Persons he has to do with. And the same Rule
may serve very well for our Clothes; in which to be moderate, as in most other
cases, is certainly the best way. We should also avoid an effeminate softness
and slowness in our Gate, like those that are marching along in Procession; and
no less an overgreat hastiness and speed, which only begets a deep panting and
breathing, distorts the Face, and perfectly changes the whole Air of the
Countenance, which discovers a lightness and inconstancy of Humor. Now if the
Motions of the Body deserve all this Pains and Concern about 'em; how much Care
should we take If this ben't done, the Motions of the Body, however gentile and
graceful they may be, will but make our Folly the more remarkable; and such
sort of Men are well enough compared by one, to an ill Piece of Painting, set
off and adorned with a beautiful Frame. Those People therefore, who spend so
much time in adorning their Outsides, would do well to consider, that they do
but make 'emselves the more ridiculous, unless they take care to make their
Insides answerable.
to keep those of the Mind, within the Limits prescribed 'em by Nature and
Right Reason? which never can be done any other way, than by keeping the Soul in
such an even Temper, as not to be concerned or dejected at any thing; and by a
constant care and application of Thought, so as to nothing but what is Honest
and Becoming. Now the Motions of the Soul are of two sorts, some of 'em
proceeding from the Reasonable or Thinking, others from the Sensitive and
Passionate part: The former is busied in nothing but searching and finding out
of Truth; by the latter we are pushed and driven forward to Action It Is our
Duty therefore to employ our Thoughts about laudable Objects; and so to reduce
and overruled the Passions, as that they may ebb and flow in obedience to
Reason.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Decorum shows it self in Speaking. Two sorts of Speech. There might Rules be
given about our ordinary Discourse. Two things required in the Voice and
Pronunciation. How each of 'em may be gotten. Several Examples of good
Speakers. Rules about the Manner, Subjects and Measure of our common Talk.

ANother He proceeds now to the second of those three things, in which Decorum
shows it self, viz. Our Speech, which he divides into two sorts, etc.
great Instance in which this Becomingness shows it self, is our Speech and
Discourse. But whereas of this there are two sorts, the one proper only for
Argument and Contention, the other for common and ordinary Talk; we should make
use of that, when we plead at the Bar, or speak in the Senate and Public
Assemblies; of this when we meet and discourse with our Friends; when we walk
in any of the public Places; or are sitting at Table, and over a Glass of
Wine. There are Teachers of Rhetoric who give Rules about the former; but
there are no Rules to be given about the latter. Not but that I think there
might some be invented; but the Business is, there is no body to be found that
would study 'em, if they were; otherwise Masters would never be wanting, if
there were but Learners that would study, and employ 'em. Hence we are almost
overrun with Rhetoricians; though no small part of the Rules which they give,
viz. those that concern either the Words or the Sense, may be very well applied
to our ordinary Discourse. It Is the The first thing to be considered in Speech
is the Voice, as to the natural Tone or Accent of it; which he desires should
be clear and harmonious; and shows the great Usefulness of its being so by
Examples.
Voice is that, whereby we can Talk, and convey our inward Thoughts from one
another; in which there are two things chiefly required: First, That it be
Clear. And, Secondly, Harmonious. Each of these must be the Gift of Nature, and
is not attainable any other way; but where they are naturally, Practice and
Exercise will increase the one, and Imitation of those, who speak sweetly and
agreeably, better the other. This was the principal thing in the Sea Note on on
chapter 22.
Catuli, which made 'em be counted Men of Judgment and Learning: though they had
some Skill in the matter it is true; and so had some others as well as they; but
this one thing recommended 'em so much that they were esteemed the most perfect
Masters of the Roman Language. The sound of their Voices was pleasing and
harmonious; they neither slurr'd over things negligently in their
Pronunciation, nor yet were too exact in expressing every Letter: the former of
which would have made their Speech obscure, and the latter affected. They never
spoke so as to strain their Voices, but equally avoided the double Extreme,
that of Faintness and Sickliness (as it were) on the one hand, and of too much
Loudness and Elevation on the other. Crassus's Discourse was full out as witty,
and not near so barren as that of the Catuli; yet these had as great a
Reputation as he, upon the score of good Speaking. Caesar, who was Brother to
the Elder Catulus, was far more facetious and witty than any of 'em; so that in
Court, when before the Judges, he would do more by his easy, familiar way of
Talking, than others could do by all the Powers of their Eloquence. Each of
these things should be diligently taken care of, if we desire to Act decently
on all Occasions. Our Having done with what concerns the manner of
Pronunciation, and Regulation of the Voice; and advised against Affectation,
Loudness, etc. in Speaking: He now proceeds to give some Rules about our
Discourse, as that it should be Easy, not Tedious, etc. which relate, some of
'em to the Manner, others to the Matter, and others to the Measure that should
be observed in Talking; and all deserve to be carefully considered.
common Discourse then I Would have to be such, as that wherein the Followers of
Socrates excel; easy and good-natured, without any stubbornness or stiffness
in Opinion: Let it be seasoned with mirth and pleasantness; and not be too
tedious, pert, and assuming, as though it had a Right to the Attention of the
Hearers, and no body else had any thing to do with it: but think it reasonable,
as in all other cases, so in this of Discourse, to let every Man fairly take
his own turn. But especially in the first place it ought to be considered, what
is the Nature of the Subject we are discoursing upon: if it be serious, we
should handle it with seriousness; but if it be merry, with gaiety and
briskness. But the most important thing to be taken care of, is, That our Talk
don't discover any Viciousness in our Manners; which is apt to appear by
nothing so much, as by falling too foul upon those that are absent, either by
turning 'em into Ridicule, or misrepresenting 'em by malicious, reproachful
Language. Now the Subject of Discourse in common Conversation is usually one of
these three things; either our own private Domestic Concerns; or those that
relate to the Commonwealth in general; or lastly, some matter of Study and
Learning; therefore when our Talk begins to ramble from these, we should always
be careful to fetch it back to 'em again. But whatever Subjects present
'emselves (for we aren't all pleased with the same things, nor with any thing
equally at all times;) but whatever Subject, I say, we are upon, we should
consider how far our Discourse may be entertaining, and as we could find a time
when to begin, so we should learn when to make an end.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Discourse should be free both from Passion, and Heaviness; and show a Respect
for those we converse with. Chiding and Correction sometimes necessary: Rules
to be observed in it. In Quarrels with Adversaries we should avoid flying out
into Passion. To talk Great of one's self very Unbecoming.

It Is a general Rule for the Conduct of our Lives, That we make it our Business
to be free from Passion; that is, from all violent Motions of the Soul, which
reject and cast off their Allegiance to Reason. This should be applied to the
Matter now before us, and all our Discourse should be Calm and Unpassionate,
without any Transports of Anger or Desire; as also on the other hand, without
Deadness, and Heaviness, or any such Vice: And in every Company we should
carefully endeavor, to show a sort of Kindness and Respect for those Persons,
with whom we converse. It sometimes comes to pass, that He has done with those
Rules, which concern the Government of our Discourse in general: He now
proceeds to some particular Species of it. The first of these is Chiding or
Correction, about which he gives us several good Directions; as, That it should
not be done Passionately, etc.
Chiding is necessary; in which we may be allowed a little to raise our Voices,
and to use more Sharpness and Authority in our Expressions: However we must be
careful that we do not discover any Passion; but let it rather be seen that we
come to such Corrections, as Physicians do to cutting and scarifying Wounds,
but seldom, and with a great deal of Regret and Unwillingness. And indeed we
should never come to 'em at all, unless it be necessary, and when no other
Methods will do any good. And even then, when we are forced to it, we must be
sure (as was said) to avoid all Anger; for whatsoever is guided by its
Influence and Directions, can never be done with any Prudence or Moderation.
Our Rebukes should be generally mild and gentle; but nevertheless such, as may
carry some Weight and Authority along with 'em; observing a Mean betwixt too
great Easiness, and breaking out into angry and contumelious Language. And
whatsoever Sharpness we may express in our Reproofs, we should let the Person
so corrected know, that we do it altogether for his Good, and not for any Ends
or Self-designs. Another particular sort of Discourse, is that which falls out
in Quarrels betwixt Opposers; in which it is our Duty to be calm and sedate, etc.
In the Quarrels we have even with our greatest Adversaries, whatever dirty
Language may be thrown at us, it is the best way to keep our Minds calm and
sedate, and never let Anger break in upon them: For whatever is spoken or done
in a Passion, can neither be consistent with the Rules of Gravity, nor be
approved of by those who are present in the Company. Lastly, A third particular
kind of Discourse, is, Talking Great of one's self, which is always very
ridiculous and unbecoming.
It Is a very unbecoming thing for a Man to Talk great of himself in Discourse,
and especially when that which he says is false: which is but to imitate
Braggadocchio in the Comedy, and make himself the Laughing Stock and Jest of
the Hearers.

CHAP. XXXIX.
What sort of House is fitting for a Person of Honor. What should be the End
of Building. The Examples of Octavius and Scaurus. A great House brings a
Reproach on its Master, if his Worth be not answerable to it; and if he don't
keep up the Laws of Hospitality. Measures to be observed in Building. Three
Rules to be observed for the keeping a Decorum in our Actions.

ANd since Another thing, wherein Decency shows it self pretty much, is
Building, which he therefore brings in here as 'twere by the bye; in which he
would have a Mediocrity observed. It Is very becoming for a Person of Quality,
to have such a House as is suitable to his Quality; neither too little, so as
not to have room for the Reception of Strangers; nor yet too extravagantly
great and magnificent.
we take in (or desire at least to take in) all the several Branches of Duty,
we must not forget to add a word or two, about what sort of House is becoming a
Gentleman, or a Person of Honor. Now the main End of Building is Lodging, and
the necessary Uses of an House, and therefore the Draught, or Contrivance of
it, should be suited accordingly. But we should not so much regard bare
Necessities, as not to have an eye to Convenience and Magnificence. A famous
and great Man, (as our Author in another place calls him) Praetor and Admiral
of the Roman Navy, in the Macedonian War with Perseus, when he triumphed for a
Sea-Victory. Afterward he was Cos. about the Year of Rome, 588.
Cneius Octavius, the first of that Family that was ever Consul, built himself
a noble and magnificent House upon the Palatin Hill, which is said to have
gained him a great deal of Reputation; insomuch that the People coming usually
to see it, the very House was supposed to have gone a great way toward
advancing its Owner (though a kind of Not but that the Family was very ancient in
Rome, even from the times of Numa Pompilius; but none of 'em had ever been any
way noted, till this Octavius.
an Upstart) to the Dignity of Consul. This some time after was pulled down by
See Note on chapter 16. Book 2.
Scaurus, that so he might make his own somewhat the bigger by it: But whereas
Whom we spoke of chap. 22.
Octavius, by Building his House, had made himself Consul; this Man, on the
contrary, by enlarging of his, (though the Son of a great and most eminent
Citizen) not only caused himself to be put by that Office, but He was convicted
of undue Ways of squezing Money out of the Allies, and at last forced to go
away into Banishment.
was moreover brought into Shame and Dishonor, and at last utterly Ruined.
It Is well if a Man can enhance that Credit and Reputation he has got, by the
Splendour of his House; but he must not depend upon his House alone for it: For
the Master ought to bring Honor to his fine Seat, and not the fine Seat bring
Honor to its Master. But as, in all other cases, a Man should not have Respect
to himself alone, but to other People also; so it is in this of a Noble Man's
House, which ought to be made very large and capacious, because he must keep up
the Laws of Hospitality, and entertain multitudes of all sorts of Persons in
it. For a fine and large House that gives Entertainment to no body, serves but
to reproach and upbraid its Owner; and especially if 'twere used to be
frequently visited under its former Master: for it is an odious thing to have
Passengers cry, as they go along, Ah! good old House, alas thy present Lord
Is Not like thy former one!
which may He reflects upon some of Caesar's Party, who possessed the Houses of
Pompey's Friends; and particularly Mark Anthony, who was got into that, which
had formerly been Pompey's own.
justly be said of but too too many in our own Days. Care should be taken,
especially when a Man Builds himself, that he ben't too extravagant in his
Magnificence and Expenses: which is a very ill thing though it had no other harm
in it, but only that one of giving a bad Example: For most Men are apt, more
than in any thing else, to imitate the Great Ones as to this Particular. Where,
for Example, shall we find the Man, that Rivals the famous Lucius Lucullus, a
noble and very wealthy Roman, famous for his Learning, Eloquence, and
especially Valor; as well as Extravagance in Building, etc. See his Life in
Plutarch.
Lucullus in his Virtues? Whereas how many have done it in the Stateliness and
Magnificence of his Country-houses? But there certainly ought to be some Bounds
fixed and prescribed to these things, and those to be according to the Rules of
Moderation: But the Measure whereby we are to judge of their being Moderate, is
their Subserviency to the Ornaments and Conveniences of Life: And so much may
suffice upon this Head. As for our Having spoken of our Carriage of Body and
Discourse; he now proceeds to the third thing, in which Decorum shows it self,
viz. Our Actions; concerning which he gives us three Rules.
Actions, the way to maintain this Decorum in them, is constantly to observe
these three following Precepts: First, That we keep all our Passions and
Appetites under the Government and Direction of Reason, than which there is
nothing of greater Efficacy toward the constant Preservation of our Duty.
Secondly, That we consider the Quality and Moment of the thing, which we go
about; that so we may proportion our Endeavors accordingly, and take neither
more nor less Pains about it, than it really deserves. And lastly, That in all
those exterior Circumstances, which are only designed for a gentile Show and
Grace of the Action, we should keep within the Measures of Prudence and
Moderation. Now the best Measure we can observe is this, To keep our Eyes fixed
on those Rules of Decorum I Have before laid down, and never to transgress 'em.
But of these three Rules the first is the most important, That the Sensitive
Part be kept obedient to the Reasonable.

CHAP. XL.
Order to be observed in our Words and Actions. Wherein it consists. The Duties
arising from it. An excellent Saying of Pericles to that purpose. Of how great
moment the due Timing a thing is. We should be particularly careful to avoid
little Indecencies. Harmony and Agreement more necessary in our Lives, than our
Music.

IT remains in the next place that we should speak of He comes now to the third
of those things, in which he told us [Chap. 35.] Decorum consists, viz. Order,
or the due Timing our Words and Actions.
that Order, which is to be observed in our Words and Actions; and of the
proper Seasons and Opportunities of 'em. And here will fall under our
Consideration, that which by the Greeks is called, (...); by which I don't mean
that The Word (...) signifies two things, either the keeping within due Bounds,
and so it is opposed to Extravagance, or living above one's Rank, Abilities,
etc. or a due Timing our Words, etc. and so it is opposed to Impertinence,
Unseasonableness, or the like. It Is taken by our Author here in this last Sense.
(...), which by us is most commonly rendered Moderation, and signifies the
keeping within due Bounds: but that which contains in the Notion of it, The
Preservation of Order. We shall crave leave, however, to call even this latter
by the Name of Moderation, which is thus defined by the Stoic Philosophers,
Moderation is the Knowledge of putting whatever we say, or do, in its proper
place. From whence it appears, That Order and the Well-placing of things are
but different Words to express the same Notion, For Order is defined by the
same Sect of Men, to be the ranging of things in their fitting and proper
places. Now the place of an Action they tells us is, The Season of Time for
doing it; and by the Season of Time they mean nothing else, than that which the
Greeks call (...), and which we express by the word Occasio: So that, in short,
by Moderation here (in the Sense of the Word which I have just now given) we
mean no more than the Knowledge of Well-timing whatever we do. Prudence may be
defined the same way too, about which we have spoken at the entrance of this
Work: but now we are discoursing of Temperance, Moderation, and such like
Virtues. What the Duties of Prudence are, is sufficiently explained in its
proper place; what those of Modesty and such other Virtues, as serve to
recommend us to those we converse with, and make up the Subject of our present
Enquiry, remains now to be considered. In the first place then, We ought to
observe a due Regularity and Order in our Actions, as that the several parts of
our whole Lives, like those of a regular and coherent Discourse, may agree and
be suitable one with another. For what is more Unseemly, and contrary to good
Manners, than when we are engaged about serious Business, to bring in some
pleasant and merry Discourse, that is proper for a Feast or over a Glass of
Wine? 'Twas a very good Answer to the present Purpose, which Pericles once gave
to A famous Tragedian of Athens, whose Works are still extant, and counted the
most perfect in their kind. His being a Poet did not hinder him from being a
good Soldier and a wise Statesman. He lived about the beginning of the
Peloponnesian War.
Sophocles the Tragedian: They were both of 'em Praetors of Athens together,
and meeting one Day about some Business of their Office, it happened a
beautiful Boy passed by; whom Sophocles espying, Heavens! said he, Pericles,
What a delicate Youth is there! To which he replied, A Magistrate, Sophocles,
should The Word Abstinentes refers to both Manus and Oculi: in the former Case
it signifies Uncorrupted, or free from Bribery and receiving Gifts; in the
latter Chaste, or free from all wanton and lascivious Looks. A Magistrate ought
to have both.
keep a strict Guard, not over his Hands only, but his Eyes too. Now had
Sophocles happened to say the same Words, at a time when they were choosing of
Wrestlers or Racers, such a Rebuke had been wholly undeserved: So much may the
Merit, or Demerit of an Action, depend upon the Circumstances of Time and
Place. Suppose, for Example, a Man had some considerable Cause upon his Hands,
or Business that required attentive Thinking: Could any one blame him for being
very thoughtful as he walked or rid? But should he show himself so at a Feast
among Company, it would be counted a great piece of Rudeness and Ill-breeding,
and this for not observing the Difference of Seasons. Now as for those things,
which notoriously offend against the Rules of Good Manners, such as for a Man
to Sing openly in the Streets, or any other gross and apparent Absurdity, these
are so easy to be observed by all, that we need give no Rules or Directions
about 'em; but we ought more especially to employ our Care, in avoiding those
little unheeded Indecencies, which are hardly understood by the generality of
Mankind. And as the least fault or disagreement in the Notes, is immediately
perceived by a skilful Musician; so we should take all imaginable Care, that
there be no Disagreement in our Lives and Actions: and that so much the more,
as the Harmony in our Lives is of much greater Consequence, than that in our
Music.

CHAP. XLI.
Decency to be kept even in the least things, as the moving of the Eyes, etc.
We should observe what is unhandsom in others, and correct it in our selves. We
should ask the Advice of experienced Persons. Cautions in taking this Advice.
We should follow Custom and Civil Constitutions. Some things allowable in some
great Men, which aren't so in others. Nothing immodest is Becoming. Some
particular Duties to be observed by all good Men.

AS therefore the delicate Ear of the Artist can quickly discover the least
fault in his Music; so would we take as much care in detecting and censuring
our Vices, we might from the least and most trivial Matters, make several
Observations that would be much to our advantage. From the moving of our Eyes,
for Example; from our way of smoothing or wrinkling our Brows; from the merry
or sorrowful Air of our Countenances; from our Laughter, freedom or
reservedness in Discourse; from the raising or falling the Tone of our Voices,
and a great many other such little kind of Circumstances, we might easily judge
what is Handsome and Becoming us, and what is repugnant to the Rules of our
Duty, and to that which our Nature or Character requires. Now in this
Particular it is a very good way, To observe first in others how each of these
suits, that so we may avoid and correct in our selves, whatever we see bad and
misbecoming in them. For, I know not how, we can sooner 'spy Faults out in
other People, than we can in our selves; upon which account there is no better
way to correct any Learner, than for the Master to mimick his Faults before
him; that so he, perceiving their Deformity in another, may the sooner be
brought to amend 'em in himself. Another good way is, Whenever we are in doubt
and suspense about a Duty, to go to some learned or experienced Person, and ask
his Advice upon the Matter in question, before we resolve and determine with our
selves: Because, generally speaking, when left to themselves, Men are apt to be
guided too much by their own Inclinations and Natures. And in asking this
Advice we should diligently observe, For Ill Will, private Interest, and a
thousand the like things, may make People give us Advice, which they don't
think best: or blind 'em and make 'em think that best, which really is not so.
not only what every one tells us in Words, but what his real inward Opinion
is, and what Reasons and Grounds he may have for such Opinions. For as your
Statuaries, Painters and Poets, use to set their Works out to be publicly
viewed; that so they may be able to correct such Faults, as are generally found
by Spectators in 'em: and as they consider with themselves and their Friends,
what Oversights or Mistakes they have been guilty of in 'em; so should we make
use of other People's Judgments as well as our own, and do or not do, correct
or alter a great many things upon their Advice. As for those things that are
settled by Custom and Civil Constitutions, I shall give no Directions at all
concerning 'em; for they are sufficient Directions of themselves: I shall only
observe, That it is a great Mistake in any one to think, because such Men as
Several eminent Philosophers have been of that Name. One Scholar of Socrates,
and Founder of the Cyrenaick Sect: another his Grandson. It Is uncertain which
he means here.
Aristippus, and Socrates, have ventured to say, or do a great many things,
which are contrary to Rule and received Custom, that therefore he may be
allowed the same: For these are Persons of extraordinary Merits, and almost
more than Human Perfections; and on that account might demand some Privileges,
which aren't to be granted to the rest of the World. But as for the Practice
and manner of the Cynicks, it is wholly to be discarded; for it is a plain
Offense against the Rules of Modesty, without which nothing can be Virtuous and
Becoming. It Is our Duty to pay a Respect and Deference, as to all those that
are Virtuous and Courageous, who design for the Good and Advantage of the
Republic, and serve or have served her in any of her Interests; so to those
also, who bear any Office or Command in the State. We should pay in like manner
a peculiar Regard and Reverence to old Age: never resist any public
Magistrate: make a Distinction between Citizens and Strangers; and of Strangers
'emselves, between those in a private and public Capacity. In fine, Not to
mention any more Particulars, we ought in all cases both to keep our selves,
and endeavor to uphold and maintain among others, that common Correspondence
and universal Society, that is among all Mankind.

CHAP. XLII.
Of the several sorts of Trade which are Creditable, and which not. All those
that administer to Vice and Debauchery, scandalous. Lying in Tradesmen
abominable. How far Merchandise is Creditable, Husbandry particularly commended.

AS for The last thing he mentions, wherein Decorum shows it self, is Trades
and Callings; which he divides into Gentile and Ungentile, and shows which are
the one and which the other.
Trades and the Ways of getting Money, which of 'em are creditable, and which
otherwise, I have only these very few things to observe: First, All those are
unworthy Ways of Gaining, which procure one a general Hatred and Ill Will; as
that of the Userers and Tax-gatherers, for Instance. Secondly, Those Arts are
mean and ungentile, in which a Man is paid for his Work not his Skill; for the
very receiving a Reward for one's Labor, is like taking of Earnest to bind
himself a Slave. Nor are they to be esteemed as better than mean and ordinary
People, that buy things up by the lump of Merchants, to sell 'em out again by
little and little; for what they gain is but a very poor Business, unless they
are guilty of abominable Lying; than which there is nothing in the World more
scandalous. Again, All Handicrafts-Men have but a mean sort of Calling, and
it is impossible that a Workhouse should have any thing that is gentile in it.
Further yet, All those Trades are pitiful and low, that Purvey and Cater for
the satisfying Men's Pleasures; These Trades don't so much cater for Pleasures,
as serve the Necessities of Life: but I suppose he brings 'em in here, because
of the great abuse of 'em among the Romans, where indeed their chief Business
was to serve Men's Luxury. G^tarius is a Seller of Salt-fish, as Piscator is of
fresh.
Fishmongers, Butchers, Cooks, Poulterers, etc. as Terence reckons 'em up; to
which we may add, if you please, Perfumers, Dancing-masters, and those who
supply us with Dice or Cards. But Arts that have something of Knowledge and
Skill in 'em, or those that are useful and necessary for the Public; such as
Physic, for Instance, or Architecture, or the Instruction and Education of
Youth in Good-manners, these are very creditable and commendable in those,
whose Rank and Condition is suited for such Employments. As for Merchandise,
it is sordid and mean, when the Trade that is driven is little and
inconsiderable: but when it takes in a great quantity of Business, and bringing
home Goods from every Country, sells 'em out again without Lying or Deceiving,
we can hardly say but that it is creditable enough: Nay, it is most certainly
very commendable, when those who are concerned in it only design (after they are
sated, or rather consented, with what they have gained) to betake themselves
wholly from the Haven to the Country, as before they have done from the Sea to
the Haven, and there enjoy quietly their private Possessions. But among all the
Methods of Enriching one's self, there is no one better; no one more profitable,
pleasant and agreeable; no one more worthy of a Man and a Gentleman, than that
of Manuring and Tilling the Ground: concerning which I have spoken at large in
my Cato Major, from whence you may borrow what is necessary to be said upon this
Subject.

CHAP. XLIII.
The comparing of two Parts of Honesty one with another. The Duties of Prudence
or finding out Truth, and those of Justice or maintaining Human Society
compared; and the Preference given to the latter.

ANd thus He has now done with his four Heads of Honesty, Prudence, Justice,
Fortitude and Temperance; and shown the Nature, and laid down some Rules
concerning each of 'em; by comparing any of our Actions with which, we may
discover whether they are Honest or Dishonest, agreeable or not agreeable to
the Rules of Virtue; which was the first general Head of Deliberation he
proposed to speak to. [See chap. 3.] The second was, Of two, which are both
Honest, which is to be preferred? which he now proceeds to.
have I finished what I had to say upon the first Question, and, I think,
sufficiently made it appear, how the particular Instances of Duty are to be
drawn from the several Heads of Honesty. But it often comes to pass, that those
very things 'emselves which are Honest, Rival as it were, and come into
Competition with one another, so as to make it be another Question, Of two that
are Honest, which is the most so? which is a Point not mentioned at all by
Panaetius. For the whole of Virtue receiving its Rise from those four
Fountains: First, Prudence, or the Knowledge of Truth. Secondly, Justice, or or
doing Good to the Community and Society of Mankind. Thirdly, Fortitude, or
Greatness of Soul. And, Lastly, Temperance, or Moderation; it cannot but happen,
that several of these must be compared together, before we can be able to
satisfy our selves, which it is our Duty to prefer before which. First then, Of
the Duties of Prudence and Justice, which are both apparently good and honest,
the latter he proves should take place of the former: i. e. Study and
Contemplation, which are Actions of Prudence, ought to be laid aside, if
occasion so require, for the sake of doing Good to Mankind, which is a part of
Justice.
If the Duties of Justice, or preserving the Community, and those of Prudence,
or the Knowledge of Truth, should come into Competition one with another; the
former, I think, should take place of the latter, as being more Consonant to
the Dictates of Nature, which may easily be proved by this following Argument:
Suppose a Wise Man to be in such a place, as afforded him all the Conveniences
of Life, and all the Opportunities of Leisure in abundance, so that he might
Study and Contemplate every thing, that was any ways worthy his Knowledge or
Contemplation; yet were he wholly deprived of all Company, and had no body ever
come near him to be seen, he would quickly be tired and grow weary of his Life.
Again, The Principal of all the Virtues is that sort of Wisdom which the Greeks
call (...); (for as for that which they call (...), and we Prudentia, it is a
thing of a perfectly different Nature, as being no more than The Skill of
discerning what it is that we ought, or ought not, to do:) but that sort of
Wisdom which I said was the Principal, is, See Note 2. on chap. 2. Book 2.
The Knowledge of things both Divine and Human; and so comprehends the Society
and Relation of Men with the Gods, and with one another. If then this, as most
certainly it is, be the greatest Virtue; it follows that the Duties, which flow
from Society, must as certainly be the greatest: For the deepest Knowledge and
Contemplation of Nature, is but a very lame and imperfect Business, unless it
proceed and tend forward to Action: Now the Occasions wherein it can show it
self best, consist in maintaining the Interests of Men, and of consequence
belong to the Society of Mankind: from whence it follows, That the Maintaining
of this should in reason take place before Learning and Knowledge. Having
proved his Assertion by Reasons, he proceeds to show, That it is what the wisest
Men in the World have always thought.
Nor is this any more, than what all good Men show they judge to be true, by
their Actions and Practices: For who is there so wholly addicted to
Contemplation and the Study of Nature, as that, if his Country should fall into
Danger, while he was in one of his noblest Researches, he would immediately
throw all aside, and run to its Relief with all possible speed; nay, though he
thought he might number the Stars, or take the just Dimensions of the whole
World? And the same would he do in case of any Danger to a Friend or a Parent.
From all which things it undeniably appears, That the Duties of Knowledge and
Searching for Truth, are obliged to give way to the Duties of Justice, which
consist in upholding Society among Men; than which there is nothing we should
be more concerned for.

CHAP. XLIV.
Even those, whose Business is the Search after Truth, are serviceable to the
Society of Mankind, and how. Speaking well preferable to the highest
Speculations, and why. Man by Nature a sociable Creature. Knowledge of little
Use, unless it tend to Action, and do some Good to the World. Necessity not the
Reason of Men's joining into Societies.

NAy those very Men, who have spent their whole Lives in Philosophy and
Learning, have yet always endeavored, as much as they could, to be serviceable
to the Interest and Good of Mankind. For many brave Men, and very useful
Members of their several States, have in great part been made such by their
Institutions. Thus Whom he mentioned chap. 24. one of the greatest Men of all
Antiquity, for his Integrity, Learning, and especially Valor. He beat the
Lacedaemonians several times, and made Thebes, as long as he lived, the chief
City of Greece; which before and after him was inconsiderable. Corn. Nep. has
written his Life.
Epaminondas, the famous Theban, was indebted for his Education to He lived
about the Year of Rome 366. born at Tarentum, in Italy, from whence he fled to
Thebes, and was entertained by Epaminondas's Father, where he died. There is
still extant an Epistle of his to Hipparchus the Pythagorean; and some take him
to be the Author of the Golden Verses, that go under the Name of Pythagoras.
Lysis, the Pythagorean: He lived in the Time of, and was near of kin to, both
the Dionysius's of Siracuse, the last of which he expelled. See Plut. and Corn.
Nep.
Dion of Siracuse, for his to Plato; and the same may be said of a great many
others; Even I my self, whatever Service I have done the Republic (if at least
it may be said I have done it any Service) must wholly ascribe it to that
Learning, and those Instructions I received from my Masters. Neither is their
Teaching, and Instructing others, determined to the time of their living here;
but they continue to do it even after they are dead, by the learned Discourses
which they leave behind them: For there is no one Point they have left
unhandled, relating either to the Laws, Customs, or Discipline of the
Commonwealth: So that they seem to have sacrificed their leisure and
opportunities of Study, to the Benefit of those who are engaged in Business.
And thus we see how those Men themselves, whose Lives have been spent in the
pursuit of Wisdom, have nevertheless endeavored by their Learning and
Prudence, to be some way profitable to the Community of Mankind. And for this
one Reason, persuasive Speaking, if joined with Prudence, is a greater
Accomplishment than the acutest Thinking, if destitute of Eloquence: for
Thinking is terminated in it self alone, but Speaking reaches out to the
Benefit of those, with whom we are joined in the same Society. Now as Bees
don't therefore unite themselves together, that so they may the better prepare
their Combs; but therefore prepare their Combs, because they do by Nature unite
themselves together: So Men, and much more, being Creatures that naturally love
Society; in consequence of that, seek how they may find Methods of living
happily in it. From hence it follows, That the Knowledge of things, unless it is
accompanied with that sort of Virtue, which consists in defending and
preserving of Men, i. e. in the Maintenance of Human Society, is but a barren
and fruitless Accomplishment; and even Greatness of Soul, without a regard to
this Society and Conjunction, is very little better than Savageness and
Barbarity. Thus we may see, that the getting of Knowledge is a Duty of much
less Concern and Moment, than the preserving this Society and Union amongst
Men. It Is a very false Notion that has been advanced by some People, That
Necessity alone was the Motive to this Society, which we have so often
mentioned; and that Men would never have associated together, but that they
weren't able, in a solitary Life, to furnish themselves with the Necessaries of
Nature; and that every great and exalted Genius, would Providence supply him
with Food and the other Conveniences of Life, would withdraw from all Business
and Intercourse with Men, and give himself wholly to Study and Contemplation.
This is not so; for he would avoid Solitude, endeavor to find a Companion in
his Studies, and always be desirous of Teaching and Learning, of Hearing and
Speaking. From all which things it is abundantly evident, That the Duties
belonging to Human Society, should in reason take place before those which
relate to unactive Knowledge.

CHAP. XLV.
The Duties of Maintaining Society not always preferable to those of
Temperance, Modesty, etc. What Duties of Justice ought to take place of Others.

PErhaps it may be asked, Having determined the former Question in favor of
Justice, he now proposes a second, Whether the Duties of Justice ought always
to be preferred before those of Temperance? He thinks not, and gives his
Reasons.
Whether the Duties of this Society, which is thus agreeable to the Dictates
and Principles of Nature, ought always to be preferred before the Duties of
Temperance, Decency and Moderation? Indeed I think not: For some things there
are so highly scandalous and abominably wicked, that a wise Man would hardly be
guilty of 'em, supposing he could bring Safety to his Country by it. a
Pesidonius has heaped up a great many Instances of things of this nature; some
of which are so very filthy, and intolerably obscene, that it is a shame even so
much as to repeat 'em after him. These then must never be done for one's
Country; nor will one's Country ever desire that they should; for the best on it
is, it is impossible such a Conjuncture should happen, as that it should be
profitable for any Republic, to have wise Men be guilty of such abominable
Actions. We may lay down this then for a certain Conclusion, That when several
Duties come into competition, those should take place before any others, which
relate to the Maintenance of Human Society. For wise and considerate Acting is
the End of all Knowledge and prudent Thinking; and According to the Maxim of
the Philosophers, The End is always more valuable than that, which is only done
for the sake of the End.
by consequence that is more valuable than this. And so much may suffice upon
this Subject; for, I think, I have sufficiently cleared the way, so that
hereafter there will be no difficulty, to know which Duties are to be preferred
before which. But those very Duties which relate to Society, are of different
Rates and Degrees among themselves; but it is no hard matter to see in what
Order they An eminent Stoic, Scholar of Panaetius; he was born at Apamea, a
Town in Syria, but lived at Rhodes, where Panaetius had been before him. [See
chap. 2. Book 3.] He was one of Cicero's Masters, who some where calls him, Vel
omnium Stoicoram maximum. Pompey the Great, in his return from the Asian Wars,
went to Rhodes on purpose to hear him. His Works are lost.
ought to be performed: as in the first place, Those to the Immortal Gods.
Secondly, To our Native Country. Thirdly, To our Parents; and so on to all
others in their respective places. What has been said in a few Words on this
last Head, I hope, is sufficient to make it appear, that it is usual for Men not
only to doubt, Whether such and such an Action be Honest or Dishonest; but
also, Of two, that are both of 'em Honest, which is the most so. This is one of
those two Heads, which I at first observed were omitted by Panaetius: Let us
now pass on to the remaining part of our proposed Division.

The End of the First Book.
TULLY 's OFFICES.
The Second Book.
CHAP. I.
What will be the Subject of this Second Book. He applies himself to the Study
of Philosophy, as his greatest Consolation in the midst of the Public
Calamities of his Country.

WHat those Duties are, Son Mark, which Honesty and Virtue require of us, and
how they arise from their several Fountains, is, I think, plain enough from the
former Book. I am now in the next place to speak of those others, which wholly
regard the Convenience of Life, and are requisite for the Getting and Enjoyment
of those things, which serve for our comfortable Subsistence here; such as
Interest, Riches, etc. And here I told you, the common Heads of Deliberation
were, What is Profitable, and what Unprofitable? And, Of several Profitables,
which is more, and which most of all such? Having proposed the Subject, about
which he is to treat in this Book, he defers discoursing of it, till he has
answered two Objections made against him, for this sort of Writing.
Concerning which I shall begin to speak, after I have premised but a Word or
two, in Vindication of my self, and my present Undertaking. For though my Books
have excited several both to the Reading, and even Writing of Philosophy; The
first Objection against him is, That he spent too much Time, and took too much
Pains, in such a fruitless Study, as that of Philosophy. For the Romans being a
rough and ambitious People, minded nothing before those Times, but the Arts of
War, and increasing the Glory of their Empire. As for Philosophy, etc. 'twas
counted fit for none almost but Pedants, and (as they used to call 'em) the
trifling, insignificant Grecians. Tu regere imperia populos, etc. was their
Maxim.
yet I am now-and-then apt to be afraid, least some, who are otherwise very
Good Men, should hate and despise the very Name of that Study; and wonder at
me, for bestowing such Portions of my Time and Pains, in so very fruitless and
insignificant a manner. To whom I answer, He excuses himself for spending his
Time in this idle manner, by showing what he had formerly done for the sake of
the Commonwealth, and how desirous he is of doing the same again, if the Times
would permit him.
That so long as the Republic was governed by those, to whose Care and
Management she had entrusted her self, I was ever diligent and employed all my
Thoughts, for her Good and Preservation. But when Julius Caesar, who having
conquered Pompey the Great, got the whole Power of Rome into his Hands.
one Man had seized of her wholly to himself, and there was no place left for
my Counsel or Authority: and when I had lost those extraordinary Persons, who
had been my Companions in laboring for her Interest: I resolved not to sink
into Anguish and Despair, which had wholly overwhelmed me, if I had not
resisted 'em; nor to follow such Pleasures or idle Ways of Living, as were
improper and unbecoming a Man of Learning. I could heartily wish, had it so
pleased the Gods, that the Republic had continued in its ancient Condition,
and never fallen into the Hands of Not only Caesar, but Mark Anthony and his
Adherents; who, after the Murder of Caesar, endeavored to get the sole Power
to himself. See his Life in Plut.
those Men, who aren't so much for Changing, as Overturning every thing! I
should then, as I did in its flourishing Circumstances, spend my Time rather in
Business, than Writing; and what I did write, would not be things of this Moral
Nature, but my Public Orations, as I have often done. But when the poor State,
which had taken up all my Care and Thoughts, and for which I had labored with
all my Power, was utterly ruined and sunk into Nothing, there was quickly no
room left for such Orations, either at the Bar, or in the Senate House: And my
active Mind, which had always been employed in that kind of Studies, now not
being able to lie wholly idle; I thought I could not find out a better way to
get rid of those Troubles which oppressed my Mind, than by returning again to
the Studies of Philosophy. I had spent a good part of my time in these, whilst
I was young, for the improvement of my Reason: But when I came once to be a
Candidate for Places, and devoted my self to the Service of the Public; I had
little time left for Philosophical Enquiries; only so much, as could be spared
from the Business of my Friends and the State; which was wholly taken up in
nothing but Reading, without any Leisure at all for Writing.

CHAP. II.
Some Advantage to be drawn out of Evils. The Commendation and Definitions of
Wisdom and Philosophy. It Is the only way of obtaining Virtue and Happiness. The
Opinion of the Academicks, and why they Dispute against every thing.

HOwever then we have this Advantage, in the midst of all our Miseries and
Calamities, that by them we are brought to the Writing of those things, The
Romans received their Philosophy from the Greeks, and did not begin to
cultivate it to any purpose, till Cicero's time.
which were not sufficiently known amongst us, though nothing in the World more
deserves our Knowledge. For what is there, O ye Gods! more desirable than
Wisdom? What more excellent and lovely in it self? What more useful and
becoming for a Man? Or what more worthy of his reasonable Nature? Now those who
are busied in the pursuit of this, are called Philosophers; and the Word
Philosophy signifies no more, if you would take it literally, than a certain Desire
and Love for Wisdom: And Wisdom's defined by the old Philosophers, The
Knowledge of things both By Divine things they meant God, and his Nature;
together with the World and Bodies in it, which are the Work of God. By things
Human the Nature of Man, both as to his Body and Soul, together with the good
or ill Use he may make of either; viz. Virtue and Vice: As also the Relation he
stands in toward God, and other Men, with the several Duties resulting from it.
See Lips. Stoic. Philos. Book 2.. 7.
Divine and Humane, together with the Causes upon which they depend: the Study
of which whosoever finds fault with, I confess I cannot perceive what it is he
would commend. For what Study is there, that brings so much Quiet and
tisfaction to the Mind, (if these are the things which we long after) as theirs
who are always a-searching out something, which may contribute to the Welfare
and Happiness of their Lives? Or if it be Virtue and Constancy that we desire,
either it is this is the Method of obtaining 'em, or else there is not any to be
found in the World. To say there is no Art of those weightier Concerns, when
none of the most trivial Matters is without Art, becomes only those who Talk
without Thinking, and deceive 'emselves in their most important Business: But
if there is an Art of attaining Virtue, in what other way we do hope to find
it, if this be forsaken, of which I am now speaking. But these things use to be
more fully handled, when we excite and persuade Men to cultivate Philosophy:
which I have endeavored to do in another His Book entitled Hortensius; because
in it he brought in Hortensius condemning, whilst he himself commended
Philosophy. It Is now all lost except some few Fragments.
Work. My Design at present was only to show, why I particularly chose this
Study, being thrust from all Business and Concern in the Government. He
proceeds to the second Exception made against him, which is this; Cicero being
(as before was observed) of the Academick Sect, who deny there is any such
thing as Certainty, How (say they) can you pretend to give Rules of Duty, when
it is a settled Maxim of your Sects, That nothing can be known? Is not this to
contradict your own Principle? Or will you say, That you don't know the Truth
of your own Rules?
There are others, and those Men of no small Learning, who object against me,
and ask, If I am not inconsistent with my self, who affirm that nothing at all
can be known, and yet have discoursed upon several Subjects, and at this very
time am laying down Rules and Directions about Duty: I could wish these Persons
had understood our Opinions a little more thoroughly; He answers, That he is not
one of those, who doubt of every thing, viz. the Scepticks or Aporeticks,
Followers of Pyrrho, who held, That all things were equally probable, and
nothing could have so much said for it, but that as much might be said against
it, and accordingly doubted of every thing in the World. But Cicero's of a
middle Opinion between these and the Dogmaticks (who hold some things to be
certain and others uncertain) and maintains that some things are extremely
probable (though not absolutely certain) and others highly improbable; which is
the Opinion of the Academicks, as distinguished from pure Scepticks. Though
therefore he will not say his Rules are certain, yet he thinks 'em so very
probable, as that no wise Man can deny his Assent to 'em.
for we are not of those, whose Minds are perpetually wandering in
Uncertainties, and have nothing whereby to determine their Assents; (for what
sort of Mind must a Man needs have, or rather what Life must he needs lead,
Which was the Case of the Scepticks; For what Disputing can there be with them,
who will not allow one thing more probable than another; when all Dispute must
suppose that some things are probable and true, and from them make out the
Matter in question? Or what regular Conduct can he observe in his Life, who
doubts whether he sees, hears, or feels any thing, or not? Therefore Quintil.
with very good Reason, excludes Pyrrho from meddling with Eloquence, Cui judices
esse (says he) apud quos verba faciat, etc. non liquebit: For he must doubt (if
he Act according to his Principles) whether there be any Judge for him to speak
to, any Criminal to defend, etc.
when he is utterly debarred from all liberty of Disputing, and observing any
regular Conduct in his Actions?) nor yet of those others, who call some things
certain and others uncertain: but rejecting both these, we say some things are
probable and others improbable. Is there any thing then that should hinder me,
from approving of that, which I think most probable; and laying aside that,
which I think the contrary? Or where is the Inconsistency, if leaving that
arrogant Pretense of Demonstrating, I am neither too rash, nor presumptuous in
my Opinions, which of all things in the World are the farthest from Wisdom? Now
this is the reason why we Academicks Dispute against every thing, because what
is probable could not appear, without comparing the Arguments upon either side
of the Question. But these things are cleared, I think, accurately enough, in
my Books entitled Academical Questions. But you, my Son, are already engaged in
the Study of The Peripatetick, of which Sect Cratippus, his Son's Master, was.
a most noble and ancient Philosophy; and have gotten Cratippus for your Master
and Instructor, who is hardly inferior to its most glorious Founders: However,
I would have you acquainted with The Academick.
our Doctrins, which are very little different from those of your own Sect. But
it is high time now to return to our Purpose. See Book 1. chap. 1.


CHAP. III.
The Knowledge of Honesty is of greatest Moment. Profit and Honesty really the
same, and distinguished only by an Act of the Mind. The customary Opinion to the
contrary very pernicious. The Division of things that are profitable, and
hurtful to Men. The Good we receive from inanimate Beings owing to Man's
Industry.

THere being then, as In Book 1. at the end of chap. 3.
was before observed, five general Heads of Deliberating and Consulting for the
finding out our Duty; two of which relate to what is Honest and Becoming; two
to the Uses and Conveniences of Life, such as Plenty, Power, Riches, etc. and
the fifth to the teaching us how we ought to Choose, if any of the former
should seem to contradict and run counter to one another: we have gone through
with that, wherein Honesty is the Question; with which I desire you would be more
especially acquainted. The Point which now comes under Consideration, is what
usually goes by the name of Profitable; Being to Discourse in this Book about
Profit, the first thing he takes care of is, to settle the true Notion of
Profit, and root out of Men's Minds a pernicious Error, which they have got
concerning it. He asserts therefore, and proves by the Authority of the
greatest Philosophers, That nothing can be Profitable, which is not Honest. See
Book 1. chap. 3. Note f.
concerning which, Custom is mightily in the wrong, and by little and little
has brought it to such a pass, as to make a Distinction between Profit and
Honesty; and settle it as a constant and received Maxim, That a thing may be
Honest without being Profitable; and again may be Profitable without being
Honest: the most pernicious Error, and most destructive of all Goodness, that
ever could have crept into the Minds of Men. The greatest however, and most
eminent Philosophers, have been always so strict and severe in their Writings,
as to make the three Natures of Justice, Profit, and Honesty, be blended and
interwoven together in Reality, and distinguishable only by an Act of the Mind.
For whatever is Just, say they, the same is also Profitable; and whatever is
Honest, the same is also Just; from whence it follows, That whatever is Honest,
the same must be also Profitable. Did People but consider this Matter as they
ought, they would not, as now they commonly do, admire a crafty and subtle sort
of Fellows, and esteem that Wisdom, which in truth is Roguery. This Error
therefore should wholly be rooted out of the Minds of Men, and all should be
taught, That if ever they hope to obtain their Ends, they should not set about
it by the ways of Knavery and underhand Dealings, but by Justice and Integrity
in their Designs and Actions. Having shown, That nothing can be Profitable
which is not Honest; he now enumerates the several sorts of things, which may
be profitable for us; so that, when we know what is Best, and what is Worst for
us, we may endeavor to obtain the one, and avoid the other.
Now all things that tend to the Good and Preservation of the Life of Man, are
either Inanimate, such as Gold, Silver, the Productions of the Earth, and other
such like; or Animals, which have natural Powers, Inclinations and Appetites.
Of these some are unreasonable and others reasonable: The unreasonable are
Horses, Oxen, and other sorts of Cattle; to which we may add Bees, which
produce and make something, that contributes to the Convenience of the Life of
Men: the reasonable are Gods and Men. The means for procuring the Favor of the
Gods, is to live a religious and holy Life: Next to the Gods, there is nothing
so capable of contributing to the Happiness and Welfare of Men, as Men
themselves. The same Distribution may serve for those things, which tend to the
Hurt and Inconvenience of Men. But because it is believed, That Because the Gods
being by Nature good and kind, if they should harm Men, they would act contrary
to their own Natures. See Lips. Phisiolog. Stoic. Book 1. chap. 10.
to hurt is incompatible with the Divine Nature, the Gods for that reason are
excepted here, so that Men are supposed, of all things in Nature, to do both
the most The words, Et prodesse, not being found in several Manuscripts, have
been excluded the late Editions; but (I think) without sufficient Reason: For
this is not a Conclusion from the last Words only, but the whole Sense
foregoing; viz. That Men do most Good, except only the Gods; and most Harm of
all, the Gods not doing any: From whence it follows, That Men do the most Good,
and most Harm, taken both together, of any thing, to one another. Beside the
words following begin to reckon up the several Goods, which Men do to one
another; which being brought in with an enim, for, ought to be a Proof of what
immediately forgoes, viz. That Men do the greatest Service as well as
Disservice, etc.
Service and Disservice to one another. For First, Being to show, That Men do
the most Good to one another; he begins with inanimate things, and shows that
the Service we receive from them is owing to Men.
Those things which are called Inanimate, are most of 'em owing to the Industry
of Men; which we neither could get, if it weren't for their Labor and Art in
procuring 'em; nor afterward use without their Assistance. For where should we
have such a Science as Physic; as Navigation or Agriculture? How should we
gather and preserve our Corn, and the rest of our Fruits, if it were not for
Men? And then how should those Commodities, which we want, be imported; or
those, with which we abound, be exported, if there were not Men to do each of
these Works? In like manner, how could Stones be fetched out of the Quarries
for our necessary Uses? How could Iron, Brass, Gold and Silver, be dug and
drawn out from the Bowels of the Earth, did not Men set their Hands to work for
these Purposes?

CHAP. IV.
Other Conveniences from inanimate Beings, and unreasonable Animals, received
by Men's Industry. The Advantages arising from Men's joining in Society.

SO Houses, which serve to defend us from the extremities of Heat and Cold,
could neither at first have been made by Mankind; nor afterward, if by
Earthquake, Tempest, or length of Days, they had fallen to decay, have been
repaired or rebuilt; had not Men, joined together in one common Society, learnt
to beg Help and Assistance of one another. To this Industry of Men we are also
indebted for Conveyances of Water, for making new Channels and Arms to Rivers,
and for turning the Streams after such a manner, as thereby to water and fatten
our Grounds; for throwing up Banks to defend us from the Waves, and making of
new Harbors in convenient Places. From all which Instances, and a great many
others that might easily be produced, it is abundantly manifest, That the Fruits
and Advantages reaped from those things, which are called Inanimate, are
entirely owing to Men's Labor and Industry. Secondly, Having shown, That the
Advantage they reap from inanimate Beings is owing to Men; he proceeds to show
the same of unreasonable Animals.
Those we receive from unreasonable Animals, how very little and inconsiderable
would they be, if they were not augmented by the same Peoples Industry? For who
was it but Men that first discovered the Uses, to which Beasts in their several
kinds might be serviceable? And how at this time could we feed or break them?
How could we keep 'em, and get the most Profit and Advantage by 'em, without
the Endeavors and Assistance of the same Men? It Is they that destroy us those
Creatures which are hurtful, and procure for us those which may be serviceable
to us. Why need I mention a Several other things, such as Arts and useful
Inventions. Civil Society, etc. whereby Men are serviceable and do good to one
another.
multitude of Arts, which are absolutely necessary to our Wellbeing here? For
what Help or Succor could those that are sick, or what Pleasure those that are
healthy find? How could Mankind be supplied with Victuals, and other
Conveniences or Comforts of Life; if it weren't for that number of Callings in
the World, which are wholly designed to provide 'em of such things? By which
Men are brought to live better and more handsomely, and are raised to a
condition so far above that of unreasonable Animals. Again, Cities could
neither have been built nor frequented, without a Community and Society of Men:
From hence have arisen all Laws and Customs; the Bounds of Equity and Justice
have been settled; and a certain and regular Method laid down for the Conduct
of Men's Lives. This has brought Modesty into request, and filled off the
natural Roughness of Men's Tempers; has contributed to the greater Security of
their Lives, and established such a Commerce and Correspondence among 'em, as
by mutual giving and receiving of Benefits, by bartering and changing one
Commodity for another, one Convenience for another, supplies 'em to the full
with whatever they stand in need of.

CHAP. V.
Nothing extraordinary either in War, or Peace, can be done without the help of
Men. Nothing the Cause of so much Evil to Men, as they themselves are to one
another. What is the Office of Virtue. The whole Business of it consists in
three things.

WE dwell much longer, than we needed to do, upon this Subject: For who does
not set, which Panaetius has spent many Pages to make out, that neither a
General in War, nor a Statesman in Peace, could ever perform any glorious
Exploits, or do any notable Service to the Public, without the concurrence of
other Men's Endeavors? To confirm this Assertion, he brings Several of the
greatest Generals and Statesmen amongst the Ancients.
Themistocles, Pericles, Agesilaus and Alexander; and tells us, that no one of
all these, without the assistance of others to support 'em, could ever have
achieved such glorious Actions. What he tells us is undoubtedly true, and such
a number of Witnesses altogether superfluous. Having thus made it appear, That
Men do, plurimum pr^desse, do the greatest Good to one another; [See Not. 4. on
chapter 3.] he is now going to show, That they do the greatest Mischief too.
And as Men thus receive most extraordinary Benefits, from agreeing and
conspiring to lend mutual Assistance; so we shall find, upon changing the
Scene, that there are no Misfortunes or Calamities so great, as those which
they bring upon one another. Born at Messene, a City in Sicily, Scholar of
Aristotle. He was also an eminent Orator, and Geometrician. He left several
Works behind him, which are all lost.
Dicaearchus, a learned and eloquent Peripatetick, has written a whole Book
concerning the Destruction of Men; where first having reckoned up all other
Causes of it, such as Inundations, Pestilences, and Famines, and even sudden
Incursions of furious wild Beasts, (by which he assures us some whole Nations
have been devoured;) and then placing on the other side Wars, Seditions, and
suchlike Misfortunes, which Men were the Occasions of; he endeavors to show
at the foot of the Account, that a great many more have been destroyed by
these, than by all other Accidents or Calamities whatever. This then being
indisputably true, That the Goods Men enjoy, and the Evils they suffer, proceed
for the most part from Men themselves; I say it is the principal Office of
Virtue, to procure the Good-liking and Favor of Men, and so to engage their
Endeavors and Affections, as to make 'em still ready to do us any Kindness.
It Is the Business therefore of laborious Callings, to supply us with all the
Conveniences of Life, which may be had from the Use of inanimate Beings, and
unreasonable Animals: But to gain the Affections of Men on our side, and beget
in them always a readiness and desire to advance our Interest, is a Work that
requires the Wisdom and Virtue of the greatest Men. He proves what he just now
said, That it requires Wisdom, etc. For, says he, the whole Work and Exercise
of Virtue consists in one of these three things: 1. The Improvement of our
Reason and Understanding; which is the Work of Prudence, and the intellectual
Virtues. 2. To govern and restrain the Passions, and keep the sensual Appetite
in subjection to Reason; which Temperance and the Moral Virtues do. 3. To gain
the Affections of Men, so as to make 'em promote our Interest; which any of the
former may help to do. Thus Wisdom or Knowledge, for Instance, perfect the
Understanding, and are proper to beget in Men Confidence or Reliance on us.
[See chap. 9.] So Justice, and Greatness of Soul, moderate the Passions and
Inclinations; and also make Men love, respect, and honor us. See chap. 9, 10,
11, etc.
For the whole Work and Exercise of Virtue in general, consists in some one of
these three things: The first is a Knowledge, in all we undertake, of what is
agreeable to Truth and Sincerity; what is becoming and suitable to every one's
Character; what will be the Consequence of such or such Actions; what are the
Materials out of which things are made, and what the Causes that first brought
'em into Being. The second, A restraining the violent Motions and Passions of
the Soul, which by the Grecians are termed (...); and bringing the irregular
Inclinations of the Appetite, which by the same are called (...), under the
Power and Government of Reason. The third is a Skilfulness of Address in our
Carriage, and a winning Demeanor toward the rest of Men, with whom we are
joined in one common Society; that so by their help we may be supplied in
abundance, with all those things which our Natures stand in need of; and by the
same may be enabled, should any Injury be offered us, to keep our selves secure
from the Violences of it; and not only so, but to revenge our selves also upon
the guilty Person, and inflict such Punishments, as are according to the Rules
of Humanity and Justice.

CHAP. VI.
How far the Power of Fortune over Men reaches. The several Reasons why Men
favor any one; or submit to his Authority.

WHat Men doing us the most Good and most Evil, (as is shown) it follows that
those are the profitablest Actions, which engage Men to be of our side, and to
do all the Good they can, and keep from us all the Evil: What these are he
proceeds now to show; only observing one thing by the way.
Means should be used for the gaining, and securing Men firm to our Interests,
we shall mention immediately; but we have one Observation to make beforehand.
It might have been objected, That the good or ill Success of our Actions
depends upon Fortune, and not Men's Assistance; which therefore why should we
endeavor to procure? To obviate this he observes, That the most and greatest
of what we call fortuitous Accidents, could never have fallen out without Men's
Assistance, notwithstanding that usually they are said to come from Fortune:
Such are Victories; Overthrows, etc.
There Is no one but knows that the Power of Fortune is very great, both as to
the good, and ill Success of our Actions: for when she favors us, we quickly
arrive at our desired Haven; but when she turns against us, we as quickly are
Shipwreckt and run A-ground. Now of those Events which depend upon Fortune,
there are some which come to pass but extraordinary seldom; such as Storms,
Tempests, Shipwrecks, Ruins, Fires, etc. which proceed from inanimate Beings;
and from brutish Animals kicks, bites, pushes, etc. all which, as I said, do
but rarely happen: But the Overthrows of Armies, as of That of Pompey the Great
in the Pharsalian Field; his ^ldest Son's at Munda in Spain; and Juba and
Scipio's in A^ick; all defeated by Caesar. See his Commentaries.
three but a while ago, and a great many others at several times; the Deaths of
Commanders, as lately of Viz. Pompey the Great, who after his Defeat at
Pharsalia, flying into Egypt, was there treacherously Murdered: Princeps
Romani nominis, imperio arbitrioque Aegyptii mancipii, jugulatus est. See Vell.
Paterc. Book 2. chap. 58.
a great and extraordinary Person; the Hatred and Violence of the enraged
Multitude, and, as a Consequence of that, the Banishments, Flights and utter
Undoings of well-deserving Citizens: as also on the other (...) prosperous
Successes, such as Honors, Commands, Victories, etc. though they are all truly
fortuitous things, yet they cannot succeed either the one way or the other,
without the Assistance and Endeavors of Men. This being noted, we are now to
discourse of those Ways and Methods, whereby Men are drawn and inclined to be
for us, and to endeavor all they can for our Interest and Advantage: Upon
which if we seem to dwell longer than we should do, I desire the Usefulness of
the Subject may be considered, and then we may possibly be thought too short.
He lays down six things, or Principles of Action in Men, which make one Man
endeavor to be Profitable to another, as, Love, Honor, etc. and shows which
of 'em are convenient, and which not; and by what Virtues we may gain each of
'em.
Whatsoever then is contributed by Men, toward any one's advancement in Riches,
Honors, Power, etc. is always done upon some of these Motives: First, That of
Kindness, Benevolence, or Good Will; when for some reasons they love any
Person. Secondly, Honor or Admiration; when they respect any one for his
Virtues, and think he deserves to be highly promoted. Thirdly, Confidence,
Trust, or Reliance; when they think they may safely confide in a Man, as one
that will certainly take care of their Affairs. Fourthly, Fear, when they stand
in any Aw of his Power and Authority. Fifthly, Hope, when they expect to get
something from him; as when Princes or popular Men promise great Donations.
And, last of all, Hire, when they are drawn to it by Money or Presents; which is
much the most pitiful and sordid Way, as for those on the one hand that are
taken by it, so likewise for those that endeavor to make use of it: For it is
never well when People shall attempt to get that by Money, which ought to be
the Reward of Virtue and Merit. However seeing sometimes one must have recourse
to this Method as a Refuge, I shall give some Rules for our Direction in the
Use of it; but first speak of those, that are more nearly related to Virtue and
Honesty. He brings in this, because he designs to Discourse not only about
private Persons, How they should get others to be serviceable to 'em; but of
Governors also of a State or Commonwealth, How they should do to make their
Subjects and Allies be firm to their Interests.
In much the same manner, and for several such Reasons, Men submit to the Power
and Authority of another: Either because they have a Kindness for him; or have
formerly received some Obligations from him; or respect him for his Worth; or
hope they shall get something by it; or fear they shall be forced to it, if
they don't do it voluntarily; or are drawn by fair Promises and large
Donations; or, lastly, (as we see it too often practiced in our own Republic)
are downright hired to it.

CHAP. VII.
A Governor should endeavor to make himself loved, and not feared. The Fates
of several, who have taken the contrary Method.

NOw of all He begins with the first Ground of Men's being serviceable and
obedient to us, Love; to which he adds its Opposite, Fear; and comparing 'em
one with another, rejects the latter as a very unsafe and inconvenient one, and
magnifies the former.
those Methods, which tend to the advancement and maintenance of our Interest,
there is none more proper and convenient than Love, and none more improper and
inconvenient than Fear. For, as it is very well observed by Ennius, Whom Men
fear, they also hate; and whom they hate, they wish out of the World. But that
no force of Power or Greatness whatever, can bear up long against a Stream of
public Hate, if it were not sufficiently known before, was of late made appear
by an Instance of our own. And not the Murder of that Jul. Caesar, who was
assassinated in the Senate House. See Sueton. and Plut.
Tyrant only, who by force of Arms oppres'd the City, which now most By
adhering to Mark Anthony, and others, who pretended to be Revengers of his
Death; endeavoring to fire the Houses, etc. of the Conspirators, etc. See the
forecited Authors.
obeys him, when taken out of the World; but the like untimely Ends of most
other Tyrants, who have generally been attended by the same ill Fate, is a
manifest Token that the Hatred of People is able to min the most absolute
Authority: For Obedience proceeding from Fear cannot possibly be lasting;
whereas that which is the Effect of Love, will be faithful for ever. It Is well
enough in those, who by open force have reduced any Nation, and accordingly
Rule it with an high Hand, if they do sometimes use Rigor and Severity, like
Masters toward their Slaves, when there is no other way of holding 'em in
Subjection: But for those who are Magistrates in a free City, to endeavor to
make themselves feared by the People, is one of the maddest, and most desperate
Attempts upon the face of the Earth. For though a Man should by his Power and
Greatness oppress the Laws, and overawe Liberty by Terror and Threatenings,
yet still they will find time to recover again, first by the private
Resentments of the Citizens, and afterward by their choosing in secret
Consults, some worthier Person to free 'em from the Oppressor. And Liberty,
after she has been chained up a while, is always more Cursed, and bites deeper,
than she would otherwise have done if she had never been restrained. Let us
therefore embrace and adhere to that Method, which is of the most universal
Influence, and serves not only to secure us what we have, but moreover to
enlarge our Power and Authority: That is in short, Let us rather endeavor to
be Loved than Feared; which is certainly the best way to make us successful as
well in our private, as our public Business. For those who desire to have
others be afraid of 'em, must needs be afraid of those others in their turns:
What, for Instance, shall we imagine of A Tyrant of Syracuse, Son of one
Hermocrates. He seized upon the Government at twenty five Years old, about the
Year of Rome 447. [See our Author's Tuse. Quest.] His Son of the same Name
succeeded him in his Tyranny; but was expelled for it by Dion. See Plut. Life
of Dion.
the Elder Dionysius? With what eternal Fears and Apprehensions must he needs
be racked, when His Barber one day happening to say, That his Life was in his
Hands, he caused him to be murdered, and made his Daughters shave him for some
time. But afterward suspecting even them too, he used singing, as the safest
way he could think of.
daring not to venture his Throat to any Razor, he was forced even to singe off
his Beard with Coals? Or what of See chap. 30. Book 1. He by his savage
Cruelties and Injustice, made all the World hate him. The Thessalians begged Aid
of the Thebans against him, who sent their General Pelopidas several times;
whom he by Treachery got into his Power, and kept Prisoner a good while.
Alexander, who was sirnam'd the Pheraean? In what Torment, think we, must he
perpetually live? When (as it is usually reported of him) he dared not so much
as to rise from Table, and go to his own Wife Thebe's Chamber, one whom he
loved with an entire Affection, without a Barbarian, and him (as it is said) too
a The Thracians were counted some of the savagest Barbarians, and ordinarily
made use of by Tyrants in those times, as the fittest Executioners of their
bloody Designs. To be marked on the Forehead was a token of Honor amongst them,
as it was of Disgrace and Slavery amongst others. But Cic. here seems to speak
of this Man, as a Slave or Villain: it is probable therefore he might be a
Thracian Slave, and marked as such, after he came into Greece.
branded Thracian, to lead the way with his naked Sword? And would always
dispatch some of his Guards before him, to search all the Clothes and Coffers
of the Women, for fear least any Weapon might be concealed within 'em. O
miserable and unhappy Man! who could think a Barbarian, one that carried the
Marks of his Condition in his Forehead, would be faithfuller to him than his
own Wife. Neither, it seems, was he mistaken in it; for he was afterward
Murdered She persuading her three Brothers to it, who accordingly flew him in
his Bed. See Plut. Life of Pelopidas.
by her Procurement, upon suspicion of having to do with someother Woman. Nor
indeed can any Authority, how absolute soever, subsist very long when it is thus
generally feared: A noted Tyrant of Agrigentum in Sicily, Son of Laodamas, Born
at Astypalea, but expelled his own Country. He is remarkable for his Cruelty,
particularly for a brazen Bull, in which he used to torture those, whom he had
a mind to get rid of. He is said however to have loved Learning and learned
Men. There is still extant a Book of Epistles under his Name.
Phalaris himself, who is particularly remarkable for his barbarous Cruelties,
may serve for a Witness to this Truth; who was not destroyed by domestic
Treacheries, like that Alexander, whom I just now mentioned; nor yet by some
few Men conspiring his Death, like our late Tyrant; but by a general
Insurrection of all the Agrigentines falling upon him at once. Again, Did not
the Macedonians revolt from Sirnam'd Poliorcetes, a King of Macedonia, Son of
Antigonus, one of Alexander the Great's Captains. By his Pride and Insolence he
made the Macedonians desert him, and go over to Pyrrhus. See his Life in
Plutarch.
Demetrius, and all with one consent march over to Pyrrhus? And when the
Lacedaemonians grew Insolent and Tyrannical, did not their Allies upon a
sudden forsake 'em, and show 'emselves idle and unconcerned Spectators of
their Ruin at A Town in Baeotia, where the Lacedaemonians were entirely routed
by the Thebans, under the Conduct of their brave Leader Epaminondas. See chap.
24. Book 1.
Leuctra, without ever stirring one Foot to their Assistance?

CHAP. VIII.
The just and gentle Government of the old Romans: When changed, and the fatal
Consequences of that Change. Caesar and Sylla 's unjust Cruelties. One Cause of
Civil Wars is Men's hoping to raise 'emselves by them. All have occasion for
some Friends, though not for general Love.

I Much rather choose, upon such a Subject, to bring Instances from Foreign,
than our own Nation. However, I cannot but observe thus much, That so long as
our Empire supported it self, not by Ways of Injustice and Violence, but rather
by Actions of Kindness and Gentleness; Wars were undertaken to Protect its
Allies or Defend its Honor, and accordingly their Issues were attended with
Mercy, or at least no more Rigor than was absolutely necessary. The Senate
then was a kind of Port or Refuge, for Princes and Nations to have recouse to
in their need; and our Officers and Commanders made it their greatest Glory, to
Defend their Provinces, and Assist their Allies, with Justice and Fidelity.
This City therefore was not then the Patrocinium verius quam imperium. 'Twas
the Duty of a Patron to Protect and Defend, not to Rule over his Clients: and
one was never the less free, because he was under the Patronage of another, but
only the more safe, as being protected by him. In like manner one Nation might
be under, and (as 'twere) the Client of another, and yet be a Free Nation for
all that. Whence there is a difference in Roman Authors, betwixt in fide esse,
and in ditione esse pop. Roman. The latter denoting a loss of Liberty; the
former only some sort of Inferiority and Homage.
Empress, so properly as the Protectress of all the World. This Conduct and
Method of managing the State, began by little and little to wear off before,
but utterly vanished immediately after the Victory of Luc. Sylla the Dictator.
He took up Arms against Marius, and defended the Cause of the Nobility against
the Commons, in a bloody Civil War: but after his Victory was inhumanly Cruel.
See his Life at large in Plut.
Sylla; for People began to think nothing could be unjust to their Confederates
and Allies, when once they had seen so great Cruelties exercised even upon
their very Citizens. This Man therefore was in a just Cause, but which was
followed by a cruel and most unjust Victory: he having had the Boldness and
Impudence to say, when in full Market he was selling the Goods of some honest
and wealthy Men, and whom he himself knew to be Roman Citizens, That he was
going to make sale of his own Booty. But there has come He means Julius Caesar.
one after him, whose Cause was impious, and his Victory yet more scandalous
and inhuman: who did not stop at selling of private Men's Estates, but involved
all our Countries and Provinces together in one common Calamity. Hence we have
seen, after Havoc and Devastation made in other Countries, as it were by way
of Praelude to the Loss of our own Empire, the City A City in France, which had
always taken part with the Romans, in all their Wars on that side. But
declaring for Pompey in the Civil War, 'twas sacked by Caesar; who carried
along a Figure of it (as was their usual Custom) with him in Triumph.
Marseilles drawn along in Triumph; and that very place, without whose
Assistance our former Generals never brought Triumph from beyond the Alps, has
now found one that could have so much Impudence, as to Triumph over its own
Destruction. I might bring a great many other Examples, of most impious
Treatment that has been shown toward our Allies; but this single Instance is
abundantly sufficient, being one of the basest that was ever committed before
the face of the Sun. The truth on it is we have deserved these Misfortunes; for
if others had not 'scap'd without Punishment for their Wickedness, this Man
could never have arrived at that Insolence; who though he has left but few Heirs
of his Estate, I am afraid will have a great many wicked ones of his Ambition.
For as long as some dissolute and profligate Fellows remember that When Lucius
Sylla sold the Goods of the Roman Citizens, whom he had Out-lawed, and caused
to be Slain.
former inhuman Auction, and are in hopes one day of seeing the same again,
they will always be for propagating Civil Dissentions. Thus Publius Sylla, who
was so busy in that mentioned, when his Kinsman was Dictator, was never
contented till he had managed When Caesar sold the Goods of those, who had been
of Pompey's Party.
a worse and more inhuman Auction six and thirty Years after: and One
Cornelius, mentioned by Salust in Lepidus the Consul's Speech against Sylla.
another, who was Scribe in that former Dictatorship, in this latter was
advanced to be Treasurer of the City. By all which it is easy enough to
perceive, that we are never to hope we shall be free from Civil Wars, when
People expect to make their Fortunes by 'em. We have therefore only the Walls
of our City remaining entire, and even they, as 'twere, expecting to feel the
Effects of their abominable Wickedness; but as for the Republic it is
absolutely sunk into Ruins and Nothing. And all these Misfortunes have fallen
upon us (that I may return to the Subject which occasioned this Digression) by
our choosing to Govern rather by Fear than Love. What then ought particular
Persons to expect, when Tyranny and Oppression could bring all these Evils upon
the whole Roman Empire? Having shown how convenient Love, and how inconvenient
Fear is, for the advancement of our Interest; it remains that he should show
how the former may be obtained. To it he joins Honor and Confidence; the
second and third Means mentioned Chap. 6. which three together make up true and
perfect Glory. See the next Chapter.
This then being so manifestly plain, That Love's a most powerful Motive to
Obedience, but Fear a most weak and dangerous one; it follows in the next place
that we should discourse of those Means, whereby such a Love, joined with
Honor and Confidence, may most easily be gotten. Before he enquires how this
Love is to be gotten, he divides it (if I may so say) into Love of Friendship,
which consists in having some few good Friends; and this he says all, whether
great or mean, are almost equally concerned to get; and general Love, which
consists in the Kindness and general Good Will of all the Citizens; and this is
necessary but to some few. Of the former he has spoken in his Laelius or of
Friendship; and therefore passes it by here. The latter he gives some Rules
about here, as making up, together with Confidence and Admiration, true and
perfect Glory.
Now this is what all Men don't equally stand in need of; but each should
consider his own way of living, and accordingly judge what is convenientest for
him; whether to be beloved by the generality of Men, or only by some few and
select Persons. This however we may lay down for certain, as a first and most
necessary Rule in this case, to procure at least some faithful and sincere
Friends, who may have a true Kindness and Esteem for us. That is, Though all
don't stand in need of the general Love and Good Will of the Citizens, yet
particular and private Friends are as useful to the Meanest, as to the Great
and more Powerful.
As far as this reaches, there is very little difference between even the
greatest and meanest of People, and all sorts of 'em are almost equally
concerned to endeavor after it. As for Honor, Glory, and the general
Good Will of all the Citizens, these indeed are things, which aren't alike
useful and necessary for all. However for those that have been able to get 'em,
they are very good Helps, as for most other Purposes, so for the obtaining of
faithful Friends: But of Friendship I have treated in another Work, which is
entitled Laelius.

CHAP. IX.
What the Ingredients of true Glory are. By what Means the Love of the People
may be obtained. How Men may be brought to place a Confidence in us. Justice
more powerful than Cunning to this End.

LEt us now proceed to discourse of Glory; though that too is a Subject, upon
which I have They are both lost. He mentions them two or three times in his
Epistles to Atticus.
two Books already extant; however I shall touch upon it here in short, because
it is a thing of such Weight and Moment toward the successful Management of the
most important Affairs. True and perfect Glory then is always made up of these
three Ingredients: First, The Love and Good Will of the Multitude. Secondly,
Their Trusting and Reliance upon a Man. And, Lastly, Their Valuing and Admiring
him so, as to think him a Person that really deserves Honor. The Means of
getting these three from the Multitude, (to give one short and easy Rule) are
very much the same as from particular Persons. However there is another peculiar
Way of approaching the People, and gaining Admittance into the Hearts and
Affections of all Men in general. He Discourses in order of the Ways how to
obtain these three, and first Love: the Means of gaining which are Liberality,
a generous Disposition, etc.
Of those three then, which I just now mentioned, let us first see the Ways of
obtaining Love. Now the Love of the People is moved by nothing so much, as by
Bounty and doing Kindnesses: Next they are pleased with an hearty Desire and
Inclination toward it, though a Man have not wherewithal to exercise it. Thirdly,
The very Name and Reputation of having Beneficence and Liberality, Justice and
Fidelity, with the rest of those Virtues, which give a kind of Smoothness and
Agreeableness to our Conversation, is of very great Efficacy in getting us the
Favor and Love of the Multitude: and the reason of it is, because Honesty and
Decorum delight us of themselves, and by their own native Beauties and
Excellencies move, and engage the Hearts of all Men: which seeing they appear
with more Luster in the Virtues, which I just now mentioned; it follows that by
Nature we must Love those People, in whom we suppose such Virtues to reside.
And these are the principal Causes of Men's Loving us: there might, I confess,
be some others given, but not of equal Weight and Importance with these.
Secondly, How Men are brought to confide and trust in us, which is the second
part of true Glory. The two great Means are Justice, and Prudence, or Knowledge
of Business: of these Justice is the chief.
We are to speak in the next place of their Trusting or Confiding in us; for
the compassing of which, it is necessary we should be supposed to have two
Qualifications, viz. Prudence and Justice. How Prudence makes Men confide in us.
For we trust those Men, whom we believe, to understand Matters better than we
do; to be wise enough to see things before they are arrived, and in the
Management of 'em, if any Danger should happen, to be ready at finding out Ways
and Expedients, to disentangle 'emselves from the Perplexities of it: in which
Men imagine that all true and profitable Wisdom consists. How Justice makes Men
confide in us.
But when a Man is found really Just and Faithful, that is Good, we place so
much Trust and Confidence in such a one, as not to entertain any the least
suspicion of Deceit or Injury. To such a Man therefore we think we may wisely,
and with a secure Confidence, entrust our Safeties, our Children and our
Fortunes. Justice therefore, of these two Virtues, has much the more strong and
effectual Tendency, to procure this Credit and Confidence from the People. For
that, even without Wisdom, can go a great way toward the obtaining of this End;
whereas Wisdom, without that, is unable to do any thing: For the more Shrewd
and Cunning any Person is, the more he is Suspected and Hated by the World, if
he ben't counted Honest and Upright withal. Justice therefore, in conjunction
with Wisdom, can make a Man be trusted as far as he pleases: Justice without
the other can do a great deal; but the other without that is of no Force at all.

CHAP. X.
Why he talks of Wisdom and Justice as separate from one another, though really
there is a mutual Connection between 'em. What will make Men admire any one. The
difference between Despising and having an Ill Opinion of a Man.

In the former Chapter he mentioned Prudence and Justice as separate from one
another, whereupon it is objected, That he talks Unphilosophically; all the
Philosophers (and himself too) having maintained, that the Virtues are all
connected and linked together, and cannot be separated from one another. This
Objection, with his Answer to it, occasions this short Digression. See Note c
on chap. 5. Book 1.
SOme Men perhaps will be ready to admire, since it is so generally agreed on by
Philosophers, and has been so often asserted by me my self, That whoever has
one must have all the Virtues; why I should speak of 'em separately now, as
though it were possible for a Man to have Prudence, without having Justice at the
same time. I answer, That the Way of Expression is highly different, according
to the difference of the Subjects we are treating of; whether they are such as
require a Niceness and Subtilty in handling, or be suited to the Capacities of
ordinary People. I do but speak here with the Vulgar therefore, when I call one
Man Courageous, another Just, and a third Prudent; for in treating upon a
Subject which concerns the People, we must make use of common and ordinary
Expressions; which is what has been done by Panaetius himself --. But to return
to our Purpose: He has shown how the two first Ingredients of true Glory, viz.
the Love and Confidence of the Multitude, are to be obtained: here he proceeds
to the third, Their Admiring, etc.
Of the three Ingredients, which we said were required to the making up of
Glory; the third was this, That Men should Admire and Value us so, as to think
we are Persons that really deserve Honor. The Extraordinariness of any thing,
the first Cause of Men's Admiration.
Now generally speaking they are apt to Admire whatever they see Great, and
beyond their Apprehensions; and likewise in particulars, if they discover any
Excellency, which they never expected. They Admire those therefore, and extol
'em even to the Skies, in whom (as they think) they have found any rare and
extraodinary Qualities: But as for those others, who have neither Virtue,
Spirit, nor Courage in them, these Men they wholly despise and set light by.
For they cannot be said to despise all those, of whom they entertain but an Ill
Opinion. They Are far from thinking well of your roguish backbiting, cozening
sort of Fellows, who are never unprepared for the doing Man an Injury: but by
no means But rather are afraid of 'em, lest they should do 'em some Injury, or
other.
despise 'em for all that; their Contempt (as was said) lighting only upon
those, who neither do Good to themselves, nor others (as we commonly speak;)
that is, who spend all their Lives in mere Idleness and Sloth, without ever
minding or taking care of any thing. A more particular Cause of Admiration, is
extraordinary Virtue: especially resisting Pleasure and Pain, which most Men
are apt to be conquered by: which is Courage or Greatness of Soul.
Those, who are esteemed to excel in Virtue, more especially draw Men to Wonder
and Admiration; who keep themselves free, as from all other things that are
Base and Unbecoming, so more especially from those sorts of Vices, which the
rest of Mankind cannot so easily stand against. Pleasures, for instance, are
very alluring. and charming Mistresses, which are apt to ensnare the better
part of the Soul, and entice it aside from the Paths of Virtue; and Pain on the
contrary racks and torments us, so that the dread of it carries most Men beyond
the Bounds of Reason. Thus again, when Life and Death, Riches and Poverty, are
the things in question, there are very few Men but are wholly transported with
desire of the one, and abhorrence of the other. When a Man therefore has got
such a great and exalted Soul, as that he can look upon all these with
Indifference; and closely pursues and adheres to Honesty, in whatever Shape she
presents her self; then it is that Virtue appears with such a Brightness, as
that all the whole World must admire her Beauties.

CHAP. XI.
Justice, and a Contempt of Riches, are especially Causes of Men's Admiration.
Justice alone procures all the three things, which make up Glory; and how. It Is
a necessary Virtue for all sorts of People. Even Robbers and Pirates cannot
subsist without it. Some Examples to this Purpose.

SUch a Constitution of Soul therefore, as can make a Man despise all Those
mentioned in the last Chapter, Pleasure and Pain, Riches and Poverty, etc.
these Goods or Evils, begets him a mighty Esteem and Admiration: But
especially Justice (which single Virtue serves to give Men the Name and
Denomination of Good) seems much the most admirable to the generality of
People. And not without Reason; it being For it is but clapping a Pistol, or the
like to such a Man's Breast, and he will betray his Friend or Country, break his
Word, or any thing in the World, rather than loose his beloved Life; and
consequently cannot be resolutely Just.
impossible for any one to be Just, who is afraid at the approaches of Death,
of Pain, of Banishment or Poverty; or prefers Viz. Life, Pleasure, Riches, etc.
those things, which are contrary to these, before the great Duties of Justice
and Honesty. And more particularly yet, Men admire those, whom they find
unconcerned as to the matter of Money; and count them tried, as it were like
Gold in the Fire, who have been able to withstand the Temptations of it.
Justice therefore of it self is sufficient to procure those three things that
are requisite to Glory: In the first place, The Love and Good Will of the
People; because of the He takes Justice in the larger Sense here, so as to
comprehend Bounty and Liberality. See Note a on chap. 7. Book 1.
Kindnesses it shows to very many. Secondly, Their Confidence. And Thirdly,
Their Admiration, both for the same Reason, viz. Because it neglects and
despises those things, which the rest of Men pursue with such Eagerness and
Passion. Having shown how necessary Justice is, for those who live in the Eye
of the World, and endeavor to get true and perfect Glory; he is now going to
show, That it is necessary also for all sorts of Men, viz. Those of Privacy and
Retirement; those of Trade and Commerce in the World; nay for even Thieves and
Pirates.
Now, in my Opinion, not only the being in a public Station, but every Method
of Living whatever, requires the Helps and Assistances of Men; as for other
Designs, so particularly for this, that we may have some familiar Friends to
converse with; which it is no easy matter for a Man to obtain, without at least
the Show and Reputation of Honesty. From hence it follows, That it is necessary
even for those Men themselves, who have withdrawn from the World, and chosen
the Quiet and Retirements of the Country, to be reputed at least Men of Honesty
and Integrity: and that so much the more, because otherwise they will certainly
be counted Dishonest; and then, having nothing of Guard or Defense, they must
needs be exposed to perpetual Injuries. The same Justice also is necessary for
those (if ever they hope to succeed in their Business) who Buy, Sell, Let,
Hire, and are concerned in the Commerce and Affairs of the World: Nay it is a
thing of such powerful Moment and universal Influence, as that those who live
only upon Villainies and Wickedness, can never subsist without something of
Justice: For should any Thief steal from another that belonged to the same
Confederacy, he would immediately be expelled, as unfit to be a Member even of a
Society of Robbers; and should the Leader himself not distribute their Booty,
according to the Measures of Justice and Honesty, he would either be murdered or
deserted by his Company: Nay it is said that your Robbers have some certain
Statutes, which they are all of 'em bound to observe amongst themselves. A
famous Greek Historian, born in the Isle Chios, and Scholar of Isocrates, who
used to say, That he was forced to use a Spurr to Ephorus, and a Bridle to
Theopompus. He is highly commended by several of the Ancients. Corn. Nepos
accuses him of Ill Nature in his Characters of Men. He left several Works,
which are lost.
Theopompus tells us of a certain Rogue, one He was afterward conquered by
Phillip, Son of Amyntas, King of Macedonia. Pyrrhus the famous King of Epirus
Married his Daughter.
Bardylis and Illyrian, that got a great Power by the fame of his Justice in
dividing the Prey: and A Man of very great Cunning and Valor; he was first a
Huntsman, afterward a General of a formidable Army. See Florus, Paterc. etc.
Viriatus the Lusitanian, got a much greater, to whom even some of our Armies
and C. Plautius and M. Vitellius, or (as others say) Claudius Unimanus, the
Praetors. At last Servilius Caepio got him treacherously murdered.
Generals were forced to yield; till at last he was conquered by that The same,
whom he brings in speaking in his Book De Amicitia.
Caius Laelius, who was sirnam'd the Wise, in the time of his Praetorship; who
brought down his Courage and Fierceness so low, as to render the War easy for
those that came after him. If Justice then be of so great Efficacy, as that it
can raise and support even Pirates; of what mighty Force must we suppose it to
be, in the midst of Laws, and in a well-constituted Republic?

CHAP. XII.
What made Men at first choose Kings, and make Laws. The justest Men usually
made Kings; and why. How to make use of the Glory he has been discoursing of.
An excellent Rule of Socrates 's. Glory must be founded upon solid Virtue.
Whatever is Counterfeit will sometime be discovered.

He still goes on in his Commendation of Justice, and tells us, That Kings
heretofore were chosen according to their Characters for Justice and Integrity.
'TWas for the sake of enjoying the Benefits of this Justice (the great Use of
which we have now been discoursing of) that the Medes heretofore, as we are
told by The first of any great note among the Greek Historians, very well known
by his Works, which are still extant in nine Books; which for their Sweetness
and Elegance are deservedly called by the names of the Nine Muses.
Herodotus, and I am apt to imagine our own Ancestors too, chose always the
honestest Persons for their Kings. For the poorer sort of People, being
oppressed by the richer, had recourse to some one of remakable Virtue, to save
and protect 'em from Violence and Injuries: who constituting Measures of Equity
and Justice, bound the greatest to observe 'em as well as the meanest. And that
which was the reason for their choosing Kings, in like manner put them upon
enacting Laws: For Men have always desired to enjoy such a Right, as all sorts
of 'em might have an equal Share in (for otherwise indeed 'twould be no Right
at all) which when they could get by the Justice and Honesty of some one
Person, they were contented with him, and never looked any further; but when
they could not, they were put upon a necessity of inventing Laws, which could
never be partial, but use the same Language to all Ranks and Conditions. It Is
very plain therefore, that those Men were usually chosen to be Kings, who were
counted by the People Men of Honesty and Integrity: but if they were held
Prudent and Wise withal, the People thought there was nothing they might not
obtain by their Conduct and Management. By all means therefore let us
constantly follow, and stick close to Justice; as for its own sake, (for
otherwise indeed 'twill not be properly Justice) so for the increase of our
Honor and Reputation. He has shown what these Virtues are, which make the
People Love, etc. But as it is not enough for a Man to get Riches, unless he
knows how to make use of 'em too: So, after we have gotten the Virtues he has
mentioned, the next thing that comes to be considered is, How we should use
'em, so as to be remarkable in the World; and let People see, by our Pactice
and Exercise in some sort of Life, that we are such Persons, as deserve their
Love, Confidence and Admiration. For these Virtues themselves are only the
Groundwork or Foundations, as it were, of perfect Glory; and we know
Foundations are laid in the Earth, and require something else to be Built upon
'em, before they are taken notice of in the Eye of the World. Here he puts in,
by way of Caution, a Saying of Socrates, That we make sure in the first place,
that we really are such, etc.
Now as it is not sufficient for a Man to get Riches, unless he has the Wisdom
to dispose of 'em so, as thereby to furnish out all his Expenses; not only
those of his bare Necessities, but those of his Bounty and Liberality too: So
neither is it enough for a Man to get By Glory here he understands the Virtues
of Justice, etc. which he has just been discoursing of, as the Foundations of
true Glory.
Glory, unless he knows how to make Use of it with discretion: Though what
Socrates says is very excellent to this purpose, That the readiest Way, and, as
it were, shortest Cut, to arrive at Outward Glory, not the Virtues themselves.
Glory, is really to be, what one desires to be accounted. Those People
therefore are highly mistaken, who think of obtaining a solid Reputation, by
vain Shows and hypocritical Pretenses; by composed Countenances and studied
Forms of Words: for true Glory takes deep rooting, and grows and flourishes
more and more; but that which is only in Show and mere Outside, quickly decays
and withers like Flowers; nor can any thing be lasting that is only
Counterfeit. I might bring a great many pregnant Examples for the proof of
these Assertions; but, for brevity sake, I shall content my self with those of
but one single Family. A Noble, Wise and Valiant Roman, who was twice Cof. and
as often triumphed; and at last was made Censor, in which Office by his Wisdom
and Prudence he saved the Republic. [See Cic. de Orat. 1. 9.] He married
Cornelia, the Daughter of the Elder Africanus, by whom he had the two Gracchi.
Tiberius Gracchus, the Son of Publius, will always be Praised and had in
Admiration, as long as there shall any Memorials remain of the Roman
Achievements: But his Tib. and Caius Gracchus, two eloquent and ingenious
young Men: but for attempting to make Laws pernicious to the State, about
equally dividing Lands, etc. they were both Slain; the former by Scipio Nasica,
and the latter by Opimius the Cos. See Paterc. Book 2. chapter 2, 3, 6, 7. and
their Lives in Plut.
Sons, on the contrary, were not in their Lives-time approved of by good Men;
and since their Decease have been numbered among those, who were justly Slain.

CHAP. XIII.
What young Men should do to make 'emselves Known, and taken Notice of in the
World. Courage in War the first thing that sets off young Men. Another,
Temperance, Sobriety, etc. Keeping often Company with Wise and Good Men another
thing that very much Recommends them.

It Is the Business therefore of those, who desire to get true Glory, strictly
to discharge all the Duties of Justice: what those are we have shown already in
the former Book. I shall now proceed to lay down some Directions, His Design is
to show, What Methods a young Man, who is just coming into the World (supposing
he has laid a Foundation of Virtue) had best enter upon, that he may make
himself Known, and taken Notice of among his Citizens, that so his Virtues
may not lie hid and concealed. In order to which he distinguishes young Men,
into those who are remarkable already upon their Ancestors account, etc. and
those who are unknown and obscure. They must both take to some honorable Way
of Life, so as to signalize their Valor, Honesty, etc.
How a Man should do to appear before the World what he is in himself; though
that of Socrates is certainly the wisest that can possibly be given, To make
sure in the first place, that he really be in himself, that which he desires to
appear before the World. For when a young Gentleman is just come into the
Public, and is already known and remarkable in it; either by the Fame of his
Father's Actions (which I think, Son Marcus, may be your Case;) or by any other
Means or Accident whatever; the Eyes of all are immediately upon him, and every
one's enquiring after what he does, and how he steers his Life; and, as though he
were set in the public View, so none of his Actions, or so much as his Words
can be long kept in secret. But those, who at the beginning and entrance of
their Lives, by reason of their Meanness, are unknown to the World; as soon as
ever they come up to years of Discretion, should set before their Eyes the most
honorable Places, and bend all their Studies and honest Endeavors toward the
obtaining of 'em: which they ought to do with so much the more boldness,
because Men are so far from envying Youth, that they rather encourage and
forward 'em in their Progress. The Courage in the Wars, the first thing that
makes a young Man become Remarkable.
first thing then, that sets a young Man off, and recommends him to the
Public, is Courage and Bravery in Martial Affairs; by which a great many
amongst our Forefathers, who were scarce ever wholly disengaged from Wars, very
nobly distinguished and signalized themselves. But you, my Son, have had the
misfortune to light upon the times of a Civil War, wherein the That of Julius
Caesar.
one Party was wicked and detestable, and the That of Pompey the Great.
other unfortunate and unsuccessful: In which however, when Pompey had given
you the Command of Each Body of Foot consisting of two Legions, had two Troops
of Horse to support it, one on the right and the other on the left. Cicero's Son
commanded one of these, being called Wings.
one Wing, you got much Praise from that great Commander and all his Army, by
your riding, darting and patiently abiding all the Fatigues of War. But as for
this piece of your rising Glory, that, and the whole Constitution of the
Republic, are both of 'em fallen to the ground together. But I never designed
so to model this Discourse, as that it should be proper for none but you; but
as that it might be applicable to all Men in general: I shall go on therefore
to the remaining part of it. As then in all things the Functions of the Soul
are more noble and excellent than those of the Body; so the Effects of our
Reason and Understanding are greater, and more powerful as to this Particular,
than those of mere Strength. Of the Virtues that don't require Strength of
Body, Temperance, etc. most recommend a young Man.
Now of these there is none that can more recommend and adorn a young Man, than
Temperance and Sobriety, Duty and Respect to his natural Parents, Love and
Goodnature toward his Friends and Relations. A third thing that recommends
young Men is, keeping frequent Company with those that are Wise, and Lovers of
their Country.
Another good Way for young People to get Known, and have a good Reputation, is
often to attend on some Great and Wise Men, who are thought to design for the
Good of the Public: For when they are observed to be frequently with such, the
People are presently apt to imagine, that they will be like those Men, whom they
choose for their Patterns Thus P. Rutilius Rufus, a noble Roman, Cos. together
with Cn. Mallius. He was Scholar of Panaetius, [See Book 3. chap. 3.] a great
lover of Learning, and very well skilled in Philosophy and the Civil Laws.
Cicero in his first Book de Oratore calls him, Exemplum innocentiae: and Vell.
Paterc. Book 2. chap. 13. Virum non sui tantum seculi, sed omnis aevi optimum.
However he was accused by the Malice of some Men, and condemned of Extortion,
and accordingly Banished. Of which see the forecited places.
Pub. Rutilius, when he was young, had the general Vogue of a very honest Man,
and an able Lawyer, because he frequented the House of P. Mutius Scaevola, a
noble Roman, famous for his Knowledge of the Civil Laws, and withal an eloquent
Speaker; therefore called by our Author, Jurisperitorum disertissimus. He was
Cos. with Calpurnius Piso, about the Year of Rome 620, when Tib. Gracchus
raised his Sedition: and afterward made Pontifex maximus.
Mutius. As for Lucius Crassus, the famous Orator, whom he mentioned Book 1.
chap. 30.
Crassus, whilst he was very young, he was not beholden to any one else, but
obtained of himself everlasting Honor, by undertaking that Of C. Carbo a very
eloquent Man, who had been Tribune and Consul; whom Crassus, at the Age of
nineteen Years, (when others begin but to study Eloquence) publicly accused
and got condemned, so that he poisoned himself.
noble and glorious Accusation: when at that term of Years, wherein others are
commended if they begin but to Study and Exercise the Art; (as we have it
recorded of the famous Demosthenes) at that Age, I say, did Crassus make it
appear, that he could perform that laudably in the open Courts of Justice,
which he might without disparagement have been Studying at home.

CHAP. XIV.
Discourse of two sorts. Affability very powerful to obtain Men's Love, etc. But
Eloquence much more. Several Occasions of showing a Man's Eloquence. To Defend
more Laudable than to Accuse; but the latter in some cases Honorable enough.
Several Examples of brave Accusations. It Is lawful in some cases to Defend the
really Guilty; but never to Accuse the Innocent. The Judges and Advocates
Duties. Defending the Accused, especially honorable, when it is against some
powerful Oppressor.

BUt Having ended the last Chapter with Crassus's Accusation of Carbo, and the
Credit he got by it: this easily brings him to another thing, that recommends
young Men, and makes 'em be taken notice of, viz. Their Discourse. This he
divides into two sorts, and speaks upon 'em severally.
of Speaking or Discourse there are two sorts; the one proper only for common
Conversation, the other for Pleadings and Debates in the Public. Of these two
the latter, which is what we call Eloquence, is apparently most powerful
toward the procurement of Glory; Of the first sort of Discourse, viz. That of
common Conversation; and its Power.
but yet it is unexpressible of what Influence Courtesy and Affability are, in
the business of obtaining Men's Love and Affections. There are extant Letters of
Son of Amyntas, Father of Alexander the Great.
Philip to Alexander, A Soldier of Philip's, left Governor of Macedonia by
Alexander, when he invaded Persia: At last he Poisoned Alexander, by his Son
Cassander's means. See Quint. Curtius.
Antipater to Cassander, and A King of Macedonia, not Father, but only first
Guardian, and afterward Father-in-law to Philip, who was Son of Demetrius,
King of Macedonia and Epirus.
Antigonus to Philip; in which these most Wise and Prudent Princes (for such we
are told they really were) advise each his Son to speak kindly to the
Multitude, and try to win the Hearts of both them, and the Soldiers, by gentle
Words and familiar Appellations. The second sort of Discourse, viz. Eloquence:
of which he speaks pretty largely, and gives some Rules about Accusations,
relating to their Lawfulness, Frequency, etc.
But that other Discourse, which is proper for Pleadings and Harangues in
Public, does oftentimes more and transport the whole Multitude: For when a Man
speaks to 'em plausibly and fluently, they are presently rapt in a strange
Admiration* and cannot but conclude, as soon as ever they hear him, that he is
wiser and more knowing than the rest of Men are. But if there be Modesty joined
with the Power and Weight of his Eloquence, there is nothing in the World can
more raise their Admiration; and especially too, if he be a young Man that
speaks. Now the Subjects and Occasions, that stand in need of Eloquence, are
more than one; and several young Gentlemen, in our own Republic, have made
'emselves eminent in several of 'em: some, for Example, by speaking in the
Senate House, and others by pleading in the Courts of Justice. Of these Ways
the latter is most fruitful of Admiration, the Duties of which are only two,
Defending and Accusing. It Is much more commendable to Defend than to Accuse;
however this latter has oftentimes brought Men a considerable Reputation. We
mentioned the Example of Crassus but just now, Grandfather to Mark Anthony the
Triumvir; whom he brings in speaking in his de Oratore; a very eloquent Person,
as appears from the great Praises he there gives him. He was Cos. and Censor,
called by V. Patercul. Princeps Civitatis and Eloquentiae. He was afterward
killed by the Command of Marius and Cinna. The Person, by whose Accusation he
gained this Credit, was Cn. Papirius Carbo.
Marcus Antonius, when he was a young Man, did the same; and nothing got One of
the Interlocutors in his de Oratore, and there commended for an excellent
Speaker. He accused Norbanus, whom Anthony defended. [See de Orat. 2. 28.] He
was Tribune of the People, and joining with Marius against Sylla, was slain by
Sylla's Order. Vell. Paterc.
Sulpitius so much Credit for his Eloquence, as his brave Accusation of Caius
Norbanus, a very seditious and troublesome Citizen. This nevertheless must be
done but seldom, or indeed never, unless it be undertaken on the behalf of the
Republic, as 'twas by those three whom I just now mentioned: Or secondly, upon
the account of some Injury received, as by the two Lucius and Marcus, who
accused Servilius the Augur, because he before had accused their Father.
Luculluses; or else for the sake of those under our Protection, as was
formerly done by In his Orations against Verres.
my self for the Sicilians; and by I have followed the Correction of Langius,
Manut. etc. who would have it read Pro Sardis in or Contra Albutium Julius.
Vid. Ed. Graevii.
Julius for the Sardians against Marcus Albutius: in like manner He mentions
this Accusation in his Brutus, where he says Fusius got a great deal of Credit
by it. Anthony the famous Orator defended Aquilius, and to move the Judges to
Pity, pulled open his Clothes, and showed them his honorable Wounds in his
Breast. Aquilius was Cos. with Marius, An. Urb. Cond. 652. and accused of
Bribery or Extortion. Multis avaritiae criminibus, testimoniisque convictus,
Cic. Orat. pro Flac.
Fusius made his Industry be taken notice of, by his accusing of Aquilius. Once
then or so, it is allowable enough; but by no means often. However, should the
Commonwealth call a Man to it, he may do it oftener upon her account; it being
no Disgrace to be often employed in taking Vengeance on her Enemies. Yet, even
in this Case, it is still the best way to be Moderate and Cautious: For he shows
himself a Man of a very unnatural and merciless Temper (or rather indeed not a
Man at all, but a Savage Monster) who can endure to make it his Business and
Employment, to bring many People into danger of their Lives: Beside that it is
dangerous to the Person himself too; and not only so, but even scandalous and
shameful, to get himself the odious Name of An Accuser: which of late was the
Fortune He mentions both Father and Son in his de Oratore, the one for an
excellent Lawyer, who wrote several Books; and the Son for a loose Debauchee.
And in his Brutus he calls the Father an excellent Man, and very skilful of the
Law; but the Son a Disgrace to his Family, etc.
of Marcus Brutus, a Person that was sprung of a noble Family, and Son of that
Brutus, who was so particularly famed for his Skill in the Civil Laws. It Is
another Rule of Duty more especially to be taken notice of, and which cannot be
broken without manifest Villainy, Never to bring an innocent Person into Danger.
For since kind Nature has given us Eloquence, to serve for the Good and
Preservation of all Men; what can be more, either Wicked, or Inhuman, than to
turn it to the Ruin and Destruction of the Viz. Those that are innocent.
best of 'em? It Is our Duty then, never to accuse the Innocent: but we need
not, on the other hand, make any Conscience, of speaking sometimes in behalf of
the Guilty, provided he ben't wholly Villainous and Abominable. For this is no
more, than what the People desires, than what Custom authorizes, and the common
Bowels of Humanity incline us to. It Is the Duty of a Judge, to endeavor after
nothing but the real Truth; but an Advocate sometimes may speak up for that,
which carries no more than an outward Appearance of it: Which, I think, I
should hardly have ventured to say, (especially in Writing a Philosophical
Discourse) but that I perceive 'twas the Opinion of Panetius, a Person of as
great and considerable Authority, as any among the Stoics. But Defending is
that, which brings the largest Returns both of Glory and Interest; especially
if one happen to be Assistant to those, who seem Injured and Oppressed by the
Power of some Great One. This was my Fortune, as a great many times, so more
especially in my younger Days; when I stood in Defense of Roscius Amerinus,
against all the Greatness and Authority of Sylla: and you know the Oration,
which I then spoke, is It Is the second of his Orations as now printed.
at this time extant.

CHAP. XV.
Two sorts of Liberality. Better to help Men by our Labor and Industry, than
by our Money. Phillip's Reproof to his Son Alexander to this purpose. The
Inconveniences of the second sort of Liberality. Measures to be observed in it.

Chap. 6. he laid down six things, as Reasons or Motives of Men's being
profitable to us: Of these he rejected Fear, as a very dangerous and
inconvenient one. Good Will, Honor or Admiration, and Confidence, all which
three go to make up true Glory, he has already discoursed of, and shown by
what Virtues they are to be obtained. There remain therefore only two more,
viz. Hope, when Princes, etc. promise great Donations; and Hire, when Money is
given. Both these he comprehends here under Beneficence or Liberality, and
shows what sort of Donations are useful, and in what Measure, and in what
particular Cases, etc. And first he divides Beneficence into two forts, of
which he prefers the former for several Reasons.
HAving given this Account of the particular Duties, which young Men must do
for the attainment of Glory; we are next to discourse of Beneficence or
Liberality. Of this there are two sorts; the one of which consists in obliging
those, who need it by our Labor and Industry; the other, by our Money. The
latter of these two is much the more easy, especially for those who have
plentiful Fortunes; but the former, on the other hand, more glorious and
magnificent, and more suitable to the Character of a brave and exalted Soul.
For though there is a Good Will, and generous Readiness to oblige shown in either;
yet in the one Case we are beholden to the Chest, in the other to the Virtues
and Abilities of the Person. Besides, those sort of Kindnesses, which are done
by the Assistance of Money or the like, within a short space of time, draw
their own Fountain dry; so that this Liberality does, as 'twere, eat out its
own Bowels, and the more you have formerly obliged in this kind, the fewer
you will be able to oblige for the future. But now, on the other hand, he whose
Generosity shows it self in Labor, that is, in Virtue and being Active for
another's good, the more Men he has formerly shown himself kind to, the more
he will have ready to assist him ever after: beside that by the Custom of doing
good Offices, he gets a kind of Habit, and grows much more expert in the Art of
Obliging. Philip the Father of Alexander the Great, reproves his Son sharply in
one of his Epistles, for endeavoring to purchase the Good Will of the
Macedonians, by giving 'em Donations; In the name of Wonder, says he, what
reason could you have, to hope that those People would ever be faithful to you,
whom you your self had Corrupted with Money? What! do you design to be thought
not the King, but only the Steward and Purse-bearer of the Macedonians? That
Steward and Purse-bearer is admirably well said; because it is so scandalous a
Business for a Prince; and that calling Donations a Corrupting the People, is
better yet; for those that receive 'em are perpetually the worse for it, and
only made readier to expect the same again. Philip writ this to his Son alone,
but it may serve for a Direction to all Men in general I think we may take it
for granted therefore, that that sort of Bounty, which consists in doing
Kindnesses by our Labor and Industry, is more Virtuous and Creditable, can
oblige more People, and has more ways of doing it, than that other has. Not but
that sometimes a Man should give, nor is this sort of Bounty to be wholly
rejected; nay, one ought oftentimes to distribute some part of one's Money to
those, who are well-deserving Persons, and stand in need of such Assistance:
But still it must be done with The word Diligentia in this place properly
signifies, the making a Choice and Distinction between Persons.
great Prudence and Moderation. For some Men have squandered away whole Estates
by inconsiderately Giving; which is certainly the foolishest thing in the
World; for so a Man disables himself ever after, from doing of that, Viz.
Showing his Bounty and Generosity in Giving; because he has given away all
already.
which he takes most delight in. But the worst thing is this, that Profuseness
in Giving is usually accompanied by unjust Ways of Getting: For when by this
means Men have parted with what is their own, they are forced to lay hands upon
that which is another's. And by this means they miss what is their principal
Design, viz. The obtaining Men's Love, by their Bounty and Generosity; for they
get more Hatred from those whom they Injure, than Good Will from those whom
they hoped to Oblige by it. We ought not therefore so to Lock up our Riches, as
that even Liberality it self cannot open 'em; nor so to keep 'em open, as if
they were common to all Men in general: The best way is, always to observe a
due Medium, and give more or less in proportion to our Estates. In fine, we'd
do well to remember a Saying, which is now grown so common as to be a Proverb
amongst us, Bounty has got no Bottom: For how indeed is it possible, there
should ever be any end on it, when those, who are used to it, look to receive
again; and others, from seeing them, are taught to expect the same?

CHAP. XVI.
Two sorts of Givers. How Liberality and Prodigality differ. What the chief
Advantage of Riches. Public Shows to the People very foolish. Several Examples
of magnificent Aediles among the Romans.

Having given his Reasons, why the first sort of Beneficence, which consists in
obliging Men by our Labor and Industry, is preferable to the second, which
does it by Money; he begins in this Chap. to discourse of the latter, and
divides those that use it (the Largi as he speaks) into two sorts, the one
Predigal, and the other Liberal, in the proper and strict Sense of that Word.
He begins with the first, and discourses of it to Chap. 18. where he comes to
the second, the Liberal.
OF those who give largely, there are two sorts, the one of which are Prodigal,
and the other Liberal. The Prodigal are those who consume vast Sums in making
public Feasts, and distributing Portions of Meat to the People: or in
providing Gladiators to Fight with one another; or with wild Beasts in the
Theaters; or in making Preparation for other such Sports, and Recreations of
the Multitude: things that are forgotten in a very short time, if ever at all
thought on, after once they are over. But the Liberal are those, who dispose of
their Money in Redeeming poor Prisoners; in helping their Friends and
Acquaintance out of Debt; in assisting 'em toward the Marrying their Daughters;
or putting 'em into some Method of Making, or Increasing their Fortunes. I
admire therefore, what should come into The same that he mentioned Book 1. chapter
1. his Book here mentioned is now quite lost, but it is quoted by Diogenes
Laertius.
Theophrastus's Head, who in a Book of his, which he wrote concerning Riches,
amongst several noble and excellent things, has been guilty of one very
grievous Absurdity: for he runs out mightily in Commendation of Magnificence,
and giving public Shows or Donations to the People; and thinks the Supplying
of such Expenses as these, the very principal Fruit and Advantage of Riches:
But in my Opinion it is both a much greater, and more durable Advantage, to be
furnished with Money for these Acts of Bounty, of which I have just now been
giving some Instances. But Nothing of this here quoted is to be found in any of
the Works of Aristotle now extant; which makes the learned Maretus think, that
it ought to be read Aristo, who was a Stoic Philosopher, mentioned by Seneca
in his 29th Epist. and who (as we learn from Plutarch) wrote a Book upon the
Subject of Riches.
Aristotle, with much more Reason and Judgment, reproves us for not being
amazed at those Sums, which are daily thrown away to Caress the People: Should
any one (says he) when a City's besieged and reduced to great Streights, give a
large Sum of Money for a little Cup of Water; People would wonder and admire at
it strangely, and hardly be persuaded to believe it at first: but afterward
possibly, upon farther Consideration, would be ready to pardon it, because
'twas a Case of mere Exigence and Necessity: But yet we can see, without any
thing of Admiration, those vast Charges and infinite Expenses, which Men put
themselves to for no Reason in the World; neither for the Relief of any Want or
Necessity, nor yet for the Increase of their Glory and Dignity: And that
Pleasure of the Multitude which is principally aimed at, is of short
Continuance; and only tickles and sooths up the Meanest of the People, who
themselves will forget the Satisfaction they received, as soon as ever the Show
and Recreation's at an end. He adds moreover with a great deal of Reason, That
Children indeed and some trifling Women, together with Slaves, and the more
servile Part of those who are free, might perhaps take a Pleasure in such
foolish kind of Pastimes: but that Men of true Prudence, and those who judge of
things by the Rules of Reason, can by no means either commend or approve of
'em. I know it is a Custom in our Republic, and has been from the time of our
good Forefathers, to expect and demand, even from the soberest Citizens,
something that is splendid and magnificent in their An Office in Rome, which
required their taking care of the public Buildings, Temples, etc. as also the
public Games on any solemn Occasion, Plays, and the like. 'Twas usually
counted the first Step toward other Offices; into which the People chose Men,
according to their good or ill Behavior in this. Hence they usually spared no
Pains, Charges, etc. so as they could but please the Multitude.
Aedileships. Hence A noble Roman, sirnam'd Mucianus, because adopted into the
Family of the Crassi, from that of the Mucii. He was the first that gave the
People a Fight of Elephants in his Aedileship. He was afterward Cos. and
Pontifex Maximus.
Publius Crassus, who was sirnam'd The Wealthy, and really was such, in his
Office of Aedile was very magnificent and noble in his Entertainments: and The
famous Orator, mentioned before.
Lucius Crassus, a little while after, was full-out as generous, though Colleague
of The Augur, who married the Daughter of the Wise Laelius: mentioned by our
Author in the beginning of his De Amicitia.
Mucius the most moderate Man living. Next after these came Sirnam'd Pulcher;
he first had their Scenes in the Theater painted, whereas before they were bare
Boards.
Caius Claudius, the Son of Appius; and a great many others, viz. the The two
Brothers Luc. and Mar. who were both Aediles together, and made the Scenes to
turn round, and so often whereas before they were fixed and unalterable.
Luculli, The famouseft Roman Orator next to Cicero, and often his Opponent;
Consul six Years before him. See his Death excellently lamented at the
beginning of our Author's Brutus.
Hortensius and D. Junius Silanus, who was Consul next after Cicero, with L.
Licinius Muraena.
Silanus. But Sirnam'd Spinther, Cos. six Years after Cicero, whom he recalled
from his Banishment. To him is written the first Book of his Familiar Epistles.
He was the first that wore a Purple Gown double died, and made the Vela or
Curtains in the Theater of fine Cypress Linen.
Publius Lentulus, when I was Cos. exceeded all others that ever went before
him: who was afterward followed and copied by He built a noble Theater, with
vast Pillars of fine Marble, and was so profuse in his Aedileship, that Pliny
says, he utterly ruined the Roman Moderation, and that Sylla did more Harm by
encouraging his Prodigalities, than he did by all his Murders and Cruelties.
Scaurus. But of all these Shows, that have been given to please and entertain
the People, those of my Friend Pompey were the greatest and most magnificent,
He brought Lions, Panthers, and Elephants in vast numbers to Fight before the
People.
exhibited when he was the second time Consul. See the latter end of the next
Chap.
In all which Cases it is easy to see what is my Opinion.

CHAP. XVII.
Expenses to please the People allowable in some Cases; and what they are. Some
Examples of laudable ones. Upon what one may best lay out his Money in this
kind.

NO Man however should be so far moderate, as to draw upon himself the
Suspicion of Avarice. A Name of the Emilian Family. Mamercus Aemilius Lepidus
was Cos. with D. Brutus, An. U. C. 676. It Is uncertain whether he be meant
here, or not.
Mamercus, a Person of very great Riches, was put by the Consulship for no
other Reason, but because he refused to be Aedile first. When, and how far such
sorts of Giving are allowable.
If such things therefore are demanded by the People, and allowed of, though
perhaps not desired, by good Men, they must even be performed; but so as to
keep within the compass of your Estate, as I my self did. Nay, though they should
not be demanded by the People, yet they might wisely enough be presented 'em,
upon a Prospect of gaining some more considerable Advantage by it. Thus A
Surname of the Aurelian Family. This is Cn. Aufidius Orestes, so called because
he was adopted by Cn. Aufidius, [Cic. pro domo, chapter 18.] He was afterward Cos.
with Corn. Lentul^^ Sura, An. U. C. 682.
Orestes of late got a great deal of Credit, by Giving the People a Dinner in
the Streets, under the Notion of 'Twas a Custom among the Romans, upon any
great Undertaking, to Vow the Tenth of their Income to some God, to make him
prosper 'em in their Undertakings. Orestes, under Pretense of Paying this to
Hercules, gave a great deal of Victuals to all the People in public, that so
he might gain their Favor.
Paying his Tenths to Hercules. Nor did any one ever find fault with M. Seius,
for selling out Corn at an easy Rate, in the time of a very great Dearth and
Scarcity: for he got himself free from a great and inveterate Hatred of the
People, by a Cost, which (considering he was at that time Aedile) was neither
dishonest, nor yet extraordinary great: But of all my Friend Milo got the
greatest Honor, by purchasing Gladiators for the Defense of the Public, which
was wholly included in my single Safety, and thereby defeating the mad and
pernicious Attempts of Clodius was a vile and profligate Fellow, a great Enemy
to Cicero, whom in his Tribuneship he got banished, [See Cicero 's Life in
Plut.] but Milo, being Tribune the Year following, endeavored to bring back
Cicero again. Clodius violently opposed it; and getting together some of his
own Gang, and a parcel of Gladiators, fell upon the People as they assembled
about it, and show several. Milo, on the other side, bought Gladiators to
defend Cicero, and in him (as he says) the Republic it self. This is that
Milo, who afterward killed this Clodius; for which being accused, he was
defended by our Author in that incomparable Oration, which is still extant.
Clodius. Such Charges therefore are not to be shunned, when either they are
necessary or very advantageous: but even when they are so, we must still not
exceed the due Limits of Mediocrity. Luc. Philippus, the Son of Quintus, an
extraordinary ingenious and eminent Man, was wont, I confess, to be making his
Brags, That he got all the Honors the Republic could give him, without ever
spending one Farthing that way: An excellent Roman, Cos. with Cn. Octavius, the
Year of Rome 677; a good Man, and a Lover of Virtue, as well as Learning. He
was also a very good Orator, and is often mentioned by our Author. His Son was
that Curio, who was Tribune of the People, and the grand Incendiary in the
Civil War between Caesar and Pompey.
Caius Curio used to say the same: and even I my self have some reason to boast
upon this account: for considering the Greatness of the Honors I got, and that
too by every one of the Votes, and the very first Years I was capable of 'em,
(which is more then can be said by any one of those two whom I just now
mentioned) the Charge of my Aedileship was very inconsiderable. But the best
way of laying out Money in this kind, is to repair the City-walls, make Docks,
Havens, Aquaeducts and the like; things that may serve to the general Use, and
Advantage of the Public. For though things which are present, and given down
upon the nail, are more acceptable for a Time; yet the Memory of these will be
more lasting, and continued even down to Posterity. I forbear to speak much
against Theaters, Portico's, new Temples and the like, out of Respect to my old
Friend Pompey: but I find 'em not approved of by the famousest Men;
particularly not by Panaetius himself, whom I have very much followed, but not
quite translated in this Work. Neither are they liked by Demetrius Phalereus,
who blames Pericles, one of the greatest Men amongst all the Grecians, for
squandring away such Above two thousand Talents: This is that entrance to their
ancient Tower called Acropolis and (because under the Protection of Pallas)
Glaucopia, so often mentioned by ancient Writers. It had five noble Doors, was
covered with curious white Stone, and was five Years in building. See Meurs.
Cecropia.
a vast Sum of Money, upon that noble Structure at the entrance of the
Acropolis. But I have spoken sufficiently upon all this Subject, in those Books
I have written This Work was in ten Books: but it is now all lost except some
few Fragments, of which Scipio's Dream is much the largest, as making a good
part of the sixth Book.
concerning the Republic. To conclude therefore, all such Profusions are
generally speaking (I think) to be blamed; but yet at sometimes, and upon
certain Occasions, may be rendered necessary: However even then they must be
proportioned to one's Estate, and kept within the Limits of Reason and
Moderation.

CHAP. XVIII.
Liberality to be varied according to the Variety of Circumstances. The Merits
of the Receiver especially to be considered. What Acts of Bounty we should more
particularly exercise. Measures to be observed in Receiving Money. It Is
profitable sometimes to part with one's Right. When a Man uses an Estate as he
ought. Hospitality deservedly commended.

IN that He has done with the first sort of Giving largely, viz. Prodigality;
which he thinks generally blamable, but in some Cases excusable. He comes now
to the Second, Liberality, which is seen not only in Giving, but in Receiving
too. He begins with Giving; concerning which his first Rule is, That we should
consider the Circumstances of the Person we give to.
other sort of Giving, which proceeds from Liberality, we should not keep
constantly to one certain Measure; but vary according to the Variety of
Circumstances in the Persons that receive. His Case (for instance) who
struggles at present under some pressing Necessity, is different from his, who
is well enough to pass, and only desires to improve his Fortune. We should lend
our Assistance in the first place to those, who are under the Burden and Weight
of some Misfortune; unless they are such as deserve to be miserable: We should
be ready however to forward those likewise, who desire only our Helping-hand,
not so much to save 'em from being Unfortunate, as to raise 'em to some higher
Degrees of Fortune. Secondly, In Giving we should consider the Person's
Deserts: For Kindnesses bestowed upon those, who don't deserve, but will make
ill use of 'em, are indeed no Kindnesses. We should make honest Men the Objects
of our Bounty in this kind.
But here we must be careful to acquaint our selves thro'ly with the Fitness of
the Persons: for that of Ennius is admirably well said, I take good Actions,
when ill applied, to become ill ones. Now that which is given to a truly honest
and grateful Person, is paid us in the Acknowledgment he himself makes, and in
the Good Will that is got by it from the rest of the World. For nothing's more
pleasing to all Mankind, than Bounty bestowed without Rashness and
Precipitancy: and the generality of Men praise it so much the more, because the
Liberality of every great Man, is a common kind of Sanctuary for all that are
Needy. We should endeavor therefore, as far as we are able, to oblige many Men
by such Acts of Generosity, as may not be forgotten as soon as ever they are
over; but be remembered by the Children and Posterity of the Receivers, in such
manner as to lay a Necessity upon 'em of showing their Gratitude: I say
Necessity; for all People hate one, that takes no care of being grateful to his
Benefactors, and count him that is such Injurious to themselves; because he
discourages Bounty and Liberality, and so is a common Enemy to all the poorer
Sort. Besides, this way of Giving, whereby Captives are ransomed, and the
meaner Folk enriched, is useful and advantageous to the Public it self; and
has frequently been practiced by those of our Order, as appears very fully from
the Oration of Crassus. That other way therefore of expending Money, which
consists in making Shows for the Entertainment of the Vulgar, ought (I think)
by no means to be compared with this: The one comports well with the Character
of a great, and a prudent Person; the other of such as Cajole the People, and
look out for Pleasures to tickle the Fancies of the unstable Multitude. Having
given some Rules for the liberal Man's direction in Giving or Spending; he
proceeds in this place to do the same about Receiving; in which he would have
him not be too rigorous, but courteous, complying, etc.
And as it is a Duty to be generous in Giving, so is it not to be too rigorous
in Demanding; but in every Transaction of Buying, Selling, Letting and Hiring,
to behave our selves toward our Neighbors and Chapmen, with all the Fairness
and Courtesy imaginable; to let go something of our strict and just Rights,
upon certain Occasions; to avoid all Suits and Contentions at Law, as far as
can reasonably and fairly be expected; perhaps I might add, And even something
farther; for in several Cases to deliver up one's Right, is not only generous,
but It Is no small part of Prudence, to know when to lose; it happening sometimes,
and upon some Occasions, that it is the best way to act against one's present
Interest, and by omitting a less Advantage, to gain a greater afterward.
Pecuniam in loco negligere, says Terence, maximum interdum est lucrum.
advantageous too. However a Man should have a decent Regard to his Estate and
Fortune; for it is not over-reputable to let that be ruined by his Easiness and
Neglect; and yet on the other hand should carry himself so, as to avoid all
Suspicion of a sordid, mean or avaritious Temper. For it is then a Man uses his
Money as he ought to do, when he shows himself liberal, without ruining his
Fortune. One particular sort of Bounty, which he thinks fit just to bring in
here, is Hospitality. This he recommends as a thing handsome, and becoming in
any City, and advantageous to get a Man Interest, and make him known among
Strangers.
Theophrastus commends, and with very good Reason, another sort of Bounty,
which we call Hospitality: For there is nothing, in my mind, more handsome and
becoming, than constantly to have the Houses of Noble Men open, and ready to
entertain all Strangers of Fashion; and it is no small Credit and Reputation to
the Public, that Strangers never fail to meet with that sort of Bounty, and
Liberality in our City. Beside that there is nothing can be more useful for
those, who design by honest Means to get an Interest in the World, than to
recommend themselves to the Esteem and Good-liking of foreign Nations, by the
help of those People whom they thus entertain. Theophrastus tells us of The Son
of Miltiades, a famous Athenian General, who beat their Enemies both at Sea and
Land the same Day: He was particularly famed for his Bounty and Hospitality.
See his Life in Plut. and Corn. Nep.
Cimon the Athenian, that he showed his Hospitality even to all his Brethren of
the There were one hundred seventy four distinct Tribes or Peoples in Attica,
one of which was called the Lacian, and the Men who were of it, Laciadae. Cimon
was one of these, and kept constantly open House for all those of his Tribe.
See Meursius de Pop. Attic.
Lacian Tribe; and not only made it his own constant Custom, but also commanded
his Bailiffs the same, to keep open House for any one of the Laciadae, that
should pass that way.

CHAP. XIX.
The Liberality which consists in doing good Offices for others: Two sorts of
it. What sorts of Study afford most Opportunities of it. The Ruin of Civil Law
and Eloquence. All Men may do Kindnesses of this Nature if they please. We
should be careful of not Offending some, by Obliging others.

He begins here with the second, and as he thinks [See Chap. 15.] much better
sort of Beneficence, which consists in doing Kindnesses for others by our
Labor and Industry. These Kindnesses may be either done to particular Persons,
or to the Republic in general: and first of the former.
I Come now to speak of that other sort of Bounty, which consists not in
Giving, but in Laboring for another's Good; and extends it self as to the
Republic in general, so to each Member of the City in particular. The first
thing that puts a Man in a Capacity of serving a great many People, is the
Civil Laws; the Knowledge of which he highly commends.
The Civil Law principally gives us Opportunities of exercising this: For
there is nothing more proper to get a Man Interest and Credit in the World, than
the Managing the Lawsuits of a great many Persons, the assisting 'em with his
Advice, and doing for 'em all that he can by his Knowledge, and Skill in that
Learning. And therefore I admire the Wisdom of our Ancestors, as for several
Reasons, so particularly for this, that the Knowledge and Interpretation of
their excellent Civil Law, was counted a matter of the highest Credit and
Reputation among them. This the greatest Men have kept constantly among
themselves, till this late sad Disorder and Confusion of every thing: But now
the Glory of this sort of Learning, together with all Honors and Degrees of
Dignity, is utterly ruined and fallen to just Nothing. And to make the matter
still so much the worse; all this has happened in the Days of He means Ser.
Sulpitius, one of the most eminent among the Romans for his Skill in the Civil
Laws.
One, who, as he equaled in Dignity all that have gone before him, so was he
far above 'em in the Knowledge of the Laws. This Study then is approved of by
most People, and puts it in one's power to assist a great many and oblige them
by Kindnesses. A second thing which enables Men to assist others this way, is
Eloquence.
There Is another sort of Knowledge near related to this, the Art, I mean, of
Persuasive Speaking, which carries more Majesty and Ornament along with it, and
is more pleasing and liked of, by the generality of Men. For what is there in
the World more extraordinary than Eloquence, whether we consider the Admiration
of its Hearers, the Reliance of those who stand in need of its Assistance, or
the Good Will procured by it from those whom it defends? Our Ancestors
therefore held this among the chief of their Civil Professions. Any one then
must oblige a great many, and have a large number of Clients and Dependants,
who is able to speak well, and willing to take pains, and (as There was even a
Law among the Romans, entitled, Cincia de donis and muneribus, forbidding to
take Money, etc. for Defending another's Cause.
'twas the Custom of our good Forefathers) is ready to undertake many Men's
Causes, without ever expecting to be rewarded for his Trouble. And here I have
a fair Opportunity offered me, to bemoan the great Downfall, that I may not say
the utter Extinction of Eloquence; but that I am afraid I shall seem to
complain for my own sake only. However I cannot but with some Concern take
notice, what a great many excellent Orators we have lost; how few there are
arising, whom we can expect any thing from; and how much fewer who are able to
perform and do any thing; and for all that, how many, who are brim full of
Impudence and vain Presumption. A third Way of doing People Kindnesses is, if
we aren't our selves able to manage their Causes, by recommending 'em to the
Judges, to those that are skilled in Law, etc.
Now it is not for all, nor indeed very many, to be either skilful Lawyers, or
eloquent Pleaders: However there is no one, if he would make it his Business, but
may do friendly Offices to several People; either by begging some Kindnesses
for 'em; or by recommending their Cases to the Judges and Officers; or by being
Industrious in promoting their Interests; or lastly, by using his Endeavors
with those, who either are able Lawyers, or eloquent Orators: which whoever
shall do, will make a great many be beholden to him, and get himself a general
Interest in the World. He puts in a Caution or two about these Rules, viz. That
whilst we oblige one, we take care not to disoblige others, etc.
There is one thing however I would advertise him of, (though I think it is so
obvious, that I hardly need do it) which is to have a care of offending some,
whilst he is endeavoring to be serviceable to others. For it often comes to
pass, that such do a Diskindness, either to those whom they ought to have
obliged; or to those who are able to make 'em suffer for it afterward: Which
shows Carelessness and Negligence, if done undesignedly; but if designedly,
Rashness and Imprudence. And if it should happen that we are forced, though
unwillingly, to disoblige any Person, we must endeavor to excuse it as well as
we are able; by showing the Necessity we lay under of doing so, and how 'twas
utterly impossible for us to avoid it: and must be careful and industrious to
repair the Injury, by making some reasonable Amends for it afterward.

CHAP. XX.
Men are readier to assist one that is Wealthy and Great than one that is Poor
and Honest. Reasons why they ought to do the contrary. The Evil Effects of Men's
Love of Riches. Never to do an Injury to one, for the sake of Obliging another.

NOw Having shown what those things are, which put us into a Capacity of
Helping others, viz. Eloquence, Civil Law, etc. and laid down a Rule or two
for our Direction in doing it; he proceeds to enquire, on whom we ought
especially to bestow our Kindnesses; where he puts the Question, Whether it is
better to assist a Rich and Great, or a Poor and Honest Man? and argues for the
latter; because a poor Man will be more grateful, etc.
whenever we do a Kindness or Friendly Office to another, we usually regard one
of these two Things, viz. Either the Honesty, or the Greatness of the Person.
It Is easily said, and every one's ready enough to profess, That in placing
their Favors, they have much more Respect to the Merits of the Person, than to
his Fortune in the World. This is very fairly and honestly spoken: but yet I Would
be glad to be shown that Man, who is more willing to Help one that is Honest and
Poor, than to get the Favor of one that is Wealthy and Powerful. For who is
not readiest to be serviceable to those, from whom he expects the most speedy
Requital? But People would do well to consider more thoroughly the Natures of
things: For though a poor Man, it is true, cannot make a Requital, yet if he is
honest, he will acknowledge the Obligation: And 'twas no unhandsom Saying,
whoever was the Author of it, That in Case of a Debt, the Man who acknowledges
it does not thereby pay it; and the Man who pays it does no longer acknowledge
it: But in Case of an Obligation, both he who returns it still continues to
acknowledge it, and he who acknowledges it thereby sufficiently returns it. But
now those, on the contrary, who value themselves upon their Riches, Honors and
flourishing Condition, will scorn to acknowledge they are obliged for any
Kindness; nay, will think they vouchsafe you a signal Favor, even whilst you
are doing 'em some considerable Service; and will always be jealous and
suspicious over you, as though you demanded and expected something from 'em: But
to have it ever said they were defended by you, or to be numbered among your
Dependants or Clients, is as insupportable to 'em as even Death it self.
Whereas your mean Person, when any one does him a friendly Office, considers
'twas done out of Respect to himself, and not out of Regard to his Fortune or
Condition; and endeavors to show himself sensible of the Obligation, not to
him only who has done him the Kindness, but (as standing in need of some other
Men's Assistance) to those others also, from whom he hopes for the like. And if
he should chance to do another any Service, he does not endeavor to cry up and
magnify it, but rather to lessen it as much as he is able. Another thing worth
the considering is this, That if you defend one that is wealthy and powerful,
the Obligation remains in the Person himself, or perhaps just his Children; but
if you protect one that is needy and forsaken, provided withal he be virtuous
and modest, all the lower sort of People immediately that aren't wicked (which
is no inconsiderable part of the Multitude) will look upon you as their
Safeguard and Protection. Upon all which Accounts I am wholly of Opinion, That
a Kindness is better bestowed upon an honest, than it is upon a wealthy and
fortunate Person. We should endeavor, it is true, to the utmost of our power,
to be serviceable to all Men of whatsoever Condition: But if their should
happen a Competition between 'em, I am clearly for following Themistocles's
Advice, who being once asked, How he would Marry his Daughter, whether to one that
was Poor, but Honest; or to one that was Rich, but of an ill Reputation? made
Answer, I Would rather have a Man without an Estate, than have an Estate without a
Man. But the mighty Respect, which is paid to Riches, has wholly depraved and
corrupted our Manners. And yet what does it signify to any one of us, that
such or such a Person has got a plentiful Fortune? Perhaps it may be useful to
him that has it; though not so neither always: But allowing it to be so: Suppose
he has got the World more at his Command; yet how (I Would fain know) is he ever
the honester for it? He gives this by way of Caution, though he would not have a
Man assisted for being Rich, he would not have his Riches be an hindrance to
him neither, provided he be otherwise an honest and good Man.
But and if a Man be Honest, as well as Wealthy, though I would not have him
helped for the sake of his Riches, yet I would not have him hindered upon their
account neither: But in every case have it fairly considered, not how Wealthy
and Great, but how Good and Deserving a Person he is. The last Rule to be
observed in this sort of Liberality.
I shall conclude this Head with only one Rule more, which is, Never for the
sake of doing any one a Kindness, to venture upon that which is unjust in it
self, or injurious to a third Person. For no Credit or Esteem can be solid and
durable, unless built upon the Foundations of Justice and Honesty; without
which nothing can be virtuous or commendable.

CHAP. XXI.
Two sorts of that Bounty, which relates to the Public. Nothing to be done for
the sake of the Members in particular, which may any ways damage the Public in
general. The first Duty of the Governors of a State, to secure each Particular
in the Possession of his own. Levelling all Estates very destructive. Why Men
first built Cities. Not to burden the People with Taxes, a second Duty. A
third, To furnish the People with Necessaries. Covetousness in a Governor
pernicious to any State. The unhappy Effects of it in the Roman Empire.

Chap. 19. He divided that Beneficence, which consists in doing Kindnesses by
our Labor, etc. into two Parts: He has done with the former, which respects
Particulars, and comes now to the latter, which respects the State in general.
This he again divides into two sorts, some terminating in the State, considered
abstractedly by it self; others in all the particular Members of it. About the
latter he immediately gives us one Direction, never to do any thing for the
sake of Particulars, which may any ways be prejudicial to the Whole in general.
Under the former he comprehends the Duties of those that are Governors, and
principal Magistrates in the Republic: concerning which he discourses very
largely.
HAving thus discoursed of the one sort of Kindnesses, which are done to
particular Members of the City; we are now in the next place to speak of those
others, which are done to them all, and to the Commonwealth in general. Now
these again are of two sorts, The one more immediately relating to the
Community; the other reaching down to each Member in particular; which latter,
of the two is more grateful and acceptable. We should show our Beneficence, as
far as we are able, in both these Ways; but especially in this latter, which
relates to each one of the particular Members: In which however one Caution
must be observed, That nothing be done in behalf of Particulars, but that which
is useful, or at least not prejudicial, to the Commonwealth in general. See chapter
12. of this Book.
C. Gracchus, for Instance, made a large Distribution of Corn to the People;
and the Effect of it was, that the Treasury was exhausted by it. He was Tribune
of the People together with Tib. Gracchus, and resisted him very much, in his
pernicious Attempts, and was therefore by him deprived of his Office. What
Action of his our Author here means is uncertain.
Marcus Octavius made one that was moderate, which was a Kindness to the
Multitude, and no ways a Burden or Grievance to the State; and accordingly
both the Public, and all the Members of the City received Benefit from it. The
first Duty of those, who are Governors of a State, to keep every Man in the
peaceful Possession of what is his own.
But the principal thing for a Governor to take care of, is, That each
Individual be kept in the quiet Possession of his own, and That private Men
ben't Which would have been done by the two Gracchi, by their equal
Distribution of Lands.
dispossessed of their Lands, under a Pretense of taking Care of the Public.
For Nothing's more destructive to the Peace of any Kingdom, than to bring in a
new Distribution of Estates, which was attempted by Luc. Marcius Philippus, See
chapter 30. Book 3.
Philip, in the Time of his Tribuneship: However he quickly gave over his
Design, and did not persist stubbornly in Defense of it, as soon as he found it
was so vigorously opposed: But in his public Speeches and Harangues to the
People, among a great many things to obtain their Favor, he was heard to say
one of very dangerous Consequence, That the whole City had not Two Thousand Men
in it, that were Masters of Estates: A very pernicious and desperate Saying,
directly tending to bring all things to a Level; which is the greatest
Misfortune that can befall any People. For to what end were Cities and
Commonwealths established, but that every one might be safer and securer, in
the Enjoyment of his own? For though Men by Nature are sociable Creatures, yet
'twas the Desire of Preserving what they had, that first put 'em upon building
of Cities for a Refuge. A second Duty of a good Governor, Not to burden, etc.
It Is a Second Duty of the Governors of a State, to see that the People ben't
forced to pay Taxes; as they often were in our Forefathers time, partly
because they were always in War, and partly by reason of the Lowness of the
Treasury. This is an Inconvenience, which ought, as far as possible, to be
provided against beforehand: But if any State should be under such
Circumstances, as that it must be forced to make use of this Expedient, (I say
any State, because I Am unwilling to suppose so unhappy a thing of our own;
beside that I speak here of all of 'em in general) but if, I say, any State
should be brought to such a Pinch, due Care must be taken to let the People
know, That it is absolutely necessary as Affairs now stand, and that otherwise
they must needs be inevitably ruined. To provide Necessaries for the Support of
the People, a third Duty of a Governor.
Again, It Is yet further required of those Men, who Govern and Preside in a
Commonwealth, to see that it be furnished with all the Conveniences and
Necessaries of Life. To tell what these are, and how to be provided, would be
altogether needless in this place, since it is sufficiently known already; I
only thought fit just to touch upon it by the Bye. A fourth Duty is, To be free
from even any Suspicion of Avarice.
But in all kinds of Business, and managing Affairs of a public Nature,
there is nothing more necessary, than always to keep one's self clear and
untainted, so as not to lie under the least suspicion of Avarice. I could
heartily wish, (said He was the Samnite General, when the Peace was made with
them at the Passage of Caudium, to the great Disgrace and Shame of the Romans.
See Livy, Book 9. chap. 1.
Caius Pontius the Samnite) that Fortune had reserved me to those Times, and
that it had been my fate to be then born, whenever the Romans shall begin to
take Bribes; I should quickly have put an end to their flourishing Empire.
Truly he must have waited a pretty many Ages; for that is a kind of Evil, which
but lately has begun to infest this Republic. If Pontius therefore were so
great a Man as he pretended to be, I am very well satisfied with his being born
when he was; and not in those times, which have lately happened. It Is not yet
an Hundred and Ten Years ago, since L. Calpurnius Piso, the first of those who
were sirnam'd Frugi, Tribune of the People when Censorinus and Manilius were
Consuls, about An. U. C. 603, Author of the Lex Calpurnia de pecuni^s
repetundis.
Lucius Piso got a Law to be enacted against the Corruption of Magistrates,
whereas there had never been any one before. But since that time there have
been so Junia, Servilia, Acilia, etc. vide Calv. de Leg.
many Laws, and still every new one more severe than the former; so many
Persons accused and condemned; such He means that which was called the Social
War, of which he only brings one, and that a very remote Cause. Livius Drusus,
Tribune of the People, amongst several Laws about the Freedom of all Italy,
proposed that all those, who were suspected of Bribery, should be made to
answer for it. Hereupon the Senators, who were pretty Guilty, misliking this
one, opposed and hindered all his other Laws. This made the Italian Nations, who
thought to have been made Free of Rome, but by this Means were frustrated, rise
up in Arms against the Romans, upon which ensued the Social or Italian War; of
which see the Historians.
a War stirred up in the Bowels of Italy, by those who were afraid of being
brought to Punishment; such shameful Extortion and Pillaging our Allies, by
those who have defied all Laws and Courts of Justice; that we are rather
beholden to the Weakness of others, than our own Strength or Virtues, that we
are not utterly ruined.

CHAP. XXII.
Examples of Contempt of Money among the ancient Romans. The Danger, etc. of
the opposite Vice. The Honor gotten by this Virtue. The Danger, Folly, etc. of
the Project of Levelling Estates.

PAnaetius highly commends The second Scipio of that Name, who razed Carthage
and Namantia; and was Scholar to Panaetius.
Africanus, for his being incorrupt as to the matter of Money. It Is a Virtue
that very well deserved his Commendation: but I think there were others in that
great Person, which deserved it much more: to be untainted with Money being not
so properly a Virtue of that Man, as of those Times in general. He conquered
Perseus King of Macedonia, and led him in Triumph; thereby putting an End to
the second Macedonian War, and that Empire together. See his Life in Plut.
Paulus Aemilius had all the Wealth of Macedonia in his Power, which amounted
to almost an infinite Value: so that he brought such a Sum into the Treasury,
as that the single Booty of that one General superseded the Necessity of all
Taxes for the future: and yet he brought nothing into his own House, but the
eternal Memory of his Name and Achievements. The same that was just now
mentioned. He was Son of Paullus, but adopted by Scipio.
Africanus followed the Example of his Father, and returned nothing richer from
the Overthrow of Carthage. So Mummius, who was afterward his Partner in the
Censorship; did he make himself ever a farthing the Wealthier, by razing
Corinth, which was razed by Mummius the same Year that Carthage was by Scipio.
See Paterc. Book 1. chap. 12. where the two Generals are very handsomely
compared together.
one of the wealthiest Cities in the World? No; he rather chose to make Italy
fine with the Spoils of his Enemies, than his own House; though in my Opinion the
Fineness of Italy reflects a bright Luster upon his own House too. There is no
Vice then (that I may return to the Subject, from which I have digress'd) more
detestable than Avarice; more especially in Great Men, and such as bear Sway in
the Government of a State. For it is not only mean for a Man to make a Prey and
Advantage of the Commonwealth, but even impious and abominable. That Oracle
therefore of the Pythian Apollo's, That nothing but Avarice should be the Ruin
of Sparta, does not seem designed for the Lacedaemonians only, but for every
wealthy and flourishing Nation. He has told us by Precept, and from the
Examples of the greatest Men, That Governors of a State should be free from
Covetousness, and regardless of Money. Here he adds, That nothing so much
recommends 'em to the Good-liking of the People as that Virtue: Which brings
him to discourse of a foolish Method, that some Men have taken to this purpose,
viz. A Design of bringing all Estates to an Equality, and making all Creditors
remit their Debts; which he shows to be unsafe, unreasonable, etc.
And as Avarice is thus very destructive to a State; so to appear Upright and
Regardless of Money, is the certainest Method those in Power can make use of,
for procuring the Love and Good-liking of the People. But those, who, designing
to curry their Favor, attempt new Laws about the Levelling Estates, so as to
force the right Owners from their lawful Possessions; or propose to make
Creditors remit all the Debts, which in Justice are due to 'em; First, He shows
it is destructive to a State, by ruining Concord and Justice, which are the
Supports of it.
plainly undermine the two principal Pillars and Supports of the Government: In
the first place, Concord and Unity among the Citizens, which can never be kept
up, whilst some are deprived of what is justly their Due, and others discharged
from the necessity of Payment. Secondly, Justice, which immediately must sink
into Ruins and Nothing, if Men cannot be secured in the Possession of what is
their own: For that (as we before remark d) is the chief End and Aim of Men's
gathering into Societies, and building of Cities, that each one might freely
enjoy what is his Right, without any danger or fear of being deprived on it.
Secondly, It Is foolish; for it does not procure 'em that Good-liking of the
People, which they thought to get by it.
Beside this, the Authors of these pernicious Designs never get that Good Will,
which they propose, from their Citizens: For, as for those Men, who are Losers
by the Bargain, it is certain that they will be their Enemies for it; and those,
who are Gainers, will besure to pretend that they never desired it: especially
in the Business of having Debts forgiven; there every one dissembles how glad
he is of it, for fear it should be thought that he was not able to pay 'em. But
those Men, to whom such Designs are prejudicial, will hardly forget 'em, but
show a perpetual Grudge and Resentment. And though the number of those, who are
thus wickedly Befriended, be greater than of those, who are injuriously Robbed;
yet it does not follow, that therefore they are more Powerful: for it is not the
Number, but the Quality of the Persons, that must carry it in this Case.
Thirdly, It Is very unjust and unreasonable.
Besides, what Reason or Equity is there, when Estates have been held for a
great many Years, or perhaps Ages, that the rightful Owners should be thrust
out from 'em, and others, that never had any, should come and possess them?

CHAP. XXIII.
Several Examples of the unhappy Effects of taking away Men's Estates, in order
to bring things to a Level. The wise Conduct of Aratus the Sicyonian in doing
the contrary. What a Magistrate's Duty in such Cases is.

FOr such kind of partial, injurious Proceedings, Having shown how pernicious,
foolish, etc. these Designs are; he gives here some Examples of their unhappy
Effects; and of the good ones of the contrary Practice.
the Spartans once banished Not their famous General Lysander, Son of
Aristarclytus, who beat the Athenians, etc. but another, Son of one Olbis, made
Ephore by King Agis, and his Assistant in his Designs.
Lysander, one of their The Word signifies Inspectors or Overseers: They were
Officers among the Spartans, usually five in number, much like the Tribunes in
Rome, who restrained the Power and Greatness of their Kings; so that Appeals
were allowed from the Kings to them, as in Rome from the Consuls to the
Tribunes.
Ephori; and put to Death The third King of Sparta of that Name, Son of
Eudamidas, and sixth in Descent from the famous Agesilaus: who for endeavoring
to alter the then present State of things, and bring in some obsolete Laws of
Lycurgus, about dividing Lands into equal Portions, etc. was murdered by the
contrary Faction. See his Life and Death in Plut.
Agis their King for the same Reason: an Action unheard of before in that City.
This was succeeded by such grievous Contentions and Discords in the State, as
that Tyranny and Oppression got the upper-hand amongst 'em; the Nobles were
banished from their Native Country; and the best constituted Republic upon the
face of the Earth was utterly dissolved, and brought into Confusion. Nor did
this Mischief end with the Spartans only, but, like a Contagion, spreading it
self farther, involved all Greece in the same Miseries and Calamities. Pray
what was it ruined our own two Gracchi, Sons of the famous Tiberius Gracchus,
and Grandsons of The Elder, whose Daughter Cornelia was married to Sempronius
Gracchus, and had those two Sons by him.
Africanus, but only these Controversies about Levelling Estates? A noble Man
of Sicyon, a City in Peloponnesus, Son of one Clinias: His Father being killed
by the treachery of Abantidas, he was forced to fly to Argos at six Years old.
Afterward, at about the Age of Twenty, he took the City again by Surprise,
made Nicocles the then Tyrant fly, and settled Peace and Unity amongst his
Citizens. His Life is written by Plut.
Aratus the Sicyonian is deservedly commended as much on the other hand: He,
when his County, for fifty Years together, had been greatly oppressed and
overrun by Tyrants, went secretly one Night from Argos to Sicyon, and made
himself Master of the City by Surpize; and unexpectedly falling upon Nicocles
the then Tyrant, he put him to flight. This being done, he recalled six Hundred
of the wealthiest Citizens, who had all been formerly banished by the Tyrants,
and by this his arrival delivered the City from Slavery and Oppression. But he
afterward found 'twould be a great deal of trouble, to settle the Business of
their Estates and Possessions; for he thought on the one hand 'twas very
unreasonable, that those Men, whom he had restored, should Want, whilst others
enjoyed what in Equity was theirs: and yet it seemed hard on the other side, that
Men should be thrust out of those Possessions, which now they had held for
these fifty Years: if more especially 'twere withal considered, That it could
not but happen in so long a time, that they must have gone, a great part of
'em, from one to another, either by Inheritance, Purchase, Dowry, or the like;
and therefore were possessed by the present Incumbents, without their having
injured the rightful Proprietors. Upon these Considerations he judged it
necessary, both to bear with the latter in the Enjoyment of what they had, and
yet to Satisfy the former, whom it justly belonged to. And finding a large Sum
of Money was requisite, to settle this Business as it ought to be; he told 'em
he had occasions to go to The capital City of Egypt, and Seat of their Kings,
built by Alexander the Great, in his return from visiting the Temple of Jupiter
Hammon.
Alexandria, and ordered they should not concern 'emselves about it, till his
return. He goes accordingly with all possible speed to his old Friend Sirnam'd
Philadelphus, the Founder of the famous Alexandrian Library. He was Son of that
Ptolomy, who was Alexander the Great's Captain, and who got Egypt to himself
after the Death of that Prince.
Ptolomy, who at that time was reigning in Alexandria, being second King after
the Founding of that City. Having told him his Design of settling Liberty in
his Country, and the Reasons that put him upon undertaking of that Voyage, he
quickly obtained of that wealthy Prince, to supply him with a quantity of Money
for his Assistance. With this he immediately returns to Sicyon, and choosing
out fifteen of the principal Citizens, to help him with their Counsel upon this
occasion; he heard both the Causes of those who possessed what had belonged to
others, and of those who had lost what had been formerly their own. At last he
so managed the whole Business, as that, the Estates being set at their true
Values, Viz. Of the present Incumbents, who possessed those Lands, which
originally belonged to others.
some were persuaded to part with what they had, and take an Equivalent in
Money for it: and Viz. Of those who had been outed of their Lands by the
Tyrants.
others to neglect the Recovery of their own, and rest themselves content with
being paid its full Value. By this means the Controversy was fairly
determined, and all went Home satisfied without Grudging or Complaining. Here
was a great and extraordinary Man now! Here was one, that deserved to have been
born in our Republic! This is the true way of Dealing with Citizens; and not
(as has been practiced amongst us First under Sylla the Dictator, and
afterward under Caesar.
twice) to make sale of their Goods in the public Markets, and have them cried
by the Voice of the Common Crier. But this famous Grecian (as was the Duty of a
wise and extraordinary Person) thought it became him to provide alike for all:
And indeed every Magistrate, who proceeds upon Principles of Reason and
Prudence, will always take care not to make any Difference between the
Interests of his People; but will govern them all by the same Rule and Standard
of Justice and Equity. Here Is one Man shall dwell in what belongs to another:
What Reason is there, I beseech you, for this; that when I have bought, built,
repaired, and laid out a great deal of Money, another should come and enjoy all
the Fruits of it, in spite of my Teeth? Is not this plainly to take away from
one that which justly belongs to him, and give to another what he has nothing
of Right to? As for the Project of Forgiving Debts, I can see no Reason in the
World for it, unless it be Reason, that another should buy Land with my Money,
and that he should have the Land, but I never have my Money.

CHAP. XXIV.
Care should be taken to prevent Peoples running too much into Debt. Faith the
Cement of Public Society. Cicero 's Conduct in his Consulship about the matter
of Debts. The Duties of a good Magistrate. How one's Health and Estate are to
be taken care of.

Since the Design of making Creditors Forgive all Debts, is so very pernicious,
etc. it is one great Business of a good Governor, to prevent Peoples running
too much into Debt; which may be done several Ways.
CAre ought therefore to be taken beforehand (which it is easy to do by a
great many ways) to keep People from running so much into Debt, as may bring
any Damage or Inconvenience to the Public: and not, when they are in, to make
the Creditors lose what is their own, and let the Debtors gain what in Justice
is another's: For nothing so cements, and holds together in Union all the parts
of a Society, as Faith or Credit; which can never be kept up, unless Men are
under some force and necessity of honestly Paying what they owe to one another.
This Design of having Debtors excused from Payment, In the Conspiracy of
Catiline. See chap. 22. Book 1.
was never attempted with greater eagerness, than whilst I was Consul: Men of
all Ranks and Degrees in the State, took up Arms and formed Camps for the
bringing it about; whose Endeavors I resisted with so much vigor, as that the
Republic was quickly delivered from so pernicious an Evil. There never were
known greater Debts in the City, nor ever more easily and faithfully paid: and
pray what was the Reason of all this? Why because when their Hopes of
Defrauding were cut off, they found 'emselves under a Necessity of Payment.
It Is true there is He means Caesar, who being over head and ears in Debt, was
suspected in Catiline's time, to favor his wicked Designs underhand; and so
may be said to have been conquered by Cicero, when he ruined Catiline.
one, who has since been a Conqueror, (though then he was conquered by my
Vigilance) that has He made the Creditors lose not all, but only a fourth part
of their Due.
found out Means to effect these Designs, at a time when they would bring him
Because he was then got free from Debt by other Ways; and so had no occasion to
make use of this, upon his own Account.
no manner of Advantage; but such an Inclination had that Man to Villainy, that
the bare Doing of it was a Pleasure to him, without any other Invitation in the
World. The Sum then of what has been said is this, That such as design for the
good of the Republic, must be sure to avoid this sort of Liberality, which
takes away from one what it gives to another; and must constantly make it their
principal Care, to uphold each Member in his proper Rights, according to the
Principles of Justice and Equity; so as neither to suffer the poorer sort of
People to be wronged or oppressed, by reason of their Poverty; nor the richer
to be hindered from keeping or demanding what is justly their own, by the Envy of
the others: and in fine must apply their most earnest Endeavors, whether in
War or Peace, to increase the Power, and enlarge the Bounds and Revenues of the
Republic. These are the Duties and Exercises of great Men: These are the
things which were practiced by our Ancestors; and whoever goes on to perform
the same, will not only bring great Advantage to the Republic, but gain a
mighty Interest and Reputation to himself. He has now done with his first Head
proposed in this Book, viz. Whether an Action be profitable or not? In which,
after having shown, That Men are able to bring the most Profit to us, he gives
some Directions about how we should engage Men to be of our side, and so do us
all the Service that lies in their Power. He should now proceed to the second
Head proposed to be the Subject of this Book; but because Antipater thought the
former not perfect, because two material things were omitted in it, viz. The
Care of our Health, and Estate; he therefore; before he leaves this Head, adds
a word or two about each of these.
In these Rules of Duty relating to things profitable, There were two or three
Stoics of that Name; The one of Tarsus, called Tarsensis, Scholar to Diogenes
Babylonius, and Master of Panaetius. He is mentioned chapter 12. of the next Book.
Another about the same time (or as others think the same Man by another name)
called Sidonius, a familiar Acquaintance of L. Crassus, an Historian and Poet,
famous for making Hexameter Verses extempore, [See Cic. and Quintil.] of whom
we have several Epigrams still extant in the Greek Anthologia. He Is said to
have had a Fever every Year on his Birthday, of which at last he died. The
third a Tyrian here mentioned, an Acquaintance of Cicero's, and particularly
familiar with Cato Uticensis, whom he Instructed in Morality and Politics.
Antipater the Tyrian, a Stoic Philosopher, who lately died at Athens, thinks
that two things have been omitted by Panaetius: First, The care of getting or
preserving one's Health. And, Secondly, Of an Estate. I believe that great
Philosopher might omit 'em on purpose, because they are so easy and obvious to
every one: however it is certain they are both of 'em profitable. How the Health
of the Body is to be maintained.
Now Health is preserved by considering the peculiar Temper of one's Body, and
observing what agrees or does not agree with it; by Temperance and Moderation
in Meats and Drinks, and other things relating to the welfare of the Body; by
forbearance and abstinence as to the matter of Pleasures; and lastly, by the
Skill of Physicians, and the like. How an Estate should be gotten, kept, etc.
An Estate should be gotten by nothing that is any ways Scandalous or Dishonest;
preserved by Diligence and prudent Management; and lastly, by the same means
bettered and augmented. But this whole Subject is excellently handled by A
famous Athenian, Son of one Gryllus, and Scholar of Socrates; a valiant and
wise Captain, as well as an eminent Philosopher and Historian. His Works are
most of 'em extant to this day: the native Simplicity, Purity, and especially
Sweetness of which, have justly got him the name of the Athenian Be. The
Translation Cicero here mentions is lost, except some Fragments.
Xenophon the Socratick, in his Book of O Economicks; which I formerly
translated from the Greek into Latin, when much about as old as you are at
present.

CHAP. XXV.
The Comparing of things Profitable one with another. An Answer of Cato 's upon
this Head. Who are best able to teach how to get Estates.

THe He comes now to the second Head to be treated on in this Book, viz. Of two
that are Profitable which is most so? Which he but just touches upon, and shows
that 'twas requisite to add this Head to the three of Panaetius.
fourth chief Head we proposed to speak of, was the Comparing things Profitable
one with another; which is oftentimes necessary, however neglected or forgotten
by Panaetius. For we use to compare either the Goods of the Body with those of
Fortune; or these back again with those of the Body; or lastly, those both of
the one and the other amongst 'emselves. First, The Goods of the Body are
compared with those of Fortune, as, It Is more eligible, suppose, to be Healthy
than Rich. Secondly, These back again with those of the Body, as, It Is better
to be Rich, than of a robust Constitution. Thirdly, Those of the Body with one
another, as Health is preferable to Pleasure, or Strength to Activity. And
Lastly, Those of Fortune with one another, as if Glory should be preferred
before Riches, or an Estate in the City before another in the Country. To this
latter sort of Comparing may be referred that Answer of the Senior Cato's, who
being once asked, What he conceived most Profitable in the Management of an
Estate? said, To Feed Cattle well. And what the second? To Feed Cattle pretty
well. And what the third? To Feed Cattle, though but ill. And what the fourth? To
Till the Ground. And then the Enquirer proceeding still to ask, Pray what do
you think of letting Money out to Usury? Pray what do I think, replies Cato, of
killing a Man? From what has been said, and a great deal more, that might
easily be added, it is sufficiently manifest, That Profits are often compared
with one another; and that we had Reason sufficient on our side, in making this
a fourth Head for the finding out our Duty. But as for the Business of getting
an Estate, and placing out Money to the best Advantage, and I wish I might add
of applying to the best Uses, there are certain So he calls by way of Derision
the Bankers, Changers, etc. who frequented the Janus, a Street in Rome of that
name, very noted and eminent for such sort of People. The upper part of it was
called Janus Summus, the middle Janus Medius, and the lower Janus Imus.
honest Men who attend at the Exchange, that can better inform you than any of
the Philosophers, that dispute in the Schools. It Is worth while however to know
these things, because they relate to the Business of Profit, which has made up
the Subject of all this Book. Let us now pass on to what remains behind.

The End of the Second Book.
TULLY 's OFFICES.
The Third Book.
CHAP. I.
An excellent Saying of the Elder Scipio Africanus. Cicero betakes himself to a
Life of Leisure and Retirement, the Republic being quite ruined. The
Difference between his Retirement, and Africanus 's. Some Good to be drawn out
of Evils.

Whom he spoke of in the last Chapter of the former Book.
CAto, Son Mark, who was near of the same Age with Publius Scipio, the first
that had the Surname of Because he beat Hannibal and the Carthaginians in
Africa. He was Grandfather of the Younger Africanus. The Roman Historians are
full of his Praises.
Africanus given him, tells us 'twas an usual Saying of his, That he never was
less idle, than when he was idle; nor ever less alone, than when he was alone.
A noble and excellent Sentence indeed, and worthy of so great and so wise a
Person; by which it appears, that in the midst of Leisure he could think of
Business, and was used when alone to converse with his own Thoughts: so that he
never was properly Idle, and needed no Company to entertain him in his
Solitude. The two things therefore, which bring a kind of Dullness and
Heaviness upon others, served but to sharpen and invigorate his Mind, viz.
Solitude and Leisure. I wish I could truly say the same of my self! But though
I Am not able to arrive at that inimitable Temper of Soul, I desire at least to
come as near it as is possible; and being excluded by open Violence, and Those
of Caesar first; but after his Death, of Mark Anthony and his Adherents.
impious Arms, from having ought to do with Affairs of the Senate, or Business
of the Bar, I wholly betake my self to a Life of Retirement; and for that very
reason have abandoned the City, and am often alone, only going from one Seat to
another in the Country. But alas! my Leisure is not to be compared with that of
Africanus, nor my Solitude with his Solitude! For he was employed, at that very
time, in Places of the greatest Reputation in the Public; and his Leisure was
only a voluntary Retirement, to give himself Respite from Business for a
season; and his Solitude only a kind of Port or Haven, into whcih he withdrew
himself from the Disturbances of Company. Whereas my Leisure proceeds not from
any desire of Respite, but from a want of Business to Employ my self about; for
what proper Work can I find to do, when there is no more The two Places in which
he before used to show himself.
a Senate, nor any Courts of Justice remaining Because all things were acted by
Violence and Force of Arms.
entire, in which I might honorably show my self? Therefore, whereas 'twas my
former Custom to appear much in Public, and in the Eye of my Citizens; I now
on the contrary hide my self from 'em, to avoid the very sight of such Packs of
Villains, as are everywhere abroad; and as much as is possible confine my self
to Solitude. But since this is given us for a Rule by the Learned, That when
several Evils are threatening us at once, we should not only choose to undergo
the least, but extract some Advantage out of 'em if it is possible: I therefore,
in the midst of all these present Misfortunes, gain the small Advantage of
Quiet and Retirement, (though not such a Quiet as he might have expected, whose
Wisdom had formerly By freeing it from Catiline's Conspiracy. See chap. 22.
Book 1.
procured the Peace of the Public) and endeavor not wholly to languish out
that Solitude, which not Choice, but Necessity has laid upon me. Though Africanus
indeed, I my self must confess, has got much greater Glory by his Solitude and
Retirement: For none of his Thoughts are committed to Writing, nor any
Monuments remain of what he did in his Leisure, and when he was alone; whereby
we are given to understand, That he never was idle, nor ever properly alone;
because he was always employed in Meditation, and in searching out those
things, which by Thinking he became Master of. But I, who han't got such a
strength of Genius, as to be content, when alone, with the company of my bare
Thoughts, am forced to apply all my Studies and Endeavors to the drudgery of
Writing: I have written more therefore within a very short time, since the Ruin
of the State, than I did for some Years, while 'twas in its flourishing
Condition.

CHAP. II.
The Subject of Duties the most useful part of all Philosophy. An Exhortation
to his Son to be diligent in his Studies. The Subject of this Third Book.
Panaetius neglected to treat of it, though he did at first design it. A Saying of
Rutilius Rufus.

NOw though all Philosophy (my dear Cicero) be a rich, as it were, and plentiful
Soil, which has not any part of it wast and uncultivate: yet there is no place
that is more fruitful in it, or from which more Advantage accrues to the
Husbandman, than that which is employed about Offices or Duties; from whence
those Precepts and Directions are drawn, which lead toward a steady and
virtuous Way of Living. Wherefore though I doubt not but that Cratippus, the
greatest Philosopher of our Age, is daily inculcating these things to you, and
you are receiving them with that Attention they deserve; yet I have thought it
not wholly unnecessary, my self to remind you of so important a Matter; and
could wish that your Ears might continually ring, as it were, with such
Precepts, and not hear (as far as possible) any thing else. And as this is a
Method which is useful for all Men, who design to lead virtuous and creditable
Lives; so for no one living, perhaps, more than your self. For consider you're
the Son of an industrious Father, one who has born the greatest Honors in the
Republic, and has gotten himself some Credit and Reputation in the World;
People therefore will expect that you should follow my Steps, and it is your
part to see that you answer their Expectation. Beside it is no small thing you
have taken upon you, by being at Athens, and under the Great Cratippus; whither
since you are gone as it were to a Staple and Mart of good Literature, 'twill
be scandalous for you to return again empty, and bring a Reproach both upon the
Place and your Master. Wherefore, dear Son, be Industrious and Diligent, and
spare no manner of Pains and Labor (if I may call it a Labor, and not rather
a Pleasure, to Study and Learn) that you may make a good Use of these
Advantages before you; and when all things are thus plentifully supplied on my
part, let it never be said, That you your self are wanting to your own greatest
Interest. But I shall say no more upon this at present, having heretofore
written again and again to you, by way of Exhortation. Let us now proceed to
the fifth and last Part of our proposed Division. After this Discourse and
Advice to his Son, he comes now to his Subject, of comparing Profit and
Honesty. But tells us first, That Panaetius, though he proposed, yet did not
discourse upon this third Head: Shows he designed to have done it, and is large
in explaining the Sense it is to be taken in.
Panaetius then, who without all controversy has written most accurately upon
the Subject of Duties, and whom in this Work, with a little Alteration, I have
hitherto followed, lays down (as was said) three general Heads, which Men use
in Consulting or Deliberating concerning their Duty: In the first it is
questioned, Whether the Action they are going about be Honest or Dishonest. In
the second, Whether it be Profitable or Unprofitable. In the third, How a good
Man ought to determine the Case, if that which seems Honest should come into
competition with that which seems Profitable. Of the two former Heads he has
given us an account in his three first Books, and therein has promised to go on
with the third of 'em; but has failed, it should seem, of being so good as his
Word. Which I wonder at the more upon this account, because we are told by his
Scholar Possidonius, That he lived thirty Years after those Books were
published. And I cannot but admire at the same Possidonius, that having an
occasion, in some of his Writings, to discourse upon this Argument, he should
do no more than just touch upon it in short; especially seeing he himself has
observed, That in all Philosophy there is no one Subject more necessary and
important. Some indeed think, whom I cannot agree with, that Panaetius did not
forget this Part, but omitted it on purpose; and that in plain truth, it ought
to be omitted, since Profit can never be really contrary to Honesty. Whether it
ought to be omitted or not, may perhaps be a Question; but whether Panaetius
designed it or no, and afterward neglected it, I think can be none: For a
Writer certainly, that proposes three Heads, and goes through with but two of
'em, must needs design to discourse upon the third; nay he tells us himself in
the close of his third Book, That he would afterward proceed to this remaining
Part. Beside we have the Authority of Possidonius to vouch it, who in one of
his Letters has given us a Saying of Rutilius Rufus, who was Scholar to
Panaetius as well as himself; That as never any Painter had been yet so bold,
as to venture upon finishing that Piece of Venus, which One of the famousest
Painters that ever was, of the Island Cos in the Aegaean Sea, therefore by Ovid
called Artifex Cous. He is often mentioned by Greek and Latin Writers, and
particularly for an admirable Piece of Venus rising out of the Sea. He began a
second, which is here mentioned, but did not live to finish it.
Apelles left imperfect at the Island Cos; (the Beauty of the Face making all
Men despair, ever to paint a Body that should be answerable to it) so the
Excellency of that, which Panaetius had writ upon this Subject, made others
afraid of attempting to add that which he had omitted.

CHAP. III.
Whether Panaetius did well in making this third Head. Reasons why he did not.
The Danger of separating Profit from Honesty. What the Stoics mean by Living
according to Nature. Two sorts of Virtue, the Perfect and Ordinary. The former
belongs to the Wise only; the latter is common to all. The most perfect Virtue
(as it is counted by the Multitude) is really imperfect.

Having shown from Reason, and the Authority of Possidonius, that Panaetius
designed to have writ upon this Head; he now proceeds to enquire, Whether he
ought to have done it, or not?
THat Panaetius therefore did think he was obliged to Discourse upon this Part,
is beyond all Question: But whether he was mistaken in his Judgment or not,
when he laid down this Head, as the third of deliberating for the finding out
our Duty, may perhaps be disputed. The Reasons why Panaetius should not have
brought in this Enquiry: First, Honesty is the only, or at least much the
greatest Good; therefore Profit should not be made to oppose it; nothing being
comparable to the greatest Good.
For whether according to the Opinion of the Stoics, we take Virtue or Honesty
to be the only Good; or, according to that of your Peripateticks, acknowledge
it so to be the chiefest Good, as that all things else are just nothing against
it; it is certain, upon either of these Suppositions, That Profit cannot be put
in the Balance against Honesty. We are therefore told, That Socrates used even
to curse those People, who disjoined these things in Thought and Conception,
which are one and the same in Nature and Reality. And Secondly, The Stoics, of
whom Panaetius was one, hold that Profit and Honesty are really the same thing;
therefore he should not have brought in this Head, wherein they are set in
opposition to each other.
the Stoics are so far of his Opinion, as constantly to maintain, That
whatever is Honest must be also Profitable, and whatever is Profitable must be
also Honest. It Is true had Panaetius been one of those, who assert that Virtue
is therefore only desirable, because it brings something of Profit along with
it; like Epicurus and his Disciples; and also Hieronymus Rhodius, whom our
Author often mentions in his Works. He lived about the 440th Year of Rome, and
had been Scholar to Aristotle.
some, who think nothing any further worth a-seeking for, than as it begets
Pleasure, or Exemption from Pain; we could then have allowed him the liberty of
saying, That Profit is sometimes repugnant to Honesty. But seeing he was one of
Viz. That of the Stoics.
a different Sect, and thinks nothing to be Good except that which is Honest;
and avows that whatever is contrary to Honesty, and appears to us under the
Notion of Profit, can neither, if we have it, make Life ever the better; nor,
if we have it not, ever the worse; he should not, methinks, have brought in
such a Deliberation, wherein that, which seems Profitable, comes into
Competition with that, which is Honest. For that, which Thirdly, The Stoics
make the whole Happiness of Man to consist in Living conformably to the Rules
of Honesty; therefore Profit should never have been brought in in opposition to
it.
the Stoics call their Sovereign Good [to live in Conformity with the Dictates
of Nature] means, I suppose, no more than this, That we should always live
agreeably to the Rules of Virtue; and should use other things, which are suited
and adapted to our natural Inclinations, no further than Virtue permits and
allows 'em. Now this being so, there are several of opinion, That this general
Head, wherein Profit and Honesty are compared with one another, was improperly
brought in; and that there ought not to have been given any Rules or Directions
upon this Subject. To what has been objected it might have been replied, That
there is a double sort of Honesty; the one Perfect, and belonging to none but a
perfectly Wise Man; the other Middle, and which ordinary Men are capable of:
That Profit ought never to be opposed to the former, but perhaps to the latter
imperfectene it might. Here he gives a large account of this Division of
Honesty, [See chap. 3. Book. 1.] and shows that the Second, or Middle sort of
Honesty, ought no more to be parted with for the sake of any Profit, than the
first or consummate one.
Now your Perfect Honesty, which is truly and properly called by that Name, is
only to be found in your perfectly Wise Men, and can never be possibly
separated from Virtue: But those Men, who have not this Perfect Wisdom, must by
no means pretend to such a Perfect Honesty, though they may have some Shadows and
Resemblances of it. For all those Duties, of which we are treating in these
Books, have the name of Middle ones given 'em by the Stoics, which are common
indifferently to all Men in general, and are not confined to any particular
number of them. But several get 'em either by the peculiar Happiness of their
Natures, or by a constant progress in Study and Learning. Whereas those others,
which they call Right ones, are perfect and consummate, or (as they 'emselves
express it) have all their Numbers, which none can attain to, but the perfectly
Wise. It Is true that the Vulgar, as soon as they see any Action of such a
nature, as indeed is no more than a Middle kind of Duty, are immediately
thinking it a Perfect and Complete one: Men judge of the Perfection or
Imperfection of any thing, according as it comes up to, or falls short of their
Idea's. He, whose Idea is short and imperfect, will think a very mean piece of
Work to be excellent, because he has no Notion of any thing that is more so:
But an Artist will judge it (as it really is) ordinary, because his Conceptions
are more refined and exquisite. This is the Reason why the Vulgar imagine the
imperfect Virtues to be Perfect and Complete; because they fully answer their
Idea of Perfection, which is but an half and inadequate one. It ought to be
read here propterea quod, in the Latin; and not proptereaque as Graevius has it.
For the common sort of People cannot tell what is Perfect, and by consequence
don't know how much any Virtue or Excellency comes short of it: but finding it
answer the highest of their Conceptions, they imagine it wants nothing of being
as perfect as can be. Just as it happens in judging of Poems or Pieces of
Painting, and other such like; those who aren't Judges, are generally pleased
with and praise those things, which by no means deserve any Praise or
Commendation: Because, I suppose, there may be something that is Good in 'em,
which serves well enough to take with those that are ignorant, and who han't so
much skill as to be able to discover their several Imperfections: Therefore
when they are instructed by those who understand it, they are brought with no
great difficulty to forsake their Opinions.

CHAP. IV.
The greatest Men that have been in the World, were not perfectly Wise. Profit
ought not to be compared with the Middle, any more than with the Perfect
Honesty. How Men come to compare 'em together, or to doubt upon this Subject.
This illustrated by an Example. One certain Rule necessary for our Guidance in
this case. The Doctrine of the Stoics preferable to that of the Peripateticks.

THose Duties therefore, which make up the Subject of this Enquiry, by the
Stoics are counted a kind of second-rate Honesty, which is not confined to
their Wise Men only, but is common and open to all Mankind: and therefore all
those, who have any kind of Sense or Inclination for Virtue, are very sensibly
touched and affected with it. For you aren't to imagine, when we call the two
Two famous Romans, Father and Son, who both in the time of their Consulships
devoted 'emselves freely for the Good of their Country: The Father in the War
with the Latins, about the Year of Rome 412; and the Son in that with the
Samnites, about forty Years after. See the form of it, Live. Book 8. chap. 9.
Book 10. chap. 29.
Decii's or The two Africani, mentioned before.
Scipio's Magnanimous, and give A noble and valiant Consul of Rome, General in
the War against Pyrrhus and the Samnites: so strictly Just and Honest, that
though both Pyrrhus and the Samnites offered him Presents, he refused to accept
them; and yet so Poor, that when he died, he did not leave enough behind him
for his Funeral; and his Daughters had Portions paid out of the public
Treasury. See chapter 22.
Fabricius and Such another at Athens, as Fabricius was at Rome. Themistocles
being his Rival in the State, got him banished by Ostracism: [See his Life in
Plut. and Nepos.] But Xerxes afterward invading Greece, they were glad to
recall him again to defend his Country, which he did very valiantly. At last,
after having born the greatest Offices in the Republic, he died as poor as
Fabricius did, and Portions were given to his Daughters by the Public.
Aristides the Appellation of Just, that we set them for Patterns of such
Justice and Magnanimity, as we suppose to be in those who are perfectly Wise.
For they were none of them Wise in that exalted Sense, which we would here be
understood to mean by that Word. Nay those who were counted and sirnam'd the
Wise, such as Cato, for Instance, and Laelius, and particularly the The seven
Wise Men of Greece, so much talked of among the Ancients.
famous Seven; yet in Truth and Reality were not such: but by frequently
practicing that middle sort of Duties, had gotten a sort of Show and
Resemblance of true Wisdom. As no Profit therefore ought ever to be put in
opposition to that, which is truly and perfectly Virtuous and Honest; so
neither should any Interest, or Convenience of Life, be set up against that,
which is ordinarily called so, and which is followed by those, who desire to be
counted Men of Honesty and Integrity: And we should be as careful of living up
to that Honesty, whereof we are capable; as the perfectly Wise are of keeping
close to that, which is truly such, and may in strictness of Speech be called
by that Name. For whatever Seize we have made in Virtue, they will never
stand us in any mighty stead, if we ben't thus careful of holding constantly to
our Duty --. What has hitherto been said can be applied to those only, who make
Goodness consist in living according to their Duty: But Viz. The Followers of
Epicurus and Hieronymus Rhodius.
those Men, who measure the Goodness of things by some It Is to be remembered,
That under the Notion of the word Profit, he comprehends Pleasures, Honors,
etc.
Profit or Advantage they bring along with them, and who let these prevail more
with them than Virtue and Honesty; frequently in deliberating use to put that,
which they take to be Profitable, into the Balance against Justice and
Honesty; but good and wise Men never offer to do it. Having brought all the
Arguments urged against Panaetius, for proposing this Head, he now shows that
they have all mistaken his Meaning; for that he does not say Profit may be
opposed to Honesty, but only that Men ordinarily use to oppose it; and explains
what is the true meaning of this Head, and how People come to deliberate upon
it.
I Am therefore of opinion, when Panaetius tells us, That Men use to deliberate,
in considering which of these two they should choose; that he meant no more than
what his Words strictly signify, viz. That they use to do this, and not that
really they ought to do it. For it is infinitely scandalous, not only to prefer
a pretended Advantage before Duty and Conscience; but so much as to bring 'em
to the Contest and Competition, and to doubt whether the one of 'em should be
chosen before the other. If this be so, you will be ready to ask me, How then
comes there to be any Doubt at all? And what is it that requires Consideration
upon this Subject? I suppose it is this, That it sometimes happens The Subject
therefore of this Book is not, When a plain Duty seems opposite to our worldly
Interest, viz. Riches, Pleasure, or the like, to deliberate which of those two
we should follow, our Pleasure (suppose) or our Duty: the very deliberating in
such a case being impious, as he often says. But the Design of the Book is,
When an Action on the one hand is apparently for our worldly Advantage; and on
the other is somewhat doubtful, whether consistent with our Duty or not; then
to teach us how to determine our selves so, as that a seeming Interest may not
betray us into that, which is opposite to our real one, i. e. our Duty and
Honesty. He gives one Instance of killing a Tyrant, which may easily be applied
to a great many other dubious Cases; in giving Directions about which he
continues to Chap. 7. where he begins again his former Discourse. See the
latter end of chap. 6.
Men are not so very certain, Whether the Action deliberated upon be Honest, or
not Honest: For that which is usually counted a piece of Villainy, is frequently
changed by the Times or Circumstances, and is found to be the contrary. To lay
down one Instance, which may serve to give some Light to a great many others:
Pray what greater Wickedness can there be upon Earth (if we speak in general)
than for any one to Murder, not only a Man, but a familiar Friend? And shall we
therefore affirm that he is chargeable with a Crime, who has murdered a Tyrant,
though he were his Familiar? The Romans thought no Duties so great, as those that
regarded the Maintenance of their Liberty; for the sake of which they would
break through all other Obligations whatever. Nay there was a Law among them,
That he who killed a Tyrant should not be questioned for it.
The People of Rome I am sure will not say so, who count it one of the gloriousest
Actions in the World. You Will say then, Does not Interst here carry it against
Honesty? No, That is, A Tyrant is not therefore to be killed, because it is a
profitable Action, though contrary to Honesty: but because it is an Honest, as
well as a Profitable one. For what can be more honest or agreeable to Nature,
than by taking off one Man to preserve a whole Community?
but rather Honesty voluntarily follows Interest. Having shown what is the
Subject of Deliberation in this Book, his next Business is to lay down some
Method of determining our selves aright. In order to which he proposes a
general Rule and Standard, which is always to be made use of in such occasions
of Doubt.
If therefore we would, upon all Emergencies, be sure to determine our selves
aright, when that which we call our Advantage or Interest, seems to be
repugnant to that which is Honest; we must lay down some general Rule or
Measure, which if we will make use of in judging about things, we shall never
be mistaken as to point of Duty. Now this Measure I would have to be
conformable to the Doctrine and Principles of the Stoics, which I principally
follow throughout this Work. For though I confess that the ancient Academicks,
and your Peripateticks, See chap. 1. Book 1.
which were formerly the same, make Honesty far preferable to that which seems
one's Interest: yet Viz. The Stoics.
those who assert, That whatever is Honest must be also Profitable, and Nothing
is Profitable but what is Honest, talk much more bravely and heroically upon
this Subject, than Viz. The Peripateticks and ancient Academicks.
those who allow, That there are some things Honest, which are not Profitable;
and some things Profitable, which are not Honest. And we have very great
Liberty given us by our Academy, so as never to be tied up to such and such
Tenets, but are left free to defend what we think most probable.

CHAP. V.
The Rule or Measure mentioned in the former Chapter. The ill Effects of Men's
Injuring others for their own Advantage. Every one allowed to take Care of
himself in the first place; but not so as to Injure any other, though to save his
own Life. Two Errors, that occasion Men's Acting contrariwise, and the Absurdity
of 'em.

BUt to return to our General Rule or Measure: For nothing being so agreeable
to Nature as Conjunction and Society, that which tends to the Ruin and
Dissolution of this, must needs be of all things most contrary to Nature. Now
the very End and Design of Society is the mutual Help and Assistance of each
other, without which it is impossible it should ever subsist; It a naturalis est
societatis utilitatum communio (says the learned Grotius) ut sine ea nequeat
Societas consistere. Those Men therefore, who, instead of profiting, injure
their Fellows, do what directly tends to the Ruin of Society, and consequently
what of all things is most contrary to Nature.
There Is nothing upon Earth then so contrary to Nature, neither Death, nor
Poverty, nor Pain, nor whatever other Evil can befall a Man either in his Body
or Fortune, as to take away any thing wrongfully from another, and do one's
self a Kindness by injuring one's Neighbor. For, in the first place, it ruins
all manner of Society and Intercourse amongst Men; since it is plain, that if
once Men arrive at such a pass, as to Plunder and Injure the rest of their
Neighbors, out of hopes to procure some Advantage to themselves, there must
follow of course a Dissolution of that Society, which of all things in the
World is most agreeable to Nature. Should we suppose, for Example, that the
bodily Members had, every one of 'em, gotten an Opinion, that to draw to its
self all the Vigor of its Neighbors, would very much serve to increase its
own; it is certain the whole Body must decay and perish: And just so, should
every one amongst us deprive other People of their Profits and Advantages, and
take away all he could get from them, with design of applying it only to his
own Use; the general Society and Fellowship of Mankind must of necessity be
broken. For though it is no more than what Nature will allow of, That each Man
should look after himself in the first place, and furnish himself with the
Necessaries of Life, before he takes care to provide for other People; yet the
same Nature will by no means permit, that any one should rise by his thrusting
down another, and increase his own Fortune by the Spoils of his Neighbors. And
not only Nature, that is the universal Law or Consent of Nations; but
particular Laws, by which several Countries and Commonwealths are governed,
have commanded likewise, That no one be suffered to do an Injury to another,
for the sake of procuring any Advantage to himself. For the very Design and End
of Laws is to keep up Agreement and Union amongst Citizens; which whoever
destroys is by them punished, not with the loss of his Goods alone, but with
Prisons, Banishment, or even Death it self. But Nature and Right Reason, as
being at once both an Humane, because consented to and acknowledged by all
Mankind, and natural to them: Divine, because whatever Right Reason commands
us, God himself, who has given us that Reason, does in effect command us too.
Human and Divine Law too, command this Duty with much greater Authority; and
whoever obeys them (as all Men must, who propose to live according to the Rules
of Nature) will never be guilty of coveting what is another's, or applying to
his own Use what had first been injuriously taken from his Neighbor. For
certainly Greatness and Elevation of Soul; as also the Virtues of Courtesy,
Justice and Liberality, are much more agreeable to Nature and Right Reason,
than Pleasure, than Riches, than even Life it self; to despise all which, and
regard 'em as just nothing, when they come to be compared with the Public
Interest, is the Duty of a brave and exalted Spirit: whereas to rob another for
one's own Advantage is (as has been shown) more contrary to Nature, than Death,
than Pain, or any other Evil whatever of that kind. Again, Those Men live much
more according to Nature, who suffer perpetual Troubles and Labors, for the
Good and Preservation, were it possible, of all Men; (like Hercules of old,
whom Men, as a grateful Requital for his Benefits, report to be placed among
the number of the Gods) than those who consume all their Lives in Retirement,
where they are not only free from Disturbances and Vexations, but are furnished
with all the Pleasures and Conveniences of Life; and have moreover the
advantages of Strength and Comeliness superadded to them. And accordingly we
find it to be so in effect, that all the most great and extraordinary Geniuses,
have preferred all the Troubles and Difficulties of the former, before the Quiet
and Ease of this latter way of Living. From all which laid together it
unanswerably follows, That whoever lives agreeably to the Dictates of Nature,
can never be guilty of Injuring another. Having laid down his general Rule or
Measure, and proved the Truth of it from Reason, Laws, and the Examples of the
greatest Men; he now shows the Absurdity of the two contrary Principles, which
are the Grounds or Causes of Men's Injuring one another, Viz. Either they think
it is not contrary to Nature, etc.
In fine, He that Injures another to do himself a Kindness, either thinks he
does nothing that is contrary to Nature; or that the doing an Injury is a less
degree of Evil, than Death, or Poverty, or Pain, or loss of Children, Friends,
or Relations. If he thinks that in Wronging and Abusing of others, he does not
do any thing that is contrary to Nature; it is in vain to dispute any longer
with such a one, who takes away from Man the distinguishing Part, and very
Characteristick (as it were) of his Nature: But if he allows that it is indeed
an Evil, only thinks that some others, such as Poverty, Pain, or Death, may be
worse; he is grossly mistaken in being of Opinion, That the Ills which touch
nothing but the Body or Fortune, can be greater than those which affect the
Soul.

CHAP. VI.
The Interest of Particulars inseparable from that of the whole Community. The
Rule of not Wronging another for our own Advantage, extends not only to
Relations, or Fellow-Citizens, but to all Mankind. The breaking of it, ruins
all Justice, Liberality, etc. Several Cases about it, put and resolved. Tyrants
no Members of Human Society.

This is a Conclusion from the foregoing Discouse; seeing for one Man to injure
another is so very pernicious to Human Society; it follows, That no one should
do any thing for his own Interest, as distinct from that of the whole Community.
WE should all of us therefore propose the same End, and every one think his
own Interest in particular, to be the same with that of the Republic in
general: which if each one endeavor to draw solely to himself, all Union and
Agreement amongst Men will be dissolved. To what he has proved in the former
Chapter, That the Injuring of others for our own Advantage is the ruin of
Society, and consequently most unnatural; it might have been answered, That
this holds good only as to lesser Societies, and in respect of our Kin, etc.
but as for those who are of a different Tribe or Country, we are under no such
Obligation of not Injuring them. He therefore here shows, in answer to this,
the extent of this Obligation; and proves that it is not confined to those of
the same Family, City, or the like, but equally comprehends all Mankind;
forasmuch as all are alike subject to the same Law of Nature, etc.
And if Nature enjoin us, That every Man should desire and procure the
Advantage of another, whoever he be, though for no other reason than because he
is a Man; it necessarily follows, That all Men are joined, by the self-same
Nature, in one common Interest: which if it be true, then all Men are subject,
and live equally under the same Law of Nature: and if this be true too, then
certainly they are forbid by that same Law of Nature, any ways to Injure or
Wrong one another: But the first of these is undoubtedly certain, therefore the
last must needs be so likewise. For as to what is usually said by some Men,
That they would not take any thing away from a Father, or Brother, for their
own Advantage; but there is not the same reason for their ordinary Citizens;
it is foolish and absurd: For they thrust 'emselves out from partaking of any
Privileges, and from joining in common with the rest of their Citizens, for
the Public Good: An Opinion that strikes at the very Root and Foundation of
all Civil Societies. Others there are, who are ready to confess, That they
ought to bear such a Regard to Fellow-Citizens; but by no means allow of it in
relation to Strangers: Now these Men destroy that universal Society of all
Mankind; which if once taken away, Kindness, Liberality, Justice and Humanity
must utterly perish; which excellent Virtues whoever makes void, is chargeable
with Impiety toward the immortal For though the Offense more immediately
concerns the Persons that are injured, yet it is also a Sin against God himself;
since it is a Breach of his Laws and Commands.
Gods: For he breaks that Society, which they have established and settled
amongst Men; the closest Cement or Bond of which, is the being of Opinion, That
for Men to Injure and Wrong one another for their private Interests, is an Evil
that Nature is much more a verse from, than all those which happen either to
the Body or Fortune; That is, To take away any thing from another, which is an
Act of Injustice, is not only a greater Evil than any of Body or Fortune, but
of Mind too, (i. e. than any other Vice) except only those, which are Offenses
against Justice as well as it self.
nay, and I might add to the Mind also, provided only they ben't contrary to
Justice; for that one Virtue is as 'twere, a kind Mistress and Queen of all the
rest. But what? (perhaps some Men will be apt to say) if a Wise Man be ready to
perish for Hunger, must not he take away Victuals from another; though a
perfectly useless and insignificant Fellow? Not at all; for Life it self is not
so dear to me, as a settled Resolution of doing no Wrong for my private
Advantage. But suppose this good Man, almost dead with Cold, should have it in
his power to take Phalaris's Clothes away, one of the most savage and inhuman
of Tyrants; would not you have him to do it? There Is no great difficulty in
determining such Cases: For it is certain if you take away any thing from
another, though never so useless and insignificant a Creature, for no other End
but to Benefit your self by it; it is an inhuman Action, and plainly contrary to
the Laws of Nature: But if you are one, who by Living will do very great
Service to the Republic, or perhaps to the Society of Mankind in general, and
for that only reason take something from another; it is an Action that is not to
be found much fault with. But in all other Cases, every Man's bound to bear his
own Misfortunes, rather than to get quit of 'em by Wronging his Neighbor.
You Will say then, Is not it more contrary to Nature, To Covet or Seize what
belongs to another, than to be in Sickness, or Want, or any such Evil? Yes; but
withal it is as contrary to Nature, to abandon all Care of the public Interest;
for it is a piece of Injustice: It Is true the Laws of Nature, or Right Reason,
forbid Men to take away ought from another, for their own Advantage; for it
would be the Ruin and Dissolution of Society, which they especially desire to
maintain: But if it should at any time chance so to happen, that the doing of a
Damage to any third Person, should be necessary to the Support and Maintenance
of that Society, then the doing it is not only allowed, but commanded by the
Law of Nature.
From whence it follows, That an honest, prudent and valiant Person, whose
Death would bring a great Disadvantage on the Public, may take from an idle
and useless Citizen, such things as are necessary for the Maintenance of Life,
without any Offense against the Laws of Nature; which aim at the Preservation
and Interest of the Public: provided that he don't make the Love of himself,
and Conceit of his own more than ordinary Merits, an occasion of Injuring and
Oppressing others. For he will perform but the Duties which Justice require of
him, by thus taking care to be serviceable to the Public, and upholding that
(which I am often forced to mention) universal Society between all Mankind. As
for the Question proposed about Phalaris, it is easily answered: For Tyrants
aren't Members of Human Society; but rather its greatest and most pestilent
Enemies; nor is it unnatural, if it lie in one's power, to Rob that Man, whom
it is even a Virtue and a Glory to Murder. And 'twere heartily to be wished,
That this whole destructive and impious Race, were utterly banished and
excluded from amongst Men. Just as we cut off those Members of the Body, which
have got no longer either Blood or Spirits in 'em, and serve but to infect and
corrupt the rest; so should those Monsters, which under the Shape and Outside
of Men, conceal all the Savageness and Cruelty of Beasts, be cut off, as it
were, and separated from the Body and Society of Mankind. These Words show what
has been the Drift and Design of his Discourse from chap. 4. [See there Note
h.] viz. To show how we should determine our selves in those particular Cases,
where the Knowledge of our Duty depends so much upon Times and Circumstances;
as in the Instance there given of Murdering a Tyrant, though a familiar Friend.
He now takes again the Thread of his Discourse.
Of much the same Nature are all those Questions, in which the Knowledge and
Understanding of our Duty, depends upon the Knowledge of Times and
Circumstances.

CHAP. VII.
Cicero will finish what Panaetius left imperfect. All his Decisions taken from
this Principle, That Honesty alone, or at least chiefly, is desirable for its
own sake. The true Meaning of Panaetius, in making Profit and Honesty be
compared with one another.

I Believe then Panaetius would have discoursed upon such things as these, but
that some Accident, or perhaps other Business, put a stop to his Designs.
However there are Precepts enough laid down in his former Books, to resolve all
Scruples and Doubts concerning 'em; from which we may learn, What that is which
is Wicked, and therefore to be avoided; and what that, which therefore is not
to be avoided, because not at such Times, and in such Cases wicked. But since I
am going (as it were) to crown He means Panaetius's Work about Duties, which
(as before was observed) he left imperfect: and Cicero in this Book designs to
add, what Panaetius either would not, or for some reason could not finish.
a Work, which was left imperfect by the Author of it, though wanting but little
of being brought to Perfection; I shall follow the Method of the Geometricians:
And as they don't use to demonstrate every thing, but demand to have some
things allowed 'em beforehand, by the help of which they more easily explain
and demonstrate their Designs: so I demand of you, Son Mark, if you can, to
grant me this following Postulatum, That nothing is desirable for it self
alone, but that which is Honest: Or however, if For being a Peripatetick he
could only allow that, which immediately follows, That Honesty is much the most
desirable Good: not, That it is the only one, which was the Stoic Opinion.
Cratippus will not permit you to do that; yet at least, I am sure, you must grant
me this which follows, That Honesty is desirable for its own sake, above all
things in the World: Either of the two is sufficient for my Purpose, and the
one is probable as well as the other, and Viz. Not the Opinions of Epicurus,
Hieronymus Rhodius, etc.
nothing else beside them is so upon this Subject. And here in the first place
we must do Right to Panaetius: who does not say, (as indeed he ought not) That
that, which is Profitable, could ever be contrary to that, which is Honest; but
only that, which has the appearance of such. And he often avows, That nothing
is Profitable, but that which is Honest; and, That whatever is Honest is at the
same time Profitable: and declares their Opinion, who first made a difference
between those two, to be the greatest Evil that ever yet spread it self abroad
amongst Men. Therefore when he speaks of a Contrariety between them, he means
an appearing, and not a real one; which he therefore laid down for one of the
Heads of his Discourse, not as though 'twere lawful for Men ever to give Profit
the Preference before Honesty; but only that they might be able to determine
themselves aright, if these two at any time should seem to interfere and be
inconsistent with one another. This Part therefore, which he has omitted, I
shall now supply; not with any borrowed Assistance from others, but purely (as
we say) by my own Strength. For I never had any thing come to my Hands upon
this Subject, that I could any ways approve of, since the time of Panaetius.

CHAP. VIII.
What we ought to do, when any thing presents it self under the appearance of
Profit. Proof that whatever is Profitable must also be Honest, and whatever is
Honest must also be Profitable. The contrary Opinion the great Source of all
Wickedness. Infamy a certain Punishment of Villainy. It Is a Wickedness even to
deliberate whether Profit should be preferred before Honesty, or not. Nothing
to be done out of hopes of being concealed.

WHenever Having laid down his Postulatum, That Honesty is the only, or at
least chief Good: He proceeds now to draw some Conclusions from it; as first,
That however a thing may carry the appearance of Profit along with it, yet it
is to be rejected if it have any Dishonesty in it: because it would deprive us
of our Virtue or Honesty, which is our greatest, if not sole Good; and
consequently however it may bring us Riches, Pleasures, etc. must be really
unprofitable. For it is impossible there should be any Profit, where the Loss is
Honesty.
therefore any thing comes in our View, which carries the appearance of Profit
along with it, we cannot but immediately be somewhat affected with it: But if,
upon taking a nearer View, we find there is any thing Base and Dishonest, in
that which appeared to be Profitable at first, it is our Duty to reject it:
Which is not to deprive us of what is really Profitable, but only to let us
understand, That nothing Dishonest can possibly be such. Now if nothing He
shows that, Whatever is truly Profitable must be Honest also; since Profit and
Dishonesty (being one of 'em contrary, and the other agreeable to Nature) can
never meet both in the same Action: and therefore in rejecting Pleasures,
Riches or Kingdoms, etc. when accompanied with Dishonesty, we don't reject what
is really our Interest, but only that which appears to be so.
be so contrary to Nature as Baseness, and nothing so agreeable to Nature as
true Profit, (which is certainly so; for she always desires what is Right, and
Becoming, and Consistent with it self, and abhors the contrary) then it
necessarily follows, That whatever is Profitable can never have any Baseness,
or Dishonesty annexed to it. Again, Having shown that, Whatever is Profitable
must also be Honest; he here shows back again, That what ever is Honest must
also be Profitable; upon which two Propositions all this Book is grounded.
If we were born for Virtue or Honesty, and this be the only desirable Good;
(as Founder of the Stoic Sect; sirnam'd Cittieus, from Cittium, a Town in
Cyprus, where he was born.
Zeno would have it) or at least so much more, so, than ey'ry thing else, as to
outweigh all that can be put in the Scale against it; (which was Aristotle's
Opinion) it must certainly follow, That Honesty's the only, or however the
greatest Good: Now whatever is Good must certainly be Profitable; from whence
it follows, That whatever is Honest must also certainly be Profitable. It Is a
villainous Error of some naughty Men therefore, when any thing strikes 'em with
an appearance of Profit, to seize it immediately and enjoy it as such, without
ever considering its relation to Honesty. Hence come Assassinations,
Poysonings, and making of false Wills: Hence Stealing, Embezling the Public
Moneys, Plundring and Oppressing both Citizens and Confederates: Hence the
unsufferable Power and Insolence, which some Men exercise, who are grown too
great for the rest of their Citizens: In fine, Hence Ambition, and the Desire
of Rule, have produced their most cursed and deplorable Effects, even in free
Commonwealths; than which nothing can be thought of more odious and detestable.
For Men look upon the fancied Advantages of things through a false Perspective;
but as for the Punishment appendant to 'em, (I don't mean of the Laws, which
they frequently break through; but of Baseness and Dishonesty, which is much the
more grievous) that, I say, they never so much as think upon at all. Such
People therefore are impious and abominable, and deserve to be excluded from
all Society, who deliberate with themselves, and make it Matter of Doubt,
Whether they should choose what they see to be Honest, or wilfully commit what
they know to be a Villainy. For the very making a Question of such a thing is
Criminal, though one should not proceed so far as to Execution. Those things
therefore ought not to be deliberated at all upon, where the very Deliberation
is Scandalous and Dishonest. He now proceeds to a second Conclusion, drawn from
his general Principle laid down, which is, Never to venture upon any thing
that is Ill, out of Hopes of being concealed: For if Dishonesty be of it self
the greatest Evil, it is not the being concealed that can make it otherwise.
This he illustrates by an excellent Fable, taken out of the second Book of
Plato de Repub. toward the beginning.
And whene're we do deliberate upon any kind of Subject, we should never do any
thing out of Hope, and Expectation, that our Actions will be concealed: For we
ought to take this as a constant Maxim, if we pretend to have made any progress
in Philosophy, That though we could hide from the Eyes of all Men, and even of
the Gods themselves, whatever we go about; yet we should be careful to abstain
from the Vices of Covetousness and Injustice, of Lasciviousness and
Incontinency.

CHAP. IX.
He illustrates his Rule laid down in the former Chapter with the Story of
Gyges, taken out of Plato. He shows himself a Villain, who acknowledges he
would do wickedly, if he could with Secrecy.

TO this purpose Plato brings in that remarkable Story of He was a Friend and
Favorite to Candaules, King of Lydia, who having an extraordinary beautiful
Wife, was continually bragging of her, and would needs have Gyges look upon her
naked. At which the Queen was so provoked, as that she persuaded Gyges to
murder Candaules; which he did, and obtained both his Wife and Kingdom after
him. His performing this with very great Ease by the Wife's Assistance, gave
Plato occasion to invent this Fable.
Gyges: A Gaping in the Earth being made by reason of some violent Showers, as
the Story tells us, Gyges went down into the hollow of it, and found there
lying a brazen Horse, with a Door in his side. This he opened, and looking in,
discovered a dead Man's Body, of an unusual bulk, with a Ring of Gold upon one
of its Fingers. This he pulls off, and puts it upon his own Finger; and then
coming up, goes and joins himself to the rest of the Shepherds; (for he was
Shepherd to the King at that time.) Here he observed, That upon turning the
Stone toward the Palm of his Hand, he became invisible to every body else, though
others did not become so to him; and that upon turning it to its proper place,
he immediately became visible again, as before. Making use therefore of this
lucky Opportunity, he found out a way to enjoy the Queen, and by her assistance
to Murder the King, his Lord and Master, and to make away those, who might
prove any hindrance or stop to his Designs; nor could any one possibly see or
discover him in any of these Villainies; so that he quickly, by the help of this
Ring, from a simple Shepherd became King of Lydia. Now had a truly Wise Man had
the keeping of this Ring, he would not have thought himself ever the more
priviledg'd to be guilty of any Action that is wicked or detestable: For good
Men desire to be Virtuous and Honest, and not to be Secret, that so they may
Sin without Danger. And here some Philosophers, Men of more Honesty, than
Acuteness or Subtilty, cry out, That this Story of Plato 's is a mere Fiction:
As though he had said either that it really was, or indeed could be done. No; the
Meaning and Design of this Example of Gyges, and the Ring, is this: Suppose you
could do any dishonest Action, for the gratifying a lustful, covetous or
ambitious Desire, so as that no one living could either know or suspect it, but
both Gods and Men must be kept perfectly in Ignorance; whether in such case,
would you do it, or no? Ay, but, say they, this is an impossible Case: though
it is not perhaps so impossible neither: But that which I ask 'em is, What they
would do, supposing that possible, which they deny now to be so? The manner of
their Arguing is somewhat odd and illiterate; for they still deny the
Possibility of it, and that they will stand to; not it seems, understanding
what the Force and true Import of this Supposition is. For when we put the
Question to 'em, Whether they would do such an Action, or not, supposing they
could conceal it? we don't ask 'em, Whether they can conceal it, or not? but
put 'em, as 'twere, to the Rack or Inquisition; that so, if they say they would
gratify such Desires upon assurance of Impunity, we may know 'em to be
Villains by their own Confession: But if they deny it, they may be forced to
grant, that every base and dishonest Action, is, barely as such, to be shunned
and detested. But to return to our Purpose, from which we have digressed.

CHAP. X.
Several Cases, wherein Men doubt, whether that which appears to be Profitable
be not Honest. The Case of Brutus banishing Collatinus; of Romulus murdering
his Brother Remus. Men may do what is for their own Advantage, provided they do
no Injury to another. An excellent Saying of Chrysippus to that purpose. How
far a Man may honestly, and ought to go, upon a Friend's Account: Illustrated
by the Example of Damon and Pinthias, two loving Friends.

He has shown in the two last Chapters, That when an Action is certainly
Dishonest, it is impious to deliberate whether we shall do it, or not; or to
hope for Secrecy, that so we might do it without Danger; whatever seeming
Profit, such as Kingdoms, etc. it may bring along with it. He now proceeds to
determine some Cases, wherein it is doubted whether the Action be Honest, or not.
As first, The desire of Honor, Empire, etc. is apt to blind Peoples Eyes, and
either make 'em in suspense about the Justice of an Action; as in the Case of
Brutus: or even Act plainly contrary to Justice and Conscience, as Romulus did.
THere frequently happen a great many Cases, which disturb Men's Minds, and put
'em into suspense, by the show of some Profit which they seem to contain in
'em. Not when Men deliberate, Whether they should leave and abandon their
Honesty, for the sake of any Profit, be it never so great; (for that is a piece
of Wickedness, as was before observed) but, Whether that Action, which appears
to be Profitable, may not safely be done without transgressing against Honesty.
It might not seem honest in The first Consul of Rome, after the Expulsion of
King Tarquinius Superbus. L. Tarquinius Collatinus was his Colleague, who had
been Husband to Lucretia, and assisting to Brutus in Expelling the King.
However Collatinus, upon the Senate's commanding it, was deprived of his
Consulship, and expelled the City by Brutus, only because he was of the Name
and Family of Tarquinius Superbus. See Livy, and Plutarch 's Poplicola.
Brutus, for Example, to depose Collatinus his Brother-Consul from his Office;
whose Wisdom and Conduct he himself had made use of in Expelling the Kings. But
since the chief Men in the Government had so ordered, That the Kindred of The
last King of the Romans, so called for his Pride and Haughtiness. He was
expelled his Kingdom by Brutus, etc. and at last died in Exile.
Superbus, and very Name of the Tarquins, should be banished the City, and no
Marks or Footsteps be suffered to remain of Monarchical Government; 'twas not
only Profitable, thus to consult for the Safety of his Country, but so Honest
too, as that Collatinus himself ought joyfully to have acquiesc'd in it. That
which was Profitable therefore prevailed, because 'twas Honest withal; which
had it not been, it could never have been Profitable. I cannot say the same in
relation to Romulus the Founder of Rome. The Historians generally tell us, That
as he was building the Walls of his City, his Brother Remus (who himself was
founding a City just by) came to see his Work; and leaping with Scorn and
Contempt over his new Wall, was murdered by Romulus for that Affront. But
Cicero, it seems, thought there was something more in it, viz. That he might
Reign alone.
that King, by whom this City was first founded: For a bare show of Profit got
the better over him, when he imbrew'd his Hands in the Blood of his own
Brother, because it seemed more Profitable to Reign by himself, than in
Conjunction with another: He broke all the Ties both of brotherly Affection and
common Humanity, for the obtaining of an End, which appeared to be Profitable,
and yet really was not so. He pretended however, for a show of Honesty, that
'twas done to revenge an Affront of his Brother's, who leapt with Contempt over
his newrais'd Wall; a frivolous Excuse, and if true, not sufficient to serve
his turn: By his Favor therefore, whether A Name given by the Romans to
Romulus, after he was supposed to be taken up into Heaven, and enrolled in the
number of the Gods.
Quirinus or Romulus, I cannot but think he did a very ill Action. Not that Men
are bound to be careless of their own Interests, or to part with that to
others, which themselves stand in need of; but every one may do what he thinks
for his own Advantage, provided it be no Injury or Prejudice to another Person.
A Stoic Philosopher, one of the chief Upholders of that Sect, Scholar of
Cleanthes, so famous for Logic as that 'twas usually said, If the Gods were to
make use of Logic, 'twould be that of Chrysippus. Cicero often quotes him, and
says, He was a Man of a sharp Wit, and very curious in all History. He left
Seven Hundred Volumes, of which Three Hundred were Logic behind him, which are
all lost. The Athenians had so great a Value for him, as that they put up his
Statue in a place of their City called Ceramicus.
Chrysippus, amongst a great many very good Sayings, has this one in
particular: He that is running a Race ought to strive and endeavor, says he, as
much as he is able, to get before his Antagonist; but must not trip his Heels
up, or thrust him aside with his Hands: So in Life it is allowable, that every
one should get what is useful and convenient for his comfortable Subsistence,
but it is not so to take it away from other People. As People may sometimes be
drawn to do wickedly for the sake of Honor, Reigning alone, etc. so may they
also for the sake of a Friend: concerning which he gives one short and
excellent Rule; Never to prefer, etc.
But it is no where more difficult to keep to one's Duty, than in the Affair of
Friendship: For as not to do every thing that one handsomely can, for the sake
of a Friend; so to do any thing that is Base or Dishonest, are both of 'em
equally contrary to one's Duty. But there is one very short and yet easy Rule,
which may serve to direct us in all Cases of this nature; and it is this, Never
to prefer that which only seems Profitable, such as Honors, Riches, Pleasures,
and the like, before a Kindness to a Friend: but never to do any thing for the
sake of a Friend, that is an Injury to the Public, or a Breach of one's Oath,
or other solemn Engagement: For whoever does this, it is impossible he should
ever be a good Man. Should such a one therefore be Judge in his Friend's Case,
he would not by any means be biased in his Favor, but would wholly lay aside
the Person of a Friend, as soon as he took upon him that of a Judge. Perhaps he
might do so much for Friendship sake, as to wish that his Friend may have the
juster Cause; and allow him as long time to speak for himself, as For there was
a Law amongst the Romans, allowing the Plaintiff but so many Hours to speak in;
and the Defendant one more.
the Laws will permit of: but when he is to give in his Sentence For the Judges
among the Romans were sworn always to Judge impartially.
upon Oath, he will then remember that he calls God to Witness, that is, (I
conceive) his own For the Soul or Conscience, according to the Ancients, is
nothing but a kind of God in us, and the Voice of one is indeed the Voice of
the other. Hence Plato called all wicked Men (...) Atheists, for acting in
opposition to their Reason and Conscience, that is, to the God dwelling within
them.
Soul and Conscience, the divinest thing that God has granted to Man. It Is a
good Custom therefore we have received from our Ancestors, if we did but
observe it, of Desiring the Judge to be as favorable to us, as his Oath will
permit him. The meaning of which Request is no more than this, That he would do so
much for us, as I just now said might very honestly be done by a Judge for his
Friend. For if Men were obliged to do every thing presently, that their Friends
should desire of 'em; such Agreements as these ought to be counted not
Friendships, but dangerous Conspiracies. I speak here only of the ordinary sort
of Friendships; for Because Men of perfect Wisdom will never desire any thing,
but what is Honest and Reasonable, one of another.
in those which are found between perfectly Wise Men, there can be no danger of
any such thing. A famous pair of Friends, and often mentioned as such by
ancient Writers. See Valor. Max. Plutarch, etc.
Damon and Pinthias, two of Pythagoras's Followers, were so closely united to
one another in their Affections, that when Dicnysius the Sicilian Tyrant had
appointed a time wherein one of 'em should die, and the Party condemned had
begged a few Days respite, wherein he might provide for his Children and Family,
and recommend 'em to Somebody, who would take care of 'em after his Death; the
other delivered up himself in his stead, voluntarily to die in the room of his
Friend, if he did not accordingly make his Appearance. The Prisoner came back
at the Day appointed, in order to his Execution: which the Tyrant perceiving,
was so greatly amazed at their extraordinary Faithfulness, as to desire he
might be admitted a third Man in their Friendship. In Friendship therefore,
when that which seems Profitable comes into competition with that which is
Honest, the latter should always be preferred before the former: but Faith and
Religion should be preferred before Friendship, whenever it demands any thing
that is not reconcilable with Virtue and Honesty. Which one Rule, if but
carefully attended to, is sufficient for the Purpose we are now upon; which is
to discover, upon every occasion, what are those Duties which Friendship
requires of us.

CHAP. XI.
In the Management of Public Affairs, the appearance of Profit makes Men
relinquish Honesty. Several Examples of it. Examples of the contrary, when the
appearance of Profit is rejected for the sake of Honesty.

Having shown how far the Love of Empire, Friends, etc. draws particular Men
from their Duty: he now goes to show, How whole Republics have been drawn to
what is ill, by the appearance of some pretended Profit.
THe appearance of Profit is also an occasion, in public Affairs, of making
false Steps, and doing several things that are contrary to Duty. Thus our
Fathers, for Instance, did ill in destroying and razing of Corinth. The
Athenians yet worse in making an Order, That the People of A little Island in
the Sinus Saronicus, almost over against the Piraeum, a Port of Athens,
somewhat distant from the City, but joined to it by a mighty Wall, built by
Themistocles.
Aegina should all have their Thumbs cut off, because they were powerful with
their Navies at Sea. This, no question, was thought a profitable Decree; for
Aegina seemed to threaten their Port Piraeum, by reason of its nearness: But
nothing can truly be Profitable, that is Cruel; for the Nature of Man, which we
ought to follow as the Guide of our Actions, of all things in the World is most
opposite to Cruelty. Those do ill likewise, who banish all Strangers, and
forbid 'em the City; as M. Junius Pennus, a Tribune of the People about the
Year of Rome 657. It Is quoted by some under the Name of Lex Petronia.
Pennus did in the preceding Age, and C. Papius, Tribune of the People An. U.
C. 688, two Years before Cicero was Consul.
Papius but lately. For though it is but fair, that he who is no Citizen should not
have the Privileges of those who are; (which was made into a In the Year of
Rome 658, called, Lex Licinia and Mucia. See Note on chap. 17. of this Book.
Law by two very wise Consuls, viz. Crassus and S^aevola) yet wholly to exclude
'em from having any thing to do there, This is true, provided those Strangers
live peceably under the Government, and no ways prejudice or endanger the
State; for then to let 'em live there is a thing innoxiae utilitatis: Otherwise
there are several Cases, wherein it is allowable to expel Strangers from a City.
is plainly against the Dictates and Laws of Humanity. And as these things are
bad in the Government of a State, so nothing's more splendid and glorious on
the other hand, than for that, which appears to be the Interest of the Public,
to be rejected in the comparison with Justice and Honesty. Our own Commonwealth
can abundantly supply us with Some Examples of the contrary Practice, of those
that would not suffer a seeming Advantage to make them do any thing contrary to
their Duty.
Examples of this nature, as on other occasions, so more especially in the
second Punick War: when after the loss of that fatal Day at Cannae, it showed
more courage and bravery of Resolution, than ever it had done upon the greatest
Successes. There was not any sign of Faintheartedness seen, nor ever any
mention of Peace once heard of: so great is the glory and brightness of
Honesty, as that it utterly overwhelms the appearance of Interest. See Plutarch
's Life of Themistocles.
The Athenians knowing they should never be able to resist the Persians,
resolved by consent to abandon their City, and carrying their Wives and their
Children to A City of Peloponnesus, in Alliance with the Athenians.
Troezene, to defend by Sea the Liberties of Greece: and when one Cyrsilus
tried to persuade 'em not to leave their City, but receive Xerxes into it, they
took him and stoned him. Not but that the Man would have drawn 'em to a thing,
which was seemingly Profitable: but that seeming Profit was really none at all,
being contrary to Honesty. Themistocles, At the Island Salamis, mentioned chap.
18. Book 1.
after that notable Victory in the Persian War, told all the People in a
general Assembly, That he had thought of a thing, which might prove of great
Use and Advantage to the Public, but which 'twas not convenient that every
body should know of: whereupon he desired they would appoint him some Person, to
whom he might safely communicate it in secret. Aristides was immediately
appointed accordingly: Themistocles told him, 'Twould be no hard matter to fire
in private the Spartan Fleet, which was laid up at A Port of the
Lacedaemonians, where their Fleet was laid up after the famous Battle at
Salamis.
Gytheum; whereby the whole Power of that Republic must necessarily be ruined.
Aristides, as soon as he knew the Business, went back into the Assembly, (which
was big with Expectation of what he had to say) and let 'em all know, That
Themistocles 's Counsel indeed was Advantageous, but by no means Honest or
Creditable for the City. The Athenians therefore, thinking what was Dishonest
not to be truly Profitable, rejected immediately the whole Proposal, without
having heard so much as what it was, upon nothing else but this Report of
Aristides. How much better and more honestly did they do, than we; who can
suffer even Pirates to live free from Molestation, and yet demand Tribute of
our It Is probable he means those of Marseilles, and King Deiotarus; whom Caesar
either deprived of their Liberty, or made pay great Sums of Money, for taking
part with Pompey in the Civil War.
Confederates and Allies?

CHAP. XII.
The Opinion, that a thing may be Profitable, though it is not Honest, very
pernicious. A Case put, wherein it is doubted, Whether that, which seems to be
Profitable, be Honest or no. The Arguments on either side, of two Philosophers,
differing in their Opinions. The Difference between to Conceal, and not to
Tell. The Society of Mankind, how far it obliges.

LEt us lay down this therefore as a standing Maxim, That whatever is Dishonest
can never be Profitable: no, not though we should arrive at the full possession
of all those Advantages, which we proposed to obtain by it. Nay, this very
Persuasion, That a thing may be Profitable, though it is Base and Dishonest, is
one of the greatest Misfortunes and Calamities, that could ever have happened
to the Life of Man. He now proposes several particular Cases, wherein the
Philosophers themselves dispute; whether Profit and Honesty be opposite, or not.
But there often fall out (as was before observed) some peculiar Cases, wherein
that which is Honest has a seeming Repugnance with that which is Profitable; so
that it requires some farther Consideration, to know whether this Repugnance be
certain and real, or whether they may not be brought to a fair Agreement. To
this Head belong such Examples as these: Suppose we, for Instance, an honest
Merchant, when Corn was scarce and extremely dear at Rhodes, to bring a large
quantity thither from Alexandria; and withal to know, That a great many Ships,
well laden with Corn, were in their way thither from the same City: Should he
tell this now to the People of Rhodes, or say nothing of it, but sell his own
Corn at the best Rates he could? We suppose him a Virtuous and Honest Man, and
don't here discourse of the Deliberation of one, that would hold his peace if
he thought 'twere Dishonest; but of one, that doubts whether it be Dishonest,
or not. In such sort of Cases Scholar of Zeno the Zidonian, born at Seleucia a
Town near Babylon, and thence called the Babylonian. He was a wise Politician
as well as a Philosopher; and was sent by the Athenians, together with
Critolaus and Carneades, to manage their Business with the Roman Senate. Here
he got acquainted with Africanus the Elder, the Wise Laelius, etc. who all
delighted to hear his Lectures. See Cic. de Orat. Book 2. chap. 37.
Diogenes the Babylonian, a Man of great Credit and Note among the Stoics, is
of one Opinion; and Antipater his Scholar, an extraordinary smart and ingenious
Man, of just the contrary. Antipater would have every thing be plainly told,
that so the Buyer might be ignorant of nothing in what he buys, that the Seller
himself knows of: Diogenes thinks it enough in the Seller, to tell the Faults
of his Goods as far as the Laws require it; and, as for the rest, though to use
no Cozening, yet, since he is come with design to sell 'em, to get as much Money
for 'em as ever he can. Here, may the Merchant say, I have brought my Corn; I
have exposed it to sale; and sell it no dearer than other People do; (nay
perhaps he will say cheaper, there being now a greater quantity, than there was
before) and pray where is now the Wrong I have done to any Body? Antipater
argues upon a different Principle: What say you, (quoth he) are not you obliged
to do Good to Mankind; and be serviceable to the Society of all Men in general?
See Book 1. chap. 7, 9. Book 3. chap. 5, 6.
Were not you born under such an Obligation? And had not you such Principles
ingrafted into you by Nature, which it is always your Duty to follow and obey,
that your single Interest should be the same with that of all Men; and again
that of all Men should be the same with yours? And will you, this
notwithstanding, conceal from the People what Plenty there is a-coming, the
knowledge of which might be of so great Use and Advantage to 'em? Diogenes
perhaps will reply upon him thus: It Is one thing to conceal, and another not to
tell; nor can I be said to conceal from you now, though I don't tell you, what
the Nature and Essence of the Gods is, and what the Happiness or chief Good of
Men; things which 'twould do one much more Kindness to know, than that
Quantities of Corn are like to be here shortly. But if any thing be Profitable
for you to hear, it is none of my Duty to come and tell it you immediately. Nay
but you will find that it is your Duty, (may the other reply) if you will piease
but to remember, That there is such a kind of thing, as a mutual Relation, and
Society amongst all Men. Well, I do remember it; (may the other reply again)
but, I pray you, is that Society of such a Nature, as that no Man, who lives in
it, must have any thing that is his own? If this be so, then there is no more
selling, but we must even give every thing away that we have.

CHAP. XIII.
Another Case put, Whether he that sells a bad House, be obliged to tell the
Purchaser it is so? The Arguments pro and con of Antipater and Diogenes. Cicero
's Determination of it, as also of that in the foregoing Chapter. What it is
properly to Conceal.

YOu plainly perceive, that it is never once said in all this Dispute, Though such
a thing's not Honest, yet I Will do it because it is Profitable: but the Diogenes.
one side defends the Expediency of it, no farther than it is Honest; and the
Antipater.
other denies that it ought to be done, because it is not Honest. Again, Suppose
a good Man were to sell an House, because of some Defects which he himself
knows of, though others do not: Suppose it to be unhealthy, for Example, but
esteemed quite the contrary; Serpents to annoy all the Chambers of it, but no
body to know this; made of bad Materials, and ready to fall, but no one to
discern this except the Owner only: I demand, if he sells this for more than he
expected, and don't tell the Buyer of these several Faults, whether he don't
act like a Knave and a Villain? Yes undoubtedly, answers Antipater: For what is
this better, than not to set a Man right, when he is out of his Way, (which at
Athens was punished with public A kind of Curse or Excommunication proclaimed
solemnly by the Priests. See Plut. and Corn. Nep. Life of Alcibiad.
Execrations) thus to suffer the Buyer, as it were, to fall headlong, and run
through a Mistake into very great Mischiefs. Nay, it is something worse yet than
not to show a Man his Way; for it is wilfully and designedly to draw him into
Mischief. Diogenes on the contrary vindicates the Seller: Pray did he force you
(says he) to buy his House, when did he so much as advise you to it? He set a
thing to sale, which he did not like; and here you have bought a thing, which
you did like. For if those Men, who make it be published to the World, Here Is a
very good House, and very well built, to be sold; are not counted Deceivers,
though the House be not good, nor at all well built; how much less should those
who don't commend their House at all? For wherever the Buyer has the free use
of his Judgment, what Fraud can there be upon the Seller's part? When, for
Example, he causes it to be published, Here Is a very good House to be sold; he
is not bound to answer for its Goodness, if it should prove otherwise.
And if a Man is not bound to make good all he said, would you have him make
good what he did not say? Beside; What, I beseech you, could be more odd and
foolish, than for the Seller to tell the Faults of his own Wares? Or what more
ridiculous, than for the Crier to proclaim by the Proprietor's Order, An
infectious, pestilential House to be sold? And thus you see there are some
doubtful Cases, in which on the one hand Men argue for Honesty, and on the
other are Advocates for Profit; so far as to show, that it is not only Honest to
do that which is Profitable, but even Dishonest to neglect and omit it: And
this is that seeming Opposition we spoke of, which often falls out between
Profit and Honesty. Having proposed these two Cases, he now proceeds to the
Decision of 'em; and thinks the two were bound to tell all to the Purchasers;
because such concealing is a shifting, sly, deceitful, etc. and by consequence
an unprofitable Trick.
But let us now proceed to determine these Cases; for we did not propose 'em for
mere Question sake, but that we might give 'em a fair Decision. I am then of
Opinion, That the Corn-Merchant ought not to have concealed from the Rhodians,
nor this Seller of his House from the Purchasers of it, the several things that
are mentioned in their Cases. It Is true not to tell a thing, is not properly to
conceal it; but not to tell that, which People are concerned to know, merely
for the sake of some Advantage to your self, I think is: And there is no body
but knows what concealing this is, and who they are that make a Custom of it: I
am sure not your plain, sincere, ingenuous, honest and good sort of People; but
rather your shifting, sly, cunning, deceitful, roguish, crafty, foxish, juggling
kind of Fellows. And must it not necessarily be Unprofitable for any Man, to
lie under this, and a much longer Catalogue, of such black and most odious
Names of Vices?

CHAP. XIV.
Of those, who are so far from telling the Faults of their Wares, as that they
invent Lies to make 'em appear the better. An Example of this kind. Aquilius 's
Definition of Knavery, or Dolus malus.

ANd Having shown that those who conceal are to blame; he proceeds to those who
invent plain Lies for the sake of a little seeming Advantage; who must needs be
much more faulty.
if those Men are thus blamable, who keep the Faults of their things secret;
what shall we think of those, who add downright Lying to it? C. Canius, a
Roman Knight, one that loved to be pleasant, and a pretty good Scholar,
removing to The chief City of the Island Sicily, a very pleasant and delightful
place; taken by the Romans under the Conduct of Marcellus, in the second Punick
War.
Siracuse for the sake of Retirement and not of Employment, (as he was used to
say) gave out he had a great mind to buy some Gardens, whither he might invite
his Friends and Acquaintance, and enjoy their Conversation without being
interrupted. This coming abroad, there was one Pythius, a Goldsmith or Banker
at Siracuse, who told him, Indeed he had no Gardens to sell, but such as he had
were at Canius's Service, if he pleased to make use of 'em, as much as though
they were his own: And withal he desired him to come next day, and take a
Dinner with him there. When Canius had promised him to come accordingly, what
does he do but send immediately for some Fishermen, (having Interest enough, by
reason of his Calling, with all sorts of People) and desires 'em the next day
to fish before his Gardens; giving 'em their Instructions about what he would have
'em do. Canius came at the time appointed, and Pythius had provided a very
splendid Entertainment for him: Just before the Garden, where he could not but
take notice of it, was a company of Fisher-boats; and every one of the Men in
particular brought the Fish he had caught, and laid 'em down before Pythius.
How now Pythius! (says Canius to him) what all these Fish here? All these
Boats? O lack, Sir, (says the other) that is no great Wonder; all the Fish that
supply the City must be taken here: this is their common Water; none of these
People could ever live, if it were not for my House. Canius immediately was all
on fire, and begged of Pythius that he would sell him the Place. He pretended
abundance of Unwillingness at first; but at length (to make short of it) was
brought to a Compliance. Canius buys it, together with all that belonged to it;
and being very Rich, and desirous of the Purchase, gives as much for it as
Pythius demanded. Security's given and taken for the Money, and the whole
Bargain finally brought to a conclusion. The next Day Canius invites some
Acquaintance thither, and he comes himself somewhat earlier than ordinary; but
sees not one of the Fishermens Boats there. Hereupon he enquires of one of the
next Neighbors, whether or no that were any Holiday with the Fishermen;
because he saw none of 'em thereabouts. Not that I know of, replies the other;
but they none of 'em ever use to fish here, and therefore I wondered what the
matter was Yesterday. This put Canius into a lamentable Fret; but how could he
remedy himself? A noble and learned Roman, oftentimes mentioned and commended
by our Author, whose Colleague he was in the Pretorship. He was excellently
skilled in the Civil Law, which he learned of Muc. Scaevola, the High Priest.
There was no Action against a Man, it seems, for this sort of Knavery before
his time. The Occasion of his making these Formulae See in Valor. Max. Book 8.
chap. 2.
For Aquillius, my Colleague and familiar Friend, had not then published his
Court-forms about Knavery; upon which when he was asked what he meant by the
word Knavery, he answered, These words must be taken in an ill Sense: For all
making Show, etc. is not Knavery, but only that which is joined cum Malitia,
with an ill Design of Cheating, etc.
The making show of one thing, while one's doing another: a very perspicuous
and plain Definition* as indeed he was a Man very happy at Defining. Pythius
then, and all others whatever, that make show of one thing, and yet do the
contrary, are perfidious, wicked and knavish Rascals. It Is impossible therefore
that any of their Actions should ever be Profitable, when they are under the
scandal of such a number of filthy and detestable Vices.

CHAP. XV.
All Hypocrisy and Dissimulation to be taken away. Knavery, or Dolus malus
punished by the Roman Laws; and Judgments of Equity. A remarkable Action of
Scaevola 's. He is not a Wise Man, who is not Wise for his own Advantage; in
what Sense true. A truly Good Man is not content with being as Just, as the
Laws require. A Definition of such a One. He Is very hard to be found.

IF then this Definition of Aquillius be good, all Hypocrisy and Dissimulation
must be banished from amongst Men; so that no honest Man will be guilty of
either of 'em, for the sake of buying or selling to his greater Advantage. He
proceeds from Natural Honesty, or the Laws of Right Reason, to the Laws of the
City; and shows that Knavery was punishable by those; though not in all, yet in
several Cases.
Nay this Knavery or Cozenage has always been punished by the Laws of the City:
witness the XII Tables about the Case of Guardianship; and Laetorius's Law
about the Overreaching of Minors. Nay where there was nothing of a Law against
it, 'twas nevertheless punishable in those Judgments of Equity, the Form of
which was, Ex fide bona agitur, That all things be done faithfully and
honestly. And the same sort of words are in all other Judgments; as when a
Wife, for Example, enters an Action for her Dowry, upon a Divorce from her
Husband, Melius Aequius, That things be settled better and more equitably: when
any thing had been mortgaged and pawned to another, Ut inter bonos been agier,
That among honest Men there be nothing done, but only that which is Honest. And
could there possibly be any Knavery allowed of in that, where the very
Court-form was, Melius Aequius, For the better and more equitable settling of
things? Or any thing done through Deceit and Roguery, where these words are
publicly read in Court, Inter bonos been agier, That amongst honest Men there
may be nothing done, except that which is Honest? Now there is something of this
Knavery, as Aquillus says, in all false Shows and hypocritical Pretenses: Lying
therefore should wholly be banished from all sorts of Business, and Commerce in
the World: Nor should Sellers bring People to bid high for their Goods, and
enhance their Prizes; nor Purchasers others to bid under-value, and so beat 'em
down lower: but each of 'em, if they come to speak about a Bargain, should say
at a word what he will give and take. Mentioned before, chap. 32. Book 1.
Quintus Scaevola, the Son of Publius, going to buy an Estate, desired the
Owner to tell him at one word, what 'twas he must have for it: the Seller did
so; and Scaevola told him, He thought 'twas worth more than what he had
demanded for it; and accordingly gave him a thousand Crowns over. Now there is
no one but will grant this was done like an Honest, but they will not allow
'twas like a Prudent Man; any more, than if he had sold a thing for less, than
he might have had for it. Here now, you may see, is that pernicious Opinion,
thus to make a Distinction between Prudence and Honesty. Ennius has a Saying to
this purpose, That he would not give a Farthing for a Prudent Man, that could
not be prudent for his own Advantage; to which I am ready to set my Hand; if he
and I can agree upon one and the same Meaning of the word Advantage. I find
that Mentioned again afterward, chap. 23. He flourished about the Year of Rome
640. All his Works are lost.
Hecaton, a Rhodian Philosopher, and Scholar of Panaetius, in his Book about
Offices, which he wrote to A noble Roman, Grandson to Paullus Aemilius, and
Nephew to the Younger Africanus; beloved of Laelius, Scaevola, and all the
great Men of that time. He was Hearer of the famous Panaetius, a Letter of
whose to him is mentioned by our Author; who often commends him for a Man of
Wisdom, Industry and Learning. He was a great Admirer of the Stoic Philosophy,
which lost him the Pretorship. See Orat. pro Muraena, chap. 63.
Q. Tubero, has laid this down as a Wise Man's Duty, First to conform to the
Laws, and Customs, and Practices of his Country; and, when he has done that,
to make the best Improvement he can of his Estate: since we ought to seek
Riches not only for our selves, but our Children, Friends, Relations and
especially the Commonwealth; whose public Riches must principally consist in
the Wealth and Stock of its particular Members. This Man can by no means
approve of that Action, which I just now mentioned of Quintus Scaevola; and
there is nothing, he tells us, that he would scruple to do for his own Advantage, if
it be but permitted and allowed of by the Law; For he that has no more regard
to Honesty, than just what the Laws of the Public require; and will scruple to
do nothing, so as he can escape their Cognizance, can never be an Honest and
Good Man. The Laws and Dictates of Nature and Right Reason, not only of the
City he dwells in, ought to be the Rule of an honest Man's Actions; these being
only a Shadow and faint Draught of that perfect Justice, to which we are led by
the other. See chap. 17.
for which I think he does not much deserve to be thanked or commended. If then
to make pretense of that which never was, and cunningly to dissemble the real
Truth, be pieces of Knavery; there are but very few Actions that are altogether
free from it: And if he alone be an honest Man, Who does all the Good he can,
and does no Injury to any body; 'twill be no easy matter to find one in the
World. The Result of what has been said is this, To be Knavish and Wicked can
never be Profitable, because it is attended with Baseness and He does not mean
that outward Dishonor, which Men draw upon themselves by their wicked Actions,
when they come to be known; (for that is avoided when the Action is concealed,
whereas even then it is infamous to be Wicked) but he means the inward Reproach
of Men's Consciences, and the real Scandal and Dishonor that it is, for a Man
to do such things as are unworthy of, and disagreeable to his Reason. This
follows every wicked Action, though kept never so secret; and cannot be avoided
but by living such a Life, as becomes the great Rule of our Actions, Reason.
Dishonor; and it always must be Profitable to be Virtuous and Good, because
it always is Honest and Creditable.

CHAP. XVI.
The Care taken by the Romans, to make the Seller tell the Faults of the thing
to be sold. An Example or two of Cases of this nature.

He proceeds to foam particulae Cases, wherein Knavery was punishable by the
Civil Laws: Such as are concealing the Faults of an House, or the like.
IN the Matter of buying and selling Estates, it is provided amongst us by the
Civil Constitutions, That he who is the Seller should tell all the Faults, that
he knows of, to the Purchaser. For the XII Tables ordering no more than this,
That the Seller should be bound to make good those Faults, which were expressly
mentioned by word of Mouth in the Bargain; and which whoever denied was to pay
double Damages: The For though the XII Tables were the Ground and Foundation of
the Roman Law; yet the Learned by their Interpretations, Inferences from 'em,
by their Formulae applied to particular Cases, or the like; added a great many
new things to 'em, which passed for a Rule in Judgments, as well as the XII
Tables.
Lawyers have appointed a Punishment for those, who themselves don't discover
the Defects of what they sell. For they so decreed, That if the Seller of an
Estate, when he made the Bargain, did not tell all the Faults in particular,
that he knew of it; he should afterward be bound to make 'em good to the
Purchaser. Titus Claudius Centumalus (to give an Example) had a House that
stood upon the Coelian Hill, and hindered the Augurs as they made their
Observations from the For making their Observations from the flights of Birds,
and that many times at a very great distance, 'twas necessary they should have
some high Place, and that nothing should be in the way to hinder their Prospect.
Capitoline Mount: who therefore gave him orders to pull that down, which was
such an hindrance to their Business. Instead of this Claudius puts a Bill over
the Door, That the House was to be sold; and quickly put it off, P. Calpurnius
Lanarius being the Man that bought it. The Augurs in a short time sent him the
same Orders, and he accordingly took care to perform them. But afterward
coming to understand, That Claudius had not set the House to sale, till after
he had been ordered by the Augurs to demolish it; he brought in against him an
Action at Law, To receive such Satisfaction, as in Conscience and Equity he was
bound to make him. Marcus Cato, the Father of him that is now living (for as
others are distinguished by the Names of their Fathers, so he that begot this
incomparable Person should be named from his Son) sat as Judge in the Case; and
gave this Sentence upon the whole matter, That since Claudius knew this
Inconvenience beforehand, and did not discover it when he sold the Estate, he
was obliged in Equity to make it good to the Purchaser. He judged it therefore
to be a part of Honesty, That the Seller should fairly declare to the Buyer,
all the Faults which he knows in the thing to be sold. If then this Judgment
were just and equitable, neither the Merchant that brought the Corn, nor the
supposed Seller of the infectious House did well in concealing what either of
'em knew. But all the particular sorts of Concealing could never be taken
notice of by the Laws of the City; however such as could were very carefully
provided against. M. Marius Gratidianus, a Son of one M. Gratidius of Arpinum,
whose Sister was Married to Cicero's Grandfather, therefore he calls him his
Kinsman. He was adopted by M. Marius, Brother of him that was seven times
Consul. He was afterward killed by Sylla's Order, having been of Marius's Party
against him.
Kinsman of mine, had sold an House to Sergius Orata, which he had bought of
the same not many Years before. The House, it seems, A thing in Law is said,
Servire alicui, when some one has a Right of using it some way, or hindering
some thing about it, etc. As I may be said to have a Servitus upon a Man's
House or Ground, when I can of Right demand a Way through it; or hinder from
Building higher, etc. lest he should hinder my Prospect.
paid a Duty to Sergius, which Marius never once mentioned in the Bargain. The
Business came at last to a Suit in Law, where The two famous Orators mentioned
above, and brought in speaking in his de Oratore; where he mentions this very
Cause.
Lucius Crassus took part with Orata, and The two famous Orators mentioned
above, and brought in speaking in his de Oratore; where he mentions this very
Cause.
Anthony with Gratidianus. Crassus insisted very much upon the Law, which says,
That the Seller shall make good those Faults, which he himself knew of, and yet
concealed 'em from the Buyer: Anthony on the other side argued for Equity, That
Sergius could not but know that Encumbrance, who had sold the House himself but
a little while before; and therefore what need was there of telling him of it?
That he could not complain of being any ways tricked upon, since he knew very
well the condition of what he bought. I have brought you these Instances only
to let you see, That these cunning sort of Men were never approved of by our
Ancestors.

CHAP. XVII.
The different Methods used by Law and Philosophy, for the rooting out of
Knavery. Treachery to set up Traps, though one don't drive the Beasts into 'em.
How the Law of Nature differs from the Civil. The Excellence of the Roman Civil
Laws. The Extent of that Expression, Ex fide bona. Knavish Cunning very
different from true Prudence. How the Laws provide against Fraud in Selling of
Slaves. Nature forbids one Man to make his Gain of another's Ignorance. The ill
Effects of false Prudence.

BUt The Difference between the Laws and Philosophers, as to taking away
Wickedness, is chiefly this: That those can restrain the outward Actions only,
but these inform the Mind and Understanding: those can only punish the actual
Crimes of Delinquents, but these by informing the Judgment, and improving the
Reason, take care to prevent the Commission of 'em; and keep Men from Vice out
of a Love of Virtue, whereas the Laws can only terrify them from it by fear of
Punishment.
the Laws take one way to root these Frauds out, and Philosophers another; the
former meddling no further with them, than as they break out into open Acts, and
may (as 'twere) be laid hold on by the Hands of Justice: the latter
endeavoring to hinder their breaking out, and to prevent them by Precepts of
Wisdom and Reason. Reason therefore requires of us, That we do nothing
Treacherously, nothing Deceitfully, nothing merely by outward Shows and false
Pretenses. Now is it not Treachery to set up a Trap, though one does not raise
and pursue the Beasts into it; for the simple Creatures of themselves will run
into it, without being driven? Just so you offer an House to be sold, because
of some Faults which you know to be in it; and put up your Bill, as it were
like a Trap, in which some unwary sort of Body will be taken. I know that, at
present, the depravation of Manners, and prevalence of evil Custom, have made
this be counted neither Base nor Dishonorable; and that it is tolerated by the
Laws and Constitutions of the Public, but I am sure it is not tolerated by the
Laws of Nature. For it is to be considered (I must repeat it again, though I have
already mentioned it a great many times) that there is such a thing as Natural
Society, which comprehends all Men, and ties and unites 'em to one another:
There Is a nearer between those of the same Nation; and a nearer yet, between
those of the same City. Therefore our Forefathers made a distinction, between
The Law of Nations is nothing else, but some Rules and Maxims of the Law of
Nature, which Reason tells us we ought to observe, in our Actions and
Intercourse with all Men whatever. This is not so distinct from that of
particular Cities, as though this could command any thing contrary to the former.
No; the Laws of every City must be allowed by Reason, and suppose it as their
Foundation; but they determine some things, which Reason has left indifferent,
and descend to some Particulars as to Time, Place, etc. which Reason does not
meddle with.
that Law which is common to Nations, and that which belongs to each City in
particular. Whatever we are bound, by the Civil Constitutions, to do to our
Citizens; we are Because the Civil may add, though it can add nothing contrary,
to that of Nations.
not obliged, by the Law of Nations, to do the same to Strangers: but Because
that of Nations is still in force and obliges, notwithstanding what the Civil
may have added to it. The building upon a Foundation does not take away the
Foundation it self.
whatever we are bound by this latter to do to others, the same we ought to do
to our Citizens also: But The Laws and particular States consider Men, as now
they are in the World, and only regulate their outward Actions, so as to
preserve the Peace and Safety of the Public: But those of Nature or Right
Reason, in the Observation of which consists the perfectest Justice that Men
are capable of; considers Men as they ought to be, and commands all that
Purity, Sincerity, etc. that becomes the Perfection of a Reasonable Nature;
which is more than the Civil can possibly do. The Nature of God is the true
Standard of genuin Right and perfect Justice: Right Reason, which is taken from
the Nature of God, is an original Piece; which, though in no wise equal to the
living Standard, is at least agreeable to it as far as it reaches: The Civil
Laws are taken from Reason, and are only a Copy and faint Representation of it;
however 'twere to be wished that, such as it is, it were carefully followed.
This is the Sense, in which I take this place.
the Law, which at present we use amongst us, is far from being an original
Piece, immediately taken from genuin Right and true perfect Justice; it is only
a Copy and faint Representation of it. However I could wish we lived up even to
this; for it is copied at least from some of the best Originals, which were
drawn from the Truth and Nature of the thing. For how excellent is that Form in
judicial Proceedings, Uti ne, etc. That I may not be Defrauded or brought to an
Inconvenience, by trusting to you, and your Honesty! And how incomparable that
other, That Honest Men do nothing, but that which is Honest and without Design.
But the great Question is, Who they are that are Honest Men; and what it is to
do nothing, but that which is Honest! Of whom he speaks chap. 1. of his de
Amicitia, and to whom he applied himself for Knowledge in the Civil Laws, after
the Death of the other Mucius, who was Augur. He was Cos. with L. Licinius
Crassus, An. U. C. 658, whom he called duo Sapientissimi Consules, chap. 11. of
this Book. He was afterward killed by Marius's Order in Vesta's Temple:
Temperantiae, prudentiaeque specimen (says our Author) ante simulachrum Vestae
trucidatus est, etc. De Not. Deor.
Q. Scaevola, I remember, the High Priest, was used to say, That all those
Judgments which had Ex fide bona, Faithfully and honestly, put into their
Forms, were of mavelous Force; and that Faithfully and Honestly were of very
large Extent, and belonged not only to Wardships, Societies, Trusts and
Commissions, but to Buyings, Sollings, Lettings and Hirings, which relate to
the Society and Intercourse of Mankind; and that 'twas the part of an
extraordinary Judge, to determine exactly, all these Cases, what one Man ought
to make good to another, upon only the bare Principles of Conscience and
Honesty; especially seeing Men differ in their Judgments about the greatest
part of 'em. All Craft therefore should utterly be banished, and that knavish
sort of Cunning, which would fain indeed be counted, but is the farthest from
Prudence, of any thing in the World: For Prudence consists in the making a
right Distinction between Good and Evil, but this kind of Cunning gives the
preference to Evil; if, at least, it be true (as most certainly it is) that
every thing is Evil, which is contrary to Honesty. Neither is it only in Farms
and Houses, that the Laws of the City, which are copied from Nature, take care
to have Cheating and Knavery punished; but in Slaves they exclude all Fraud in
the Seller: For he that is presumed to know what the Slave was, if he does not
declare whether he be Healthy, a Runagate, or apt to Steal, is answerable to
the Buyer, by an Order of the Aediles: But this does not hold in the Case of
Because he being newly come to the Estate, of which Slaves were a part, is
presumed not to know whether they are Healthy, etc. or not.
an Heir. From what has been said, it apparently follows, That is, The Laws
command, that no one should Enrich himself by Cheating another; and the Laws
are copied from Reason; whence it follows, that Reason commands, etc.
since Nature is the Fountain from whence Law is derived, that it is agreeable
to the Dictates and Rules of Nature, that no one should endeavor to make his
own Advantage from the Ignorance of another. Having shown by a sufficient
number of Instances, That none of these Actions can be Profitable, which are
contrary to strict Justice or Honesty: he now goes on to those Actions, which
are done under the pretense of Wisdom and Prudence, but indeed are quite
contrary to it; and shows these also to be Unprofitable.
And indeed there is no greater Mischief in the World, than this Wisdom, falsely
so named, joined with Baseness and Knavery. From this have arisen innumerable
Cases, wherein Profit is set up in opposition to Honesty: For where almost is
there a Man to be found, that would scruple to Injure and Wrong any other, if
he could do it with secrecy, and without fear of being punished?

CHAP. XVIII.
An Example of a Wickedness committed, when there was no Fear of Punishment.
It Is a Wickedness to be a Receiver of ill-gotten Goods, though you have no hand
in the getting 'em. It Is Dishonest to get Estates by servile Flattery.
Separating Profit from Honesty the Cause of all Mischiefs.

LEt us try, if you please, by some Examples of that nature, wherein the common
sort of People, perhaps, think there is no Crime: For we don't speak here of
such as cut Throats, Poison, make false Wills, Rob or Embezzle the public
Treasures; who aren't to be repressed with nothing but Words and philosophical
Discourses, but must be vexed and wearied out with Chains and Imprisonment: But
let us consider here what is done by those, who pass in the World for Men of
Honesty and Integrity. A Will that was forged, of one Minutius Basilus, a
wealthy Person, was brought by some People out of Greece into Italy; who, to
make it the more easily pass for good, made Both mentioned before, chapter 8. Book
1. and chapter 16. Book 2.
Marcus Crassus and Lucius Hortensius, the two greatest Men at that time in the
City, Joint-Heirs with themselves: who, though they suspected the whole to be a
Forgery, yet having nothing of hand in it themselves, they made little scruple
of getting an Advantage by other Peoples Villainy. And what then? was that
sufficient to excuse 'em from Fault, That they themselves had no hand in it?
Truly I am fully persuaded not; though I always loved Hortensius.
one of 'em while he was alive, and don't hate the Crassus, whom Cicero by no
means liked, as appears from the next Chapter, and especially from his sixth
Paradox.
other since he is dead and gone. But when Basilus had desired that Marcus
Satrius, his Sister's Son, should bear his Name, and had appointed him his
Heir; (I nominate him, says he, Lord of my Sabine and Picenian Manors) was it
any ways a just and reasonable Thing, and not rather an eternal Blot upon those
times, that some principal Citizens should have a Man's Estate, and Satrius the
Heir be put off barely with his Name? For if he be unjust, that don't keep off
Injuries from any of his Neighbors, and defend and protect 'em as far as he is
able, (as I Have shown already in the Chap. 7.
first Book) what sort of Man shall we take him to be, who not only does not
keep off an Injury, but rather on the contrary helps to promote it? Nay I, for
my part, am wholly of Opinion, That Estates which are left Men by true Wills,
if gotten by knavish and servile Flatteries, not by a real, but pretended
Friendship, are Scandalous and Dishonest. But in such kind of Cases it often
comes to pass, that one thing seems Profitable, and another Honest: undoubtedly
by a Mistake; for the same Viz. Nature or Right Reason, to which whatever is
contrary can neither be Honest nor Profitable.
thing is the Measure both of the one and the other; which whoever perceives
not, will easily be led into all sorts of Roguery. For he that begins thus to
argue with himself, That indeed is Honest, but this is Advantageous; impudently
divides, by this gross Mistake, those things which by Nature are coupled and
united: which is the deadly Root, from which all Frauds, Wickednesses and
Villainies spring.

CHAP. XIX.
The Carriage of a truly Honest Man, when it is in his power to be Dishonest, so
as not to be discovered. The true Notion of a Good Man. A Saying of Fimbria 's
in the Case of Lutatius Pinthia, to this purpose. A Proverb borrowed from the
Country, showing, That nothing Dishonest how secret soever can be Profitable.

IF a Good Man therefore should have such a power, as that by snapping of his
Fingers he could slip his Name cunningly into rich Peoples Wills, he would never
make use of it: no, not although he were fully assured, that no one living could
either know or suspect it: But give such a power to Marcus Crassus, that by
doing the same thing he should make himself Heir, where he really was not so,
and he would Dancing was esteemed but a scandalous Practice, and unbecoming a sober
and prudent Person, among the Romans: wherefore our Author tells us in his
Oration for Muraena, chap. 6. No body almost Dances, unless he be Drunk or Mad;
and calls it, Omnium vitiorum extremum, A Vice that no one would be guilty of,
'till he had utterly abandoned all Virtue; and Umbram luxuriae that which
follows Riot and Debauchery, as the Shadow does the Body. The meaning therefore
of this place is, That Crassus would not stick at the basest Actions, if he
could but fill his Coffers by them.
Dance, I dare warrant you, publicly in the Marketplace. But he that is
Honest, and answers to our Notion of a Good Man, will never take any thing away
from another for the enriching himself, and filling his own Coffers; which
whoever admires at, let him even confess at the same time, that he does not
understand what a Good Man is. For if any one will thro'ly examine his own
Thoughts, and clear up a little his obscure Conceptions, he will quickly be able
to tell himself, that a Good Man is one, Who does all the Good that he can to
others, but never any Harm; unless necessarily forced upon it for his own
Security. I desire to know then; is not that Man guilty of Harming another,
that outs the rightful Heirs, as it were, by a Spell, and procures himself to
be put into their Rooms? How then! (will some Men say) what, would not you have
People consult their own Interest? Yes; but withal I would have 'em understand,
That nothing can be so, that is Base or Dishonest: which is a necessary Maxim
for all those to learn, who ever design to be Good Men. I remember I heard my
own Father tell, as long ago as when I was a Boy, That Fimbria, one who had
formerly been With C. Marius, An. Romans Cond. 649, when Cicero was but three
Years old.
Consul, was Judge in a case of Lutatius Pinthia's, a Roman Knight, and a very
Honest Man; who, The Plaintiff in a Cause was to lay down a Sum of Money, which
if his Case was not just, he was to lose. The Defendant was to do the same, or
give up the Cause to the Plaintiff. This Money was called Sponsio or
Sacramentum. See Val. Max. Book 7. chap. 2.
upon pain of losing a certain Sum of Money, was to prove himself to be a Good
Man. Hereupon Fimbria plainly told him, that he would never pass Judgment upon such
a matter; least either, by giving the Cause against him, he should spoil the
Credit of a well-approv'd Citizen; or else should be forced, by giving it for
him, to pronounce that any one was a Good Man: which he could not do,
considering the infinite Virtues and Duties, that are requisite to the
completing any Person of that Character. This Good Man then, of whom Fimbria
had a Notion, as well as Socrates, will never judge any thing Profitable,
that is Dishonest: From whence it follows, That such a one will always be so far
from doing, as that he will never so much as think of any thing, which he is
afraid should be laid open to the rest of the World. And is it not a shame that
Philosophers should doubt of this, when there is not ever a Peasant in the
Country but assents to it? For from them we have gotten that common Saying,
which is now by long Usage become a Proverb among us, which they bring in to
signify the faithful Dealing and Honesty of a Man, He Is one (say they) that
you may venture Micare signifies to hold up the Fingers; a Play among the
Romans, said to be in use to this Day in Italy, wherein one holding up such a
number of his Fingers, the other on a sudden (or something like it) was to
guess how many they were. 'Twas easy therefore to Cheat in the dark, by
holding up more or fewer before the other could be able to see. Hence to
express a very Honest Man, and one that would scorn to Cheat, though sure not to
be discovered, they used this Proverb. See Erasm. Adag.
to play with at Even and Odd in the dark. The meaning of which, what can it be
but this, That nothing can be Profitable, which is not Honest and Becoming,
though a Man could be certain of being never found out in it? You see then
according to this Proverb, that neither that Gyges, whom we mentioned above;
nor that other, whom we just now supposed to have a power, by the snapping of
his Fingers to become all Peoples Heir, can by any means be excused. For as
that, which is Scandalous and Dishonest in it self, however it may be hid from
the Eye of the World, can never be brought to be Honest and Creditable; so also
that, which is not Honest and Creditable, can never be brought to be Profitable
and Advantageous; the very That which is not Honest is contrary to Reason; that
which is Profitable must be agreeable to Reason; otherwise it deprives Men of
their Good, viz. Virtue, and consequently would be Unprofitable. The Natures
therefore of these two being opposite, can never let the same Action be not
Honest, and yet Advantageous.
Nature of the things resisting and opposing it.

CHAP. XX.
Great Rewards are very apt to make Men forgetful of Honesty. Examples
concerning this. An excellent Rule for our Direction in this case. A Man loses
more by doing an unjust Action, than ever he can gain by it, be the Reward what
it will.

BUt He goes on with his Examples of Craft, that pretends to be true Prudence;
and shows, That though it gets Men Honors, etc. as it did Marius the Consulship;
yet that it is truly Unprofitable.
when People expect great Advantages from their Roguery, it is a mighty
Temptation for 'em to be guilty of it. Thus, for Instance, when He who
afterward came to be seven times Consul.
Marius was far from any hopes of obtaining the Consulship, and had lain seven
Years from the time of his being Praetor, so that no one suspected his standing
for that Honor; being dispatched to Rome by A noble, valiant and virtuous
Roman, chose Cos. in the War of Jugurtha King of Numidia, and sent against him;
where by his Valor and wise Conduct he beat that Prince, and might have ended
the War, had not Marius supplanted him. However he obtained a Triumph, and the
Surname of Numidicus. See Sallust. Jugurth.
Q. Metellus, whose Lieutenant he was, an extraordinary Man, and a brave Member
of the Republic; he accused his General to the People of Rome for protracting
the War; and told 'em, That if they would but choose him Consul, they should
soon have Jugurtha, either dead or alive, delivered into their power. It Is true
by this Artifice he got to be chosen Consul, but he paid for it the price of
his Honesty and Fidelity; who could thus bring an useful and excellent Citizen,
whose Lieutenant he was, and by whom he was sent, into Hatred and Ill Will by
false Accusations? Nor did my See chap. 16. of this Book.
Kinsman Gratidianus act the part of an Honest and Fair-dealing Man, in the
time of his Praetorship: The Tribunes of the People held a common Consultation
with the Company of Praetors, about settling the Value and Rate of Money; which
at those times was grown to be so very Unconstant, as that no body could be
certain how much he was Worth. They made an Edict by common Consent, allowing
an Action against those who transgressed it, and appointing a Penalty for those
who were convicted. This being ordered, they agreed to meet again in the
Assembly after Noon, and all of 'em together tell the People what they had
done. The Meeting broke up, and the rest all departed some one way, and some
another: Marius only directly from the Court went down to the Assembly, and by
himself alone declared that to the People, which all of 'em had agreed upon by
general Consent. If you ask now what was the Event of this; nothing in the
World could have got him greater Honor; Statues erected for him about the
Streets; Frankincense and Tapers burnt at every one of 'em; and, in short,
never was any Man more adored by the Multitude. These are the things, which do
sometimes mislead Men in deliberating about their Duty; when the Offense
against Honesty seems very trivial, but the Advantage that is gained by it very
considerable. Thus Marius thought it but a little piece of Knavery, to steal
the Peoples Love from the Tribunes and his Colleagues; but a mighty Advantage to
be made Consul by it, which was what he at that time proposed to himself. But
in all these Cases there is only one Rule, which I desire you would constantly take
along with you: Be sure in the first place, that what you count Profitable be
no way Dishonest; and if it be Dishonest, then assure your self that it is not
truly Profitable. And can we then esteem either the one or the other of these
Mariuses Good Men? Consider a little and examine your own Thoughts, that you may
see what Idea, what Notion or Conception you have of a Good Man. Is it
reconcilable then with the Character of such a one, As the former Marius did,
in accusing Metellus.
to Lie for the sake of his own Advantage; to Deceive, to raise false Reports
and Misrepresentations of others; As his Kinsman Gratidianus did the favor of
the People from the Tribunes, and his Colleagues.
to Seize that beforehand, which others have a Right to as well as himself?
Certainly nothing less. And is there any thing then of such excellent Worth?
any Profit or Interest so very desirable, for the gaining of which one would
forfeit the Glory and Reputation of a Good Man? Can that, which we call by the
name of Profitable, bring us any thing so good as what it takes away from us,
if it spoil our being counted Men of Honesty and Integrity? if it occasion the
loss of our Justice and Faithfulness; that is, in plain truth, if it change us
into Brutes? For where is the great difference between altering our Shapes and
becoming real Beasts; and carrying the Nature and Fierceness of Beasts, though
under the Outsides and Figures of Men?

CHAP. XXI.
To do any thing Dishonest for the sake of Power and Authority, not Profitable.
A most detestable Maxim of Caesar 's. Not Profitable to make himself King in a
Free City. The Unhappiness of a Tyrant's Life.

AGain, In the last Chapter he showed, That no Trick can be Profitable, if
contrary to Honesty and true Prudence, though it should procure a Man never so
much Honor: Here he shows the same as to Power.
Those who contemn all Justice and Honesty for the sake of Power, don't they do
the same thing that Pompey the Great, who chose to be Caesar's Son-in-law,
marrying his Daughter Julia.
a certain Man did, when he chose to be Son-in-law to none but one, by whose
daring Boldness he might increase his own Authority? He thought it a very great
Advantage no question, to enlarge his own Greatness, by drawing Hatred upon
another; but he never considered how great a Disservice he did to his Country,
and how much Scandal and Discredit he brought upon himself. As for the Father,
he had always a couple of Greek Verses in his Mouth, taken out of A famous
Greek Tragedian, Cotemporary and Rival of Sophocles; very well known by his
Plays, which are still (a great many of 'em) extant.
Euripides's Tragedy of Phaenissae; which I Will endeavor to translate as well
as I am able, perhaps it may be aukwardly, but however so as to make their
Sense appear, If ever we may break the Ties of Right,
It Is when a Kingdom is the glorious Prize:
In other things be strictly Just --
'Twas a villainous thing in A King of Thebes, Brother to Polynices; who were
both of 'em Sons of Oedipus by Jocasta his own Mother. They agreed to Reign by
turns, and the Elder Eteocles began first, but when his Year was out, would not
resign to Polynices. Hence arose a War, in which the two Brothers killed one
another. The Verses here quoted agree very well with the Person of Eteocles,
who for the sake of Reigning, broke his Faith and Agreement with his Brother.
Eteocles, or rather in Euripides indeed, to exempt Viz. For the sake of a
Kingdom.
that one Breach of Right from being criminal, which is certainly of all others
the most wicked and detestable. Why do we stop then at Examples of lesser
Rogueries, such as making one's self Heir by Cunning and Spells; Cheats about
Buying, Selling, etc? Here Is Julius Caesar.
a Man for you, that has made no scruple of desiring to make himself King of
the Roman People, and Lord and Governor of the whole Earth; nay, and which is
worse, has accomplished his Desire. If any Man call this an honest Ambition,
he must be out of his Wits; for he justifies the Subversion of our Laws and
Liberties, and counts the most base and detestable Oppression of 'em, a
virtuous, laudable and glorious Action: But if any Man, confessing that it is
not Honest, to get the Dominion in that Republic, which has been and ought to
be always free, will yet say, It Is Profitable for him that can do it; what
Reproofs shall I use, or what Reproaches rather, to recall such a one from so
dangerous an Error? Good Gods! Can it be supposed then ever to be any Man's
Interest, by the heinousest and most unnatural Wickedness upon Earth, to ruin
and destroy his own Native Country; though perhaps the Man, who is guilty of it,
may afterward be styled by his poor oppressed Citizens, Caesar was called so,
notwithstanding his Oppressions. See Sueton. chap. 76, 85.
The Father of it? Interest therefore should always be measured by Justice and
Honesty, so that these two Words, though of different Sounds, should yet be
understood to mean one and the same Thing. I know the common People are apt to
imagine, that nothing in the World can be better than to Govern; but when I
consider the real Truth and Reason of the thing it self, I find on the contrary
that nothing can be worse, when People arrive at it by unlawful Means. Can it
possibly be Profitable for any Man then, to live in perpetual Cares and
Anxieties? to be Day and Night racked and tormented with Fears, in a Life full
of nothing but Treacheries and Dangers? Many are Treacherous and Unfaithful to
Kings, says Accius, and but few are Faithful. But of what sort of Kings did he
speak this? Was it not of those, who by lawful Succession had received the
Royal Scepter from King of Phrygia, whom the Poets make Son of Jupiter, and
tell us he served his Son Pelops up to Table to the Gods. But they (except
Ceres, who eat a Shoulder) abhorring the Banquet, restored Pelops to Life, and
sent Tantalus into Hell, where he was tormented with Hunger in the midst of
Plenty. Pelops afterward married Hippodamia, Daughter of O Enomaus, and became
King of that part of Greece, which afterward from him was called Peloponnesus,
now Morea. His Descendants were Atreus, Thyestes, Agamemnon, etc.
Tantalus and Pelops? How many more then must we suppose to be unfaithful to
that King, who with an Army of Romans had oppressed and enslaved the Roman
People it self? and had forced that City, which was not only Free, but even
Empress of the whole World, to submit her Neck to his tyrannical Yoke? What
Uneasiness of Mind must such a one, think you, be continually under? What
Wounds and Twitches of Conscience must he needs feel? How, in short, can that
Life be an Advantage to any Man, which has this Inconvenience inseparably
annexed to it, that whoever is so happy as to take it away, will obtain the
greatest Glory and Good Will from all the World? And if these things, which
seem most of all to be Profitable, yet are found to be the contrary when
Unworthy and Dishonest; this certainly ought to convince us all, That nothing
can be Profitable, which is not Honest.

CHAP. XXII.
A brave Example of the Romans preferring Justice before a seeming Profit.
Glory can never be gotten by Wickedness. Riches Unprofitable, if accompanied
with Infamy. Example of Injustice in the Romans. How an Empire ought to be
supported. Cato too severe in exacting the Tributes. An unjust Saying of Curio
's.

BUt this has been determined, as at many other times by our wise Forefathers,
so See Book 1. chap. 12, 13. Book 3. chap. 4.
particularly by Fabricius, then a second time Consul, and the whole Roman
Senate, in the War with Pyrrhus. For when Pyrrhus had voluntarily made War upon
the Romans, and the Contention was held about Empire and Mastery, with a no
less powerful than generous Adversary; a Deserter came secretly into
Fabricius's Camp, and offered, upon condition he might be well Rewarded, to
return back again with the same secrecy that he came, and to Poison Pyrrhus.
But instead of Encouragement, Fabricius ordered him to be sent back to Pyrrhus,
and was afterward commended by the Senate for so doing. If we look no further
now than the outward appearance of what seems to be Profitable, here is a
dangerous War, and a powerful Adversary of the growing Empire, might soon have
been removed by the single assistance of this one Deserter: But then it would
have been an eternal Scandal, not to mention the Villainy and Wickedness of it,
in an honorable War, which was managed with a fair and generous Enemy, not to
get the Victory by Virtue and Courage, but only by base and treacherous
Practices. Whether was more Profitable then for Fabricius, who was such in this
City as Aristides was at Athens; or for the Roman Senate, which never thought
any thing dishonorable their Interest; to contend with an Enemy by Valor or
by Poison? If Empire be desirable for the sake of Glory, why is not Wickedness
altogether banished, in which it is impossible there should ever be any Glory?
But if we are for Riches at any rate, we'd do well to consider, that they can
never be Profitable when accompanied with Infamy. That Counsel therefore of
Lucius Philippus, the Son of Quintus, was far from being Profitable, That those
very Cities, which Sylla had freed for a set Sum of Money by the Senate's
Order, should again be brought under their former Contributions; and yet not
the Money, which they had paid, be returned 'em. This Advice of his was
followed by the Senate, to the great Disparagement and Shame of the Empire; for
even Pirates at this rate will sooner be trusted, than the Roman Senate. Well,
but the public Revenues were increased by it, and therefore 'twas Profitable:
Heavens! How long will Men dare to call any thing Profitable, which is not
Honest! Can Hatred then and Infamy be Profitable to a State, which ought to be
supported by Glory, and Credit, and the Love of its Confederates! In this
particular I often disagreed from my old Friend He that was Sirnam'd Uticensis,
mentioned above.
Cato; whom I always thought to be somewhat too headstrong, in standing up for
the Interest of the Public Treasury; and exacting the Tributes with so much
rigor, as not to make any Allowances to the Farmers, and very seldom or never
grant any thing to the Confederates: whereas we ought always to be kind to the
latter, and to deal with the former, as we would do with our own Bailiffs; and
that so much the more, because all the Safety and Welfare of the Republic
depends upon the Agreement of The Senators and Equites: which last were Farmers
of the Public Taxes.
the several Orders in it. Nor less Ill than Philip's, was the Counsel of Curio
the Father. See chap. 17. Book 2.
Curio; who, in the Case of the Who desired to be made free of the City of
Rome, but were denied.
People inhabiting beyond the Po, though he confessed their Demands were but just
and reasonable, yet always added, Vincat utilitas; Every thing must give way to
the Interest of the Public. He should rather have said that they were not
just, because not comporting with the Public Interest; than thus have declared
that they did not comport with it, and at the same time confess 'em to be just
and reasonable.

CHAP. XXIII.
Several Cases put by Hecaton the Rhodian. Diogenes and Antipater oppose one
another. Whether bad Money received for Good should be put off?

One of Panaetius's Scholars, mentioned chap. 15.
HEcaton proposes, in his sixth Book of Offices, several Questions such as
these which follow: Whether a Good Man, in time of great Scarcity, may refuse
to give Victuals to the Servants of his own Family? He discourses indeed upon
either side the Question, but at last concludes, That he should rather be
guided by his Interest, than Humanity. He demands again, If a Merchant in a
Storm be forced to throw his Goods overboard, whether of the two should he
choose to cast away, a very valuable Horse, or a Servant that is good for
nothing? Here Interest, and the saving of his Goods draws one way, and
compassion of Human Nature another. Should a Fool in a Shipwreck have gotten a
Plank, may a Wise Man take it away from him if he can? He answers, No; because
it would be plainly a piece of Injustice: But what if the Owner of the Ship
should come? may not he take it away when it properly belongs to him? No, not
at all; no more than he may throw a Man out of the Ship, under the pretense
that the Ship belongs to him: For till they are arrived whither the Ship was
hired for, it does not more properly belong to the Owner, than it does to the
Passengers by whom it was hired. Suppose two Men, that are equally Wise, should
both of 'em in a Shipwreck lay hold of the same Plank; may either of 'em seize
upon it forcibly to himself, or should one of them voluntarily yield it to the
other? Let one yield to the other; provided that other will be more serviceable
to the Public, or there is more depending upon his Life and Preservation. But
what if these are equal in either of them? Why then there is no more to be said
about it, but it must even be let alone for Chance to determine, as though they
should cast Lots, or What Micare, the word here used, signifies. See chapter 19.
play at Even and Odd for it. What if a Father should rifle Temples, and dig
Passages underground into the Treasury? Should the Son discover him to the
Public Magistrate? No; that were an horrid unnatural Impiety: he should rather
on the contrary defend his Father, if any one else should pretend to accuse
him. But what! ought not the Interest of my Country to be consulted, before
that of any one else whatsoever? Yes undeniably; but then it is very much the
Interest of your Country, to have Citizens that are dutiful and obedient to
their Parents. But if a Father should attempt to make himself King, or any ways
endeavor to betray his Country; should a Son in such a case hold his Tongue
and Conceal it? In the first place, let him beg of his Father to desist: if
that does no good, let him proceed to rebuke and even to threaten him about it:
but if at last he perceive that it directly tends to the Ruin of his Country,
he should prefer its Safety before that of his Father. Another of the Questions
he proposes is this, Suppose a Good Man to receive, by an oversight, bad Money
for good, and afterward come to understand that it is bad; may he pay it for
good, if he owes another any thing? Diogenes thinks he may, but Antipater not;
whom I rather assent to. Suppose a Man be a selling a Vessel of Wine, which he
knows will not keep; is he bound to tell of this? Diogenes thinks he is under no
such Obligation; Antipater will have it to be every honest Man's Duty. These
are the things, which whether they are Right and one's Duty or not, is often
controverted amongst the Stoics. In selling a Slave is one bound to declare
what his Faults are or not? I don't mean those, which unless they are told, the
Law it self commands he shall be returned upon our Hands; but his being a Liar,
For if he be a downright Thief, the Seller's bound to tell it by the Law,
otherwise his Slave will be turned upon his Hands; as appears from chap. 18.
a Filcher, a Player at Dice, or a Drunkard. One's of Opinion we ought to
declare 'em, and the other not. Should an ignorant Body sell a quantity of
Gold, and suppose it to be Copper; is a good Man obliged now to tell him that
it is Gold; or may he buy for a Penny what is worth a thousand Pence? It Is plain
enough by this time what my Thoughts are, and wherein consists the Controversy
between Diogenes and Antipater.
the forementioned Philosophers.

CHAP. XXIV.
Whether a Man's obliged to perform all his Promises, or not; though at the
Expense of his Life or Reputation. Some Examples upon it.

ARe we bound to perform all those Promises and Bargains, which (in the
Praetor's Language) have neither Force nor Fraud in them? Here Is a Man, for
Example, that has gotten the Dropsy, and another prescribes him an infallible
Cure for it, upon Condition that he will never make use of it again. The Man
recovers by its help at present, but falls again, some time after, into the
same Distemper. Suppose now that he, to whom he made such Promise, will by no
means allow him to use the Cure again; what would be his Duty in such a Case!
Why, since he, who denies him the Request, is Inhuman, and it is No one's
obliged to perform any Promise, when 'twill but bring a Loss and Inconvenience
on himself, and do no Service to the Person 'twas made to. For why should that
be demanded of me, which can do no body any Good, but me a great Diskindness?
Or what reason is there a thing should be done, which brings a great deal of
Harm, and no manner of Good with it?
a thing that will do him no manner of Prejudice, it is the best way to take
care of his Life and Safety. A Good and Wise Man is desired by one, who
appoints him his Heir, and leaves him by Will a considerable Estate, that
before he enters upon the Possession of it, he should Dance at Noonday in the
open Streets; and this he accordingly Promises to do, because otherwise the
Testator would not make him his Heir: would you have him perform now what he
promised, or not? I could wish that he never had promised it at all, which I
think would much better have suited with his Character: But since he has done
it, if he think it dishonorable to Dance so in public, the best way will be
not to stand to such a Promise, provided he takes none of the Money that was
left him. Unless the Money may be turned to some very great Benefit and
Advantage of the Public; so that 'twould be no Disgrace for a Man For an
Action offending against outward Decency and Modesty, such as Dancing is, ought
to give place to an Action of Justice; such as is the doing a real Kindness to
the Public.
even to Dance, when it brings so much Good to his Country along with it.

CHAP. XXV.
Several other Cases, wherein a Man is not obliged to perform his Promises and
Vows; nor to give up a Trust. The Method he designs to take in the following
part of the Work.

NEither is one bound to perform those Promises, which are hurtful and
prejudicial to the Persons they were made to. Thus Father Phoebus ( For he
mentioned 'em in Book 1. and the Fable of Gyges in chap. 9. of this.
that we may return to our Fables) promised to grant See Ovid 's Metamorph.
Book 2.
Phaethon whatsoever he should desire; and the mad young Fellow desired to get
up into his Father's Chariot. 'Twas accordingly granted him; but before he
could get to be well settled in it, he was struck down with Lightning. How
abundantly better had it been, in such a Case, if the Father had refused to
perform such a Promise? The same may be said of another, which Theseus married
Hippolyte, Queen of the Amazons, by whom he had Hippolytus. Afterward he
married Phaedra, Daughter to King Minos of Creet, who fell in Love with
Hippolytus. He neglecting her, she (in Revenge) complained to her Husband, That
he would have lain with her. Theseus in a rage desired Neptune to destroy him,
which he did. But the Truth afterward coming out, Theseus was grievously
afflicted. Seneca and Euripides have written Tragedies upon it.
Theseus obtained of Neptune: This God had promised to do any three things for
him, whatever he should request: and he requested the Death of his own Son
Hippolytus, upon a false Suspicion, that he had been naught with his
Mother-in-law. He obtained what he asked; which occasioned him very much Sorrow
and Affliction. Again, Diana being angry with Agamemnon for having slain a Stag
of hers, kept the Grecian Fleet, that was going to Troy, at Aulis by contrary
Winds. Agamemnon to appease her, vowed to Sacrifice the beautifullest thing at
that time in his Dominions; which proving to be his own Daughter, he sacrificed
her. Others say the Goddess put a Heart in her stead, and carried her away to be
her Priestess at Taurica. See Eurip. Iphigenia.
Agamemnon had vowed, for a Sacrifice to Diana, the most beautiful thing that
was born that Year in his whole Dominions. To be as good as his Word, he was
forced to offer his Daughter Iphigenia, than whom nothing that Year had been
born more beautiful. Had not it been Unlawful Oaths, Vows or Promises are not
to be kept, because no Man can ever oblige himself to that, which is contrary
to a former and superior Obligation. We are all by God obliged to the
Performance of such and such Duties, therefore we cannot be obliged to the
contrary by an Act of our own. But here we must distinguish between those which
are Unlawful as to the Manner or Circumstances of them, and those that are
Unlawful as to the Matter they are about. The first is by some called
Jaramentum illicitum; and the second, De re illicita. All hasty and rash Oaths
are Unlawful in the first Sense, by which we are obliged for all that; provided
the Subject they are about be Lawful. Then an Oath is Unlawful in the second
Sense, when a Man swears he will do any thing that is wicked; which cannot oblige
him for the Reason above given. However he sins in Swearing such a thing.
better to have broke his Promise, than have done such an horrid and unnatural
Action? In some Cases then a Man is not obliged to perform his Promises: no
more is he to restore what was given him in Trust. Suppose, for the purpose, a
Man in his Wits had entrusted you with his Sword, and should demand it of you
again when he is beside himself; your Duty would be not to give it him again,
and if you did, you would be guilty of a very great Error. Again, Oaths, etc.
don't bind, when the keeping of 'em will hinder some greater Good, or bring
some great Evil. See Grotius, de Jure B. and P. Sanderson de Oblig. Jur. etc.
should a Man put a large Sum of Money in your Hands, and afterward raise a
Rebellion against his Country; would you deliver up your Trust, if demanded it
by him? Certainly no; for this would be to act against the Public Interest,
which ought to be preferred before every thing else. Thus a great many things,
which are Honest of themselves, we may see cease to be so when the
Circumstances alter: to perform a Promise, for Instance, to stand to an
Agreement, or deliver up a Trust, ought not to be done when they become
Unprofitable. This may suffice to have been said of those things, which a See
Note i on chapter 17.
pretended Wisdom would fain count Profitable, though contrary to Justice. But
having laid down four general Heads in the First Book, from which all Offices
or Duties are derived, I shall discourse upon each of the same in this; and
make out, that what is contrary to any of those Virtues, is only in show, and
not really Profitable. Of Prudence then, which a knavish sort of Cunning
endeavors to imitate; as also of Justice, which is never but Profitable, we
have discoursed already. It He has shown that those Actions, which may seem to
be just and prudent, but really are not so, whatever Advantages of Wealth,
Honors, or the like they bring along with them, are not truly Profitable,
because contrary to those two parts of Honesty. He now proceeds to show the
same of the other two remaining parts, viz. Courage and Temperance, That
nothing can be Profitable that is contrary to either of 'em. And first of
Courage; see the next Chapter.
remains that we speak of the other two general Heads of Duty; the one of which
consists in the Greatness and Excellency of a courageous Soul; and the other in
such a Regularity of our Actions, as is conformable to the Precepts of
Temperance and Moderation.

CHAP. XXVI.
That nothing can be Profitable, which is contrary to the Virtue of Fortitude,
shown from the Examples of Ulysses and Regulus.

ULysses thought 'twould be Profitable for him, (if what the Tragedians tell us
be true; for Homer, a Writer of the greatest Authority, never once insinuates
any such thing) but the Writers of Tragedy accuse Ulysses, for feigning to be
Mad that he might avoid the War; a Design that was by no means Honest and
Creditable: Well, but 'twas Profitable (will some one say) to stay and govern
at his own home, and enjoy himself quietly in his Island An Isle in the Ionian
Sea, now called Theaca, which Ulysses was Prince of.
Ithaca, together with his Parents, his Wife and Son. Is there any such Credit
in the daily Dangers and Fatigues of War, that you can ever think comparable
with living such a Life of Tranquillity and Security? Yes; I wholly despise and
contemn your Security, being fully persuaded that it can never be Profitable,
so long as it is Because cowardly, and so contrary to the Virtue of Courage.
Dishonest. Pray what would they have said, do you think, of Ulysses, suppose
he had continued in his pretended Madness? when after his He Conquered Rhesus,
stole away the Palladium, etc. See Ovid 's Metamorph. Book 13.
glorious Achievements in the War, he had yet these Reproaches thrown upon him
by Ajax, Though, you all know, he first proposed this The Greeks took an Oath, at
their preparing for Troy, never to cease till they were revenged on the
Trojans. Notwithstanding which Ulysses would have escaped. These Verses are
taken out of a Tragedy of Pacuvius, about Ajax and Ulysses contending for
Achilles's Arms. The Person spoken of in them is Ulysses, and the Speaker Ajax.
Oath,
Yet he 's the only Man that would have broke it.
He first endeavored not to join in the War,
Faint-hearted Coward! feigning to be Mad.
And had not prudent Palamede found out,
By Cunning, this his impudent Deceit;
The Villain, notwithstanding all the Ties
Of sacred Oaths, had certainly gone off.
'Twas much better for him to bear all the Hazards, not of the War only, but of
the Sea too, (as at last Wandering ten Years, after the War was ended, before he
could get home.
he did) than not to make one among the rest of the Grecians, then resolving,
by Consent, upon a War with So the Grecians called all other People beside
themselves.
the Barbarians. But to remove the Scene from Foreign Countries, and fabulous
Relations, that we may come nearer home, and to a thing that really happened:
M. Atilius Regulus, then a second time Consul, was surpised in Africa by Who
was at that time made Leader of the Carthaginians, and gave the Romans a
notable Overthrow in the first Punick War. See Polib. Book 1. chap. 32.
Xanthippus the Lacedaemonian, and made a Prisoner, ( A noble and valiant
Carthaginian, at the latter end of the first Punick War, counted the greatest
General of his Age, who not only defended, but enlarged the Carthaginian
Empire. See Polybius and Corn. Nepos.
Amilcar, Father of Hannibal being General of the Carthaginians) and was sent
by the Carthaginians to the Roman Senate, upon solemn Oath given, that, unless
some remarkable Prisoners were restored 'em, he should himself return back
again to Carthage. Now as soon as this Man arrived at Rome, he could not but
perceive what appeared to be his Interest, but withal was persuaded (as the
Event declared) that it only appeared so. The Case was thus: Here he might have
staid in his Native Country, and have lived at home quietly with his Wife and
Children; might have judged his Misfortune, received in the War, no more than
what all Men in that State are liable to; and might still have continued in his
old Degree of Honor among those of consular Dignity. And who can deny now,
(will any one say) that all these things are Expedient and Profitable? Who do
you think? why That is, 'Twas not really expedient and profitable for him to
stay at home, though it might seem so; because contrary to Courage and Greatness
of Soul.
Greatness of Soul, and true Courage deny it. Can you desire any greater and
more illustrious Authorities?

CHAP. XXVII.
What Courage and Greatness of Soul teach us. A continuation of the Story of
Regulus.

THese are the Virtues, by which we are taught to be afraid of nothing, to
despise all the outward Concerns of Life, and count nothing intolerable that
can possibly befall a Man. Well, but pray what did this Regulus do then? He came
into the Senate, and told 'em what 'twas he was sent about, and refused to give
his own Vote in the Case, forasmuch as he was not to be counted a Senator, as
being by Oath under the Enemy's Power. And in his Speech, which he spoke to the
Senate upon that Subject, (Fool that he was, some will be ready to say, and an
Enemy to his own Interest!) he told 'em, 'Twas best not to give up their
Prisoners; that they were young Men, and might make able Leaders; but that he,
for his part, was grown almost useless, and worn away with old Age. The Senate
were so far persuaded by his Speech, that they resolved the Prisoners should be
detained in Custody, and he himself returned back again to Carthage; not all
the Love which he had for his Country, his Friends and Relations, being able to
detain him. And though he knew well enough what a barbarous Enemy, and what He
was put into a little Place, stuck all about with sharp Points, so that he
could neither lie down, lean on one side, nor stand upright: beside that his
Eyelids were cut off, and the Sun let shine upon his Eyes, so that he could
never sleep, etc.
exquisite Torments he was going to return to; yet he thought it his Duty,
whatever came of it, not to violate his Oath. I think he was in a better
condition therefore, even whilst he was murdered by being kept from Sleeping,
than e're he could have been, had he stayed at home, and lived under the
Scandal of being an old Captive and a perjured Nobleman. But was not it very
great Folly and Madness, if he would not persuade the Releasing of the
Prisoners, yet to go and dissuade it as much as he could? Pray how Folly and
Madness? What, though 'twere conducive to the Good of the Republic? or can any
thing be Profitable to a private Citizen, which brings a Disadvantage to the
Commonwealth in general?

CHAP. XXVIII.
To separate Profit from Honesty, is to pervert the first Principle of Nature.
All Men naturally desirous of Profit. The Reasons given by those, who think
Regulus did ill in returning.

THose Men, who separate Profit from Honesty, wholly pervert the The first
Principle of Nature is, That every one desire his own Happiness, which is
certainly his true and greatest Profit. Now this consisting in Virtue or
Honesty, the right use of this Principle is, to conduct and lead Men on in the
ways of Virtue. But those who make Men's Interest separate from Honesty, pervert
this Principle, and make it conduct Men to other things instead of Honesty,
viz. Riches, Power or the like.
first Principles of Nature: For we all of us naturally desire our Interest,
toward which we are carried with so strong a Biass, as that it is not in our
power to turn the other way. For who is averse from? or rather, who does not
most eagerly follow his own Advantage? But since we can find out no real
Advantage, except in what is Honest, Becoming and Commendable, therefore we
count these the principal things; and take the word Profit to signify
something, which only relates to our outward Necessities, and the supplying of
them; without all that glorious and shining Excellence, which appears in the
Actions of Virtue and Honesty. He brings all the Arguments of those Men, who
would have that Regulus did foolishly in returning: as, First, That he could
not fear the Anger of the Gods, if he had staid at home; for they are never
Angry. Secondly, If they had been Angry, they could not have hurt him worse,
than he did himself by returning, etc. To all which he answers in the following
Chapters.
But after all is done, perhaps some Men will say, pray what is there in an
Oath, that he should be afraid thus to break it? What! was it Jupiter's Anger
that he dreaded? But this is agreed on by all Philosophers; not only those, The
Epicureaus, who made the Happiness of the Gods consist in Ease, and Freedom
from Disturbance; and denied a Providence.
who maintain that the Gods lead an idle Life, neither busying themselves, nor
disturbing others; but The Stoics, Academicks, etc. who held that the Gods
took care of the World and the Affairs of it: only Aristotle confined his
Providence to the heavenly Bodies.
those who affirm they are always busy, and always doing something that
relates to the World: in this thing, I say, they are all agreed, That the Sea
Note on chap. 3. Book 2. The Deity it is true is never Angry as Men are, never
transported with violent Passion. But this was not so meant (by those I mean
who allowed a Providence) as though the Gods were not displeased at Men's Sins,
their Breaches of Oaths, and the like; and did not Punish them too as they
thought fit: But these Philosophers well understood, That the Gods punishing
Offenders was not a Hurt, but a real Good; if not to the punished Person, yet at
least to the rest of the World.
Deity neither hurts, nor is angry with any one. But supposing the worst, Pray
what hurt could Jupiter's Vengeance have done Regulus, greater than what
Regulus did to himself? It could not be any thing of Religion therefore, that
hindered him from following what appeared to be his Interest. Again, Was he
afraid of the Baseness and Dishonesty of the Action? As to that in the first
place, Always of two Evils choose the least: and where was any Evil in the
Baseness of the thing, so great as was that of the Torments which he endured?
Beside, pray remember that Sentence of Accius, which however it might be said
by an impious King, is yet generally acknowledged to be very well said, who
when one told him, You have broken your Oath to me: answered, The force of this
Argument is, Men are not obliged to keep their Oaths to Deceivers and
treacherous People; and such the Carthaginians were; therefore Regulus needed
not have kept his Oath to them.
I neither am, nor have been tied by Oath to any treacherous Deceiver. Again
they tell us, That as we affirm some things seem Profitable, which are not so;
so they affirm some things seem Honest, which are not so: As this, for Example,
of returning to be tormented, rather than break one's Oath; which is not
Honest, though it may seem to be so; because no Man's obliged to perform that
Oath, which was These Words contain two Arguments, which are afterward
distinctly answered: First, 'Twas made to an Enemy, Secondly, Extorted by Force.
extorted from him by the force of his Enemies. And lastly they argue, That
whatever makes very much for one's Profit and Advantage, thereby becomes
Honest, though before it did not seem so. This is what is generally brought
against Regulus; but let us see and examine all the parts of it in order.

CHAP. XXIX.
He answers the first part of the Arguments brought against Regulus. The
Sacredness of an Oath. The Divinity of Faith. Pain none, or at least not the
greatest Evil. Dishonesty the greatest, if not only Evil. Faith to be kept even
with those who are Treacherous. Oaths made to Enemies should be kept. Not so
those made to Pirates, and why. What it is to Forswear one's self. The Form of
Oaths among the Romans. Laws of War to be kept inviolable.

He begins with answering the first Argument brought against Regulus; and shows
what is to be regarded when People take Oaths.
FIrst then they say, He could fear no Harm from the Anger of Jupiter, who
neither can be Angry, nor do Harm to any body. This proves as strongly against
all Oaths in general, as it does in particular against this of Regulus. But the
thing to be considered in Peoples taking of Oaths, is not what Danger they are
in, should they break 'em; but what a sacred and powerful Obligation is laid
upon 'em. For every Oath is a religious Affirmation; and whatever is promised
after such a manner, as it were calling God for a Witness to your Words, ought
certainly to be performed. For now Faith and Justice require it of us, and not
any Fear of that Anger of the Gods, which is not incident to their Divine
Natures. That Faith I mean, of which Ennius has got these incomparable words: O
Faith All-glorious and Divine!
In lofty Temples fit to shine;
Even Men and the inferior Gods might swear by Jupiter, who was above them;
but Jupiter himself could swear by none, but the inviolable Faith of his Word
and Promises.
Jove himself by thee does Swear!
Whosoever therefore does not perform his Oath, affronts the The Heathens made
Deities almost of every thing, viz. Faith, Concord, Luck, etc.
Deity of that Divine Faith, which was (as Cato in his Speech informs us) set
up by our Fathers in the Capitol it self, even next to the Statue of the great
God Jupiter. He comes to answer the second Argument against Regulus.
But, secondly, they tell us, Supposing Jupiter had been Angry with Regulus, he
could not have brought any Evil upon him, greater than what Regulus brought
upon himself. This, I confess, would be very true, if there was no other Evil
but only Pain: But that is so far from being the greatest Evil, that, if we may
credit some of the The Stoics, who (as was before observed) allowed nothing to
be Evil, but what concerned the Soul and Conscience; calling the Calamities of
the Body or Fortune, such as Pain or Poverty, indifferent things.
chief Philosophers, it is not so much as any Evil at all: Among whom, I pray
you, let Regulus be counted of no small Authority; if I may not rather say of
the greatest and most weighty: For what greater Testimony can any one desire,
than that of a principal Man among the Romans; who rather than be wanting in
any point of his Duty, chose to undergo the most exquisite Torments? The third
Argument against him, answered.
But of two Evils, say they, always choose the least: That is, in plain words,
Rather be a Rogue than undergo any Calamity. Can any Calamity then be greater,
than that of Baseness and Injustice? For if even the Filth and Deformity of the
Body be loathsome and offensive; how much more so must that of the Mind needs
be, when it is covered and polluted with Shame and Dishonesty? Those
Philosophers therefore, who discourse of these things with most Closeness and
Severity, venture bodly to affirm, That nothing is Evil but only what is
Dishonest: and even those themselves, who do it more loosly, yet always
acknowledge, That it is the greatest however of all Evils. The fourth Argument,
taken out of Accius's Tragedy of Atreus, answered.
That Saying of the Poet's indeed is good, I neither am, nor have been tied by
Oath to a treacherous Deceiver; but it is therefore so, because when Atreus was
brought upon the Stage, he was to make him speak that, which was suitable to
his Character. But if once they begin to lay down this for a Maxim, That Faith,
when given to those who are trearous, is not to be kept; they had best have a
care, that this be not made a Refuge and Cover for Perjury. Answer to the fifth
Argument, His Oaths being made to an Enemy.
As for his Oaths being made to an Enemy; even War it self has Laws that belong
to it; and Faith, except in some very few cases, is always to be kept even with
our greatest Adversaries. For whatever you swear, for Example, in such a
manner, as that So I understand the words, Ut men's conciperet, etc. not as though
it were Men's deferentis; for I am not bound to perform whatever I Swear,
according to the Mind of him that gives the Oath; for it may be unlawful, or
the like. Beside it is unreasonable to interpret Oaths, just according to the
Mind of the Imposer: He may have his private Meanings, etc. as well as the
Receiver. See upon this whole Subject Sanderf. Grotius, etc.
your Conscience tells you it ought to be done, you are bound most inviolably
to perform it: But where it is otherwise, you don't lie under any such
Obligation; and are not perjured, though you should not perform it. Suppose, for
the purpose, you had sworn to a Pirate, That you would pay him such a Sum, if
he would spare your Life; it would not be Perjury, though you should not pay it him.
Grotius does not like this Decision of Gicero's: because in an Oath we are not
only to consider the Person's Right whom we Swear to; but God also, by whom we
Swear. It Is true, the Pirate can demand nothing in this case, but the Majesty
of God, by whom I swore, lays an Obligation of Performance upon me. But
Pufendorf de Jur. N. and G. Book 4. chap. 2.. 9. seems rather to favor our
Author's Opinion.
For a Pirate is by no means a lawful Adversary, but rather a common Pest and
Enemy of Mankind; so that no one's obliged to keep his Faith or Oath with him.
For to Swear to a thing, and yet not perform it, is not immediately to Forswear
one's self: But then a Man is properly said to be Perjured, when he Swears
That Is the meaning of Ex Animi sententia, and not with design of Obliging your
self. Oaths would signify just nothing at all, if they obliged no further,
than People designed to be obliged by them. 'Twas the Form of Oaths among the
Romans, Do you Swear such a thing is so or so, Ex Animi tui sententia? which
words signify either according to your Mind, or upon your Conscience. Hence
that Jest which our Author quotes in his de Orat. Cato the Censor asked a Man,
Have you a Wife or not, Ex Animi tui sententia? meaning, upon your Conscience
or Oath: To which he answers, Non quidem ex Animi mei sententia; meaning, Not
according to my Mind or Liking.
upon his Conscience (as our Form runs) to do such and such things, and yet
does not do them. For that of Euripides may be said in When, for Example, a Man
only reads or repeats the words of an Oath, or the like. See Grot. Book 2.
chap. 13.. 2.
some Cases to be very good, My Tongue indeed Swore, but my Conscience did not
Assent. But had Regulus, in his Case, done any thing contrary to the Laws, and
Conditions, that are kept between Enemies, it had been downright Perjury. For
the Carthaginians, with whom he had then to do, were a lawful Adversary,
between whom and us there is all See chap. 11. Book 1.
the Fecial, and several other Laws that are common to Nations. For had it been
otherwise, it is certain the Senate would never have delivered up some Generals,
who had made Leagues with the Enemy, without Power from the Senate and People.
eminent Persons in Chains to their Enemies.

CHAP. XXX.
Examples of several eminent Romans given up to the Enemy. Answer to the rest
of the Arguments brought against Regulus.

BUt they did deliver both About the Year of Rome 433, Caius Pontius, whom he
mentioned chap. 21. Book 2. was then General of the Samnites. See Livy, Book 9.
chap 1.
Lucius Veturius and Sp. Posthumous, in their second Consulships to their
Enemies, the Samnites; because, being beaten at the Passage of Caudium, and the
Legions being disarmed and sent away with Disgrace, they had concluded a Peace
of their own Heads, without any Orders from the Senate or People. T. Numicius
and Q. Melius, who were Tribunes of the People at the same time, because by
their Authority the Peace was concluded, were likewise delivered; that so we
might be freed from any Obligation of keeping it. And all this was done upon
the Proposal and Advice of Posthumous himself, who was the Person delivered.
The Case of C. Hostilius Mancinus, Cos. about the Year of Rome 613, who being
brought into very great Streights by the Numantines, was forced to make a
dishonorable League with them. The Senate that they might not be bound to the
League, delivered the Author of it up to the Enemy. But they refused to receive
him, as the Samnites had Posthumous before. See Vell. Paterc. Book 2. chap. 1.
Mancinus, a great many Years after, was exactly the same; who having, without
any Orders from the Senate, struck up an Alliance with those of A small Town in
Spain, which with a very few Men held a War against the Romans fourteen Years,
and beat them several times: At last 'twas razed by the Younger Africanus.
Numantia, was the first Man that spoke for that Bill in the Senate House,
which by L. Furius and Sext. Atilius was carried to the People; and which they
agreeing to, he was delivered to the Enemy. He did more honestly than Cos. the
Year before Mancinus, who made the first shameful League with the Numantines;
but by his Interest and Entreaties escaped being delivered up to them. He was
the first of the Pompey's that ever was Cos.
Sext. Pompeius, who being concerned in the same sort of Crime, made Interest
to be excused from undergoing the same Punishment; and by that means escaped
it. This Man now let the Appearance of Profit prevail over Honesty; but in all
the others mentioned, the Authority of Honesty easily carried it from the
pretended Profit. He returns to his Defense of Regulus, and answers the other
Arguments urged against him.
But to go on with Regulus: Another thing urged by his Adversaries is this,
That he should not have performed what was forcibly put upon him. As though a Man
of Courage could be wrought upon by Force, But why, say they, did he go at all
to the Senate, being resolved to dissuade the Delivery of the Captives? This is
to blame him for that, which particularly deserves Commendation: He would not
depend upon his own Judgment, but pleading for that which he thought most
Profitable, left it to be determined by the Judgment of the Senate: And had not
it been for his Counsel in the Case, the Prisoners had surely been sent again
to Carthage, and he remained safe in his Native Country: But this he concluded
would be a Prejudice to the Public; and therefore esteemed it to be no more
than his Duty, to speak what he thought, and endure what might come of it.
Lastly, They add, That whatever makes highly for one's Profit and Advantage,
thereby becomes Honest. I answer, That it Fieri signifies to be made, and esse
actually to be: The meaning is, That a thing which is very Profitable may be
also Honest; but it cannot be made Honest by its being Profitable, if it were
otherwise Dishonest.
may indeed antecedently. be such, but can never thereby become such: For
nothing is Profitable but what is Honest; and things don't become Honest by
their first being Profitable, but become Profitable by their first being
Honest. I conclude therefore, That of all those great and wonderful Examples,
which might easily be brought upon this Subject, 'twill be hard to find any
more illustrious and commendable, than this of Regulus.

CHAP. XXXI.
Regulus 's Returning to Carthage a Commendation of those Times. The Sacredness
of an Oath, though extorted by Force, among the ancient Romans. This illustrated
by the Example of Pomponius and Manlius.

BUt the only thing that deserves our Admiration, in all this glorious Conduct
of Regulus, is his persuading the Senate not to restore the Capives. As for his
returning again to Carthage, it is true we admire it in our Days, but at those
times he could not have possibly avoided it. The Age, I think, therefore should
rather be commended for that, than the Man. For there is nothing our Ancestors
took greater care of, than that the Tie of an Oath should be always held as
most Sacred and Inviolable. This appears plainly from the XII Tables; it
appears from those Laws which are called Because the Commons, thinking they
were oppressed by the Nobles, raised a Sedition, and retiring to a place called
Sacer mons, refused to return till such and such Privileges were granted them
by the Senate. The Laws made upon that occasion were called Sacratae. See Livy
Book 2. chap. 32, 33. and Paul. Manut. de Leg. Romans page 39.
Sacratae; it appears from the strict Observation of Leagues, by which we are
obliged to keep Faith even with Enemies; and lastly, it appears from the
Punishments and Penalties which have been inflicted by the Censors; who in no
one thing have been more severe, than in punishing those, who had transgressed
their Oaths. M. Pomponius, a Tribune of the People, once entered an Action
against Sirnam'd Imperiosus, a valiant and noble Roman; he was chose Dictator
upon a Religious Account, for driving a Nail into Jupiter's Tempel, [Livy Book
7. chap. 3.] but a War falling out in the mean time, he would have managed that
too, imperiously forcing the Youth to take Arms; which got him the Hatred of
the Tribunes, and made Pomponius accuse him; about the Year of Rome 393.
L. Manlius, the Son of Aulus, who had been Dictator, for holding that Office
somewhat longer than he should have done. And amongst other things brought in
this too against him, That he kept his Son Titus, who was afterward Torquatus,
from Conversation with the World, and had strictly charged him to live solitary
in the Country. As soon as the Son heard his Father was in Trouble about this
Business, he is reported immediately to have set out for Rome, and come early in
the Morning to Pomponius's House. Pomponius was no sooner told of his coming,
but he got up immediately; and thinking the Youth, out of Anger, had brought
some Complaint against his Father, commanded all others to depart the Room, and
him alone to be brought in to him. As soon as the young Man was got into the
Room, he drew his Sword, and swore he would immediately kill Pomponius, unless
he would promise him upon Oath, to meddle with his Father no further. Pomponius,
out of sudden Apprehension of the Danger, did swear to him accordingly; and
discharged his Father from any more Trouble; having first reported the Matter
to the People, and told 'em why he was forced to let fall his Action. Thus
strict and conscientious were People at those times, in observing their Oaths.
And this Titus Manlius is that very Person, who, being afterward challenged by
a mighty French Man, The Year of Rome 394, T. Quintius Pennus, being Dictator.
Livy Book 6. chap. 9, 10.
killed him in a Duel by the River A River in Italy, that falls into the Tiber
a few Miles above Rome; whence it is now called Teverone, that is, the little
Tiber.
Anien, and was Sirnam'd Torquatus from wearing a Chain, (in Latin Torquis)
which he took from his Neck. The same Man again, in his third Consulship, put
to flight and defeated the Latins near Another River in Italy, not far from the
foot of the Mountain Vesuvius.
Veseris. He was indeed a very great and extraordinary Person; who as he showed
his Love, in this Case, to his Father, so he was His Son fought a single Combat
with Geminius Metius, a stout Latin, and overcame him; but because he did it
without Leave from him who was General, he commanded his Head to be cut off,
for his Breach of Military Discipline: Hence Manliana Imperia, used to signify
any unnatural Rigor and Barbarity.
unnaturally Cruel to his Son.

CHAP. XXXII.
The Severity of the Romans against the Breakers of Oaths. The Example of ten
sent by Hannibal to the Senate, upon Oath of returning. Fraud not sufficient to
excuse a Perjury. A resolute Action of the Senate in not redeeming eight
Thousand Prisoners. The Conclusion of this Head.

BUt as Regulus did well in performing his Oath; so those ten, who, after the
Battle at Cannae, were by Hannibal sent to the Roman Senate, upon Oath of
returning to the Carthaginian Camp, if they could not obtain an Exchange of
Prisoners; did ill if they did not return accordingly: Concerning whom Writers
have differed in their Relations. An eminent Historian, Native of Achaia, and
Son of one Lycortas, a Prince of that Country; but afterward brought to Rome,
where he was admired for his Learning by all the Great Men, Scipio, Laelius,
etc. He wrote in Greek a History of the World, containing forty Books; most of
which are now lost.
Polybius, an Author of very good Credit, informs us, Ten Persons of
considerable Quality were sent to the Senate; and that nine of 'em honestly
returned to the Camp, not having been able to obtain what they went about; but
the tenth staid behind and remained at Rome. This Man, as soon as he was out of
the Camp, pretending he had forgot to take something along with him, went back
thither again; as thinking his returning under such a color, was a very
sufficient Performance of his Oath. But certainly he was mistaken; for
Cunning's so far from excusing a Perjury, For all departure from the Simplicity
of an Oath (they are the Words of a very great Man) is a Degree of Perjury; and
a Man is never a whit the less Forsworn, because his Perjury is a little finer
and more artificial than ordinary. And though Men think by such Devices to save
themselves harmless from the Guilt of so great a Sin, they do really increase
it, by adding to their Iniquity the impudent Folly of Mocking God, and
Deceiving themselves.
that it aggravates it rather, and makes it the more criminal. This therefore
was no more than a foolish piece of Craftiness, impudently pretending to pass
for Prudence: Whereupon the Senate took care to order, that my crafty Gentleman
should be sent back in Fetters again to Hannibal. But the gloriousest Action of
the Senate was this: Hannibal had After the Battle at Cannae, where Paullus and
Varro the two Consuls were defeated by Hannibal.
eight Thousand of our Soldiers his Prisoners; not such as had either been
taken in Battle, or had fled from any imminent Danger of their Lives; but were
left in the Camp by Paullus and Varro, the then two Consuls. The Senate decreed
that these should not be Ransomed, though it might have been done with a small
Sum of Money; for no other end but to let our Soldiers see, that either they
must resolve to Conquer, or Die. Upon the News of which, as the same Author
tells us, Hannibal presently began to be disheartened, when he saw that the
Senate, and People of Rome, had so great Resolution even in the midst of their
Misfortunes. Thus, we see, Honesty gets the better in the comparison, against
that which has only the Appearance of Profit. But A learned Roman, who was
Quaestor and Tribune of the People. He writ the Annals of the Roman Empire in
Greek, which are thought to have been translated into Latin by Q. Claudius
Quadrigarius, and to be the Claudii Annals Aciliani, quoted by Livy.
Acilius, who has written an History in Greek, says, More of 'em returned under
this Pretense to the Camp, hoping by such a Trick to get quit of their Oaths;
and that they were all of 'em branded with Shame and Dishonor by the Censors.
But let us now put an end to this third Head; since from what has been said
it is apparently manifest, That whatever is contrary to the Virtue of Fortitude;
that is to say, whatever is done with a timorous, mean, disheartened, abject
Spirit, can never be really and truly Profitable, because it is wicked,
disgraceful and odious. And such would this Action of Regulus have been, had he
either, in delivering his Sense about the Captives, spoke what was for his own,
not the Public Security; or afterward chosen to remain at home, instead of
returning to fulfill his Oath.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Nothing contrary to Temperance, etc. can be truly Profitable. Who those
Philosophers were, that made Happiness and Misery consist in Pleasure and Pain.
This Opinion ruins all Virtue, Prudence, Fortitude, Temperance and Justice:
However these Philosophers endeavor to clear themselves of this Imputation;
but cannot get well off. Pleasure opposite to Honesty. The Absurdity of those,
who would have made Happiness to consist in both these. A short Recapitulation
of this last Book. How far Pleasure may be allowed. A Conclusion, by way of
Exhortation to his Son.

WE have now finished our third Head, He has shown that nothing can ever be
Profitable, that is contrary to three of the general Virtues, Justice, Prudence,
and Courage: It only remains that he show the same of the fourth, Temperance;
which he endeavors to do in this Chapter.
the fourth and last remains only to be spoke to, which contains in it Decency,
Modesty, Moderation, Continence and Temperance. And can any thing be
Profitable, that is opposite to a Train of such excellent Virtues? There has
been however a Sect of Philosophers, Scholars of Aristippus, who were called
Because Aristippus [chap. 14. Book 1.] was born at Cyrene, a Town in Africa.
Cyrenaicks; and others, who had the Name of So called from one Anniceris, a
Cyrenian, Scholar of Paraebates, a Cyrenaick. He corrected a little the
Cyrenaick Opinions, and therefore was called Founder of a new Sect. See Menage
on Laertius's Life of Aristippus, where he shows there were two called
Anniceris: the former Contemporary with Plato, and his Redeemer when a Slave in
Aegina; and the latter of this Sect.
Annicerians given them, that affirm all Good to consist in Pleasure, and count
Virtue it self therefore only desirable, because of some Pleasure which it
brings along with it. But these being now almost worn out of Date, Epicurus is
mightily come into Vogue, the great Supporter, and, as 'twere, second Founder
of the same Opinions. With these we must fight (as they say) with might and
main, if ever we think of supporting the Cause, and maintaining the Interest of
Virtue and Honesty. For if what An Athenian, Scholar and most intimate Friend
to Epicurus; often mentioned by our Author.
Metrodorus has written pass for Truth, That whatever can truly be called our
Profit, nay and all the Welfare and Happiness of Life, consists in a firm
Constitution of Body, and a well-grounded Hope of its lasting Continuance; it
is certain this Profit, nay this sovereign Profit (for such they account it)
must sometimes be set in opposition to Honesty. He proceeds to show, That this
Opinion ruins all the Virtues; as first, Prudence.
For what, in the first place, will be the Office of Prudence? only to cater
and look about for Pleafures? How miserable a case is that Virtue in, which is
thus made a Servant and Pander to Pleasure? But what shall be her Business in
this Office? to taste and distinguish ingeniously betwixt Pleasures? Supposing
this to be a pleasant Business, it is certainly the most scandalous one that
could ever have been thought on. Again, Can he that makes Pain be the greatest
Evil, have ever such a Virtue as Fortitude in him, the very Nature of which
consists wholly in despising of Pains and Difficulties? I know Epicurus upon
several Occasions, and this in particular, speaks very courageously as to the
matter of Pain; but we must not consider so much what is said, as what ought to
be said by a Man of his Principles, who makes Pleasure and Pain to be the
ultimate Bounds of Man's Happiness and Misery. So again, if you would hear him
about Continence and Temperance, he tells you abundance of extraordinary things
in a great many places; but he is gravelled (as we speak) and can never be able
to acquit himself handsomely. For with what Face of Reason can he commend
Temperance, who places his Happiness in the Enjoyment of Pleasures? That is
Pleasure (Epicurus's Happiness) consists in indulging the sensual Appetite; but
Temperance consists in opposing this Appetite; therefore Temperance and
Pleasure can never agree; and consequently Epicurus is inconsistent with
himself, when he commends Temperance, and yet makes Pleasure his sovereign Good.
when the sensual Appetite follows after Pleasures, and it is the Business of
Temperance to correct that Appetite. Having proved that this Opinion ruins all
the Virtues; he proceeds to show, how these endeavor to bring themselves off
in each of them.
But still they endeavor, in each of these Virtues, to bring themselves off by
one little Shift or other: Thus Prudence is admitted, and defined to be The
Skill of supplying us with Pleasures, and defending us from Pains: And they
make out Fortitude as well as they can, by saying it consists in despising
Death and enduring Torments: They do bring in a sort of Temperance too, though
not without a great deal of Straining and Difficulty; but however they make a
shift, after some fashion, by saying, they count it the greatest Pleasure, if
they can but be exempt from Pain and Uneasiness. Thus these three Virtues stand
up pretty well; but Justice, the fourth, totters mightily with them, or rather
indeed is quite fallen to the Ground; with all those Duties, which relate to the
maintenance of Human Society: See Note on Book 1. chap. 2.
For what Kindness, Liberality, Affability or Friendship can there be amongst
those, who desire these Virtues not purely for themselves, but only in relation
to their Pleasure or Advantage? To make short then, I shall only say, that as I
have shown before, That nothing can be Profitable which is contrary to Honesty;
so now I do affirm, That Pleasure in general is contrary to Honesty. I the more
blame therefore Two Philosophers often mentioned by our Author, who made
Happiness consist in Pleasure and Honesty joined together.
Dinomachus and Callipho, who thought this Dispute might be brought to an
Issue, if they joined both Pleasure and Virtue together, like a Man and a Beast
as it were in the same Yoke. For Virtue can never admit of this Conjunction,
but abhors and disdains it; nor can ever the sovereign Good and Evil, which
must be one single and simple thing, be made up and compounded of such
different Principles. But of this, which is a thing of the greatest Moment, I
have written at large in His Books De Finibus Bonorum and Malorum.
another Work: Let us now return to our present Subject: What has been said in
this last Book, I hope, is enough to let any one see, How it is his Duty to
determine his Choice, if that which seems useful and expedient for him, should
come into competition with that which is Honest. But if it should be said, That
even Pleasure carries with it the appearance of Profit; let it also be
considered, That it never can be brought to an Agreement with Honesty: For the
most that can possibly be said for Pleasure, (that we may not seem wholly to
exclude it) is, That it serves by way of Sauce, to give a Relish to things, but
has no true Profit or Advantage in it self.

This is the Present, dear Son Mark, that your Father sends you, and in my
Opinion it is a very good one; but that must be judged of according to the use
you your self shall make of it. However entertain, among Cratippus's Lectures,
these three Books, and show them at least the Civility due to Strangers. Had it
been my fortune to have come to Athens ( He was on his way thither; but was
sent home again by some who told him, That his Presence would be very
advantageous to the Public. See his own Relation of it, at the beginning of
his first Philippick.
which had surely been done, if I had not been recalled by the Cries of my
Country) you might then perhaps sometimes have heard my Lectures: However since
now, in perusing these Sheets, you will have my Voice, as it were, by Proxy; Pray
bestow upon them as much time as you can, and I am sure you can as much as you
please. When I hear you take a pleasure in this sort of Studies, 'twill delight
me to talk to you (which I hope may be speedily) face to face; or however to
write to you, though at never so great a distance. In the mean time Adieu, my
dear Cicero, and assure your self, that though no one in the World is more dear
to me than you are, yet you will hereafter be much more so, if I find you take
Delight in such Writings and Instructions.

FINIS.
THE INDEX.
The first Figure refers to one of the Three Books, the second, etc. to the
Chapter of that Book.

A.
ACademicks little differing from the Peripateticks, 1, 1. 3, 4. have a right
to treat about Duties, 1, 2. how differing from the Scepticks, and why they
dispute against every thing, 2, 2. formerly the same with the Peripateticks, 3,
4. are not tied to a Set of Opinions, 3, 4. Accusing, how far allowable, 2, 14.
Acilius the Historian, 3, 32. Acknowledgment a sufficient return of a Kindness,
2, 20. Acropolis, its entrance, 2, 17. Action gives a true Value to Virtue, 1,
6. to take place of Speculation, 1, 6, 43, 44, 45. not to be ventured on, if we
doubt of its Honesty, 1, 9. should be free from Rashness, etc. 1, 29. three
Rules to be observed for keeping Decorum in our Actions, 1, 39. Order and
Regularity to be observed in our Actions, 1, 40. these depend upon Time and
Place, 1, 40. good Actons ill applied become ill ones, 2, 18. Actors choose the
Parts fittest for their Humors, 1, 31. respect Modesty, 1, 35. Admiration, how
moved in Men, 2, 10, 11. Advantages tempt Men to be Rogues, 3, 10. Advice of
Friends to be asked in Prosperity, 1, 26. of experienced Men, in doubt, 1, 41.
Rules about taking this Advice, 1, 41. Advocates may plead for what is not
really true, 2, 14. Aediles who, and their Magnificence, 2, 16. Affability wins
Peoples Love, 2, 14. Affectation odious, 1, 36. Africanus his saying, That Men
grown proud, etc. 1, 26. his Retirement and saying, That he was never less
Idle, etc. 3, 1. Afric. the Younger razes Carthage and Numantia, 1, 22. Son of
Paullus, 1, 33. not to be corrupted by Money, 2, 22. Agamemnon sacrificed his
Daughter, 3, 25. Agreement between the several Orders, the Support of a State,
3, 22. Agriculture commended, 1, 42. Ajax, his Character, 1, 31. Alexander
Phereus the Tyrant, 2, 7. Alex. the Great, often guilty of great Vices, 1, 26.
chidden by his Father for giving Money, 2, 15. Ambition a great Cause of
Injustice, 1, 8, 19. is generally in Men of the greatest Souls, ibid. is
contrary to true Courage, 1, 19, 20. robs a Man of his Liberty, 1, 20. is
destructive to a State, 1, 25. 3, 21. Anger against Adversaries to be avoided,
1, 25. especially in Punishing, 1, 25. also in common Discourse; in Chiding,
and in Quarrels, 1, 38. Annicerian Philosophers, 3, 33. Another's Right, see
take. Antipater the Stoic, 2, 24. 3, 14. Apelles's Venus, 3, 2. Applause, the
desire of it to be avoided, 1, 19, 20. Aquillius's Formulae, 3, 14, 15. Aratus
the Sicyonian, 2, 23. Aristippus, 1, 41. 3, 33. Aristo, 1, 2. Aristotle
neglected Eloquence 1, 1. his Opinion about Shows to the People, etc. 2, 16.
makes Honesty far outweigh all other Goods, 3, 8. Armies of little use abroad,
without Prudence at home, etc. 1, 22. Assent not no be given hastily, 1, 6.
Athens a famous University, 1, 1. 3, 2. Athenians make a cruel Edict, 3, 11.
forsake their City for fear of the Persians, ibid. reject a dishonest Proposal,
etc. ibid. Avarice one great cause of Injustice, 1, 7, 8. a sign of a narrow
and sordid Spirit, 1, 20. Magistrates should be free from Suspicion of it, 2,
21. is destructive to a State, 2, 22.
B.
BArdylis the Illyrian, 2, 11. Bargains should be made at a word, 3, 15. Beauty
of two sorts, 1, 36. how to be gotten, ibid. Becoming, see Decency. Benefits;
how we should judge of their Value, 1, 15. done either by our Money or
Industry, 2, 15. relate either to the Republic, or to Particulars, 2, 19. etc.
upon whom best bestowed, 2, 18, 20. Body should be enured to Labor, 1, 23. the
care Nature has taken in its Fabric, 1, 35. Bounty, 12. see Liberality. Boys
not allowed all sorts of Plays, 1, 29. Bragging very unbecoming, 1, 38. Bribery
in Magistrates the Ruin of a Republic, 2, 21, 22. Laws made against it by the
Romans, 2, 21. Brutes, how differing from Men, 1, 4, etc. we often talk of
their Courage, but not Justice, etc. 1, 16. Brutus deposed Collatinus, 3, 10.
Building; its Measures and End, 1, 39. Buyers should not use Arts to beat down
the Prizes, 3, 15. see Seller.
C.
Caesar, Brother of Catulus, a facetious Man, 1, 37. Caesar broke through the
most sacred Ties for the sake of Empire, 1, 8. Robbed some that he might be
Generous to others, 1, 14. rent and mangled his Country, 1, 17. was Murdered
for his Tyranny, 2, 7. Triumphs over Marseilles, etc. 2, 8. his Party was
Wicked and Detestable, 2, 13. loved Villainy, though he got nothing by it, 2, 24.
makes himself K. of the Romans, etc. 3, 21. Callicratidas too careful of his
own Honor, 1, 24. a Lover of Simplicity, 1, 30. Calling, see Life. Callipho
and Dinomachus join Pleasure and Virtue, 3, 33. (...) what, 1, 3. Cannius's
Bargain, 3, 14. Carriage toward all Men to be taken care of, 1, 28, 35.
Carthaginians Treacherous, 1, 12. Cato Censorius, his Letter to Poppilius, 1,
11. caused the third Carthaginian War, 1, 23. his Apothegms, 1, 29. his Answer
about managing an Estate, 2, 25. Cato, Father to Uticensis, his Determination
of a Case, 3, 16. Cato Uticensis's Genius, 1, 31. too headstrong in standing up
for the Interest of the Public, 3, 22. (...) what, 1, 3. Catulus not inferior
to Pompey, 1, 22. Catuli counted the best Speakers, 1, 37. Chiding sometimes
necessary, 1, 38. Rules to be observed in it, ibid. Children naturally loved,
1, 4. Chrysippus's excellent Saying, 3, 10. Cicero's Service to his Countrymen
by Writing, 1, 1. assumes to himself the Virtues of an Orator, etc. ibid. his
prudent Management of the Republic, 1, 22. 2, 24. got his Preferments by all
the Votes, 2, 17. betakes himself to Retirement, 3, 1. designed to have gone to
Athens, 3, 33. Cimbers and Celtibers, 1, 12. Cimon of Athens's Hospitality, 2,
18. Circumstances of Men to be regarded in Giving, 1, 8. 2, 18. make that not
to be a Crime, which usually is one, 3, 4. Cities, in taking 'em nothing to be
done cruelly, etc. 1, 24. the great use of 'em, 2, 4. why at first built, 2,
21, 22. Citizens Duties, 1, 34. Claudius Centumalus, 3, 16. Clemency, how far
laudable, 1, 25. Cleombrotus beat by Epaminondas, 1, 24. Clothes; only Health
to be regarded in 'em, 1, 30. Moderation to be observed in the fineness of 'em,
1, 36. Clownishness to be avoided, 1, 35, 36. Common: all things at first were
so, 1, 7. what things are common to all, 1, 16. Company; a Man would be weary
of his Life without it, 1, 43. to keep company with Good and Wise Men
recommends young People, 2, 13. Conceal, how differing from not to tell, 3, 12.
what it is, 3, 13. Concord a Pillar of any State, 2, 22. Confidence, see Trust.
Constantia, what it is, 1, 20. Contemplation should give place to Action, 1, 4,
6, 43, 44, 45. Copulation, the Desire of it natural to all Animals, 1, 4.
Corinth razed by the Romans, 1, 11. 3, 11. Correction, see Chiding, Punishment.
Covetousness, see Avarice. Countenance to be kept always the same, without
Dejection, 1, 26. Counterfeit: nothing can be lasting that is such, 2, 12.
Country claims a share in us 1, 8. the Love we have for it swallows up all
other Loves, 1, 17. their Wickedness who injure it, 1, 17. every one that is
able ought to serve it, 1, 20. should be preferred even before Parents, 1, 17,
45. 3, 23. Courage is a Virtue contending for Honesty, 1, 19. an Enemy to
Treachery, etc. ibid. to desire of Applause, 1, 20. consists in two things,
ibid. is obtained by the Mind, not the Body, 1, 23. in War, recommends young
Men, 2, 13. teaches us to fear nothing, etc. 3, 27. nothing Profitable that is
contrary to it, 3, 26, etc. Craft, see Cunning. Crassus [Marc.] his Saying
about Riches, 1, 8. made Heir by a false Will, 3, 18. an ill Man, 3, 19.
Crassus Luc. an Orator, 1, 37. got Honor by an Accusation, 2, 13. Crassus the
Wealthy, Aedile, 2, 16. Cratippus, who he was, 1, 1. 2, 2. Cruelty most
contrary to Nature, 2, 11. Cunning far from true Wisdom, 1, 19. 2, 3. 3, 17.
the great Mischief of it, 3, 17. does not excuse from Perjury, but rather
aggravates it, 3, 32. Custom and Civil Constitutions to be followed, 1, 41.
some may act against 'em, and others not, ibid. Cynicks argue against Modesty,
1, 35. to be wholly rejected, 1, 41. Cyrenaick Phisophers, 3, 33.
D.
DAncing in the Streets scandalous, 3, 19, 25. Danger how far to be undertaken,
1, 24. we should endanger our selves rather than the Public, ibid. Debts
forgiven, etc. 2, 22, 23. Governors should hinder People from running into
Debts, 2, 24. Deceit frees a Man from being bound by his Promise, 1, 10.
Decency observed by Man only, 1, 4. inseparable from Honesty, 1, 27. is seen in
all the parts of Honesty, ibid. two sorts of it, universal and particular,
ibid. draws the Approbation of all, 1, 28. relates both to Body and Mind, ibid.
nothing Decent that is contrary to a Man's Genius, 1, 31. Decency of Living
according to Universal Nature, 1, 28, 29, 30. according to each Man's
particular one, 1, 30, 31. according to one's Place or Station in the World, 1,
32. is seen in our Words, Actions, etc. 1, 35. in our Eyes, Hands, etc. ibid.
consists in three things, ibid. Decorum of the Poets, 1, 28. Defending more
laudable than to Accuse, 2, 14. to defend a guilty Person lawful, ibid. Define;
the Subject of a Discourse ought to be defined at the beginning, 1, 2.
Deliberation, five Heads of it, 1, 3. in some Cases sinful, 3, 4, 8, etc.
Demetrius Phalereus, who he was, 1, 1. blames Pericles, 2, 17. Demetrius
forsaken by the Macedonians, 2, 7. Demosthenes a Hearer of Plato, 1, 1. at what
age he began his Study, 2, 13. Desire of Riches, etc. see Avarice, Ambition.
Despising different from having an ill Opinion of, 2, 10. Dicaearchus's Book
about the Destruction of Men, 2, 5. Difficult Subjects, see Study, Difficulty
makes a thing more honorable, 1, 19. Diogenes and Antipater dispute, 3, 12,
13. Dion taught by Plato, 1, 44. Dionysius the Sicilian Tyrant, 2, 7. Direct a
wandering Traveller, 1, 16. Discourse; variety in Men's Ways of it, 1, 30. not to
be dressed up with Greek Expressions, 1, 31. of two sorts, 1, 37. 2, 14. common
Discourse should be easy, etc. ibid. free from Passion, etc. 1, 38. should be
agreeable to the Subject we discourse upon, 1, 37, 40. Disputing of two sorts,
by Reason and by Force, 1, 11. Dissimulation should be excluded, 3, 15.
Division should take in the whole Matter divided, 1, 3. Dolus malus what, 3,
14. punished by the Civil Laws, 3. 15. Donations to the People when allowable,
2, 16, 17. Doubt: We should do nothing, of which we doubt whether it is Honest
or not, 1, 9. in Cases of doubt ask experienced Men's Advice, 41. Duties: the
whole Subject of 'em consists of two parts, 1, 3. middle and perfect ones,
ibid. 3, 3, 4. incumbent on us in every part of our Lives, 1, 2. greater ones
to take place before less, 1, 10. Duty to Parents adorns a young Man, 2, 13.
E.
EDucation of Youth a laudable Employment, 1, 42. makes many useful Men, etc.
1, 44. Effeminacy to be avoided, 1, 4. see Niceness. E^^^r, its signification,
1, 30. Eloquence preferable to acute Thinking, 1, 44. its great force, etc. 2,
14. its downfall in Rome, 2, 19. gives one opportunities of Obliging many, ibid.
Enemies by the old Romans called Strangers, 1, 12. Justice to be kept toward
them, 1, 11, 12. 3, 29. difference of Carriage to be observed toward 'em, 1,
12. none to be reckoned Enemies, but who take up Arms against the State, 1, 25.
Ennius, 1, 8, 16. Epicurus ruins all Virtue, 1, 2. 3, 33. makes Happiness
consist in Pleasure, 3, 33. endeavors to bring himself off, but in vain, ibid.
Estate, how to be gotten, bettered, etc. 1, 26. 2, 24, 25. it is a scandal to
ruin it by neglect, 2, 18. what the best, that can be left to a Son, 1, 33.
Evenness of Temper, a part of Courage, 1, 26. Evils; the least to be chosen, 3,
1, 28, 29. those of Body and Fortune less than those of the Soul, 3, 5.
Euripides's Phoenissae, 3, 21. (...), what it signifies, 1, 40. Exacting to be
avoided in Dealings with others, 2, 18. Exercise requisite to make Men perfect,
1, 18. Extraordinary things move admiration, 2, 10.
F.
Q. Fabius Lab^o's Trick, 1, 10. Fab. Maximus his Wise Delaying, 1, 24. his
Subtilty and Cunning, 1, 30. Fabricius's Justice, 1, 13. 3, 4, 22. Faith the
Foundation of Justice, 1, 7. set up in the Capitol next to Jupiter, 3, 29. to
be kept with Enemies, ibid. See Oaths. Fathers often followed in course of Life
by their Sons, 1, 32. Rules to be observed in imitating them, 1, 33. whether to
be accused by their Sons, should they Plot against the State, 3, 23. Fear one
cause of Injustice, 1, 7. Promises made through fear not binding, 1, 10. an
improper way of getting Men to be of our side; and the ill Consequences of it,
2, 7, 8. Fecial Law of the Romans, 1, 11. 3, 29. Fides derived by the Stoics,
1, 7. Ex fide bona, a Form in Law, 3, 17. Fighting when laudable, 1, 23.
Fimbria Judge in a Case, 3, 19. Flatterers to be avoided, 1. 26. Estates got by
Flattery, scandalous, 3, 18. Force and Fraud, the two ways of injuring Men; the
latter more odious, 1, 13. a courageous Man cannot be forced, 3, 31. Forms in
Judgment, 3, 15. the general Form or Rule, 3, 5. Fortune must yield to Nature,
1, 33. her influence upon the good or ill Su^ of Actions, 2, 6. Seditions will
never be wanting, while Men hope to make their Fortunes by 'em, 2, 8. to be
transported with good or ill Fortune shows a mean Spirit, 1, 26. Freedom;
wherein it consists, 1, 20. Fretfulness upon unseasonable Visits, etc. to be
avoided, 1, 25. Friends necessary for all, 2, 8. all common among Friends, 1,
16. the Counsel of Friends should be asked, 1, 26. Men are born for their
Friends, as well as themselves, 1, 8. Corrections, Counsel, etc. due among
Friends, 1, 17. How much may be done for the sake of a Friend, 3, 10. Damon and
Pythas two Friends, ibid. closeness of Union between Friends, 1, 17. Friendship
makes many become one, 1, 17. is cemented by likeness of Manners, ibid. to be
broken off by little and little, 1, 33.
G.
GAte should not be too slow, etc. 1, 36. Generals of the Romans delivered to
their Enemies, 3, 30. Genius, see Nature. Geometricians Method, 3, 7. Gentile
Jests, 1, 29. Carriage, 1, 35. Glory made upof three Ingredients, 2, 9. Cicero
wrote two Books about it, ibid. must be used with Discretion; and what the
shortest cut to it, 2, 12, 13. not to be gotten by Counterfeit, 2, 12. but by
Justice, 2, 13. cannot be durable unless founded upon Virtue, 2, 20.
inconsistent with Wickedness, 3, 22. Gods; Duties to them to be performed
first, 1, 45. how their Favor may be procured, 2, 3. they never hurt, ibid.
are never angry, 3, 28, 29. Good Fortune; it is a sign of a low Spirit to be
transported with it, 1, 26. Good Men so called from Justice, 1, 7. 2, 11. who,
3, 15, 19. very hard to be found, ibid. it is always profitable to be one, ibid.
Good Men desire Honesty, not Secrecy, 3, 9. Good Will, see Love. Government of
a State like the Office of a Guardian, 1, 25. the several Duties of those that
govern, 2, 21, etc. Gownsmen as useful as Soldiers, 1, 22, 23. Gracchus Father
of the two Gracchi's, 2, 12. his Sons justly slain, ibid. ruined by their
levelling Principles, 2. 23. Gratidianus, 3, 16, 20. Gratitude a most necessary
Duty, in which we should imitate fruitful Fields, 1, 15. all People hate one
that is not Grateful, 2, 18. Greatness of Soul, natural to Man, 1, 4. what it
appears in, 1, 5. enclines Men to Ambition, 1, 8, 19. is often too hot, 1, 15.
usually made most account of in the World, 1, 18. necessary for Statesmen more
than Philosophers, 1, 20. its Description, and how it differs from Greatness of
Understanding, 1, 23. seen even in a retired Life, 1, 26. is Savageness, if not
accompanied with Justice, 1, 44. see Courage. Greek and Latin to be joined, 1,
1. to bring Greek into Discourse, ridiculous, 1, 31. Guilty Persons may
sometimes be defended, 2, 14. Gyges's Ring, 3, 9, 19.
H.
HAnnibal Cruel, 1, 12. sends ten to Rome after the Fight at Cannae, 1, 13. 3,
32. Hastiness in giving assent, a Fault in the search of Truth, 1, 7. the
Passions should not through have outrun Reason, 1, 29. Hate able to ruin the
greatest Power, 2, 7, 8. Haughtiness in Prosperity to be avoided, 1, 26. Health
how to be preserved, 2, 24. Hecaton the Rhodian, 3, 15, 23. Help: not to help
the Injured, if we can is Injustice, 1, 7. Hercules sees two ways, 1, 32. is
placed among the Gods, 3, 5. Herillus exploded, 1, 2. Herodotus the Historian,
2, 12. Hesiod's Rule, 1, 15. Hire; the worst means of winning Men to our side,
2, 6. Honestum, whence it results, 1, 4, 5. laudable in it self, ibid. would
make the World in Love with it, could it be seen, 1, 5. shows it self by its
own brightness, 1, 9. entitles a Man to our Liberality, 1, 14, 15. 2, 20. more
especially deserves our Study, 2, 3. naturally pleases Men, 2, 9. is the same
with Profit, 3, 3, 7, 8, etc. honest Man, who, 3, 19. Honor; the Desire of it
tempts Men to Injustice, 3, 20. Hortensius Aedile, 2, 15. uses a false Will, 3,
18. Hospitality to be kept by great Men, 1, 39. praised deservedly by
Theophrastus, 2, 18. Hostis, its signification among the old Romans, 1, 12. Hot
Counsels and Deiigns preferred by some, 1, 24. House, of what sort becomes a
great Man, 1, 39. the Master should be an Honor to his House, ibid. Humility
requisite in Prosperity, 1, 26. Humors, see Nature. Hunting, a Manly
Recreation, 1, 29. Hypocrisy should be banished cut of the World, 3, 14.
I.
JEsting in what kind and degree allowable, 1, 29. Inheritance; the best a
Father can leave to his Son, is the fame of his Virtues, 1, 33. Injuries, two
ways of doing 'em, 1, 13. injuring others most contrary to Nature, 3, 5.
Injustice of two sorts, and the Causes of each, 1, 7, 8, 9. the greatest, which
is done under the mask of Honesty, 1, 13. Innocent Persons never to be accused,
2, 14. Interest draws one way, and Honesty another, 1, 3. no base thing can be
any one's Interest, 3, 19. should be measured by Justice, 3, 21. Isocrates
contrary to Aristotle, 1, 1. Judges Duty, 2, 14. Justice the most splendid
Virtue, 1, 7. makes Men be called Good, ibid. 2, 11. the Duties of it, 1, 7. is
altered upon an alteration of the Circumstances, 1, 10. to be kept toward those
that have injured us, and Enemies, 1, 11. toward the meanest, such as Salves,
1, 13. is the only way of obtaining our Ends, 2, 3. makes Men trust us more
than Prudence, 2, 9. no Man just, who is afraid of Death, etc. 2, 11. Justice
gets us all the three Ingredients of Glory, ibid. is necessary for all Men,
even Pirates, 2. 11. Kings were at first chose, and Laws made for the sake of
it, 2, 12. no Credit can be lasting, that is not built upon it, 2, 20. is the
Queen of all Virtues, 3, 6. nothing Profitable that is contrary to it, 3, 22,
etc.
K.
KIndnesses should be done to Honest rather than Great Men, 2, 20. not to be
done to one, by injuring another, ibid. See Benefits. Kings formerly chose for
their Justice, 2, 12. no Faith in case of a Kingdom, 1, 8. Justice violated for
a Kingdom, 3, 21. many treacherous, and but few faithful to Kings, ibid.
Knowledge how desired, etc. by Men, 1, 4, 6. must give place to Action, 1, 43.
is a barren accomplishment, without Justice, 1, 44. that of Honesty, best, 2,
2, 3. 3, 2. Knavery to be avoided, 2, 3. few Actions wholly free from it, 3,
15. See Dolus malus.
L.
LAcedaemonians: Plato's Observation of 'em, 1, 19. ruined by Epimanondas, 1,
24. forsaken by their Allies, 2, 7. murder their King Agis, etc. 2, 23.
Laetorius's Law, 3, 15. Language, see Discourse. Largi, of two forts, 2, 16.
Latin to be joined with Greek, 1, 1. Laws; a malicious Interpretation of 'em a
means of Roguery, 1, 10. punish Offenders according to Justice, 1, 25. why
first invented, 2, 12. use the same Language to all Conditions, ibid. the
knowledge of 'em creditable at Rome, 2, 19. gives a Man opportunities of
obliging, ibid. the End and Design of 'em, 3, 5. how they root out Frauds, 3,
17. the Law of Nations different from that of particular Cities, ibid. Roman
Law taken from Nature, and its Excellence, ibid. Law of Nature takes in all
Men, 3, 6. Lawsuits to be a voided, 2, 18. Learners how best corrected, 1, 41.
Learning; who may be allowed to give 'emselves up to the Study of it, 1, 20. is
a Pleasure, not a Labor, 3, 2. Letters, how to be expressed, 1, 37. Levelling
Estates destructive, etc. 2, 21, etc. Liberality: Three Cautions to be observed
in it, 1, 14. 2, 25. must be governed by Justice, ibid. to give to one what is
taken from another not Liberality, ibid. to whom it should be most shown, 1,
15, 18. 2, 18, 20. moves the Peoples Love, 2, 9, 18. consists in doing
Kindnesses either by Money or Labor; the latter preferrable, 2, 15. has got no
bottom, ibid. how the Liberal dispose of their Money, 2, 16. Liberty ought to
be most of all contended for, 1, 20. wherein it consists, ibid. bites deeper
after she has been chained, 2, 7. Life of Retirement, and that of Public
Business compared, 1, 21. several Men take several ways of Life, 1, 32. the
difficulty of choosing a way of Life; and what chiefly to be regarded in it, 1,
32, 33. should not easily be changed, 1, 33. how such Change should be made,
ibid. Little Indecencies especially to be avoided, 1, 40. in the least things
we observe what is becoming, 1, 41. Love of 'emselves and Offspring in all
Animals, 1, 4. Love a stronger Motive to Obedience than Fear, 2, 7, 8. how to
be gained of the People, 2, 9. by what we are to judge of Men's Love to us, 1,
15. we should do most for those, by whom we are loved most, ibid. general Love,
and that of Friendship, how far necessary, 2, 8. Lucullus magnificent in
Building, 1, 39. Lycurgus the Lawgiver of Sparta, 1, 22. Lying abominable, 1,
42. 3, 14. should be banished from all Commerce, 3, 15. is inconsistent with
the Character of a good Man, 3, 20. Lysander enlarged the Spartan Empire, 1,
22. Crafty, 1, 30. the Ephore banished, 2, 23. Lysis Master of Epaminondas, 1,
44.
M.
MAcedonians desert Demetrius, 2, 7. Paullus took the Treasure of Macedon, 2,
22. Magistrates Duties, 1, 24, 25, 34. 2, 21, etc. Mamercus put by the
Consulship, 2, 17. Man; how different from Brutes, 1, 4, 30. not born for
himself alone, 1, 7. all things on Earth made for him, say the Stoics, ibid.
we should show a respect for all Men, 1, 28, 36. and desire to be thought well
of by 'em, ibid. some are Men in Name only, 1, 30. Men may be allowed some
Ornaments; but must avoid Niceness, 1, 36. naturally love Society, 1, 43, 44.
do the most Good and Harm to one another, 2, 3, 4, 5. to procure their Love the
chief of Virtue, 2, 5. by what means they are drawn to be for us, 2, 6. every
Man should help any other because he is a Man, 3, 6. Manlius Luc. and Titus, 3,
31. Marius made Consul, etc. 3, 20. Marius Gratidianus, 3, 16, 20. Marriage the
closest Bond of Society, 1, 17. Medes chose the justest Men Kings, 2, 12.
Merchandice, how far creditable, 1, 42. Merchant of Corn's Case, 3, 12, 13.
Merits of the Receiver to be considered in giving; of four sorts, 1, 14.
Metelius accused by Marius, 3, 20. and Africanus's Dissent, 1, 25. Metrodorus's
Opinion about Happiness, 3, 33. Milo got great Honor, 2, 17. Mind of Man
always in Motion, 1, 6. consists in Reason and Appetite, 1, 28, 36. decency to
be kept in its Motions, 1, 36. filthiness of the Mind more loathsome than of
the Body, 3, 29. Moderation what, 1, 40. is best in most things, 1, 36.
Modesty, Bashfulness, etc. 1, 27. the Duties of 'em different from those of
Justice, 1, 28. forbids to do or name some things, 1, 35. the Cynicks argue
against it, ibid. nothing virtuous or becoming without it, 1, 41. sets off
Eloquence, especially in young Men, 2, 14. Money: See Hire, Riches, etc. those
tried with Fire, who have withstood its Temptations, 2, 11. how best laid out,
2, 16, 17, 18. bad Money should not be put away, 3, 23. Motives drawing Men to
favor us, etc. 2, 6. Mummius took Corinth, etc. 2, 22. Musicians discover the
least Faults in Music, 1, 40, 41.
N.
NAsica murdered T. Gracchus, 1, 22. Nature should be taken for Guide, and
then we cannot err, 1, 28. Pleasure, etc. unworthy Man's Nature, 1, 30. variety
of Men's particular Natures, ibid. every one should follow his own Nature; and
how far, 1, 31. nothing becoming that is contrary to it, ibid. its great
influence on our Actions, ibid. has greater sway than Fortune, 1, 33. directs
to Modesty, 1, 35. is both an Human and Divine Law, 3, 5. enjoins each Man to
help another, 3, 6. always desires what is becoming, 3, 8. to live according to
Nature the Stoical, chief Good, 3, 3. Necessity not the Motive to Society among
Men, 1, 44. Niceness in Carriage, 1, 35. Dress, etc. 1, 36. Nola and Naples
quarrel about their Bounds, 1, 10. Non putaram, a Fool's shift, 1, 23.
O.
OAths given to Soldiers, 1, 11. what is to be considered in Oaths, 1, 13. 3,
29. I am not tied by Oath to a Deceiver, 3, 28, 29. Oath is a religious
Affirmation, etc. 3, 29. the Sacredness of 'em among the old Romans, 3, 31. not
eluded by shifts, 1, 13. 3, 32. Obscene Jesting, 1, 29. Talking discovers ill
Inclinations, etc. 1, 35. Obscure Subjects to be neglected, 1, 6. Offense: a
fear of giving Offense, a cause of Injustice, 1, 9. a cause of Mismanagement in
Civil and Military Affairs, 1, 24. it is the Duty of Modesty not to give
Offense, 1, 28. nothing to be done, that may offend the Eyes and Ears, 1, 35.
Offices a most useful and comprehensive Subject, 1, 2. 3, 2. who have a Right
to discourse about 'em, 1, 2. Old Age to be reverenced, 1, 34, 41. the Duties
of it, 1, 34. Opinion of the World concerning us not to be neglected, 1, 28.
Oratory and Philosophy to be joined, 1, 1. Order in our Words and Actions, 1,
40. Orestes gives a Dinner to the People, 2, 17. (...), 2, 5. Other Men's
Affairs appear small to us, as things at a distance, 1, 9. we should mind by
others what is becoming, 1, 42. we can soonest see Faults in others, ibid. Own:
every one to be kept in the Enjoyment of his own, 2, 22. own's Interest how far
to be regarded, 3, 5, 10.
P.
(...), 2, 5. Pain racks and torments us, 2, 10. not the greatest Evil, 3, 29.
Pains should be proportioned to what we are about, 1, 39. Painters set their
Works out to be viewed, 1, 41. Panaetius, who he was, 1, 2. left his Work about
Duties unfinished, 3, 2, 7. Particulars; nothing to be done for 'em, that is a
Damage to the Public, 2, 21. should not have Interest separate from the
Public, 3, 6. Parts; Men have several parts to be acted, 1, 30, 32. parts of
the Body well fitted by Nature, 1, 35. Passion: Injuries done in a Passion less
heinous than in cold Blood, 1, 8. should be governed by Reason, 1, 29, 36, 39.
2, 5. disturb both Body and Mind, 1, 29. to be shunned in Discourse, 1, 38.
nothing can be liked, that is done in a Passion, ib. Pausanias, Spartan
General, 1, 22. Paullus had all the Riches of Macedon, 2, 22. Pericles's Answer
to Sophocles, 1, 40. is blamed by Phalereus, 2, 17. People caressed, etc. 2,
16. Peripateticks differ little from the Academicks, 1, 1. 3, 4. have a Right
to treat about Duties, 1, 2. require a Mediocrity, and say Anger was given us
to good Purposes, 1, 25. theirs a most noble and ancient Philosophy, 2, 2.
Perjury; when a Man is guilty of it, 3, 29. Phaeton, 3, 25. Phalaris, 2, 7. 3,
6. Philip of Macedon, above his Son in good Nature, 1, 26. advises his Son to
speak kindly to the People, 2, 14. rebukes him for giving them Money, 2, 15.
Philip's Harangues in his Tribuneship, 2, 21. his ill Council, 3, 22.
Philosophers unjust in minding only their Studies, 1, 9. relinquish the
Public, ibid. their Method of rooting out Frauds, 3, 17. none may assume that
Name, without giving Rules about Duty, 1, 2. their Study commended, 2, 2.
Philosophy a Comfort in Affliction, 2, 1, 2. a rich and plentiful Soil, 3, 2.
the meaning of the word, 2, 2. Pirates ought to have no Faith kept with 'em, 3,
29. cannot be without Justice, 2, 11. Place, its influence on our Actions, 1,
40. Plato might have made an excellent Orator, 1, 1. his saying, That Men
aren't born for themselves only, 1, 7. his Mistake about the Philosophers, 1,
9. his two Rules about Government, 1, 25. his Saying about Ambition, ibid. his
excellent Saying about Prudence, 1, 19. his Fable of Gyges, 3, 9. Plays and
Recreations how far allowable, 1, 29. Play at Even and Odd, etc. 3, 19. Players
choose the parts fittest for 'em, 1, 31. their respect to Modesty, 1, 35.
Pleasures of Body beneath a Man, 1, 30. Pleasures are alluring Mistresses, 2,
10. are contrary to Honesty, 3, 33. may serve to give a relish to Actions,
ibid. should not be regarded in Eating, etc. 1, 30. Poetical Decorum, 1, 28.
Poets set their Works out to be viewed, 1, 41. Polybius the Historian, 3, 32.
Pompey Sext. a Geometrician, 1, 6. Pompey the Great, his Saying to Cicero, 1,
20. his Party unsuccessful, 2, 13. his magnificent Shows to the People, 2, 16.
Pomponius the Tribune, 3, 31. Pontius C. the Samnite, 2, 21. Poppilius a Roman
Commander, 1, 11. Popular Expressions to be used, 2, 10. Power; the desire of
it draws Men to Injustice, 3, 21. Practice necessary to perfect a Man in
Virtue, 1, 18. Precepts insufficient without Exercise, ibid. Present things
more acceptable for a time, 2, 17. Pride in Prosperity to be avoided, 1, 26.
Private Men should be kept in their Estates, 2, 21. Prodigal who, 2, 16. Profit
the same with Honesty, 2, 3. 3, 3, 7, 12, etc. moves all Men, 3, 8, 28. the
appearance of it makes Men act contrary to Duty, 3, 11. ought to be rejected,
ibid. every thing Honest Profitable, and every thing Profitable Honest, 3, 8.
Promises not always obliging, 1, 10. 3, 24, 25. Property, its Original, 1, 7.
Prudence; the Duties resulting from, 1, 5. consists in the Knowledge of Truth,
and is most natural to Man, 1, 6. of but little Worth without Justice, 1, 43.
different from Craft, 1, 19. 2, 3. 3, 17. a Definition of it, 1, 43. makes Men
confide in us, if joined, etc. 2, 9. Public Officers should be free from
Passion, etc. 1, 20, 25. should see that what they undertake be Honest, ibid.
remember Plato's two Rules, 1, 25. a Description of a good one, ibid. should be
Courteous, Affable, etc. ibid. do the bravest Actions, 1, 26. should guard
their Eyes as well as Hands, 1, 40. not to be resisted, 1, 41. public and
private Life compared, 1, 21. Punishments; Rules to be observed about 'em, 1,
15. if some escape 'em, others grow more insolent, 2, 8. Pyrrho can give no
Rules about Duty, 1, 2. 2, 2. Pyrrhus his Speech upon giving up the Prisoners,
1, 12. a Deserter offers to Poison him, 1, 13. 3, 22. Pythagoras, 1, 17, 30.
Pythias, a Banker, etc. 3, 14.
R.
RAshness in giving up our Assent to be avoided, 1, 6. 2, 2. in our Actions, 1,
29. Reason ought to be the governing Faculty in Man, 1, 28. Rebukes in
Friendship, 1, 17, see Chiding. Regularity, see Uniformity. Regulus taken by
the Carthaginians, etc. 1, 3. 3, 26, etc. Relations should be considered before
other People, 1, 14, 16. Republic. Cicero wrote six Books about it, 2, 17.
Respect should be had for all Men, 1, 28. especially those we converse with, 1,
35, 36, 38. Retired People do very noble things, 1, 26. See Life. Revenge must
be kept within bounds, 1, 11. Rhetoric Masters overrun all, 1, 36. Riches why
desired, 1, 8. it is not enough to get, unless one know how to use 'em, 2, 12.
neither to be kept too close, nor too open, 2, 15. the best Fruit of 'em, 2,
16. are too much respected. 2, 20. to be got not for our selves alone, etc. 3,
15. aren't Profitable, if accompanied with Infamy, 3, 22. See Avarice,
Liberality. Romans famous for Courage, 1, 18. their ancient Justice and
Kindness to Allies when changed, 2, 8. ruined by Tyranny and Oppression, ibid.
Romulus did ill in killing Remus, 3, 10. Roscius Amerinus defended by Cicero,
2, 14. Rule; the Desire of it natural to Men, 1, 4. general Rule or Measure, 3,
5. Rutilius had the Name of an Honest Man, etc. 2, 13. Scholar of Panaetius, 3,
2.
S.
SAlamis famous for a Victory, 1, 22. Salmacis, 1, 18. Scaevola gives more than
was asked for an Estate, 3, 15. Pontifex max. 3, 17. Scepticks; their Opinion,
2, 2. Secrecy, nothing to be committed out of hopes of it, 3, 8, 9, etc.
Self-love keeps Men from seeing their Duty, 1, 9. Nature allows a Man to Love
himself first, 3, 5, 10. but not to injure others for the sake of self, ibid.
3, 6. Seller, bound to tell the Faults of his Goods, 3, 12, 13, etc. should use
no Arts to enhance their Price, 3, 15. Serious things to be handled seriously,
1, 37, 40. Shows to the People, how far allowable, 2, 16, 17. Sincerity
agreeable to Man's Nature, 1, 4. Singing openly a great Rudeness, 1, 40. Slaves
how to be dealt with, 1, 13. 2, 7. Tricks in selling 'em punished, 3, 17.
Society; the Principles, sorts and degrees of it, 1, 16, 17. nothing that Men
should be more concerned for, 1, 43. Man by Nature sociable, 1, 44. Necessity
not the Motive to Society, ibid. Duties of it of several Degrees, in what Order
to be performed, 1, 43. Universal Society of what Nature, 3, 12. Socrates
facetious and drolling, 1, 30. of extraordinary Virtues, 1, 41. his shortest
cut to Glory, 2, 12, 13. used to Curse those that separate Profit and Honesty,
3, 3. Solon, Athenian Lawgiver, 1, 22. his Craft, 1, 30. Sons should live as
becomes the Name of their Ancestors, 1, 22, 23. don't bath with their Fathers,
1, 35. (...), 1, 43. Sophocles the Tragedian, 1, 40. Soul's Functions more
noble than the Body's, 2, 13. Speech, see Discourse. State, how to be
supported, 2, 7, 8. 3, 22. Styles of Eloquence and Philophy to be both
cultivated, 1, 1. Stoics; Cicero follows 'em in this Book, 1, 2. great
Admirers of Derivations, 1, 8. their chief Good, etc. 3, 3. Strangers Duties in
a place, 1, 34. a difference to be made between 'em, 1, 41. should not be
forbid a City, 3, 11. Study not to be spent upon obscure and difficult
Subjects, 1, 7. the end of it, ibid. should give place to Action, 1, 4, 6, 43,
44, 45. Subject of a Discourse must be first explained. 1, 2. different
Subjects require different ways of Expression, 2, 10. Subjects of common
Discourse, 1, 37. Sulpitius an Astronomer, 1, 6. an Orator accuses Norbanus, 2,
14. Summum jus summam injuria, 1, 10. Swearing upon one's Conscience, 3, 19. my
Tongue swore, but, etc. 3, 29. Sylla [Lucius's] inhuman Victory, 2, 8. Sylla
[Pub.] Kinsman to the former, ibid.
T.
TAking away what is another's, a breach of Justice, 1, 7. most contrary to
Nature, 3, 5, 6. taking away from one and giving to another, no liberality, 1,
14. no good Man will take from another to enrich himself, 3, 19. Talk, see
Discourse. Taxes, the People not to be burdened with 'em, 2, 21. Tax-gatherers
hated, 1, 42. Ten Men sent by Hannibal to Rome, etc. 1, 13. 3, 32. Temperance,
1, 5. the Duties of it must not always give place to those of Justice, 1, 45.
and sobriety adorn a young Man, 2, 13. nothing Profitable that is contrary to
it, 3, 33. Tenths paid to the Gods, 2, 17. Terence's Chremes, 1, 9. Thebe Wife
of Tyrant Alexander, 2, 7. Themistocles, 1, 22. his Opinion about Marrying a
Daughter, 2, 20. his Proposal to the Athenians, 3, 11. Theophrastus, 1, 1. his
Book about Riches, 2, 16. praises Hospitality, 2, 18. Theseus's Wish granted by
Neptune, 1, 10. 3. 25. Thieves cannot subsist without Justice, 2. 11. Thinking;
the end of it, 1, 6. a good Man will not think what he is ashamed should be known,
3, 19. Thracians branded, 2, 7. Time and Place make Actions good or bad, 1, 40.
Trades which creditable, etc. 1, 42. Tradesmen should avoid Lying, 1, 42. be
Just, 2. 11. Treachery, etc. contrary to Reason, 3, 17. Truce for thirty Days,
1, 10. Trust: how Men are induced to Trust us, 2, 9. Trusts not always to be
restored, 3, 25. Truth; the Love of it natural to Man, 1, 4, 30. two Faults in
search of it to be avoided, 1, 6. Tyrants generally come to ill End, 2, 7. to
kill 'em counted glorious among the Romans, 3, 4. are Enemies of Human Society,
3, 6. lead miserable Lives, 3, 21.
U. V.
VIctuals: Pleasure should not be regarded in it, 1, 30. Viriathus, the
Lysitanian Robber, 2, 11. Virtue alone, or at least chiefly desirable, 1, 2. 3,
7. Virtues all connected, 1, 5. 2, 10. forces us to love the Persons that
possess it, 1, 17. 2, 9. its principal Office to procure the Love of Men, 2, 5.
consists in three things, ibid. moves Men's Admiration, 2, 10. when it appears
with greatest Splendour, ibid. scorns Affinity with Pleasure, 3, 33. see
Honesty. Ulysses of a Temper to undergo any thing, 1, 31. would have avoided
the War, 3, 26. Unable: those who are unable to exercise some Virtues, should
take the more care to get others, 1, 33. Ungrateful Men hated by all, 2, 18.
Uniformity of Life, whence it arises, 1, 31, 40. is most becoming, ibid.
Unjust: those who spend their Lives in Contemplation are so, 1, 9. and those
who mind no body's Business but their own, ibid. Voice should be clear and
harmonious, etc. 1, 37. Voluntary: no true Virtue, that is not so, 1, 9.
Userers hated, 1, 42. Cato's Opinion of Usery, 2, 25.
W.
WAnt: we should be most liberal to those that want most, etc. 1, 15. 2, 18.
War: Laws of it to be observed, 1, 11. 3, 29. may be undertaken; but it must be
for the sake of Peace, 1, 11, 23. the Management of it less glorious than Civil
Prudence, 1, 22. Courage in it recommends a young Man, 2, 13. Ways two, of
Pleasure and Virtue, 1, 32. Wicked: to be so, never Profitable, 3, 15. Will
forged of Minut. Basilus, etc. 3, 18. Wing of Horse, 2, 13. Wisdom, which the
chief, 1, 43. the Desinition and Commendation of it, 2, 2. to be often with
Wise Men, recommends a young Man, 2, 13. a Wise Man not Wise for himself, good
for nothing, 3, 15, Workhouse can have nothing gentile in it, 1, 42. World: we
should endeavor to be well thought of by all the World, 1, 28.
X.
XAnthippus the Lacedemonian, 3, 26. Xenocrates the severest Philosopher, 1,
30. Xenophon's O Economicks translated by Cicero, 2, 24.
Y.
Young Men: the Duties of 'em, 1, 34. how they should make 'emselves taken
notice of in the World, 2, 13. are not envied, but rather encouraged, ibid.
Z.
ZEno holds Virtue to be the only Good, 3, 8.
Printed by W. Onley, in Bond 's Stables, adjoining to Symond 's Inn, in
Chancery Lane. MDCXCIX.


