THE CITIES Just Vindication: OR, A Scourge for a Vagabond LIBEL, ENTITLED,
Goodman Country to his Worship the City.
I Shall not spend time in Hunting out the Absconded Author of this Paper,
Though by the impertinent Contents dangling down its sides, one might give a
shrewd guess. There is a certain Worshipful Scribbler that pesters the Town
with a Litter of Pamphlets much of the same complexion, and just so accoutred,
Buffoon in the Text, and Statesman in the Margin. But whether it be He, or
only some puny Imitator of the same Cast, is not much material. Our business
is to consider its matter and scope; which, without Spectacles of Prejudice,
may be discovered to be A Libel upon the City of London; and perhaps it is the
first time that ever that Honorable Corporation was so openly and effrontedly,
and withal so causelessly scandall'd: For can any thing be more false and
slanderous than that -- The City proudly and insolently calls all the
Protestants that go to Church, by the name of Church-Papists, and Popishly
affected? And yet this He no less than four times repeats in less than forty
lines. Again, he takes them all to task -- Come, come, leave your Madness and
Fooling: As if our Citizens, every Mothers Child, were turned Bedlamites and
Jack-Adamses. Nay, not content to represent them as Changlings and Mad men, he
makes them Cannibals and Villains too, that will Treat the best and greatest
part of the Nation with Blows and bloody Persecution. And immediately after
feigns them ready prepared for a Rebellion, longing after an Holy War, to fight
the Lords Battle; and prescribes where they shall muster, and where they must
not quarter their Troops, etc. Now what can all this tend to, but to create
Jealousies in the mind of the King? (were he not (as we know, and bless God he
is) a Prince of greater wisdom than to hearken to the mischievous suggestions
of any such vile mercenary Incendiaries:) To make him suspect the Loyalty of
his Imperial City? and render the Inhabitants thereof infamous, and for ever
odious to all the good People and Loyal Subjects in the world?

But what is the matter? what horrid Crime has London committed to give cause
for such black Reflections? Nothing in the world, Sirs, but chosen according to
Custom a couple of Sheriffs. This our Author acknowledges at first step, the
occasion of all his outcries We have of late been in a woundy Pudder and
Tattle about the Election of Sheriffs. Here he belies the Country as liberally
as afterward the City; for sure Countrymen are generally more discreet than
to trouble themselves so much about a matter that did not concern them;
especially if they are so very indifferent as he presently tells us, Not to
care what they are, or what they will be, or what Party they are of, as long as
they have money. But though he makes his supposed Country fo^k such silly
regardless fellows, yet he must give us who are concerned, leave to be more
circumspect, and to choose men (as much as in us lies) that are likely by their
Prudence and Moderation to be most serviceable to the Public: for though we
neglect not the Estate, yet we should not (whatever we have done) make that the
sole Qualification. For why should such Offices be entrusted in the hands of
any whose Brains lie in their Cleest, or whose Zeal for the Protestant Religion
reaches no further than beginning an Health, or who shall think they have
laudably discharged their Duty when they have spent a thousand pounds or two in
making people drunk for the Honor of the City. We speak not this to reflect on
any, much less the worthy Gentlemen late in nomination, (who for ought we hear,
were persons very well qualified, and the only reason why they were not
Elected, seems to be, that they had too many Friends in the City who were
unwilling to vote them into a Charge so troublesome and expensive;) we mention
it only to confute that sage Aphorism of our little Sir Poll, wherewith he
struts his Margin -- That It is no matter who the City chooses for Sheriffs, so
they are wealthy. But before this, he falls into a Raving fit, and talks of
carrying the Cause, a Battle, and a Victory, and this attended with Houting and
Shouting, and flourishing of Handkerchiefs. It Is hard to reconcile it to sense,
how the City can be said thus to Battle and Triumph over it self; but it seems
he would have his folks in the Country believe that the Livery-men went to
Loggerheads about their Choice, and a pitched field to have been fought in
Guild Hall. This is not the first misrepresentation of that business; and
though we thought it had been sufficiently cleared, and the Authors of such
Stories covered with guilty Blushes; yet since he revives it, let us briefly
review the matter.

The City of London has a Right (though this Libeller take liberty to jeer at
it) practiced time out of mind, allowed by many Charters, and confirmed by
diverse Acts of Parliament, freely to elect every year their Sheriffs. To this
purpose being met in Common Hall, the two Gentlemen, since Declared, were
chosen by majority of Hands (in the judgment of most indifferent Spectators,
near Ten to one;) and the present Sheriffs gave their Opinion, that they were
Elected. It happened (I know not why, or out of what design) some persons
present would, notwithstanding the apparent Disproportion, demand a Poll, which
was as freely granted; but adjourned (most Citizens apprehended contrary to
former Custom) for decision, from time to time for several days after: so that
no Surprise, Tumult, etc. could be pretended. This being admitted and
accomplished, upon summing up the Books, it appeared that the first two had
fairly near a thousand Names a piece more than the others; and so they were
declared the Free Choice of the City.

Now where is the Treason of all this? or if there were any Faction, on which
side did it lie? How does this business wound the Church of England, or concern
Forty one? or why must this Gaffer Two-shoes post up a Letter to the City of
London, and charge it with Schism and Rebellion upon this occasion?

But we must dive a little deeper, if we would fadome the bottom of these
pestilent Scribblers Intrigues. It Is too apparent there are a sort of men in
the world that would be taken for good Protestants, and the most Loyal
Subjects, who very industriously, though no less subtlely, and under odd
Disguises, endeavor to lessen or utterly efface the belief of the Popish Plot,
and baulk the prosecution of the Conspirators, and at the same time take all
occasions (and rather than fail, will make some) to divide and exasperate
Protestants one against another, and create misunderstandings, and horridly
represent the most innocent Actions, and particularly amuse people that the
Church of England is in danger, and the Government ready to be invaded by some
Protestants, and that all Dissenters in point of Ceremony are far more
dangerous than Papists; that Forty one is revived, and a Rebellion carrying on,
etc.

Now to take right measures of their designs herein, we must consider,

1. That within these two years there was discovered, just when it was ripe for
execution, and ready to involve us all in Blood and Confusion, A Damnable
Popish Plot. And that the same was real, we have (after a long Examination) it
attested by the King in repeated Proclamations, by several Parliaments in
unanimous Votes, by all the Judges of the Land in their proceedings, and by the
Church in public Prayers and Thanksgivings for our Deliverance. So that
whoever shall deny or doubt of it, must necessarily be guilty of the most saucy
impudence, in giving the lie to the greatest Authorities on Earth, and ought
justly to be esteemed as an Accomplice or Abetter of that horrid Conspiracy.

2. The Reality of a Dlot of that vast undertaking, and so far advanced, being
granted, can it be supposed, that no body but poor Ned Coleman and half a score
raskally Jesuits were concerned in it? It Is true, there are some people would
gladly lay it wholly on the Society. The Jesuits (say they) are Villains, and
always plotting Treasons, but it cannot be thought that the Body of Catholics
could be drawn in to consent to any such Baseness.

To this we answer, This is but an old threadbare Shift. The Gunpowder-Treason
we have often been told was carried on by a few Desperado's, the business in
Ireland (where there were Two hundred thousand Innocents most barbarously
murdered) was only the Heat of a few zealous Tories, etc. But in truth, these
things being of the nature of those, Quae nunquam laudantur nisi peracta, which
are never owned till accomplished, we are to look upon such Pretensions as
frivolous and designing. Those that now pretend to abominate it, would, if it
had taken effect, have applauded it as brave and meritorious. And whereas they
would pin it only on the Jesuits, it is well known most of the Popish Nobility
and Gentry have persons of that Society for their Confessors. Now if they are
(as these little Advocates agree) people of such desperate principles, will
they not (having such opportunities) soon leaven the whole Lump? He that
acknowledges Jesuits are Plotters, will but in vain deny, that all the rest
whose Souls they have the conduct of (which are the greatest part and of the
greatest influence in England) are very likely to be so too.

3. Agreeing therefore (as necessarily we must) That it is not likely a few
should undertake such a design, which 'twas impossible to carry on without
great numbers of persons of Quality and Estates; and that it is probable the
Body of Papists were actually engaged, or fairly disposed to join therein; can
any vigilance be too great, any care too much? is not a charitable union
amongst Protestants necessary, and strict prosecution but requisite to obviate
and punish such a Conspiracy?

4. But this Plot having thus taken wind, how should the Traitors secure their
repute, make good their Retreat, or gain present Impunity, and future
opportunities for an After-game, but either by an obstiante out-facing, or a
Politic diversion? The first they ran as far as 'twould go, witness the
impudent denyals of the Traitors at the Gibbet, wherein several of them have
notoriously been proved Liars, as Gavan, Ireland, etc. Witness too their
numerous barefaced Pamphlets, as, The Compendium, etc. But finding this too
short, they take up the second: Then comes on the forging of a Protestant Plot,
(happily discovered at Colonel Mansels Lodgings) the Buzze that the Church of
England was in danger, and the outcry of Forty one, without the least grounds
in the world: but thus Thieves pursued, hope to escape by crying stop Thief
after an honest man; and crafty Lapwings draw people from their own Nests, by
fluttering and Mewing at a distance. And though it were the most unaccountable
notion imaginable, That the Church of England should suffer or be endangered by
a vigorous prosecution of Popish Traitors. yet by the industry of the
Broachers, this conceit has not a little served their interest.

5. They have therefore procured, (or at least so it has happened) That
multitudes of wheadling squinting Pamphlets are daily spawned abroad, some to
Ridicule the Plot, and Asperse the Evidence, others to Create Jealousies and
Animosities; some to balance Accounts, and represent Papists and dissenting
Protestants equally dangerous. And though the first are actually proved guilty,
but the second besides contributing to His Majesty's Restoration, have ever
since most peacefully demeaned themselves, yet so prevalent are these dividing
Charms, That the Church of England is not only set at a greater distance, and
so new Fewds raised, but things almost brought to that pass, that the Popish
Plot seems forgot by Protestants; and every one that zealously endeavors to
detect it, and bring the prime known Conspirators to Justice, is presently
stigmatized as a Phanatick, a Factious Fellow, an enemy to the Church and
Government, etc. and what greater Advantages can the Romanists hope for?

6. In order to this, observe what slender opportunities they lay hold on. A
little debate happens in London about Sheriffs, straight the whole City is
Arraigned as ready for Rebellion. The City in Common Hall humbly desires its
Loyalty to be signified to the King, to take off base misrepresentations;
protests its resolution to stand by him to the utmost peril; begs His Majesty
to make use of His Great Council, as a sure Expedient to frustrate the wicked
Councils of Rome. And the Citizens assembled, signify their joining in this
humble Petition, and demonstrate their zealous affection to His Majesty's
Person and Government, by unanimous (but not disorderly) Acclamations; and this
is here carpt at, as Tumult and Sedition, and the Triumphs of the City for a
Victory over the Church of England! Can any thing be more unjust, or indeed
more Seditious! or tend more to amuse our Fellow Subjects in the Country or
more dishonor and render us contemptible to Nations abroad?

Yet still our Author is sore offended, that any body should say there are any
such Amphibious Creatures amongst us, as Church-Papists, or Protestants in
Masquerade; but is not this a shrewd sign that himself is one? Conscius ipse
sibi, etc. For though no good man, much less the whole City of London (as they
villainously assert) ever said or thought, That all that go to Church were
such; for without doubt, the Church of England in her Doctrine, and by the
Writings of her Learned Members, both Prelates and others, has been, and is
the greatest Bulwark against Popery: yet it is not impossible, that Jesuits and
Papists may shelter themselves under her Mantle, and in their Pamphlets, or
when called before a Magistrate, pretend to be her Sons. And such furious ones
commonly they seem, (by which mark they may be known) that they are ready like
those of Zebedee, to be calling for fire on all their Brethren, that cannot
keep pace with them in Ceremonies and External Observations. The Term
Church-Papist is not new, but older much than 41; and if we see a Jesuitical or
Atheistical villain, that merely for secular ends, or to create disturbances,
vapors of his being a Son of the Church, and yet endeavors to weaken the
Protestant Interest, whiffle over a Popish Plot against the Life of the King,
and divert the prosecution of the Traitorous Conspiratours, etc. how then can
we more appositely express him, than by the Title of a Protestant in
Masquerade? And though no Protestant holds it lawful, yet it is no wonder for a
Rank Papist to swallow Oaths, and join in outward Communion contrary to
Conscience; witness their Doctrine of Dispensations, etc. I shall only give
you the Testimonies of two Authors, one a Papist when he wrote, the other but
late before come over from them; and so neither unacquainted with their
practifes: the first a Secular Priest (during their quarrel with the Jesuits)
in a Treatise printed Anno 1601. Entitled, A Dialogue between a Gentleman and
a Priest, p. 97. has these words: -- The Jesuits have freely permitted
Catholics to go to Church with Protestants, and make no sin nor scruple of it;
thus no Law could take hold of them, for who could be known to be a Catholic?

Gent. Did they grant this Liberty to all?

Priest. In this sort they did it. If one were a notorious known Catholic
where be came, then they taught it to be unlawful in that place to go to
Church, by reason of scandal, and no otherwise, but if one were not certainly
known to be such a Catholic, he might go without offense; upon condition, that
if he heard any Heretical Doctrine preached, which moved him to doubt in any
point of Faith, he should presently come to some of those Fathers to be
resolved.

The second, one John Copley a Seminary Priest, (converted from the Romish
Church) in a Book called -- Doctrinal and Moral Observations, published Anno
1612. in his Epictle to the Reader, thus expresses himself, -- I must give you
farther notice, that there are in this Realm many dissembling Protestants,
[there's a Synonymous term for the Protestants in Masquerade] who outwardly do
all the acts of Religion belonging to this Church of England, either to stay in
their places in the Common-weatlh, or to avoid the Penal Laws; and yet in their
hearts are resolved Believers of the Roman Faith, egregiously dissembling both
with God and men, and practicing most notorious equivocation, not sticking to
take Oaths, receive Sacraments, go to Church, and commit many a like act
directly against their Consciences and persuasion.

Thus you see by Catholic Testimonies what has been done; and is there not as
much reason for them to play these tricks now as ever? Therefore let the
Blister rise on that false Tongue that would wheedle us into too good an
opinion of Popish Innocence.

Having thus laid open our Authors main design, I have not only Answered him,
but two and twenty Pamphlets besides, for they are all of a piece. As for the
rest of his Libel, it is fooling and impertinence. Did the people in King
Edward's, or Queen Mary's days, first Model and Compile your Religion? how then
will you satisfy the Papists when they ask you, where it was before Luther? In
Queen Elizabeth's, King Jameses, and King Charles the First's time, people went
to their Parish Churches, Ergo, there is now no Popish Plot, nor any body that
can make mischief under an honest pretense. But how are you sure, that if ever
an Army of sixty thousand men get into the heart of our Kingdom, they shall so
easily Conquer it? Perhaps you are North Country, but I assure you I am West,
and our Volk are not of the opinion: for if ever we catch you with your
Threeschre Thousands, be they French or Irish, or any other Papists, I, or
Scottish Presbyters either, we will in defense of our King, and our Religion,
send you all to Purgatory, and then how will your Worship answer it, for
Beroguing and Bepoxing the Pope at this fate? We will not vilify any honest
Church of England men, but love and honor them; yet we will implore God and
the King, that Popish and all other Treasons, may be fully detected and
punished.

Thus withing you to ^eep your self close, and prevent (if you can) a smarter
Answer shortly from the Pillory, or the Whipping post I commit you to your
destiny,

FVNIS.

