Cicero's LAELIUS. A DISCOURSE OF FRIENDSHIP.

Together with a Pastoral Dialogue Concerning FRIENDSHIP and LOVE.

Licensed, Rob. Midgley.

LONDON, Printed for William Crook, at the Green-Dragon without Temple Bar,
1691.

THE PREFACE.
THE usual design of a Preface is either for an Introduction to the Book it
self, or an Apology to the Reader for the Publication of it; the Former of
these being the more pertinent and useful of the two, tho it is partly done
already by my Author, I shall insist most upon that.

The following Discourse was written by Tully (as Himself observes) in his
later years, which produced many excellent Treatises: in This particularly we
find more of Majesty than Gaiety in his Style, we see the Philosopher joined to
the Orator, and (which is somewhat rare) the Friend to the States man; he being
qualified, besides his own natural Abilities, by a long experience of
Friendship in his familiarity with Pomponius Atticus, to treat of this Subject
with great exactuess. The Discourse being occasioned by Scipio's Death, and his
Character making so considerable a part of it, it will not be improper to set
down some brief Memoirs of his Life, which may serve to explain several
Passages in this Treatise.

He was the Son of Paullus Aemilius the greatest General of his time, from whom
he was called Aemilianus, Plutarch. in Vit. Paulli Aemilij.
and upon the Divorce that happened between his Parents, was adopted by the Son
of Africanus major, his Cousin-german, and by him named Scipio. Plutarch says,
that from his Youth he was endu'd above any of his Equals, with all the good
Qualities requisite in a General or a Statesman. Ibid.
First, He served under his Father in the Macedonian War, and had a
considerable share in the defeat of Perseus's Army. Afterward, Oros. Lib. 4.
Cap. 23.
in the Third Punic War (which began 606 Years after the Building of Rome, and
lasted 4 Years) he overthrew Carthage, and from his Successes in Africa, got
the Title of Africanus Minor. About 15 Years after that, Oros. Lib. 5.
he reduced Numantia, after it had held out for 14 Years against the Romans.
Whilst he lay with his Army before this Place, Plutarch. in Vit. Tib. Gracch.
and Oros. Lib. 5. Cap. 8.
the Sedition of the Gracchi broke out at Rome, and Tiberius Gracchus, the
Elder of the two Brothers, having endeavored the establishment of some new
Laws in favor of the Commons, which were against the interest of the Nobility,
was slain in the Capitol, in his Second Tribuneship. Upon Scipio's return to
Rome, he being asked by Caius Gracchus and Fulvius, Plutarch. in Vit. C. Gracch.
what he thought of Tiberius's Death, replied, That he always disliked
Tiberius's way of Proceeding: This Answer, tho 'twas delivered with a great
deal of sincerity, lost him the affections of the Populace, and mightily
iucens'd Caius. Soon after this, Idem ibid. and in Vit. Romuh.
Scipio was found dead in his Bed, and no outward Cause of his Death appeared.
Some said he died easily and suddenly, having been naturally sickly; others,
that he poisoned himself; others, that his Enemies, who were supposed to be
Caius Gracchus and Fulvius, broke in upon him in the night and stifled him:
Certain it is, that they Two were suspected to be the Authors of his Death; and
though his Body lay open to be seen of all, and gave some suspicion of a violent
Death, yet there was no public Enquiry made into it; and 'twas thought the
Rabble opposed all Proceedings of Justice, for fear that Caius should be found
accessory to the Murder. His Death happened in Caius's second Tribuneship, who
pursuing the same measures with his Brother, suffered the same fate, and being
forsaken by all his Adherents, was slain by his own Servant. Plutarch. in Vit.
Paull. Aemil.
Scipio in his lifetime was esteemed the Valiantest of the Romans, and had the
greatest Authority among them: He was a strict abserver of Military Discipline,
Flor. Lib. 2. Cap. 18.
and made a great Reformation in the Army: His vacant hours were employed in
the Study of Philosophy and Politics, in which he had Panaetius and Polybius
for his Masters. Thus was his Life divided between the Arts of War and Peace,
in both which his Friend Laelius shared with him, who was no less famous for
Wisdom than Scipio for Valor: In Vit. Ti. Gracch.
Plutarch gives us a remarkable Instance of his prudent management in the
Divisions that happened in Rome about the Agratian Law, which gained him the
Name of Laelius the Wise.

Thus much by way of Introduction. As for the Apology, though I think the
Translation wants it very much, (for really I don't know how to justify the
Presumption of an attempt to express Tully's Conceptions in any other Language
or Words than his own) yet I Am sure the Poem that follows, stands in most need
of it, and being more my Own, must consequently be more obnoxious to Censure.
However, I have ventured to place it at the End, as treating of the same
Subject, though upon a different Occasion. I hope the Fair Sex will not think
their Prerogative invaded, because in that Poem I prefer Friendship to Love;
since the Love I condemn there, is a Passion, which, I dare say, the Best and
Modestest part of them will not think themselves concerned to defend. As for
Conjugal Love, I look upon it as a Union of Souls as well as Bodies, and a
State so exactly conformable to all the Laws of Friendship, that, methinks, the
Names of Friend and Wife should signify the same.

They who will think it something unseasonable for Me to be giving Rules of
Friendship when all the World is in Arms, may as well blame Laelius for making
this Discourse when Rome was distracted by the Ambition of Gracchus, and Tully
for publishing it at a time when all Italy was divided by the Factions of
Pompey and Caesar; Certainly Remedies are never more Necessary, than when
Diseases are most Epidemical.

I hope the Reader is not curious to know, whether these Papers are published
at the Importunity of Friends, by the Command of Superiors, or for the
Prevention of false Copies: These are the common Topics which every Prefacer
makes use of, to justify his intrusion into the Press. I shall therefore wave
all Evasions, and boldly but my self upon my Reader's mercy; for I don't
understand why an Author may not have the liberty of keeping his Reasons to
himself, as well as his Name.

CICERO'S LAELIUS: A DISCOURSE OF FRIENDSHIP.
The Author's Prefatory Epistle To T. Pomponius Atticus.
QVintus Mucius Scaevola, the Augur, would often talk of Caius Laelius his
Father-in-Law with a great deal of pleasure, and in all his Discourses gave him
the Title of Wise. As soon as I came to Age, my Father disposed of me so
entirely to this Scaevola, that (unless some extraordinary occasion called me
away) I was never from him. During this time I furnished my Memory with many
excellent Sayings and useful Instructions of his, and made it my business to
improve by so wise a Conversation. Upon his Death, I applied my self to
Scaevola the Priest, whom I dare affirm for Learning and Justice to be the most
excellent Person in Rome. But having spoken of Him in another place, I shall
now return to Scaevola the Augur.

Among other Discourses of his, I remember, when I and two or three of his most
familiar Friends were sitting with him, he fell upon a Subject which was then
in every Man's Mouth. For I suppose, Atticus, You who were so well acquainted
with P. Sulpicius, cannot forget how the mortal hatred he bore Q. Pompeius, (who
was Consul when he was Tribune, and with whom he had formerly been very
intimate) did amaze as well as trouble all the Town. Scaevola took occasion
from this, to entertain us with a Discourse of Loelius's to Him and his other
Son in Law C. Fannius ( Marcus's Son) upon Friendship, which passed within a
few days after the Death of Africanus. The Heads of this Discourse I remember
very well, and have digested them into this Treatise after my own Method. For I
have brought in the Persons speaking to one another, that I might avoid the
troublesome repetition of [said I] and [said He,] and that they might seem to
talk as if they were present.

Now having been often desired by You to write something of Friendship, and
looking upon it as a Subject that might be as worthy of every one's Knowledge,
as of our Familiarity, I was the more inclined to contribute what I could to
the public Good and your private Satisfaction. But as in that Dialogue of mine
concerning Old Age, which was dedicated to You, I brought in the elder Cato
discoursing, because I thought to Person fitter to speak upon that Theme than
one who had seen the World so long, and had flourished so eminently in his
later years: So having understood from Tradition, that the Friendship between
C. Laelius and P. Scipio was very famous, I judged it proper to make Laelius
once more speak those things concerning Friendship, which Scaevola remembered
to have been formerly said by Him. This way of Discourse seems to carry the
more weight in it, when it is grounded upon the Authority of Men so Ancient and
Illustrious; insomuch as in the reading over that former Treatise, I am
sometimes so strangely affected with it, though 'twas written by my self, that
methinks Cato speaks, not I. But as in that Book, being my self an Old Man, I
wrote to an Old Man concerning Age; so in this, being a Friend, I write to a
Friend concerning Friendship; there Cato spoke, than whom no Man of his time
was Older or Wiser: Here Laelius, who always had the repute of the Wisest Man
and the Faithsullest Friend, talks of Friendship. Therefore I must desire you
to divert your thoughts from Me, that write it, to Laelius, that speaks it.

Caius Fannius and Quintus Mucius are supposed to come to their Father-in-Law,
upon the Death of Africanus: They begin the Discourse with Laelius, who talks
all the way of Friendship, and in whose Character of a Friend you will see your
own.

FANNIUS. What you say, Laelius, is true: for there never was a Man of greater
Prudence or Renown than Africanus, but you must consider that the Eyes of all
are now upon You; You only are called and counted Wise. This was lately the
Attribute of Cato, and formerly of L. Atilius: But both of them had it in a
different respect, Atilius for his knowledge in the Civil Law, Cato for his
long Experience in the World, his Wisdom and Courage in the Senate, and his Wit
and Eloquence at the Bar: So that when He came to be Old, the Epithet of Wise
was in a manner become his Proper Name. But You are esteemed for another kind
of Wisdom, which is no less owing to your Industry and Knowledge, than to your
Nature and Manners: And that not as Wisdom goes among the Vulgar, but as the
better sort describe a Wise Man, such as Greece never had; For the more exact
Critics will not allow those Seven, who were called the Sages, to be perfectly
Wise: we read of One only at Athens, and Him pronounced so by Apollo. Now the
Wisdom which is held to be in You, is such as enables you to esteem all that
can be called your own, as proceeding from your Self, and to look upon all
humance Accidents as things beneath the thoughts of a Virtuous Man. Therefore
several have inquired of Me, and I believe of Scaevola, how You bear the Death
of Africanus: and so much the rather, because when we met last Nones (according
to our custom) in D. Brutus's Garden, to discourse, You only were absent, who
always used to observe that day and that Duty very punctually.


SCAEVOLA. It Is true, Laelius; several (as Fannius says) enquire: But I answer
them from my own observation, that You bear the loss of so great a Man and so
good a Friend, with all the moderation that can be expected; that indeed a Man
of your good Nature could not but be somewhat moved, but that your absence from
Us was occasioned by your Illness rather than by any excess of Grief.


LAELIUS. You say well, Scaevola: No small Impediment should have kept me from
an Office which I always attended when I was in health: For I don't think, that
any Accident can excuse a Man of Resolution from the performance of his Duty.
But you, Fannius, that attribute more to Me than I either desire or deserve,
show more of your Friendship to Me, than of your Justice to Cato; for either no
Man ever was Wise (which I am more inclinable to think,) or if ever Man was, He
was. For (to omit other Instances) how bravely did he bear the Death of his
Son? Paulus I remember, and Caius I have seen: but their Loss was not so great
as Cato's, and consequently their Trial less; Their Sons died in their
Childhood: Cato's was a Man not only of great Hopes, but of approved Ver^ues.
Wherefore have a care of preferring even Him, whom you say, Apollo judged the
Wisest of Men, before Cato; for if the Sayings of the First deserve our Praise,
the Actions of the Last will challenge our Admiration. But now to deal freely
with you Both, as to your Sentiments of Me.

Whether I should do well or no in denying my self to be concerned for Scipio's
Death, let the Learned determine: I Am sure I should not speak the Truth; for I
must needs say, I am moved at the loss of such a Friend as I think there never
will be, and I am certain there never was. But I want no Remedies: I am my own
Comforter, and chiefly in this, that I am freed from an Error with which most
Men are possessed upon the Death of their Friends; for I think not that any
Harm has happened to Scipio, all that has happened, is to Me: Now to take one's own
Misfortunes to heart, shows more like Self-love than Friendship. But who can
deny that all is well with Scipio? For unless He expected an Immortality on
Earth, (which I dare say He never did) what is there in the Ambition of Man
that He did not obtain? who in his growing years not only answered, but out-did
the mighty Hopes which all Rome had of his Childhood: who never sought the
Consulship, yet was twice made Consul; once before the usual time, and again
for his own sake at the usual time, though for the Nations sake not soon enough:
who by conquering two Cities that were the greatest Enemies to this Empire, did
not only put a stop to those Wars for the present, but prevented them for the
future. What shall I say of his sweet disposition, his Dutifulness to his
Mother, his Kindness to his Sisters, his Goodness to his Friends, his Justice
to all the World? These you Both know; and how dear he was to Rome, their
Sorrow at his Funeral sufficiently declares. Now what good could the addition
of a few Years have done Him, since Age, though it is not grievous (as, I
remember, Cato told Me and Scipio the year before he died,) yet it takes off
from that Vigor and Activity of Mind which was yet alive in Scipio, whose Life,
as well as his Fortune and his Glory, was already such as not to be capable of
any improvement. The sense of his Death was lessened by the suddenness of it;
what kind of Death it was is hard for me to determine: what others suspect, you
hear. But this I may truly say for Scipio, that of all the glorious and happy
days of his Life (and they were not a few) none was more remarkable than That
on which, after the dismission of the Senate, He was attended to his House in
the Evening by all the Senators, the Latins, and other Allies of Rome, which
was the day before He died. So that from so high a pitch of Glory, He seemed
fitter to ascend to Heaven, than to descend so low as the Grave.

I am not of their Opinion, who have undertaken of late to maintain, That the
Soul is mortal as well as the Body, and that both are extinguished in Death;
but am rather governed by the Authority of the Ancients, whether it was derived
from our Forefathers, who performed such solemn Obsequies to the Dead, (which
certainly they would never have done, had they thought they had no sense of
them:) or from Those who were formerly of this Nation, and instructed the
bigger Grecia (which then flourished, and is now destroyed) with their
Precepts: or, whether we received it from Him whom Apollo declared the Wisest
of Men, who never contradicted his own Assertions (as several have done,) but
always taught, That the Souls of Men were Immortal, that upon their departure
from our Bodies they were received into Heaven, and that the best and justest
Persons had the easiest and quickest passage thither. This was Scipio's
Opinion, who, as if he had foreseen his Death within a few days before it
happened, when Philus and Manilius and my Self, together with You, Scaevola, and
some Others were with him, spent three days in a Discourse about the
Commonwealth, and concluded with the Immortality of the Soul: all which he told
us he had heard from Africanus in a Dream.

Now if it be true, that every good Man's Soul is so easily loosened from the
Prison and Fetters of his Body, who, think you, could have a freer passage to
Heaven than Scipio? So that to Weep for his Fate I Am afraid would look more
like Envy than Love. Nay, though I should suppose that all Sense is lost with
Life, and that Body and Soul die together; yet as there is no good in Death, so
certainly there can be no harm: For when Scipio loses all Sense, he is in the
same condition as if he had never been born; for whose Birth not only I, but
all Rome will rejoice as long as it is a City. Thus Heaven seems (...) have
dealt more kindly by Him tha^ by Me, who, as I came first into the World, ought
to have gone first out of it: But the very remembrance of our Friendship is so
delightful to me, that I esteem my self happy in having lived with Scipio,
whose Care and mine (in the management of public and private Affairs) was
always the same; our Life in Peace and War still the same: and (which is the
very Soul of Friendship) our Tempers, Inclinations and Opinions ever the same.
Wherefore I am not so much pleased with the Name that Fannius and the World
give me of Wise, (which is false,) as with the hopes I entertain, that the
memory of our Friendship will be Eternal; and I am so much the rather induced
to flatter my self with this Opinion, because in all past Ages there are not
mentioned above three or four pair of Friends, among whom I have some reason to
hope, that the Friendship of Scipio and Laelius will be known to Posterity.


FANNIUS. That must needs be, Laelius: But since you were pleased to make
mention of Friendship, and we are at leisure, you will mightily oblige Me, and
(I hope) Scaevola, if as you used formerly to discourse upon other Subjects
that were proposed; so you will now let us know what are your Sentiments of
Friendship, how you would define it, and what Rules you would lay down for the
establishment of it.


SCAEVOLA. 'Twill be very acceptable to Me; and, I assure you, I was only
prevented by Fannius from making the same Request: Therefore, Sir, what you
please to say upon this Theme will oblige us Both.


LAELIUS. I should not be against it, could I think my self sufficient: For the
Subject is noble, and we are at leisure (as Fannius says;) but who am I? Or,
what is there in Me? It Is for the greatest Philosophers in Greece to speak
Extempore upon every Argument; the Undertaking is great, and requires no small
Preparation; therefore, if you would hear a formal Discourse upon this Subject,
you must expect it from those whose Practice and Profession lay that way. As
for me, I can only advise you, to prefer Friendship before all things in the
World, since nothing is so agreeable to the Nature of Man, nothing so necessary
in Prosperity or Adversity.

My first Opinion is, that there can be no real Friendship, but between Good
Men: Not to be so very nice as some, whose Notion of Goodness (though perhaps it
is not altogether false) is very useless to, and destructive of Society; for
they deny, that any Man can be Good, unless he be Wise. Be it so: But their
Wisdom, as they define it, is such as never Man yet attained. Now the Wisdom I
would look for in a Good man, is such as is useful and practicable, not an
imaginary Virtue that is only to be wished for. According to their Rules, I
shall never allow C. Fabricius, M. Curious, and T. Coruncanius to be Wise, though
all our Fore fathers esteemed them so. Therefore let them keep to themselves
their obscure and invidious definition of Wisdom, and grant that These were
Wise Men; but they will not do that: They Will deny this to any one that is not
their Wise Man. Then let us speak a plain Truth in plain English: They whose
Life and Conversation is such, that their Honesty, Integrity, Justice and
Goodness are generally approved: They that are neither Covetous, Lustful, nor
Bold, and have but that Principle of Honor that was in the Persons I just now
mentioned, they (I think) are and ought to be accounted Good Men: Who, as far
as Man can go, follow the Dictates of Nature, the best and surest Guide. For
(methinks) it is Natural to all Mankind to maintain a mutual Society, especially
where there is a Relation; thus we find that our Country men are dearer to us
than Foreigners, and our Kinsmen than Strangers: For Nature seems to have
planted in us a kind of regard and tenderness for the former. But these are not
always sufficient ties upon our Affections: For there is this difference
between Affinity and Friendship, that the first may subsist without Love,
whereas the last cannot; take away Love, and the very Name of Friendship is
gone, though that of Affinity shall remain. How great the power of Friendship is,
we may gather from hence, that of all the numerous and different Societies
which Nature has appointed among Men, This alone is contracted into so narrow a
compass, that Love is always limited to Two, or very few Persons.

Now Friendship is an unanimous consent of Opinions in all Matters relating to
Religion, or Civil Affairs, with all Love and Kindness: Which (next to Wisdom)
I hold to be the greatest Blessing that the immortal Gods ever bestowed upon
Man. Others may prefer Riches, Health, Power, Honor and Pleasure, (which,
indeed, is the highest Bliss that Beasts are capable of attaining;) but these
are frail and fleeting Enjoyments, whose possession lays not so much in our own
power, as in the arbitrary disposal of Fortune. They that place the Supreme
Good in Virtue are most in the right; but in the mean time, it is this very
Virtue that creates and maintains Friendship, for there can be no such thing as
a Friend without it. Let us now measure Virtue by the common Rules of Life and
Conversation; not like some of our modern Virtuosi, by lofty Expressions; let
us call them Good Men, who have always been reputed so; such as Paulus, Cato,
Gallus, Scipio and Philus, who are the best Patterns to live by; and not seek
after Others, who are never to be found. Among these Men there were more and
stronger engagements of Affection, than I am able to number or express.

First then, How can Life live (as Ennius has it) without an acquiescence in
the mutual Love of some Friend? What is happier, than to have a Companion whom
one may trust as one's self? Where were the pleasures and enjoyments of
Prosperity, without a Friend, who shall rejoice for them as if they were his
own? How hard is it to undergo the burden of Adversity. without one that shall
take the greatest share upon himself? All other things that are desirable to
Man, are proper only for one end or occasion; Riches serve for Use, Power for
Respect, Honor for Praise, Pleasures for Delight, Health for Ease and
Business: but Friendship is suitable to every occasion, wherever you go it
follows you; it is neither to be excluded from any Place, nor unseasonable or
troublesome at any Time; so that we have not more frequent occasion (as they
say) for Fire, Air, and Water, than we have for Friendship. I am not now.
speaking of the common and ordinary Friendship, (though that too is not without
it is Pleasure and Use) but of that which is more refined and perfect: That, I
mean, which was between those few Persons I have mentioned. Such Friendship as
this is an Ornament to Prosperity, and a Support and Comfort in Adversity.

But amongst all the Conveniences of Friendship, (which are many and great) I
hold this to be the greatest, that in the lowest ebb of Fortune, it still bears
up with cheerful hopes of a better condition, never suffering the Mind to
despond or be cast down. He that looks upon his Friend, sees Himself, as in a
Glass: so that Absence cannot divide them, Want impoverish them. Sickness
weaken them, nor (which is stranger) Death kill them; such esteem and honor for
his Memory does a Man leave behind him to his surviving Friend, that the Life
of the One is glorious, and the Death of the Other happy. Take away mutual Love
from among Men, and you will find that neither Cities nor Families will stand,
nay, not so much as Agriculture will last. If this does not serve to convince
you of the efficacy of Friendship and Concord, you may learn to value it from
the fatal consequences of Dissension and Discord. What Family is so strongly
Allied, what City so well Fortified, that it cannot be utterly destroyed by
Factions and Animosities? From hence (by the Rule of Contraries) we may easily
gather the many benefits that arise from Friendship. A certain Philosopher
Empedocles. Vid. Sext. Empiric. adv. Mathem. lib. 8.
of Agrigentum, is reported to say in Greek Verse, That all things in Nature
and in the Universe, whether they be fixed or moveable, are kept together by
Friendship, or divided by Discord; the Truth of this Sentence is evident to
every Man from his own Experience. What Acclamations were there in the Theater
the other day, when in my Friend Pacuvius's new Play, the King, not knowing which
of the two Strangers was Orestes, Pylades avouch'd himself to be Orestes, that
he might die for his Friend, and Orestes protested himself to be (what he
really was) the true Orestes? Now, if the bare Representation of a Story was so
generally applauded, by the Audience, what do you think they would have done,
if it had been Matter of Fact? Here Nature plainly shows her power, when Men
own that to be well done in another which they would not do themselves.

Thus have I, as well as I could, declared my Sentiments of Friendship: If any
thing more remains to be said, (as I believe there is much) you must expect it
from those who handle this Subject more at large.


FANNIUS. But we had rather expect it from You; for though I have frequently
desired it from others, and heard them with some satisfaction, yet we know, You
have another way of Delivering your self upon all occasions.


SCAEVOLA. You would say so indeed, Fannius, had you been present at the Debare
which was held about the Republic, in Scipio's Garden, to hear how bravely he
desended Justice against the subtle Objections of Philus.


FANNIUS. 'Twas easy for so Just a Person to speak for Justice.


SCAEVOLA. Then, sure it must be as easy for him to discourse of Friendship,
whose chief glory it is, that he has with all the strictest Methods of Truth,
Constancy and Justice, observed its Rules and Precepts.


LAELIUS. Nay, now ye lay a Force upon me; no matter by what Arguments: it is
enough that I am forced; for to deny so fair Request to one's Kinsmen, were not
only unkind, but unreasonable.

As often therefore as I think upon Friendship, this Consideration offers it
self first to my thoughts, whether Weakness or Necessity should be any
inducements to contract a Friendship, that so, whereas either Party would be
helpless of himself, the Occasions of the one might be supplied by the other,
and all kind Offices performed by both, in a mutual reciprocation of Benefits;
whether (I say) this might properly be called Friendship, or whether there were
not some other Motive of greater worth and beauty, which proceeds from Nature.
And certainly Love (from whence the Name of Friendship is derived in Latin) is
the first and strongest tie of our Affections. Some Men shall receive a good
Turn from those whom they only flatter with an outward show of Friendship, and
to whom they pay a Respect suitable to their present occasions: But Friendship
will not admit of any Disguise or Dissimulation, whatever proceeds from That,
must be sincere and voluntary. So that methinks Friendship arises rather from
Nature than Want, and from a secret application of the Mind with a tender sense
of Love, rather than from any consideration how to make it serviceable to our
Interest. Experience shows us this in most Animals, who for a time love their
Young so entirely, and are so well beloved by them, that one may easily
perceive the force of Nature in these Creatures, which is more eminently
apparent in Man: First, from the mutual Love between Parents and their
Children, which nothing but some horrible Crime can destroy; and next, when
there are equal grounds for Love on both sides; as when we light upon one of
the same Temper and Disposition with our selves, in whom we have discovered
some eminent Ray of Goodness and Virtue. For nothing is more amiable than
Virtue, nothing more attractive of our Affections. We find in our selves an
inclination for some Persons whom we never saw, merely upon the Report of their
Virtue. Who has not an honor and esteem for the Memory of C. Fabricius and M
Curious, though he never beheld them? Who does not at the same time detest
Tarquinius Superbus, Sp. Cassius, and Sp. Moelius? When the two Generals,
Pyrrhus and Hannibal, strove for the Mastery in Italy, we had no great aversion
to the former, because of his Generosity, the later Rome always hated for his
Cruelty. Now, since the power of Virtue is so great as to render it lovely in a
Stranger, and (which is more) in an Enemy, it is no wonder if we are affected
with it, when we see it every day in an Acquaintance. Though I must confess,
Friendship is mightily confirmed by receiving some demonstrations of Kindness,
by an experience of Love, and by frequent Conversation: All which being added
to that first Motive of Love, will flame out into a wonderful Endearment of
Friendship; now if any one thinks this to proceed from a Weakness in our
selves, and a design to obtain private Ends and Interests upon others, he makes
the Rise of Friendship mean and ignoble, by ascribing it to Necessity and Want,
which at that rate would best qualify a Man for Friendship. But it is quite
otherwise: For he that has most assurance in himself, and is endued with so
much Wisdom and Virtue that he wants no Body, but has every thing that is
needful within himself, this Man is worthiest to gain and preserve a Friend.
How did Africanus want me? Not at all: Neither did I stand in need of Him; but
as I loved him out of an Honor I had for his Virtue, so He regarded me for some
little Esteem he had of mine; Time and Conversation increased our Affection:
And though many and great Conveniences on both sides did arise from thence, yet
we never made the hopes of them any Inducements to contract a Friendship. For
as we are sometimes willing to assist and oblige one another, not through any
hopes of Requital, (for that were to put a Benefit out to Use;) but because we
are all naturally inclined to Humanity: So methinks we should cover Friendship,
not for any expectation of an outward Recompense, but because it is always its
own Reward.

Some, who (like Brutes) place all Happiness in Pleasure, have a quite
different Notion of Friendship; but it is no wonder if such as misplace their
Affections upon so low and worthless an Object, can never raise them to the
contemplation of any thing that is Sublime, Noble, and Divine. Such therefore
we shall exclude from our discourse, and rest satisfied, that Nature creates in
us all a propensity to Love, and that the appearance of Virtue begets a true
and sincere Affection. This last Motive makes us place our selves as near as we
can to Him we love, that we may more freely enjoy the benefit of his
Conversation and Manners, that there may be an equality and correspondence in
love, and a readiness to oblige without the least expectation of a Return. From
this kind Contention many Benefits will arise, and its Foundation will be
stronger and surer than that of Weakness and Want: For if Interest were the
only tie of Friendship, when one fails, the other cannot last; but because
Nature cannot be changed, therefore true Friendship, which proceeds from
Nature, is immutable and eternal.

Thus have I shown you the Rise of Friendship: Would you know any thing further?


SCAEVOLA. Good Loelius, proceed; for Fannius, who is my Junior, I dare Answer.


FANNIUS. My Brother has spoken my Mind; therefore, pray Sir, let us hear you
on.


LAELIUS. Hear then, Gentlemen, what Scipio and I have often said of
Friendship. He always thought, that nothing was more difficult than to preserve
an inviolate Friendship till Death: For things may so happen, that the
Interests of Friends will be distinct, or their Opinions in Matters of State
different. We find (said He) every day, that the Humors of Men change with
their Condition, or their Tears. An Instance of this he brought from Children,
who commonly lay aside their greatest Friendships with their Play-things; or if
they continued them till their Youth, they were generally parted by some
dispute for a Pleasure or Advantage, that could not be obtained by both at the
same time; but if any were so constant as to preserve their Friendship under
these Trials, yet at last it would be violated when both were Competitors in
Honor: For there is no greater bane of Friendship than among most Men, Avarice,
among the Better sort, Ambition; these have too often proved the causes of
great Enmities between the greatest Friends. Besides, (said Scipio) many, and
sometimes just Occasions of Separation are given by some Ill Men, that expect
to be gratified by their Friend in every unlawful Request; as that he should be
an Instrument of their Lust, or an Assistant to their Injustice; which if he
refuses to do, let his Refusal be never so well grounded, he shall be taxed
with a breach of Friendship; though at the same time, when these Men have the
confidence to require a Compliance with all their Demands, they seem to profess
that They would do any thing right or wrong, to serve a Friend. But this is an
old Complaint, which has not only parted Friends, but created Mortal and
Implacable Enemies. These are the Inconveniences which Scipio thought so
incident to common Friendships, that he who could conquer or avoid them, was to
be esteemed not only a Wise, but a Happy Man.


And now, if you please, let us consider how far Love ought to proceed in
Friendship. If Coriolanus had Friends, ought they to have born Arms with him
against their Country? Should the Friends of Viscellinus, or Sp. Moelius have
assisted their Ambition in aspiring to the Empire? We saw but the other day that
Tib. Gracchus, when he disturbed the Government, was forsaken by Qu. Tubero,
and all his Friends that were of any Quality. But C. Blossius of Cuma, an
Acquaintance of your Family ( Scoevola,) when he came to me to the Senate (
Loenas and Rupilius being then Consuls) to sue for his Pardon, urged this
Argument for his Excuse, Because he had so high an esteem for Tib. Gracchus,
that he thought himself obliged to do whatever he desired: But what (said I) if
he should bid you Fire the Capitol? He would never have proposed that (answered
he:) Well, but what if he had? Truly (said he) I should have done it. You hear
how Wickedly he spoke; and really he did as he said, or rather more: For he was
no longer. the Instrument, but the Author of Gracchus's Rage, and was his
Leader rather than his Companion in all his desperate Attempts; at last, the
Hot brained Rebel being terrified by a heavy Accusation for fresh Crimes, fled
into Asia and revolted to the Enemy, and in the end was overtaken by a severe,
but just Punishment for all his Treasons.

Therefore it will not excuse you from the Offense to say you offended for a
Friend's sake; for Virtue being the very cement of Friendship, there is no
preserving the one, if you forsake the other. Now, if we judge it very fit for
us to comply with all the Desires of a Friend, and for him to do the same by
us, we have Reason on our side, as long as the Matter of his Request is not
unlawful. I speak here of such Friends as we have before our Eyes, such as we
meet with in History or Conversation, Those we are to make our Precedents, and
those chiefly who come nearest to the true Wisdom. We have heard of the
intimate Friendship between Papus Aemilius and C. Luscinus, who (as Tradition
tells us) were twice Consuls together, and twice Censors; and we find that M.
Curious and T. Coruncanius were familiar with them, and between themselves. Now
we cannot suppose that any one of these would ever press the other to the
performance of ought that touched their Honor, their Oath, or their Loyalty.
No; they were Men of so much Virtue, that if such Demands were ever made, I
dare say, they were never granted. Yet we see Tib. Gracchus was assisted by C.
Carbo, C. Cato and his Brother Caius, who proves a greater Stickler for that
Faction, since his Brother's Death, than he was before.

Therefore we may take this for a general Rule in Friendship, Neither to make
nor grant any dishonorable Request: For in all other Offenses, but especially
in those that are against our Country, it is a poor Evasion to cry, They were
committed upon a Friend's account. Now we are fallen into such Times, ( Fannius
and Scoevola) that it concerns us to look as far as we can into the Future
state of the Republic, especially since we have degenerated from the Customs
and Manners of our Ancestors. Tib. Gracchus strove to obtain, or rather did
actually usurp the Supreme Power for a few Months. Did ever any Roman see or
hear the like? Yet even after his Death, his Friends and Adherents maintained
what he had done; nor can I mention their usage of P. Nasica Scipio without
Tears. Carbo (whom I named just now) we bore with, by reason we had punished
Tib. Gracchus so lately. What will be the Event of C. Gracchus's Tribuneship, I
shall not pretend to guess; that Affair grows daily upon us, and if it once
gets a Head, will be very pernicious to the Republic. You may see by every
Poll for Magistrates, what mischievous Consequences have attended the Gabinian
Law, and that which Cassius brought in, two years after. And now, methinks, I
see the Senate and People of Rome divided, and all things managed by a
Headstrong Multitude, whilst some stand looking on, and are more curious to
enquire what occasioned these Calamities, than how they should be remedied. But
what is the Reason of all this? Truly, because no Body would dare to attempt
such a thing without a Party. Therefore every Honest Man must be cautioned,
that though his Friendship should betray him unawares into such Alliances, yet he
must ot hold himself obliged to stand by his Friend, in any Design that tends
to the subversion or prejudice of the Commonwealth: For all Offenders of this
kind, some Punishment must be provided, and no less for the Adherents than for
the Leaders of a Faction.

Who in all Greece was more Renowned or more Powerful than Themistocles, who
delivered that Nation from Slavery in the Persian War, where he was General?
Yet after all, this Man, when he was Banished through the Jealousy of his
Fellow-Citizen, knew not how to bear that Affront from his Ungrateful Country,
(though 'twas his Duty to have born it;) but took the same course as Coriolanus
had done here Twenty years before him, and Revolted: Neither of these could
find a Friend that would assist them against his Country, and therefore Both
killed themselves. Now, I say, such wicked Associations as these, must not only
be denied the umbrage of Friendship for their Excuse, but should be made liable
to some heavy Censure, that no Man may think it lawful upon any account to take
up Arms with his Friend against his Country, which, for ought I can see, as
things go now, may too frequently happen. For my part, I am no less concerned
to think what the Condition of the Republic will be after my Death, than what
is now in my Life time.

Therefore this must be laid down as the first Maxim in Friendship, To request
what is just of our Friends, and to perform what is just for them, scarcely
respiting the performance so long as to be asked. Let us always be ready to
oblige them, and exclude all delays from Friendship: Let us be willing and glad
to give good Counsel, and let the Authority of a Friend, if his Advice be
honest, go a great way with us; this Authority must extend it self not only to
open Admonitions, but, where occasion requires, to severe Reproofs, and then it
must be strictly obeyed.

Yet some, who (I hear) are esteemed Wise in Greece, please themselves with
strange and singular Opinions; but nothing can escape the nicety of their
Distinctions. They (forsooth) will tell us, that we must not be over-stock'd
with Friends, for that is the way to involve one Man in the Cares of a
Multitude, who at the same time has enough, and it may be too many of his own:
That it is troublesome to have too great an Interest in other Men's Concerns, and
more convenient to have the Knot of Friendship as slight and as loose as we
can, that upon occasion, we may streighten or slacken it, as we see fit: That
Quiet is the readiest Means to obtain Happiness, which the mind can never
enjoy, if it must be in continual labor for the Fortunes of so many several
Men. Others, they say, are of a more selfish Opinion, (which I have hinted at
already,) that Friendship was to be desired for Convenience and Interest, not
for Love and Affection: And therefore the more helpless a Man is, the more
reason he has to seek a Friend; from hence (say they) it comes to pass that,
Women rather than Men, the Poor rather than the Rich, the Distressed rather
than the Happy fly to Friendship as a Sanctuary. Brave Wisdom indeed! They may
as well rob the World of the Sun, as Human Life of Friendship, the best and
happiest Gift of Heaven. But what is that Quiet they talk of, which in
appearance may be pleasant, but is really to be avoided in most cases? Would
any Man in his Wits excuse himself from undertaking an honorable Action or
Employment, or lay it down when he has undertaken it, merely because there is
some trouble in the performance of it? He that would avoid all Care, must by
the same Rule avoid Virtue, which cannot without some difficulty reject and
hate it is contrary, as Good does Evil, Temperance Lust, or Courage Cowardice.
Thus, you see, Virtuous Men have the strongest aversion for those that are
Vicious, the Valiant for those that are Fearful, and the Sober for those that
are Lewd. It Is therefore essential to a well governed Mind to delight in all
that is Good, and to be offended at all that is otherwise. Now since Trouble
will sometimes befall the wisest Man, (which it must necessarily do, unless we
can suppose him divested of all Humanity,) I see no reason why we should banish
Friendship from our Life, because it may give us a little trouble. Take but
away the Affections of the Soul, and tell me what difference there is, (I will
not say between a Beast and a Man, but) between a Man and a Stone, a Stock or
any senssess thing. We must not hearken to those, that will make Virtue so hard
and cruel a Mistress, which in all things is easy and gentle, especially in
Friendship, where she allows us a well to share the Comforts of our Friend's
Prosperity, as the Sorrows of his Adversity. Therefore Friendship is not to be
laid aside, because some trouble must be undergon for a Friend, no more than
Virtue is to be neglected, because it is attended with some difficulties.

Now Virtue being (as I told you) the very Cement of Affection, when That
appears so eminently in one Man, as to create in another of the like
disposition, a desire of being joined to him; when, I say, this happens, an
Amity must necessarily follow. And methinks it is strange, that Men should take
so much Pleasure in the Vanities and Superfluities of Life; as Honor, Grandeur,
Building, Dressing and Beautifying the Body, and yet find no delight in a Mind
enriched with Virtue, that knows where to bestow and how to return Affection.
For certainly nothing can be more Charming than a Correspondence of Kindness,
and a mutual intercourse of friendly Offices. Now if we add, what we justly
may, that Likeness is so attractive of Friendship as nothing more, 'twill
easily be granted that Virtuous Men love such as are Virtuous, and delight to
associate with them, as if there were already some Alliance in Nature, and
Affinity in Blood: For nothing is more desirous, and (I may say) greedy of it is
Like, than Nature.

And now, ( Fannius and Scoevola,) I hope I have demonstrated the necessity of
a good Will between good Men, which is the natural spring of Friendship. But
this Goodness is of a large extent: For Virtue is not so selfish, insociable or
proud, but that she is equally communicative of her Benefits to every
particular, and active for the public Good; which would never be, had she not
an universal kindness for all. Therefore they that make Interest an inducement
to Friendship, seem to me to loosen it is most amiable Tie; for it is not so much
the Advantages we receive from a Friend, as the Love he has for us, that ought
to be valued; and then it is that a good turn is most acceptable, when it comes
with a good will. Now it is so far from being true, that Friendship proceeds
from Necessity, that they who abound most in the possession of Riches and
Virtue, (which of all things has least need of any outward assistance) are
generally the most liberal, and readiest to oblige. Yet I question, whether
it is always necessary that nothing should be wanting between Friends: For if
Scipio had never stood in need of my Service, Advice, or Assistance, neither at
home nor abroad, what proofs had their been of our mutual Affection? Therefore
Convenience and Interest ought not to be the causes, but the consequences of
Friendship.

We must not give ear to those Worldlings who entertain such notions of
Friendship, as are grounded neither upon their knowledge nor their experience:
For (God knows,) what Man living, would purchase the greatest Wealth and Plenty
in the World at so dear a rate, as not to Love the rest of Mankind, nor to be
beloved by them? This were to live the Life of a Tyrant, destitute of the least
assurance of Kindness or common good Will, and so full of Jealousies and
Distrusts, that there is no room for Friendship. For who can Love that Man whom
he Fears, or by whom he thinks himself to be Feared? Tyrants are flattered
indeed for a while with an appearance of Friendship, but when they fall, (as
commonly they do,) then they see too plainly how few Friends they have. It Is
reported of Tarquin, that he should say in his Banishment, that now he could
discern his Friends from his Enemies, when he was not in a capacity of being
useful to the one, or hurtful to the other: Though I should wonder if so proud
and cruel a Tyrant, could find one Friend in the World. Now as this Man's ill
qualities, gained him no true Friends, so commonly the affluence of Wealth
indisposes some Men for a real Friendship: For Fortune is not only Blind her
self, but she hoodwinks her Favorites, so that they are generally puffed up
with Pride and self-conceit; and certainly nothing is more unsufferable than a
fortunate Fool. Of this we have frequent instances in some whose humor is at
first not disagreeable, till Honor, Power and Prosperity make such an
alteration in them, that they slight their Old Friends and grow fond of New.
Now what can be a greater weakness, than for Men abounding in Riches, to lay
out vast Sums upon Horses, Equipage, Clothes, Furniture, and twenty other
Commodities that every Man may have for his Money, and yet not to be solicitous
in the obtaining a Friend, the Richest Treasure and Lovelyest Ornament of ones
Life? For let a Man bestow never so much in the purchase of worldly Goods, yet
he cannot tell for whom they are purchased, or who shall enjoy the Fruits of all
his Cost and Care, which may at last be snatched from him by some stronger
hand; but a Friend is a sure and lasting Possession. Nay, though we should
suppose our selves absolute Masters of all that Fortune can give, yet even in
that condition, a Life destitute of Friends would be Solitary and Uncomfortable.

And so much for this Point. Let us now set some Bounds and Limits to
Friendship, how far it should proceed in Kindness; concerning these, I find
three several Opinions, none of which I approve.

The First is, That we must stand equally affected to our Friends, as to our
Selves. The Second, That our Returns of Friendship, must bear an exact
proportion to the Obligations we receive from our Friends. The Third, That
accordingly as a Man esteems of Himself, such he must be esteemed by his
Friend.
Of these three Assertions there is not one to which I can assent. First, It is
not true, that a Man ought to stand equally affected to his Friend as to
Himself. For how many things are there which we would never do in our own Case,
and yet we are willing to do them for a Friend's sake? For instance, to sue to
an unworthy Man, to be importunate, to reproach any one with some Bitterness
and Passion, all which would not appear so well in our own behalf, yet might be
excusable upon a Friend's account. Besides, there are many cases in which a
good Man willingly neglects or quits his own Convenience, that his Friend
rather than himself may enjoy it.

The next Opinion limits Friendship to a mutual equality and exact
Correspondence in all good Offices. This is to call Friendship to too strict
and severe an account, by requiring that the Returns should be equivalent to
the Obligations. True Friendship, methinks, is of a more generous and noble
Nature, and scorns to be exact in observing whether more is returned than has
been received; for we must not be afraid, lest any thing should fall to the
ground and be forgotten, or lest our Friends should have too much of our
Kindness.

The last and indeed the worst is, that a Man must be esteemed by his Friend,
as he esteems of Himself. We frequently see some Men dejected in Mind, and
hopeless of mending their Condition: in such a case it will not become a Friend
to entertain the same mean thoughts of his desponding Companion, as he has of
himself; but rather to use all arts and endeavors to raise his drooping
Spirits, and to animate him with better thoughts of himself and his Fortunes.

But we shall find that true Friendship has a nobler End than any of these; if
we remember what Scipio found so much fault with, when he said, there could be
no Opinion more pernicious to Friendship than his, who said that a Man must
love with this reserve, that he may one day hate. He could never be persuaded
that this Sentence was spoken by Bias, who was one of the Seven, but rather by
some Lewd ill-natured Fellow, that had a mind to subject all the World to his
Interest and Ambition. For how can any Body be that Man's Friend, whose Enemy
he thinks he may become hereafter? Besides, he must needs wish that his Friend
may offend often, that he may find more Occasions to rebuke him; and he must as
necessarily be displeased when he does well, or succeeds well. Wherefore this
Doctrine (whoever was the Author of it) tends to the utter dissolution of
Friendship. He should rather have advised us to use such Caution in choosing a
Friend, as not to begin to love one, whom at some time or other we may hate;
but if we are not so happy in our Choice as we could wish, 'twas Scipio's
Opinion, that we must rather bear with it than ever think of a Separation.

This, in my mind, should be the chief aim of Friendship, that the Manners and
Dispositions of Friends should be good, and that there may be a Communication
of all things between them, both of their Intentions and Thoughts, without any
reserve. And though it should sometimes fall out, that a Friend's Request is less
reasonable than it ought to be, yet if his Life or Credit lies at Stake, we may
step a little aside to serve him, unless we foresee that some scandalous
Consequence will attend our Compliance: For though there are some Allowances to
be made in Friendship, yet we must not hazard our own Reputation, nor that
necessary Instrument in all our Affairs, the good Will of our Neighbors, which
to purchase by Fawning and Flattery, is base and mean. Above all things we must
be mindful of Virtue, which is the Foundation of Friendship.

Scipio (for I must often return to Him, who was always talking of this
Subject) used to complain, that in all other Matters Men were more diligent
than in this. Every one can tell you how many Sheep or Oxen he has; but ask him
how many Friends, and he is silent: Most People are cautious and curious enough
in the purchase of the first, but very negligent and indifferent in the choice
of the last. All this proceeds from an ignorance of the true Marks and Tokens
by which we may discern one that is well qualified for a Friend. We must
therefore pitch upon those whom we think to be Men of a firm, steady, and
constant Principle; there are so few of this sort, that we can hardly judge of
them, but by making some Trial, and this Trial cannot be made till we have
entered into some Familiarity, which being antecedent to our Experience, seems
to prevent our making a right Judgment of a Friend. Therefore a Prudent Man
must know as well how to stop the Torrent of his Affection, as a good Rider how
to check the Cariere of a head strong Jade. Friendship must be used like
Managed Horses, the Humors and Dispositions of those we intend for our Friends
must be observed by degrees. Some are tried in a little matter of Money how
slight their Professions are; Others again, who are not to be tempted with a
small Sum, will be proved in a greater. But if you can find a Man after all,
that scorns to prefer your Money before your Friendship, where will you light
upon one that will not value Greatness, Power, Wealth and Empire above his
Friend, that, when These stand in competition with the Laws and Rights of
Friendship, will not choose the first before the last? So hard is it for Flesh
and Blood to resist the Temptations of Honor and Interest: And though they are
purchased with the violation of Friendship, yet some Men shall think it very
allowable to make bold with a Friend upon so great an account. So that true
Friendship is hardly to be looked for from the Ambitious and Busy part of
Mankind; for it is almost impossible to find One among them that will wish his
Friend's Advancement before his own. To say no more of this -- how grievous and
intolerable is it to some Men, to bear the least share of their Friends
Misfortunes? How few are there in the World that can submit to that? Now though
Ennius was in the right when he said, Our cruellest Fortune shows our kindest
Friends: Yet there are two Cases in which most Men show the levity and
inconstancy of their Nature, namely when they slight a Friend in their
Prosperity, or forsake him in his Adversity. He therefore that in both
Conditions of Fortune is a constant, firm, faithful Friend, He (I say) ought to
be esteemed as one of that Noble and almost Divine sort of Men. Now the main
Foundation of that Stability and Constancy which is required in Friendship, is
Truth; for nothing can be lasting that is not true. We must choose a Man that is
Plain, Courteous, good Humor'd, and of the same Mind with our selves; these are
the inseparable Marks of Fidelity; for a Heart that is various and full of
doublings can never be faithful, nor can one that is of a Temper and
Disposition different from ours be either cordial or constant. Give me leave to
add this, That a Man must not be too forward in laying Faults upon his Friend
of himself, nor in believing them from others: All this belongs to that
Constancy which I mentioned just now.

Thus have I proved what I told you at first, that there can be no Friendship,
but between Good Men. For it is the part of a Good Man (whom I may justly call a
Wise Man) to observe these two Rules in Friendship: First, That it be without
any Deceit or Dissimulation; for it is more ingenuous to profess an open Hatred,
than to disguise it under the Mask of Love. Secondly, Not only to defend his
Friend against false Accusations; but to keep himself from suspecting that he
violates the Laws of Friendship.


It Is necessary too, that there should be a sweetness of Temper, and a
pleasantness in Conversation, which certainly gives a delightful relish to
Friendship; Sullenness and Moroseness must be avoided by all means: For though
Friendship admits of Gravity, yet it must always be remiss and easy, and
disposed to all innocent Cheerfulness and Complaisance.

Here some will think it a disputable Question, Whether a New Friend, if he
deserves our Love, should not be preferred before an Old one; as we use to
prize a young Horse above one that is past his Prime? This is an ill natured
Doubt: For we must not think that Friendship (like the ordinary Pleasures of
Life) is capable of Satiety; but rather that Old Friends (like Old Wine) are
the better for their Age. It Is a true though common Saying, that One must eat
many a Bushel of Salt with a Friend, before he can acquit himself in all the
Offices of Friendship. Novelties indeed, like young Plants, if they give us any
hopes of Fruit, are not to be rejected; but still that which is of an elder
Date is to be cherished most: For certainly long Acquaintance and continual Use
are strong Engagements upon our Nature. And if the Horse I was speaking of, has
no great Faults, I know no Man that would not rather choose to Ride one that he
has been long used to, than a skittish Colt that was never Backed. This power
of Custom and Use is not only discernible in Living Creatures, but even in
things Inanimate: It Is a common Observation, That Men take most Pleasure in
those Places where they have dwelt longest, though they are never so Wild and
Mountainous.

It Is a great Step to Friendship, when the Superior descends to an Equality
with his Inferior: For many times there will happen a difference in Degree, as
there was between Scipio and us that were his Friends; yet He never would
esteem himself above Philus, Rupilius, Mummius, or any of his Friends that were
of an Inferior Rank; but on the contrary always respected his Brother Q.
Maximus, who was a Worthy Gentleman, but no way Scipio's Equal (for he was a
great deal younger,) as if he had been his Superior, and looked upon all his
Friends as Men that were his Betters in their intrinsic Worth. It Is pity but
all Men should follow Scipio's Example in this; and if they have any Advantage
above their Friends in the Gifts of Nature or Fortune, they should freely
impart it to them, and share it with them. For Instance, If their Parentage be
low, or their Endowments of Mind or Fortune mean, they should increase their
Stock in both, and do them all the Honor and Service they can. As we read in
Romances of some Heroes, who having been brought up in Mean Families, through the
obscurity of their Birth and ignorance of their Parentage, and proving at last
the Sons of some King or God, retain their first Affection to the Shepherds,
whom till then they looked upon as their Natural Fathers. This Duty is much
more incumbent upon us where our Real Parents are known: And then it is that
the Fruits of Knowledge and Wisdom and every Excellence are most certainly
enjoyed by our Selves, when they are communicated to Others.

Therefore as they who are any way Superior to their Friends, should make them
their Equals; so on the other side, they that are Inferiors must not be
dissatisfied if they have a Friend that excels them in Knowledge, Fortune or
Dignity. But it is the Humor of some to be always complaining of their Friends,
or else upbraiding them, especially where they find any color of saying, such
a thing was done for their sake, and that they showed enough of their Kindness
by serving them in an Affair, where none but a Friend would have given himself
half the trouble. This sort of Men is intolerable, for they turn their very
Favors into Reproaches; whereas the nature of an Obligation seems to require
that it should be remembered by him that received it, not upbraided by him that
gave it.

Now as the Superior must submit himself, so must the Inferior in some sort
raise himself to an Equality with his Friend. Some Men make their Friends very
uneasy by thinking themselves slighted; though this seldom happens, but to such
as are conscious of their own Demerits: such as these are to be won from their
Opinion, not only by Persuasion, but by real Assistance. And here it might be
proper to consider first how far it lays in our power to oblige, and secondly
how far the Person we would oblige is qualified for the Character and Post we
intend him. For it is impossible for a Man (let him be never so able) to advance
all his Friends and Acquaintance. We see Scipio had interest enough to make P.
Rutilius Consul, but he could not serve his Brother Lucius upon the same
occasion. Nay, though we can do never so much for a Friend, yet (as I said
before) we must consider whether he is fit for such or such an Employment.

There is no true Judgment to be made of our Friendships, till they are
confirmed by length of time, and maturity of understanding. If in our Youth, we
had a Love for the Companions of our Recreations, this does not oblige us to
contract a strict Friendship with them, in our riper Years; for at that rate
our Nurses and Tutors might justly challenge the largest share in our
Affection. Now though these are not to be slighted, yet they are to esteemed
after another manner than our Friends, whom otherwise we can never preserve
long. Different Manners create different Minds, and consequently dissolve
Friendship: And the only Reason why Good Men can never Love those that are Bad
is, because there is the widest difference imaginable in their Minds and
Manners.

It Is a good Rule in Friendship, to take care lest the Intemperance and
Extravagance of our Affection, should hinder the Occasions of our Friends, or
prejudice their Interest. For (to return to Story,) Neoptolemus had never taken
Troy, if he had hearkened to his Father-in-Law Lycomedes, who had the Education
of Him, and strove with many Tears to stop his Journey. Sometimes there will
fall out pressing occasions, that must necessarily divide Friends; which he
that goes about to obstruct, because he cannot bear a Friend's absence, shows a
weak impotent and unreasonable Friendship. Therefore we must always consider
what we ought to ask of our Friends, as well as what we ought to grant them.

Sometimes there falls out an unhappy necessity of a final Separation between
Friends: For my Discourse descends now from the Friendship of the Wiser Sort,
to that of the Vulgar. For Instance; Suppose a Friend of ours has done some
great injury to a third Person, and that the Infamy of it is likely to extend
to all that hold any Familiarity or Correspondence with him: In this case, we
must let our Friendship cool by degrees, and discontinuance of Conversation,
and (as Cato used to say,) rather unty it gently, than break it off abruptly;
unless some intolerable enormity breaks out, so that we cannot with any
appearance of Justice or Honesty, avoid an immediate Separation. Where we find
an alteration in the Manners and Inclinations of our Friend, (which often
happens,) or a difference between their Sentiments, and ours in matters of
Government, (for as I told you, I am not now speaking of a Philosophical
Friendship, but of that which is more ordinary:) There, I say, we must take
heed lest instead of laying down our Friendship fairly, we take up a mortal
Enmity: for nothing can be worse than to own an open Quarrel, where one has
formerly used a Familiarity. You see, Scipio withdrew from Q. Pompeius's
Friendship upon my account, and left off all Familiarity with my Colleague
Metellus, because he was disaffected to the State: In both he used that Wisdom
and Moderation, as to discover a Resentment free from Passion. Therefore it
must be our first care, to have no variance between our Friends and our selves,
and where such a misfortune happens, to use that Temper in our demeanor toward
them, that our Friendship may rather seem to dye of it self, than to suffer any
Violence from us. We must take heed, lest of intimate Friends, we become
Irreconcilable Enemies: For this is commonly the occasion of Quarrels,
Reproaches and Railings, which if they are by any means tolerable, must be born
with; and we ought to have so much regard for our former Friendship, that he
that does the Injury, may be more to blame, than he that receives it.

Against all these Errors and Inconveniences, there is but one caution and
remedy; and that is, not to begin our Friendship too soon, nor to misplace it
upon such as do not deserve it. Now those are to be looked upon as most
deserving, in whom we find such good Qualities, as seem to command our
Affection. This sort of Men (as every thing that is excellent) is hard to be
met with; and it is very difficult to find any thing that is every way Perfect
in it is kind. There are a great many that will allow nothing to be Good, but
what is Profitable, and value their Friends as Grasiers do their Cattle,
accordingly as they think they will turn to account. Such as these want that
generous and most natural Friendship, which is to be desired of it self, and
for it self, and never understood by any experience upon themselves, how great
the force and efficacy of Friendship is. For a Man loves himself, not because
he expects any reward, or return of his own Affection from himself, but because
every one is naturally dear to himself. Now he that does not find he stands
thus affected toward another, can never be a true Friend: for a Friend is
one's other Self. And since it is evident in Birds, Beasts and Fishes, and all
Creatures Wild or Tame, First, how they love themselves, (for this affection is
born with them,) and next, how naturally they apply themselves to others of
their own kind, and that with a strange tenderness and emulation (as it were)
of Human Love; we must certainly conclude, that these Inclinations are much
more strongly imprinted in the Heart of Man, and that it is Natural for him to
Love himself, and to seek some other, with whom he may so mingle Souls, as to
unite Two into One.

Yet some Ill-natured (not to say impudent) Men would have their Friends be
such as they can never be themselves, and expect that from them, which was
never done by themselves. It Is therefore necessary in the first place, that the
Man who would be a Friend, should be a Good Man; and next, that he should find,
and fix upon one of his own disposition; for then it is, that the Friendship I
mentioned, is thoroughly established, when two Men equally affected to one
another, have so entirely mastered those Appetites, to which the greatest part
of Mankind is enslaved, as to find a Pleasure in Virtue and Integrity, and to
delight in the mutual performance of all friendly Offices, neither party
desiring any thing from the other but what is fair and honest, and Both having
a Regard as well as a Love for each other: For he that would separate Modesty
from Friendship, will Rob it of it is greatest Ornament. It Is a great Heresy in
Friendship, to think that it gives any encouragement to a loose and licentious
Life: For certainly a Friend was designed by Nature, for an Assistant to
Virtue, not for a Companion in Vice, that because a solitary Virtue would be
helpless and unable of her self, to reach that degree of Perfection which she
aims at, she might be enabled by the assistance of some Companion, to obtain
her desires. If therefore this noble Association ever was, is, or can be found
between any two Persons, they are to be looked upon as the best Guides, to this
greatest Blessing of Human Nature. This, this is the Society in which is to be
found all that Man can wish for, Virtue, Honor, Peace of Mind, Pleasure, and
every solid Enjoyment that makes our Lives happy, and without which they cannot
be comfortable. This, doubtless, is the highest consummation of Human Felicity;
and if we would attain to it, we must make Virtue the means, without which we
can never deserve a Friend, nor any thing that is worth our wishes; and which
being neglected, they that think they have Friends will (too late) find their
Error, when they have occasion to make use of them. Therefore (for I cannot
repeat it too often) we must Try before we Love, and not Love before we Try.
But as our neglect in other matters of moment is too visible, so is it chiefly
blameable in the choice and management of our Friendships, in which many of us
use very preposterous Methods, and (in spite of the Proverb) frustrate our own
designs. For sometimes we suffer our selves to be so encumbered with our own
worldly concerns, or engage our selves so deeply in public affairs, that upon
the least distaste or disappointment in them, we immediately take pett, and fall
out with our Friends.

But nothing can excuse our want of Care in a matter of so great importance;
for Friendship is the only thing in the World, concerning whose usefulness all
Men agree. Nay, though Virtue it self is derided by some, and passes with them
for Singularity and Ostentation, though many that content themselves with a
little, despise Riches; though Honor and Greatness which inflame the Ambition of
most Men, are so slighted by some, that nothing is thought more vain and empty,
(and so for other things of this nature that are admired by some and contemned
by others:) yet all Men have the same respect for Friendship; the Statesman and
the Philosopher, the Idleman and the Man of Business, nay even those that mind
nothing but their Pleasures will tell you, that there is no living without a
Friend, if you mena to live happily. For Friendship runs through every Stage of
our life, no Age or Condition is exempt from it: Nay, though a Man were of that
morose and savage disposition as to hate and shun the conversation of Mankind,
(as we read one Timon an Athenian to have done,) yet that very Man cannot live
without some body to whom he may vent his spleen and ill nature. This we should
find by our own experience, if it were possible for some God to take us from
the Society of Men, and to place us in a Solitude, there supplying with all the
necessities of nature, and only debarring us of the power to see any of our
Fellow Creatures: Is there any Man of so hard a temper that he could endure
such a life, and to whom that Solitude would not render all Pleasures fruitless
and insipid? 'Twas a very true Saying that, which we have received from our
Forefathers and they from theirs, as spoken by Archytas of Tarentum, that if a
Man were to ascend into Heaven, and there to contemplate the nature of the
Universe and the beauty of the Stars, all that Entertainment would be
ungrateful to him, which, if he had a Companion to speak to, would have been
very acceptable and pleasant.

Thus we see, Nature flies Solitude, and seems to seek some support and
assistance from without, which every true Friend does with pleasure. But though
Nature by so many tokens declares what she wants and requires, we stop our ears
I know not how nor why, and will not hearken to what she suggests. Now as the
usefulness of Friendship is various and manyfold, so in it there are too many
occasions given of suspicions and distasts, all which a wise Man will avoid,
lessen, or bear. And without doubt, it requires a great deal of Discretion to
preserve the Truth and Faithfulness of a Friend, without giving offense at some
time or other. For our Friends must be often admonished and sometimes rebuked,
both which, if they are wellmeant, are to be taken well. But it is too true, as
my friend Terence says in a Play of his called Andria, Compliance gains
Friends, and Truth Enemies: Truth is ungrateful, because it begets Hatred,
which is the Bane of Friendship: But Compliance is infinitely worse, for that
ruins a Friend by indulging him in his faults, and suffers him to run headlong
into destruction. But he of all Men is most to blame, that both hates Truth,
and suffers himself to be misled by Compliance. In this case, all possible care
and diligence is to be used, that our Admonitions be without Severity, and our
Reproofs without Scurrility: But let our Compliance (to use Terence's
expression) be tempered with all Freedom, and void of Flattery, that Pandar to
Vice, which is misbecoming not only of a Friend, but of a Gentleman: For it is
one thing to live upon equal terms with a Friend, and another thing to live
under a Tyrant; but he that stops his Ears against the Truth, and will not hear
it though it comes from a Friend, is certainly in a desperate condition, and must
be given over. What Cato tells us, is infallibly true, that some Men are more
beholding to their sharpest Enemies than to their smoothest Friends, for the
first speak truth sometimes, but the last never. It Is very absurd in most Men,
when they are admonished, to be troubled where they should not, and not to be
troubled where they should: For usually they are not so angry with Themselves
for committing a fault, as with their Friend for telling them of it; whereas on
the contrary they should be sorry they have Erred, and glad they are Reprov*d.

As therefore it is the property of cordial Friendship mutually to admonish and
to be admonished, and as the one is to be done with all Freedom, but without
any Sharpness, and the other to be taken with all Patience and without any
murmuring: so we may be sure that there is no greater Canker to Friendship than
Flattery, fawning and assentation. This Vice has too many Names as well as
Shapes, and is the infallible symptom of a base deceitful temper, that speaks
and acts every thing out of a love to Compliance more than Truth. But
Dissimulation, besides that it is odious in all cases, (for it corrupts and
destroys our Judgment,) is utterly inconsistent with Friendship, because it is
repugnant to Truth, without which, the name of Friendship is but taken in vain.
For since the End and Excellence of Friendship is to unite our minds, how can
that be effected where one Man has not always one and the same mind, but is
unsettled, inconstant, and inconsistent with himself? What can be so flexible
and slippery as his mind, who conforms himself not only to the Will, but even
to the very Looks of another? Does any one deny? I deny too: does he affirm? So
do I; in short, I have that command over my self, as to be of every Man's mind,
as Terence has it in another Play; this he applies wittily to Gnatho a
Parasite, which would look very absurd in a Friend. There are too many in the
World that resemble Gnatho in their Character, though they make a better figure
than he did upon the Stage: Flattery in them is fullsome, when they think their
Vanity authorized by their Greatness. But we may as easily discern a Flatterer
from a Friend, with a little care, as we can distinguish false and
sophisticated Ware from that which is right. The very unthinking Multitude
(where one would little expect to find any Judgment) shall sometimes find the
difference between a fawning Demagogue, that is, a Public Flatterer, and a
wise and worthy Patriot.

What fine arts did C. Papirius use to insinuate himself into the minds of his
Auditors, when he endeavored to bring in a Law for making the same Person
Tribune of the Commons as often as they pleased? I opposed it; but I shall say
nothing of my self, of Scipio I shall speak most willingly. Lord! what weight,
what Majesty was there in his Oration? One would have thought he had been their
Governor and not their Fellow-Citizen -- But you were present, and his Speech
is in every Man's hands. Thus through his means that popular Law was rejected
by the unanimous Consent of the People: But to speak a word or two of my self.
You may remember, when Q. Maximus ( Scipio's Brother) and L. Mancinus were
Consuls, how universally the Law that C. Licinius Crassus proposed concerning
the Creation of Priests, had obtained among the Vulgar: Now the intent of this
Law was to transfer the right of choosing Men into that Office, upon the
Populace. 'Twas he that first brought up the Custom of Haranguing the People in
Verse: But the Honor every one had for the immortal Gods, together with my best
endeavors in their defense, did easily defeat his mercenary Oration. This was
done when I was Praetor, five years before I was Consul; though I must confess,
the success of that Affair is more owing to the Justice of the Cause, than to
the Abilities of its Advocate.

Since therefore upon so public a Stage as a Vulgar Audience is, where there
is room enough for Shuffling and Prevarication, Naked Truth can prevail, when
it is laid open and illustrated; how much more can it do in Friendship, which is
wholly measured by it? For here, unless your Friend unlocks his Breast to you,
and you do the same to him, there can be no Trust or Confidence between you;
you cannot so much as Love or be Beloved, but will be forced to doubt the
sincerity of each other's Affection. Now though Flattery is very pernicious of it
self, yet can it hurt no Body but him that admits of it, and is pleased with
it; from hence it comes to pass, that those Men are most exposed to the
Flattery of others who are most apt to flatter themselves, and to have an
over-weaning Conceit of their own Worth. It Is true, Virtue is lovely in her own
Eye, for she best knows her self, and understands how Amiable she is to others:
But I speak not now of Virtue, but of an Opinion of Virtue; for most Men desire
not so much to be Virtuous, as to appear so: Such as these are pleased with
Flattery; These, when they meet with some elaborate Panegyric that tickles the
vanity of their Humor, shall think the fulsom Encomium to be a true Testimonial
of their Merit. But this is not Friendship, where one does not care to hear
Truth, nor the other to speak it. The Flattery of the Parasite in the Play
would not seem so witty to us, unless there was such a Fop for him to work
upon, as the Braggadocio. But does Thais thank me kindly, do you say? One would
have thought it enough for Gnatho to have answered, She does: But he cries, Oh!
infinitely! Thus your right Flatterer always aggravates that which the
Vainglorious Man desires should look Big. Now though this sort of Witchcraft has
most power over such as invite and encourage it, yet the Wisest and Gravest
Persons must be cautioned to take care lest they be overtaken by it some time
or other. Any Man that has his Wits about him may quickly discern an open
Flatterer: but we cannot use too much Caution in arming our selves against the
subtle Insinuations of the sly undermining Sycophant, who shall then be most
guilty of Assentation, when he seems the Spirit of Contradiction; who all the
while he pretends to oppose you, shall only amuse you, and at last in
Complaisance to you, shall suffer himself to be convinced; so that he who is
most in the Wrong, shall seem to have the Better side of the Question: Now what
is more gross than to be thus imposed upon? To prevent all this, we must take
care (as the Poet says in his Epiclerus) lest we be banter'd and bubbled worse
than all the foolish Old Fellows in Comedies use to be: For even upon the Stage
we think the Character of an improvident Credulous Dotard very ridiculous.

My Discourse has deviated I know not how from the Friendships of the more
Refined, that is, the Wiser sort of Men (I mean here such Wisdom as Man is
capable of,) to those of smaller account; let us now return to the first Motive
of Friendship, and end with it.

It Is Virtue, Virtue ( C. Fannius and Q. Mucius) that creates and preserves
Friendship; in That alone we shall find all that is agreeable, faithful, or
constant. Virtue, having raised her self above the common Pitch, and showing
her own Light, sees the same, and knows it in another, to whom she joins her
self by a mutual giving and receiving of all that is needful for Both: From
hence proceeds Love or Friendship, which are both derived from the same word
(Amo) in Latin. Now Love is nothing else but a well wishing to him whom you
affect, without any inducement from Necessity or Interest; for the Later will
naturally follow upon Friendship, though you do not think of it. This sort of
Affection I had when I was young, for L. Paulus, C. Gallus, P. Nasica and T.
Gracchus (my Friend Scipio's Father in-Law) who were all of them Old Men. This
is more eminently perfect between those of the same Age, as between Me and
Scipio, L. Furius, P. Rupilius and Sp. Mummius. Again, when we grow Old, we are
pleased with the Conversation of Younger Persons; as I am with Yours and
Tubero's: Nay, I take great delight in my familiarity with P. Rutilius and A.
Virginius; though they are very young.

Now, because the condition of our Life and Nature is so ordered, that one Age
grows out of another; it might be wished, that as we began the Race of Life
together with our Equals, so we might all along continue it and end it with
them. But since all things in this World are so frail and uncertain, we must
never be without some One whom we may love, and by whom we may be mutually
beloved; for without Friendship, there is no Enjoyment of Life.

Though Scipio was suddenly snatched from me, yet to Me he still does and always
will live; for I loved his Virtue, and That can never die: That is not only
continually before my Eyes, in whose Arms it sometimes was; but will be
signally Famous to all Posterity. No man will think of any gallant and
extraordinary Undertaking, but He will Copy out his Actions from Scipio's Life.
Among all the Blessings that Fortune or Nature ever bestowed upon me, I know
none that I can compare with Scipio's Friendship. With Him I advised and agreed
in the management of all Public and Private Affairs; in Him was treasured up my
Happiness. I never offended him (to my knowledge) in the least; I never heard
any thing from him that I could wish un said. Our Lodging and Diet was in one
House, and at one Table; and not only our Warfare, but our Travels and our
Retirements were always together. Not to mention our Studies, which, having
withdrawn our selves from the Eyes of the World, we spent in the search of
Knowledge?

Now if the Remembrance of these things had died with Scipio, I could never
have born the Loss of so dear and loving a Friend; No, that can never decay,
but is rather continually strengthened and renewed by the frequency of my
Thoughts, and the freshness of my Memory: Nay, though That too were gone, yet I
should find some Comfort from my Age, for by the Course of Nature I cannot want
Him long; and what is but short must be born patiently, though it be grievous.

This is all I have to say upon this Subject; and let me advise you, Gentlemen,
to have that esteem for Virtue, without which there can be no Amity, as to
think that (That only excepted) nothing is more excellent than Friendship.

FINIS.
A Pastoral Dialogue CONCERNING FRIENDSHIP AND LOVE.

OCCASIONED By the DEATH of the Honorable J. T.

Extinctum Nymphoe crudeli funere Daphnim Flebant --

Virg Eclog. Printed in the Year MDCXCI.

A Pastoral Dialogue CONCERNING FRIENDSHIP AND LOVE.
ALCON and LYCIDAS.
ALCON. SAy, Lycidas, why all alone?
Is thy Dorinda false, or does she frown?
Do Thou to this dark Desert fly,
To vent thy own, or blame her Jealousy?

LYCIDAS. No, Shepherd, no; the Maid was ever kind,
Dear to my Eyes, and charming to my Mind;
(Nay, I remember with her Parting Breath
She blessed our Loves, and smiled and kissed in Death.)
But oh! She Is gone! like a fallen Blossom cast
From its fair Stalk, by some untimely Blast;
For ever gone! whilst I distracted rove,
Tell the sad Tale to every conscious Grove,
And mourn the dear remembrance of our injured Love.

ALC. Look up, despairing Youth, and see
With pitying Eyes, a sadder Wretch than Thee:
My Friend, my Soul, my Daphnis is no more,
Snatched, like an early Flower,
Which some rude Hand had cropped before its hour;
Whilst I through many a Pathless-way
With heedless Sorrow stray,
Led hither by my wandering Sheep
With much more Tears a dearer Loss than Thine to weep.

LYC. A dearer Loss! Rash Swain, take heed;
With emulous Grief you wrong the beauteous Dead:
My Tears can brook a Rival now no more
Than could my Flames (my Hapless flames) before;
Fate has not killed my Passion, but improved,
For Dead I worship what Alive I loved.

ALC. Fond Youth, in yon' soft Myrtle Shades
To amo'rous Boys and wanton Maids
Tell thy sad Tale, whilst every conscious Grove
With tatling sounds mocks thy unmanly Love;
Be silent Here: where Reason holds the Scale,
Thy Passion needs must yield, my Friendship must prevail.

LYC. Here then with mournful strife we'll Both contend;
And let yon' Swain our Fleecy Charge attend,
Whilst I a Mistress weep. -- ALC.) But I a Friend.

LYC. Come all ye Nymphs, a beauteous mournful Train,
(Beauteous indeed now my Dorinda's gone,)
Come All, and teach the listening Plain
To tell Our loss, and weep Its own.
Ye Nymphs that crowded round her graceful side,
Whilst She, your Envy and your Pride,
With all your Myrtles, all your Praises crowned
In tuneful measures struck the gladsom ground.
And all ye Swains, whose emulous Harmony,
Taught by the Equal motions of her Feet
Thence grew Artful, thence grew Sweet;
Ye Swains that courted Her, and envied Me,
Come all, with mingled Grief combine
To mourn your own Despair, and pity Mine.
Over Her sad Hearse
Pour out your Tears,
And with them write this Melancholy Verse,
Here fair Dorinda lies, Dorinda here did fall,
Who One blessed Shepherd loved, Her self beloved of All.

ALC. Come all ye Youths, Ye dear Companions come,
(Now dear indeed, since Daphnis is no more)
With equal Tears Our common Loss deplore,
And bless his Fame and beautify his Tomb.
Ye Youths that round my Daphnis proudly rode,
Whilst He the Grace, the Terror of the Wood,
With active Force and fatal Certainty
By his own Shafts instructed Yours to fly.
Ye Virgins too, that thronged the joyful place
To seek the conquests of a nobler Chase;
To seek indeed, but all in vain,
Whilst Daphnis, Charms an unsought Triumph gain;
As many Darts as the Loved Shepherd threw
As many Cupid shot, as many wounded You.
Come all, with mournful Care
Your freshest latest Gifts prepare;
Round his beauteous, his cold Head
The short-lived Honors of mixed Garlands spread,
And oh! a while their short-lived Honors cheer
With many a Sigh and many a Tear,
Alive ye loved Him all, All weep Him dead.
Weep All, and say -- Daphnis lies here,
Whom every Maid did court, each Shepherd did commend,
Daphnis the loveliest Swain, Daphnis the kindest Friend.

LYC. Flowers to the Vale are grateful, lofty Pines
To the proud Mountain's head, embracing Vines
To the rich Garden, Cypress to the Grove,
To Me more grateful far Dorinda's Love.

ALC. Frosts to the Flowers are hurtful, the rude Storm
To lofty Pines, to Vines the cruel Worm,
Fire to the wasted Grove, to Me than those
More hurtful far my much loved Daphnis' Loss.

LYC. Oh! She was innocent, She was fair,
As are those spotless Sheep
The dying Dear wished me to keep,
My wretched Wealth and my unwelcom Care.
Was there a Youth over all the Plain
But for Dorinda sighed, and sighed in vain?
Gay Dorilas Old Melibaeus' Heir,
And rich Menalcas (rich indeed,
His thrifty Father lately dead)
With rival Arts and Presents courted Her.
And one his Kids, and one his Fruits would bring:
Both she refused, or deigning to receive,
To me the Kinder Maid would give.
One well could Play, and one could sweetly Sing:
Deaf to their Arts, and with their Gifts unmoved
She stood, and Me, even happyer Me she loved.
" Now all forlorn these pious Tears 1 shed
" To Love deserted and Dorinda dead.

ALC. Daphnis was sweet and gentle as yon' Flood,
Whose listening Waters loved to crowd
Toward the glad Shore, whilst His soft Melody
Made them forget their Parent Sea,
Admire his Music, and indulge their stay.
The Swans too, gladly held by the late Tide,
Heard his delightful Strains, then tried
To imitate the Voice, and died.
Daphnis was tall and graceful, as the Heart
That wept the skilful anger of his Dart,
Like our Melampus faithful, like him fleet,
(If Little things we may compare with Great)
Our poor Melampus wandering round the Plain,
Hark! with shrill Howls laments his Master slain.
Was there a Maid could hide her conscious flame,
When some glad Tale was blessed with Daphnis' Name?
Youthful Galatea, (Fair
When your Dorinda was not there)
Alcippe, Nysa, Chloe strove
For the wished Triumph of his Love.
Each her officious Presents would prepare,
Fruits for his Scrip, and Garlands for his Hair;
Each pressed with glad amazement to the Ring,
And when He danced, each strove to sing.
Their Gifts He would receive, their Music He would hear,
Till wearied with their Praises He
Thanked their Civility,
Refused their Love, and hastened home to Me.
There in a clasped embrace We lay,
And with sweet Talk deceived the live-long day,
Pitied the Wretches that in vain had wooed,
Smiled at their Passion and our own pursued.
" Now left alone, with hopeless Grief I moan
" My ill-Starr'd Friendship wronged, my Daphnis gone.

LYC. 'Twas in a fatal Hour,
When the loved Maid impatient of my stay,
Had decked, and did forsake her Bower
To chide my Sloth, whilst in the treache'rous way
In fair deceit a murde'rous Viper lay:
There as with eager have she trod the ground,
There her swift Foot received the sudden wound.
In vain (alas!) the wondering Maid
From the following Danger fled;
Death proud of his fair Conquest grew,
And all his cruel speed employed and hastened to pursue.
" Now I these tributary Sorrows shed
" To Love deserted and Dorinda dead.

ALC. Cursed be the deadly Steel
By whose much lamented powe'r
In a black inauspicious Hour
My dear, unhappy Daphnis fell.
'Twas a sad Morn, when He the loved He rose
From my unwilling Breast and his disturbed Repose;
Back to my Arms the struggling Youth I pulled,
Told Him how young the Day, the Air how cold,
Asked Him what was the unwonted Cause
That broke our close embrace so soon?
He told me, I should hear of Him e're Noon,
Fetched an ill-boding Sigh and said -- He must be gone.
What was the Cause (Ah Me!) too well I know,
Too soon; for an ill Dream was scarcely past,
And waking Thoughts my sleeping Fears increased,
When Every Tongue and every Eye spoke Woe,
And every Maid and every Shepherd said,
Oh cruel Fate! Oh Daphnis dead!
Cursed be that Idol Honor; doubly cursed
The Wretch that with its nice Exceptions first
Stained the free Mirth of our infected Plain,
And taught destructive Swords
To be the Judges (how unfit!) of Words.
For this eve'n Me my Daphnis left
Of Him and Happiness berest;
For this the Youth with early brave Disdain
Challenged, went forth, contended, and was slain.
"For this sad I with hopeless Grief bemoan
"My ill Starr'd Friendship wronged, my Daphnis gone.

LYC. Thy ill-Starr'd Friendship, Swain, lament no more,
I my deserted Love deplore.

ALC. Thy Love! the dying flames of loose Desire
Look pale and tremble at my chaster Fire.

LYC. Then let just Pan our Cause's merit try,
Whilst mighty Love I sing --.

ALC. Whilst mightier Friendship I.


LYC. I have a Pipe on which I Have often played
To the lovely listening Maid;
None disliked my artless Lays,
She Would find something out to praise.
On this I Will play. "Ye mighty Powe'rs of Love
"Inspire my willing Pipe, my happy Choice approve.

ALC. I have a Pipe on which my Daphnis played,
Whilst every lovely listening Maid
Would leave her Flocks to hear his artful Lays,
And every wondering Youth his every strain would praise.
To this I Will sing -- "Kind Friendship bless my Choice,
"Whilst to thy powerful Harmony I tune my willing voice.

LYC. Tell me what kind Power of Old
Enriched the World, and named the Age from Gold?
When every Nymph and every Swain
Loved, and was beloved again.
When Falsehood and Disdain were yet unknown,
And Innocence and Love were One?
Each amo'rous Shepherd chose a willing Maid
Above the cares of Honor, Birth or State,
And in Affection richly paid;
The willing Maid his plain Address received,
His unprotested Love believed,
And neither vowed, yet neither was deceived.
Then new Delight did each new Hour employ,
Love was their Life, their Life one lasting Joy.
"Assist, Almighty Queen of Heaven and Love,
"Inspire my willing Pipe, my happy Choice approve.

ALC. Tell me, e're all this beauteous World was framed,
Or Your fond Age from glittering Gold was named,
When Heaven and Earth were one rude Heap,
And wild Confusion filled the pregnant Deep,
What nobler Cause, what Kinder Power
The Melancholy Mass did stir,
And made the appeased Embryo's Friends?
The appeased Embryo's never since
Have to that Friendly Knot done violence;
That Knot nor Chance nor Force can e're destroy,
Their very Being Friendship is, their Friendship one long Joy.
"Almighty Friendship, bless my noble Choice,
"Whilst to thy powerful Harmony I tune my willing voice.

LYC. See thou yon' Bird, that in the Cypress Grove
With busy flight from Tree to Tree
And untaught Melody
Calls his dear Mate, and says -- I am in Love?
And, Alcon, see! from yonder Bough
His dear Mate flies and and answers -- I love too.
Their happy Care through all the Spring
Is only how to Love, and how to Sing.
Then look, grave Moralist, and learn from These
To imitate their Flames, and to improve thy Bliss.
"Assist, Almighty Queen of Heaven and Love,
"Inspire my willing Pipe, my happy Choice approve.

ALC. See thou yon' Oak, which many a Year has stood
Gracefully firm, it self a Wood?
Why does it raise its lofty Head,
And all around diffuse a friendly shade?
See, Lycidas, a circling Ivy joins
Its mingled Root, and round the glad Trunk twines
Its willing Leaves: Wind, Cold, and Age they scorn
Whilst One can still defend, and One adom
Thus their embracing Honors each extends,
Both flourish, Both are happy, Both are Friends.
Hence thy gross Joys, fond Amorist, improve,
In Friendship's purer Flames refine thy drossy Love.
"Almighty Friendship, bless my noble Choice,
"Whilst to thy powerful Harmony I tune my willing Voice.

LYC. 'Twas Love, Great Love that from his awful Throne
Charmed the amo'rous Thunderer down;
Love made the Horned Deity
At fair Europa's feet submissive lie;
Love taught the feathered God to go
To Leda and a Happyer Heaven below.
Strange Power! that rules the noblest Souls
And turns Divinities to Beasts and Fowls! --

ALC. To Beasts indeed! who blindly place
In lawless Lust their sovereign Happiness.
'Twas Friendship, nobler Friendship could inspire
Leda's famed Sons with a much happyer Fire
Than e're inflamed their wanton Sire.
Friendship taught the Gene'rous Pair
A mixed Divinity to share:
And made them, that they might unite
Their Souls, divide their Friendly Light.
Then boast no more thy worthless Passion, when
It Is Love makes Beasts of Gods, but Friendship Gods of Men.
"Almighty Friendship bless my noble Choice,
"Whilst to thy powerful Harmony I tune my willing Voice.

LYC. Often have I heard, and I remember well,
When under our tall Poplar shade
To Me and to the dear dead Maid
Often faithful Loves old Aegon used to tell:
For faithful Love what Priam's Son could do;
( Priam's Son a Shepherd too;)
How Venus He did worthily prefer
Or to the Queen of Heaven or to the Queen of War.
Venus recompensed his Voice,
Venus blessed His noble Choice:
Though Heaven and Greece his Choice denied,
Venus gave the beauteous Bride.
For Love's happy Violence She
Despised the Dangers of the Sea,
The Dangers of the Battle He.
Often have I heard, how, when War's rude Alarms
From chaste Penelope's unwilling Arms
Her dear Ulysses forced, the Widowed Fair
Sat pensive twice ten tedious Year;
In vain at Troy unhappy Hector strove
To reach the faithful Hero's guarded Head,
At Ithaca in vain with hated Love
His Rivals strove to stain Her spotless Bed.
Love preserved the happy Pair,
Eased his Toils and cured her Fear,
Whilst He abroad maintained, whilst she at home a War.
Aegon would often the grateful Tale renew,
And to it add some happy pleasant Truth
That blessed the smiling Vigor of his Youth;
Often would He bid us these fair Tracks pursue,
And told Us Love would bless Us too.
But Oh! in moving Words He would relate
Eurydice's untimely Fate,
For whom sad Orpheus lest alone
In sweet mournful Strains did moan,
And ecchoing Rhodope was heard to groan.
For whom (blessed Power of Love!) his Harmony
Changed arbitrary Fate's Decree,
Broke wondering Death's till then resistless Chain,
And to his longing Bosom did the joyful Nymph regain.
Oh! that like Him (for I like Him have mourned)
My dearer Loss I might retrieve!
Oh! that like Her, the Maid might be returned,
And (for like Her she died) like Her again might Live.
" But Oh, in vain these fruitfuless Tears I shed
" For Love Deserted and Dorinda dead.

ALC. I too have heard ('twere impious to forget)
When beneath Yon' spreading Tree
To Daphnis dearly known and Me
Of Faithful Friends wise Thyrsis would relate;
How Sicily's envying Tyrant grieved to know
That his delighted Realm could boast of Two
Happyer, happyer far then He
With all his Power and all his Royalty,
Two for faithful Friendship sam'd,
Damon (I think) and Pythias they were named:
And One in cruel Fetters He confined,
The Other disdained his useless Liberty
To set his loved Companion free,
He less afflicted that was left behind.
This the wondering Tyrant saw,
And owned the juster Power of Friendship's Law;
Their blessed Acquaintance humbly He did woo,
If happily of the strong-link'd Chain
The least kind Portion might remain,
Which to the pleasing Yoke might join a Monarch too.
Often of the Grecian Pair our Priest would speak,
Whose Friendship Fate it self could hardly break:
How, when sad Garlands crowned Orestes Head,
And with cruel Piety
The destined Victim to the Shrine was led,
His Pylades did all his skill employ
With kind Deceit to frame the Gene'rous Lie,
And for his dearer Self, Himself to dye.
Both strove to fall, Both happily in vain,
The fatal Conquest neither could obtain;
The Smiling Goddess did to Friendship give
Its just Reward, and bad them Love and Live.
With glad remembrance Thyrsis would commend
The wondrous Faith of some old Friend,
Whose strong surviving Love still warmed his Breast,
Then bid Us thus be Friends, and thus We should be blessed.
But Oh! with strange concern the Bard would tell
How, when his Loved Perithous fell,
To amazed Styx bold Theseus did descend,
And lost Himself to find his Friend.
How when the dear, the mournful Captives lay
To Death's unpitying King a hopeless Prey,
Both to redeem, the fair Alcmena's Son
( Alcmena's Son did not disdain
To feed his Herds and Love the Plain)
To the frighted shades went down;
Both He redeemed, from Both He did remove
All Bonds but those of grateful Love.
This noble Act his less famed Labors crowned,
Made Him for Courage much, for Friendship more renow'd.
Oh! that like Him, a meaner Shepherd I
Could make the unrelenting Power
My dear lamented Youth restore!
Oh! that with Me He lived, or I for Him could die!
Oh! that, like Them, He might return, for He
Was dearer far than Both to Me.
" But Oh! in vain with hopeless Grief I moan
" My ill-Starr'd Friendship wronged, my Daphnis gone.

LYC. Kind Friendship, Swain, has blessed thy noble Choice:
Pan has inspired thy Pipe, and tuned thy Voice:
Thy Voice at least this Conquest shall obtain,
That, since the matchless Maid is slain
I Will never, never Love again.

ALC. Oh! Yield a little farther yet,
And make my Conquest and my Joy complete;
For, since my dearest Daphnis bled,
Too justly I despair to find
A Youth so true, a Friend so kind,
Unless to Daphnis Lycidas succeed.

LYC. Though all unworthy I,
And rude in Friendship's well sung Mystery.
Yet would Alcon deign to show
The happy means, (for Alcon well does know)
I fain would Learn (methinks,) and Practice too.

ALC. Then may all Strife in this blessed Union end,
And Kindness only Here contend;
So Thou a Mistress scarce have lost --

LYC. -- So Thou have found a Friend.

BOOKS Printed for WILLIAM CROOK, at the Green-Dragon without Temple Bar.
1. THE London practice of Physic, or the whole Practical part of Physic,
contained in the Works of Dr. Thomas Willis, faithfully made English, and
Printed together for the public good; To which is Bound His new Book, being a
plain and easy Method for preserving from, and curing of the Plague, and all
other contagious Diseases. In Octavo, price bound 7 s.

2. The Christian's Manual in Three Parts. 1. The Catechumen, or an Account
given by the young Person of his knowledge in Religion, before his Admission to
the Lords Supper, as a Groundwork, for his right understanding the Sacrament.
2. An Introduction to a plain and safe way to the Communion Table, with Prayers
fitted for the Communicant, before, at, and after the Receiving of the Lords
Supper. 3. The Primitive Institution, showing the great benefit and necessity
of Catechizing, to save the Souls of particular Persons, and to heal the
present Distempers of the Church. In Twelves, price bound 2 s.


3. The Historians Guide, or Britain's Remembrance; being a Summary of all the
Actions, Battles, etc. Preserments, Changes, etc. that happened in his Majesty's
Kingdom, from An. Dom. 1600. to 1690. showing the Year, Month, and Day of the
Month, each was done in; with an Alphabetical Table, for the more easy finding
out any thing in the Book. In Twelves, price bound 2 s.

4. Bucaniers of America in two Volums; or a true account of the most
remarkable Assaults, committed of late years upon the Coast of the West Indies,
by the English and French, with the unparalled Exploits of Sir Henry Morgan,
Capt. Cook, Capt. Sharp, and other English Men; also the great Cruelties of
the French Bucaniers. Both Parts bound together, price 10 s. In Quarto.

5. Nine Treatises of Thomas Hobbes of Malmsbury, bound in two Volums in
Octavo, viz. 1. His Behemoth or Civil Wars of England. 2 His Historical
Narration of Heresy. 3 His Answer to Bishop Bramhall, in defense of his
Leviathan. 4 His seven Problems, with an Apology to the King for his Writing:
These 4 were Printed all at one time and called his Tracts, at 5 s. bound. 5
His Life in Latin, writ part by himself, and finished by Dr. B. 6 His
Considerations on his own Religion, Loyalty, etc. 7 His Art of Rhetoric in
English. 8 His Dialogue about the Common Laws of England. 9 His Ten Dialogues
of Natural Philosophy in English.
These 5 last new Printed at several times, and sold single; but for
convenience also bound in a Volume together, and sold for 7 s. 6 d.

6 Britain Glory, and Englands Bravery, wherein is showed the Degrees of
Honor, from the Prince to the Peasant, the Precedence of all Persons from the
Throne to the Bondsman; useful for all, especially for Feasts, Funerals,
Processions and all great Assemblies, etc. with the Heralds Duty and Power, and
a Dictionary of the Terms in Heraldry, and an Account of all the Orders of
Knighthood in Christendom, and of the Weights and Measures of England. By B.
Smithurst. In Twelves, price bound 1 s. 6 d.

FINIS.

