Mr. CHUTES Petition Of Appeal consists of these Nine Points.
The 1st. point to be reheard (in Case the Lady Dacres is reheard) to a point
decreed in Chancery against his late Father, viz. 1st. The 5000 l. and Interest
which ought not to have been; there being no breach of Covenant. The 2d. 3d.
and 4th. points to complain that the Chancery has aparently disobeyed the Lords
Order, viz. 2d. In allowing Mr. Chute but 380 l. for the value of the Legacy,
which as well by the Decree in 66, as by the Lords Order, upon his Appeal in
1680. was settled at 900 l. and the particulars of the Legacy are so
undervalued, that for one of those particulars, making up the 380 l. (valued by
the Chancery but at 40 l.) he has offered the whole 380 l. It appears as to
part of the Goods, that the Persons procured to make this new Valuation; only
made it by what they guessed the Goods, etc. might be worth 20 Years ago,
(having never seen them before) as to the rest of them (not in being) they are
valued by what the Lady Dacres her self told the Witnesses of them. 3d. In not
charging the Lady with the Sum of 1232 l. that she received out of his Estate
under her sequestration, till the end of the Account, in which the Chancery
ought to have charged her with it at the times she received it (the Decree for
the maintenance being reversed, which before had justified her keeping it) and
the rather for that Mr. Chute pays her Interest all the time, and Interest upon
Interest for a great part of her demand. 4th. In not allowing any more then
2500 l. for the value of the Timber, tho proved worth 7. or 8000 l.
The 5th. and 6th. points to have relief against the late order in Chancery
concerning. 5th. The Goods that the Lady possessed her self of at the Vine, and
in Newport-Street, by virtue of her sequestration, for which it is apparent,
she does not charge her self; nor the Chancery would not charge her with a
quarter of the value; Mr. Chute having offered 200 l. for one parcel for which
he is not allowed any more than five pound, and the same in several other
particulars. 6th. The 244 l. costs of the former Suit with Interest (with which
the Chancery has charged Mr. Chute) for 18 years, tho they were not taxed till
Mr. Chute (the Father's) Death, and therefore ought not to have been taxed at
all, it being a Personal wrong if any, and dying with him; there is not one
President in Chancery, where it was ever given thus, but very many to the
contrary, and it comes to 500 l.
The 7th. 8th. and 9th. points to have relief against the same Order charging
the Lady Dacres but with. 7th. 20 l. per Annum, for the Rent of the Vine-House,
proved worth (with other things that she enjoyed) 50 l. per Annum. 8th. 20 l.
per Annum. for Firewood, proved worth 70 l. per Annum. 9th. And nothing for
wilfully under-litting some part of the Estate.



After all to put an end to this unnatural dispute between Mr. Chute and his
Grandmother the Lady Dacres, and to avoid troubling the Lords in Parliament
further therein, Mr. Chute is ready to submit the whole matter in dispute, from
the Death of his Grandfather to this present time, to the judgment of two
Lords to be indifferently chosen between the Lady Dacres and him, and will give
5000 l. security tostand to their Award.


