THE CITIZENS COMPANION: OR THE TRADES-MAN'S MIRROR.

WHEREIN Most parts of a Trading Life are accommodated to the Judgments and
Examples of the ANCIENTS.

A WORK Enriched with Proverbs, and Historically beautified with the Deeds and
Sayings of the Wisest and Worthiest Men that ever were in the World.

Otium Ingenii rubigo.
Justitia sine Prudentia plurimum poterit,
Sine Justitia nihil valebit Prudentia.
Cicero. LONDON, Printed by J. C. for Barber Tooth, near York-House in the
Strand, 1673.

TO THE READER, Of what Quality or Calling soever.
IT is as common to see a Preface (which is the key ordinarily to unlock the
design of every good and solid Author) stand begging the favor of its Reader
to every idle Tract, and therein to imitate the method, more than to deserve
the reward of the best Writers; as to behold Fantastical, and insipid Tradesmen
to deck their outsides; nay, (in some persons) to outstrip rather than keep
pace in Fashions with Gentlemen. Yet the Compiler of the following matter is
not so Cynical or crazy in his judgment, as to deem handsome apparel unworthy or
unbecoming a Citizen; but it is the extravagancy, singularity, and gay
preciseness of too many now adays, that urges him to a comparison of this
nature. For certainly the value of the greatest part of the sprucest and most
modish that a Shop contains, are as subject to the censure of Pens far more
biting and reprehensive, than mine; as Prefaces of the aforesaid kind, are to
the merit of being made Bum-fodder, and only to set up Candles. However, the
chiefest, at least the most in number of my Perusers, will be apt to ask (as
indeed they have some reason, an Author's name swaying so much oftentimes in
the Sale of a Book) pray who is this, that professes such verbal kindness, and
as if he spoke through a Vizor, or was afraid of thanks, seems to admonish us
invisibly? Truly, ingratitude, and the fineness (amongst the rest of mankind)
of most of our Cit's Ears and Eyes, and consequently of their Understandings,
obliges him to conceal himself to a Public knowledge. Ingratitude on one side
is managed by Malice and Envy, so disadvantageously to the fame and deserts of
any that endeavor to stop the violent course of In^quity, especially as it
runs and rages at present too frequently amongst Traders, that Interest and
Ignorance shall move them sooner to revil^ their just Rebukers (who have the
comfort of being warranted in such sufferings by the examples of our Savior,
and a world of others motioned in Sacred and Profane History, for their Piety,
Wisdom, and meekness) than to repay them with that love, kindness, and common
respect mere Society, and civil community lays a claim to; if they were not
bound (as undeniably they are) to wish well, honor, and procure the benefit of
those, who hazard their temporal felicity to save them Body and Soul. They who
concur not with me in opinion (wherein they may be easily enlightened) chiefly
as to morality, exemplyfied in those insertions which History has afforded for
the strengthening what I argue on; though I think I have fortified my
endeavors too impregnably in all particulars, with the acts and judgments of
the wisest men, but above all of Solomon himself: yet to touch you my Viewer
(and it may be pert Censurer) hereof more to the quick, let me tell you that I
have changed my former resolution of sending my Companion abroad without a
Preface; and because I would not obscure my self for want of one, and be
Proverbially judged out of the World, being out of the Mode, such a one as it
is, take it; but observe heedfully (or you will one day smart for it) those
Precepts which I have chosen from Solomon's Armory, as well to guard my self
from any ones captiousness, as to overthrow all obstacles raised by partiality,
mis-conceit, or that pleasure every one too unreasonably pursues in worldly
enjoyments. But my own defense being contained only in the Preface, behold how
Solomon or Wisdoms Self denounces, That reproofs of instruction are the way of
life; and that he that hears them, abides among the wise; but he that hates
them is brutish, and shall dye, Prove. 6.23.15, 31.12, 1. They who are less
tainted, and so have the less need of a Physician, will undoubtedly manifest
themselves to understand knowledge, to be no Scorners, but to favor their
rebuker, beyond a flatterer, Prove. 19.25.9, 8.28, 28. Whether my Reader does me
Justice, or no, yet I have this invincible refuge, To them that reprove the
wicked shall be delight, and a good blessing shall come upon them, Prove. 24.25.

In my next place, for Citizens niceness, (or rather that of whole Mankind) it
is too customary to dislike, what they hear or read, if not delivered in a
quaint, pithy, and alluring style, more toward tickling their senses, than
improving their understandings; far be it from my Citizen to hug himself in
such conceits, and with this foolishness to pervert his way, Prove. 19.3. Now to
imagine upon viewing the Title, that because it talks of Ancients Deeds and
Sayings, of necessity such trumpetting at the door, cannot choose but declare
some rare sight within, worth your time and Money: Indeed (who ever you be,) you
will incur a great mistake to expect much Art in a Piece intended for Vulgar
use, which would have fitted it rather for Scholars than Shopkeepers, and
would have wrought the same effect in Trade, as Prayers in Latin do in the
Romish Religion. For whereas the education of the Vulgar is confined by
ignorance, in reference to all things hidden in Learning, it would have proved
very impracticable, (had any attempted it) to have exposed, for the practice of
the meanest degrees of people, what should be hard to apprehend without a
Dictionary. Besides, albeit my remaining in cognito to the most, may instigate
some, (for their own readier excuse) to think hard, and judge the Author, (like
a Beadle with his dark Lanthorn, who sees all things save himself, walks the
Rounds to scare Rakehels, yet sometimes participates of the sweet of their
mischiefs, because the poor man is frail) to be surrounded with more light of
Nature than Grace, and to mix erroneously his own actions with flesh and blood.
It Is confessed, I am none of those, Who can say I have made my heart clean, I
am free from my sin, Prove. 20.9. Nevertheless (I thank God for it) since I
began to understand the World, and to deal properly with men, I have as few
encumbrances both on my reputation and estate, as any of my standing. I shall not
insist too long on my own vindication, lest I render my self obvious to the
imputation of flying (through guilt) when none pursues. For what I assert in
the shaping of my Pattern for a Trading life, the Testimonies are so evident,
and the exigence of the Age so pinching and exacting, as I should have dipped my
hand in the ruin of not a few, had I deferred any longer those instructive and
reprehensive remedies, which are so wanted, so little minded or promoted by any
whose abler parts, better leisure, and apter utensils, would have contributed
mightily to the reformation of Citizens manners, and to the cleansing them from
those corruptions ill courses have filled them with; to the disparagement of
Commerce, to a forced distrust of one another, but finally and especially for
committing those transgressions which retard the conquest of our Enemies, whose
down fall, with our own amendment, (which is the only way for obtaining it)
will complete the luster of our City, which will be celebrated, and rejoice
when it goes well with those shall deserve the name of Righteous, Prove. 11.10.
I never intended to court any ones candor; but the Press, (as it seldom is
otherwise) has here and there made (...) few scapes; wherefore to blame me,
would be through sudden anger to deal foolishly; but (on all occasions) it will
be your glory to pa^ over a transgression, Prove. 14, 17.19, 11.

THE CITIZEN'S COMPANION: OR THE Trades-man's Mirror, etc.
IT might be expected from me, to speak something in the Praise of a Trade or
Calling; But the benefit accruing by it both to public and particulars, is too
perspicuous; ^ational, useful and honorable to need any Apology. It Is true,
that for the seven, eight, or nine years of Apprentiship undergone by a
Servant, some have been so frighted at a Civil subjection for so long a term,
as rather to mispend and cast away the aptest part of their days in Idleness
(the Mother of all mischief) or, any how, (having the face of a Gentile (though
mostly in the end a pernicious) liberty) than to submit to the commands of a
Shopkeeper, or to reject that airy enjoyment which is aimed at by Youth; and
(because most concurring with corrupt Nature) is embraced before any thing not
so easy in the attainment. It would grow a mad world if Children should be
allowed to be their own choosers: A Child left to himself brings his Mother
to shame, Prove. 9.15. certainly if raw and ignorant judgments were determinable
in a business of that Nature, their poor and insipid inclinations would pitch
as soon on the worse courses for the future maintenance of their bodies, as
they are prone to prefer playing the Truant to going to School, and thereby
losing those opportunities, so expedient for the beautifying of their minds.
Foolishness is bound in the hea^ of a Child (says Solomon) but the R^^ of
correction shall drive it far from him Prove. 22.15. Parents must then a^
custom their Sons to a stricter libert than commonly they enjoy. They (...)
more indulgent than discreet, if for^ little crying they shall remit and slack
that obedience they naturally and legal have over their Children, especia^
knowing by their own sometimes wo^^ experience, the ill consequence of Childish
customs, and the misery attending inconsideration. Withold not correction from
thy child, for if thou beatest him with a rod he shall not dye, Prove. 23.13.
How many depending on the fruits of a petty patrimony, have begged or stole
before they dyed! Therefore every Father ought to use his Authority in planting
his Sons judiciously to their future benefit, not omitting the suiting of each
ones inclination to a Trade most agreeable. My Citizen, by such a means falling
under the remarks and advice of this Discourse, if he daigns to make it his
Companion till he has read it over, he may become of my opinion, and conclude
it a happy thing for a man to go through his affairs without Injustice; which
he cannot do, save by being Master of his affections and appetites, and by a
narrow inspection into all his Actions; that maturely consulting and discreetly
managing his business, he may live justly with pleasure and profit.

Hot Youth running inconsiderately, and giving time no leisure to do any thing
for him, speeds unjustly and with trouble; but catches nothing, at least
nothing durable. And a dull-spirited man, not taking occasion when it is ready^
misseth his advancement, yet is no^ freed from cares and perplexity; both these
trusting to Fortune the Goddess o^ Rashness and Sloth, their unskilfullne^
effects their destiny. The Jullice.
first coun^ of the three is best, the Rashness.
second an^ Stupidity.
third may rise, but it is very doubtful the first must of necessity be
promoted the order of his actions being set down in His Decree that made him.
Thus it i^ in all Professions; no Tradesman can (...) counted good, except he
be a real good man; opening his Conscience, living^ if he were always in
public, rather fearing himself than others; by this (...) raises himself
above and beyond (...) fear, contemning the blows of Fortu^ His wisdom without
this will be e^^neous, his policy will be knavery; (...) honesty without wisdom
is unprofitable Wisdom (says a Learned man) of all (...) gifts of God is most
pure; she inf^goodness into her Disciples, she pardo^^ the wicked, she makes
the poor ri^^ and the rich honorable, and such as (...) feignedly embrace her,
she makes (...) like to God. Wisdom is the beau^^ and noble composition of him,
in (...) Word, Actions, and Motions; could the eyes see her, she would stir up
wonderful love; by her he enfranchises his Spirit, from an unjust subjection
unto unnecessary things, and out of his calling. Socrates (according to the
judgment of Physiognomers) naturally given to all wickedness, by the study of
wisdom reformed his lewd inclinations. And though Cicero in his latter days
cried out, Would I had never known what wisdom meant; Yet Julius Caesar only
by his wisdom and experience brought all his designs to effects. However,
suppose little knowledge to be unfruitful; yet the course of a general Learning
being too long, the purchased experience must be pertinent and within the pale
of his own calling, and is to be prosecuted diligently, because none is so
easy to be dived into (as it were) in a moment. A course may be soon begun,
but every one is sure of meeting with unforeseen rubs. As no humane action is
delivered to the World without many circumstances; so there is no Trade without
them: there is no circumstance in it but is a step mounting the understanding
to the true value and clear perspection of it. Nevertheless it would be
esteemed a great piece of sottishness to enslave ones self, and to be so
over-exact and industrious, as like Nicias the Painter, (who was so earnest and
intentive in his profession) t^ forget food, and omit the reception o^ Nature's
support. And Apelles the Pai^ter used to chide Protagines; who no knowing when
a thing was well, would never keep his hands from the Table* If it could be
attained, the discretion o^ CRISPVS the Roman is to be imitated, who under a
color of negligen^ accomplished whatever he undertoo^ Though curiosity and
excellency are the less reprehensive, because setting fo^^ the glory of a man's
Country; ye^ mean and moderate care is to be concl^ ded on, because the Bow
too long bent^ subject to breaking. If an extreme (...) to be admitted, it
ought to tend to (...) ready curing of our excesses and vic^ appetites. Nor are
they so hard to (...) conquered, if we will but a little t^^ the paths of our
Ancestors. Julius C^^ was of a constitution infirm and (...) vulsive, yet he
scorned to submit^^ feeble and slothful inclination; (...) sought a remedy in
War, fighting ag^ his Distemper, with continual labor and exercise, lying for
the most part in the open air. Demosthenes was such an enemy to pleasure, as in
the most Festival times to cause his head to be shaven, hindering thereby his
forwardness to appear in public, and sticking the closer to his Studies.
Certainly diligence in all points is a thing of that moment, as every great and
noble action ows unto it the means of achievement. Cleanthes in the nightime
carried water, and in the day he hearkened attentively to the Philosophical
Lectures read by Chrysippus. The Romans allowed every hour of the day to some
exercise or other. Alexander never slept save with his arm stretched out of the
bed, holding in his hand a Silver Ball, having a Silver Basin by his Bedside,
that lest he slept too securely and soundly, the falling of the Ball might
awake him, and admonish him of his Enemies. Examples are numberless if I would
crowd them in so little room. But remitting such kind of incitations, and
Youthful instigations to Virtue, to their patter places, and more proper
insertions; I shall now begin to define my Citizen, as one who has served
seven years, and is entering on the Worlds Stage, to manifest to all dealers
with him, that no advantage or lucre can shake his surefounded justice, (rather
like Aristides the Athenian, to leave behind him not enough to bury him, than
wrong any man, and lose after his death the Su^name of Just) declaring by his
smooth deportment to all, that he imitates the wise Lord Burleigh, in putting
off his Cares with his Clothes; and by the improvement of his Fortunes and
Stock, raising himself (by a blessing on his inde^ vors) to the highest Dignity
reputation (...) wealth can advance him; using Demostines his diligence, who
was grieved to ^e any one up before him, which made hi^ in his Profession as an
Orator to pro^ the most famous of his Time.

Of Justice.
Justice by the Poets is fained to be a a Virgin, and to have reigned among men
in the golden world; but being by them abused, forsook the world and returned
to Heaven. St. Augustine makes mention of a certain Jester who undertook to
tell all the people what they most desired; standing up, he said with a loud
voice, You would buy cheap, and sell dear. To do so as it was in his time, so
it is in ours common; but a Common vice, unless it be limited. Certainly, if
ever buying and selling was corrupted, it was but venial and indifferent in
comparison to that of our times. If Thievery may claim the epithet of lawful,
and if authority in bargaining may not be abused, then the wicked Customs of
some men may uncontroulably be established for Laws. But I am sure they therein
follow their own private allowances, not caring, so it be a Pennyworth, how and
by whom it is conveyed to their hands. It is usual (would to God it were less
Epidemical and Sinful) for Tradesmen, chiefly Retailers of second-hand
Commodities, to fasten inconsiderately on all proffered goods, seldom minding
the person and the power of the Seller. What unrighteous and rash dealing is
this? How can any one pretend to the Privileges o^ Society, to the marks of
loving his neighbor as himself, to fulfill the Commands laid upon him by an
All-seeing Eye, when to purchase more than ordinary advantage, he shall
knavishly (at least implicitly) connive at theft, to the debasing of Divine and
Humane Laws, to the extreme damage of Masters or Father^ but chiefly in
hardening of such parties as pick a secure sweetness out of filching who get by
degrees such a habit, tha^ many for lack of timely correction, ha^^ continued
those courses, till it w^^ too late to take up, and have sinish^ their
unfortunate lives by an infam^^ death, to the sorrow and great grief (...)
Parents and Masters, (that have any kindness for their Servants) and lastly to
the Buyers disparagement, if not punishment at least, thereby lying liable to
the hea^ and sticking curses of those afflicte Souls, who if it had not been
for them might have survived honorably. That my Citizen may eschew all blame,
shame, and danger, subject to such unworthy, base, and abominable courses; Let
him never buy any thing proffered at his Shop, without first inquiring into the
disposers power; especially if he seem to be a Schoolboy, Apprentice, or
Shirk, wherein he ought to regard: next, he must take an account of the persons
Friends, Master, Habitation, and what else may contribute to discovery. Then if
what is offered be suspected, as always it is when tendered by mere Boys, he must
detain it till he be better informed how it was come by: but if through
laziness or worse intents he defers notifying it to the Persons interess'd, his
honesty is but painted and formal, and his fault is treble to what it should
have been. First, he furthers the loss of the party before wronged, in not
giving him warning for the future. Secondly, he occasions the Pilferers
continuance in his illegal ways, it may be to his sudden destruction both of
Body and Soul. Thirdly, and lastly, instead of righting his Neighbor, he robs
him, being worse than a Receiver (who is equal with the Thief,) because under
the Cloak of Justice he deceives both. Finally, if the pretended lawful
disposer look suspitiously, and answer not pertinently to the questions put to
him; my Citizen is bound to stop the Party, at least the Goods, and to se^ them
restored to the true Owners. If my Citizen esteem a jot what is told him; if
Reason, Justice, and Religion have any share in him, he will abhor such a
scandalous and odious practice as I have insisted on; and by such a hate he
will purchase a peace of Conscience, a lasting, eminent, and good fame, thereb^
avoiding Solomou's censure, Whose is Partner with a Thief hates his own Soul
Prove. 29.24. And he will entitle him self to that Little which is better wi^^
righteousness, than great Revenues with out right, Prove. 16.8. That Justi^^ may
be kept in prizing Commoditie^^ the vulgar estimation of wise good m^ is to be
followed. Upon some the La^ has pitched a price, which may be d^ minished, not
enhauns'd; because the price was set in favor of the buyer, (...) all which,
with the innumerable sorts (...) commodities, it is impossible for Law (...)
determine the value. Yet the Civil Law says, that is the just price of a thing,
if it be sold for so much as it can, that is, says Amesius, for how much it
can commonly be sold, the affection of this or that particular man not
considered: But where taxation or common estimation cannot, there without
deceit, the judgment of the Owner must set the price. A Contract must be
according to the equality of the thing, and that must be measured by the price
given. For as Time is the measure of Business, so is price of Wares. If the
price exceed the things worth, or that exceed the price, the equality of
Justice is taken away: that both agree is the just rule of Trading; against
which Deceit is opposite. The Soul of the wicked desires evil, his neighbor
finds no favor in his eyes, Prove. 21.10. To deceive, is to make show of one
thing, and bring in another, besides the opinion of the Customer, by which more
is given for Wares than they are worth; but it is seldom men sell at an
under-rate.

Cicero tells us, There is no greater plague for Justice, than for some men
under the masks of honesty to deceive others. His rule was exact that said, A
wise man will not deceive, neither can he be deceived. So did his profession of
honesty resound, who chose this Motto; To deceive or be deceived, is hateful to
me.

St. Augustine (and who not?) met with many that would deceive, but few that
would be deceived. To cozen others is worse than to be cozened, as a sin is
worse than a cross; not that every wile is a Sin. Lucius approaching the Boat
wherein Athanasius was, Eusebius.
asked for him, and was answered by him (who was known to Lucius only by name
and not face) that Athanasius was hard before him; if he made have he might
overtake him: who being violent in his pursuit, missed Athanasius. This Arrian
persecutor was deceived by the truth spoken with wisdom and a good conscience;
but that deceit which is the corruption of justice, I shall now speak against;
this stands more in the wills, than wits o^ men.

1. This is first against Nature: one Serpent does not sting another; and the
Fishes of the Sea devour none but those of contrary kinds. But the greatest
evil that befall man, come from man. Hom^ homini lupus, one man is a Wolf to
another. The Lions spared Daniel, the ravenous Birds sed Eliah, but man
exercises cruelty upon man. As a madman who casts Firebrands, Arrows, and
Death, so is the man that deceives his Neighbor, Prove. 26.18. Pope Alexander
the Sixth never did what he said, his Son Borgia never said what he meant to
do, Guichardin.
pleasing themselves in counterfeiting and dissimulation, but their ends were
fatal, one being poisoned, the other slain. Frederick a Roman Emperor, when
the Senators were entering the Senate House, would say to them, Cast away two
things, deceit and dissimulation. The crafty are like the Chameleon, apt to all
objects, capable of all colors; they cloak Hate with Holiness, Ambition with
good Government, and Flattery with Eloquence; but whatever they pretend, the
issue is dishonest. An Hypocrite with his mouth destroys his Neighbor, Prove.
11.9. An old Lacedemonian, who had colored his hairs, discovered his head in a
great Assembly, and made a Declaration of the matters he came about. Archidamus
the King rising up, said, What truth can this fellow speak, whose heart is
stained with spots of Hypocrisy and double dealing?

2. Secondly, it is against civil Society, for the preservation whereof it is
expedient that men converse safely, without fear of being undermined by each
other. Therefore one said well, the first foundation of Justice is not to hurt,
the second to endeavor to procure the common benefit.

3. Thirdly, it is against Christianity; which teaches a man so much charity and
patience, as to do well, and suffer ill. It was Prophesied that in the time of
the Gospel, Isai. 11.
the sucking child should play upon the hole of the Asp, and the weanel child
should put his hand upon the hole of the Cockatrice.

4. Fourthly, it is Theft. Themistocles the Athenian, spying a dead body richly
adorned, passed by; but called to his Companion, Take up these, for thou a^ not
Themistocles: he could not stoop^^ low as to gather gold out of blood and dirt;
but he stoops lower that plucks it from the living, and commits a double theft,
robbing himself of honor, and the other of means and life. The way of (...)
wicked is darkness, they know not at what they stumble, Prove. 4.19.

Lastly, it is odious to God. It is the will of God that no man oppress his
brother, nor defraud him; 1 These. 4.6
for the Lord is the avenger of all such. A good man obtains favor of the
Lord; but a man of wicked devices shall be condemned, Prove. 12.2. And to good
men, even to the Heathen, they counted no profit lasting which was got by
fraud: (says one amongst them) I will overcome by Roman Arts, (viz.) by
Virtue, Labor, and Arms. In Athens it was a custom, when men bought or sold
any thing, they came before the Magistrate appointed for the purpose, and there
took an Oath that they had not dealt fraudulently, nor used any deceit. I have
heard of a Turk that having bought some Manufactures of an Englishman, wherein
was enclosed a great sum of Money, unknown to both Parties; and finding it,
made many Journeys in quest of the Englishman; and at length meeting him,
unasked restored the Money. Are Heathens just, and thou unjust? What does it
profit thee to be called what thou art not? It is said of the Jesuits, They
have retained nothing of Jesus, but the name; and of the Popes, Who was called
Bonifacius, or Benefactor, was a Malefactor; Pius or Godly, was wicked; Vrbanus
or civil, was rude and savage; Innocentius or harmless, was hurtful and
pestiferous; and Clementius or meek, was cruel and unmerciful. He that
justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just, even both are an
abomination to the Lord, Prove. 17.15. I would it might not be said of many
Christians, that they are but so in name, having good words, not answerable
works; supposing more of Gods hearing than his seeing. But many eat that here,
which they cannot digest in Hell hereafter.

If Dives was sent into Hell for not giving his own, whither shall they be
sent, that take that which is another?

The unjust ways of cunning which (...) would have my Citizen to shun, are
many; as Flattery, Dissimulation, Lying etc. of which in their order. There be
some whom Gain will transform into a shapes; let the Customer look how ^e will,
they like a Looking-glass will have something in them like him. The Old Law
would not allow the Swan is man's meat, his Feathers being white, is Body black.
Neither are those fit (...) deal with man, whose pretenses being fair, have
soul practices. These are the Aves Gaviae of the times; which Birds when
Alphonsus King of Sicily lanch'd from the Shore, flew about the Ship; and he
causing Meat to be thrown them, they had no sooner taken it, but they flew
away. Thus it is with me (says he) my Flatterers having received of me what
they expected, withdraw their obsequiousness, and return no more, unless they
are a hungry after new benefits. Most Shopkeepers respect, even so, lasts no
longer than the Customer uses them to their extreme advantage. Divines say that
Flattery divides a man from himself; he thinks himself otherwise than he is. A
house divided cannot stand; which some unjust ones considering, by Flattery part
a man's judgment from his will, and so deceive him. Oil poured upon the
Grass-hopper, kills it; Vinegar revives it. Flattery kills those whom sincere
harsh treating does heal. A flattering mouth works ruin, Prove. 26.28. So
much danger has Flattery begotten, as the Emperor Sigismond, Emperor of
Germany, struck one who praised him too much, saying he hit him. Antigonus King
of Macedonia, told a Poe^ who called him a God (therein observing his soothing)
that the Groom of his Stool knew 'twas no such matter. Alexander when his
Parasite persuaded him to think himself a God, replied, he knew himself by two
special things to be Man and not a God, namely, by sleep an^ carnal motions.
Heavier and sadder were their following Dooms. King Philip of France and
Constantine the Gre^^ banished all Flatterers from their Counts. At Athens they
were put to death as the ruin and plagues of the Countries they dwelt in. The
Athenians put Tymagor^ to death, because to insinuate with Darius, he saluted
him after the Persian manner. Whereby it is visible how obnor^ ous Flattery
has ever been esteemed and the hatred it has always contracted, and the
punishment a man have met withal. But it is not alw^^ so in Trade. Some
Customers will gr^o^ dull and displeased, if they be not of^ whetted by
Flattery; downright ho^^ speeches discontent them. For th^^ cause, as the
Apostle said, Be angry b^ sin not: So I say, Flatter but sin not it be
possible. Yet it is my opinion that amiable looks and fair speeches will go far
enough, we need seek no by-ways. It is better (says Plutarch) to fall among a
sort of Ravens, than to happen into the company of Flatterers. For the Ravens
never eat a man till he be dead; But Flatterers will not spare to devour him
while he is alive. Flattery is the corruption of truth; a thing as pernicious,
as truth is excellent. Flattery is like a Golden-pill, which outwardly gives
pleasure, but inwardly is full of bitterness. Lastly, among other things, a
Flatterer is known by this, that he does not only imitate friendship, but go
beyond it.

Secondly, Dissimulation is an evil more tolerable in a Citizen. Nevertheless
Plato the Mellifluous Philosopher advises all, not to dissemble with a friend,
either for fear of displeasing him, or for malice to deceive him. Yet I said it
was more tolerable, because it is with him, as with one who has married a
wise, whom he must use well, pretending affection to her, though he cannot love
her: and indeed Divines hold it in some cases lawful, to pretend one thing, and
intend another: as in the case of our Saviors going to Emaus with the two
Disciples; He made as if he would go further, to stir up their desire of his
presence: whatever he pretended, he intended to stay with them that night. If a
man pretends a long journey by being booted and spurred, but intends to return
suddenly to see what those whom he puts in trust would do; if he had gone, is
no sin: whereas if he had said he would go such a journey, and went not, had
been a lie. But woe to them that dissemble to an ill end; these have the voice
of Jacob, but the hands of Esau; they are smooth in their words, rough in their
actions. A feigned equity (says St. Augustine) is a double iniquity, because
dissimulation is iniquity it self Let him know also, that he sins thrice, that
counterfeits himself good, to whom he may do ill. Let him dread the judgment
fell on a King of Poland, who ((...) great Dissembler) had always this with his
mouth; If it be not true, I would (...) Rats might eat me: which came to pass
for he was assailed by them in such manne at a Banquet, that neither his Guard
Fire or Water could defend him fin them. Worms eat up the tongue of the Cozener
Nestorius. Absalom that Masterpiece of Hypocrisy, who was within a Nero,
without a Cato; he had a painted tongue, but not a painted punishment. Behold
him hanging on a Tree, as unworthy of Heaven or Earth: Behold him thrust
through with three Darts, as worthy of a treble death. He that hates,
dissembleth with his lips. Pro. 26.24
These Dissemblers, like the Polypus, can take all colors to deceive. But how
cowardly a humor is this, and how servile? He that dissembles, must still have
a fearful eye upon himself, lest he be discovered: his mystery is poor; for he
is ere long found out, and then not credited: all he speaks is Apocryphal. O
how excellent a thing is freedom! there is no better life, than to live
according to a man's nature, resolving always to dip the tongues Pen in the
hearts Ink, speaking but what he thinks; to do otherwise is impiety, and
deserves the punishment the Lacedaemonians inflicted on one, who professing a
rigid life, used to wear hair-cloth lined with purple. Yet to utter all he
thinks, is eminent folly. Clytus for speaking too boldly to Alexander, was
killed by him. Silence is most safe; and Phocion is to be imitated above all,
whose closeness was a freedom, in expressing in a few words his matter, and
surpassing therein (as it is said) Demosthenes himself whose eloquence excelled
all others.

Thirdly, A lying tongue (says Solomon) hates those that are afflicted by it,
Prove. 26.28. Lying is a base vice, is a sickness of the soul, which cannot be
cured, but by shame and reason: It is a menstruous and wicked evil, that
filthily prophaneth and defiles the tongue of man, which is consecrated of
God, for the utterance of his praise. It is the part of a slave (says Bias) to
lie: It is the property of a liar (says the same) (...) put on the Countenance
of an honest man that so by his outward habit he m^ the more subtly deceive.
And the Poet is offended at it highly: Dare to be true, nothing
Can need a Lie:
A fault that needs it most,
Grows two thereby.


Lying is pernicious to humane Society, contrary to Nature, and worse tha^
Theft; for silence is more sociable than untrue speech: it is the worse,
because so various; if it had but one visage, there were some remedy for it, a
man might take the contrary to it for truth. That which is good is certain and
finite (says Philosophy) there is but one way to hit the mark. Evil is
infinite and uncertain; there are a thousand ways to miss it. It is reported of
the Indians, that they offered humane blood to their Gods; but none other than
what was drawn from their tongues and ears, for an expiation of the sin of
lying, as well heard as pronounced. Even those that use this vice most,
conceive the baseness of it, counting that the extremest injury that can be
verbally done to them, to reproach them with the lie. They are not ashamed to
lie, but to be called liars. The Tongue is connexed by veins to the brain and
heart, by which Nature teaches us, that it is to be governed by the Intellect,
whose seat is in the head, so that it may agree with the heart. A man deceived
through error, may utter this or that falsehood, thinking that true, which is
no proper lie. To speak falsely, thinking it true, is to lie materially; to
speak truth, thinking it false, is to lie formally; but he that speaks false,
knowing it false, lies in the matter and form, and therefore perfectly. Thus
to lie to save our lives we may not, much less to save or increase our Wealth.
Buy the truth, and sell it not, Prove. 23.23. Memorable is the Example of that
Woman in St. Hierome; she knew how to die, but not to tell an untruth. In a
strait where Money or Justice must be left, rather lose Money than Justice,
There is no disference (says Cicero) between a Liar and a Forswearer; for
whomsoever I can make to tell a lie, I can easily persuade to forswear himself.
The Egyptians made a Law that every Liar should be put to death. The Persians
and Indian used to degrade Liars of all honor, and to cut out their tongues.
Artaxerxes King of Persia, caused a Soldier to be nailed to a post by the
tongue, for lying The Cretans for lying became despise^ of the whole world. But
Truth has two Champions, Wisdom and Constancy; she shines brightest when
foiled looks most beautiful in rags, is bess defended with nakedness, smiles
before the Judge, and needs no Orator. The lips of truth shall be established,
Prove. 12.19. Pharamond King of France was named Waramond; that is, Truth.
Marcus Aurelius the Emperor, was called most True, because he was never found
in a Lie, nor ever failed in truth. Pyrrhus the King of Epyrus, however an
Enemy to the Romans, yet gave this praise unto Fabritius, that a man might
as soon turn him from Truth and honesty, as the Sun out of his course. The
getting of treasures by a lying tongue, is vanity tossed to and fro of them
that seek death, Prove. 21.6. Lying then must be banished and abominated. But
this rule must be observed; as we may not lie, so we need not speak all the
truth. St. Augustine makes mention of one Firmus, who when he was asked to tell
where his friend was, lest he should be delivered to his enemies hands, said he
would not tell. I will (says he) neither lie or betray him. This man (says
Augustine) was Constant in name, but more Constant in mind. Nor must Pompey
the great be forgotten, who chose rather to endure the burning of a finger,
than to disclose the secrets of the Senate. But Papilius went beyond him, who
cut out his own tongue, and flung it in the Tyrants face, because he would not
betray his Associates, who together had conspired against him.

Fourthly, Among these Polluters of the tongue, Swearing must be spoken of;
when the rest will not serve turn, it is common to add Oaths: and indeed, what
sin so heinous, which he that makes have to be rich is afraid or ashamed to
commit? He that makes have to be rich shall not be innocent, Prove. 28.20. But
what need I say any thing against this, more than the commandment, Thou shall
not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord will not hold hint
guiltless which takes his name in vain? This Law (says Augustine) should be
to all Christians as a thousand Sermons: He that lays his faith in pawn,
binds his safety, his honor, and his soul to the redeeming it. Faith gives
no honor to an Oath; yet Oaths broken dishonor Faith. To swear and forswear
(says Periander, one of the seven Sages) is a vice so hateful, that slaves
themselves judge it worthy punishment. Yet all Oaths are not unlawful: we may
Swear: but let the light go before us. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and
serve him, and swear by his name, Deuteronomy. 6.13. How horrid a thing is it to call
God to bear witness to trifles and lies? What is it to swear (says St.
Augustine) but to call God to witness? if this was considered, many would not,
as they do, make Rhetoric of an Oath, taking delight in that which moves Gods
displeasure. To forswear is a greater sin than to swear; for the Apostle does
not say, Jam. 5.12.
My Brethren do not forswear, but do not swear. Would thou be far from
Perjury, swear not: false swearing is deadly; true swearing is dangerous. Those
who have worshipped Stones have been afraid to swear falsely by them; and do
thou not fear that God who is everywhere present, who sees all things generally
without exception, evidently without doubt, immutably without forgetfulness?
Let me tell the swearer in another words, Though the punishment may be
deferred, yet it shall be heavy. Besides all other curses this is one; he will
certainly be false to man, who is not true to Gods honor. O matchless folly,
that men should through open Sluices, let their souls run out for nothing! Wise
men think more than they speak, and to swear is the least part of their
knowledge. A man shall eat good by the fruit of his mouth; but the soul of the
transgressour shall eat violence. Prove. 13.2. By the blessing of the upright
(says Solomon) the City is exalted; but it is overthrown by the mouth of the
wicked, Prove. 11.11. And if the daily misfortunes which befall those who use
too often to call on the name of a Deity, who in a moments time they are as apt
to slight, are not powerful enough to dissuade my Citizen from participating of
so contemptible a custom; if the precepts of holy Writ, and the advice of all
the Wisest men ever were, conduce nothing to abolishing in him so much
ignorance and foolishness as an Oath contains; then let the dooms of some wh^
valued not at what rate they swore, because they counted an Oath to have (...)
more virtue and validity in it than a je^ let their sad and frightful
departures te^fie and scare my Citizen from venturi^ to swim in a water so
rough. We w^ begin with Andronicus Comnenus, wh^ having swore to protect the
Sons of^ manuel Emperor of Constantinopl^ contrary to his so solemn faith
plighted, slew them, usurped the Empire; and to complete his happiness, was not
long after deposed, hung up by the feet, and hewed to pieces for his perjury.
Christien King of Denmark paid dearly for his faithlesness: for conceiving no
tie to be in an adjured promise, he was dethroned, banished, and lived
miserably the rest of his life, for all that he was supported by many great
Friends. Melius Suffetius a Roman was torn in pieces by four Horses, for
having broken his faith, and trampled on that reverence, he ought to have paid
a Deity. To conclude, He (says Sigismundus) that accustometh himself to
swearing, shall never escape those plagues every Oath heaps up; whose torture
also shall continue eternally, unless through an early and an unfeigned
penitence he make his peace with his Creator.

Fifthly, I must not skip those slippery ones who with unjust weights and
measures can deceive, though the vigilance of authority ties them to true ones.
Diverse weights and diverse measures both of them are an abomination to the Lord.
Pro. 20.10
Yet they not remembering that God sees they do, they pervert justice. I have
read that Ferdinand Emperor of Germany possessed a great number of Watches,
wherein he much delighted. It pleased him once to put this his variety of
speaking gold upon a Table, as if he would expose it to sale: going aside, a
stander by, driven by a desire of stealing, or occasion, snapt one of them;
which the Emperor espying aslant, called him to him, and held him in various
discourse, till the Watch striking discovered the Hour and his Theft. He that
deceives with unjust weight or measure, may apply this: what he has done has
a tongue to discover him; besides, his conscience betrays him; nor for all
being his own judge, can he be absolved. He has one witness within, and
another without. His own iniquities shall take the wicked himself, and he shall
be holden with the cords of his sins, Prove. 5.22. By the time he blushes, where
I leave him wit^ restitution to repent, or in time (...) suffer the following
penalty. In 1475 Robert Basset a Salter being Mayor he was very vigilant to
punish those the used false Weights and Measures; f^ which misdemeanors,
several Bake^ were set in the Pillory, and others severely handled.

Now I discover some false lights; their end is to make the Wares seem better
than they are, that the Seller may receive for them more than they are worth.
But do they that use them, think light can look upon the wares, and not He that
made that light? Or will they think to enjoy the perfect light hereafter, which
adulterate it here? There was a presumptuous Carrier, that travelleth in the
night, was told of certain dangerous Pits in the way, that if he had no care of
his Horse, he might regard his own life. I shut my eyes (says he) and all
things everywhere are plain. Like this man are those, who cannot beling but
there is danger, yet fear it not; they know Gods omnipresence, but reverence it
not. It is to be lamented, that men have too dark Shops; but more, that they
have too dark minds: let them remember, who it was, said, 2 Timothy 3.9
There is nothing which shall not be made manifest. A shop may be too dark, and
it may be too light; therefore it is, or should be so ordered, for the benefit
of Buyer and Seller, that light may be by art neither obscured, not let in to
much. For a good man obtains favor of the Lord, but a man of wicke devices
shall he condemn, Prove. 12.2.

Seventhly, It is ordinary to pre^ upon the Sellers want of money, or the
Buyers want of Commodities. This^ robbing the poor, because he is poor, an^
oppressing the afflicted in the gate, Prov^ 22.22. But this should move pity,
no^ cruelty. The Lion (says Pliny) spare^ the prostrate; and shall man be so
unjus^ as to do less? or if a man, far be it from my Citizen, who conversing
with most Men, should have most Humanity.

Eighthly, It is likewise unjust, as ordinary, to buy Wares for time, and no^
to pay for them at the time appointed The Indians of Guinee, when they promise
any thing, will deliver a bundle (...) Sticks equal to the Months and Da^^ they
appoint; keeping for themselve a bundle of the same number: eve^day or month
they take away a Stick^ so when all are removed they are assur'^ of the times
expiration. Thus careful are they in observing their time, b^ how negligent are
we! It was well sa^ by Reverend Bishop Jewel, It Is our mi^sery, that we are
called Christians, yet live like Heathens under that name; nay, it were well,
if we did as these Heathens. They which are so backward, are like ill Singers
(says one) they should be sent to the Compter, a good Singing-school for them
to learn to keep better time in.

Ninthly, But what shall we think of those which will find no time at all to
pay, breaking deeply indebted to many? I know what they will allege in their
defense; it was destined, Providence had decreed they should not prosper. I
remember to have read, that Zeno Citicus having a servant surprised in
stealing, commanded him to be slain; who pleading for himself, said the Fates
had decreed him to steal. And to suffer too, replied Zeno. So for those that
break, especially out of Policy to deceive, let them prove its decree, the
punishment is sure enough. Was there ever any of these, but it might be said of
him, He felt the smart of it? He may seem to prosper for a time, and we may
wonder that the way of the wicked should do so; but Divinity it self will
answer us, Isa. 48.22. There is no peace to the wicked: if no Peace, no
Prosperity. Polycrates, Tyrant of Samos, was so fortunate all his life, he
never tasted grief o^ loss: howbeit, to partake some sorrow with others, he
cast a Ring of an inesti^ mable value into the Sea; which afterward was found
in a Fishes belly, and presented him by a poor Fisherman* notwithstanding which
probable eternal felicity, a Gibbet helped to shorten hi^ days. Yet some there
are, whom ((...) must pity, not inveigh against) the violent blasts of cross
accidents has blowt down; they would pay every man hi^ own but cannot. Of
these I must hold with St. Augustine, It is not to be considered what they do,
as with what mind* These are those broken ones, into who^ Charity must pour the
balm of comfort they have broken estates, and brok^ hearts. To bring up some
solace a^ praise, which the Ancients have fasto^ to themselves, by misfortunes;
let n^^^ be disheartened because of Poverty, b^^ entertain it with a fatal
voluntarness, and a hope still for better; f^^ Solomon assures them, A just man
f^^eth seven times, and rises again, P^^ 24.16. If this comfort avails little,
the let them ruminate on the Honor conferred by the Romans of old on the
Favorites of Poverty, which Nearness once laid aside, they confess to be the
beginning of their woes. Aristides the Grecian, Fabritius and Publicola Romans,
had been as soon forgotten in the mind, as eye, if their mean and hard kind of
life had not made an impression very deep in the memories of their Countrymen,
who once accounted it the pitch of Virtue, not to indulge their carcasses, or
live up to the allowance of Plenty.

Tenthly, The last way of deceit, falling under my discourse, is the inhansing
and raising the price of Commodities above measure; a thing condemned by
Cicero, though inspired only with the light of nature. If a man in time of
dearth, bring a Ship laden with Corn, and know there are a great many more will
in few days be up with him, if he dissemble this, taking advantage of the
present want, to sell his Corn at too high a rate, he is guilty of hard and
unjust dealing. The wicked works a deceitful work; but to him that sows
righteousness, shall be a sure reward, Prove. 11.18.

Now a Consideration of what cases lessen and raise the price, does here offer
it self.

1. A Commodity may be worth more being sold to one man than to another; For if
our Commodities be sold cheap without respect of persons, Forraigners in other
Countries may afford them as cheap as the English Merchant: and this way has
caused a decay in several Places of our Trade by Natives.

2. Commodity increases its price, victuals or houshold-provision being dear;
otherwise thousands of Artificers and Handicrafts-men must fare the worse.

3. When Buyers seek Wares, they or a sort of them being scarce, the common
estimation being increased, the price may be raised.

4. Commodities retailed must be de^ rer than those sold by whose sale; t^^
labor and care in selling them thus being greater: not to do so, is to under
value the labor and care of the who^^ profession.

5. Lastly, Commodities may be s^^ dearer for time than ready money: Sa^^ is a
perpetual estranging of the properly from the price. But that, that price
should be estranged for a time, is neither the most ancient or true way; it
should be paid upon receipt of the Wares: which so paid may by Industry be
increased; not paid, thence follows a sensible want of what might have been
gained; which the Buyer in Conscience ought to recompense, and the Seller may
take if his Customer be not poor, or a loser by the Wares thus bought. I have
heard and read words against this, but not arguments.

First, The price is to be lessened when a man has foolishly bought his Wares;
for it may happen, that he may sell them cheaper then he bought them, and yet
do unjustly: or if the worth of his Commodities falls after his buying them,
then the price is to be lessened.

Secondly, When one sells a great deal together, here the manner of selling
lessening the number of buyers, but augmenting his takings, abates the price;
and giving thus occasion of selling them again, they must be sold cheaper, lest
many thousands, as it may fall out, suffer in buying them at too dear a rate.

Thirdly, When Wares seek buyers (according to our Proverb) proffered Ware
grows cheap; yet this is no sufficient reason of lessening the price, unless
the thing thus sold be little profitable to the Buyer, or such as he would not
buy, or buying it rather respecting the Seller than himself.

Fourthly, When a Commodity proves faulty, or is any ways perished in the
substance or circumstance, the price is to be lessened. I might insist upon
this subject in a larger manner; but let this suffice: all Contracts must tend
to the good of those that make them; So shall injustice be avoided. That my
Citize^ may do so, I desire that he may never forget that God is All eye, and
so mus^ behold all his actions. There is a Figure in Rhetoric resolving many
question with one answer, which St. Basil uses thus: his Disciples sought
amongst the^ who was oftnest angry? who was slow^^ to divine service? whose
mind wandered most at prayers? He answered all a once thus; He that does not
always thin^ God to be the Spectatour of all his action. So if it be demanded,
who is a Flatter^^, Liar, Dissembler, and a Deceitful person I answer, He who
thinks not that God takes notice of his doings. He who remembers this, will
live justly; and that God which sees him do so, has a blessing for him. The
Righteous is delivered out of trouble, and the wicked comes in his stead,
Prove. 11.8. Surely in the flood of many waters they shall not come near him; he
will draw him out of many waters, as he did Moses; he will keep him safe in the
midst of many waters, as he did Jonas; so trouble shall not hurt him, he and
his seed after him shall prosper.

But unjust wicked deceitful ways are so common, as I must for a while say
nothing of blessings: Mercy go aside, Peace return to the God of Peace, and not
be spoken of. There is judgment with thee O Lord; with thee there is ruin and
subversion, battle and famine, snares and plagues, storms and tempests, fire
and brimstone; and therefore thou shall be feared. Psalm. 95.10
Above forty years long have thou been grieved with this generation, who have
erred in their hearts, and not known thy ways, that thou have been forced to
punish it; still art caused to complain of it, and that daily by thy Ministers,
that the noise is uttered from them with grievous sighs: but if any oppress
thee thus, it shall not be London, for whom thy mercy has done so much, that
they are quieter in their houses than their Enemies in their Castles; they have
many Conduits to convey comfort to their souls, which others wander many
leagues for. Thy mercies toward them are new and strange. If God be Under, as
our vileness is too ponderous for his patience, which is no fit place for his
Majesty; methinks he should not be Under you of London. I therefore speak from
the mouth of David; for my words will not be regarded. God turns a fruitful
Land to barrennes, Psalm. 107.
for the wickedness of them that dwell therein; and from St. Augustine, The
ruin of a City is not wrought by the Walls weakness, but the Citizens
wickedness. Livy observes, that Rome began to lose all, when sin abounded
amongst all. In Gellius, mention is made of Sejus, Sejanus his Horse, who
though handsome and brave to look on, yet whoever kept him was unfortunate:
Such is Injustice, fair to the eye, but the practices of it seldom prosper. The
Enemy is within the Walls; this Enemy is Injustice, but shall that be found in
Sion? If the same things be there that were in Sodom, How then? shall not God
do to one City as to another? Or shall there be any difference between one and
the other? but that it shall be easier in the day of judgment, for them of Sodom
than them of Sion? The more grace Sion, the more grace London has received;
the more fearfully for their sins shall her inhabitants be punished and
tormented. But lest I be censured for putting my Sickle into the Divines
Harvest, I turn this Discourse into Prayer, beseeching God to guide my Citizen
so in the way of Justice, that he may follow him that said, I am the truth: Let
him endeavor to be with him truth in words, not knowing how to be deceived;
truth in deeds, conforming his actions to the Divine will, teaching him thus
which is the truth, he follows him which is the way too, and that Way which
leads to life, to a good one here, and a better hereafter.

The path of the just is as a shining Light, Pro. 4.18.
that shines more and more unto the perfect day.

Of living delightfully to himself.
THales one of the seven Sages being asked wherein consisted man's truest
happiness, answered, In a sound Body, a full Purse, and a mind neither
sluggish or unplished. Yet how can my Citizen live delightfully, when
Philosophy professes sorrow to be natural to all conditions, but pleasure to be
a stranger? The parts capable of delight, can receive but one or two sorts at
once, but grief can affect all parts. Man has no continuance in pleasure, it
quickly vanishes. He tastes of felicity, but drinks deep of misery, according
to the Proverb: Evil comes by pounds, but goes away by ounces. The best State
of this life has been so undervalued, as wise men have said, Had man been
worthy to have known what life was before he received it, he would have been
loath to accept it. This made Seneca that wise Roman even to hug death, as his
Deliverer from pain and perplexity, saying, as he bled to death, With a
Penknife is the way opened to that great liberty. Happy is that death (says
the same,) that extinguishes the evils of this life. The Mexicans of India thus
salute their Children coming forth of the womb: Infant, thou art come into the
World to suffer; suffer, and hold thy peace. They observed the condition of all
men to be full of trouble; and I observe a Citizens condition to be
extraordinary full of trouble. As no man has pleasure and profit without the
price of some evil; so he pays a greater rate for them than most men do. God
makes men his Balls; but of these Balls, who is tossed more up and down than a
Citizen? He never rests, and thus his state seems miserable. Misery and life
are twins, which increase, are nourished, and live together. We are taught out
of holy Writ, that the days of man are few, and full of misery. But Custom
makes things natural. Every Milk-sop can swim in hot Baths; though he is most
man, can endure violent tides, and still swim aloft. To arm my Reader against
the feeling and falling under adversity, I shall instance a few examples, as
more impressive than Precepts. Judas Macchabeus amongst 22000 men being
councelled to fly; God forbid (replied he) that the Sun should see me fly; I
had rather die than stain my glory by an ignominious slight. Danger and
necessity could in no wise overtop the strength of his mind, founded on the
aid of an Almighty God.

The very Heathens have transmitted to us examples of continence, temperance
and patience, as reaches the highest degree of Morality; and but altering the
Persons worshipped, they must needs stir us up to tread their steps, who have
walked so contented in all conditions. Cato the Elder was wont to say, Nor
House, nor Plate, nor Raiment, nor Man or Maidservant, is precious or esteemed
by me. What I have, I use; if I want, it is all one with me, as if I enjoyed.
Is not Cato the younger to be admired^ who traveling the vast Deserts of Lybia
and laboring under extreme thirst, when a Soldier offered him Water, i^ his
motion, he threw it on the ground, saying, he would fare no better than the
rest of the Army. Darius King of Persi^ is recorded by Herodotus to have m^ all
crosses and misadventures with meenesses and patience. Anaxagoras the
Philosopher, when one brought him word that his Son was dead; I knew (said he)
that I had begot a mortal man. Lastly, Lycurgus the Lacedemonian Lawgiver,
having power to punish one who had caused to him the loss of an eye, contrary
to opinion, dismissed him, and pardoned the offense. By which foresaid Examples,
if my Reader be nothing moved, and study not to shape his mind to an equal
resenting of all accidents and unfortunate chances; he will deserve the title
either of a negligent, an ignorant, or an impotent person; like the Sluggard
Solomon describes, whose desire kills him; Pro. 21.25 19.15.26.16.
Who is cast into a deep sleep; Who is wiser than seven men in his own conceit;
Who turns upon his bed, and in his business, as a door on the hinges: and
finally, 2.14. Eccl. 9.16. Prove. 24.7^
is void of that Wisdom, which is better than strength, or riches; and is too
high for a fool.

We have entered the City, where we must live by the Laws, and desire freedom
from all trouble; yet that my Citizen may be helped with his own endeavors to
allay the furiousness of misfortune, I present to his Consideration these
following Rules.

First, He ought to look into his Trade circumspectly and exactly, as a true
understanding thereof requires, lest he incur Solomon's censure; Pro. 19.2
as having a Soul without knowledge: and as the Fool, who has no heart to what
he has a price in his hand for; 17.16.
so lest he slight, and take no delight in his business.

Secondly, It is expedient for him to have sufficient skill in Arithmetic, and
a right way of keeping his Shop-Books; by which, great trading and retailing
may be drawn into a little compass; bringing about with delight, what nature
produces not without much pain and vexation.

Thirdly, Let him not the himself too strictly to any thing beyond Nature:
proceedings are pleasant, and run smooth with the stream; but if cut cross the
grain, are rough and ill shapen; beside the disturbance they cause in the
Attempters. It Is Socrates saying, The it is worth the time to observe, what goo^
offices Wisdom does to those whose desires she squareth. Pro. 8.12.
I Wisdom (says Solomon) dwell with Prudence, and find o^t knowledge of witty
Inventions. If he would study the liberal Arts, let him do (...) superficially,
so as not to be swallowed up of them. Take Solomon's counsel, Through desire a
man separateth himself, Pro. 18.18
seeks and intermedleth with all wisdom. But to qualify the too
intentiveness of any, see how he moderates his former encouragement, by saying,
Eccl. 1.18.
In much wisdom is much grief; and he that increases knowledge increases
sorrow.

Of all Republics, that built by Lycurgus the Lacedemonian, was the best,
which often overcame Athens; yet never boasted of Learning. It Is remarqueable
that Rome, for the first five hundred years flourished through Virtue, not
Learning; Whereas now it decays; its Religion and immoderate Learning quite
razing out Virtue. Has not this Age produced those who comprehended Aristotle
and Cicero in their heads, yet have been very irregular in their performances?
Policy when natural, works free and quietly, and is without noise; whilst the
contrary sends out little save clamor and confusion. I speak not against
Learning; for a Citizen may use her, if she be not imperious: but Discretion (I
dare affirm) is above Learning, and sufficiently inables a man to improve
himself in all his affairs; whatever he or has, is put forth to the best adva^
tage. Learning lies in contemplation Prudence in business and action.
'T^neither Wit, Learning, Arts liberal, (...) Mechanique, but that which shows
ho^ to govern them all conveniently, an^ every other thing with them; like
Iphcrates the Athenian, who was neith^^ Legionary, Soldier, Archer or Targ^
teer, but one who could govern an^ Command all these.

Again, let him not have too gre^ care of the future. Future things i^ time
become present; therefore theca^ of present suffices. Commit thy wor^ unto the
Lord, and thy thoughts shall established, Prove. 16.3. It was said first, In the
sweat of thy brows thou she eat thy bread. He did not say (sa^ St. Augustine)
in solitude and care; ought to be heedful, but we must (...) ware, lest we be
tainted with Covetousi^ A good Bishop could have preached against this vice an
hour together, in ^^ing nothing, but Beware of covetousnes^ a wonder to see
what anxious thoug^ men have for the World, which is bi^^ and yet it is loved:
but how would it (...) loved, if it became wholly sweet? What extreme care do
some men take to heap up wealth! Caligula Emperor of Rome was so Covetous, as
besides the hundred ways he had to bring in the blood of his Subjects, he laid
an Impost on Urine; nay, sold his Sisters Gowns, and other Attires, after he
had banished them. Calipha King of Persia, for his Avarice, and excessive
oppressions to fill his Coffers, being forsaken of his Subjects when he stood
in need of their aid against his Enemies, was forced to retire himself into a
strong Castle, where his heart was chested, and wherein lay all his felicity;
there (like Minos King of Creet) starving, because what ere he touched was
Gold, which ministered little comfort to his pining and languishing body. Her
mocrates a Grecian Philosopher, dying, bequeathed all his Estate to himself,
his mind being fixed immovably on the trash he had scraped together. Cardinal
Angelot was so wrapped up in covetousness, as by a trap-dore to get into his
Stable, and to steal the Corn his Groom had given his Horses. O the blindness
of man's judgment, and what poison incloses and shoots forth of this Root of all
evil! Epimenides the Philosopher wished, The a Prodigal might inherit the means
of very Covetous person. The forementioned Lycurgus banished the use of Go^ and
Silver from Lacedemon, Iron-mon^ being only current and allowed of, the^ by
taking away the cause of coveto^ ness. I Am sure this restlesness in the pu^
suit, and plotting how to get wealt^ is not successful; for Divine Providen^
will not be bound by our provisions those have been stillest and most
prosp^rous, who readily apprehended the p^^ sent opportunity with cheerfulness.
(...) man may be careful for to morrow wi^^ content. Prove. 23.4
Labor not to be rich (says Sol^mon) cease from thy own understandin^^ Riches
are not for ever. 27.24.
However, (...) ligence is not pleaded for, in this (...) monition against
riches, but the wr^^ use of them; it is a defect: and he (...) labors, 16.26.
labors for himself, (...) mouth craveth it of him. To dwell^ long in
deliberation is excess; for^ Slothful is brother to the Waster. 18.9.


As the Emperor would add City City, Country to Country, and Nat^ to Nation;
so men strive to join (...) dreds to hundreds, and thousands thousands,
thinking to rest when they have but compassed their ends. Oh Fools! they may do
so before if they will; every man is rich, if his mind hinder not. There is
(says the Wiseman) a man to whom God has given riches, Eccl. 24.4
wealth and honor, so that he wants nothing for his soul of all he desires;
yet God gives him not power to eat thereof, but a stranger eats it; this is
vanity of an evil disease. Prove. 23.5.
Will thou set thine eyes upon that which has wings, upon that which profits
not in the day of wrath? 11.4.
Finally, it is every ones duty to pray not to enter into this temptation; For
he that trusts to his riches shall fall; 11.28.
but the Righteous shall stourish as a branch.

I will bring up the rear with an example or two, of the further contempt of
unbounded wealth, at least its niggardly enjoyment. Fabritius the Roman being
sent Ambassador to King Pyrrhus, his renowned actions had so gained the Kings
affections by mere fame, as he offered him half his Dominions to serve him. But
Fabritius gallantly refused his proffer, as being dishonorable for a Roman,
and not suiting with his nature, who lived (though a Heathen) as if he was to
die each morrow. Solon (one of the seven wisemen) desired riches, but by just
ways, and to the injury of none. Socrates being sent for by Archelaus King of
Cappadocia to come and live in pomp and splendor, returned him this answer,
that a measure of flo^^ was sold in Athens for two pence, and water cost him
nothing. Lastly, There is nothing better for a man, Eccl. 2.22.
than that he should eat and drink, and that he should make his soul enjoy good
in his labor; and so the Lord give thee neither poverty or riches. Prove. 30.8


Fifthly, All things which we sufie^ are by our opinion made greater: the are
more things fright than hurt us some trouble us more than they should some
before they should, and for which should not at all. It is strange (...)
consider most of our disturbances to rise from such small causes, and that a
cidents should touch us more than t^ principal. Caesar's robe more moved Ro^^
than his 22 stabs; and lesser circumstan^^ stir us more many times than the
subject themselves. In what has been spoke, we are as miserable as we think o^
selves. Pro. 29.25
The fear of a man brings a sna^^ It becomes a wise man to be heedful, not
fearful; for base fear brings double danger, says Vigetius. Dionysius the
Tyrant was so fearful, that rather than trust the Barbers Razor, he sindged his
Beard with Coals. Valienus a Roman, cut off the Fingers of his left hand,
rather than to follow the Wars in Italy. The Emperor Claudius was so
faint-hearted, base-minded and blockish, as caused his own Mother to say often,
Nature had begun, but not finished him; wherein we may behold the ugliness of a
passion so low. Quite contrary, how quietly might we live, if when being
disturbed we help reason to the upper hand, and weigh well what we put in act?
Let Marcus Aurclius persuade you to throw off fear, who had neither Guard nor
Porter. Dangers sometimes are like Crocodiles, who if pursued, fly; but if
fled from are emboldned to follow. If any kind of Fear is suffered to abide
with you, let it be that which Solomon says, Pro 10.27.14.27.15. (...).
Prolongeth days; is the fountain of life, is the inseruction of wisdom, *
keeps the Commandments, and is the riches and honor of Life: all which
virtues are comprehended solely in him, who can and (...) pense his graces to
those who humbly beg them of him, and is our only Omnipotent Lord and Creator.

Sixthly, It Is ordinary for a Citizen to trust, and he commonly loses much by
it. I think there is no Citizen, nor ever was, can or could boast of his
gettings by all he dealt withal. Democritus the Philosopher promised to revive
Artaxerxes his dead friend, upon conditition, that the Inscription of his Tomb
might be the name of thirty men, who had lived to the twentieth year of their
age without grief. They sought thirty, but found none. I might promise the like
impossibility, upon Condition that I might see the names of thirty Citizens,
which have traded twenty, nay ten years, whose Books are without some Debts
they never hope to be discharged. But what of that! Why do thou wonder that
good men are smitten to be confirmed? Pro. 10.29 24.10.
when the way of the Lord is strength. If thou faint in the days of adversity,
thy strength is but small, says Solomon. Our Savior showed his glory in Mount
Tabor but to three, and those his Apostles: But why was there no Centurion, no
Publican, or not all the stles? There was a world of people saw him on the
Cross; and good reason for it, (says one) Prosperity scarce profits any. The
Cross and affliction does many good; and therefore Bonaventure said, he had
rather go with Christ to Golgotha than to Tabor. Shall a man be weary of his
life, because it is accompanied with trouble and losses? no, our Savior (our
Head) was crowned with Thorns. Oh! how ill do delicate Members agree with a
Thorny head! When Marcus Aurelius and others his Soldiers and Citizens of
Rome, wore Garlands, to testify publicly their joy; one of them a Christian
wore his Crown on his arm, not head, (saying) That it did not become a
Christian to be crowned in this life. Patiently should that be born, which no
strength can overcome, nor counsel avoid, whether body and mind be afflicted by
it. A man cannot be always on the gaining hand; however, it declares a great
deal of weakness and folly to vex, and fret, and debar himself or rest, when
his very tears cannot recall or recover the loss. We may amend our defects in
dealing; but to make them not to be any more, requires more than Mortality can
produce. Actions past may admit a correction, not a nullity. Why then should
loss separate a man from his heart? He that has himself (says a Wiseman) has
all things. Observe a ltttle more what sense the Ancients had of crosses and
Adversity. Socrates counseled to revenge a wrong, answered, What if a Mastiff
had bit me, or an Ass had kicked me, would you have me to go to law with them?
Mauritius Emperor of the West, beholding his Children put to death before his
eyes, when he saw his Wife also suffer, only cried out, Oh Lord, thou art
just, and thy judgments are right. Eusebius being wounded to death with a Stone
thrown at him by an Arrian woman, was so far from storming and revenge, as he
swore all his Friends not to punish her after his death. Harpalus being invited
by Astyages King of Media to supper, where two of his Children were cooked for
him instead of Venison, without the least Marks of astonishment he beheld a
spectacle, able to have drawn water and resentment from a heart less Rocky and
Prudent.

I must acknowledge my Citizens patience and fortitude of mind to be screwed
up to the height, when he is driven to the necessity of breaking, after he has
striven it may be to fetch fire out of wood, and to resist the Decree of Divine
Providence: yet it is doubtful, whether he has not neglected some means, been
an ill husband, and spent too much time and money in vain. Let him take my
advice before my comfort; I would have him, though he leave himself not worth a
groat, to pay every one his own: or if he compounds to pay a part, nevertheless
let him resolve to satisfy all to the full, if his endeavors and Gods
blessing ever again enables him. This is his comfort, by suffering he shall
conquer. The Romans overcame sitting still: his soul, because his intentions
are sincere, will be void of it anxiety and repining; and by how much he is
more quiet, by so much the stronger. Great aspersions lie on his name, his
spirits are dampt, and almost stifled with grief. Let him apply Socrates and
Mauritius their Medicine. A Poor, yet the wisest of Grecians, was slandered,
and an unfortunate Emperor found comfort in the horrid Agonies of Cruelty. His
blessings were of the Lord, how then can he want, that by patience holds fast
him that gave him all? who has taken from him with Job to season him, and make
him afterward more thankfully to abound in plenty. What Cain said of his sins,
They are greater than can be forgiven, no Christian may say of his losses,
Greater then can be restored. It Is impious to imagine Jobs God not to retain
his Omnipotency and Mercy for those who seek him with a pure and incorrupt
heart. Consider only Jobs beginning and ending: Perhaps he never saw Fortunes
double face before: Providence permits him to be tried by Adversity for his
experience and improvement of wisdom. Tribulation refines the understanding:
We grow wise by blows. Hannibal deservedly boasted of himself: Age, Prosperity
and Adversity have so instructed me, that I had rather follow Reason than
Fortune. He had never attained this pitch of discernment, had not his declining
Fortunes obliged him to surmount all difficulties by his conduct. My experience
amounting not to above seven years, has furnished me with examples in this
City, of some who have sunk for all a good Stock and Trade, into nothing
comparatively; and of others whose small beginnings have risen to vast and
incredible Estates. Whose advancement and their likely causes, is fit for thee
to inquire into. Socrates thanked God for being born a man, not a woman; a
Grecian, not a Barbarian^ and for not being unlearned, esteeming the Gifts of
Nature and Fortune to be contemptible, if not beautified with the Ornaments of
the Mind. He was a wise King that would be pictured swimming, with this Motto:
I strive, I am not drowned. And Chabot the Famous Admiral of France would be
symboliz'd by a Ball, with this Inscription: Being smitten, Irise higher. But
above all Examples take this: Our Savior calling to Saul, said, Arise, and
stand upon thy feet. As if he had said (writes one) I have cast thee down, to
the intent that thou may rise stronger. And it was the voice of that great
Apostle; When I am weakened, I then grow mighty. This I speak to comfort his
soul, and to help him forward in bettering his Religion even as his Estate. Men
in Prosperity are seldom Religious. He therefore and only he gets, by his
breaking, who is more humble, pitiful, mortified, given to prayer, and the like
duties: doing thus, if Poor without, he is Rich within; He has that within
him, whereof he may rejoice. Our Wealth and Gold is Christ; come to him, and
you shall abound with true riches. He now flings off his former careless way,
and finds God before angry, now to be kind: Nothing save his trespasses, could
keep off Gods blessings; now nothing but a continued serious repentance blots
out sinning; which repentance, I advise may not fall short, but reach out far
as the blessings expected; for that falls not on the entrance but exit of a
spiritual grace; he only that endures to the end shall receive the Crown.
Nothing can lay claim to the eternal benedictions of God, but perseverance,
which is man's Eternity. If thou would then extract spiritual from the loss of
temporal blessings; if thou would by Jacobs Ladder climb from all that is
Terrestrial and Earthy, which is its foot, to all that is Celestial and
Heavenly, which is its top; Remember upon that Ladder Angels were ascending and
descending, but none standing still: therefore persist, and leave not. Solomon
tells thee, Prove. 10.8
The Lord will not suffer the Righteous to famish; but he casts away the
substance of the wicked. The Righteous shall never be removed. 10.30.13.6.
Righteousness keeps him that is upright in the way; and is better than great
Revenues.

Seventhly, To conclude; if he would live in true delight, let him become a Son
of the Church, and increase daily in piety toward his Creator: it becomes him
not to have his Bible in his House more for ornament than use. Let him study
Divinity, yet so, As the Priests lips may be said to preserve knowledge. It Is
the fault of these times, to make that their own and others destruction, which
should be their solace, by mistaking Schism for true Religion. They would not
run from Religion to Superstition, yet how they hurry to profaneness.
Superstition and Schism are both bad; the one erects an absolute Tyranny over
men's minds, the other gives way to all looseness. He was a wise Statist, that
said, Papists call the true way Wereste, the Start-ups Formality.
He had rather have a man an Atheist than either, because he seldom disturbs
States, and is always very wary. But to our purpose: let his Religion teach
him to have his soul still panting after Heaven, stealing up thither in the
midst of business, as if he was ever conversing in a place, whence he looks for
his Savior. It is better (says Solomon) to go to the house of mourning, Eccl.
7.2.
than to the house of feasting. The fear of the Lord is strong confidence, Pro.
14.26
and his Children shall have a place of refuge. Eccl. 12.13
To fear God and keep his Commandments is the whole duty of Man. King Alfred is
recorded to have divided the day and night into three parts; eight hours he
allotted to eat and sleep in, eight to business and recreation, and eight he
dedicated to study, meditation and prayer. How happy should we all be, if we
could form our life by such a Pattern! Certainly the repentance of most
Tradesmen comes too late: For it is rare to see a Shopkeeper to break any hours
of rest, to serve his God, or so much as to prize an hour in his Worship,
before the dispatch of the most frivolous matters. Let the example of our
Glorious King and Martyr CHARLES the First, quicken the deadness of my Citizens
zeal. For our Pious Prince could seldom be turned from his constancy in
prayers and meditations, whereof his incomparable Books give sufficient
Testimony. What a shame then is it in the highest degree, for a Citizen whose
concerns are petty, trivial, and of no moment, in comparison of a Princes, to
be outstript by one, who lived in the midst of Tumults, Disorders,
Conspiracies, and Disturbances? Man is made in the Earth, and of the Earth, but
not for it, and to it; but to Heaven (says one) and for Heaven. He, whom no
business should put out of our minds, is in Heaven: He is risen, he is not
here. Look for him in the Church, you shall have him there; look for him by
invocation, and a Conscionable diligence in thy Calling, and the Holy Ghost
will show him there; and when thou have thus found him, he will take thee up to
Heaven to reign there with him. St. Chrysostom and St. Jerome wonder at the
Eunuch in the 8 of the Acts; He was a Barbarian distracted with many
businesses; he read, and though he understood not, yet he read, and that in the
way in the Chariot. If he was thus devoted in his journey, how would he have
been in quiet at home? If he a Heathen did thus much in the way, shall not we
Christians do more in our Shops? To mind the affair of our Soul, is the way to
prevent distraction, and not to further it: as Physicians say of sorrow for
sin: It hurts not the heart, as worldly sorrow does; So I may say, it is
worldly care, not this, that troubles our peace. I shall end with Solomon; Pro.
10.10
That the labor of the Righteous man tends to life, the fruit of the Wicked
to sin.

Of pleasing Others.
IT is written of Alcibiades the Athenian, that in what Country or Company
soever he happened to be, he could frame himself admirably to their different
Customs and Humors. Wherefore Behavior is much to be sought after, and to be
prized by my Citizen. It must needs be distastful to any man coming into a
Shop, to see a man stand as if he was drowned in phlegm and puddle; having no
other sign of motion, or being awake, than that his eyes are open. The outward
Carriage should promise what is within the man; except Liberality, Courtesy is
more regarded of men than any other virtue. Courtesy is a true token of
Nobility, and the certain mark of a Gentleman (says a Wise man.) Courtesy
(says another) draws the love of strangers, and good liking of our
Countrymen. It pays a great deal, yet is never the poorer; it satisfies every
man, yet lessens not the Stock: it is a good Character of a good nature; and it
has been observed, that few surly and churlish, have risen to great Fortunes.
These small ceremonies win larger commendations, because they are in continual
use and note; whereas the occasion for showing a great virtue, presents it self
but seldom. To be clownish to others, instigates them to return quid for quo,
and destroys that respect which amongst Civil, and persons of any breeding, is
a quality of worth. It is a kind of Majesty to be Courteous without Pride or
affectation. Yet to make no difference in the use of it toward a Lord, or
Ploughman, kissing their hands, and bowing as low to a Chambermaid as her Lady,
is uncomely. It was well said of one, The outward deportment covers and
uncovers the mind; which to some should be more open, to others more hid. Let
my Citizen then be Ceremonious, but without affectation, nor too often. He
cannot comprehend great matters, that breaks his mind too much on small
observations. But there is an inward thing, which, unless it be added to the
exterior, makes them all nothing. A Schoolmaster had in his place of Exercise
a Glass, wherein he caused his Scholars to behold themselves. If they were
Handsome, he would tell them what pity it was, such goodly bodies should be
possessed with defective minds: If they were deformed (he would tell them) they
should make their bodies more beautiful, with dressing their minds.

If the behavior and countenance be good, the ornament of the mind doubles
the excellency: If misshapen and ill, parts and ingenuity will polish Natures
roughness, and cause the greater admiration, performance and promise being at
such a distance.

His mind must be stuffed with sufficiency to produce pleasant Discourse,
wherein he must not lavishly hinder his observation, and become tedious to him
he deals with. A word fitly spoken, is like Apples of Gold in pictures of
Silver, Prove. 25.11. To speak all he can at once (as if he were making his
Will) is not the most plausible and pleasing way; the best to do it, is to know
how to be silent. Pro. 17.2^
Even a Fool when he holds his peace (says Solomon) is counted wise, and he
that shuts his lips is esteemed a man of understanding. When he speaks, let
it not be with vehemence. His words should flow from his mouth, so that it
might be said of them, They are not so much Words as Honey. Pleasant words
(says Solomon again) are as a Honeycomb, sweet to the Soul, Pro. 16.24
and health to the bones. I would have such words used in his Commerce; for
therein his Customer, will commonly take more delight to hear, than he to
speak. All he speaks must be true: however the Dress be, Truth is constantly
the same; it still retains the same splendor; and if it meets with a
masculine, and not a whining utterance, fitted to matter and circumstances, is
praiseworthy: besides, it gives more grace and luster to the Speech, than
possibly it can borrow from it. The tongue of the wise, uses knowledge aright;
Pro. 15.2.
but the mouth of Fools pours out foolishness. Because most men are taken
with smooth language, let words be discreetly chosen, and properly applied; for
as Speech makes a man more excellent than a Beast, so Eloquence intitles him to
a preference before other men: but to this must be added a grave natural
action, wherein a man may behold the Visage, Hands, and Members of another to
speak with his Mouth; and thus persuading the Customer to a liking of his
Commodity, he must put on the same Liking himself; for by acting himself, that
Passion he would stir up in others, he seldom misses of prevailing.
Nevertheless, in as much as he is to deal with Persons of diverse Dispositions,
he must accommodate his discourse, as near as he can, to the humor of the
Cheapner, as being his best Rhetoric. I must needs condemn the using of one
Phrase or kind of Speech to all men, the mistrusting of every ones Senses,
with a D^ you hear Sir, and the telling of all he wi^^ make but a word, which
are ordinary terms, but of no fineness or validity. (...) he would tell his
mind at once, I wis^ him to do it, as being the Old and Bes^ way. He that sold
Abraham the Field for burial, asked what he would, and had it. But the custom
of our times is contrary, and what is usual is presumed to be just: however, I
desire my Citizen to use the fewest words he can; and it is possible, Time will
reduce the manner of Bargaining to its first and best Rule.

I shall not tax the common Phrase of What lack ye? it being great Policy, for
a man in that form to entreat for his own necessities; but the too much use of
it sounds harsh. I would not have a man's throat worn like a highway; he should
step a little out of the ordinary Road; but taking heed of the other extreme,
he must not become a wilful maker of complements, and so a Tyrannous torment to
his Customer, who will count him Impertinent, to find him drowned in such
superfluous Ceremonies.

To his Superior his words must carry much humility, to his Equals
familiarity, set off notwithstanding with a mean state, as requiring their
notice, and not contempt. Do this now my Son (says Solomon) when thou art come
into the hand of thy Friend, humble thy self, Pro. 6.3.
and make sure of him.

To his Inferiors he must be familiar too, Pro. 29.23
lest Man's pride make him low; yet observe a distance, lest he lose his esteem.
Esops Frogs, after they had recovered their fright, insulted over what before
they feared. So dreggish and low Natures, cannot prize a thing acquaintance
makes them bold with: It Is undeniable, but a reserved familiarity, heightens
reputation; and when Opinion shall universally favor a man, Reverence never
fails attendance.

To conclude, my Citizen may deal pleasingly with all men: if he has
Ingenuity, nay but a grain, Time and Opportunity, it would advance his Credit
to attain knowledge in Languages. For Learning, as it is accounted no burden,
raises its Pretenders in the eyes of all men, above what is merely Wealthy:
besides, it must needs contribute much to obtaining acquaintance, and
purchasing of Friends, the very Fundamentals of Trade, increasing the
possessors fame, as being Countryman to all Europeans; at least to more than
one Kingdom contains, Pardon me if I reflect more severely on Booksellers than
any other Callings: They have all the Utensils of Learning about them, living
by Learning, though its worth runs more into their Pockets than Heads. Just
what value the Indians set upon Gold, the supreamest Metal, they do on Learning
and knowledge, which are precious Jewels. The Indians slight as trash (because
it is very easy to come by,) the richest part of Earth, exchanging it for any
trifles which have no more of art in them than would content Children in
Christendom, as Beads, Knives, and other such like knick-nacks. Booksellers
comparatively, live amidst whatever is conducible toward polishing the chief
parts of Man; and yet how few of them do (when Age should expose them more
conspicuous and bright, for their parts sucked out of Profit) excel other
Tradesmen? how few, I say are there, whose tongues are cloven; but exchanging
their time and Books sooner for Ignorance and Money, than employ some hours
(whereof God knows they have yearly a great many to spare) in improving their
understandings, whether in Languages, History or Divinity: which last two,
might be by them in a large measure acquired, and that in prosecuting the
attainable necessary and most useful Tongues. Without diligent reading and
observation, Syllables are not to be distinctly fixed in the memory, and so
cannot be either true spoken or written. Whereas the advantages resulting of
Reading, are Matter for discourse or imitation, exactness for expression, by
mouth, or pen: and above all, to kill two Birds with one Stone, when in
surmounting the difficulties of any Language (whether in the Grammatical part,
or a general comprehension of its fullness, that without a Dictionary an Author
may be perused, besides his skill in Phrase, words and rules) my Citizen may
collect piece by piece, enough to make a complete armor to defend himself
against the strokes of fear, fancy, ignorance and presumption. History as a
Headpiece will keep his fancy from danger, strengthen his judgment by example,
withold him from assenting to vulgar and irrational Stories, and arm him
against the various changes of Time, the infinite casualties, and daily actions
happening in the World, which distract and disturb the too prompt Nature of us
English. Wherefore a small inspection into History affords Passages and Persons
enough to compare with the like of his days. It is mere ignorance, and want of
consulting Books, makes the greatest part of mankind, to be so deservedly
rebuked by Solomon, with a Say not thou, What is the cause that the former days
were better than these? for thou do not enquire wisely concerning this,
Eccles. 7.10. Divinity (which may be picked out of such works, learned and
pious men, nay, the general part of mankind have a great kindness for, and
approve of, and which a Bookseller cannot miss, or fail of knowing;) This
Divinity (especially the Bible, which is the Buckler) assures him in the Faith
of his most zealous and godly Forefathers, makes him to cling to the unerring
Principles of the Catholic and Apostolic Church; nay, his constant and light
viewing of the most famous Pieces, whereof choice cannot be wanting to him,
instills by degrees into him arguments strong enough to repel those mighty
shifts, his enemies in Religion may set afoot to supplant him. Arising in this
manner in course of time to some perfection, he is capacitated for Magistracy;
or what ere his sufficiency shall cause to be laid on him. Wisdom thus built,
and on these foundations of thoroughly considering the World and its Opinions,
This is better than weapons of War; Eccl. 9.18.
This Wisdom is a defense, Eccl. 7.12.
and gives life to them that have it.

Of Self-Profit.
EVery man (says Socrates) is a worker of his own Fortune, fashioning it as he
pleases. Yet it cannot be denied, but outward accidents conduce much: as death
of others, occasion fitting virtues; but most commonly the folly and fall of
one man, is the Fortune of another: no man prospers so suddenly as by another
errors and unhappiness; therefore it was imprudently done by Daemades to
condemn an Athenian for selling necessaries belonging to burials; saying, his
great profit came not save by the death of many: for what man almost gets,
but by the loss of others? Was not Rome raised on the ruin of her
Neighbour-Cities? did Caesar assume to himself the dignity of Emperor, till he
had overthrown, or rather destroyed Pompey? Have not the Turks expelled and
rooted Christianity out of the chiefest places they have in possession? Have
not the Dutch attained almost an invincible strength, only by fraud, industry,
and overreaching all (if they could) that ever they traffick'd with? do not
abundance thrive, through the licentiousness of Youth? the Husbandman by dearth
of Corn? Garpenters, Bricklayers and Glasiers, by the decay and desire of
building Houses? the Lawyers by contentions? the Physicians by others
Distempers? Yet this is not contrary to the general Policy and order of Nature;
for the Learned hold, That the production and augmentation of one thing, is the
alteration and corruption of another. God takes from one, and gives to another:
but let no man desire it; for the Commandment is, Thou shall not covet: there
are then, and must be external causes of a man's Fortune. Ptolomy, of a Common
Soldier, was chosen King of Egypt; Telophanes Chariot-maker, King of Lydia;
Darius (Cyrus his Quiverbearer) King of Persia; Agathocles, of a Potters Son,
King of Sicily; and Tamberlan of a Shepherd became King of the Tartars. In
which we cannot but with admiration, contemplate the omnipotency of God
Almighty, who without respect of persons, Pulls down, and sets up, that
his most holy and great Name may be exalted (with confusion of face) through
the whole Earth.

But there is some hidden virtue, which must bear a great stroke. He that
observes the wind (says Solomon) shall not sow; Eccl. 11.4.
and he that regards the Clouds shall not reap: Whereupon comments another; A
Wiseman will make more opportunities than he finds.

Quest. Is the main thing then that promotes a man, and enlarges his Fortunes
within or without him?

Answ. First, Titus Livius tells us, Cato Senior was so well accomplished in
body and mind, that in what place soever he had been born, he could have
raised the structure of his own preferment. Rodolphus Emperor of Germany,
otherwise of base Parentage, for his Virtues sake was chosen to that Dignity.
The Scripture testifies of many who were advanced from low degree. These are
then open virtues which beget praise, but hidden ones which bring forth
preferment.

Secondly, For that which is without a man (instead of Providence, let me call
it Divine Providence) it can make him fortunate who is not wise; and if wise,
miserable. Alcibiades the Athenian was highly beloved of his Countrymen,
merely because Nature showed so much perfection in him, who nevertheless for
the greatest part of his life was of a Luxurious and debauched disposition. But
Socrates, the wisest of Heathens, (who has been so often, already, and
deservedly mentioned,) for all he had been so useful and beneficial to the
aforesaid Athenians, was through envy accused, and by those who had received so
much good at his hands, condemned to death. Examples clear enough to behold
therein the blindness of Chance. Sometimes simple Men bring to pass happily,
matters both Public and Private, whilst the best Councels have the worst
issues. There are (says Solomon) many devices in man's heart; Pro. 19.21.
but the Council of the Lord shall stand. The same Council succeeds,
prosperously to some, unhappily to others. Many things alike in the Case and to
the man, that yesterday happened luckily, to day, fall out cross and unfortunate;
so that man's sufficiency and ability is not always to be judged by Event. The
Lord gave Solomon Wisdom above all the Men of the Earth; Kings 3.
yet how did he swerve and go astray, before he died! wherein may be seen the
pravity of Man's Nature; and how vain it is to trust to Mortal Wisdom. How did
Hamans counsel to destroy the Jews, light with heavy vengeance on his own head!
One wondering why ill success should follow the mature deliberation of wise men,
was answered thus; Every man Proposes, but God Disposes. Timotheus in the
account he gave the Athenians of his warlike actions, often interlaced his
speech, with this saying, And in this Fortune had no part: but it was noted of
him, that he never prospered afterward. Divine Providence must have its due;
there is no rising without it. Romans 13.1
There is no Power but of God. Saul from amongst the lowest of the People was
anointed the first King of Israel; Samuel.
but sinning, he was rejected of God, and died presently after the Philistines
had put him and his Army to flight. Now joining all together, Diligence with
the blessing of the Lord, crowns the expectation of Man. Pro. 10.22
The blessing of the Lord (says Solomon) makes rich, and he adds no sorrow
with it. Whereby it is evident, that Industry not accompanied with Providence,
Pro. 16.27
is but Digging up of Evil. Wisdom's advice then is (if any dependence) to fix
and attribute it on, and to him, who of a Shepherd, 1 Samuel.
and the youngest Son of Jesse, raised David to a Throne; who thankfully
acknowledged it, and thereby has left a pattern of gratitude to be imitated by
all who have a true sense of their own inabilities and weakness.

It was the plot of Joseph's Religion, to preserve himself honest, that he
might remain Fortunate: Therefore the first profitable thing I advise my
Citizen to put in practice, is to be constantly and sincerely Religious; so he
may expect the fruitful influences of him he puts his trust in.

If a man should at every weeks end consider how he has spent it; how many
hours might he reckon up, to have been lavished and idly thrown away, besides
eating and drinking? How many needless Items would he find given to sleep?
Item, seven nights: Item, so many many afternoons, besides half hours and
quarters at accustomed times. Had those men, whose Wealth has made them
admired, kept eight-a-clock-hours, Fame had never had them on Record: as indeed
Slug-abeds, are seldom mentioned but with disparagement. The Soul of the
Sluggard (says Solomon) desires, Pro. 13.4.
and has nothing; but the Soul of the diligent man makes fat. Pro. 22.29
See thou a man diligent in his business (says the same) he shall stand
before Kings. Adam in the state of Innocence must dress the Garden; and after
it was denounced against him, In the sweat of thy Brows shall thou eat thy
Bread. So the indisputable Precept is Labor.

Labor not (says our Savior) for the meat which perishes; John 6.27
but for that which indureth everlastingly. Should we hear only of Labor, and
not of Everlasting life, we should be discouraged: so should we hear of Labor,
and not of Prosit, we could have little comfort in employment. But shall we
think Providence has nimble feet, if ours be slow? Shall we eat, and not work?
shall we think with the Lillies (which neither spin nor labor) our clothes
will grow upon us? No, let him that looks for profit, take the pains. Selymus
the first, Emperor of the Turks, thought Victories unfinished, if gotten in
the Masters absence. Just as in Military, so it is in Civil affairs; and that
man may blush for shame, who puts off his business to his servants, doing
nothing himself, save by thoughts and verbal directions.

Julian the Emperor was ashamed any man should see him spit or sweat; because
he thought continual labor should have concocted and dried up all such
superfluities.

Caesar of his own accord exempting an Ancient man of ninety years from
service, the man having been accustomed to exercise and labor, and was very
lusty at that time; supposing it a kind of disgrace to be deemed feeble, and
fearing sloth would shorten his days, he counterfetied himself sick; and
keeping his bed, his friends never left lamenting over their fained drooping
kinsman, till Caesar to satisfy their importunities, and to hearten the old
man, caused him again to be enrolled one of his Soldiers. Thus see how
Heathens detested Idleness; and shall we, whom Christianity obliges to be
diligent and watchful, sit still? Labor (says Cicero) is a burden that man
undergoeth with pleasure. As brightness (says Thales) is to rustiness, so
excrcise excels idleness. Eccl. 10.18
By much slothfulness the building decays; and through idleness of the hands,
the house droppeth through.

I allege not this against a man's employing others in his affairs, when their
burden is too heavy for him. But I would have a Master Do, as well as Direct;
for nothing does more diminish his respect, than to let his servant be sole
Master of his Trade, while himself is but Master to a Servant: and in the mean
while indulging an idle disposition, he renders himself less honorable than
his Man. He must Labor, but so forecast his business, as to avoid what is too
Solicitous, or Untimely.

For the First; Have makes a bad speed, and Force gives all things ill. The
Lions roar, yet they suffer hunger; while the Sheep have a Shepherd to provide
for them: a too sharp intention hinders the wise conduct of business. He that is
hasty stumbles, and is staid, Nolens, Volens. To hurry, is to be entangled;
whence it happens, have proves slow. An over-ardent way in dealing, is never
without many indiscreet actions and wrongs. Even in Play, he that games
passionately, spoils his judgment; and the more he troubles himself, he loses.
He that walks moderately is always with himself, and directs his Concerns
with the best advantage: Therefore (said a Wise Englishman,) Let Us stay a
while, that we may end the sooner. The deliberate is always ready for a new
change; his Fair and softly, goes quick and far. Consideration (says Solon) is
enemy to all untimely attempts. Consideration is the root of all noble things;
for by her, we do attain to the end of all our hopes. I would have my Citizen
diligent, but not passionate. They are woefully mistaken, who fancy business can
never be performed well, without clamor and noise. The Prudent man (says
Solomon) foreseeth the evil, and hides himself; Pro. 23.3.
but the simple pass on, and are punished.

For the second, or Vnseasonableness: there is a time to eat, a time to drink,
to sleep, and to sport, as well as labor. Labor may be reckoned at Meat,
which out of time hurts, not nourishes: What Is made to cheer man's heart, if
unduly taken in, perishes the body. It was the famous saying of Anacharsis the
Scythian Philosopher; Rule lust, Temper the tongue, and Bridle the belly.
Augustus Caesar's manner was to sit down, when those who dined with him had
half done, and to rise up the first. Next, we must not by Labor, commit
Sacrilege; we must not entrench on the Sabbath, and make our Souls Feasts
movables. Gods time is measured out by Inches, ours by Else: since he has so
little allotted him, let us not grudge, and abridge it. Be astonished and
reformed at the Judgments, which have fallen so heavy on those (in the memory of
man) who slighted the Seventh day, and made no conscience to act according to
their wicked and diabolical opinions. How many have been drowned, ventring to
swim, when they should be at Church! wherein the secular Officers of the Church
have been always to blame, for minding no more to scour those places, which all
Summer long are so notorious for the multitudes of Youth, who gather there, and
meet their deaths untimely and deservedly, for trespassing and misimploying
their time, contrary to the Word, and Laws of the Land, in the ignorance of
their Fathers, Friends and Masters; nay, which is worse, thereby bring upon the
Church scandal of carelessness and remisness in Discipline; who can no more
remedy these omissions of Parish-Officers, than hinder that some Houses be not
broken up, sometimes by the negligence of Constables. How many have had their
Legs broken; nay, have sunk irrecoverably through Ice, in playing at Football
on the Sacred day. How many for traveling, working, and acting unlawful and
unholy things, have past the edge of Gods remarquable sword of vengeance!
Wherefore my Citizen, if he intends to escape the Title, (which has damnation
at the end of it, if it provokes not the immediate and exemplary justice of the
Almighty, and the assured, though slow punishment of a Sabbath-breaker,) he
must bend his carnal and sinful inclinations, and make them obey the voice of
the Lord his God, In keeping holy the sacred day of rest. To fix the more
reverence of a Deity in him, behold here some memorable and most dreadful
Examples on such whom the Ancients abhorred for their irreligion; for none will
tread in such paths, who have any fear of a God before their eyes; as Socrates
(though a Heathen) after an unintermitted twenty four hours study, concluded
there was and is an Only Almighty one. Undoubtedly Satan without his permission
could not have declared himself (by the means of Oracles) so wonderfully to the
superstitious Heathens; and a Divine right, though Hellish, has showed it self
marvellously and direfully, to the incroachers thereon.

Xerxes that potent King of Persia, sent four thousand men to destroy Apollo's
Temple at Delphos, who were entirely blotted out with rain, lightning and
thunder. Brennus Captain of a Host of supernumerous and barbarous Gauls,
intended to despoil the same Temple: But his Army being dispersed, more through
a hidden terror that possessed them, than any visible force, he with a dagger
ended his own life. There is greater reason to look for Judgments to light on
our contempt and obstinacy in robbing God of the glory we should pay him in his
Church (being created for the same purpose, and it being the least we ought or
can do,) than the Ancients had, for committing sacrilege in robbing their
Temples of their riches, and destroying them. Besides (if we depend any thing
on Providence) how dare we to wait for Gods blessing on our day, if we neglect
to serve him on his'n? Nay, if we would prosper on weekdays, let us pray on
them. He, and none but he, who consecrates the Prime of the morning, may
steadfastly hope increase and fruits of his industry. The Jews being returned
from Captivity, were wont to spend one fourth of the day in reading the Law,
Neh. 9.
and another fourth part in confessing their sins and in prayer; And shall not
we, whose mercies are infinitely beyond theirs, show our selves thankful, for
having been freed from the slavery of Romish Ignorance and Superstition, from
the ravenous jaws of a Needy, Mercenary, Factious, Rebellious, and Bloody
rabble of Incendiaries, who, had not he been gracious in the Restoration of
King and Church, would by this time have rooted us up, and reduced us to a
condition pitiful, impotent, and fit to be made tributary to the next Invader;
from the Raging and dismal gripes of a Pestilence, an utter desolation by Fire;
and lastly, from a ruin (had we our deserts) which our Sea-Enemies had
inevitably brought on us, had not the Almighty's Mercy stood between us and his
Justice? shall not we, I say, for all these benesits received at his hands,
spare one hour (and that scanty of employment) in which we should express a
sense of his Goodness, and our unprofitableness? We might with some reason
plead for a respite, if with continual prayer, our knees, like those of Jacobus
Minor, the Son of Joseph, our Saviors brother, were become (with kneeling)
hard as a Camels hoof. But our wontedness in it is so slender, as most seem to
be readier (and would sooner embrace it) to wear out their stockings in
drinking of Healths, than in Devotion. The Public (and in many places daily)
Prayers of our Church should toward men upright and really Pious, have
allurement enough (besides their obligation) to inflame any ones coldness and
to stir up the most drowzy and worldly to seek assistance from a Power of such
immensity and grace.

O times, O manners! What a Change is here? In King Edward's time, when our
Land was newly cleared from that fog of Egypt, Romish Blindness; with what joy,
readiness, and thanksgiving did the people come to hear the Liturgy in their
own tongue? But nothing is so great and admirable in the beginning, whose worth
and wonder is not lessened by little and little. Now men come to it (nay on
Sundays) as if Preaching were against Prayers, and by their consent, we should
have more Pillars than Proselytes. It is well, that it it is said, Mat. 18.20
Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst
of them. Had the Promise been tied to a greater number, those few which meet in
some Places might doubt of success. No question but our Times might flourish
equally with former, if our Temples were filled with Praying unanimously with
one mind and soul, as they have been. O the transcendent sweetness of Litanies
(which are used in allusion to the 2 and 17 of Joel, Let the Priests and the
Ministers of the Lord weep before the Porch and the Altar, and let them say,
Spare thy People) where many hands and hearts are lifted up; hands in purity,
hearts in Piety; hands in good Works, hearts in good thoughts. Who is able to
conceive the unspeakable value of Public Services? of these Sacred and
Heavenly Evaporations? they are more than the breath of Spices; they are none
other than Emissions of Paradise? When the Organs (used in his Majesty's
Chapel, and in most Colleges and Cathedrals of his Dominions) are blown; When
the Voices are heard, and the whole Quire of Religious men do sill the Air with
loud cries and vocal Symphonies of devout and pathetical invocations; Then do
the Spices flow, the Odours are burnt, and the smoke of our Incense goes up
before the Lord, from the Angels hand. To labor when our Prayers might ascend,
and have the easier admittance, such a time is preposterous.

Thus my Citizen considering what is past, and squaring his Actions by the
foregoing Rules, will find profit on it, and undisturbedly fill his bags. The
way of the Lord (says Solomon) is strength Pro. 10.20
to the Upright; but destruction shall be to the workers of iniquity. After
these instances, can you imagine, that scantling of time Morning-Prayer takes
up, to lessen your gain, and thwart your endeavors? when to lie abed till nine
or ten a clock, or to spend four or five hours in a Mornings draught, is
pocketed up contentedly, and counted no retardment to your business? If my
Citizen be guilty of this Sloth, and Companionship, he errs extremely, and
utterly, nay, openly disowns any necessity of returning thanks to him he is
indebted to for all he is worth. He is far from consenting with David, when he
sings, Psalm. 5.3.
My voice shall thou hear in the morning, O Lord, in the morning will I direct
my prayer unto thee, and look up. He is very ungrateful, for his health,
preservation and prosperity, and manifests too presumptuously to carry in his
hand an exemption from all manner of Misery. As Servius Tullius the Roman
boasted, that the Goddess Fortune lay with him every night; and therefore was
in subjection to him. Our Citizen (if as aforesaid inclined) does intimate by
his Actions, Providence to have no more power over him, than Fortune had over
Tullius; but if he is more inwardly touched, he will concur with David, by
performing what the Royal Prophet testifies of himself; But I will sing of thy
power; Psalm. 58.16
I will sing of thy mercy in the morning: for thou have been my defense and
refuge in the day of my trouble. He may by such an unfeigned, submissive, and
constant exercise, assume the confidence and assured hope of the Man after Gods
own heart, when he said, P^sal. 30.6.
And in my prosperity I shall never be moved. To keep to my Method, and to
quicken your zeal, observe what Antiquity relates of our Forefathers Devotion.
St. Chrysostom gives the Character of most Christian and Godly Prince to
Arcadius Emperor of the East, who was for his Piety and Sobriety highly
beloved of his Subjects. God (says a certain Historian) made Narsetes (General
under the Emperor Justinian) victorious by Sea and Land, more for his zealous
prayers, than Force and Valor; Who never began Fight, went to Council, or
mounted on Horsback, before he went to the Temple and served God. Tyberius
Emperor of Rome, the second of that name, and a most holy, virtuous, just, and
merciful Prince, being driven to a blessed necessity; as he walked in the midst
of his Palace, he saw at his feet a Marble-stone, which was in the form of a
Cross; and because he thought it not Religious to spurn it with his feet, he
caused it to be taken up; under which was found another, and so a third of the
same shape: which last, when removed, had hid under it two Millions of Ducats;
for which he praised the bounty of his God. This last has efficacy and
encouragement in abundance to enliven the lumpishness of any, who has not
abjured Christianity.

It Is related of the birds of Norway, that they fly faster than the fowls of
any other Country: By an instinct of Nature they know the days in that Climate
to be very short, as not above three hours long; and therefore they wing it the
speedier. My Citizen must learn of these Birds the shortness of his life, and
to be the more industrious. He must apply all diligence and assiduity in the
pursuit of Wealth; Pro. 9.10.
Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with all thy might; for there is no
work, nor device, nor wisdom, nor knowledge in the Grave, whither thou go.
Pro. 12.24
The hand of the Diligent (says the same) shall bear rule; but the slothful
shall be under tribute. The Monyed man is the Mighty man. Honor, Liberty, and
Royalty attend on Riches; Logic fails, and Rhetoric faints, when Gold
pleads the Cause. Orpheus his Harp, Amphion's Music, Virgil's Muse, and
Tully's Tongue, are silent; yea, Thundering Demosthenes will complain of the
Squinzy, if Money forbid him to play the Orator. They only despise Riches,
which despair of them: Like the Fox in the Fable, cursing the grapes he could
not reach. Nevertheless Riches are not the chiefest good; and therefore wicked
men enjoy them. But as they are not Evil in themselves, it may become a good
man to labor for them. The Poor and Rich meet together (says Solomon) and the
Lord is the maker of them both. Pro. 22.2.
The Holy Ghost has placed poor Lazarus in the bosom of Rich Abraham, to show
that Rich and Poor, if they be indeniz'd the Kingdom of Grace, have an equal
interest in that of Glory.

Secondly, If outward blessings might be monopoliz'd to the wicked, the godly
being encompassed with flesh and blood, would think basely of Religion, of the
Worship and Service of God; Therefore endeavor to obtain them.

Thirdly, Riches are expedient, for illustrating the virtues of Charity,
Almsgiving, and the like: they are a good by which thou may do good.

Fourthly, Men are not so apt to take exact notice of those spiritual blessings
wherewith the Elect are inwardly adorned (so God loses some of his glory)
unless Temporal blessings be added to them; therefore labor for them.

Lastly, Let the consideration of that great Senator, the Lord Mayor's Dignity,
with his Brethren, the Right Worshipful Court of Aldermen, show what in time a
man may come to, if he tends his Affairs with that foresight, Prudence,
Diligence, and incessant care, which are able to rank him among the truly Rich;
and at length, to advance him to the highest degree of that honor a Citizen
ought to enable himself for, both in Mind and Purse.

Senators ought to be Rich, for these REASONS.
FIrst, It is a Pledge of their care of the Commonwealth: it is likely he that
has done well for himself, is the better instructed how to advance the Public
good, if put to it.

Secondly, Wealth being gotten, they may the more intentively regard Public
Affairs, having enough to maintain Servants for performance of Domestic.

Thirdly, in Ruling there must be Power and Command: for if a Governor be
needy, it is to be feared, lest sad experience proves the old Proverb to be too
true; That a poor Magistrate is a great plague; and that weakness and
impuissance begets contempt to the hindrance of justice. The Rich rules over
the Poor (says Solomon.) Pro. 27.2.
Wherefore let the Honor any man may be called to move him to get Riches. It
belonget^ to a Governor (says a great Politician) to be learned (my Citizen
may understand it in the words Well Read) the better to know himself, and what
he undertakes.

Robert Fabian was Sheriff in the 9 of Henry the 7. and was Knighted by him,
for his Merits; but is famous especially for a Chronicle he made to the Honor
of the City. Wise to design how to perform, and Discreet to watch and lay hold
on opportunity.

Sir John Allen Mereer, and Mayor of London, in the 27 of King Henry the 8. was
sworn of the Privy Council to him; being indeed a man Eminent for his Wisdom
and Charity, Resolute in the action of Justice, without fear or corruption; but
above all, to excel others as much in Virtue as Power.

Matthew Philips Goldsmith, was Mayor in the 3 year of Edward the 4. and was by
the said King, for his faithful Service, and Administration of Justice, made
Knight of the Bath. When the Righteous are in Authority the people rejoice;
Pro. 29.2.
but when the Wicked bears rule, the people mourn.

Anno Dom. 1190. Henry Fitz-Allen Goldsmith, was made the first Lord Mayor of
London, and held it twenty four years together.

Anno Dom. 1380. In the reign of King Richard the Second, William Walworth Lord
Mayor, for his courage in cutting off the Head of Watt Tyler, who in a
tumultuous manner had rebelled against the King, and pitched his Camp in
Smithfield, with his Rout of Rascals, defying Allegiance, and braving
Sovereignty to the teeth; the said William for his Valor in beheading the said
Tyler, in the sight of his Rabble, was Knighted.

But excellent Policy has now so ordered it, that every year shall have a new
Mayor. Let the chiefest Magistrates (says a famous Machiavilian) be perpetual;
the lesser yearly, still removing. And the Turks own this Maxim, as useful in
many of their Governments.

Besides other Reasons, this is none of the least: It encourages every man to
take pains, when his Merits may be so Crowned. But Ambition must be avoided.
There is a twofold way to Honor; Direct, when God calls; Indirect, when Man
seeks it without his Warrant My Citizen must mind the way, and not merely the
end. Let him not run Honors, but expect them; not as one that hunts after, but
deserves them. The conditions of Honor are such (says a Wise man) that she
enquireth for him she never saw, runs after him that flies from her, honors
him that esteems her not, gives to him requires not, and trusts him she
knows not. He that follows after righteousness, finds life, Pro. 21.21
righteousness and honor.

The World at present differs much from Alexander the Great's humor, who
commanded both Grecians and Barbarians should no more be disguised by their
garments; but that all virtuous and men of fortitude should be counted
Grecians; and all vicious, and ill addicted, Barbarians. Quite contrary now, a
man bears not the mark of his desert about him. Virtuous men are not now so
honored, that they may be Triumphs imprint their actions deeply in men's
Memories; nor is there such an equalness in States, that all men's actions
should be seen with the same judgment: and indeed 'twere pity it should be so
now; for Pride would ruin all in a moment. Marcellus the Roman dedicated two
Temples; one to Virtue, the other to Honor; and contrived them in such manner,
that none could enter into that of Honor, save through that of Virtue. My
Citizen if he would be honored, must be virtuously Rich. It was worthily
answered by Maximilian the German Emperor, to one who desired his
Letters Patent to ennoble him: I am able (said he) to make thee rich, but
Virtue must make thee Noble. Having cleared my Point concerning the necessity
of striving to be Rich, I now proceed.

As I would have my Citizen labor, I mean it not incessantly: there is
difference between providing for himself and family, and doing nothing else.
The business of his Soul, and the refreshing of his Body, must be looked into;
besides the interest the Public has in his time.

The labors of less than the Worlds third part maintain the whole. How many
then live Idly? Almost all Women, which are half the number; or if Women be
employed in their stead, Me^ throw away their time. Put to, all that are
enclosed in the pale of Gentility and Estate; and lastly, add the great number
of Beggars, and you will compute few Laborers; and of those, few well
imimploy'd. If then less than the Worlds third part maintains the whole, less
than the third part of my Citizens time one day with another will suffice for
him; unless his Private concerns be extraordinary, and he be forced to attend
Public ones.

But before I treat of his industrious gettings, let me touch a little on his
spendings. First, I would have him think it more honorable to stoop to petty
savings, than to base gain. Lusty spenders, and dainty feeders, so they have
it, care not by what means. He must not close and practically adhere to
Caligula, that profuse Emperors opinion, who professed all kind of thrift to
be durtiness of Nature. It is better (says Bias, one of the seven Sages) to be
hated for having much, than to be pitied for spending all. Let him imitate
Francis, that frugal King of France, who thought it no discredit to tie a knot
in a broken point, and wear it again.

Secondly, He must not haunt Taverns too much; which is the Epidemical fault of
the City. I know it is not company, but the want of discretion in the choice
and use of it, that overthrows a man: besides needless expenses, how can that
man be fit for business, who makes his body a continual quagmire? Wine (says
Solomon) is a mocker, Pro. 20.1.
strong drink is raging; and whosoever is deceived thereby is not wise. In
another place: Who has woe? Pro. 23.29, 30.
who has sorrow? who has contentions? who has bablings? who has wounds? who
has redness of eyes? They that tarry long at wine. In another hear and obey.
Pro. 23.31, 32, 33.
Look not upon wine when it is red, when it gives its color; At last it
biteth like a Serpent, and stingeth like an Adder: Thine eyes shall behold
strange women, and thy heart shall utter perverse things. Now if thou
pretendest to reason, which distinguishes thee from a Beast, hearken to the
Ancients, how they reprove drunkenness and excess. Wine (says Aristotle)
distempereth the wit, weakneth the feet, and overpowreth the vital spirits.
Drunkenness (says Plato) and intemperance, is a root proper to every disease.
Origin (one of the Primitive Fathers) says, it makes a man a Beast, a strong
man weak, a wise man a fool. One Calisthenes a Heathen, happening to be at one of
Alexander's Feasts, and often urged to drink as others did, answered, he would
not; for (says he) who drinks to Alexander, had need of a Physician. Lastly,
behold some sad consequences of taking in liquor too freely, and then be
excessive if thou dare. Aruntius a Roman, being drunk deflowred his own
Daughter Medullina; for which she immediately killed him. Alexander that mighty
Conqueror, in his drink oftentimes committed such tragical deeds, as engaged
some of his Servants to plot the shortning of his days by poison, lest he
should, if he lived longer, in his raging fits destroy them all. Nevertheless
if thou can not abstain fellowship, then drink as in the Primitive times,
concluding God is to be remembered both in Night and Day.

Thirdly, Next, what shall I say of superfluous Diet. The belly (says Crates
the Philosopher) is an unthankful beast, never requiting the pleasure done, but
craveth continually more than it needs. I Am sure he that said, In my Country
the belly is the God, if now living, his words would be found too true. What
infinite sums of money are sacrificed to it, in procuring the Earth, the Air,
and the Sea, to center at one Table, making Table-Cloths like St. Peter's
sheet, including creatures clean and unclean? How many are there to be found
that imitate Muleasses King of Tunis, who spent a hundred Crowns on the
dressing of a Peacock? Certainly many of our Modern Gluttons show too well by
their Acates and costly dainties, that their wills and inclinations are not far
behind his^. We are sick of those things wherewith we live. The most wholesome
food, the least Cookery: Diseases spring from corruptions and riotous eating.
What profit either to Body, Purse or Soul can it be; nay, what pleasure, with
Geta the Roman Emperous, to swill and cram for three days and nights together?
If your power could bring together, like Sergius Galba, that monstrous
Emperor, seven thousand Fowls at one Meal, in twenty four hours; how much
lustier, healthfuller, and brisker would you be, than he who has dined or
supped on one poor single Dish? My Citizen is much mistaken, if he holds that
most strength is drawn out of the daintiest and most luxurious fare. Socrates
our worthy Tutor, inviting once certain of his Friends to a Feast, was reproved
for his slender provision. If they be virtuous (says he) it is enough; if not,
there is too much. If our Forefathers were alive now, they could hardly tell
the names of our needless variety of Dishes, without the help of a
Kitching-Dictionary. They would wonder Art should keep School in the Kitching,
and that our Palats should be so ingenious. The Ancients have in their words
and deeds scourged this vice to the purpose; and if my Citizen means to attain
any thing above the reach of his mouth, he must set himself to trace the steps
of those, History makes famous for their abstinence. King Cyrus, being asked by
Artabanus (when he lay once in the Camp) what he would have for Supper? Bread,
answered he; for I hope we shall find some Fountain to furnish us with Drink.
Therefore let my Citizen learn to be temperate. Gorgias the Philosopher, being
demanded how he arrived to the number of a hundred and eight years, answered;
By never eating or drinking any thing for pleasure.

Finally, if nothing but the consideration of danger, can prevail with him to
abstain; it cannot choose but afright, and make his blood recoil, to know, that
Septimus Severus, and Jovianus, two Famous Emperors, in their height of Cups
and Plates, surrendered their lives. Laeydes a Philosopher, through excess
expired ignominiously. Valentinianus an Emperor suddenly dyed of a Surfeit.
Pardon me for telling him flat and plain, though a little immethodically; if
his tendency to such exorbitances be not bounded, though his days partly
through a strong constitution may be prolonged, (and that happens but seldom
to the Experimenters) yet I dare be so bold as to stick on him the true and
woeful jest of Diogenes, who hearing the House of a Prodigal was to be sold; I
knew (said he) very well, that a house so full of meat and drink, would vomit
out its Master.

Fourthly, Needless Expenses in Apparel must be examined. He that wastes his
wealth to follow every fashion (says one of our already quoted Authors,) and
hates his substance to maintain his bravery, may be counted the Mercers
friend, the Tailors fool, and his Own foe. One bragging of his Golden
Ornaments, was thus answered; The praise is due to the metal, not the man. That
is the most ornamental, which makes the more virtuous. I am not sumptuous
(says Seneca) yet no man can live otherwise at Rome. Why do we deceive our
selves? (goes he on) the Evil is within us; it cleaves to our bowels; the fault
is our own. Diogenes, (whom we newly named) going from Sparta to Athens, was
asked by the way, whence he came, and whither he went; who answered, He came
from Men, and was going to Women: noting the Effeminacy of the Athenians, who
for their delicacy and niceness in Food and Raiment, were derided by all
Grecia. St. Bernard preaching the Funeral-Sermon of his own Steward, among
other his commendations gave him this; That He was great even in small matters,
his care and circumspection extending to the most trivial and slightest things.
Let my Citizen imitate him. Happy is he that deserves the Title, Faithful in a
little; he shall be made owner of a great deal. Let the Example of Agesilaus,
King of Lacedemon, moderate my Citizens airishness and apishness, who was wont
to wear one Suit both Winter and Summer. Let it moderate I say, seeing there
are within London not a few Tradesmen, whose best parts lie in the frequent
change of Suits, as if the snake was to be loved for its bright skin; they
strutting like an Actor, whose Rich habits being laid aside, and his Part done.
He is rare to be met withal, that can show himself extraordinary out of his
Theater, wherein my Shopkeeper in many places equals him, as appearing dull and
insipid in all things, save in clothes, lying, and swearing.

Augustus Caesar was not ashamed to wear what was wrought by his Daughters: and
is it mean and durty to trace a man so famous? But our City, you will say, is much
exalted, since a hundred years. Remember, or (if you never read so much) read
now, that Romes pride and idleness was Romes ruin. Citizens Wives and
Daughters now scorn to meddle in Kitchin-affairs; the best quality of a good
and a true Houswife. They had rather make a pattern of C. Marius the Romans
Kinswoman, who being great with child, yet at a Solemnity coveting to appear
slender-wasted, laced her self so straight, as she immediately fell into
travail, miscarried, and died. Our Town Wives and Maids (their Parents must
take some of the blame and shame) hold it more becoming to pinion up themselves
in a narrow Bodiss, that they may gain the praise of having a handsome body,
than to adorn themselves as it is convenient for persons of any business. Where
we may observe what considerable disadvantages, nay, downright losses, proceed
from this very neglect of Parents, and Idleness (in comparison of City-breeding
as it ought to be) in their Daughters.

First, the Parents omit their Duty to God in Training up their Children as
they might never depart from it.

Secondly, they lose by not exercising their Children in such things, as they
might manage to their Credit and profit in their Parents absence.

Thirdly, they get such a custom of fluttishness and improvidence, as makes
them incapable of improving to the best advantage what they are concerned to
perform, either as maids or married.

Fourthly, if married, they are eager in pursuit of some Recreations they
enjoyed when single, through their Friends weakness; therein oftentimes
throwing off all obedience to their Husbands; all sense of the want and loss a
Wife puts a man to, when ever and anon she is pleased to freak it; all
concernment for a Family; and, which is worst of all, occasion by their slips
those grounds of Scandal that reflect so sharply on the whole City, for
suffering their Chucks so grossly to abuse them. If they were bred answerable to
a Tradesmans Daughter, though never so responsible, every Citizen should follow
the rule of an English person of quality, who hardly acquainted his Daughters
with the difference between Course and Fine before they were marriagable, and
then he set them out gorgeously, and to admiration; nay, with no loss to his
Purse; for their thristiness had hoarded up for those days; their lowly
education, as to lostiness of spirit, ease and ignorance, added to their
luster, when they came to shine among so many obscure, flitting, gossipping,
idle, proud and careless Females, as then appeared in the World. In short, my
Citizen must save any thing he can, without loss to his credit and hurt to his
conscience.

Fifthly, I had almost quite skipt or forgot a devouring practice, called
Gaming; a poison gilded over, pleasant to look upon, but dangerous to take;
besides, the gain by it is dishonest. Cards and Dice are smooth, deceitful, and
thievish slights, unbecoming the closeness of a Citizen, as Master of a family,
and dangerous to the welfare of all his Fortunes. How privily do some men bring
their whole estates to nothing, falling like lightning, sooner felt then
foreseen, and all by this unthrifty sport. Certainly Aurelius Alexander
Emperor of Rome, was not besides himself when he made a Law, that any one
being found at Dice, should be esteemed frantic, a mere Natural, and as one
that wants wit and discretion to govern himself. If St. Augustin's advice was
put in ure, Gaming would quickly be forsaken, as not worth the pains; who
counseled, that all winnings and advantage arising from Play should be bestowed
on the poor. If there be any real pleasure in Games, or Sports, it is founded
on the glory gotten by exercise of the body, by understanding what is graceful;
as nothing can be more, than to be active, and skilful in the most civil and
necessary appurtenances of a Citizen. The S^^ate of Rome forbad any manner of
playing for Money, except those of wagering who was the best Wrastler, who
threw an Iron Ball farthest, who cast a Dart best, and who Outrun or Leaped
each other. If my Citizen accustomed himself to the most martial and useful
exercises of his Country, it would raise his Repute, preserve his Health, free
him from thinking too much on Company and the Tavern; and by his example
encourage others to return to the simplicity (if it deserves the style) of
their Ancestors. Never was it known, that any dyed for joy of winning another
Money. But Diagoras the Rhodian, and Chilon the Greeian, hearing their Children
had bore away the Prize at the Olympic Games, felt in them such a motion of
the Spleen, as they were stifled with joy. Crossing the appetite, as it leads
to Virtue, so it does to Profit. Having thus broken the Ice, I shall proceed.

Cunning is a crooked Wisdom; let him shun that then, and fasten on one more
direct, which is not without honesty or ability, and teaches the necessity of
knowing the parties well with whom he deals. He must dive into their nature,
humor, inclination, designs, and proceedings; so the nature of business in
hand must be comprehended. A superficial knowledge is not enough; a man must
penetrate the inside, and see things in themselves, with their accidents and
consequents belonging thereto; joining these two together, it will be easy for
him to gain, if according to the dispositions of persons and affairs, he change
his style and manners of proceeding; as a wise Seaman, who according to the
diverse state of the Sea, and change of the winds, does diversely turn his Sails
and Rudder: if he scans a Customers temper, he may lead him; knowing his ends,
he may persuade him, and marking his weakness he may awe him; if the quality of
the business be understood (in the finding whereof every man's own observation
must be set a work) if it be diligent 'twill bring forth more than the best
Writer is able to utter. Experience and instruction is the best way to
perfection.

His words I would have to be few; for, He (says Solomon) that has knowledge
spares his words, and a man of understanding is of an excellent spirit.
Cleanthes being desired by one to teach his Son a short sentence, answered, Be
silent. For besides the advantage he has of the talker, in receiving all
gratis, secrecy is safer than speech: It is better to have his simplicity
doubted, than to speak inconveniently, idly, or needlessly. If all men thought
alike, silence were unnecessary; but since the Speaker and Expositour utter and
receive with different minds, speech cannot carry her meaning always, just as a
man would have her; therefore a man must defend her impotency by keeping her
in, otherwise he may put a Knife in the other hand to stab himself. Whosoever keeps
his mouth and tongue, keeps his soul from trouble. The Italian Proverb is,
The tongue of a wise man is hid in his heart. Isocrates the Grecian Orator,
lest his Scholars at any time should shame him by their words, never admitted
any into his School, without a double pay; first to learn silence, and then to
speak, especially what was certain.

Next, his Servants must be enjoined secrecy. It is well their Indentures
mention it; but it was better if they more regarded it. The Moors are wont to
cut off their privities who tell secrets. The Egyptians used to cut out his
tongue, that blab'd abroad all he knew, having no power over his unruly
instrument. The Turks have Mutes, persons deaf to all lamentation, and dumb to
all discovery, to perform execution; who should be nearly imitated by my
Citizens Servants. If Flavius had not disclosed to Scylla the most unfortified
part of Athens, he had lain before it labor in vain.

Again, I would have my Citizen wiser than to unfold all his concerns to his
wife. Every man's experience tells him of the mischief occasioned by women's
tongues. In the reign of Augustus Caesar, Fulvius having revealed a matter of
privacy to his wife, they were both put to death. Far be it from me to have so
cruel a thought, to believe no woman now alive deserves Solomon's praise, who
says, Pro. 31.26
A virtuous woman opens her mouth with wisdom. Certainly he is highly
blessed, whose Consort may lay claim to this commendation. But as the Pool of
Bethesda had little virtue, save when the Angel at a certain season went down
into it, to the absolute healing of him that stepped in next: so a man may wait a
long time before he happens on the opportunity of embracing the comfort, help,
and counsel he hopes to enjoy in a prudent Wife.

If he does impart his secrets, he must know, they cannot lie hid save in a few.
There is an infallible Precept; Lay your Estate, if need requires, upon many;
your thoughts and weighty intents upon few. For it is hard to find in a crowd
of Confidents, one who will not abuse them to his particular profit. Tattling
was once a safeguard, when the Geese preserved the Roman Capitol; but such
examples are rare in History.

For his speaking, let me deliver this, He must consult with himself. I never
knew a man better himself by his rashness and passion. The perturbations of the
mind (says Anaxagoras) do punish reason, and blind the judgment. Wherefore
my Citizen must balance the least circumstances, as he would choose to eat
what is fittest for his bodies health. So anger impairing both body and mind,
he should thoroughly consider before he speaks. Hastiness is ever attended by
repentance. Wrath and rigor (says Isocrates) lead shame in a Lease. Besides,
He that is soon angry deals foolishly. Pro. 14.17.
He that is slow to wrath, Pro. 14.29
is of great understanding; but he that is hasty of spirit exalts folly.

To proceed: let him that desires his actions should go forward with a
profitable success, deliberate upon them. Pro. 15.22.
Without counsel purposes are disappointed. Wise men say, A man must consult
slowly, and execute speedily, ponder leisurely, and accomplish expeditiously.
Yet sudden in counsel, proves oftentimes prosperous in event; but it is very
seldom. As he must advise with himself, so with others (because no man's wisdom
comprehends all business) For in the multitude of Counselors there is safety.
Pro. 11.14
However, he may ask what is best to be done, without telling his own
resolution, as depending on them; and take the matter back into his own hands,
to evidence to the World, that the final direction proceeds from himself. He
must notwithstanding consider, to whom he breaks his mind. It Is an old
Precept, Trust few: it is almost as old, Trust none. To counsel, is the chiefest
part of a Friend; but let him be so assuredly, to whom you display your
thoughts. Look especially and exactly, that he be qualified with honesty and
sufficiency. The words of a friend (says a Wise man) joined with true
affection, give life to the heart, and comfort a mind oppressed with care.
Such a friend resembles Pho^ion, who when one of his intimates was desperately
inclined to cast himself away, told him he should not; for he was made his
friend to that purpose. For the acting of things duly consulted upon, times and
seasons must be well observed; precipitation is an enemy to business, and the
stepmother of all actions. Affectatious and formal dispatches are dangerous;
and like what Physicians call Pre-digestion, or too quick concoction, which
surely fills the body full of crudities, and hidden seeds of diseases:
therefore measure not dispatch by the time of employment, but the advancement
of the business.

If the case requires help of a Foreman or Journeyman, let him embrace the use
of his abilities, and virtuous Service; let him use him upon extraordinary
occasions only, otherwise his own ceasing in business may deprave his
affections and understanding. Let it be also upon good terms, thankfully, and
respectively, principally remembering the Labourer is worthy of his hire.

In some cases my Citizen may mingle profit with honesty, and compound with
both; though he must not turn his back to honesty, yet he may sometimes go
about and coast it, with a skill, better practiced than expressed; something
which may be done openly, must be done secretly, because of the misconstruing
World; but this is a good Rule: Avoid and abhor all unjust means, but search,
spy out, and diligently cleave to the most just, plausible, and feasible.

It Is expedient for my Citizen to defend himself with the Buckler of Distrust,
which is a great share of Prudence; it is the very sinew of Wisdom, for my
Citizen to take heed of all men: the nature of the world induces him to this,
being wholly composed of lies, fraud, and counterfeit dealing. It Is hard (says
Aurelius) to cozen Distrust with false colors, Conceit standing at the enemies
door. One Opimius lying dangerously sick of a Lethargy, when some would share
his goods before the breath was out his body, his careful Physician caused his
Money to be poured out before him, and bid him awake, to live. So distrust will
cure a Lethargy, make a sleepy man wakeful, and arm him against poverty; them
he trusts he must have good experience of, disguising his suspicion; for open
diffidence inviteth as much to deceive, as an over-careless confidence. Many
dreading causlesly, have taught the suspected persons to beguile indeed;
whereas a professed assurance, has removed a desire to deceive by obliging
Fidelity. Every man would be credited; and a belief of his honesty does many
times engage him to retain it; wherefore a professed trust agrees well with a
concealed diffidence. In the practice whereof he must be very circumspect; for
I cannot warrant it in all cases to be lawful.

From this orderly distrust proceeds a commendable, close, Commodious carriage,
which in frivolous matters must for a man's credit sake be laid aside. Thus with
applause he may deal privily in affairs of greatest concern. Curious
subtleties, when once vented, dissolve to nothing.

Let him not keep Inferiors so distant, as afterward to stand in need of
them. It was the wisdom of a French King, to stoop below his dignity, to win
that man to him that might benefit or hurt him. Let him be liberal in his
words, and so he bestows costless favors; Let him be free in his deeds; for
one good turn begets another. It was observed, Sejanus, Tyberius his favorite,
could never have been advanced, without an infinite number of men, on whom he
plenteously conferred his kindness. Yet here my Citizens discretion must guide
him; for small benefits are soon forgotten, and large ordinarily overcharge:
some ungrateful ones neglect them, and some would have none alive, to whom they
are indebted, wishing with all their hearts the death of their Benefactour.

In conversing with Equals, let him profess himself to be less than they; let
him be courteous and affable to them: for they that are so, will find their
worst Enemies to be greater Friends than natural Brothers will be to men
high-minded. Pro. 29.23
A man's pride (says Solomon) shall bring him low; but honor shall uphold the
humble in spirit.

If he deals with his Superiors, let him make all the use he can of them, but
not trust in them: among all mortal things, there is none more fading than that
power which derives not its support from its self; it is common for one man to
be unfortunate, through his dependence on another. Let him endeavor by good
and laudable courses to acquire the opinion of all honest men, which imports
much to shorten the way leading to an eminent esteem; so let him strive in his
rising to be assisted by many, otherwise he will find himself oppressed with age
before he be Rich or well known.

Thus let him be diligent in the quest of Riches and Credit, but not
over-violent and long: he knows not how to enjoy, that is ignorant when he has
enough; therefore let him be content with what he may have; for Abundance is
not the end, but change of evils. If doing according to prescription, he miss
Wealth and Esteem, let him not slip Virtue; for though Fortune frowns, it is no
disgrace or damage to be Virtuous.

Thus my Citizen shall live in his Calling. First, in the Calling God has
fitted him with abilities for; and Secondly, if he came to it lawfully, and by
the ordinary way of the place he inhabits. For any Calling otherwise attained
is improper, usurping, and the person ought to be soundly fined for his
presumption.

Now I have showed how my Citizen shall live profitably; but if only to
himself, it is too poor an end for an honest man: he must not be right earth,
which stands merely upon its own Center, whereas all things having an affinity
with the Heavens, move upon another Center, and therefore benefit it. The
liberal man (says Cicero) daily seeks out occasion to put his virtue in
practice. He that has a bountiful eye, Pro. 22.9.
shall be blessed. Dionysius the Elder, entering into his Sons Chamber, and
beholding there great store of rich Jewels and Gold, said unto him, My Son, I
did not give thee these Riches to use in this sort, but to impart them to thy
Friends.

Of Benefiting Others.
THe aforesaid Dionysius, being advertised of one that had hidden great store
of Money, commanded him upon pain of death to bring it to him, which he did,
save some which he reserved and bought an Inheritance. Whereof Dionysius
hearing, he sent him back that he took from him, saying, Now thou know how
to use riches, I restore what I had from thee. Now that I am about to treat of
necessary Expenses, I shall begin first with my Citizens obligation to his Wife.

We are taught by the light of Nature, that in a Family, the first and chiefest
care should be of the Wife. Live joyfully (says Solomon) with the Wife whom
thou love, Eccl. 9.9.
all the days of the life of thy vanity, which God has given thee under the
Sun; for that is thy portion in this life, and in thy labor which thou take
under the Sun.

Certainly a Wife is a great Officer in a little Commonwealth, the House; for
if a good Wife, she is grave abroad, wise at home, patient to suffer, constant
to love, friendly to her Neighbors, profitable to her Household; and rather
than she will be the impediment to a worthy enterprise, she will accompany her
Husband, as Ipsicrates did Mithridates her Royal Lord, like a Page in his Wars.
It Is undeniable, the best and most meritorious deeds have been acted by single
persons, who have sought eternity in memory, not posterity; and in regard of
liberty, the unmarried man is happiest. Some have said wittily, and in my
opinion devoutly, Marriage fills the Earth, and Virginity Heaven: but they
speak better, who demanded, how Heaven should be full, if the Earth were empty.
Without Marriage the Earth would be depopulated. The Jews had such a reverence
for married folks, as any were exempted from the Wars, or any other Military
Office, the first year after their Wedding Day. The Lacedaemonians regarded the
peopling of their Country so narrowly, as he who chose rather to maintain a
Mistress, than venture into Wedlock (thereby sowing on Sand, and exhausting that
spirit profusely and unprofitably, which naturally tends to, and produces
likeness) and lawfully to beget props for his Family and Country, was in
Summertime kept close Prisoner, and hindered the recreation every one enjoyed
in their Festivals, Sports, Games and Shows; and in the Winter he was in frosty
and the coldest weather, exposed (and forced to walk round the Market) in his
Shirt only, to do Penance before all whom he endeavored to deprave by such a
destructive Example. The renowned and ancient Romans (much differing from the
present lascivious and restrained ones) were wont to fine severely, any who
fancied a single life, not permitting them to execute any honorable Office in
their Republic.

It is commendable for my Citizen to Marry; but since his negligence may undo
his Wife, he must sooner part with his life, loving her so dearly, as to prefer
the imitation of Tiberius Gracchus the Roman, who finding two Serpents in his
Chamber, inquired of a Southsayer the meaning; Who told him, if he slew the
Male, he should die first; if the Female, his Wife: but he loving his Wife
extremely, slew the Male, and soon after past out of this world himself.

The ancient Heathens used to place Mercury by Venus; to show what need the
affections of Marriage have of Reason and Wisdom to rule and order them. God
cast Adam into a sleep, whilst he made him a Wife of one of his Ribs: Upon
which one moralizeth very quaintly thus; The Affections ought to sleep about
this work; Reason to wake, as in the choice of a Wife, so in the governing her
when he has her.

When my Citizen (if single) is minded to alter or double his condition, let
him do his best to pick out a person of shape, and bearing continually about
her something lovely, whereby (if he be loosly given) she may reclaim him; if
he wavers, she may retain him; but especially that her own comeliness may
impress, and enlarge the fruit of her womb. For crooked persons, both alienate
their Husbands affections, and by the narrowness of their wombs, spoil what
Nature forms therein. Secondly, let him look after a reasonable Portion; and
though one said, he would have a Dinner, as well as a Supper, yet the
weightiest and most unequal Matches commonly conclude in discord, discontent,
and feparation, sometimes of bodies, always of minds. If thou being mean,
obtain a great Fortune; if she have not discretion to know her distance, and
especially grace to know her obedience, she will daily be objecting her own
worthiness, and debasing the state she affirms singly (and nothing existing in
thy self) to have raised thee from. Prove. 21.19.
It is better to dwell in the wilderness, than with a contentious and angry
woman. It would be much wondered at, and I think there would be great cause, if
a young, beautiful and wealthy Lady should marry against her friends consent, a
deformed, poor, yet wise man. But History informs us how Hipparchia
accomplished as aforesaid, vehemently and for virtues sake tied her self by
Matrimony to the Philosopher Crates. Thirdly and chiefly, respect her
qualifications. Houses and Riches (says Solomon) are the inheritance of
Fathers; Prove. 19.14.
but a Prudent wife is from the Lord. He that Marries only a fair face, or a
full bag, ties himself to a foul bargain. Beauty in the face, and folly in the
head, be two worms that fret life and waste goods. If my Citizen espouses a
peaceable and virtuous Woman, he will attain Heaven on Earth, wealth in want,
and comfort in woe. Therefore he must heedfully mark her inward perfections,
value her for her useful parts, and absolutely expect the highest felicity to
be compassed with a Wife to lie in her head, and not in her heels: for though
dancing be an ornament, Prudence is far beyond it; a mind decked with
Huswifery, excells (principally in a Mistress of a Family) all the tires of
dancing, singing, dressing, and whatever an idle, sluggish, licourish, wanton
and foolish woman can plead for. Favor is deceitful, Pro. 31.30 31.
and beauty is vain; but a woman that fears the Lord shall be praised. Give
her of the fruit of her hands, and let her own works praise her. Pro. 14.1.
Every Wise woman builds her house; but a foolish woman pulls it down.

Supposing now my Citizen to be Married, as respecting his Posterity and the
Kingdom, he must not let her spend too much, lest his Posterity rue it, or he
be disabled to do others good.

Among many faults of She-Citizens, their pride as a Saul is higher by head and
shoulders than the rest. Not that it is greater or more common than their
secret sins, but more seen, and so the less dangerous. Many, if not stinted by
their Husbands, would hold it no vanity to walk in the path of Poppeia, Nero's
Concubine, whose Horses were shod with Gold. Few of them have a kindness for
Philon's Wife, because, once asked why she went so plainly apparel'd, she
answered, Her Husbands virtues were Ornament sufficient for her.

For redress of this evil, let Husbands show them good Examples, by going plain
themselves; and their Wives, if they have any grace, goodness, love, or
obedience, will be ashamed to do otherwise. If their own pattern fails, they
must use the authority of Husbands, and restrain them.

Let not a woman rule; it is the Apostles counsel; Ephesians. 5.22.
Let wives be subject to the^^ Husbands. A woman (says Socrat^^) once made
equal with man, becomes his Superior. A woman's rule is her husband. My
Citizens wife must have no power over him; for suffer her to day to tread upon
thy foot, and to morrow she will not stick to set her foot on thy neck.
Semiramis the wife of Ninus King of Assyria, obtaining of him the government of
the Kingdom for five days, and that his Nobles should obey her during that
time; she caused him to be presently apprehended, and cast into Prison; who
impatient of this disgrace, dashed out his own brains. If my Vxorious Citizen,
notwithstanding what is just now related, will take no notice, as being acted by
a Pagan, let him hearken to what St Hierom says: A wise man must love his wife
with judgment, not blind assection. Though he may not dote on her, Col. 3.19.
he must not be bitter toward her: opprobrious terms, and rough dealing, have
made women cast off their submissive and mild nature. Clytemnestra the wife of
Agamemnon, being harshly used, and injuriously treated by him, fell into
adultery, and then slew him. A naughty person, Pro. 6.12.17.20.
a wicked man, walks with a froward mouth, and finds no good. Cato a sworn
enemy to women, never struck his wife. It Is the part of an esteemed husband, to
be wise in words, mild in conversation, and patient in importunity.

Lastly, the counsel of the Learned Emperor Marcus Aurelius is of mighty
moment: If any one (says he) intends to live peaceably with his Wife, he ought
above all things to observe this Rule: To admonish her often, to chide her
seldom; but never to lay hands on her.

Let him walk chastely toward her; let him be to her, as he desires she should
be to him. The lust of one, being the fault; the lust of the other may be the
punishment. Pro. 31.3.
Give not thy strength to women, nor thy ways to that which destroys Kings.
Lust was the cause of Rome's first alteration in government: It brought King
David to the choice of Sword or Pestilence: It drew away Solomon's heart from
worshipping his Creator: It brought the Moors into Spain, whence since they
have been so hardly driven; and finally, occasioned Alcibiades, that famous
Athenian, to be burnt in his Bed. Therefore hearken to Solomon, who was once
involved to the hazard of his life everlasting; but lived to recant his error,
and to question and advise thee. Why will thou my Son be ravished with a
strange woman, Pro. 5.20, 21.
and embrace the bosom of a stranger? For the ways of a man are before the
eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth all his goings.

Lastly, if that Act of Parliament was revived, which was procured by Adam
Francis Mayor, in the 25 of Edw. the third, That all known Whores should be
distinguished by their head-attires, from honest women, What a world of Persons
would forsake a Calling so vile and abominable, chiefly so remarquable and
obvious to scoffs and curses? And Citizens would be detered the keeping openly
such scandalous and pernicious Company.

Let him practice lenity and not severity, clemency and not tyranny; or a good
woman's patience may be turned to fury: if she does not perform such business as
he puts her upon, with that wisdom he expects, he must bear with her. He must
sight with flesh, blood, and corruption, to attain Socrates humor, who was all
one at home as abroad. That woman's wit is reckoned pregnant enough, that can
discern her Husband's bed from a Stranger's. If she chance to be angry, let him
use Socrates his patience; who was the better enabled to converse with perverse
persons abroad, by hearing and enduring his wife Zantippe at home.

Let him be willing and endeavor to struct her with Meekness when she opposes
her self. 2 Timothy 2.25.
He is bound not only to walk with his wife as a man of love, but likewise as
a man of understanding. It is monstrous to see the head stand where the feet
should be; and a double pity, when a Nabal and an Abigail are matched together.
But if thou have a Wife whose wisdom needs not thy instruction, thank God; For
whosoever finds a wife, Prove. 19.22.
finds a good thing, and obtains favor of the Lord.

Lastly, let him show kindness to her at his death. There was a Law amongst the
Ancient Romans, That no man should make his Wife or only Daughter Heir.
Nothing I think can be more unjust: God himself has commanded, If a Man die,
Number. 27.8
and has no Son, then he shall turn his inheritance to his Daughter: and
Divinity, which has taught men to Love their Wives, has likewise to Provide
for them. Yet discretion must allot them no more than enough. For we often see
a man's enemies enjoy his labors, and the fruits of his sweat, care and toil.
How much good might those many thousands (which several Citizens have left)
have done to the Poor, to Hospitals, to Schools of Learning and Religion, to
repairing of Churches, and in other uses, more beneficial to the Public, more
lasting to perpetuate a man's name; and I verily believe, more necessary to
their Wives happiness, who, if living lower, and not having the means to stir
up in them the ambition of becoming a Lady forsooth, had avoided those miseries
and misfortunes, the greedy desire of Honor has too frequently plunged them
in. Therefore my Citizen must be wary and Charitable when he makes his Will,
lest his Family be ruined, through the folly of a Woman, too weak to bear the
load of a great Estate, whose management and profitable distribution requires
an able head, a solid judgment, and a mind not garish, vain and profusely
expensive.

In 1439, and the Reign of Henry the sixth, Philip Malpas Sheriff of London, at
his decease gave 120 l. to poor Prisoners, and every year for five years
following 400 Shirts and Smocks, 40 pair of Sheets, and 150 Gowns of Frize to
the Poor; to poor Maids marriages 100 Marks; toward mending the Highways 100
Marks; besides, to 500 poor people in London Six shillings and eight pence
apiece.

Sir William Copinger Mayor, Stows Survey.
in the fourth of Henry the 8, at his death, gave half he was worth to his
Wife, and the other half to the Poor, and other pious uses.

Behaving himself thus toward his Wife, his care and kindness also must extend
toward the rest of his Charge, Children and Apprentices. Train up a Child in
the way he should go, Pro. 22.6.
and when he is old he will not depart from it. Dionysius King of Syracuse,
meaning to revenge himself on Dion a Syracusean, who made war upon him, caused
his Son to be brought up in riot and wantonness. This labor many Men save
their Enemies, and do it themselves, proving miserable Governors of dissolute
young ones. What hope can our City have of those Youth, whose debauchedness
has not been obstructed by good Education?

The Lacedaemonians reproach highly our Citizens negligence; for they were wont
to choose Public Tutours for the education of Citizens, bringing them up, and
fitting them upon emergent occasions for their Countries service: but we have
so little respect to the encouragement of Virtue, that most of us would rather
let all perish for want of Example, than practice with some hardship (an enemy
to voluptuousness) those Exercises which keep the body sound, clean, and
healthful, strengthen the brain, further the dispatch of business, spur up
others to overtake us in such honorable and profitable courses, awe all under
our command from committing lewdness, invite to tread in our steps, and lastly
wipe off from us that imputation Hipperides a Grecian Philosopher laid on one,
who told him he had sent his Son to travail with a slave for his Tutor; You
have done notably (said he) for instead of one Slave, at his return you shall
receive two. I wish Fathers had less cause to charge Tradesmen for their
immoderate harshness, and sleighting regards toward their Children: for most
are either dissolutely careless, or unreasonably rigid; governing either as if
Servants needed no restraint or freedom.

It Is remarkable, few good Citizens Sons but degenerate from their Fathers:
They know such ways of spending their Fathers were wisely ignorant of; but
those of saving are as distant from their inclination, as the search of America
was to Europeans a thousand years ago. They like Cicero's Son, resemble their
Fathers only in name. To redress such destructive heedlessness whereto Masters
are so prone, if they look for any blessing from Providence, in the name of God
let them begin such a kind of life as may be judged holy, upright, and godly.
And as where there is a smoke, there is some fire; the Grace of the Almighty
may by degrees work such a change, that their Souls, Sons, Servants and Success
in their endeavors, shall find an equal and lasting improvement.

Nevertheless let my Citizen consult these few following rules. Suffer neither
Son (if capable of doing any thing) or Servant to be idle. It was great and
good policy in the Romans, to let their youth learn nothing sitting. The best
Commonwealths have allowed them Theaters and spacious fields for their
exercises; and the Republicans have allowed their Youth time to perform them.
In the Eleventh year of Henry the 4th, to the astonishment of beholders, for
Eight days together, and in the presence of his then Majesty, accompanied by
the most of the Nobles and great Estates of the Realm, near Clerken-Well was
shown all the skill and cunning that Age and the renowned activity of the
English could put forth, in such Exercises, of hands or feet, as far excelling
smoking and drinking, as riding the Great Horse does a Hobby: For the first
being manly and healthful, the last is effeminate, ridiculous, and destructive
to the body. Finally, upon more than bare Quarterly days, if some of the most
Eminent and reputed Citizens used to be present in places of Public Exercise,
there to praise, to encourage, and sometimes to reward Young men that were
active; what an alteration would there be in the customs of a World! How would
young men abstain excesses and riotting, to preserve their strengths? how would
they by their Service oblige their Masters to dispense with a space of time,
now and then, for them to show themselves active, skilful, and emulous of
glory? which though it be vain in the practice of Virtue, yet it is always
accompanied with the hope of understanding themselves more knowingly in process
of time. Themistocles by Nature viciously inclined, was so inflamed with the
fame of Miltiades, fung by all people, and so ardently emulated his deeds, that
from a depraved and loose person he became a virtuous and renowned Captain.

In the next place my Citizen must look bountifully on the Poor. I should have
spoken a little of Hospitality in a place foregoing, amongst my Citizens
needless expenses. But Vice having almost rooted out a Virtue so many shared in
formerly in our Land, and of late years it lying even breathless; I shall touch
on it lightly in my treating of Charity, to make the memory of our Heathen
Ancestors appear more amiable and exemplary, and to quicken my Citizen for the
amplification of that we call good Housekeeping.

Charity (says St. Augustine) is the way of man to God, and of God to man. Is
my Citizen great and wealthy, and would have his Riches known? let him do it
then by gifts. Marcus Antonius said of the Roman grandeur, that is was less
discerned by what it took, than by what it gave. If occasions for doing good be
not offered, seek them. Merciful works are accepted of God as Sacrifice, yea
better than Sacrifice. Anthony Prince of Salern, being asked what he would
leave himself, answered, That which I have given. But avaricious men think all
lost that is given. When they beg in Italy, they use this Phrase, Do good for
your selves. There is that scatters (says Solomon) and yet increases; Prove.
11.27.
and there is that witholdeth more then is meet, but it tends to Poverty.
Prove. 19.17.
He that has pity on the Poor lends to the Lord, and that which he has
given will he pay again. So he that forbids thee to be a Usurer, commands thee
to be so. Titus Vespasian his Son (who destroyed Jerusalem) so loved
liberality, that remembering one evening he had given nothing the same day, he
burst out, O my friends, we have lost this day! What a reproach is it to
Christians to be thus outdone by Infidels? They may be judged very well to rise
in judgment against us, though they were obscurely lighted by Nature: for we
generally walk as men with dark Lanthorns; they light none but themselves, as
we love none save our selves. But mark, Prove. 21.13.
He that stops his ear at the cry of the Poor, he also shall cry himself,
and not be heard. The Romans made a certain Law, that no man should make a
public Feast, except he had provided before for the Poor. Far alas! is the
sense of such a thing from us, much less the imitation.

Cymon of Athens (says a famous Author) gave a yearly pension to the poor, fed
the hungry, and clothed the naked. The house of Lucius Lucullus, was the
Hospital of all that travailed from Greece to Rome. Pertinax the Successor of
Comodus the Roman Emperor, was liberal above all before or after him; he used
to say, that His Lands were not proper to him alone, but common to all the
people of Rome. If I would swell my Piece with such observations, how bulky
might it be made? but I deem what is already quoted, enough to shame my Citizen
(if he be too close-fisted;) and to enkindle the sparks of his charity, till
his Zeal for God's Service (like David's) consumes him. Psalm. 119.139.


I shall end this Subject by enlivening him with two or three recompensed (as
the Scripture assures us) and that merely for their tenderness and hospitality.
Rahab on this score was with all her kindred saved from death, when all the
people of Jericho besides, both great and small past the edg of the Sword. I
should have mentioned, foremost, Genesis 19.
how Lot was drawn out of Sodom by force, and preserved from burning in it,
because he entertained most kindly two Angels in the shapes of men. 2 Kings. 4.
Elisha to requite the charitableness of the Shunamite, who had constrained him
so often to eat bread, restored her dead Son to life. And now if my Citizen can
lock up his Yellow and White, rather than impart to the wants of distressed and
unfortunate people, he may cloth himself in fine Linen, and fare delicately;
but the doom of Dives too assuredly and dreadfully will at length light on him:
He that denied a Crum of bread to Lazarus, was denied a drop of water, when he
was all afire. Alas, what is the Ocean, to the infinite World of fire in Hell?
Yet Dives, unhappy and much to be pityed Dives, who wasted in his life so many
Tuns of Wine, cannot now procure a drop of Water to cool the tip of his tongue.

Lastly, my Citizen must not be backward to promote the weal of the Public,
lest at one time or other he be chastised by another Epaminondas, who
commanding a miserable Citizen of Thebes to give another a round Sum of Money,
was asked by him upon what account? Because (replied he sharply) thou have
robbed the Commonwealth. An Ant is a wise Creature for it self, but a shrewd
thing in an Orchard or Garden; and certainly men, that are great Lovers of
themselves, waste the Public. Men (says Cicero) are not born for themselves,
but for their Gountrey, Parents, Kindred, and Friends. I cannot hold now from
reproving (with reason) the Cowardice, and fearful amazement of our late
Citizens, when they should have succored singly or in gross the best of
Princes. How can the Ghost of Wat Tyler's Conqueror do less than haunt such a
degenerate brood, whose aim is at a dignity, springing from Majesty and
King-ship, and yet none stirred before the dreadful stroke, with a single blow,
to deliver their oppressed Country; but especially a Prince that as mere man,
never had his fellow upon Earth. Mutius Scaevola, that magnanimous Roman, was
possessed with that courage, that to free the City by Porsenna's death, he
entered the Camp alone, and killing the King's Secretary instead of himself, not
knowing well to distinguish them; notwithstanding, he undauntedly justified his
intention, by burning his hand in a fire, before Porsenna's face, seeming to
feel no more heat, than if he warmed it in the Sun; and thereby frighting the
King to a dismissing of him honorably, (though with the loss of his right
hand) and to the raising his Siege from before Rome. Dion of Syracuse, never
rested till he had dethroned Dionysius the Tyrant. Aglauros an Athenian,
hearing the Oracle had pronounced the ruin of his Country, unless some one
dyed voluntarily to expiate their crimes, cast himself fea^lesly from the walls
of the City. But faint-heartedness, avarice, sloth, and luxury, caused the
fall of Constantinople into the Great Turk's hands, Mahomet the first and cruel
Emperor; caused Constantine a pious virtuous Prince, and the last Eastern
Emperor, to expire amidst the horror and confusion of the City, and
afterward to have his Head exalted on a pole, and carried by the Turks in
derision through the City. The Pride and ill affections, the cowardice and
covetousness of our City, undoubtedly concurred most to the deplorable end of
our Learned, Wise, Virtuous, Valiant, Merciful and Religious Sovereign. But as
Constantinople was destroyed with Fire and Sword, and desolated, as a deserved
punishment on those that had wherewithal, and might with ease have prevented
their own miseries, and their Princes: So with a kind of Authority (for I could
cite a credible Prophecy for it) may I speak London comparatively to have
labored under the effects of impartial Justice, for their defaults and
bewailable negligence, in permitting Gods Anointed to be so ignominiously used,
as was our Royal Martyr. But (Ah the Mercies of a patient and ever-loving God!)
it happened with this difference, as if we had been put to David's choice, and
chose like him. Whereas Constantinople was almost razed, and its Inhabitants
e'n extirpated the Earth, by the rage and cruelty of Men; Our London (blessed
be the lot) was almost depopulated by a Pestilence, and its Buildings e'n
consumed through Fire; but by the immediate and powerful hand of a most
merciful and restoring God. I may well say restoring: For what man ever read or
heard of such a prodigious and sudden Rebuilding a City so vast and ruinated?
who cannot but admire the populousness of a place, whose Inhabitants had been
first innumerably swallowed by a Pestilence, and afterward dispersed into all
parts of England by an entire overthrow of their dwellings? Certainly my
Citizen must needs be astonished to consider those wonders he may behold in our
Phoenix-City. And it is impossible to refrain crying out with David, Psalm. 126.3
The Lord has done great things for us, whereof we are glad. Finally, if my
Citizen would be reckoned a just, peaceable, and profitable man; he must
reverence the higher Powers, established by Time, Right Reason, and the Laws of
the Land. The present Government is most agreeable and consistent with the
Divine, most suitable to the Genius of the Nation, and the advantage of
particular persons: It is free from discords, emulation, and ambitious desires;
concluding, that, For the sins of our Land, many were the Princes thereof.
Wherefore my Citizen, Prove. 24.21.
Fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with those that are given to
Change.

Never did London need more the assistance of Wealthy and Liberal men: for
albeit, to admiration, the City seems almost Rebuilt, nevertheless but a slow
hand forwards the works of Piety and Public good. Now is the time for my
Citizen to show his large and bountiful thoughts, in the acts of open Charity,
and necessary expense. No pretenses for the contrary can favor his too
apparent Covetousness: All his veiled excuses are transparent enough, to see
into his miserable, foolish, and unworthy temper. How do the charitable deeds
of his Predecessors reproach his Avarice! What a shame it is for a Protestant,
whose reason is satisfied in what he believes, to be exceeded by mere
Ignorants, who scarce knew any truth in the ends they proposed themselves, when
they built Churches, erected Halls, Conduits, and other places of Common
Advantage; built and endowed Colleges, Free-Schools, Hospitals, and
Almshouses; when they repaired Bridges, Highways, and ^^ined through their
Virtues, bright and clear, as light in a dark place. Wherefore my Citizen ought
to consider the works of such as have been great Benefactors, and exemplary
Promoters of the Public good. And the better to stir him up, I have adjoined
hereto the famous and meritorious deeds of some past Citizens; so that if he
cuts by their Pattern, I have my wish.

In the Reign of Richard the Second, the same Sir William Walworth, (that had
so courageously killed Wat Tyler the Rebel,) repaired St. Michael's Church in
Crooked-Lane, and founded there a College.

About the year 1385. John Churchman Sheriff in the Ninth of Richard the
Second, built the Custom-House nigh the Tower; and was besides a great Promoter
of any thing was commodious for the City.

In 1431. John Wells Grocer, and Mayor, he was a great Benefactour to the New
building of the Chapel by Guild Hall, and erected the Standard in West-Cheap
at his own cost and charges.

In 1445. Simon Air Draper, being Mayor, built Leaden Hall, to be a common
Garner for the City.

In 1480. Bartholomew James, Draper and Mayor, built new the great Conduit in
West-Cheap.

In 1508. Ralph Jennings Merchant-Taylor being Mayor, he built the greatest
part of St. Andrews Church, called Undershaft.

In 1513. John Tare Mercer, being Mayor, he new built the Church of St.
Anthonies Hospital in London.

In 1521. Sir John Milborn Draper, being Mayor, he founded fourteen Almshouses
by Crossed-Fryers Church.

In 1560. Sir Christopher Chester being Mayor, the Merchant-Taylors founded
their Free School.

My Citizen considerately and rationally dividing his time, between Particular
and Public Interest, Self-love and Society, must use all honest and laudable
means in advancing the common good.

In the year 1337. Walter Neal Sheriff, gave Lands toward the repair of the
Highways about London.

In 1378. John Philpot a Citizen of London, sent Ships to Sea, and scowred it
of Pirates, taking many of them Prisoners.

In 1390. Adam Bamme Goldsmith, and Mayor, in a time of scarcity, so prudently
and plentifully provided the City with Corn from beyond Sea, as the Country it
self was served out of the Store.

In 1486. In the Reign of Henry the Seventh, William Horn Salter, being Mayor,
and Knighted in the Field by the King; he gave to the repairing the Road
between London and Cambridge, and some other wants, 500 Marks; a Sum in those
days of great value, and equal to above 20 times as much now.

Two especial ways more I shall insist upon. First, his Study ought to be
Unity. Scilurus (says Plutarch) a King of Tartary, having many Sons, and
feeling his hour to approach, called them all before him, and bid them one
after another to break a bundle of Darts, laid before them to the same purpose;
which being bound together, the strongest was not able to perform; but he
taking them asunder (though very feeble) easily broak them: Thus shall it be
with you (says he) if you agree together, no man shall hurt you; but divided
you cannot prosper: So it fares with a City; their safety depends chiefly on
Unity, and a mutual conjunction of Inferiors with Superiors. A threefold Cord
is hot easily broken. Eccl. 4.12.
Themistocles the brave, and Aristides the just Athenian, were at such
variance, as the former told the people one day in a full Assembly, that unless
both he and Aristides were thrust forth of the City, it would not stand.

If Discord then between two men of their wisdom was so dangerous, how dreadful
would it appear, hatched under Faction and Ignorance? Briefly, Concord makes
small things mightily to increase; but Division decays and destroys the
wealth, peace, strength and Unity of Families, Cities, and Kingdoms themselves.

Secondly, I could wish Citizens did not so much increase the number of
Apprentices, as in these times they do. It Is strange inferior Trades should in
their policy this way exceed those of a higher rank. It Is probable scarce one
Artificer in five, could have been employed three days in a Week, without the
laudable course of restraining a man to one or two Apprentices in his appointed
time; which has wrought this effect, that none in these Callings so ordered,
can (unless the fault be his own) complain for want of work.

In taking many Apprentices, a man's Secrets are open to more than one, and the
likelier to be discovered, to his own disadvantage, but especially to the hurt
of the Public.

A man that has had a good stock to begin with, being brought to decay, is it
not a thousand pities, that having paid a Sum of Money at his entrance, and
discharged all requisite Duties in the City, he shall be forced to beg or
starve in it, or go out of it for a Living?

Again, many a Young man which shall not have, or for the present has not a
sufficient stock of Money or Credit to begin; is it not pity he should leave
the City? In the year 1371. John Barns Mercer, and Mayor, gave a Chest with
three Locks, and one thousand Marks to be Lent to poor young men. Yet while men
may have what number of Apprentices they please, it shall be very hard for
either of these to find employment. To redress this, fewer Apprentices ought
to be taken, and those for a longer time than ordinary. It Is not fit, that
every child, because a good Sum of Money is given with him, should be bound but
for seven years; which expired, he issues out a Master, before he be a Man.
Thus the splendor of the City grows dimmer and dimmer, and Boys stand in
Shop-Doors, in the places of personable men; which is an inconvenience,
something akin to that, Woe to thee O Land, Ec. 10.16.
when thy King is a Child.

These things considered, let the Common good of all be rather endeavored,
than the particular of a few: Every private man is a Servant to the Public; it
is very disproportionable, for Servants to be preferred before their Masters;
for when a Servant reigns, Prove. 30.31.
the earth is disquieted.

Thus have I led my Citizen through the Labyrinth of a Trading life, to his
Temporal and Eternal profit; if he contemns not in my directions the Counsel of
Solomon the wisest man ever was, or will be; the judgments and acts of the most
loved, admired, and worthily renowned men Antiquity can boast of; and finally,
the real, durable, nay everlasting benefits and possessions, which a just
diligence will procure him here, and a righteous use bestow on him hereafter;
besides the honor, praise, and reverence his very name and memory will exact
from posterity.

A man shall not be established by wickedness, Prove. 12.3.
but the root of the Righteous shall not be moved.

A good name is better than precious Ointment, Ecc. 7.^.
and the day of Death is better than the day of ones Birth.

The just man walks in his integrity, Prove. 20.2^.
his Children are blessed after him.

FINIS.

