THE City of London's PLEA TO THE Quo Warranto, (An Information) brought
against their CHARTER In Michaelmas Term, 1681. WHEREIN It will Appear, That
the Liberties, Privileges, and Customs of the said City cannot be Forfeited,
or Lost by the Misdemeanor of any Officer or Magistrate thereof. Nor their
CHARTER be Seized into the King's Hands for any Mis-usage or Abusage of their
Liberties and Privileges, they being Confirmed by diverse Ancient Records and
Acts of Parliament made before and since MAGNA CHARTA. ALSO, How far the
Commons of the said City have Power of Choosing and Removing their SHERIFFS.
Published Both in English and Latin.

London, Printed in the Year 1682. And Published by Randal Tailor.

Per Informat' Mich. xxxiii Car. Secund. Reg.
Land. ss. MEmorandum quod Robertus Sawyer Miles, Attorn. Dom. Regis nunc
Generalis, qui pro codem Dom. Rege in hac part sequitur, in propria persona
sua von. hic in Cur. dict. Dom. Regis coram ipso Rege apud Westminster. die Lunae
prox. post quinden' S. Martini isto codem term', and pro eodem Dom. Rege dat.
Cur. hic Intelligi and Informari, quod Major and Communitas ac Cives Civitat.
Land. praed. per spacium unius Mensis jam ult. elaps. and amplius usi fuerunt
and adhuc utuntur, ac clamant habere and uti absque aliquo Warranto sive Regali
Concessione infra Civitat. Land. praed. and Libertat. and Praecinct. ejusdem
Civitat. diversis Libertat. Privileg. and Franches. sequen. videl. Fore de
seipsis unum Corpus Corporat. and Politicum in nomine Majoris and Civitat. ac
Civium Civitat. London ac per idem nomen placitare and implacitari, respondere
and responderi, ac etiam habere Vicecomit. Civitat. and Comitat. Civitat. Land.
and nominare and eligere ex seipsis duas personas fore Vicecomit. Civitat.
praed. and Com. ejusdem Civitat. Ac ill. sic nominat. and elect. praesicere and
constituere Vic. Civit. praed. and Com. ejusdem Civitat. ad Execution. and
Retorn. omnium Brevium, Billarum, and Praeceptorum Dom. Regis pro
Administratione and Executione Justic. infra Civit. praed. and Com. ejusdem
Civit. exequend. faciend. ac ad faciend. and exequend. omnia and singula al.
infra Civit. praed. and Com. ejusdem Civit. quae ad Officium Vic. faciend.
pertinent. Ac etiam habere Vic. Com. Middlesex, and nominare, eligere and
constituere exseipsis Vic. Com. Middlesex, pro eodem Com. ut Vicecomes inde
deservitur. ac omnia Brevia, Billas, and praecepta Dom. Regis infra Com.
Middlesex praed. pro Administratione and Executione Justic. ibid. exequend. and
retorn. inde faciend. absque aliqua Commissione sive aliquibus Literis
Patentibus a Dom. Rege inde obtent. sive obtinend. Ac etiam quod Major and
Aldermanni ejusdem Civit. fucrunt Justic. Dom. Regis ad pacem infra Civit.
praed. conservand. ac ad Sessiones pacis and placita Coronae infra eandem
Civit. tenend. ac ad omnes Felon. Riot. and Conventic. illicit. infra Civit.
praed. inquirend. audiend. and terminand. Authoritate ipsorum propria, absque
aliqua Commissione, sive al. Authoritate a Dom. Rege in ea part concess. sive
obtent. De quibus quidem omnibus and singulis Libertat. Privileg. and Franches.
iidem Major and Communitas ac Cives Civit. London praed. per totum tempus
supradictum, supra dictum Dom. Regem nunc usurpaverunt and adhuc usurpant, in
dict. Dom. Regis nunc Contempt. Praerogativae suae Regiae grave dampnum and
praejudicium. Vnde idem Attornat. dict. Dom. Regis nunc General. pro eodem Dom.
Rege pet. Advisament. Cur. hic in praemiss. and debit. Legis Process. versus
Praefat. Major. and Communitat. ac Cives Civit. Land. praed. in hac part fieri
ad respondend. dict. Dom. Regi Quo Warranto clamant habere, uti and gaudere
Libertat. Privileg. and Franches. supradict. etc.

In English thus: The Information in Michaelmas Term, in the Thirty Third Year
of Car. II. King of England, etc.
Land. ss. MEmorand' That Robert Sawyer Knight, our Lord the Kings Attorney
General, who on this behalf prosecutes for our said Lord the King, appears here
in his own person in the Court of our said Lord the King, before the King
himself at Westminster on Monday next after the Quindene of St. Martin ( viz.
Nov. 27.) in the same Term; and for our said Lord the King, gives this Court to
understand and be informed, That the Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the
City of London aforesaid, for the space of one month last past, and longer,
have used, and do yet use, and claim to have and use (without any Warrant or
Royal Grant) within the City of London aforesaid, and the Liberties and
Precincts of the said City, diverse Liberties, Privileges, and Franchises
following, to wit, To be of themselves one Body Corporate and Politic, in the
Name of the Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London, and by the
same Name to implead and be impleaded, to answer and be answered; And also to
have a Sheriff of the City and County of the City of London, and to Nominate
and Elect out of themselves two persons, One to be the Sheriff of the City
aforesaid, and of the County of the same City, and him so nominated and elected
to prefer and constitute Sheriff of the City aforesaid and of the County of the
said City, for the Execution and Return of all Breve's, Bills, and Precepts of
our Lord the King, for the administration and execution of the Justice within
the City aforesaid, and County of the same City, to be executed and done, and
to do and execute all and every the other things within the City aforesaid, and
County of the same, that belong to the Office of a Sheriff: And also to
Nominate, Elect and Constitute Another person out of themselves for the Sheriff
of the County of Middlesex, for the said County to serve as Sheriff for the
same, and to execute there and make return of all Breve's, Bills and Precepts
of our Lord the King within the County of Middlesex aforesaid, for the
administration and execution of Justice, without any Commission or Letters
Patents obtained or to be obtained from our Lord the King on that behalf: And
also, that the Mayor and Aldermen of the said City, have been Justices of our
Lord the King to keep the Peace within the said City, and to hold Sessions of
the Peace and Pleas of the Crown within the said City, and all the Felonies,
Riots and unlawful Conventicles within the said City, to enquire into, hear and
determine by their own proper authority, without any Commismission or other
Authority from our Lord the King granted or obtained on that behalf. All and
every of which Liberties, Privileges, and Franchises, the said Mayor and
Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London aforesaid, for all the said time,
have usurped, and do still usurp over our said Lord the King, to the contempt
of our said Lord the King, and to the great damage and prejudice of his
Prerogative Royal. Whereupon the said Attorney General of our Lord the King,
does desire for our said Lord the King the Advice of this Court in the
premises, and due course of Law to be made against the said Mayor and
Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London aforesaid on this behalf, to
answer our said Lord the King, By what Warrant they claim to have, use and
enjoy the Liberties, Privileges, and Franchises aforesaid, etc.

The PLEA. Major and Communitas ac Cives Civit' London, ad Sectam Dom' Regis.
ET predicti Major and Communitas ac Cives Civitatis London per Benedictum
Brown Attornat' suu' ven' and habito auditu Information' predict' querunt' se
Color ejusdem Informationis gravit' fore vexat' and inquietat' and hoc minus
just quia protestando quod Informatio predict' materiaque in eadem content'
min' suffic' in Lege exist' ad-qua' quidem Informat' ipsi necesse non habent
nec per Legem Terre tenet' aliquo modo respondere pro Placito tamen quoad
libertat' Privileg' and Franchiz' sequen' (viz.) ipsos Major and Communitas ac
Cives Civit' London fore de seipsis unu' corpus Corporat' and Politic' in re
facto and nomine per Nomen Majoris and Communitat' ac Civiu' Civitat' London,
ac per idem Nomen placitare and implacitare respondere ac responderi in
Informat' praedict' superius specificat' iidem Major and Communitas ac Cives
Civit' London dicunt quod dict' Domin' Rex nunc ipsos occasion inde impetere
seu occasonare non debet quia dicunt quod praedict Civit' London est and a
tempore cujus contrar' memoria' homin' non exist' fuit antiqua Civitas Quodque
Cives ejusdem Civit' sunt and a praedict' tempore cujus contra memor' homin'
non exist' fuerunt un' corpus corporat' and Politic' in re facto and nomine per
nomen Majoris and Communitat' ac Civium Civit' London ac per idem nomen per
tot' tempus illud placitaver' and implacitat' fuerunt responder' and respons'
fuerunt, and placitare and implacitari, respondere ac responderi ac toto
tempore supradicto usi fuerunt and consuever' Quodque in Magna Charta de
libertat' Angl' in Parliament' Domin' Henrici quondam Regis Angl' tertii apud
Westm' in Comitat' Midd' Anno Regni sui nono tent' edit' and provis' continet'
quod Civitas London habeat omnes libertat' suas antiquas and consuetud' suas
and iidem Major and Communitas ac Cives Civit' London ulterius dicunt quod
Domin' Edwardus quondam Rex Angl' tertius in Parliamento suo apud Westm' in
Comit' Midd' Anno Regni sui primo tent' per quandam Cartam suam de consensu
Praelator' Comit' Baron' ac totius Communitat' Regni sui in eodem Parliament'
suo apud Westm' praedict' convocat' existen' ac Authoritat' ejusdem Parliament'
confirmavit tunc Civibus Civit' London praedict' libertat' subsequen' int'
alia) habend' sibi and successoribus suis in perpetuum, imprimis recitando:
quod cu' in Magna Charta de libertat' Angl' contineat' quod Civit' London
habeat omn' libertat' suas antiquas and consuetud' suas; Et quod iidem Cives
tempore confection' dictae Cartae ac temporibus Sancti Edwardi Regis and
Confessoris and Willielmi Conquestoris and al' Progenitor' dict' Regis Edwardi
in divers' libertat' and consuetud' tam per Cartas ipsor' Progenitor' suor'
quam suae Cartis ex antiqua consuetud' habuissent, voluit and concessit idem
Rex Edwardus tertius pro se and Haeredibus suis per Cartam illam authoritat'
praedict' quod iidem Cives habuerint Tibertac' suas secund' form' Magn' Cartae
supradict' and quod pro aliqua personali transgr' vel Judicio personal'
alicujus Ministri ejusdem Civit' non caperet' libertat' Civit' ill' in manus
ejasdem Regis Edwardi tertii vel Hered' suor' sed hujusmodi Minister prout
qualitas transgress' requiret puniet' prout per eandem Cartam geren' dat' apud
Westm' praedict' sexto die Martii, Anno Regni dict' Regis Edwardi tertii primo
supradict' sub magno sigillo suo Angl' sigillat' hic in Cur' praelat' inter
alia before apparet Et iidem Major and Communitas ac Cives Civit' London
ulterius dicunt quod ad instant' and requisite Communitat' Regni Angl' in
Parliamento Domin' Ricardi nuper Regis Angl' secundo post Conquest' apud Westm'
praedict' Anno Regni sui septimo tent' assemblat' pro majore quiet and pace
int' ligeos ejusdem nuper Regis faciend' and pro bono publico omnes Consuetud'
libertat' Privileg' and franch' Civit' praedict' tunc Civibus Civit' illius and
eor' successor' licet usi non fuerint vel abusi fuerint eisdem Authorit'
ejusdem Parliament' ratificat' and confirmat' fuer' Quodque Domin' Henricus
nuper Rex Angl' sextus per litteras suas patent' sub magno sigillo suo Angl'
sigillat' geren' dat' apud Westm' praedict' vicesimo sexto die Octobr' Anno
Regn' sui vicesimo tertio quas iidem Major and Communitas and Cives Civit'
London hic in Cur' proferunt pro se, Heredibus et Successoribus suis
confirmavit Majori et Communitat' ac Civibus Civit' London et successor' suis
omnes et singulas suas' libertat' franc' et liberas Consuetud' adeo integras et
illesas sicut eas unquam aliquo tempore Progenitor' ejusdem nuper Regis Henrici
sexti melius, quietius et liber' habuissent et tenuissent prout per easdem
litteras patent' int' alia before apparet Quodque Domin' Edwardus nuper Rex
Ang' quartus per litteras suas patent' sub magno sigillo suo Angl' sigillat'
geren' dat' apud Westm' praedict' Nono die Novembr' Anno Regn' sui secundo quas
iidem Major et Communitas ac Cives Civit' London hic in Cur' proferunt pro se
et Heredibus suis confirmavit Majori et Communitat' ac Civib. Civit. London et
successoribus suis in perpetu. omn. et singulas suas libertat. Franc. et
liberas Consuetud. adeo integr. et illaes. sicut eas unquam aliquo tempore
Progenitor. ejusdem nuper Reg. Edwardi quarti melius, quietius et liber.
habuissent et tenuissent Et ulterius idem nuper Rex Edwardus quartus per easdem
litteras suas patent. concessit eisdem Majori et Communitat. ac Civibus quod
licet ipsi vel Predecessor. sui aut Major et Alderman. Civit. praedict. vel
Predecessor. sui praeantea vel Successor. sui extunc imposter. aliqua vel
aliquibus libertat. quietant. concess. ordinat. Articulor. seu liberar.
Consuetud. aut alior. in eisdem litteris patent' ejusdem nuper Regis Edwardi
quarti seu al' literis suis aut Progenitor' suor' quondam Reg' Angl' eisdem
Majori and Communitat' concess' content' aliquo Casu emergente plene non usi
vel abusi fuerint: Noluit tamen idem nuper Rex Edwardus quartus quod propt' hoc
ipsi Major and Communitat' Aldermann' and Cives seu Successoribus sui
forisfactur' aliquor' praemiss' incurrerent sed quod ipsi and eor' Successor'
universis and singulis libertat' quietant' concess' ordinat' Articulis, liberis
Consuetud' and quibuscunque al' in Cartis and litteris praedict' content.
totaliter non usis vel etiam abusis and eor. quolibet extunc de caetero plene
and libere gauderent and eis uterent. sine impetition. vel impediment' ejusdem
nuper Regis seu Hered. suor. Justic. Escator. Vicecom. aut al. Balliv. seu
Ministr. ipsius nuper Regis vel al. quorumcunque prout per easdem litteras
patent, ejusdem nuper Regis Edwardi quarti hic in Cur. prolat. int. alia
before apparet. Quodque Domin. Henricus nuper Rex Angl. Septimus per litteras
suas patent. sub magno sigillo suo Angl. sigillat. geren. dat. apud Westminster.
praedict. vicessimo tertio die Julii Anno Regnisui Vicessimo, quas iidem Major
and Communitas ac Cives Civit. London hic in Cur. proferunt pro se Heredibus
and Successoribus suis Ratificavit and Confirmavit Majori and Communitat. ac
Civibus Civit' London and eor. Successor. omnia and singula libertat. privileg.
quietant. and liberas Consuetud. quibus ipsi Major Communitas and Cives seu
Predecessor. sui habere, exercere seu gaudere consuevissent vel usi fuissent
aut devenissent adeo plene, plan. and integre ac si ac omnia and singula
separatim and verbat. in eisdem litteris patent. express. declarat. and
manifestat. essent and fuissent, prout per easdem litteras patent intalia
before apparet. Et iidem Major and Communitas ac Cives Civit. London ulterius
dicunt quod Domin. Jacobus nuper Rex Angl. etc. per litteras suas Patent. sub
Magno sigillo suo Angl. sigillat. geren. dat. apud Honorem suu. de
Hampton Court Vicessimo quarto die Septembris Anno Regni sui Angl. sexte, quas
iidem Major and Communitas ac Cives Civit. London hic in Cur. proserunt
recitando quod cum quamplurimi Progenitores ipsius nuper Regis quondam Reges
Angl. de gratia sua special. ac progratis laudabil. multiplicib. and contin.
servit. per Majorem and Communitat. ac Cives Civit. London et Praedecessor'
suos temporibus retract. fact. et impens. Necnon pro diverse. al. urgent. causis
et consideration. cos separatim moven. dedissent concessissent et confirmassent
Majori et Communitat. ac Civib. Civit. London praedict. et Successor. suis
diverse. libertat. Privileg. Franch. Immunitat. Authorit. Jurisdiction. Ordinat.
Consuetud. et quietant. prout, per separat. litteras Patent. Progenitor. et
Predecessor. suor. quondam Regum Angl. before et manifestius liquelat et
apparebat. Idem nuper Rex Jacobus pro et in considerat. sum. fidelitat.
constant. et prompt. et laudabil. servit. per Major. et Communitat. ac Cives.
Civit. London praedict. eidem nuper Regi in ips. Regn. sui primis Auspiciis et
continue usque tunc manifest. et fidelissim. fact. et impens. omnes et singulas
Litteras Patent. Cartas et confirmac. Praeclariss. Progenitor. et Successor.
suor. eisdem Majori et Communitat. ac Civib. Civit. London praedict. et
successor. suis per quaecunque nomina incorporat. ante tunc tempora fact.
concess. seu confirmat. ac omnes et singulas donac. concess. confirmac.
restitut. consuetud. ordinac. explanac. articul. et omnes al. res quascunque in
quibuscunque litteris paten. sive Cartae quorumcunque Progenitor. Predecess.
aut Antecessor. suor. Regn. Angl. Necnon omnia et singula in dict. litteris
patent. Chartis concess. confirmat. seu eor. aliquibus content. recitat.
specifac. confirmat. seu explanat. Ac omnia et singula Jurisdiction.
Authoritat. Privileg. Libertat. Franch. Quietanc. Immunitat. liberas Consuetud.
et Hereditament. quaecunque quae praedict. Major et Communitas ac Cives Civit.
London praedict. vel Predecessor. sui per Nomen Major. et Communitat. ac Civium
Civit. London seu per Nomen Major. et Aldermann. Civit. London seu per Nomen
Majoris Civium et Communitat. Civit. London seu per Nomen Majoris et Civium
Civit. London seu per Nomen Majoris et Communitat. Civit. London seu per Nomen
Civium Civit. London seu per nomen Baron. London seu per Nomen Baron. Civit.
London seu per aliquod al. nomen quodcunque ratione seu vigore aliquar.
litterar. patent. Cartar. seu confirmac. aliquor. Progenitor. Praedecessor. aut
Antecessor. ejusdem nuper Regis Jacobi quondam Regis Angl. aliquo tempore vel
aliquib. temporib. habuissent seu rationabilit. usi fuissent aut exercuissent
rata habuit et grata ac pro se et Hered. et Successor. suis acceptavit et
approbavit ac ea omnia et singula prefat. Major. et Communitat. ac Civib.
Civit. London praedict. et eor. Successorib. per easdem litteras suas patent.
ratificavit et confirmavit habend. tenend. gaudend. et exercend. omnia et
singula praemiss. eisdem Major. et Communitat. ac Civibus Civit. London
praedict. et Successoribus suis in perpetuum adeo plene, libere et integre ac
in tam amplis modo et forma ac si separatim, singulatim et nominatim in
litteris patent. ill. express. nominat. declarat. recitat. et manifest. essent
et fuissent, prout per easdem litteras patent. inter alia before apparet.
Quodque Domin. Carolus primus nuper Rex Angl' etc. per litteras suas patent.
sub magno sigillo suo Angl. sigillat. geren. dat. apud Westminster. praedict. decimo
octavo die Octobris Anno regni sui quartodecimo, quas iidem Major et Communitas
ac Cives Civit. London hic in Cur. proferunt omnia et singula Privileg.
Libertat. Franc. Quietanc. Immunitat. et liberas Consuetud. quaecunque que
praedict. Major et Communitas ac Cives Civit. London praedict. vel
Praedecessor. sui per Nomen Majoris et Communitat. ac Civium Civit. London seu
per Nomen Majoris et Aldermann. Civium et Communitat. London seu per Nomen
Majoris et Civium Civit. London seu per Nomen Majoris et Communitat. Civit.
London seu per Nomen Civium Civit. London seu per Nomen Baron. London seu per
Nomen Baron. Civit. London seu per aliquod al. nomen quodcunque ratione seu
vigore litterar. patent. Cartar. seu confirmac. in eisdem litteris patent.
dicti nuper Regis Caroli primi mentionat. vel usu vel praescriptione aut alio
legal. modo aliquo tempore vel aliquibus temporibus ante hoc habuissent seu
rationabiliter usi fuissent aut exercuissent rat. haben. et grata ac pro se
heredibus et successoribus suis acceptavit et approbavit, ac ea omnia et
singula praefat. Majori et Communitat. ac Civibus Civit. London et eor.
Successor. per easdem litteras suas patent. ratificavit et confirmavit, prout
per litteras patent. ill. int. alia before liquet et apparet. Quodque
praedict. Domin. Rex nunc per litteras suas patent. sub magno sigillo suo Angl.
sigillat. geren. dat. apud Westminster. praedict. vicesimo quarto die Junii Anno
regni sui decimo quinto, quas iidem Major et Communitas ac Cives Civit. London
hic in Cur. proferunt pro ipso Rege, Heredibus et Successoribus suis
ratificavit et confirmavit Major et Communitat. ac Civibus Civit. London et
successor. suis omnia et singula Jurisdiction. Authoritat. Privileg. Libertat.
Franch. Quietanc. Immunitat. et Consuetud. quecunque que praefat. Major et
Communitas ac Cives Civit. London vel Praedecessor. sui per Nomen Major. et
Communitat. ac Civium Civit. London seu per Nomen Majoris Aldermannor. Civium
et Communitat. London seu per Nomen Majoris et Civium Civit. London seu per
Nomen Major. et Communit. Civit. London seu per Nomen Civium Civit. London, seu
per Nomen Baron. London, seu per Nomen Baron. Civitat. London, seu per aliquod
al' Nomen quodcunque ratione vel vigore Litterar. patent. cartar. seu
confirmat. in eisdem litteris patent. dicti Domin. Regis nunc praementionat.
vel alicujus seu aliquar. usus vel usu. praescription. vel praescriptionum seu
al. legali modo quocunque aliquo tempore, vel aliquibus temporibus ante tunc
habuissent seu rationabilit. usi fuissent, seu exercuissent habend. tenend.
gaudend. and exercend. omnia and singula praemiss. praedict. eisdem Majori and
Communitat. ac Civibus Civitat. London praedict. and Successoribus suis
inperpetuum adeo plene libere and integre ac in tam amplio modo and forma prout
in eisdem Litteris patent. superius mentionat. fore data sive concessa aut
alit. usu praescription. vel al. legali modo seu jure quocunque ante tunc
respective habit. obtent. sive gavisa fuissent ac si separatim singulatim and
nominatim in et per dictas litteras patent. ipsius Domin. Regis nunc express.
nominat. declarat. concess. and manifesta essent et fuissent prout per easdem
Litteras Patent. inter alia before apparet. Et eo Warranto iidem Major and
Communitat. ac Cives Civitat. London per tempus in Informatione praedicta
superius specifac. usi fuer. and adhuc utunt. ac clamant habere and uti
Libertat. Privileg. and Franch. fore de seipsis unum Corpus Corporat. and
politic. in re facto and Nomine per Nomen Majoris and Communitat. ac Civium
Civitat' London, ac per idem Nomen placitare and implacitari, respondere ac
responderi prout eis been licuit and licet. Absque hoc quod iidem Major and
Communitas ac Cives Civitat. London de Libertat. Privileg. and Franch. ill.
super dictum Domin. Regem nunc per tempus praedict. in Informatione praedict.
superius specifac. Vsurpaver. seu Vsurpant prout per Information. ill. pro
dicto Domin. Rege nunc superius supposuit. Quae omnia and singula iidem Major
ac Communitas ac Cives Civitat. London parat. sunt verificare, unde petit
Judicium; Et quod Libertat. Privileg. and Franch. ill. eis and Successoribus
suis in perpetuu. deinceps allocent. and adjudicent. and quod ipsi quoad
praemiss. ill. ab hac Cur. dimittant. etc. Et iidem Major and Communitas ac
Cives Civit. London, quoad Libertat. Privileg. and Franch. sequen. viz. ipsos
habere. Vicecom. Civit. and Com. Civit. London and Vicecom. Midd. and nominare
et eligere ex seipsis suas personas fore Vicecom. Civit. praedict. et Com.
ejusdem Civit. et Vicecom. Midd. ac ill. sic nominat. et Elect. praeficere et
constituere Vicecom. Civit. praedict. et Com. ejusdem Civit. et Vicecom. Midd.
ac ut Vicecom. Civit. praedict. et in Com. ejusdem Civit. ad execut. et Retorn.
omniu. breviu. Bill. et Praecept. Domin. Regis pro Administratione et execut.
Justic. infra Civit. praedict. et Com. ejusdem Civit. exequend. faciend. quae
ad Officiu. Vicecom. faciend. pertinent ac ad faciend. et exequend. omnia et
singula alia infra Civit. praedict. and Com. ejusdem Civit. que ad officiu.
Vicecom. faciend. pertinent, acout Vicecom. Com. Midd. pro eodem Com.
deservitur. ac omnia Brevia, Bill. and Praecept. Domin. Regis infra Com. Midd.
praedict. pro Administratione and Executione Justitiae ibidem exequend. and
retorn. inde faciend. quae ad Officium Vicecom. faciend. pertinen. Dicunt quod
Dictus Domin. Rex nunc ipsos Majorem and Communitat. ac Cives Civitat. London
occasion inde impetere seu occasonare non debet, quia dicunt quod praedict.
Civit. London est and a tempore cujus contrar. memoria. homin. non exist. fuit
antiqua Civitas and antiqu. Commit. de se Quodque praedict. Com. Midd. per totum
tempus praedict. fuit and est antiquus Commit. Quodque Cives ejusdem Civit. sunt
and a praedict. tempore cujus contrar. memor. homin. non exist. fuer. un.
corpus corporat. and politicu. tam per Nomen Major. and Communitat. ac Civium
Civit. London quam per Nomen Civium London Quodque Domin. Johannes quondam Rex
Angl. per litteras suas patent. sub magno sigillo suo Angl. sigillat. geren.
dat. apud bonam Villam super Tokam, quinto die Julii, Anno Regni sui primo,
quas iidem Major and Communitat. ac Cives Civitat. London hic in Cur.
proferunt, concessit Civibus London praedict. Vicecomit. London and de Midd.
cum omnibus rebus and consuetudinibus que pertinebant ad praedict. Vicecom.
infra Civit. and extra, per terras and per aquas habend. and tenend. eis in
perpetuum. Et praeterea idem Domin. Rex Johannes per litteras suas patent.
praedict. concessit eisdem Civibus London quod ipsi de seipsis facerent
Vicecom. quoscunque voluerint and amoverent quando voluerint prout per easdem
litteras patent. inter alia before apparet. Quodque in Magna Charta de
libertatibus Angl. in Parliament. Domin. Henrici quondam Regis Angl. tertii
apud Westminster. in Com. Midd. Anno regni sui nono tent. edit. and provis. continet.
quod Civit. London habeat omnes libertat. suas antiquas and consuetud. suas. Et
iidem Major and Communitas, ac Cives Civit. London ulterius dicunt quod idem
Domin. Rex Henricus tertius per litteras suas patent. sub magno sigillo suo
Angl. sigillat. geren. dat. apud Westminster. praedict. decimo octavo die Februarii
Anno Regni sui undecimo quas iidem Major and Communitas ac Cives Civit. London
hic in Cur. proferunt, confirmavit Civibus London Vicecom. London and de Midd.
cum omnibus rebus and consuetudinib. quae pertineb. ad praedict. Vicecom. infra
Civitat. and extra, per terras and per aquas prout per easdem litteras patent.
int. al. before apparet. Quodque Domin. Edwardus quondam Rex Angl. tertius in
Parliament. suo apud Westm' tent. in Com. Midd. Anno regni sui primo tent. per
quandam Cartam suam de assensu Praelator. Commit. Baron ac totius Communitat.
regni sui in eodem Parliamento suo apud Westminster. praedict. convocat. existen. ac
Authoritate ejusdem Parliamenti confirmavit tunc Civibus Civit. London
praedict. libertat. subsequen. int. al. habend. sibi and Successoribus suis in
perpetuum. Imprimis recitando quod cum in Magna Charta de libertat. Angl.
contineat. quod Civitas London habeat omnes libertat. suas antiquas et
consuetud. suas. Et quod iidem Cives tempore confection. dictae Cartae ac
temporibus sancti Edwardi Regis et Confessoris, et Willielmi Conquestor. et al.
Progenitor. dicti Regis Edwardi tertii diversas libertat. et consuetud. tamper
Cartas ipsor. Progenitor. suor. quam sine Cartis ex antiqua consuetud.
habuissent, voluit et concessit idem Rex Edwardus tertius pro se et Heredibus
suis per Cartam ill. authoritat. praedict. quod idem Cives haberent Libertat.
suas secund. formam magn. Cartae supradict. Et quod pro aliqua personal.
transgr. vel Judicio Personal. alicujus Ministri ejusdem Civit. non caperet.
libertas Civit. ill. in manu ejusdem Regis Edwardi tertii vel Hered. suor. sed
hujusmodi Minister prout qualitas transgr. requireret puniretur prout per
eandem Cartam geren. dat. apud Westminster. praedict. sexto die martii Anno Regni
dicti Regis Edwardi tertii primo supradict. sub magno sigillo suo Angl.
sigillat. hic in Cur. prolat. int. alia before apparet. Et iidem Major et
Communitas ac Cives Civit. London ulterius dicunt quod ad Instant. et
requisition. Communitat' Regni Angl. in Parliamento Domin. Ricardi nuper Regis
Angl. Secundi post Conquestum apud Westminster. praedict. Anno Regni sui septimo
tent. assemblat. pro majore quiet' et pace inter ligeos ejusdem nuper Regis
fovend. et pro bono publico omnes Consuetud. Libertat. Privileg. et Franch.
Civit. praedict. tunc Civibus Civitat. illius et eor. Successoribus, licet usi
non fuerint vel abusi fuerint eisdem Authoritat. ejusdem Parliament. ratificat.
and confirmat. fuer. Quodque Dominus Henricus nuper Rex Angl. sextus per
litteras suas patent. sub magno sigillo suo Angl. sigillat. geren. dat. apud
Westminster. praedict. vicesimo sexto die Octobris, Anno Regni sui vicesimo tertio
quas iidem Major and Communitas ac Cives Civit. London hic in Cur. proferunt
pro se Heredibus and Successoribus suis confirmavit Majori and Communitat. ac
Civibus Civit. London et Successoribus suis omnes et singulas suas libertat.
franch. et liberas Consuetud. adeo integras et illesas sicut eas unquam aliquo
tempore Progenitor. ejusdem nuper Regis Henrici sexti melius, quietius et
liber. habuissent et tenuissent prout per easdem litteras patent. int. al.
before apparet. Quodque Domin. Edwardus nuper Rex Angl. quartus per litteras
suas patent. sub magno sigillo suo Angl. sigillat geren. dat. apud Westminster.
praedict. nono die Novembr. Anno Regni sui secundo quas iidem Major et
Communitas ac Cives Civit. London hic in Cur. proferunt pro se et Heredibus
suis confirmavit Majori et Communitat. ac Civibus Civit. London et
Successoribus suis in perpetuum omnes et singulas suas libertat. franch. et
liberas Consuetud. adeo integr. et illes. sicut eas unquam aliquo tempore
Progenitor. ejusdem nuper Regis Edwardi quarti melius, quietius et liber.
habuissent et tenuissent Et ulterius idem nuper Rex Edwardus quartus per easdem
litteras suas patent. concessit eisdem Majori et Communitat. ac Civibus, quod
licet ipsi vel Predecessores sui aut Major et Aldermann. Civit. praedict. vel
Praedecessor. sui praeantea vel Successores sui extunc imposterum aliqua vel
aliquibus libertat. quietant. concess. Ordination. Articulor. seu liberar.
Consuetudin. aut alior. in eisdem Litteris Patentibus ejusdem nuper Regis
Edwardi quarti seu al. Litteris suis aut Progenitor. suor. quondam Regum Angl.
eisdem Majori and Communitat. concess. content. aliquo casu emergente plene non
usi vel abusi fuerint. Noluit tamen idem nuper Rex. Edwardus quartus. quod
propt. hoc. ipsi Major and Communitas Alderman. and Cives seu Successor. sui
forisfactur. aliquor. premissor. incurrent sed quod ipsi and eorum Successor.
Vniversis and singulis libertat. quietant. concess. ordinat. Articulis Liberis
Consuetud. and quibuscunque al. in Cartis and litteris praedict. content.
totalit. non usis vel etiam abusis, and eor. quolibet extunc de caetero plene
and libere gauderent and eis uterent. sine impetatione vel impediment. ejusdem
nuper Regis seu Hered. suor. Justic. Escaetor. Viceom. aut al. Balliv. seu
Ministr. ipsius nuper Regis vel alior. quorumcunque prout per easdem Litteras
patent. ejusdem nuper Regis Edwardi quarti hic in Cur. Prolat. int. al. before
apparet. Quodque Domin. Henricus nuper Rex Angl. Septimus per Litteras suas
Patent. sub Magno sigillo suo Angl. Sigillat. geren. dat. apud Westminster. praedict.
Vicesimo tertio die Julii Anno Regni sui Vicesimo, quas iidem Major and
Communitas ac Cives Civit. London hic in Cur. proferunt pro se Hered. and
Successoribus suis ratificavit and confirmavit Majori and Communitat. ac
Civibus Civit. London, and eorum Successoribus omnia and singula Libertat.
Privileg. quietant. and liberas consuetudines quibus ipsi Major Communitas and
Cives seu Predecessor. sui habere, exercere seu gaudere consuevissent vel ust
fuissent aut debuissent aut plene, plane and integre ac si ea omnia and singula
separatim and verbatim in eisdem Litteris Patent express' declarat' and
manifestat' essent and fuissent prout per easdem Litteras Patent' inter alia
before apparet. Quodque Domin' Henricus nuper Rex Angl' Octavus per Litteras
suas Patent. sub magno sigillo suo Angl' sigillat' geren' dat' apud Westm'
praedict duodecimo Die Julii Anno Regni sui quinto, quas iidem Major and
Communitas ac Cives Civit' London hic in Cur' proferunt omnes concessiones and
al, quaecunque in praedict' Litteris Patent' praedict' Domin' Regis Johannis
superius specificat' content' quod ipse Rege Henrico octavo and Heredibus suis,
Majori and Communitat' ac Civibus Civitat' London and Successoribus suis
Ratificavit and Confirmavit, prout per easdem Litteras Patent' ejusdem nuper
Regis Henrici Octavi inter alia before apparet. Quodque Dom' Edwardus nuper
Rex Angl' Sextus per Litteras suas Patent' sub magno figillo suo Angl'
sigillat' geren' dat' apud Westm' praedict' Vicesimo primo die Februarii Anno
Regni sui Secundo, quas iidem Major and Communitas ac Cives Civit' London hic
in Cur' proferunt omnes concession' and al' quaecunque in praedict' Litteris
Patent' dicti Domin' Regis Johannis superius specificat' content' pro ipso
nuper Rege Edwardo Sexto and Heredibus suis, Major. and Communitat' ac Civibus
Civit. London, and Successoribus suis Ratificavit et Confirmavit, prout per
easdem Litteras Patent' ejusdem nuper Regis Edwardi Sexti inter alia before
apparet. Quodque Domina Maria nuper Regnii. Angl' per Litteras suas Patent' sub
magno sigillo Angl. sigillat. geren. dat. apud Westminster. praedict. primo die
Martii, Anno Regni sui primo quas iidem Major and Communitas ac Cives Civitat.
London hic in Cur. proferunt pro ipsa nuper Regina Hered. and Successoribus
suis omnes concessiones and al. quaecunque in praedict. litteris. patent. dicti
Domin. Regis Johannis superius specificat. content. Majori et Communitat. ac
Civibus Civitat. London praedict. et Successor. suis ratificavit et confirmavit
prout per easdem litteras patent. ejusdem nuper Regis int. al. before apparet.
Quodque Domina Elizabetha nuper Regin. Ang. per litteras suas patent. sub magno
sigillo suo Angl. sigillat. geren. dat. apud Westminster. praedict. nono die Maii,
Anno Regni sui quarto, quas iidem Major et Communitas ac Cives Civitat. London
hic in Cur. proferunt pro ipsa nuper Regina Elizabetha Hered. et Successoribus,
suis omnes concession. et al. quaecunque in praedict. litteris patent. dicti
Domin. Regis Johannis superius specificat. content. Majori et Communitat. ac
Civibus Civit. London et Successoribus suis ratificavit et confirmavit, prout
per easdem litteras patent. ejusdem nuper Reginae Elizabeth. inter alia before
apparet. Et iidem Major et Communitas ac Cives Civitat. London ulterius dicunt,
quod Domin. Jacobus nuper Rex Angl. per litteras suas patentes sub magno
sigillo suo Angl. sigillat. geren. dat. apud Honorem suum de Hampton Court
Vicesimo quarto die Septembris Anno regni sui Angl. sexto quas iidem Major et
Communitas ac Cives Civitat. London hic in Cur. proferunt recitando, quod cum
quamplurim. Progenitor. ipsius nuper Regis quondam Regis Angl. de gratia sua
speciali ac pro gratis laudabil. multiplicibus and continuis servitiis per
Majorem and Comunitat. ac Cives Civitat, London and Praedecessores suos
temporibus retractis fact. and impens' necnon pro diversas al. urgentibus
causis and considerationibus eos seperatim moventibus dedissent concessissent
and confirmassent Majori and Communitati ac Civibus Civitat. London praedict,
ac Successoribus suis diversis libertat. privilege. Franc. imunitat.
Authoritat. Jurisdiction. Ordinationes consuetudin. and quietantias prout per
seperal. Litteras Patent. Progenitor. and Praedecessor. suor. quondum Regina
Angl. before and manefestus liquebat and apparebat. Idem nuper Rex Jacobus pro
and in Consideratione sum. fidelitat. constant. prompt. and laudabil. servitii
per Majorem and Comunitat. ac Cives Ciuitat. London praedict. eidem nuper Regi
in in ipsis Regni sui primis Auspitii and continue vsque tunc manifestat. and
fidelissim. fact. and impens. omnes and singulas Litteras Patentes Cartas and
Confirmation. Praeclarissimor. Progenitor. and Antecessor. suor. eisdem Majori
and Communitat. ac Civibus Civitat. London praedict. and Praedecessoribus suis
per quecunque nomina incorporat. ante tunc tempora fact. concess. seu
confirmat. ac omnes and singulas Donationes Concessiones confirmation.
restitution. Consuetudines Ordinationes and Explanationes Articul. and omnes
al. res quascunque in quibuscunque Litteris Patentibus sine Chartis
quorumcunque Progenitor. Predecessor. aut Antecessor. suor. Regum Angl. nec non
omnia and singula in dictis Litteris Patentibus Chartis Concessionibus
Confirmationibus seu eor aliquibus content, recitat. specificat. confirmat. seu
explanat. ac omnia and singulis Jurisdictiones Authoritates Privilegia
libertates and Franches quietant. imunitates liberas consuetudines and
Hereditament. quecunque que praedict. Major and Comunitat. ac Cives Civitat.
London praedict. vel. Predecessor. sui per nomen Majoris and communitat. ac
Civium Civitat. London seu per nomen Majoris and Aldermann. Civitat. London seu
per nomen Majoris Civium and Comunitat. Civitat. London su per nomen Majoris
and Civium Civitat. London seu per nomen Major. and Comunitat. Civitat. London,
seu per nomen Civium Civitat. London seu per nomen Baron London seu per nomen
Baron Civitat. London seu per aliquod aliud nomen quodcunque ratione seu Pigore
aliquar. litterar. patent Chartar. seu confirmation. aliquor Progenitor.
Predecessor. aut Antecessor. ejusdem nuper Regis Jacobi quondam Regium Angl.
aliquo tempore vel aliquibus Temporibus habuissent seu rationabilit. usi
fuissent aut exercuissent rata habuit and grata ac pro se Heredibus and
Successoribus suis acceptavit and approbavit ac ea omnia and singula praefat.
Majori and Communitat. ac Civibus Civitat. London praedict. and eor'
Successoribus per easdem Litteras suas Patent. Ratificavit and confirmavit
habend. and tenend. gaudend. and exercend. omnia and singula praemissa eisdem
Majori and Comunitat. ac Civibus Civitat. London praedict. and Successoribus
suis imperpetuum adeo plene libere and integre ac tam amplis modo and forma and
si seperatim and singulatim and nominatim in Litteris Patentibus ill'
expressmominat. declarat. recitat. and manifestat. essent and fuissent prout
per easdem Litteras patentes inter alia before apparet Quodque Domini Carolas
Primus nuper Rex Angl. etc. per Litteras suas patentes sub magno sigillo suo
Angl. sigillat. geren. dat apud Westminster. praedict. decimo Octavo die Octobris
Anno Regni sui quartadecimo quas iidem Major and Comunitas ac Cives Civitat.
London hic in cur proferunt omnia and singula privilegia libertat. Franch.
quietant. immunitates and liberas Confuetudines quecuncque que praedict. Major
and Comunitat. ac Cives Civitat. London praedict. vel Predecessor. sui per
nomen Mojoris and Comunitas ac Civium Civitat. Land. seu per nomen Majoris and
Alderman. Civium and Comunitat. London seu per nomen Majoris and Civium
Civitat. London seu per nomen Majoris and Communitatis London seu per nomen
Civium Civitat. London seu per nomen Baron. London seu per nomen Baron.
Civitat. London seu per aliquod aliud nomen quodcunque ratione seu vigore
praedict. litterar. patent. praedicti Domin. Regis Johnnis aut aliar. litterar.
patent. Chartarum seu confirmation. in eisdem litteris patentibus dicti nuper
Regis Caroli primi mentioriat. vel usu vel praescription. aut alio legali modo
aliquo tempore vel aliquibus temporibus ante tunc habuisent seu rationabilit.
usi. fuiscent aut exercuissent rata habem and grata ea pro se Heredibus and
Successoribus suis acceptavit and approbavit ac ea omnia and singula praefat.
Majori and Communitati ac Civibus Civitat. London and eor. successoribus per
easdem litteras suas patentes ratificavit and confirmavit prout per litteras
patent illas inter alia before apparet Quodque praedictus Domini. Rex nunc per
litteras suas patent. sub magno sigillo suo Angl. sigillat geren. dat. apud
Westminster. predict. vicesimo quarto die Junii Anno Regni sui decimo quinto quas
iidem Major and Communitas ac Cives Civitat London hic in Cur. proferunt pro
ipso Rege Heredibus and succestoribus suis rati ficavit and confirmavit Majori
and Communitati ac Civibus, Civitat. London and successoribus suis omnia and
singula Jurisdiction. Authoritat. Privilegia libertates Eranch. quietant.
immunitates and consuetudin. quecunquc que prefat. Major and Communitas ac
Cives Civitat. London vel Predecessores sui per Nomen Majoris and Communitatis
ac Civium Civitatis London seu per nomen Majoris Alldermannor. Civium and
Comunitat. London seu per Nomen Majoris and Civium Civitatis London seu per
nomen Major and Communitat Civit London seu pes nomen Civium Civitat London seu
per. nomen Baron. London seu per nomen Baron. Civitat. London seu per aliquod
aliud nomen quodcunque ratione vel vigore praedict. litterar patent praedict.
Domini Regis Johannis aut aliorum litterar patent Chartar seu conformation in
eisdem litteris patentibus dicti Domini Regis nunc praementionat vel alicujus
seu alequor usus vel usum praescription. vel praescription. seu alio legali
modo quecunque aliquo tempore vel aliquibus temporibus antetunt seu
rationabilit. usi fuissent aut exercuissent habend. tenend. gaudend. and
exertend. omnia and singula praemissa praedict. eisdem Majori and Communitat.
ac Civibus Civitat. London praedict. and Successoribus suis imperpetun. adeo
plene libere and integre ac in tam amplis modo and forma prout, in easdem
litteras patentibus superius mentionant. fore data sive concessa aut. alit usu
praesciption vel aliolegalimodo seu jure quocunque ad tunc respective habit
obtent. sive gavisa fuissent ac ei seperatim singulatim and nominatim in and
per dictas litteras patentes ipsius Domini Regis nunc express nominat.
declarat. concessa and manifesta essent and fuissent prout per easdem litteras
patent. (inter alia) before apparet

Et iidem Major and Communitas ac Cives Civitat' London ulterius dicunt quod a
tempore confection' praedict' Litterar' Patent' praedict' quondam Regum
Johannis hucusque tidem Major and Communitas ac Cives Civitat' London habuer'
Vicecom' Civit' and Com' Civit' London and Vicecom' Comitat' Midd' and quolibet
anno nominaverunt and elegerunt ex seipsis duas personas Cives Civitat' fore
Vicecom' Civitat' praedict' and Com' ejusdem Civitat' and Vicecom' Com' Midd'
ac ill' sic nommat' and elect' praesecerunt and conf^^tuerunt Viccom' Civitat'
praedict' and Com' ejusdem Civitat' and Vicecom' Com' Midd' ac ut Vicecom'
Civitat' praedict' and Com' ejusdem Civitat' ad execut' and retorn' omniu'
Breviu' Billar' and Praeceptor' Domin' Begis pro administratione and executione
Justitiae in infra Civit' praedict' and Com' ejusdem Civitat' exequend'
faciend' quae ad Officium Vicecom' faciend' pertinent' ac ad faciend' and
exequend' omnia and singula alia infra Civitat' praedict' and Com' ejusdem
Civitat' quae ad Offic' Vicecom' faciend' pertinent' ac ut Vicecom' Midd' pro
eodem Com' descrvitur ac omnia Brevia Billas and Praescripta Domin' Regis infra
Com' Midd' praedict' pro Administratione and Executione Justitiae ibidem
exequend' and retorn' inde faciend' quae ad Officiu' Vicecom' faciend'
pertinent' Ft eo Warranto iidem Major and Communitas ac Cives Civitat' London
per tempus in Informatione praedicta superius specificat' usi fuer' and adhuc
utunt' ac clamant habere and uti libertat' Privilegia and Franch' habere
Vicecom' Civit' and Com' Civit' London and Vicecom' Comitat' Midd' and nominare
and elegere ex seipsis duas person' fore Vicecom' Civitat' praedict' and Com'
ejusdem Civit' and Vicecom' Midd' ac ill' ac nominat' and elect' praeficere and
constituere Vicecom' Civit' puaedict' and Com' ejusdem Civitat' and Vicecom'
Midd' ac ut Vicecom' Civitat' praedict' and Com' ejusdem Civitat' ad execut'
and retorn' omni' Litterar' Billar' and Praeceptor' Domini Regis pro
Administratione and Executione Justitiae infra Civitat' praedict' and Com'
ejusdem Civit' exequend' faciend' quae ad Officiu' Vicecom' faciend' pertinent'
ac ad faciend' and exequend' omnia and singula alia infra Civitat' praedict'
and Com' ejusdem Civitat' quae ad Offic' Vicecom' faciend' pertinent' ac ut
Vicecom' Midd' pro eodem Com' deservitur' ac omnia Brevia Billas and Praecepta
Domin' Reg' infra Com' Midd' praedict' pro Administratione and Executione
Justitiae ibidem exequend' and retorn' inde faciend' quae ad Officiu' Vicecom'
faciend' pertinent' prout eis been licuit and licet.

Absque hoc quod idem Major and Communit' ac Cives Civitat' London de Libertat'
Privileg' and Franch' ill' super dictu' Dom' Regem nunc per tempus praedict' in
Informatione praedicta superius specificat' usurpaver' and usurpant' pro ut per
Inform' illam pro dicto Domin' Rege nunc superius supposuit que omnia and
singula iidem Major' and Communitat' ac Cives Civit' London parati sunt
verificare unde petit Judicium and quod Libertat' Privileg' and Franch' ill'
eis and Successoribus suis in perpetuu' deinceps allocent' and adjudicentur ac
quod ipsi quoad Praemissa ill' ab hac' Cur' dimittantur, etc.

Et iidem Major and Communitas and Cives Civit' London quoad Libertat'
Privileg' and Franch' sequen' viz. Major dictae Civitat' pro hujusmodi
Aldermann' ejusdem Civit' qui Officiu' Majoris Civit' illius susi inner' ac
inde fuer' dimissi ac tres Senior' Aldermann' Civit' praedict' qui diutius in
Officiu' Aldermanat' Civit' praedict' steter' and onus and Officiu' Majorat'
Civit' praedict' non sustinner' fore Justic' Dom' Regis ad Pacem infra Civitat'
praedict' conservand' ac ad Session' Pacis and Placita Coron' scilicet talia
Placit' Coronae qual' Justic' Domin' Regis ad Pacem Conservand' Assign'
ligittim' tenere possent inf' eandem Civit' tenend' ac ad omnes Felon' Riot'
Rout' and Conventicul' illicit' infra Civit' praedict' inquirend' audiend' and
terminand' in Informatione praedict' superius specificat' dic' quod dict'
Domin' Rex nunc ipsos Majorem and Communitat' ac Cives Civitat' London
occasion inde impetere seu occasionare non debet quia dicunt quod praedict'
Civit' London est and a tempore cujus contrar' memor' homin' non existit fuit
antiqua Civitas ac antiquus Comitat' de se ac Cives ejusdem Civit' sunt and a
praedicto tempore cujus contrar' memor' homin' non existit suer' Vnu' Corpus
corporat' and Politic' in re facto and nomine per nomen Majoris and Communitat'
ac Cives Civitat' London. Quodque Domin' Carolus Primus nuper Rex Angl' per
Litteras suas Patent' sub Magno Sigillo suo Angl' Sigillat geren' dat' apud
Westm' praedict' Decimo octavo die Octobris Anno Regni sui quarto decimo quas
iidem Major and Communitas ac Cives Civit' London hic in Cur' proferunt pro
ipso nuper Rege Hered' and Successorib' suis concessit Majori and Communitat'
ac Civibus Civit' London and eoru' Successoribus quod Major and Recordat'
Civit' praedict' qui tunc fuer' ac Majores and Recordator' Civit' praedict' qui
pro tempore fuerent ac tam ill' Aldermann' qui Major' Civitat' illius praeantea
extitissent quam ill' Aldermann' qui onus and Officiu' Majorat' Civitat'
praedict' tunc in posteru' sustinnerent and gererent licet a Majorat' ill'
cesserent aut inde essent dimissi quidam Aldermann' ibidem starent and tres
Seniores Aldermann' Civit' praedict' per tempus existen' qui diutius in
Officiu' Aldermannat' steter' and ante tunc onus and Officiu' Majorat' Civitat'
illius non sustinuer' imperpetuu' forent Custodes and quidlibet eor' esset
Custos Pacis ejusdem nuper Regis Hered' and Successor' inf' Civitat' London
praedict' and Libertat' ejusdem conservand' and custodiend' ac eosdem Majorem
and Recordator' ac Aldermann' praedict' ac omnia and singula Statuta and
Ordinationes pro bono Pacis dicti nuper Regis Hered' and Successorib' suor' ac
pro conservatione ejusdem ac pro quiet' Regimine and Gubernatione Populi ipsius
nuper Regis Hered' and Successor' suor' edit' and edend' and omnib' suis
Articul' tam infra Civitat' praedict' quam Libertat' ejusdem juxta vim formam
and effectu' eorundem Custodiend' and custodire faciend' ac ad omnes illos quos
juxta forma' and effectu' Ordination' and Statutar' eorundem and eoru' alicujus
in Civitat' praedict' pro Libertat' ejusdem Delinquentes invenirent castigand'
and puniend'prout secundu' forma' Ordination' and Statutor' ill' foret faciend'
Et ad omnes illos qui alicui vel aliquibus de Populo ejusdem nuper Regis
Haered' vel Successor' suor' de Corporationibus suis vol de incendio Dombr'
suar' minas facerent ad sufficien' securitat' de Pace vel Bono gestu suo erga
ipsu' nuper Regem Haered' and Successores suos and cunctis Populis ejus Haered'
vel Successor' invenirend' Et si hujusmodi securitat' ivenire recusarent tunc
eos in Gaola ejusdem Domin' Regis de Newgate vel in aliqua al' Prisona Haered'
vel Successor' suor' in praedict' Civit' London quousque bujusmodi securitat'
invenirent salvo custodiri faciend' Custodes and Justitiar' ipsius nuper Regis
and quemlibet coru' and Custodem and Justitiar' ejus Hered' and Successor'
suor' infra Civit' London praedict' and Libertat' ejusdem idem nuper Rex
Carolus Primus pro^se Heredibus and Successoribus suis constituit fecit and
Ordinavit per Litteras Patentes suas praedict' ac ad omnin and singula alia
exequend' and peragend' quae Justic' and Custod' Pacis ejus Hered' vel
Successor' suor' inf' aliquum Com' Regni sui Angl' exequi sive peragere
valerent possent aut deberent virtute aliquor' Statutor' and Ordination' hujus
Begni sui Angl' aut vertute Commissionis ejus Hered' and Successor' suor' ad
Pacem in aliquo hujusmodi Com' conservand' voluit etiam idem nuper Rex Carolus
Primus ac per easdem Litteras Patentes pro se Heredibus and Successoribus suis
concessit praefat' Majori and Communitati ac de Civibus Civitat' London and
eoru' Successor' quod Major and Recordator' Civit' praedict' pro tempore
existen' and hujusmodi ut prefert' Aldermann' pro tempore existen' qui Officiu'
vel locu' Majorat' Civit' illius antea sustinner' and exercuer' and tres
hujusmodi ut praefert' Seniores Aldermann' pro tempore existen' qui locu'
Majorat' praedict' non sustinner' vel quatuor eorundem Major' Recordator' and
Aldermannorum quoru' dict' Major and Recordator' pro tempore existen' unu' esse
voluit forent Justiciar' ipsius nuper Regis Hered' and Successor' suor' and
ipsos Justiciar' suos Hered' and Successor' suor' pro se Heredibus and
Successor' suis imperpetuu' assignavit ad inquirend' quotiens and quando eis
melius videret' expedire per Sacramentu' probor' and legalu' homin' tam de
Civitat' praedict' quam de Libertat' ejusdem per quos rei veritas melius sciri
posset de omnibus Murdris Felon' Veneficiis Incantation' Scortileg' Art
Magicie Transgr' Forestallar' Regretar' Ingrossar' and Extortionibus
quibuscunque ac de omnibus and singulis al' Malefactis and Offens' de quibus
Justiciar' Pacis ipsius nuper Regis Hered' and Successor' suor' legitime
inquirere possent aut deberent per quoscunque and qualitercunque infra Civit'
praed' seu Libertat' ejusdem antetunc habit' seu perpetrat' vel quae extunc
ibidem fieri vel attemptari contingerent and tam de omnibus ill' qui in
Civitat' praedict' and Libertat' ejusd' in Conventiculis contra Pacem ipsius
nuper Regis Hered' and Successor' suor' in perturbatione Populi sui Hered' and
Successor' suor' seu vi armata irent vel equitarent seu extunc ire vel equitare
presumerent. Et etiam de hiis quae ibidem ad gentem dict' Dom' Regis Hered' vel
Successor' suor' machin' vel interficiend' in Incidiis jacerent vel imposteru'
jacere praesumerent. Ac etiam de Hostillar' and al' omnibus and singulis
person' qui in abusu mensurar' and ponderu' sive in venditione Victual' contra
formam Ordination' and Statut' vel eoru' alicujus inde Communi Vtilitate Regni
sui Angl' and Populi ejusdem nuper Regis Hered' and Successor' suor' ejusdem
edit' and edend' delinquerent vel attempterent and in Civit' praedict' and
Libertat' ejusdem seu extunc imposteru' delinquere vel attemptare presumerent.
Ac etiam de quibuscunque Vicecom' Constabular' Custod' Jail and al' Offic' qui
non execut' Officiu' suor' circa premissor' vel eor' aliqua indebere se habuer'
aut imposteru' indebere se habuere presumerent aut tepidi premiss' vel
negligentes fuer' aut extunc tepidi premiss' vel negligent' fore contingerent
infra Civit' praed' and Libertat' ejusdem ac de omnibus and singulis Articulis
and Circumstant' and al' quibuscunque per quoscunque and qualitercunque in
Civit' praed' and Libertat' ejusdem fact' sive perpetrat' and quae extunc
ibidem fieri vel attemptarit contingerent qualitercunque prewiss' aut eor'
aliqua concernen' Et ad Indictament' quecunque quae coram Majore aut
Recordatore Civit' praedict' pro tempore existen' and hujusmodi ut prefert'
Aldermann' vel quatuor aut pluribus eorundem quor' dict' Major vel Recordator'
pro tempore existen' unu' esse voluit tunc imposteru' caperent' inspiciend' and
ad process' inde pres' omnes and sing^^^, sic indictat' vel quos imposteru' ac
indictat' contingerent quousque caperent' redderent se vel utlagarent' faciend'
and continuand' and ad omnia and singula murdra fellon' venesic' incantat'
scortileg' Artis magic' tam falsas Conspiration' and al' malefact' forestall'
regrat' ingrossar' Extortion' Conventicul' Indictament' pred' ceteraque omnia
and singula premiss' secund' Leges and Statut' Regni sui Angl' prout in
hujusmodi Casu fieri consuevit aut debuit audiend' and terminand' and ad casdem
delinquen' and quamlibet eoru' pro debit' suis per fines redemption'
amerciament' forisfactur' and al' modo prout secundum Legem and Consuetud'
Regni sui Angl' ac formam Ordination' and Statut' corundem fieri consuevit aut
debuit castigand' and puniend' ac ad omnia al' and singula faciend' exercend'
audiend' terminand' and exequend' infra Civit' praed' ac Libertat' ejusdem quae
Justic' ad pacem per Leges vel per Statut' hujus Regni sui Angl' facere
exercere inquirere vel exequi possent and valerent and in tam amplis' modo and
forma prout aliquis' al' aut aliqui al' Justic' ad Pacem in aliquibus al' Com'
hujus' regni sui Angel' ligittime facere exercere inquirere punire vel quoque
modo exequi possent aut valerent' prout per easdem Litteras Patent' inter al'
before apparet Quodque predictus Domin' Rex nunc per Litteras suas Patent' sub
Magno Sigillo suo Angl' Sigillat' geren' dat' apud Westm' predict' vicesimo
quarto die Junii Anno Regni sui decimo quinto quas iidem Major and Communitas
ac Cives Civit' London hic in Cur' proferunt omnes Concession' and al'
quecunque in predict' Litteris Patent' predict' nuper Regis Caroli Primi
Superius specificat' pro eodem Domin' Regis nunc Hered' and Successor' suis
Majori and Communitat' ac Civibus Civit' London pred' and coru' Successor' in
perpetuu' ratificavit and confirmavit prout per easdem Litteras Patent' ipsius
Domin' Regis nunc inter al' before apparet and iidem Major and Communitas ac
Cives Civit' London Ulterius dicunt quod tempore confection' predict' Litterar'
Patent' pred' nuper Regis Caroli Primi and dum antea and extunc hucusque fuer'
and adhuc existunt Major' and Recordator' Civit' pred' ac Alderman' ejusdem
Civit'. qui Major dicte Civit' extitissent and onus Majorat' Civit' illius
sustin' ac tres and plures! Alderman' ejusdem Civit' qui onus Majorat' Civit'
ill' non sustinuissent Quodque a tempore confection' eorundem Litterar' Patent'
predict' nuper Regis Caroli Primi hucusque Major and Recordator Civit' pred'
pro tempore existend ac hujusmodi Alderman' ejusdem Civitat' pro tempore
existen' qui onus Majorat' Civit' ill' sustin' Necnon tres Senior' Alderman'
Civit' predict' pro tempore existen' qui diutius in Officiu' Aldermannat'
Civit' pred' steter', and onus and Officit' Majorat' Civit' ill' non sustin'
virtute Litterar' Patent' ill' fuer' Justic' ad pacem infra Civit' pred' and
libertat' ejusdem conservand' ac virtute Litterar' Patent' ill' and secundum
formam and effectu' eorund' de tempore in tempus per tot' tempus ill' tener'
Session' pacis and placita coron' scilicet talia placita coron' qual' Justic'
Domin' Regis ad pacem conservand' assign' per idem tempus ligittime tener' vel
tenere potueri inf' eandem Civitat'.

Et eo Warranto iidem Major and Communitas ac Cives Civit' London per tempus in
Informatione praed' superius specificat' usi fuer' and adhuc utuntur ac clamant
habere and uti Libertat' Privileg' and Franch' quod Major dict' Civit' and
hujusmodi Aldermann' ejusdem Civit' qui onus Majorat' Civit' ill' sustinner' ac
inde fuerunt dimissi ac tres seniores Aldermann' ejusdem Civit' qui diutius
Offic' Aldermannat' Ci, vit praedict' steter' and onus and Officiu' Majorat'
Civit' ill' non sustuler' fuer' Justic' Domin' Regis ad Pacem infra Civit'
praedict' conservand' ac ad Session' Pacis and Placita Corone (scilicet) talia
Placita Coron' qual' Justic' Domin' Regis ad Pacem conservand' assign'
ligittime tenere possent infra eand' Civit' tenend' ac ad omnes Felon' Riot'
Rout' and Conventicul' illicit' infra Civit' praed' inquirend' audiend' and
terminand' prout eis been licuit and licet.

Absque hoc quod idem Major and Communitas ac Cives Civit' London de Libertat'
Privileg' and Franches ill' super dictum Domin' Regem nunc per tempus praed' in
Informatione praed' superius specificat' usurpaver' seu usurpant pro ut per
Inform' illam pro dicto Dom' Rege nunc superius supponit' Quae omn' and singula
iidem Major and Communitas and Cives Civit' London perati sunt verificare unde
petunt Judicium and quod Libertat' Privileg' and Franch' illis eis and
Successoribus suis in perpetuum deinceps allocentur and adjudicent' ac quod
ipsi quoad premissa illi ab hac Curia dimittantur, etc.

Et quoad resid' Libertat' Privileg' and Franchisa in Information' praedict'
specificat' per isum Majorem and Communitat' ac Cives Civitat' London superimo
nomine clamat iidem Major and Communit' ac Cives Civit' London Libertat'
Privileg' and Franchisa illis nunquam usi fuerunt seu utuntur sed de eisdem
penitus declamans, etc.

The Mayor Commonalty and Citizens of London at the Suit of the King.
ANd the said Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London, by
Bendict Brown their Attorney, came and had Hearing of the Information
aforesaid, by color of which Information they are Prosecuted and may be
hereafter burdened vexed and disquieted, and that unjustly, because by
Protestation that in the said Information there is nothing contained material
or sufficient in the Law, to which Information they have no necessity, nor by
the Law of the Land they ought to be held in any manner to Answer nevertheless
for Plea; for as much as the Liberties, Privileges and Franchizes following,
viz. They the said Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London to
be of themselves one Body Corporate and Politic in matter fact and name, by
the Name of Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London, and by
that Name to Plead and be Impleaded, to Answer, and be Answered in the
Information above specified, the said Mayor Comonalty and Citizens of the City
of London say, That our said Sovereign Lord the King that now is, ought not by
occasion thereof to Impeach or undo them, because he says, That the said City
of London is, and from which time beyond the memory of Man was an Ancient City;
and that the Citizens of the said City are, and from that time out of mind were
one Body Corporate and Politic in Matter, Fact, and Name, by the name of Mayor
and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London, and by that Name during that
time have Pleaded, and were Impleaded; have Answered, and were Answered, and to
Plead and be Impleaded, to Answer and be Answered, and during the time
aforesaid have been used and accustomed. And that in the Great Charter of the
Liberties of England in the Parliament of our Sovereign Lord Henry the Third
sometime King of England, at Westminster in the County of Middlesex, in the
Ninth Year of his Reign, held, made and provided it is contained, That the
Citizens of London should have all their ancient Liberties and Customs; And the
said Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London further say, That
the Lord Edward the Third sometimes King of England, in his Parliament at
Westminster in the County of Middlesex, in the First Year of his Reign held, by
which his Charter, with the consent of the Prelates, Earls Barons and the whole
Commonalty of his Realm in his said Parliament at Westminster aforesaid were
Assembled. And by the Authority of the said Parliament was then Confirmed to
the Citizens of the City of London aforesaid, the Liberties following (amongst
other things) to hold to themselves and their Successors for Ever, first of all
in reciting: That whereas in the Great Charter of the Liberties of England it
is contained, That the City of London should have all their ancient Liberties
and Customs; And that the said Citizens, at the time of making the said
Charter, and in the times of King Edward the Confessor, and of William the
Conqueror and other Progenitors of the said King Edward in diverse Liberties
and Customs have had not only by the Charters of their Progenitors, but also of
other Charters of ancient custom, the said King Edward the Third did give and
grant for himself and his Heirs by those Charters, by the Authority aforesaid,
that the said Citizens shall have their Liberties according to the form of the
Great Charter aforesaid; And that for any personal Transgression or personal
Judgment of any Officer of the said City, the Liberty of that City shall not be
taken into the hands of King Edward the Third or his Successors, but such
Officer for such Offense shall be required and punished, as by the said
Charter, bearing date at Westminster aforesaid, the sixth day of March, in the
first Year of the Reign of the said King Edward the First under his Great Seal
of England, brought here in Court, among other things more fully does appear.
And the said Mayor, Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London further say,
That at the instance (and at the request of the Commonalty of the Realm of
England) in the Parliament of our said Lord Richard the Second, late King of
England, after the Conquest, at Westminster aforesaid, in the seventh Year of
his Reign, held and assembled for the greater quiet and peace among the
Subjects of the late King, and for the public good, all Customs, Liberties,
Privileges, and Franchises of the said City then to the Citizens of that City
and their Successors, although they have not been used or abused, have been
ratified and confirmed by the Authority of the said Parliament. And that our
Lord Henry the Sixth, late King of England, by his Letters Patents, sealed with
his Great Seal of England, bearing date at Westminster aforesaid, the sixth day
of October, in the Twenty third Year of his Reign, which the said Mayor,
Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London brings here in Court for their
Heirs and Successors, did confirm to the Mayor and Commonalty, and to the
Citizens of the City of London and their Successors, all and singular their
Liberties, Franchizes, and free Customs, so whole and untouched in any time of
the Progenitors of the late King Henry the Sixth, when as more freely and
better they had the same, as by the said Letters Patents, among other things
more fully appears. And that our Lord Edward the Fourth, late King of England,
by his Letters Patents, under his Great Seal of England, bearing date at
Westminster aforesaid, the Ninth day of November, in the Second Year of his
Reign, which the said Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London
brings here in Court, for themselves and their Heirs, did confirm to the Mayor
and Commonalty and to the Citizens of the City of London and their Successors
for ever, all and singular their Liberties, Franchizes and free Customs, so
whole and untouched, like as to them in any time of the Progenitors of the said
late King Edward the Fourth, they have had and held more quiet and free. And
further, the said late King Edward the Fourth, by his Letters Patents, did
grant to the said Mayor and Commonalty and to the Citizens, that although they
or their Predecessors, or the Mayor and Aldermen of the said City or their
Predecessors before or succeeding then from thence after any or to any
Liberties, did quietly grant the Order of Articles or free Customs, or of any
other in the said Letters Patents of the said late King Edward the Fourth, or
other his Letters Patents contained, or of his Progenitors sometime Kings of
England to the Mayor and Commonalty, did grant in any Case arising, albeit,
they have not been fully used or abused: Notwithstanding the said King Edward
the Fourth was unwilling that for this, they the Mayor and Commonalty Aldermen,
and Citizens, or their Successors should incur the forfeiture of the Premises;
but that they and their Successors all and singular the Liberties, Freedoms,
Grants, Ordinations in the Articles, free-Customs, and whatsoever else in the
Charters and Letters aforesaid contained the like not used, or also abused, and
every of them from thence of the rest fully and freely may use and enjoy
without the Impeachment or Impediment of the said late King, or his Heirs of
the Justices, Escheators, Sheriffs any other Bailiff or Officer of the said
late King, or any other whatsoever, as by the said Letters Patents of the said
late King Edward the Fourth, brought here in Court; among other things more
fully appeared. And that the late King Henry the Seventh by his Letters Patents
under his Great Seal of England bearing Date at Westminster aforesaid, the 23
d. Day of July, in the 20th. Year of his Reign, which the said Mayor and
Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London brings here in Court for
themselves their Heirs and Successors did ratify and confirm to the Mayor and
Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London and their Successors all and
singular the Liberties, Privileges, Freedoms and Free Customs, which they the
said Mayor, Commonalty and Citizens, or their Predecessors have been accustomed
to have, exercise or enjoy, or have been used or accustomed so fully, plainly,
and wholly, as if all and singular the several words in the said Letters
Patents were and have been expressed, declared, and manifested, as by the said
Letters Patents among other things more fully appears. And the said Mayor and
Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London further says, That the late King
James by his Letters Patents under his Great Seal of England, bearing Date at
his Honor of Hampton Court the 24th. day of September in the 6th. Year of his
Reign which the said Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London
brings here in Court by reciting that whereas many others of his Predecessors
sometime Kings of England of his special Grace for the many acceptable,
laudable, and continued Services by the Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of
the City of London and their Predecessors in times past done, and unrewarded;
also for diverse other urgent Causes and considerations, them severally moving
did give grant and confirm to the Mayor and Commonalty and to the Citizens of
the City of London and their Successors diverse Liberties Privileges,
Franchizes, Immunities, Authorities, Jurisdictions, Ordinances, Customs and
Freedoms; as by the several Letters Patents of the Progenitors and Predecessors
of the said late Kings of England more fully and manifest it does, and may
appear. The said King James for, and in consideration of the great Fidelity,
Constancy, and very late and laudable Service by the Mayor and Commonalty and
Citizens of the City of London aforesaid, to the late King of this Realm in his
first coming to this Realm, and continuing until then manifested and most
faithfully done and unrewarded all and singular Letters Patents Charters, and
Confirmations of his most noble Progenitors and Predecessors to the said Mayor
and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London aforesaid and their
Successors, by what name soever incorporated, before that time made, granted or
confirmed, and all and singular Donations, Grants, Confirmations, Restitutions,
Customs, Ordinances, Explanations, Articles, and all other things whatsoever in
whatsoever Letters Patents or Charters whatsoever of the Progenitors,
Predecessors or Ancestors of the said Kings of England; also all and singular
in the said Letters Patents, Charters, Concessions, Confirmations, or any of
them contained, recited, specified, confirmed, or explained. And all and
singular Jurisdictions, Authorities, Privileges, Liberties, Franchizes,
Freedoms, Immunities, free Customs, and Hereditaments whatsoever, which the
Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London or their Predecessors,
by the Name of the Mayor and Commonalty and of the Citizens of the City of
London, or by the Name of the Mayor and Aldermen of the City of London, or by
the Name of the Mayor, Citizens and Commonalty of the City of London or by the
Name of Mayor and Citizens of the City of London, or by the Name of the Mayor
and Commonalty of the City of London, or by the Name of the Citizens of the
City of London, or by the Name of Barons of London, or by the Name of Barons of
the City of London, or by any other Name whatsoever, by reason or force of any
Letters Patents, Charters or Consirmations of any the Progenitors, Predecessors
or Ancestors of the said late King James, in any time or times have been had or
reasonably been used or exercised, or have been adjudged for themselves and
their Heirs and Successors, did accept and approve, and all and singular to the
said Mayor and Commonalty and to the Citizens of the City of London aforesaid,
and their Successors, by the said Letters Patents did ratify and confirm to
have, hold, enjoy, and exercise, all and singular the Premises to the said
Mayor and Commonalty and to the Citizens of the City of London aforesaid, and
their Successors for ever, so fully, freely, and wholly, as in as large manner
and form as if every several single Name, and Name by Name, in those said
Letters Patents have been expressed, named, declared, recited, and manifested,
as by the said Letters Patents, among other things, more fully appears. And
that the said late King Charles the First by his Letters Patents, under his
Great Seal of England, bearing date at Westminster aforesaid, the Eighteenth
day of October, in the Fourteenth Year of his Reign, which the said Mayor and
Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London brings here in Court, all and
singular Privileges, Liberties, Franchizes, Freedoms, Immunities and free
Customs whatsoever, which the said Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the
City of London aforesaid, or their Predecessors, by the Name of the Mayor and
Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London, or by the Name of the Mayor and
Aldermen, Citizens and Commonalty of London, or by the Name of Mayor and
Citizens of the City of London, or by the Name of Mayor and Commonalty of the
City of London, or by the Name of the Citizens of the City of London, or by the
Name of the Barons of London, or by the Name of the Barons of the City of
London, or by any other Name whatsoever, by reason or force of the said Letters
Patents, Charters or Confirmations in the said Letters Patents of the said late
King Charles the First mentioned, or in use or by prescription, or in any other
lawful manner, in any time or in any time or times before that time have had or
have been reasonably used or exercised, declared and adjudged for themselves,
their Heirs and Successors, did accept and approve, and all and singular to the
aforesaid Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London and their
Successors, by their said Letters Patents have ratified and confirmed, as by
those said Letters Patents (among other things) it does and may appear. And
that our Lord the King that now is, by his Letters Patents, under his Great
Seal of England, bearing date at Westminster, the Twenty fourth day of June, in
the Fifteenth Year of his Reign, which the said Mayor and Commonalty and
Citizens of the City of London brings here in Court for the said King himself,
his Heirs and Successors, did ratify and confirm to the Mayor and Commonalty
and Citizens of the City of London, their Successors, all and singular the
Jurisdictions, Authorities, Privileges, Liberties, Franchizes, Freedoms,
Immunities, and Customs whatsoever, which the said Mayor and Commonalty and
Citizens of the City of London or their Predecessors by the Name of Mayor and
Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London, or by the Name of Mayor,
Aldermen, Citizens and Commonalty of London, or by the Name of Mayor and
Citizens of the City of London, or by the Name of Mayor and Commonalty of the
City of London, or by the Name of the Citizens of the City of London; or by the
Name of the Barons of London, or by the Name of the Barons of the City of
London, or by any other Name whatsoever, by reason or force of the Letters
Patents Charters or Confirmations in the said Letters Patents of our said now
Lord the King before mentioned, or of any or any use or uses, prescription or
prescriptions, or in any other Legal way whatsoever in any time or times before
then, have been had, or reasonably have been used or exercised to have, hold,
enjoy and exercise all and singular the said Premises to the Mayor and
Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London aforesaid, and their Successors
for ever, so fully, freely, and wholly as in as ample manner and form as by the
said Letters Patents above mentioned, to be given or granted, or any other use,
prescription, or any other Legal manner or Right whatsoever before then
respectively have been had, obtained or enjoyed as if separately, singly and
name by name in, and by the said Letters Patents of our said King that now is,
were, or have been expressed, nominated, declared, granted and manifested, as
by the said Letters Patents among other things more fully it does, and may
appear; And by that Authority, the said Major and Commonalty and Citizens of
the City of London by the time in the Information aforesaid above specified
have been used and hitherto do use and claim to have, and use the Liberties,
Privileges, and Franchizes to be of themselves one Body Corporate and Politic
in Matter, Deed, and Name, by the Name of May or and Commonalty and Citizens of
the City of London, and by that Name to Plead, and be Impleaded; to Answer, and
be Answered; as to them it has or may be Lawful. Without that that the said
Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London of these Liberties,
Privileges, and Franchizes upon our now Sovereign Lord the King by the time
aforesaid in the Information above specified have been Usurped, or do Usurp as
by that Information for our said Lord the King above it is supposed. Which all
and singular the said Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London
are ready to verify, from whence they pray Judgment; And that the Liberties,
Privileges and Franchizes to them and their Successors for ever, should be
allowed and adjudged, and that they may be dismissed, as also the Premises from
this Court, etc. And the said Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of
London, so as their Liberties, Privileges, and Franchizes following, viz. Them
to have Sheriffs of the City and County of the City of London, and Sheriff of
the County of Middlesex, and to Name, and Elect of themselves their Persons to
be Sheriffs of the City aforesaid and County of the said City, and Sheriff of
Middlesex, and those so Named and Elected to be made and constituted Sheriffs
of the said City and County of the said City, and Sheriff of the said County of
Middlesex, and as Sheriff of the said City and in the County of the said City
to execut and Return all Writs, Bills, and Precepts of our said Lord the King
for the Administration and Execution of Justice within the said City, and
County of the said City, to perform and do what shall appertain or belong to
the Office of Sheriff, and also to do and perform, and all and singular others
within the said City and County of the same, which shall appertain to, or
belong to the Office of Sheriff, also to serve as Sheriff for the County of
Middlesex, and all Writs, Bills and Precepts of our Lord the King within the
said County of Middlesex, for the Administration and Execution of Justice
there, to perform and make return thereof, which belongs or appertains to the
Office of Sheriff: Say our said Lord the King ought not to impeach or hinder
them the Mayor, Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London by occasion
thereof, because they say, that the City of London is and time out of mind has
been an ancient City and County of themselves. And that the said County of
Middlesex, by the time aforesaid, has been and is an ancient County. And that
the Citizens of the said City are and from which time, beyond the memory of
Man, has been one Body Corporate and Politic, not only by the Name of Mayor
and Commonalty of the Citizens of the City of London, but also by the Names of
the Citizens of London. And that King John some time King of England, by his
Letters Patents under his Great Seal of England, bearing date at his good Town
upon Tokam, the fifth day of July, in the First Year of his Reign, which the
said Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London brings here in
Court, did grant to the Citizens of London aforesaid, Sheriffs of London and
Middlesex, with all things and Customs which did appertain and belong to the
said Sheriffs within the City and without, by Land and by Water, to have and to
hold to them for Ever. And besides, that the said King John, by his said
Letters Patents, did grant to the said Citizens of London, that they of
themselves should make Sheriffs whomsoever they would, and amove them when they
pleased, as by the said Letters Patents (among other things) more fully
appears. And that in the Great Charter of the Liberties of England, in the
Parliament of our Lord Henry the Third sometime King of England, at
Westminster, in the County of Middlesex, in the Ninth Year of his Reign, held,
made, and provided, it is contained that the City of London should have all
their ancient Liberties and Customs. And the said Mayor, Commonalty and
Citizens of the City of London further say, that the said King Henry the Third,
by his Letters Patents under his Great Seal of England, bearing date at
Westminster aforesaid, the Eighteenth day of February, in the Eleventh Year of
his Reign, which the said Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of
London brings here in Court, did confirm to the Citizens of London, Sheriffs of
London and Middlesex, with all things and Customs that did belong to the said
Sheriffs within the City, and without, by Land and by Water, as by the said
Letters Patents (among other things) more fully appears. And that King Edward
the Third in his Parliament at Westminster, held in the County of Middlesex, in
the First Year of his Reign, by his Charter, with the assent of the Prelates,
Earls, Barons, and the whole Commonalty of this Realm, in his said Parliament
at Westminster being assembled, and by Authority of the said Parliament, did
then confirm to the Citizens of the City of London the said Liberties following
(among other things) to have to themselves and Successors for Ever. First in
reciting, that whereas in the Great Charter of the Liberties of England it is
contained, that the City of London should have all their ancient Liberties and
Customs. And that the said Citizens at the time of making the said Charter, and
in the times of King Edward the Confessor, and William the Conqueror, and other
the Progenitors of the said King Edward the Third, diverse Liberties and
Customs, not only by the Charters of their Progenitors, but also without
Charters of ancient Customs have had, the said King Edward the Third did will
and grant for himself and his Heirs, by the authority of those Charters, that
the said Citizens should have their Liberties according to the Form of the
Great Charter abovementioned. And that for any Personal Offense, or Personal
Judgment of any Officer of the said City, their Liberties should not be taken
into the hands of the said King Edward the Third or his Heirs, but of such
Officer the like Offense should be required of, and punished, as by the said
Charters, bearing date at Westminster aforesaid, the Sixth day of March, in the
First Year of the Reign of the said King Edward the Third, under his Great Seal
of England, here brought into Court (among other things) more fully may appear.
And the said Mayor, Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London further say,
that at the instance and request of the Commons of England, in the Parliament
of King Richard the Second, after the Conquest, at Westminster aforesaid, in
the Seventh Year of his Reign, held and assembled for the greater quiet and
peace of his Subjects, to maintain and for the public good, all Customs,
Liberties, Privileges and Franchises of the said City then to the Citizens of
that City and their Successors, although they have not been used or abused, was
ratified and confirmed by the Authority of the said Parliament. And that the
late King Henry the Sixth, by His Letters Patents under his Great Seal of
England, bearing Date at Westminster aforesaid the 26th. day of October in the
23 d. Year of his Reign which the said Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the
City of London brings here in Court for themselves, their Heirs and Successors
did confirm to the Mayor and Commonalty, and to the Citizens of the City of
London, and their Successors all and singular their Liberties, Franchizes and
Free Customs so entire and unmolested, like as in any time of the Progenitors
of the said King Henry the Sixth, they evermore quietly and freely have had,
and held, as by the said Letters Patents among other things more fully may
appear. And that King Edward the 4th. by his Letters Patents under his Great
Seal of England bearing date at Westminster aforesaid the Ninth day of
November, in the Second Year of his Reign which the Major and Commonalty and
Citizens of the City of London brings here in Court for themselves, and their
Heirs did confirm to the Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of
London and their Successors for Ever, all and singular their Liberties,
Franchizes and Free Customs so entire and untouched like as in any time of the
Progenitors of the said King Edward the 4th. more quietly and freely they ever
had and held. And further, the said King Edward the Fourth, by his Letters
Patents did grant to the Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of London, that
although they, or their Predecessors, or Mayor and Aldermen of the City
aforesaid, or their Predecessors before that, or their Successors from thence
after any, or to any Liberties, Freedoms, Concessions, Ordinances of Articles,
or Free Customs, or of any other in the said Letters Patents of the said King
Edward the Fourth, or any other his Letters Patents, of his Progenitors Kings
of England, to the said Mayor and Commonalty granted, contained in any Case
arising, that have not been fully used or abused, the said King Edward the
Fourth is unwilling that the Mayor and Commonalty Aldermen and Citizens or
their Successors shall incur the forfeiture of any the Premises, but that they
and their Successors to all and singular the Liberties, Freedoms, Grants,
Ordinances, Articles, Free Customs, and whatsoever else in the said Charters
and Letters contained the like not used or abused, and any of them from thence,
fully and freely shall use and enjoy without the Impeachment or Impediment of
the said King, or his Heirs, Justices, Escheators, Sheriffs, or any Bailiff or
Officer of the said King, or of any other whatsoever, as by the said Letters
Patents of the said King Edward the 4th. brought here in Court among other
things more fully may appear. And that the late King Henry the 7th. by his
Letters Patents under his Great Seal of England bearing Date at Westminster
aforesaid, the 23d. Day of July in the Twentieth Year of his Reign, which the
said Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London brings here in
Court for themselves, and their Successors did Ratify and Confirm to the Mayor
and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London and their Successors, all and
singular the Liberties, Privileges, Freedoms, and Free Customs, to which they
the Mayor Commonalty and Citizens or their Successors have been accustomed to
have, exercise, or enjoy, or have, or ought to have been used, and fully,
plainly and wholly, as if all and singular the several words in the said
Letters Patents were expressed, declared and manifested, as by the said Letters
Patents (among other things) more fully may appear. And that the late King
Henry the Eighth by his Letters Patents, under his Great Seal of England,
bearing date at Westminster aforesaid, the Twelfth day of July in the Fifth
Year of his Reign, which the Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of
London brings here in Court all Grants and others whatsoever in the said
Letters Patents of the said King John above specified and contained, that he
the said King Henry the Eighth and his Successors, to the Mayor and Commonalty
and Citizens of the City of London and their Successors, did ratify and
confirm, as by the said Letters Patents of the said King Henry the Eighth
(among other things) more fully appears. And that the said late King Edward the
Sixth, by his Letters Patents, under the Great Seal of England, bearing date at
Westminster aforesaid, the Twenty first day of February, in the Second Year of
his Reign, which the said Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of
London brings here in Court all Grants and others whatsoever in the said
Letters Patents of the said King John abovementioned, contained for himself and
his Heirs, to the Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London and
their Successors, did ratify and confirm, as by the said Letters Patents of
the said King Edward the Sixth (among other things) more fully appears. And
that the late Queen Mary by her Letters Patents, under the great Seal of
England, bearing date at Westminster aforesaid, the first day of March, in the
first Year of her Reign, which the said Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of
the City of London brings here in Court, for her self, her Heirs and
Successors, all Grants and others whatsoever in the said Letters Patents of the
said King John above specified, contained to the Mayor and Commonalty and to
the Citizens of the City of London aforesaid and their Successors, did ratify
and confirm, as by the said Letters Patents more fully appears. And that the
late Queen Elizabeth, by her Letters Patents, under her Great Seal of England,
bearing date at Westminster aforesaid, the Ninth day of May, in the Fourth Year
of her Reign, which the said Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of
London brings here in Court, for her self, her Heirs and Successors, all Grants
and others whatsoever in the said Letters Patents of the said King John above
specified and contained, to the Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City
of London and their Successors, did ratify and confirm, as by the said Queen
Elizabeth's Letters Patents (among other things) more fully appears. And the
said Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London further say, that
King James, by his Letters Patents, under his Great Seal of England, bearing
date at his Honor of Hampton Court, the Twenty fourth day of September, in the
Sixth Year of his Reign, which the said Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of
the City of London brings here in Court by reciting, That whereas the most part
of the Progenitors of the late King, sometimes Kings of England of their
special Grace, and for the many grateful laudable and continued Services, by
the Mayor Commonalty and Cityzens of the City of London, and their Predecessors
in times past, done and unre warded, also for diverse others urgent Causes and
Considerations, them severally moving, did give grace, and confirm to the Mayor
and Commonalty and Cityzens or of the City of London and their Successors
diverse Libertys Privileges, Franchises, Immunities, Authorityes,
Jurisdictions, Ordinances, Customs, and Freedoms, as by the several Letters,
Patents of the said Progenitors and Predecessors Kings of England more fully
and manifest, it does and may appear the said King James for, and in
consideration of the most faithful, and constant, and laudable service by the
Mayor and Commonalty and Cityzens of the City of London aforesaid to him in his
first coming to this Realm, and still continued then manifested and most
faithfully done and unrewarded all and singular Letters, Patents, Charters, and
confirmations of his most noble Progenitors and Antecessors to to the Mayor and
Commonalty and to the Cityzens of the City of London and their Predecessors, by
whatsoever named, Incorporated before that time made granted or confirmed and
all and singular Donations, Grants, Confirmations, Restitutions, Customs,
Ordinances. Explanations, Articles, and all other things whatsoever, in
whatsoever Letters, Patents, or Charters whatsoever of his Progenitors,
Predecessors, or Antecessors Kings of England. And also all and singular in the
said Letters, Patents, Charters Grants, Confirmations, or any of them
contained, recited, specified, confirmed or explained, and all and singular
Jurisdictions, Authorities, Privileges, Liberties, and Franchises, Freedoms,
Immunities, free Customs and Hereditaments whatsoever, which the said Mayor and
Commonalty and Cityzens of the City of London aforesaid or their Predecessors
by the name of Mayor and Comminalty and Citizens of the City of London, or by
the name of Mayor and Aldermen of the City of London, or by the Name of Mayor
Cityzens and Commonalty of the City of London, or by the name of Mayor and
Cityzens of the City of London, or by the name of Citizens of the City of
London, Or by the name of Barons of London, or by the name Barons of the City
of London, or by any other name whatsoever by reason or force of any Letters,
Patents, Charters or Confirmation of any the Progenitors, Predecessors,
Ansecessors of the said King James in any time or times have had or reasonably
have been used or exercised has ratified and confirmed and for himself his
Heirs and Successors did accept and approve and all and singular to the said
Mayor and Commonalty and to the Cityzens of the City of London and their
Successors by the said Letters, Patents, did ratify and confirm to have, hold,
enjoy and exercise all and singular the said premises to the said Mayor and
Commonalty and to the Cityzens of the City of London aforesaid and to their
Successors for Ever, so fully, clearly, and wholly in as ample manner and form
as if seperately singly, and name by name those said Letters Patents were
expressed, named, declared, recited and manifested, as by the said Letters,
Patents among other things more fully appear. And that our late Sovereign Ld.
King Charles the first by his Letters, Patents under his Great Seal of England
bearing date at West. the 18th. day of October in the 14th. year of his Reign,
which the said Mayor and Commonalty and Cityzens of the City of London brings
here in Courts all and singular Privileges, Liberties, Franchises, Freedoms,
Immunities and free-Customs whatsoever, which the said Mayor and Commonalty and
Cityzens of the City of London or their Predecessors by the name of the Mayor
and Commonalty and Cityzens of the City of London, Or by the name of Mayor and
Aldermen, Cityzens and Commonalty of London, Or by the name of Mayor and
Citizens of the City of London, or by the name of Mayor and Commonalty of
London, Or by the name of the Cityzens of the City London, or by the name of
Barons of London, or by the name of Barons of the City of London, or by any
other name whatsoever by reason or force of the said Letters, Patents, of the
said King John or of any other Letters, Patents, Charters, or Confirmations in
the said Letters, Patent, of the said late King Charles the first mentioned or
in use or by prescription or by any other lawful manner in any time or times
before that they have had or reasonablely have used or exercised has adjudged
and conformed the same for himself his Heirs and Successors, and accepted and
approved them, all and singular to the said Mayor and Commonalty and Cityzens
of the City of London and their Successors by his said Letters, Patents has
ratified and confirmed as by the said Letters, Patents among other things more
fully appears, And that our now said Sovereign Lord the King by his Letters,
Patents under his Great Seal of England bearing date at Westminster. the 24th. day
of June in the 15th year of his Reign which the said Mayor and Commonalty and
Cityzens of the City of London brings here in Court, for himself his Heris and
Successors has ratified and confirmed to the Mayor and Commonalty and to the
Cityzens of the City of London, and their Successors all and singular the
Jurisdictions, Authorities, Privileges, Liberties Franchises, Feeedoms,
Immunities, and Customs whatsoever, which the said Mayor and Commonalty and
Cityzens of the City of London, or their Prepecessors, by the name of Mayor and
Commonalty and Cityzens of the City of London, or by the name of the Mayor and
Alderman Cityzens and Commonalty of London, or by the name of Mayor and
Cityzens of the City of London or by the name of Mayor and Commonalty of the
City of London, or by the name of the Cityzens of the City of London, or by the
name of the Barons of London, or by the name of the Barons of the City of
London, or by any other name whatsoever by reason or force of the said Letters,
Patents of the said King John, or of any other Letters Patents, Charters, or
Confirmations in the said Letters, Patents of our now said Soveragin Lord the
King before mentioned, or of any or any use or uses Prescription or
Prescriptions, or in any other lawful manner whatsoever in any time or times
before that, or reasonably have used or exercised to have, hold, enjoy, and
exercise all and singular the Premises aforesaid to the said Mayor and
Commonalty and to the Citizens of the City of London and their Successors for
ever so fully, freely, and entire, in as ample manner and form as in the said
Letters, Patents above is mentioned to be given or granted, or any other use,
prescription, or in any other lawful manner or right whatsoever before that
respectively had been obtained, or enjoyed as if severally singly, and name by
name in and by the said Letters Patents of his now present Majesty were named,
declared, granted and manifested as by the said Letters Patents among other
things morefully appears

And the said Mayor and Commonalty, and Citizens of the City of London, further
say, That from the time of granting the said Letters Patents of the said King
John, hitherto, they the said Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of
London, have Sheriff of the City and County of the City of London, and Sheriff
for the County of Middlesex, and in every year have named and elected of
themselves two Persons, Citizens of the City, to be Sheriffs of the said City
and County of the said City, and Sheriff for the County of Middlesex; and those
so named and elected, have constituted and made Sheriffs of the said City and
County of the said City, and Sheriff of the County of Middlesex; And as
Sheriffs of the said City and County of the said City, to execute and return
all Writs, Bills, and Precepts of our Sovereign Lord the King, for the
Administration and Execution of Justice within the said City and County of the
said City to be done and performed, which belongs to the Office of Sheriff: And
to do and exercise all and singular other things within the said City and
County of the said City, which belongs to the Office of Sheriff: And as Sheriff
of Middlesex, for the said County to serve, and all Writs, Bills, and Precepts
of our said Sovereign Lord the King, within the said County of Middlesex, for
the Administration and Execution of Justice, there to exercise, and make return
thereof, which belongs to the Office of Sheriff. And by that Authority the
Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London, during the time in the
said Information above-specified, have used, and hitherto do use and claim to
have and use the Liberties, Privileges and Franchises, to have Sheriffs of the
City and County of the City of London, and Sheriffs for the County of
Middlesex, and to name and choose of themselves two Persons to be Sheriffs of
the said City and County of the said City, and Sheriff of the County of
Middlesex; and those so named and elected, to make and constitute Sheriffs of
the said City and County of the said City, and Sheriff of the County of
Middlesex; and as Sheriffs of the said City and County of the said City, to
execute and return all Letters, Bills, and Precepts of our said Lord the King,
for the Administration and Execution of Justice, within the said City and
County of the said City to be done and performed, as to the Office of Sheriff
belongs; and also to do and perform all and singular other things within the
said City and County of the said City, which belongs to the Office of Sheriff;
and as Sheriff of the County of Middlesex to serve for that County, and all
Writs, Bills, and Precepts of our said Lord the King, within the said County of
Middlesex, for the Administration and Execution of Justice there to be
performed, and to make return thereof, which belongs to the Office of Sheriff,
as to them it shall and may be lawful to do.

Without that, That they the said Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City
of London, of their Liberties, Privileges, and Franchises, upon our said Lord
the King, for the time in the said Information specified, have usurped, and do
usurp, as by the said Imformation for our said Sovereign Lord the King it is
supposed, and all and singular they the said Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens
of the City of London are ready to verify; whereof they require Judgment, and
that their Liberties, Privileges, and Franchises, to them and their Successors,
henceforth for ever may be allowed and adjudged: and that they may be
dismissed, as also the Premises, from this Court, etc.

And they the said Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London, so
as the Liberties, Privileges and Franchises following, to wit, the Mayor of the
said City, and such Aldermen who have executed the Office of Mayor, and thereof
be dismissed, and that three Senior Aldermen of the said City, who have stood
longest in the Office of Aldermen thereof, and have not underwent the Burden
and Office of Mayor of the said City, to be Justices of the Peace within the
said City, and at the Sessions of the Peace, and Pleas of the Crown, to wit,
such Pleas of the Crown as the Justices of our said Lord the King lawfully
assigned to hold within the said City, and all Felonies, Riots, Routs, and
unlawful Conventicles in the said City, to inquire, hear and determine, in the
said Information mentioned, say, That our said Lord the King them the said
Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London, ought not by occasion
thereof to impeach or hinder, because they say the said City of London is, and
from that time beyond the memory of Man has been an ancient City or ancient
County of themselves, and Citizens of the said City are, and from that time
beyond the memory of Man have been one Body Corporate and Politic, in Marter,
Fact, and Name, by the Name of Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of
London. And that the said late King Charles the First, by His Letters Patents
under His Great Seal of England, bearing date at Westminster the Eighteenth day
of October, in the Fourteenth Year of His Reign, which the said Mayor and
Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London brings here in Court, for
Himself, His Heirs and Successors, did grant to the Mayor and Commonalty and
Citizens of the City of London, and their Successors, That the Mayor and
Recorder of the said City for the time being, and the Mayor and Recorder who
for the time shall be, and not only those Aldermen who have been before Mayors
of the City, but also those Aldermen who hereafter shall bear the Office of
Mayor of the said City, although from the Mayoralty they should depart or be
dismissed, but those Aldermen should stand, and the three eldest Aldermen for
the time being, who shall be in the Office of Alderman longest, and before that
time have not executed the Office of Mayor, shall be for ever hereafter
Justices of the Peace, and every of them shall be a Justice of the Peace for
our said Lord the King. His Heirs and Successors, within the said City and
Liberties thereof. And the said Mayor, Recorder, and Aldermen aforesaid, to all
and singular the Statutes and Ordinances for the good of the Peace of the King,
His Heirs and Successors, and for the Preservation of the same, and for the
quiet Rule and Government of His People made and provided, and in all their
Articles, not only within the Liberties of the same, but also without the said
City, according to the force, form, and effect of the same, made to be
observed, and to all those who according to the form and effect of the said
Order and Statutes, or any of them, in the said City and Liberties thereof,
shall be found Offenders, shall be corrected and punished according to the form
of the Ordinance, and of those Articles to be made: And all those who to any of
His Majesty's Subjects of their Corporation, who shall be found out in burning
their Houses by Threatening, shall find sufficient Security for the Peace, or to
his Good Behavior toward our Sovereign Lord the King, and all his People: and
if they shall refuse to find such Security, then them to the Goal of Newgate,
or any other of the King's Prisons within the said City of London, until such
Security shall be found, shall be kept in safe Custody; the Keepers and
Justices of our Lord the King, and every of them, the Keepers and Justices and
their Heirs and Successors, within the said City and Liberties, our late Lord
King Charles the First, for himself, his Heirs, and Successors, has
Constituted, made, and Ordained, by His Letters, Patents aforesaid, and to all
singular any other to be Executed and Performed, which the Justices and Keepers
of the Peace, their Heirs and Successors, within any other County of England
they might Lawfully exercise and perform, and as they ought by virtue of any
other Statute and Ordinance of this Realm, or by virtue of any Commission of
their Heirs, and Successors, the Peace in any such County he is willing to
preserve. Also our said Lord King Charles the First, by His said Letters
Patents, for Himself, His Heirs and Successors, did grant to the said Mayor and
Commonalty, and to the Citizens of the City of London, and their Successors,
That the Mayor and Recorder of the said City for the time being, and such
Aldermen as aforesaid for the time being, who the Office or Place of Mayor of
that City before that have executed and performed the same, and such of the
three Eldest Aldermen for the time being who the Place of Mayor have not born,
or four of them the Mayor, Recorder, and Aldermen, of which the said Mayor or
Recorder for the time being to be one, shall be Justices of our Lord the King,
His Heirs and Successors, and those Justices, their Heirs and Successors, for
Himself, His Heirs and Successors, has assigned for Ever, to inquire as often
and when they shall see most expedient, by the Oath of approved and lawful Men,
not only of the City aforesaid, but also of the Liberties of the same, by which
the very Truth may be the better known of all Murders, Felonies, Sorceries,
Enchantments, Whoredom, Magick-Art, Trespasses, Forestallers, Regretters,
Ingrossers, and Extortions whatsoever, and all and singular other Misdeeds and
Offenses, of which the said Justices of the Peace of our said Lord the King,
his Heirs and Successors, may lawfully be or ought to be inquired, by
whomsoever, and what sort soever, within the said City and Liberties thereof,
before that time done and perpetrated, or which from thence there shall happen
to be done and attempted; and not only of all those that shall in that City and
Liberties thereof go to Conventicles, against the Peace of the late King and
His Successors, in the disturbance of His People, His Heirs and Successors, or
by force should go or ride Armed, or from thence shall presume to ride or go
Armed: And also of those which there the People of our said Lord the King or
His Successors shall lie in wait to kill, or after shall presume to throw down:
Also of Hostilities, and all and singular Persons who in abuse of the Weights
and Measures, or in selling Victuals contrary to the form of the Ordinance and
Statute, or any of them, whereof the Common Advantage of this Realm, and of the
People of the late King, His Heirs and Successors, made and provided, shall
offend, or attempt, in the said City and Liberties thereof, or from thenceforth
shall presume to attempt or offend: And also of Sheriffs, Constables, Keepers
of Gaols, and all other Officers, who in the Execution of their Office about
the Premises, or any of them, where they ought not to have them, or hereafter
shall presume to have them where he ought not, or carry himself remiss and
negligent, or from thence shall happen to be remiss or negligent, within the
said City and Liberties thereof: And of all and singular the Articles,
Circumstances, and others whatsoever, by whomsoever, and of what quality
soever, in the said City or Liberties thereof, shall be done or committed, and
which from thenceforth shall happen to be done by any whatsoever, in the
Premises, or concerning any of them: And to what Indictment soever, which
before the Mayor or Recorder of the said City for the time being, and such of
the said Aldermen, or any four or more of them, whereof the said Mayor or
Recorder for the time being shall be one, then afterward shall be taken and
inspected, and Process thereof made, to all and singular that are Indicted, or
shall happen to be Indicted, until they shall be taken or restore themselves,
or shall be or restore themselves, or shall be outlawed, and in making and
continuing, and to all and singular Murders, Felonies, Sorceries, Enchantments,
Whoredom, Magick-Art, also false Conspiracies, and other Misdeeds,
Forestallers, Regretters, Ingrossers, Extortioners, Conventicles, Indictments,
aforesaid; and all and singular other the Premises, according to the Laws and
Statutes of this Realm of England, as in such like Cases have used to be done
or ought to hear and determine: And the Offenders, and such of them, for their
Duties by Fines, Redemptions, Amercements, Forfeitures, and other manner
according to the Laws and Customs of this Realm, and Form of the Ordinances and
Statutes of the same have been accustomed to be done, or ought to be corrected
and punished, and all and singular others to do, perform, hear, determine, and
execute within the said City and Liberties thereof, which Justices of the Peace
by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, to do, exercise, and inquire, or may be
Executed and of Force, and in as ample manner and Form, for any one, or to any
one Justice of the Peace in any other County of this Realm, lawfully to do,
exercise, inquire, punish, or in any other manner may be exercised or of Force,
as by the said Letters Patents, among other things, more fully appears. And
that our said Lord the King that now is, by his Letters Patents under the Great
Seal of England, bearing Date at Westminster aforesaid, the 24th. Day of June,
in the Fifteenth Year of his Reign, which the Mayor and Commonality and
Citizens of the City of London here brings in Court all Grants and other,
whatsoever in the said Letters Patent of King Charles the First above
specified, for the said King His Heirs and Successors, to the Mayor and
Commonalty, and to the Citizens of the City of London, and their Successors for
ever, did ratify and confirm, as by the said Letters Patents among other
things may appear. And they the said Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens of the
City of London, further say, that in the time of making the said Letters of the
said King Charles the First, and whilst before that, and from that, have
hitherto been, and still are Mayor and Recorder of the said City, and Aldermen
of the said City, who have not been Mayor, and sustained the burden of that
Office; and three and more Aldermen of the said City, who have not underwent
the burden of Mayor thereof: And from that time of the making of the said
Letters Patents of the said King Charles the First, hitherto the Mayor and
Recorder of the said City for the time being, and such Aldermen for the time
being as have not been Mayor of the said City, also three of the Eldest
Aldermen for the time being, who shall be longest in that Office of Alderman,
and has not been Mayor of the said City, nor by virtue of the said Letters
Patents, have been Justice of the Peace within the said City or Liberties
thereof, or by virtue of the said Letters Patents, and according to the Form
and Effect of the same, of the time, in the time, by the whole time, they have
holden Sessions of the Peace, and Pleas of the Crown, (to wit) such Pleas of
the Crown as such Justices of our said Lord the King Assigned to keep by the
same time lawfully have held or may hold within the said City.

And by that Authority the said Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City
of London by the time in the Information abovespecified, have been used or
hitherto use and claim to have and use the Liberties, Privileges, and
Franchises that the said Mayor of the said City, and such of the Aldermen of
the said City who have not been Mayor therrof, or have been dismissed, or three
eldest Aldermen of the said City, who have been longest Aldermen thereof, or
executed the Office of Mayor, have been Justices of the Peace of our said Lord
the King, to preserve the Peace within the said City, and to the Sessions of
the Peace, and Pleas of the Crown, to wit, such Pleas of the Crown as Justices
of our said Lord the King lawfully assigned may hold within the said City, and
to all Felonies, Riots, Routs, and unlawful Conventicles within the said City,
to inquire, to hear and determine, as to them may seem lawful, or be lawful.

Without that, the said Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of
London, of their Liberties, Privileges, and Franchises, upon our said Sovereign
Lord the King that now is, by the time in the Information above-specified, have
usurped, or do usurp, as by the Information for our Lord the King above
mentioned it is supposed, which all and singular the said Mayor and Commonalty
and Citizens of the City of London are ready to verify; whereof they pray
Judgment, and that their Liberties, Privileges, and Franchises, to them and
their Heirs, for ever hereafter, may be allowed and adjudged: and that they, as
also the Premisies, may be dismissed from this Court, etc.

And as to the residue of the Liberties, Privileges, and Franchises in the said
Information specified, by them the Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the
said City of London above-specified not claimed, they the said Mayor and
Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London those Liberties, Privileges and
Franchises were never used, or do use, but the same do uterly disclaim.

FINIS.
The Courteous Reader is desired to pardon the small Faults of the Press.


