(...) ACCOUNT OF THE TRANSLATION OF THE BIBLE INTO THE LITHVANIAN TONGVE, Into
which LANGUAGE the SCRIPTURES were as yet never Translated: WITH A Copy of the
Testimonial Given to the TRANSLATOR, And of the Approbation of his
undertaking, by several Reverend Doctors of Divinity, with the Professors of
the same, and other Persons of Note, in the UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD, November 15.
1659.

OXFORD: Printed by H^^^ Hall, Printer to the University. ^^^^.

The Translator wishes all health and happiness to the Christian Reader.
THere is none, I presume, of those who love the Lord Jesus Christ in
sincerity, but will account that a good service done to Religion, and an
acceptable work unto the Church of God, of those who employ their whole studies
and endeavors for saving the souls of men, and for the propagating of the
true worship of God in all places throughout the world: Since that it is our
duty not only to have regard of our selves, but we ought likewise, so far as
we are able, to endeavor the salvation of others also, and to be industrious
in the promoting of it. He that does the work of the Lord deceitfully, or
having put his hand to the plough, does through slothfulness draw it back
again, is pronounced accursed: But a crown of eternal glory is laid up for
those who have kept the faith, have brought sinners unto righteousness, and
accomplished their course with cheerfulness. It is not ease or idleness, but
industry and labor, is the portion of those who desire to do service in the
Church of God; difficulties and dangers they must expect to meet with, the
cross also, and many grievous things to be undergone, the weight whereof
without the assistance of the holy spirit were insupportable. Of this Moses
^ha^ faithful servant in the house of God, had much experience, when with many
signs and wounders he brought the Children of Israel out of the bondage of
Egypt, and did in the wilderness (...) that people to be observed the law of
God published for that end on mount Sinai. He found the like in preparing and
erecting the Tabernacle, the draught whereof he received from God himself, for
notwithstanding the large contribution of materials to the work, yet was
there need also, that Bezaleel and Aholiab the workmen of it should be
furnished by God himself, with a spirit of wisdom and skill, to prepare it,
and the several sorts of vessels belonging to it; whereby God, the most wise
Architect of the whole Universe, would make known to us, that to the doing of
Gods work, the spirit and help of God is mainly necessary, which is not in the
power of man to confer, but proceeds alone from the Father of lights. 'Twas
the work of God to put into Solomon's heart a spirit of wisdom, which made him
surpass the wisest of men; and to stir him up with cherefullnesse and
resolution, to undertake and accomplish the building of that famous Temple at
Jerusalem: as also to incline the heart of Hiram King of Tire, to supply wood
and stones for that magnificent structure, and fit workmen for the employment;
who were by God also enabled to perform the work. The same Spirit of God it
was, that put it into the heart of Cyrus King of Persia, to afford to the
people of God then in captivity, a safe return to their own land. It Is God
also that put courage into Zerubbabel and Joshua, and a spirit of alacrity into
the people, to set to their whole strength for rebuilding the Temple, and not
be dismayed by difficulties or dangers, and their Enemies stratagems. And 'twas
God that over ruled the spirit of Darius a heathen King, and made him by a
public edict give order to the neighboring people, to forbear demolishing the
work once begun, which by diverse subtilties and artifices they were
endeavoring to do. Nor was it less a work of the same spirit of God, which
stirred up the holy Prophets of old, who made it their business to extirpate
the false worship of feigned deities, and bring the people under their charge
to the true worship of God; nor would suffer themselves by the many
threatenings of an ungrateful world, or the many hazards that did attend the
service, to be deterred from it.

To these succeeded Christ's holy Apostles; who, notwithstanding they were
looked upon as the offscouring of the world and as sheep appointed to the
slaughter; though what they preached were to the Jews a stumbling-blocke, and
to the Greeks foolishness; though exposed to the hatred and injuries of the
world which they did undergo; yet could not be drawn off from the love of
Christ, whose Church, by their ministry, was greatly enlarged, both amongst
Jews, and Gentiles. And after them, the Orthodox Fathers of the Primitive
Church; who faithfully transmitting to the Church the word of God, detecting
hypocrites and stopping the mouths of heretics, were eminently serviceable to
Christ the Prince of Glory: To whom I must add also those faithful laborers
in the Lords vineyard in these latter ages; furnished with his spirit, and
taught of God; who arming themselves with Religions buckler, have fought
manfully in the cause of God against Satan and Antichrist, have vindicated the
light of truth from out of darkness, have restored the learned languages and
the liberal arts and sciences to their pristine splendor, nor spare any
pains for the propagating of truth: To say nothing of those many others whose
names are yet flourishing, who at this day by their learned writings, and good
name, both at home and abroad, improve that light transmitted to them; whose
modesty forbids to name them. To conclude, what ever at any time, by the holy
men of God, in matter of Religion and Gods worship, has been prudently managed
or successefully accomplished, it is all to be ascribed to divine providence.
Nor can I believe, that it is without this secret and wise disposal of the
divine Majesty, that my self, the meanest of those who minister to Christ or
serve under him, and no ways comparable with others; have been enabled in
these last times, when the day of the consummation of all things is at hand,
(many signs whereof we have already seen, and many more daily discovering
themselves both in heaven and in earth, so that scarce any of them remain as
yet unaccomplished, save that only, foretold by Christ Math. 24. of preaching
the Gospel throughout the world, a testimony to all nations, and then shall
the end be,) willingly to begin, constantly to persevere in, and happily to
consummate, a work of vast labor, (namly) the TRANSLATION of the BIBLE, into
the LITHUANIAN TONGUE.

For having long ago considered that several pious and learned men, since the
year of our Lord 1387. (at which time Lithuania received the Christian faith,
by means of that most religious King Jagello,) have hitherto in vain
expected, that some body would have been raised up by God, to translate the
Holy Scriptures into that tongue, (which not only in those large Territories
but also in the neighboring Countries of Livonia, Curlandia, Russia, Prussia,
and in the borders of Moscovy, it self is commonly used,) I thought it my duty
(having dedicated my self to the service of the Church from my youth) to
furnish my self with such abilities, whereby I might be advantageous to it.
Wherefore imploring the assistance and direction of Christ, ( through whom we
can do all things,) that a work so acceptable and signally conducing to the
edification of the Church of God, may continue no longer unattempted, or be put
off till the coming of Elias, or our Savior Christ, I have adventured upon it,
and my aim is not only now by this Translation (with the sum and contents of
all the Historical, Dogmaticall, Prophetical books, of the Gospels, Epistles
and Chapters,) to be helpful to those people, who have hitherto been destitute
of books in that language for the furtherance of the practice of piety, save
only the Lords prayer, the Apostles Creed, the Ten Commandments, some few
Catecheticall tracts, fragments of Gospells and Epistles, and a late Book in
Quarto, set out in the year 1653. (containing only seventy eight of David's
Psalms, some Hymns composed by Luther and others, the Gospells for the Lords
days, with a short analysis, the History of Christ's passion, and a Catechism
for the younger:) but also for their fuller knowledge of the articles of
Christian religion, by faithfully translating out of the English Tongue, the
Confession of faith, the Larger and Lesser Catechism, framed by the Assembly
of Divines, convened by the Authority of the Parliament of England, to whom
being afterward exhibited, they were examined and approved by them, as also by
the Churches of Scotland: I have a purpose shortly also by Gods assistance, to
turn the book of Psalms, into meeter, according to that melody, that is now
in use in the Churches of this happy Island, which is easy to be learned by
ordinary persons; for having skill but in three tunes, they may be able to sing
all the Psalms, whereas contrariwise in the French Psalter (otherwise very
excellent,) according to which almost all the Protestant Churches in Europe,
have theirs composed, it comes to pass, by reason of the difficulty of the
tunes, and unskilfullnes in singing, that only some of the easier Psalms are
wont to be sung, even in the public Assemblyes. It were to be wished, that
others also in their generation, after the same manner, would endeavor, to
roll away, that reproach, from the Israel of God: likewise they would do a
thing very pleasing, both to God and good men, if they would compile Notes on
the Bible, out of the most learned English and Dutch Annotations, (of which
sort nothing has as yet been done in several nations) or merely by their
joint labor translate both of them, especially in this age, wherein Antichrist
attempts an universal apostasy from the truth.

For it is meet, that they who debarr the faithful of the free use of the
Scriptures that principle of Christian faith, allowing the reading thereof to
none, but Austins, Ambroses and Chrysostoms, should know that not one, or two
alone, but many among the orthodox professers do watch for the souls of the
godly, especially seeing the papists boast so much of their number. Every
builder of the new Babylon has wherewithal to defend the apostasy of Rome,
and to maintain the servitude and tyranny of the Doctrine of the pope, the
chief bulwark and Helena of their divinity; let Christ also have such means
through the industry of his servants, who succeed in their room, who continual
labor, the burden of men's unthankfullnes, and the tyranny of their enemies
has broken and enervated; by which, not only those who are already in the
Lords sheepfold may be guarded, but also that a watch tower may be erected for
such who are without it, by the light of which they may be brought into the
haven of salvation, from the storms of errors and idolatry, whereby they are
miserably tossed to the present hazard of their souls. This being the ground
of my undertaking, God grant, that by it I may see, some at least, if not all,
in my own nation converted from the darkness of humane traditions, to the
true Gospel worship, and that God would keep and continue others in the
heavenly truth by the help of these labors, which I heartily wish, nothing
doubting, that his divine favor who has stirred up my heart in the carrying
on of this work will not here leave me, but raise up some religious Patrons,
who will judge it unfit to suffer so Christian a work to remain unpublished,
considering how laudable and worthy a thing it is for pious men, out of the
love of the truth, and a desire of the increase of Christ's Kingdom in this
world, to use all endeavors that the Church and true religion may take root
and bring forth abundant fruits in foreign nations also. And surely; if in
times of the Old Testament, the building of the material Temple was pleasing
to God, how much more acceptable shall we think the building of his spiritual
house, whose corner Stone is Christ, on whom believers are built as living
stones, will be to him. The memory of those that framed the Tabernacle is
blessed, and their names also who are wont to put their helping hands to such
pious works, shall not only, as others, be written in heaven, but they also
shall be made pillars in the house of God, and Christ shall write on them the
name of his God, and the name of the City of his God, that is new Jerusalem,
which descends from God out of heaven and his new name, to whom with the
Father and the Holy Ghost be all honor and glory for ever. Amen.

A Copy of the Testimonial given to the Translator, and of the approbation of
his undertaking, by several Reverend Doctors of Divinity, with the Professors
of the same, and other Persons of Note, in the University of Oxford.
THese are to certify any whom it may concern, That Mr. Samuel Boguslaus
Chylinski, a Lithuanian, and a Member of the Protestant Churches of that
Country, being employed by the Authority of their Synods there, and at their
charges, into these parts for his better accomplishment, to be afterward
serviceable to those Churches; and to that purpose, specially recommended by
them to the Belgic Churches and Universities, and from thence hither (as
appears to us, as well from the sight of Letters Testimonial to that purpose,
as by other credible informations,) but by reason of the late Wars in Poland
(whereby those Churches are in a manner wholly destroyed) being left destitute
of supplies from those that sent him, either for his subsistence here, or
return home, has been supported here (for the space of two whole years, and
upwards) merely by the charity of such persons amongst us, as upon
commiseration of his condition, have been willing voluntarily to contribute
toward the relief of him, and some others in like distress. We do also
testify, that, upon some special acquaintance with him, we do judge him to be
a serious and godly person, deserving all good encouragement. And whereas,
during the time of his abode here, he has employed himself in Translating he
whole Bible into the Lithuanian Tongue (into which Language the Scriptures were
as yet never Translated) and has now accomplished that work: We do hereby
declare, That we judge the undertaking very considerable, in reference to the
propagation of the Gospel in that large Country, as also in several other
adjacent parts where this Tongue is vulgarly spoken. And moreover, upon our
best inquiry into the matter (so far as we are able to judge) we conceive the
work to have been managed with much diligence and faithfulness: So as we cannot
but recommend the publication of it, as a thing very worthy of their
furtherance, unto whom God has given hearts and estates to promote the
enlargement of the Kingdom of Christ.

John Conant. Vic. Can. Tho: Goodwin. Edmund Staunton. Christopher Rogers.
Thomas Barlow. John Owen. Henr: Wilkinson, Chr. Chapter Henr: Langley. John Wallis.
Francis Johnson. Seth Ward. Robert Say. Th: Owen. Hen: Savage. Hen: Hickman.


FINIS.

