THE NATIONAL COVENANT of the Kirk of SCOTLAND, And the SOLEMN LEAGUE AND
COVENANT of the three KINGDOMS.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by a Society of Stationers, Anno Dom. 1660.

The National Covenant, Or The Confession of Faith, subscribed at first by the
Kings Majesty and his Household, in the year of God, 1580. Thereafter by all
sorts of ranks in the year 1581. By ordinance of the Lords of the Secret
Counsel, and Acts of the General Assembly, Subscribed again by all sorts of
persons in the year 1590. by a new Ordinance of Counsel, at the desire of the
General Assembly: with a general Band for maintenance of the true Religion,
and the Kings person. And subscribed in the year 1638. By us, Noblemen,
Barrons, Gentlemen, Burgesses, Ministers, and Commons, then undersubscribing.
Together, with our resolution and promises for the causes after specified, To
maintain the said true Religion, and the Kings Majesty, according to the
Confession foresaid, and Acts of Parliament. And now, upon the supplication of
the General Assembly to his Majesty's high Commissioner, and the Lords of his
Majesty's honorable Privy Counsel, subscribed again in the year 1639. by
Ordinance of counsel, and Act of the General Assembly.
WE all, and every one of Us underwritten, protest, that, after long and due
Examination of our own Consciences, in matters of true and false Religion, We
are now thoroughly resolved of the Truth, by the Word and Spirit of God; and
therefore We believe with our hearts, confess with our mouths, subscribe with
our hands, and constantly affirm before God, and the whole World, that this
only is the true Christian Faith and Religion pleasing God, and bringing
Salvation to man, which now is by the mercy of God revealed to the world, by
the preaching of the blessed Evangell, and received, believed, and defended, by
many and sundry notable Kirks and Realms, but chiefly by the Kirk of Scotland,
the Kings Majesty, and the three Estates of this Realm, as Gods eternal Truth,
and only ground of our Salvation, as more particularly is expressed in the
Confession of our Faith, established; and publicly confirmed by sundry Acts of
Parliament, and now of a long time has been openly professed by the Kings
Majesty, and whole body of this Realm, both in Burgh and Land. To the which
Confession and form of Religion, we willingly agree in our consciences in all
points, as unto Gods undoubted Truth and verity, grounded only upon His written
Word. And therefore, we abhor and detest all contrary Religion, and Doctrine:
But chiefly, all kind of Papistry, in general and particular heads, even as
they are now damned, and confuted by the Word of God, and Kirk of Scotland: But
in special, we detest and refuse the usurped authority of that Roman
Antichrist upon the Scriptures of God, upon the Kirk, the Civil Magistrate, and
consciences of men; all his tyrannous laws made upon indifferent things
against our Christian liberty: His erroneous Doctrine, against the sufficiency
of the written Word, the perfection of the Law, the Office of Christ, and His
blessed Evangell: His corrupted Doctrine concerning original sin, our natural
inability and rebellion to Gods Law, our Justification by Faith only, our
imperfect Sanctification and obedience to the Law, the nature, number and use
of the Holy Sacraments, His five bastard Sacraments, With all his Rites,
Ceremonies, and false Doctrine, added to the ministration of the true
Sacraments without the Word of God: His cruel judgment against Infants,
departing without the Sacrament: His absolute necessity of Baptism, His
blasphemous opinion of Transubstantiation, or real presence of Christ's Body in
the Elements, and receiving of the same by the wicked, or bodies of men, his
dispensation with solemn Oaths, Perjuries; and degrees of Marriage forbidden in
the Word: His cruelty against the innocent divorced: His devilish Mass: His
blasphemous Priesthood: His profane Sacrifice for the sins of the dead and the
quick: His Canonization of men, calling upon Angels or Saints departed,
worshipping of Imagery, Relicts, and Crosses, dedicating of Kirks; Altars,
Days, Vows to creatures; His Purgatory, Prayers for the dead; praying, or
speaking in a strange language, with his Processions, blasphemous Leteny, and
multitude of Advocates or Mediators: His manifold Orders, Auricular Confession:
His desperate and uncertain Repentance; His general and doubtsome Faith; His
satisfactions of men for their sins: His Justifications by works, opus
operatum, works of Supererogation, Merits, Pardons, Peregrinations, and
Stations; His holy water, baptising of Bells, conjuring of Spirits, crossing,
saning, anointing, conjuring, hallowing of Gods good creatures, with the
superstitious opinion joined therewith: His worldly Monarchy, and wicked
Hierarchy: His three solemn vows, with all his shavellings of sundry sorts:
His erroneous and bloody decrees made at Trent, with all the subscribers and
approvers of that cruel and bloody Band, conjured against the Kirk of God: And
finally, We detest all his vain Allegories, Rites, Signs and Traditions,
brought in the Kirk, without, or against the Word of God, and Doctrine of this
true reformed Kirk: To the which we join our selves willingly, in Doctrine,
Faith, Religion, Discipline, and use of the holy Sacraments, as lively members
of the same, in Christ our Head: Promising and swearing by the Great Name of
the Lord our God, that we shall continue in the Obedience of the Doctrine and
Discipline of this Kirk, and shall defend the same according to our vocation
and power, all the days of our lives, under the pains contained in the Law,
and danger both of Body and Soul, in the day of Gods fearful judgment. And
seeing that many are stirred up by Satan, and that Roman Antichrist, to
promise, swear, subscribe, and for a time use the holy Sacraments in the Kirk
deceitfully, against their own consciences, minding thereby, first, under the
external cloak of Religion, to corrupt and subvert secretly Gods true Religion
within the Kirk, and afterward, when time may serve, to become open enemies and
persecutors of the same, under vain hopes of the Popes dispensation, devised
against the Word of God, to his greater confusion, and their double
condemnation in the day of the Lord Jesus: We therefore, willing to take away
all suspicion of hypocrisy, and of such double dealing with God and his Kirk,
Protest, and call The Searcher of all hearts for witness that our minds and
hearts do fully agree with this our Confession, Promise, Oath, and
Subscription, so that We are not moved for any worldly respect, but are
persuaded only in our consciences, through the knowledge and love of Gods true
Religion, printed in our hearts, by the holy Spirit, as we shall answer to him
in the day, when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed. And because we
perceive, that the quietness and stability of our Religion and Kirk, does
depend upon the safety and good behavior of the Kings Majesty, as upon a
comfortable instrument of Gods mercy, granted to this Country, for the
maintaining of this Kirk, and ministration of Justice amongst us, we protest
and promise with our hearts, under the same Oath, hand-writ, and pains, that we
shall defend his person and Authority, with our goods, bodies, and lives, in
the defense of Christ his Evangell, Liberties of our Country, ministration of
Justice, and punishment of Iniquity, against all enemies within this Realm, or
without, as we desire our God to be a strong and merciful defender to us in
the day of our death, and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ: To whom with the
Father and the holy Spirit, be all honor and Glory eternally.

LIke as many Acts of Parliament not only in general do abrogate, annull, and
rescind all Laws, Statutes, Acts, Constitutions, Canons, civil or municipal,
with all other Ordinances and practique penalties whatsoever, made in prejudice
of the true Religion and Professors thereof: or, of the true Kirk discipline,
jurisdiction and freedom thereof: Or in favors of Idolatry and Superstition:
Or of the Papisticall Kirk: As Act. 3. Act. 31. Parl. 1. Act. 23. Parl. 11.
Act. 114. Parl. 12. of King James the sixth, That Papistry and Superstition may
be utterly suppressed according to the intention of the Acts of Parliament
repeated in the 5 Act. Parl. 20. King James 6. And to that end they ordain all
Papists and Priests to be punished by manifold Civil and Ecclesiastical pains,
as adversaries to Gods true Religion, preached, and by Law established within
this Realm, Act. 24. Parl. 11. King James 6. as common enemies to all
Christian government, Act. 18. Parl. 16. King James 6. as rebellers and
gainstanders of our Sovereign Lords Authority, Act. 47. Parl. 3. King James 6.
and as Idolaters, Act. 104. Parl. 7. King James 6. But also in particular (by
and attour the Confession of Faith) do abolish and condemn the Popes Authority
and Jurisdiction out of this Land, and ordain the maintainers thereof to be
punished, Act. 2. Parl. 1. Act. 51. Parl. 3. Act. 106. Parl. 7. Act. 114. Parl.
12. King James 6. do condemn the Popes erroneous doctrine, or any other
erroneous doctrine repugnant to any of the Articles of the true and Christian
Religion publicly preached, and by Law established in this Realm: And ordain
the spreaders and makers of Books or Libels, or Letters, or Writes of that
nature to be punished, Act. 46. Parl. 3. Act. 106. Parl. 7. Act. 24. Parl. 11.
K. James 6. do condemn all Baptism conform to the Popes Kirk and the Idolatry
of the Mass, and ordain all sayers, wilful hearers, and concealers of the
Mass, the maintainers and resetters of the Priests, Jesuits, traffiquing
Papists, to be punished without any exception or restriction, Act. 5. Parl. 1.
Act. 120. Parl. 2. Act. 164. Parl. 13. Act. 193. Parl. 14. Act. 1. Parl. 19.
Act. 5. Parl. 20. K. James 6. do condemn all erroneous books and writes
containing erroneous doctrine against the Religion presently professed, or
containing superstitious Rites and Ceremonies Papisticall, whereby the people
are greatly abused, and ordain the home bringers of them to be punished, Act.
25. Parl. 11. K. James 6. do condemn the monuments and dregs of bygane
Idolatry, as going to the Crosses, observing the Feastival days of Saints, and
such other superstitious and Papistical Rites, to the dishonor of God,
contempt of true Religion, and fostering of great error among the people, and
ordain the users of them to be punished for the second fault as Idolaters, Act.
104. Parl. 7. K. James 6.

LIKE AS many Acts of Parliament are conceived For maintenance of Gods true and
Christian Religion, and the purity thereof in Doctrine and Sacraments of the
true Church of God, the liberty and freedom thereof, in her National and
Synodal Assemblies, Presbyteries, Sessions, Policy, Discipline, and
Jurisdiction thereof, as that purity of Religion and liberty of the Church was
used, professed, exercised, preached and confessed according to the Reformation
of Religion in this Realm; As for instance the 99 Act. Parl. 7. Act. 23. Parl.
11. Act. 114. Parl. 12. Act. 160. Parl. 13. of King James 6. ratified by the 4
Act. of King Charles. So that the 6 Act. Parl. 1. and 68. Act. Parl. 6. of King
James 6. in the year of God 1579. declare the Ministers of the blessed Evangel,
whom God of his mercy had raised up, or hereafter should raise, agreeing with
them that then lived in Doctrine, and Administration of the Sacraments, and the
people that professed Christ, as he was then offered in the Evangel, and does
communicate with the holy Sacraments, (as in the reformed Kirks of this Realm
they were publicly administrate) according to the Confession of Faith, to be
the true and holy Kirk of Christ Jesus within this Realm. And decern and
declare all and sundry, who either gainsay the Word of the Evangel, received
and approved as the heads of the Confession of Faith, professed in Parliament,
in the year of God, 1560. specified also in the first Parliament of King James
6. and ratified in this present Parliament, more particularly do specify, or
that refuses the administration of the holy Sacraments, as they were then
ministrated, to be no members of the said Kirk within this Realm, and true
Religion, presently professed, so long as they keep themselves so divided from
the society of Christ's Body: And the subsequent Act 69. Parl. 6. of King James
6. declares, that there is none other Face of Kirk, nor other Face of Religion,
then was presently at that time, by the favor of God established within this
Realm, which therefore is ever styled, Gods true Religion, Christ's true
Religion, the true and Christian Religion, and a perfect Religion, Which, by
manifold Acts of Parliament, all within this Realm, are bound to profess to
subscribe the articles thereof, the Confession of Faith, to recant all doctrine
and errors, repugnant to any of the said Articles, Act 4. and 9. Parl. 1. Act.
45, 46, 47. Parl. 3. Act. 71. Parl. 6. Act. 106. Parl. 7. Act. 24 Parl. 11.
Act. 123. Parl. 12. Act. 194. and 197. Parl. 14. of King James 6. And all
Magistrates, Sherifs, etc. on the one part are ordained to search, apprehend,
and punish all contraveeners, For instance, Act 5. Parl. 1. Act. 104. Parl. 7.
Act. 25. Parl. 11. K. James 6. And that notwithstanding of the Kings Majesty's
licenses on the contrary which are discharged and declared to be of no force in
so far as they tend in any ways to the prejudice and hinder of the execution
of the Acts of Parliament against Papists and adversaries of true Religion,
Act. 106. Parl. 7. K. James 6. On the other part in the 47. Act. Parl. 3. K.
James 6. It is declared and ordained, seeing the cause of Gods true Religion
and his Highness authority are so joined, as the hurt of the one is common to
both, and that none shall be reputed as loyal and faithful Subjects to our
Sovereign Lord, or his authority, but be punishable as rebellers and
gainstanders of the same, who shall not give their Confession, and make their
Profession of the said true Religion, and that they who after defection shall
give the Confession of their Faith of new, they shall promise to continue
therein in time coming, to maintain our Sovereign Lords Authority, and at the
uttermost of their power to fortify, assist and maintain the true Preachers
and Professors of Christ's Evangel against whatsoever enemies and gainstanders
of the same: and namely, against all such (of whatsoever nation, estate or
degree they be of) that have joined and bound themselves; or have assisted, or
assist to set forward and execute the cruel decrees of the Counsel of Trent,
contrary to the true Preachers and Professors of the Word of God, which is
repeated word by word in the Articles of Pacification at Perth the 23 of
February, 1572. approved by Parliament the last of April 1573. Ratified in
parliament 1587. and related, Act. 123. parl. 12. of King James 6. with this
addition, that they are bound to resist all treasonable uproars and
hostilities, raised against the true Religion, the Kings Majesty, and the true
Professors. LIKE AS all Liedges are bound to maintain the Kings Majesty's
Royal Person, and Authority, the Authority of Parliament, without the which
neither any Laws or lawful Judicatories can be established, Act. 130. Act.
131. parl. 8. King James 6. and the Subjects liberties, who ought only to live
and be governed by the Kings laws, the common laws of this Realm allanerly,
Act. 48. parl. 3. King James the 1. Act. 79. parl. 6. King James the 4.
repeated in the Act. 131. parl. 8. King James 6. Which if they be innovated or
prejudged the Commission anent the Union of the two Kingdoms of Scotland and
England, which is the sole Act of the 17. Parl. of King James 6. declares such
confusion would ensue, as this Realm could be no more a free Monarchy, because
by the fundamental laws, ancient privileges, offices, and liberties of this
Kingdom, not only the Princely Authority of his Majesty's Royal descent has
been these many ages maintained, but also the peoples security of their Land,
livings, rights, offices, liberties, and dignities preserved. And therefore for
the preservation of the said true Religion, Laws, and Liberties of this
Kingdom, it is statute by the 8 Act. Parl. 1. repeated in the 99. Act. Parl.
7. Ratified in the 23. Act. Parl. 11. and 114. Act. parl. 12. of K. James 6.
and 4. Act of K. Charles, that all Kings and princes at their Coronation and
reception of their Princely authority, shall make their faithful promise by
their solemn Oath in the presence of the Eternal God, that enduring the whole
time of their lives, they shall serve the same Eternal God to the uttermost of
their power, according as he has required in his most holy Word, contained in
the Old and New Testament: And according to the same Word, shall maintain the
true Religion of Christ Jesus, the preaching of his holy Word, the due and
right ministration of the Sacraments now received and preached within this
Realm (according to the Confession of Faith immediately preceding) and shall
abolish and gainstand all false Religion contrary to the same, and shall rule
the people, committed to their charge, according to the will and command of
God, revealed in his foresaid Word, and according to the laudable Laws and
Constitutions received in this Realm, no ways repugnant to the said will of
the Eternal GOD, and shall procure to the uttermost of their power, to the
Kirk of God, and whole Christian People, true and perfect peace in all time
coming, and that they shall be careful to root out of their Empire all
Heretics and enemies to the true worship of God, who shall be convicted by the
true Kirk of God, of the foresaid crimes, which was also observed by his
Majesty at his Coronation at Edinburgh, 1633. as may be seen in the order of
the Coronation.

IN OBEDIENCE to the Commandment of God, conform to the practice of the godly
in former times, and according to the laudable example of our Worthy and
Religious Progenitors, and of many yet living amongst us, which was warranted
also by Act of Council, commanding a general Band to be made and subscribed by
his Majesty's Subjects of all ranks, for two causes: One was, for defending the
true Religion, as it was then Reformed, and is expressed in the Confession of
Faith, above written, and a former large Confession established by sundry Acts
of lawful General Assemblies, and of Parliament, unto which it has relation
set down in public Catechisms, and which had been for many years with a
blessing from Heaven preached and professed in this Kirk and Kingdom, as Gods
undoubted Truth, grounded only upon his written Word. The other cause was, for
maintaining the Kings Majesty his Person and Estate: the true Worship of God,
and the Kings Authority being so straightly joined, as that they had the same
friends, and common enemies, and did stand and fall together. And finally,
being convinced in our minds, and confessing with our mouths that the present
and succeeding generations in this Land, are bound to keep the foresaid
National Oath and Subscription inviolable. We Noblemen, Barons, Gentlemen,
Burgesses, Ministers, and Commons underscribing, considering diverse times
before, and especially at this time, the danger of the true reformed Religion,
of the Kings honor, and of the public peace of the Kingdom, by the manifold
innovations and evils, generally contained, and particularly mentioned in our
late supplications, complaints, and protestations, Do hereby profess, and
before God, his Angels, and the world, solemnly declare, that with our whole
hearts we agree and resolve all the days of our life constantly to adhere
unto, and to defend the foresaid true Religion, and (forbearing the practice of
all novations, already introduced in the matter of the worship of God, or
approbation of the corruptions of the public Governments of the Kirk or civil
places and power of Kirk-men, till they be tried and allowed in free
Assemblies, and in Parliaments) to labor by all means lawful to recover the
purity and liberty of the Gospel, as it was established and professed before
the foresaid novations. And because after due examination we plainly perceive,
and undoubtedly believe, that the innovations and evils contained in our
Supplications, Complaints, and Protestations have no warrant of the Word of
God, are contrary to the articles of the foresaid Confessions, to the intention
and meaning of the blessed reformers of Religion in this Land, to the above
written Acts of Parliament, and do sensibly tend to the re-establishing of the
Popish Religion and tyranny, and to the subversion and ruin of the true
reformed Religion, and of our liberties, laws, and estates; We also declare,
that the foresaid Confessions are to be interpreted, and ought to be understood
of the forsaid novations and evils no less than if every one of them had been
expressed in the foresaid Confessions, and that we are obliged to detest and
abhor them amongst other particular heads of Papistry abjured therein. And
therefore from the knowledge and consciences of our duty to God, to our King
and Country, without any worldly respect or inducement, so far as humane
infirmity will suffer, wishing a further measure of the grace of God for this
effect; We promise, and swear by the great Name of the Lord our GOD, to
continue in the Profession and obedience of the foresaid Religion, That we
shall defend the same and resist all these contrary errors and corruptions,
according to our vocation, and to the uttermost of that power that God has put
in our hands, all the days of our life. And in like manner, with the same
heart we declare before God and Men, that we have no intention nor desire to
attempt any thing that may turn to the dishonor of God, or to the diminution
of the Kings greatness and authority: but on the contrary, we promise and
swear, that we shall to the uttermost of our power, with our means and lives,
stand to the defense of our dread Sovereign the Kings Majesty, his Person, and
Authority, in the defense and preservation of the foresaid true Religion,
Liberties and Laws of the Kingdom: As also, to the mutual defense and
assistance every one of us of another, in the same cause of maintaining the
true Religion, and his Majesty's Authority, with our best counsel, our bodies,
means, and whole power against all sorts of persons whatsoever; So that
whatsoever shall be done to the least of us for that cause, shall be taken as
done to us all in general, and to every one of us in particular: And that we
shall neither directly nor indirectly suffer our selves to be divided or
withdrawn by whatsoever suggestion, or allurement, or terror from this blessed
and loyal Conjunction, nor shall cast in any let or impediment, that may stay
or hinder any such resolution as by common consent shall be found to conduce
for so good ends. But on the contrary, shall by all lawful means labor to
further and promove the same. And if any such dangerous and divisive motion
should be made to us by word or writ; we, and every one of us, shall either
suppress it, or if need be, shall incontinent make the same known; that it may
be timously obviated: Neither do we fear the foul aspersions of rebellion,
combinations, or what else our adversaries from their craft and malice would
put upon us, seeing what we do is so well warranted, and arises from an
unfeigned desire to maintain the true worship of God, the Majesty of our King,
and peace of the Kingdom, for the common happiness of our selves and
posterity. And because we cannot look for a blessing from God upon our
proceedings, except with our profession and subscription we join such a life
and conversation, as beseems Christians, who have renewed their Covenant with
God; We therefore faithfully promise, for our selves, our followers, and all
others under us, both in public, in our particular Familes, and personal
carriage, to endeavor to keep our selves within the bounds of Christian
liberty, and to be good examples of all godliness, soberness, and
righteousness, and of every duty we owe to God and Man. And that this our
Union and Conjunction may be observed without violation, We call the living
GOD, the Searcher of our hearts, to witness, who knows this to be our
sincere Desire and unfeigned Resolution, as we shall answer to JESUS CHRIST in
the great Day, and under the pain of Gods everlasting wrath, and of infamy, and
loss of all honor and respect in this World, most humbly beseeching the Lord
to strengthen us by His holy Spirit for this end; and to bless our desires and
proceedings with a happy success, that Religion and Righteousness may
flourish in the Land, to the glory of God, the honor of our King, and peace
and comfort of us all, In witness whereof, we have subscribed with our hands
all the premises.

The article of this Covenant, which was at the first subscription referred to
the determination of the General Assembly being determined. And thereby the
Five Articles of Perth, The government of the Kirk by Bishops, The civil places
and power of Kirkmen upon the reasons and grounds contained in the Acts of the
General Assembly declared to be unlawful within this Kirk, We subscribe
according to the determination foresaid.

FINIS.

