Licensed

Ian. 11th. 1685/6. To. L'Estrange.

THE HISTORY OF THE TRIVMVIRATES.

The First that of Julius Caesar, Pompey and Crassus.

The Second that of Augustus, Anthony and Lepidus.

BEING A faithful Collection from the best Historians, and other Authors;
concerning that Revolution of the Roman Government which happened under their
Authority.

Written originally in French, AND Made English by Tho. Otway, lately deceased.

LONDON, Printed for Charles Brom, at the Gun, at the West end of St. Paul's.
1686.

THE FRENCH PREFACE.
EVery one has a different taste as well in reading as in other things; some
read for Instruction, others only to divert themselves, and each have their
Reasons for what they do. This however we may truly affirm, that History alone
is able to satisfy both, since in that only Pleasure is so naturally joined
to Instruction.

Treatises of Philosophy and other Sciences contain only Precepts and Axioms
without delight. On the other side, the Poets have only Pleasure that is
natural to them, for what moral notions we find in them they are not properly
theirs, but are borrowed from Philosophy. The like may be said of Romances, and
even of those Historical Novels which of late are so much in vogue for the
Purity of their style and the Delicacy of thoughts; and though some of them
have justly deserved approbation, yet it is plain, they were not made for
Instruction, since they throw us into the same confusion and perplexity of the
first Greek Historians, where Truth and Fables are so mixed and entangled, that
it is almost impossible to distinguish them.

It is true indeed, that in this kind of writing there is an opportunity of
employing all the Ornaments of Eloquence; but it is certain too, that History
has her natural graces which she takes from Truth it self: she may besides
borrow Beauty of Art; nor is it improper sometimes for her to adorn her self,
especially when fiction pretends to outshine her in charms.

In History we find a thousand pleasant passages where Truth is capable of all
kind of embellishments, and yet keep its character; but more particularly when
the subject is limited. This is Salust's manner, who has by it made himself
inimitable. The best Greek Historians gave him that Example, which Appian also
has followed; and it is from this last Author that this design of an Essay of
the Roman History is taken, which contains the Story of the two Triumvirates.

Without doubt these great Men considered, that the design of a General History
was a thing of too great an extent to leave any clear or distinct Idea's of the
subject of them: for if the sense of the Author is not confused, yet the mind
and attention of the Reader is often tired and confounded by the multitude of
different actions and the long succession of years. There is an absolute
necessity of retrenching all the ornamental parts of it, shunning
particularities and omitting several circumstances which are indeed the
pleasantest part of it, and very often are the causes and very hinges of the
greatest turns in a History. In short, It is for this kind of writing that the
severe Laws of the historical style are made. These constraints are not found
in particular relations; there one may study ornament, relate conversations,
give an account of letters, draw the characters of the most remarkable
personages, and even descend into the particularities of their private lives,
and exalt or humble the style as the subject requires. To these other Reasons
may be added, but we find that in all excellent writings Men of understanding
consult only their own fancy, and when the manner pleases, none much cares
whether it be that of Herodotus, Thucydides or Salust.

However, notwithstanding all this liberty, we have yet endeavored to make use
of no ornamental flourishes, but what the very subject it self affords; and for
this reason Descriptions of Provinces and Cities are avoided, and many Speeches
are shortened: very often instead of instructing they are tedious, and serve
rather to show the eloquence of the Author, than explain the matter they treat
of. The subject of this ensuing Discourse every where gives opportunities of
making remarks. But this in a great measure is the Reader's privilege, which he
is unjustly deprived of by the Author's own reflections. If here there be any
by chance, they are only in such places where they are necessary to enlighten
the Story, and oppose some error of Antiquity.

Perhaps it may be objected, that the Portraictures and Descriptions of Persons
are superfluous and not to the purpose; but though the example of several the
best Writers of that time should not justify it, yet certainly that of Salust
would authorize it; he who described persons that were living in his time, and
which every body should know. In these draughts we have endeavored not to
flatter; and if we have not with some Authors as well ancient as modern agreed
in the Praises they have given Brutus and Cato, it is because they proposed to
themselves a strange Idea of Virtue, which since is much amended by the
Principles of Christianity: and it may be we have been too severe upon the Fact
of Brutus against Caesar; but if this be an offense against the Rules of
History, it is none against the Laws of Honor and Religion.

That which is added concerning the Dignities and the Offices of old Rome is
not performed with very great exactness, nor is it here pretended to, but only
what is necessary to avoid being obscure: and for this reason have we been
obliged to end this Discourse with some remarks upon the proper Names of the
Romans, and those of their Families; in like manner have we done with the Roman
Moneys and their manner of making War.

There were three kinds of Families in Rome. The Patricians, who were descended
from those of whom Romulus and the Kings who succeeded him composed the Senate;
they called them Patres, Fathers, from whence came the word Patricii. Such were
the Iulii, the Clodii, the Valerii, Cornelii, the Iunii and Fabii, and diverse
others. The second order was that of the Knights, who composed the body of the
Roman Cavalry. The third was that of the People; but here we must understand
that by the word People is not understood the Rabble or Mobile, but only those
civil substantial Citizens that had some estate and a right of Voting in the
election of Magistrates.

The Patrician Families were Noble by their original alone. Those of the two
other orders became so too when after several long Contests, Divisions and
Seditions, the People obtained to have their share in Honors and Offices; then
many of the gentilest Persons among the People raised their Families by their
merit and gallant actions. Such were the Livii, of which was Livia Wife of
Augustus, the popular Clodii different from the former, the Decii, Drusii, and
in the later days of the Republic the Portian Family, of which where the two
Cato's; the Tullian, of which was Cicero; the Pompeii, and many others.

As to the Names of the Romans (at least those of Quality) they usually had
three; as Caius Julius Caesar, Marcus Iunius Brutus, almost as we have in
France. The difference was that the Proper or Christian Name which we receive
in Baptism was given them from the time or order of their birth; as for
example, they called him Lucius that was born at break of day, a luce; him that
was born at the declining of the day Caius, a die cadente; or Gaius, a gaudio,
from the Joy of his Parents at his birth; Marcus, from the month of March, etc.
So likewise from the order of their being born; as Quintus, the Fifth; Sextus,
the Sixth; Decimus, the Tenth; and so of others. The second name was that of
the Family; as Julius, Clodius, Portius, Tullius, etc. The third was derived
from some Imperfection; as Scaevola, Left Handed; Strabo, Purblind; or from
some Virtue, as Pius, Holy; Scipio, the Staff, because he led and bore his
Father when he walked; or else from some advantage and perfection of body; as
Celer, the Swift; Pulcher, the Handsome; and from these Instances we may easily
find out the reason of the rest.

As to what concerns the Money and Manner of counting among the Romans, we have
consulted Budaeus and Vigenere who are the most exact French Authors that have
handled this Subject; but as Budaeus is the older, and the difference between
his calculation and that of this present age is considerable, we have rather
followed Vigenere, whose computations agree more with the modern accounts. The
Coins of the ancient Romans were the As of Copper, and that of Silver called
Libella, the Sesterce, or Nummus, the Denarius and the Dram. The As which is
generally wrong taken for a Sol or Penny, according to Vigenere, was worth six
Deniers of France, and the Libella as much. The Sesterce, or Nummus, which is
also improperly translated a Crown, was equivalent to two As and a half, which
is fifteen Deniers of France; and four Sesterces being ten As or five Soulz,
was the value of the Roman Denarius, and the Dram was the same.

They usually reckoned either by Sesterces or by Talents, the Talent was not
the name of a Coin, but of a certain Sum, Budee and Vigenere both esteem a
Talent at six hundred Crowns; but as Vigenere well observes, the Crown in
Budaeus his time was worth but thirty five Sols; at this rate the Talent will
amount but to a thousand and fifty Livres; and the most part of the modern
Authors have stated the Talent at a thousand eight hundred Livres: but
Vigenere in his remarks upon Livy has not followed this text; but tells you
that the Crown he means is fifty Sols; so that at this estimation the Talent
amounts to a thousand five hundred Livres of our Money: this is easy enough,
but the reducing the computation of Sesterces is much more difficult. There was
Sestercius of the masculine gender and Sestercium in the neuter; the difference
between them was considerable: our two Authors explain them by greater and
less Sesterces. The Sestercius, or lesser, is beforementioned and valued at
fifteen Deniers French; but the Sestercium, or greater, was as much as a
thousand small ones, and makes sixty two Livres, ten Sols; and in this manner
of reckoning they had three ways, which must be explained from the Latin
words, december Sestercii, or ten little Sesterces, made twelve Sols and a half,
and the rest in proportion; and this is the first way of counting. December
Sestercia, or ten great Sesterces, was six hundred twenty five Livres; and this
was the second way: But Decies Sestercium was an abbreviated way of multiplying
either in speaking or writing, which the two forenamed Writers call ten-fold
Sesterces, which is ten times a hundred; that is to say, a hundred great
Sesterces which makes sixty two thousand five hundred Livres tournois. After
this manner all the Sums were multiplied vicies, twenty times; tricies, thirty
times, etc. to centies, a hundred times, and millies, a thousand times; and so
on, still augmenting. Those that have any knowledge of the Latin know that
here in this place Sestercium is put for Sesterciorum, the genitive plural; and
in writing the Abbreviation of it is by this mark decies H S.

There now remains something to be said of the Romans way of Fighting and
Marshalling their Armies. It is very difficult to know this from Livy, who was
no Soldier himself; all that he tells us is, that they left the Macedonian
way, which was to draw all their Foot into one Battalion, which the Greeks
called Phalanx, which was a Figure very inconvenient any where unless upon a
large Plain. The Romans therefore, to avoid this inconvenience, as that
Historian says, drew their Troops into Manipuli, Pelottons, or small bodies:
but the Description he gives of it being very confused, we must seek for a
clearer from other Authors. Their Infantry they distinguished into heavy and
light armed; the former of these too had some difference according to their
Wealth and Dignity, as it was regulated by Servius Tullus the sixth King of
Rome; the richest of them, had their Helmet, their Cuirass, or Armor, for Back
and Breast, their Buskins or Greaves and Buckler of Copper or Brass: And for
offensive Arms, the Pike and Sword. Those of a meaner degree had the same Arms,
except the Cuirass, but their Shield was made of Leather large enough to cover
almost their whole body. Those of the third order had no Buskins or Greaves,
and these were their heavy armed Foot. In the later times they had besides
Javelins or Darts five foot long with three square heads, which they called
Pila, and these they threw at their first approaches. The light armed Foot wore
no defensive Armor; and had only Slings or Bows, with a Dagger by their
sides. Of the former Infantry they formed bodies called Legions, consisting of
four, five or six thousand men, (for the number sometime altered) and three or
four hundred Horse. These Legions were divided into Centuries, Manipuli and
Cohorts, as Gellius relates, who wrote in the time of the Emperors: the
Legion, says he, consists of sixty Centuries, thirty Manipuli, and fifteen
Cohorts, by which we may know, that when he wrote, the Legion was six thousand
men. And this may be easily known too by Caesar's counting Pompey's Cohorts at
the Battle of Pharsalia. The Officer or Colonel who commanded the Legion was
called Legatus, and he had under him Tribunes who commanded Cohorts, and
Centurions, Centuries. As to their order of Battle, Caesar drew his men up
always in two or three Lines, duplici aut triplici acie, even when he speaks of
single Legions, which we cannot conceive without imagining they made two or
three distinct bodies of one Legion, as now we form one Regiment into several
Battalions. It Is true indeed some Writers explain this after another manner;
but without disputing their opinion, we will follow this method as the most
probable, and having most resemblance to the modern Discipline. The Romans
therefore formed their first Battalions of their youngest raw Soldiers, which
they called Bo-Hastati; the second were those who had served some years, and
were named Principes: the old Soldiers were in the rere, and there was the
Post of the Eagles, which were the Ensigns Colonel and the other Ensigns of the
Legions. These old Soldiers, called Triarii, waited the Success of the first
Battalions, with one Knee upon the ground, and leaning upon their Bucklers: and
still as the first bodies were broke or gave way, they retired into the
intervals in the rere; and then the third line rose up, and closing the ranks,
the Battalions left no interval at all, but marched up to the Enemies, and
charged in one continued front. In all these occasions the Horse always acted
separate detaches from the Legions, and with the light-armed Foot was posted on
the Wings, or right and left of the Army; they were armed almost like the
legionary Foot, only their Javelins were longer, and their Shields were
lighter.

This is what has been thought fit to be explained, but here the Reader is
desired to be so charitable as not to think it done to make any vain show of
reading or learning, for every one knows these things are but trifles, and very
common amongst the learned: what is done here is only for the information of
those whose business and emploiments will not permit them to make enquiry
themselves among Books of this nature.

THE CONTENTS TO The First Volume.
CHap. I. The estate of the Roman Commonwealth after Cataline's Conspiracy,
Page 1. Chap. II. Caesar's design upon Cicero, and Cicero's reply to Metellus
Nepos, p. 9. Chap. III. Concerning Clodius, and the return of Pompey, p. 14.
Chap. IV. Pompey makes the Consuls: He ruffles the Senate. The Union of Caesar
and Pompey, p. 21. Chap. V. Caesar's Consulship, and what followed, p. 25.
Chap. VI. The pursuit of Caesar's Consulship. The Affair of Vettius; Clodius
admitted into the popular Order. The Banishment of Cicero, p. 29. Chap. VII.
The Departure of Caesar for the Gallick War, and the return of Cicero, p. 35.
Chap. VIII. Cicero unites himself with Pompey, who is chosen Consul with
Crassus. Their union with Caesar after his first Triumvirate, p. 40. Chap. IX.
Pompey and Crassus get themselves invested in Governments. The Cause of
Division between Caesar and Pompey, p 46. Chap. X. The Death of Pompey's Wife
Julia. The Magnificent Shows he gave the People. The Death of Clodius, p. 49.
Chap. XI. Pompey sole Consul. Caesar secures himself of the favor of the Roman
People, p. 54. Chap. XII. Pompey's Laws. Curio goes over to Caesar's Interest,
p. 59. Chap. XIII. Curio declares himself against Pompey. Caesar returns the
Legion that Pompey had lent him, p. 63. Chap. XIV. Caesar sends a Letter to the
Senate; They declare War against him. Anthony and Curio the Tribunes of the
People go to find out Caesar, p. 66. Chap. XV. The Passage of the Rubicon, and
the taking of Rimini, p. 70. Chap. XVI. The amazement of the Senators: They
leave Rome, and retire to Capua, p. 73. Chap. XVII. Some Propositions of Peace
between Caesar and Pompey, but without any success, p. 76. Chap. XVIII. The
Progress of Caesar. He seizes upon the March of Ancona. The siege of Corfinium,
p. 79. Chap. XIX. The taking of Corfinium, Caesar gives Domitius and the other
Senators their liberty; He writes to Cicero, p. 83. Chap. XX. New Propositions
for Peace. Caesar besieges Pompey in Brundusium. Pompey retires by Sea, p. 87.
Chap. XXI. Caesar goes to Rome, by the way sees Cicero. He seizes upon the
money of the public Treasury, and goes into Spain. The Siege of Marseilles. p.
92. Chap. XXII. Pompey gathers together great Forces. Fabius enters Spain with
the Troops belonging to Caesar, p. 96. Chap. XXIII. Caesar joins his Army, and
marches against Petreius and Afranius, p. 99. Chap. XXIV. The Battle of Lerida,
p. 101. Chap. XXV. Caesar's Army reduced to great extremities by the
overflowing of two Rivers. Cicero and a great many other Senators go to find
out Pompey, p. 104. Chap. XXVI. Caesar passes the Segre, and pursues Afranius
and Petreius, p. 108. Chap. XXVII. Different motions of the two Armies. Caesar
besieges the Enemies two Generals, p. 111. Chap. XXVIII. Petreius causes
several of Caesar's Soldiers to be slain. He decampeth, and Caesar follows
him, but without a design of defeating him utterly, p. 116. Chap. XXIX.
Afranius and Petreius pressed for want of Provision, surrender themselves to
Caesar with all their Army, p. 120. Chap. XXX. The Continuation of the Siege of
Marseilles, and the taking of that City. Caesar chosen Dictatour. The Defeat
and Death of Curio in Africa. p. 123. Chap. XXXI. Pompey's Forces. The Defeat
of Dolabella and Cajus Antonius, Caesar's Lieutenants, Brutus goes to find out
Pompey, p. 127. Chap. XXXII. A Mutiny amongst Caesar's Troops. He reduces them
to their Duty by his Eloquence and Resolution. He is chosen Consul with
Servilius, and makes new Laws, p. 130. Chap. XXXIII. Caesar with part of his
Army goes into Greece: some Discourse of Peace, but to no purpose. Two Armies
draw toward one another near Durazzo, p. 133. Chap. XXXIV. Caesar exposes
himself alone in a Skiff to go and find the rest of his Army, p. 137. Chap.
XXXV. The happy arrival of Caesar's Troops in Greece. Caelius and Milo raising
disturbances in Italy, are slain, p. 140. Chap. XXXVI. Marcus Antonius joins
himself with Caesar in spite of Pompey, who retreats to Aspargua near Durazzo,
p. 143. Chap. XXXVII. Caesar offers Battle to Pompey, who refuses it. They both
post themselves near Durazzo. Caesar hemmed in by the lines of Pompey's Camp,
p. 146. Chap. XXXVIII. A fight between Caesar and Pompey's Troops, p. 150.
Chap. XXXIX. Pompey attacks Caesar's Fortifications. The Valor of Sceva.
Pompey quits his Camp; the Treason of Roscillus and Aegus, p. 154. Chap. XL.
Pompey attacks Caesar's Trenches: great disorder amongst Caesar's Troops; he
confirms them by his Presence, p. 158. Chap. XLI. Caesar, in a great Battle, is
overthrown: Pompey loses the opportunity of totally routing him. Caesar's
opinion upon that occasion, p. 161. Chap. XLII. Caesar's Discourse to his
Troops to confirm them. He decamps to march toward Thessaly. Pompey follows
him, p. 165. Chap. XLIII. Caesar goes into Apolonia, Domitius joins himself
with him. The taking of Gomphes and Metropolis. p. 169. Chap. XLIV. Scipio
joins his Troops with those of Pompey's. They post themselves in the Plains of
Pharsalia. The approach of the two Armies. Pompey's uneasiness, p. 172. Chap.
XLV. Pompey forced to fight against his Opinion. His Discourse with Labienus.
Some Presages, p. 175. Chap. XLVI. The order of the two Armies. The two
Generals speak to their Soldiers to encourage them to the Fight, p. 178. Chap.
XLVII. The Battle of Pharsalia. The Fierceness of Crastinus. The Flight of
Pompey, and overthrow of his Troops, p. 181. Chap. XLVIII. Some other Presages
reported to Caesar, p. 187. Chap. XLIX. Pompey puts to Sea, and takes in King
Dejotarus, and goes to Amphipolis, p. 189. Chap. L. Pompey goes to meet his
Wife at Lesbos: he resolves to retire into Egypt. Achillas, Photinus and
Theodotus advised the King to put him to Death, Pompey slain by a Roman called
Septinius, p. 192. Chap. LI. Philip, Pompey's Freed man, pays him his last
Rites of Funeral. The Misfortune of Lentulus, p. 197. Chap. LII. Caesar pursues
his Victory. Cassius surrenders himself to him with all his Fleet. Caesar lands
in Egypt. The Insolence of Photinus and Achillas, p. 199. Chap. LIII. Caesar
fortifies himself in Alexandria. He is attacked by Achillas. He seizes upon
Pharos. Falls in love with Cleopatra. He is besieged by the Egyptians, p. 204.
Chap. LIVE. Caesar receives succors. A Sea Fight. A disorder amongst Caesar's
Troops upon the Peer. He saves himself by swimming. He restores the Egyptians
their King, who declares War against him, p. 209. Chap. LV. Mithridates defeats
the Egyptians. He joins himself with Caesar, who attacks Ptolemy's Camp. The
Egyptians routed. Their King is drowned. Caesar establishes Cleopatra Queen of
Egypt with her Brother, p. 213. Chap. LVI. Cato retires into Africa, and
Cicero into Italy, where Caesar Pardons him. Pompey^s Sons go into Spain; Cato
joins himself with Scipio and Juba. Some broils at Rome, p. 216. Chap. LVII.
Caesar goes into Asia, p. 220. Chap. LVIII. Caesar returns into Italy. His
Troops mutiny, he appeases them, and returns into Africa. More Battles, p. 224.
Chap. LIX. Caesar chastises some Mutineers, and after several movements
defeats Scipio and Juba. p. 234. Chap. LX. The Death of Scipio and Juba. Caesar
marches toward Utica. The Death of Cato. p. 240. Chap. LXI. Caesar returns to
Rome. The Pomp and Magnificence of his Triumphs. p. 247. Chap. LXII. Caesar
goes into Spain, where he defeats the two Sons of Pompey, the oldest whereof is
slain. p. 251. Chap. LXIII. Caesar's return to Rome. He makes several Laws. The
extreme Honors which were done him, draw upon him the Envy of the Senate. p.
257. Chap. LXIV. A Conspiracy against Caesar. Presages of his Death. He is
murdered in the Senate. p. 264.
THE CONTENTS TO The Second Volume.
CHap. I. The Troubles and Fears of the Senate and the People of Rome after the
Death of Caesar, Page 271. Chap. II. Brutus and Cassius endeavor to justify
what they have done before the People, who rise upon them. They retire to the
Capitol, p. 275. Chap. III. Antonius and Lepidus rally Caesar's Friends. Some
Propositions of Accommodation, p. 279. Chap. IV. The Senate assembles.
Diversity of Opinions amongst the Senators. Caesar's Ordinances ratified, p.
283. Chap. V. New Divisions occasioned by Caesar's Will. Brutus and Cassius
speak to the People in their own justification. They come to an agreement with
Anthony and Lepidus, p. 287. Chap. VI. Caesar's Will read publicly. Antonius
makes his Funeral Oration, p. 291. Chap. VII. The Pomp of Caesar's Funeral. The
Rising of the People of Rome, and their Fury against the Conspirators, p. 296.
Chap. VIII. The Artifices of Antonius. He procures himself Guards. Brutus and
Cassius withdraw from Rome. Antonius gets the Government of Macedonia for his
Brother. Cyrene is given to Cassius, and Bithynia to Brutus, p. 299. Chap. IX.
Octavius the grand Nephew of Caesar comes to Rome against the Opinion of his
Kindred, he declares himself Caesar's Heir, and takes upon him his Name, p.
305. Chap. X. Octavius visits Antonius, who receives him very ill. His Demands
and Antonius his Answer, p. 308. Chap. XI. Octavius falls out with Antonius. He
gains the affections of the People. Antonius sends for the Macedonian Army into
Italy, p. 311. Chap. XII. Antonius demands the Government of the Cis-alpine
Gaul. He offends young Caesar. The Soldiers oblige him to an agreement with
him. Antonius gets the Government, p. 315. Chap. XIII. New Quarrels between
Antonius and Caesar. Cicero declares himself for Caesar. He offends Antonius in
his Orations, p. 319. Chap. XIV. Antonius and Caesar meet at the Capitol. They
fall out again. Caesar raises Troop^, p. 323. Chap. XV. Antonius joins his
Army; but is not well received. He returns to Rome. Two of his Legions des^rt
him, and go to Caesar's Army. Antonius's force, p. 327. Chap. XVI. Caesar's
force. He assures himself of the affections of his Troops, p. 331. Chap. XVII.
Antonius besieges Decimus Brutus in Modena, p. 333. Chap. XVIII. Hirtius and
Pansa chosen Consuls. The Decreee of the Senate against Antonius. The death of
Trebonius. Dolabella declared an Enemy to the Republic. Honors and Offices
allotted to Cassius and Brutus, p. 335. Chap. XIX. Antonius's Letter to Hirtius
and young Caesar, p. 340. Chap. XX. The Consuls raise Troops for the relief of
Decimus, which was but one Legion. The manner of laying sieges in those times.
Ventidius raises Troops for Antonius, p. 344. Chap. XXI. A Battle between
Antonius's Troops and Caesar's, joined with the Consuls. Pansa mortally
wounded. Caesar's Troops are beaten. Hirtius comes to their relief, and defeats
Antonius, p. 348. Chap. XXII. Antonius defeated by Hirtius and Caesar. The
death of Hirtius. The raising of the siege of Modena. Brutus writes to Cicero,
p. 353. Chap. XXIII. Decimus speaks to Caesar, who treats him ill. The death of
Pansa. His dying words to Caesar, p. 355. Chap. XXIV. Cassius in Syria. He
raises great Forces. The Conduct of Cleopatra. Brutus defeats Antonius's
Brother, and takes him Prisoner, p. 358. Chap. XXV. Caesar demands the Honor
of Triumph, which is refused him. He attempts the Consulship by Cicero's
interference, p. 361. Chap. XXVI. Antonius makes his retreat into Gall. He
makes himself Master of Lepidus's Army. He returns into Italy with seventeen
Legions. p. 363. Chap. XXVII. Caesar pursues the Consulship. He speaks to his
Soldiers. He marches toward Rome. The fright the Senate were in, p. 365.
Chap. XXVIII. The Senates want of resolution. Caesar enters into the City. He
treats Cicero ill, and is declared Consul with Pedius, p. 368. Chap. XXIX.
Caesar causes Brutus and Cassius to be Condemned, with all those who had
murdered his Uncle. Antonius persues Decimus, who is at last slain, p. 373.
Chap. XXX. Presages which were before the Triumvirate. The Alliance of Caesar,
Antonius and Lepidus, called the Triumvirate. They meet in a certain Island.
Their Ordinances, p. 377. Chap. XXXI. The Decree of the Triumvirate. The
Proscription. Murders up and down the City, p. 382. Chap. XXXII. The entry of
the Triumvirate into Rome. Murders committed, and the sad condition which that
City was in, p. 385. Chap. XXXIII. Some stirs amongst the People. The death of
Cicero, p. 388. Chap. XXXIV. The Triumph of Lepidus. The Goods of the
Proscripts set to Sale. Attacks upon the Roman Ladies. Their speech to the
Triumvirate, p. 392. Chap. XXXV. Several of the Proscripts escape into Sicily
to Sextus, the Son of Pompey. Some extraordinary Adventures during the
Proscription, p. 397. Chap. XXXVI. The Examples of Several remarkable changes
of Fortune, p. 402. Chap. XXXVII. The end of the Proscription. War in Africa.
Sextius, Caesar's Lieutenant, overthrows Cornificius, the Lieutenant of Brutus,
p. 405. Chap. XXXVIII. Dolabella is defeated and slain by Cassius, p. 407.
Chap. XXXIX. Cassius lays waste the City of Tharsus. He joins himself with
Brutus. They take measures for carrying on the War, p. 410. Chap. XL. Cassius
attacks Rhodes. The siege of that City. The taking and desolation of Rhodes by
Cassius, p. 413. Chap. XLI. Brutus enters into Lycia. He besieges the City
Xanthus, p. 417. Chap. XLII. The taking of Xanthus. The fury and despair of the
Xanthians, p. 420. Chap. XLIII. Caesar and Antonius caused their Troops to pass
into Macedonia. Cassius joins himself with Brutus. Their interview, p. 424.
Chap. XLIV. Brutus sees a Ghost. Cassius satisfies him by his Reasons, p. 426.
Chap. XLV. The Forces of Cassius and Brutus. Those of Antonius and Caesar.
Cassius speaks to his Soldiers, p. 429. Chap. XLVI. The two Armies draw near
each other. A description of the City of Philippi and its outworks, p. 432.
Chap. XLVII. The two Armies retrench themselves. Their different movements, and
some skirmishes. The uneasiness of Cassius, p. 434. Chap. XLVIII. Antonius
possesses himself of a Post behind the Enemies Camp. Brutus resolves to fight
contrary to the Opinion of Cassius, p. 437. Chap. XLIX. The Battle of Philippi.
Brutus overthrows Caesar's Troops. Cassius being defeated by Antonius, in
despair kills himself, p. 439. Chap. L. Brutus's Melancholy. His Fleet defeats
that of Caesar and Antonius, and Brutus knows not of it. He speaks to his
Troops to confirm them, p. 444. Chap. LI. Brutus utterly defeated by Antonius
and Caesar, p. 447. Chap. LII. Brutus's last Words and Death. Messala goes over
to Caesar with all his Forces, p. 452.
THE CONTENTS TO THE CONTINUATION.
CHap. I. After the Battle of Philippi, Anthony and Caesar bring their Enemies
to punishment. They part the Forces of Pompey. Caesar goes into Italy, p. 457.
Chap. II. Anthony goes into Grecia, he stays at Athens, he goes into Asia,
where he is honorably received, his Speech to the Deputies, p. 463. Chap. III.
Cleopatra Queen of Egypt her Character, she comes to Anthony, their interview,
Anthony puts Arsinoe the Sister of Cleopatra to death, p. 470. Chap. IV.
Caesar's Sickness. He comes to Rome. His difficulties in distributing Rewards.
The dangers he run upon this occasion, p. 475. Chap. V. Misunderstandings
between Caesar, Fulvia and Lucius; They come to open War. The Negligence of
Pompey, p. 485. Chap. VI. Fagius, Lieutenant of Caesar, is overthrown in Africa
by Sextius, Anthony's Lieutenant. Caesar and Lucius make preparations of war
against each other, p. 491. Chap. VII. The Forces of the two Parties. The
Characters of the principal Officers, as Agrippa, Salvidienus, Ventidius and
Pollio. Lucius is besieged in Perusia, p. 496. Chap. VIII. The Siege of
Perusia. Caesar in danger. The extreme misery of the besieged, p. 501. Chap.
IX. Lucius resolves to treat with Caesar. He Harangues his Soldiers, and sends
Deputies to Caesar, p. 507. Chap. X. Lucius Speech to Caesar, his Answer, p.
511. Chap. XI. Lucius and Caesar part. Lucius delivers up the Town. Caesar
speaks to the besieged Soldiers with indignation, he punishes the Senators of
Perusia, the Town is pillaged and by accident burnt. Tiberius continues the War
in the Kingdom of Naples, from whence he is driven by Caesar, p. 516. Chap.
XII. The diversions of Anthony and Cleopatra. The Prodigality of their
Entertainments. The ingenuity of Cleopatra, p. 521. Chap. XIII. Anthony
receives the news of his Brother's defeat. He resolves for War, and makes an
alliance with Pompey. Caesar marries Scribonia. The death of Fulvia. Anthony is
Master of Domitius his Fleet which yields to him. p. 526. Chap. XIV. Anthony
arrives at Brundusium. He is refused entrance. The Veterans force Caesar and
him to agree. They come to a Treaty by the mediation of Cocceius. Anthony
marries Octavia. The punishment and Death of Salvidienus, p. 531. Chap. XV.
Rome afflicted with Famine; the People mutiny against Anthony and Caesar; they
agree with Pompey; his Generosity, p. 541. Chap. XVI. The People's Joy upon the
first News of the Peace. Caesar goes into Gaul, and Anthony stays at Athens, p.
548. Chap. XVII. New Causes of breach between Caesar and Pompey. Caesar marries
Livia. Several Fights between the Lieutenants of Caesar and Pompey, p. 552.
Chap. XVIII. The wreck of Caesar's Fleet. The arrival of Anthony at Brundusium.
He agreed with Caesar, by means of Octavia, p. 561. Chap. XIX. Caesar puts a
powerful Fleet to Sea, commanded by Agrippa. He attacks Pompey in Sicilia.
Lepidus comes to Caesar's assistence. Several Actions, p. 568. Chap. XX. The
Actions of Agrippa against Pompey, who beats Caesar's Fleet, p. 574. Chap. XXI.
Caesar gives new Orders for the fighting of Pompey, who in a general battle is
entirely defeated, p. 580. Chap. XXII. Pompey's flight. Lepidus endeavors to
make himself Master of Sicily. His Soldiers forsake him to serve Caesar, who
orders the Affairs of Rome with great prudence, p. 585. Chap. XXIII. Pompey
goes into Asia, where he makes War. The Lieutenants of Anthony fight and take
him. The death of Pompey, p. 593. Chap. XXIV. The causes of the division
between Anthony and Caesar. Anthony's unfortunate expedition against the
Parthians; his return to Alexandria, p. 599. Chap. XXV. Caesar accuses Anthony
in the Senate. He declares War against Anthony. His Forces, p. 605. Chap. XXVI.
Anthony (with Cleopatra) goes to Athens. Plancus and several others of his
Friends forsake him, p. 611. Chap. XXVII. The Forces of Caesar and Anthony.
They write sharp Letters to each other. Caesar approaches Anthony's Army which
lay at Actium, p. 617. Chap. XXVIII. The battle of Actium. The retreat of
Cleopatra. The flight of Anthony. Caesar makes himself Master of Anthony's Navy
and his Landforces, p. 623. Chap. XXIX. Anthony's displeasure against
Cleopatra. He retires into Libya, and returns into Egypt. p. 630. Chap. XXX.
Caesar goes into Italy. He pacifies the Soldiers, and besieges Alexandria, p.
635. Chap. XXXI. Anthony defeats Caesar*s Cavalry. He is forsaken by his men.
His Despair. He wounds himself. Is carried to Cleopatra. His Death, p. 639.
Chap. XXXII. Caesar enters into Alexandria. He visits Cleopatra. Her Death. The
Posterity of Anthony. p. 663.
THE HISTORY Of the first TRIVMVIRATE. Volume I.
CHAP. I. The estate of the Roman Commonwealth after Catiline's Conspiracy.
NEVER was the City of Rome in such danger since its being sacked and burnt by
the Gauls, as it appeared to be in the Conspiracy of Catiline. It is
impossible, in the account Salust gives of it, without horror to read of the
Rage, the Madness, the Debauchery and Ambition of that Man, and yet at the same
time his Address in managing a design that was to carry fire and sword even
into the very Bowels of his Country. But the wisdom and vigilance of Cicero
hindered its taking effect, and Catiline was slain at the Head of those Troops
he was leading against the City: But neither this man's defeat or death was
sufficient to settle so firm a peace in that City, but that still she lay
exposed to the enterprises which some more Ambitious Senators than the rest
were always forming against her Liberty. Nor could their Inclinations of that
kind meet any where with greater temptation, since the Conquest of that only
City must carry with it the greatest part of the Universe: In short, after the
War of the Confederates, in which all the Armies of Italy, jealous of the power
and greatness of Rome, had been in a great many Battles defeated, that part of
the World, came to an absolute submission: Half of Gaul, and all Spain received
quietly the Pretors which were sent to govern them; the Coast of Africa as far
as Egypt, became subject to the Romans; and Egypt her self preserved its
Monarchy only by the profession which her Kings made to respect in all matters
the Authority of the Senate. Syria was reduced to a Province, and governed by
Roman Officers, and after the defeat and death of Mithridates, all the Princes
of the lesser Asia became Tributaries, and thought themselves very happy to be
supported by the credit of some of the Senators. Greece, though it retained
some appearance of liberty became yet more reduced, for besides the rights of
Conquest, she found her self under the obligations of Acknowledgment and
Allegiance: In short, all that Coast, which stretches it self along the
Adriatic Gulf up a good way into Germany, was filled with those powerful
Armies that made head against the Barbarians. And the defeat of the Corsaires
which Pompey had driven into the Mountains of Cilicia established the Roman
Empire over all the Mediterranean Sea: These Conquests had brought into Rome
daintiness and plenty, and all curious Arts soon followed; Learning became an
ordinary Accomplishment even amongst men of the highest Quality. And almost all
the Wits of that time were polished and pure, insomuch that that City never
afforded so great men for War, Eloquence, Law, Poetry, and all other fine
knowledge as at this time; so that it was the more unlikely that Ambition
should not find an opportunity to mingle her self among so many extraordinary
Qualities. Those men who upon quitting the Charges they had exercised in Rome,
went to receive those Honors in the Provinces which used only to be allowed
to Sovereigns that commanded great Armies, and disposed of Kingdoms, found it
very hard upon their return home to reduce themselves to the level of a private
life, and forget the sweetness of Command and Power. Envy, as dangerous as it
is common to all Republics, ever took care to make way for it self upon these
occasions, and trouble the Quiet even of those who thought of nothing but
peaceably enjoying the Honors they had gotten: It appeared for the most part
amongst those who had less Desert, less Fortune, but more Ambition than the
others; and their pretense was always the public Good, when they had often no
other end than the destruction of every thing that hindered their own
elevation. A noble Reputation, great Riches, and acquired Honors passed always
amongst them for Qualities dangerous to the Commonwealth: And these
Persecutions may have contributed as much to kindling the fire of Civil Wars,
as that Ambition which Caius Julius Caesar, Aeneus Pompeius Magnus, the second
Name was that of their Families.
Caesar, and Pompey himself have been so much reproached withal, who never
could have put themselves at the head of their different Parties, but that they
had really and indeed more merit than the rest. They were both of goodly
Personage, Valiant, and equally desirous of Glory. Caesar had the advantage of
Pompey in Birth, being of the most Illustrious Family in Rome; he disputed
already the prize of Eloquence with the most famous Orators, and there was
nothing that appeared impossible for his great Genius to undertake. Pompey had
great Riches, the favor of the Senate, and an established Reputation: He had
been a General, as soon as he was a Soldier, and although he had never obeyed,
was not to seek in the Art of giving Command; he had won Battles, and deserved
the Honor of Triumph at an Age when others only begin to make themselves
taken notice of. It is impossible to tell exactly which of the two had the most
repugnancy to Obey, Caesar would have no Superior, and Pompey could not bear
an Equal. The latter supported himself upon his extraordinary good Fortune, the
other by his very great Merit. In short, they were both Brave, Generous and
Magnificent. But the luster of those many Triumphs which Pompey had obtained,
was no inconsiderable addition to his other great Qualities, so that he passed
without contradiction at that time for the first man in Rome. Crassus only
found himself in a condition to dispute it with him as well by the Nobility and
the desert of his Ancestors, as by his great estate, which accumulated to him
the surname of Rich. Of which some Judgment may be given from what he himself
once said, that he ought not to be esteemed a wealthy man, who could not
entertain an Army out of his own Revenue. Nevertheless, his own Estate amounted
not to above 1500000 Crowns.
six thousand Talents, but that brought him in a very considerable profit by
the means of his Slaves, which some Authors say amounted in number to 40000.
He had besides all this a great deal of Wit, and was very Eloquent: His good
humor and Compliasance were perhaps the effect of his Policy. For when that
Pompey, puffed up by his Victories, fansied that it was necessary to his
Grandeur to take upon him a haughty behavior, and to communicate himself to
very few; Crassus on the contrary was familiar with all the world, and employed
his Reputation and his Eloquence at the Bar in the behalf of all such as would
apply themselves to him: From whence arose that Plutarch.
judicious and excellent Observation, That by the luster of his Actions,
Pompey, when he was absent, had the advantage of Crassus; but so soon as he
returned to Rome, he lost it again by his manners. Nor was it only Emulation
which caused so great a misunderstanding between them. Crassus had other
reasons to complain of Pompey in relation to the affair of Spartacus. This
Spartacus was a Gladiatour or Fencer that had appeared against the Romans at
the head of forty thousand of his Companions, and had beaten three of their
Armies. At last Crassus had the advantage to rout him with a great deal of
hazard. Spartacus was killed in the fight, and six thousand Gladiatours
escaping from the Battle fell into the hands of Pompey, as he was returning
with his Army out of Spain; who slew them all* and then sent word to the
Senate, that he had cut up the very roots of that War. This hindered Crassus
from Triumphing, and forced him to sit down contented with the honors of the
Ovation, much inferior to those of the Triumph: This Injury touched him very
sharply, and though outwardly matters were brought to some Accommodation
between them, and Crassus in the presence of the people made the first step
toward it, by saying he thought it no shame to seek that man whom they had
honored with the Title of Great, the reconciliation was far from sincerity;
for Crassus could not hide his regret, nor whenever Pompey was named in his
hearing with the Title of Great, forbear asking in a scoffing manner, how much
he was taller than himself. Caesar, who thought himself at this time too young
to become the head of a Party, embarked himself in Crassus his interest, as
well to balance the Credit of Pompey, as to assist himself with that of Crassus
against his own Creditours, who at this time began to be importunate, and yet
for all this there was little resemblance between their Inclinations. Crassus
was a good Husband, even to Avarice, and Caesar liberal to Prodigality. Either
his love, or his State-Intrigues had already ruined him, and we may judge of
his other Expenses by the Present he once made to Servilia the Mother of
Brutus, of a Pearl that cost six thousand Sesterces. These three men already
began to give suspicion and jealousy to all the other Senators, such as were
Luctatius,
Catulus, Calphurnius,
Bibulus, and Claudius,
Marcellus, but above all the rest Tullius.
Cicero, who endeavored as much as any to signalize his Zeal for the
Commonwealth; and though he could pretend no great Authority from his
Extraction, nor was much Ambitious to be thought a very great Soldier; yet the
advantages of his Wit, the Charms of his Eloquence, and the happy discovery
which he had made of Catiline's Conspiracy in the time of his Consulship,
brought him into very great consideration: But besides that, this Action (of
which he always in his Harangues took occasion to make mention, and very often
too to very little purpose had occasioned some railery upon his Vanity: the
Punishment of Cornelius.
Lentulus and other great Ones concerned in the Conspiracy, had created him
many powerful Enemies. And it may be upon that occasion the Troubles of Rome
were renewed.

CHAP. II. Caesar's design upon Cicero, and Cicero's reply to Metellus Nepos.
CAesar had had very strait Alliances with many of Catiline's Accomplices,
which made him not altogether unsuspected: But Cicero thought it not fit to
insist much upon that point, lest his Credit might become an Argument in favor
of the other Offenders. Caesar had other Causes to be angry with the Senate, by
reason of some dispute he had with them during the time of his being Praetor: He
consulted with Metellus Caeci^ius.
Nepos, Tribune of the People, to bring Cicero to an account of his Conduct;
and Nepos, seconded by Calphurnius.
Bestia, the other Tribune, declared aloud; that he could not suffer that
Cicero should have the liberty of speaking to the people in quitting his
Consulship, in regard that he himself had Condemned Senators without hearing
their Defenses. It is true, that Cicero had done so by reason of the present
danger, but it is true too, that he did it with the advice of the Senate:
Nevertheless, when he presented himself to speak, the Tribunes opposed him, and
only would permit him to take the usual Oath; which was, That he had never
done any thing to the prejudice of the Commonwealth: Cicero, who upon that
occasion was very present to himself, contrived to turn all that Indignity they
designed him, to his Honor, and swore that he not only had not prejudiced the
Commonwealth, but had saved the Senate, and the People of Rome. All the
Assembly Applauded the thing; and the next day Cicero complained to the Senate
of the insolency of the Tribunes. To this Nepos made his reply, and in the heat
of the dispute, Cicero, who never wanted an Answer, had an occasion of making a
very good one: For Nepos, who mistook the extraction of Cicero, demanded of him
very often, who was his Father? To which he replied; If any Credit may be given
to the behavior of your Mother, that were a harder Question for you to answer
than me. Afterward, when the matter was put to a debate, the Senate judged
that for the reputation of their Authority, they ought to stand by Cicero, and
so made a Decree that no body should be called henceforward to account for the
death of any of the Conspiratours, and that they who should presume to speak
before the People, should be looked upon as Enemies to their Country: The
Tribunes provoked by that Decree, which tied up their mouths, and established,
as they said, the Tyranny of Cicero, proposed to the People by the advice of
Caesar, to recall Pompey, who at that time Commanded a powerful Army in Asia;
the pretense was to put into his care the interests of the Commonwealth, which
this new growing Tyranny seemed to threaten. But Caesar's secret designs indeed
were to unite himself with him: This Proposition entangled the Senators, many
of whom were Pompey's Friends, and the other afraid of his Army, so that they
durst not openly oppose it; but were for finding out some one man, who upon
that occasion would for their interests sacrifice himself to the hatred of
Pompey: Marcus Porcius Cato.
Cato offered himself very frankly, and perhaps was drawn into it by the
cunning of Cicero. Cato had been bred up in the Austere Maxims of his great
Grandfather, Cato the Censor, and in the rigid Opinions of the Stoics: Cicero
knew his Character very well, and has defined it very pleasantly, that he was
severe in his Manners, steady in his Conduct, unalterable in his Opinions,
pitiless toward Offenders, and no mincer of faults, believing that a wise man
could never be deceived, and therefore never repented, and that the Virtuous
only were really happy, rich and handsome; in a word, of an excellent
disposition, but seldom thought right, and one that spoke in the Senate, as if
he had been in the Commonwealth of Plato, when he was in the midst of the
corruptions of Rome. To speak truth, he was the only man amongst them that
heartily designed the real good of the Republic, and it was by that he justly
acquired the reputation of his Virtue. He was at that time Tribune of the
people with Nepos and Bestia; the principal Authority of which charge consisted
in putting stop to any thing which other Magistrates might propose to the
prejudice of the people: So he opposed in the Senate the Opinion of Nepos, and
afterward when that Tribune brought the matter before the people, and had
gathered together a great many Soldiers in Arms to make the Law pass. Cato
only presented himself with Minutius.
Thermus one of his Acquaintance, and looking upon those that threatened him,
with an undaunted air, he went and seated himself between Caesar and Nepos. He
told Nepos, That it argued very little Courage in him to Assemble together so
many men in Arms against one single, and without any; and afterward when the
Register would have read the Edict, he tore it out of his hand. Nepos, who knew
it by heart, would have pronounced it, but Thermus laid his hand upon his
mouth. At which, Nepos gave the sign to his Soldiers, when instantly, and in a
moments time, Vollies of Clubs and Stones were flying round the place, the
people ran away, and Cato had certainly been slain, had not Lucius Murena.
Murena covered him with his Robe, and Conducted him into the Temple of Castor
and Pollux: Upon which occasion this Action of Murena appeared the more
generous in that he exposed his life for a man who not long before had accused
him of Crimes to take it away. The people enraged, returned a moment after in
great numbers, and drove away the Soldiers of Nepos. Cato came back again upon
the place, and exhorted the Romans, if they would ever, now to give Testimony
of their Courage: In fine, the Law did not pass; and Nepos after a great many
Threatenings thought fit to withdraw himself from Rome, and went to find out
Pompey.

CHAP. III. Concerning Clodius, and the return of Pompey.
LOve, or rather that Debauchery which reigned in Rome, even to excess, came at
last (as it usually does) to increase disorders, and furnish out new matter for
the Spirit of Sedition and Revenge to work upon. Clodius a young man of a Noble
Family, rich, and well accomplished, was one of those that affected to be
thought well with the Ladies; and managed matters with so little discretion,
that the scandal of the times did not spare him even in relation to his own
Sisters, whereof he had three Married to Men of the best Quality, Martius
surnamed Rex, Caecilius Marcus Lucullus.
Metellus Celer, Brother to Nepos, and Lucullus. He was at that time in love
with Pompeia, Caesar's Wife, but that Lady was too closely guarded under the
Conduct of Aurelia, a Woman of untainted Virtue, and Caesar's Mother: Now the
Romans observed a certain Festival, which they called the Feast of the Good
Goddess, who was a Nymph, espoused of Faunus, wherein the Women only had right
of assisting at the Sacrifices, which they performed every year in the house of
one of the Magistrates, from whence the men were obliged to withdraw
themselves; one only being enough to profane the Mysteries, should he be
present: Clodius thought this opportunity might be favorable to him for the
obtaining some moments conversation with Pompeia, who then presided at the
Ceremony, the Feast being kept at her House, by reason her Husband was Praetor.
He disguised himself in the habit of a Woman, and was introduced by a Slave,
who immediately ran to give her Mistress notice. But she not returning so soon
as was expected, Clodius rash and impatient, venturing farther into the House,
was stopped upon the stairs by a Woman that belonged to Aurelia, who knowing him
by his voice, gave a great shriek, and Allarum'd the Company. The Feast was
disturbed, the Mysteries presently shut up and concealed, and the Women
immediately upon search for Clodius, who having made his escape out of her
hands who discovered him, had concealed himself in the Chamber of the Slave
that first brought him thither, where at last he was found, and driven out of
the House with Reproaches and Infamy. This adventure became the next days
public discourse, and every body was ashamed at the story. But Caesar resolved
to take the wisest and most honorable course he could, and being unwilling,
(as his Affairs then stood,) to make any man his Enemy, was contented, without
declaring against his Wife, to put her away privately, and being afterward
asked the Reason, said, he did not believe her guilty. But that the Wife of
Caesar ought to have preserved her self from the suspicion, as well as the
Crime. Cornificius made a report of this matter in an Assembly of the Senate,
who referring it to the consideration of the Vestals and chief Priests, they
declared their Opinion that it was an Offense of the highest nature against the
Gods and their Religion: It was then put to the Question for the exhibiting of
Informations, and appointing Judges; Upon this occasion, the whole City became
divided, and the Animosities of the Factions were renewed. Caesar upon the
expiration of his Pretorship was to go and take possession of the Government of
Spain, but was retarded by the Prosecution of his Creditours. Crassus who was
his Friend, and wrought upon by the importunities of his Wife Tertulla, who no
less loved Caesaer than Clodius did Pompeia, became security for him in the sum
of Eight hundred and thirty Talents. It was in this Government that Caesar
viewing the statue of Alexander* wept to think that he had done nothing great
and memorable, at an Age wherein that Prince had Conquered almost all the
World. And he gave indeed sufficient marks and evidences of his Bravery and
desire of Glory, for he reduced all those Nations to be Tributaries to the
Romans, and collected together so vast a Treasure to himself, and in the name
of the Commonwealth, as enabled him afterward to imitate that Alexander.
Pompey was now returned home to Rome, covered with Glories for the defeat of
Mithridates, and the Conquest of the greater part of Asia: He had upon his
arrival in Italy, sent back his Troops to prevent such suspicions as might
arise from his coming at the head of an Army, so that he obtained the honor of
Triumph with a general Applause, and with so much more Splendor, in regard
that he now Triumphed over another third part of the World, after having
received the same Honor for the Conquest of two parts before. The Triumph
lasted two days, wherein were exposed the names of fifteen Conquered Provinces,
eight hundred Cities, and a thousand Castles. The Gold, the Silver, and the
Jewels that made up part of this public Pomp, amounted to the value of two
Millions of Gold: He made it appear by an account plainly stated, that he had
improved the revenue of the Commonwealth twelve Millions, without mentioning
what he had distributed amongst his Men of War, whereof the meanest Soldiers
share was a hundred and fifty Crowns. Amongst his Prisoners appeared the Son of
Tygranes, the King of Armenia, with his Wife and Daughter. Zozima the Wife of
King Tygranes himself. Aristobulus King of the Jews. The Sister of Mithridates,
with five of her Children. The Ladies of Scythia, and the The People of that
Country, called now Georgia.
Hyberian, and The People inhabiting near the Caspian Sea.
Albanian Hostages, with those of the King of A Neighboring Province to Syria.
Comagena. But one disgustfull thing in his Family, troubled all the Joy which
the luster of so much glory might else have given him; his Wife Mutia had not
seen Caesar with altogether so much Caution as was requisite, and some people
more officious than was necessary, had taken pains to give him notice of it
upon his first coming down into Italy, so that immediately after his Arrival at
Rome, he put her away. Besides, Pompey found an occasion not to be very well
pleased with the Senate, for (in regard that those who demanded the Triumph,
were not permitted to enter the City,) he had desired the Election of Consuls
might be deferred till after his Triumph was over, that he might be present to
assist the Pretensions of Piso one of his Lieutenants, Cato opposed it, and
persuaded the Senate to reject the demand. But the People resolved to maintain
the Authority of Pompey, and Piso was chosen Consul with The year after the
foundation of Rome, 693.
Messalla: Pompey afterward solicited that all things done by him in Asia and
elsewhere, might be confirmed and approved of. But all other matters were now
set aside for the dispatching the business of Clodius, who desiring to know if
the choice of the Judges were in the Praetor or the People: Pompey avoided the
declaring himself upon that Point: but Messala, Crassus, Cato, Cicero,
Lucullus, and all the honest Party were for the Praetor. Piso the Consul
assisted by Curio at the head of all the young Men, appeared on the other side.
And the matter was debated with a great deal of sharpness. Cato inveighed
against the Consul; Clodius, who was present, answered him with Anger, and in
his speeches uttered reproachful Language against Lucullus, Hortensius, and
Messala himself. In short, after a high and hot Contest both in the Senate, and
before the People, Hortensius a Noble Senator, and one not inferior for
Eloquence to Cicero himself, proposed the Publishing of the Edict by Fusius the
Tribune. The People insisted upon their Right of choosing the Judges, and by the
underhand management of Clodius, at last they were named. He alleged, that
upon the day of the Festival of the Good Goddess he was not in Rome; and
offered to prove it. Now Cicero had had an Intrigue with one of Clodius his
Sisters, who thought to have Married him. But his Wife Terentia, a haughty and
jealous Woman, quickly broke off that Correspondence, and made her Husband
depose, that upon the very same day whereon Clodius pretended not to have been
in Rome, he made him a visit at his House. This Action, the effect of a Woman's
Jealousy, was the Fountain of all that hatred which Clodius afterward
conceived against Cicero, and which, upon the rebound, affected, even the
Republic it self, in obliging him to contribute so much as he did to the union
of Caesar and Pompey. Now then, his Evidence being received with Honor; and
the Judges demanding Guards for their safety, Clodius by his Cunning and Money
carried the Cause, and of the fifty Judges that were appointed, thirty appeared
and declared for him: Upon which occasion, Cicero told Clodius (who reproached
him, for that the Judges would not credit him) they are the thirty who took
your Money when they would not take your word, the other twenty were satisfied
with mine: And Catulus seeing them returning from the place where they gave
Judgment, Rallied them, saying, They had done wisely to desire Cuards, they
might else have been robbed of the Money they had gotten. This Decree of
Judgment offended all the honester sort in Rome; and Cicero above the rest, who
had rashly drawn upon himself the hatred of a Man, of so great Credit, and one
rash and violent, even to madness; so that from that time he thought to assist
himself, by making a friendship with Pompey against Clodius, who meditated
nothing but Revenge, and to bring it in some measure about, had contrived
underhand to get himself the Tribuneship. But considering he was of one of the
first Families of the Patricians, who never were wont to be received into those
charges, Metellus his own Brother-in-Law opposed his Design, and he lost it.

CHAP. IV. Pompey makes the Consuls: He ruffles the Senate. The union of Caesar
and Pompey.
AFter this, Pompey again began to solicit the Confirmation of all that he had
done in Asia, and a reward for his Soldiers, for which he demanded the setting
apart of certain Lands: He had already prevailed by his Credit in the Election
of two Consuls, Metellus Celer, and The year of Rome, 699.
Afranius, but quickly found himself mistaken in his Choice: Afranius, who was
a man wholly given over to his Pleasure, never acquired to himself any
Authority in the Senate; and Metellus drowned every thought of any new
obligation he had to Pompey, in remembrance of the Disgrace done to his Sister
Mutia. Cato on the other side set all his Power against the Interests of
Pompey, and Lucullus was for being revenged of him, for that he had deprived
him of the Honor of Triumphing over Mithridates: The ordinary methods upon
these Occasions, was the gaining of the Tribunes. The People being always
managed and guided by those Magistrates set over them for the defense of their
Privileges against the Senate, and it was upon this pretense the Tribunes
usually supported themselves, their Authority well managed, being so highly
respected, that they had power of Imprisoning even the Consuls themselves.
Flavius one of these Tribunes, proposed the Edict or Law for the reward of the
Soldiers. Metellus interposed with his Authority for the hindrance of it, till
the Contest rising even to blows and bloodshed, the Tribune caused the Consul
to be Arrested; and when the Senate in a whole body would have made themselves
Prisoners with him, placed his Tribunal at the Prison door, and forbad them
entrance. Upon which the Senate caused in another place the walls to be broken
down, so that by these means it came to pass that private hatred, interest, and
each particular passion, began daily to mingle themselves in Rome, disguised in
the business of the Commonwealth. And by this example we may reasonably judge
of all other such Quarrels; The constancy of the Senate began to shake the
resolutions of the People, who evermore judge of all extraordinary Actions by
their outward appearances. This Pompey quickly perceived, and made it his
request to the Tribune, that matters might be accommodated, pretending
Commission from Metellus for his so doing, which he that well understands the
firmness and resolution of that Consul will find very hard to believe. Now
Caesar had very good intelligence of all these disturbances, and of the reasons
Pompey had to be dissatisfied, so that he now resolved either to improve his
own Authority with the Senate, or take some handsome opportunity to quit their
interest: His services in Spain had deserved the Honor of Triumph, since it
had been often allowed upon less occasions, insomuch that he demanded it, and
declared at the same time his design was to pursue also the Consulship. Now
these demands were inconsistent, for that the Law forbids any one that demanded
the Triumph entrance into the City, and required that whosoever sued for the
Consulship, must do it in his proper Person. Caesar therefore sent his Letters
to the Senate, desiring that he might be dispensed withal in respect of those
Formalities. But Cato in his usual manner stood up for the maintaining of the
Laws to their utmost rigor, and his Opinion prevailed above all others, so
that then Caesar without any farther consideration resolved to renounce the
Triumph, and came to Rome to solicit the Consulship. And as he very well
understood the Credit of Pompey, and was not ignorant of his Quarrel to the
Senate, this appeared no unfavourable juncture for him to engage himself into
his Interests. Pompey on the other side was no less glad to gain a man of such
extraordinary Merit, and the Friends of both Parties began to promise
themselves no small advantages from the union, so that it was easily brought
about, and their Alliance confirmed by mutual Oaths. When this was done, Caesar
made it his business to bring Crassus into the League, who seeing his interest
too weak to dispute it with two such Men, was easily persuaded to strengthen it
by joining with theirs, and Caesar being made Judge of the Dispute between
Pompey and him, managed the matter so well, that a perfect Reconciliation was
established between them, and all the Subjects of their former differences
utterly forgotten. Now nothing could appear outwardly an Action of more Honor,
than the reconciling of two men, whose hatred might have produced so terrible
effects as theirs: But that League which was called afterward the Triumvirate
was the first power that ever broke in upon the Liberty of Rome.

CHAP. V. Caesar's Consulship, and what followed.
THE first effect of it was the promotion of Caesar to the Consulship: he had
two that stood against him; Luceius who was very Covetous, and very Rich, and
Bibulus: Luceius was taken off by great Promises, and bribed to bring what
voices he could for Caesar: The Senators who supported Bibulus, made a
voluntary Collection among themselves, and gave as much on their side: So that
Bibulus was chosen with Caesar. Cato himself being persuaded to believe that
the Law which forbad all manner of Bribery on these occasions, ought
nevertheless at that time to give place to the interest of the Commonwealth. In
a word, Caesar was chosen one, and from that time wholly applied himself to win
the favor of the People, and the Argument he wrought by, was the Agrarian Law;
this Law was a Proposition for the disposal of such Lands as belonged to the
Republic in common, in favor of the poor Soldiers, and such of the People as
had more than three Children. The People it is to be imagined were always very
well pleased with this Proposition. For the most violent Mutinies that had ever
happened in the City of Rome, (such as those of the Tiberius and Caius, who
strongly asserting that Law, were slain by the Senators. The name of their
Family was Sempronius.
Gracchi, and others) had been made upon this occasion, and Examples are to be
found of the like nature in all the Roman History. Caesar had besides taken
very proper methods; for the Law was drawn in Terms so very just, that no
Censure could find fault with it. He declared to the Senators that he would
think of doing nothing without their Authority, that he would not propose any
of his Friends, or any body else that might be liable to suspicion as
Commissioners for the disposal of it, but that they should be all Persons of
Condition, such as had well discharged themselves of great Employments, and
were of known Reputation and Ability: This fair and cautious way of dealing
left hardly any room for contradiction. But all this while the Senate had it in
their Power, if they thought fitting to oppose this Law. So that from day to
day the affair was adjourned: Till at last Cato pulling off the Mask, declared
how it was not to be suffered that any thing of the present Estate should be
changed, the Senators all pronounced their Opinion to be the same, and Caesar
complaining of the injustice and stubborness of the Senate remitted the affair
to the People, taking with him Pompey and Crassus, whose advice he asked
concerning this Law: They both of them approved of it, and Pompey declared that
if those who opposed it should come with their Swords in their hands, he would
oppose his Sword and his Shield against them, so a day was appointed for the
publishing of this Law. The People gathered together in great numbers, and
spite of all opposition to the company, drove Cato and Bibulus himself with
stones and clubs from off the place; the Consuls Axes were broken in pieces,
and the People approving the Ordinance, declared they would have all the
Senators swear to the observation of it. Almost all of them took the Oath
except Cato, Metellus and Favonius, who nevertheless made shift to swallow it
at last, to save the Fines that were setting on their heads: From this time
Bibulus never durst venture to appear in public, and Caesar declared that he
would not call the Senate any more that year: He nevertheless proceeded to pass
several Edicts before the People in spite of those which Bibulus had caused to
be fixed up against him, and Pompey, whom he already had by his discourse
brought into an ill Opinion with the People, as did appear from the Games which
were celebrated in the honor of Apollo, where an excellent Comedian called
Diphilus, speaking these Verses, By our misfortunes thou do great appear,
That Title once may chance to cost thee dear.
The People gave a general Applause, and made the Player repeat it over and
over Now this made Pompey think it convenient to enter into a stricter union
with Caesar, by the Alliances of Consanguinity. So he Wedded Iulia the Daughter
of Caesar, who was very Beautiful, very Virtuous, and lived very well with
him; Caesar took also to Wife Calphurnia, the Daugher of Lucius Piso, whom they
designed Consul for the year ensuing, with Gabinius a Creature of Pompey's. In
short, all that Pompey had done in Asia was confirmed and approved of, and the
Government of all Gaul and Illyria was given to Caesar for five years, with the
command of four Legions.

CHAP. VI. The pursuit of Caesar's Consulship. The Affair of Vettius; Clodius
admitted into the popular Order. The Banishment of Cicero.
THIS manner of proceeding extremely Allarum'd the Senate, every one laughed at
them publicly for their idleness, and negligence, and at the head of those
Acts where used to be inscribed the names of the Consuls, some body or other
instead of Caesar and Bibulus, wrote only Caius Caesar, and Julius Caesar,
which were only two names, belonging to one man; besides the Affair of Vettius
appeared greatly to increase suspicion, which was thus. He declared that
Bibulus, Lucullus, Domitius and Curio had endeavored the persuading of him to
murder Pompey; indeed he did not name Cicero, but gave very shrewd signs of
him, by saying, That a certain man of consular Dignity, very Eloquent, and a
Neighbor to Bibulus, had told him that they never stood in more need than now
of a man bold and enterprising as Servilius, who killed Metius, when he aspired
to the Tyranny.
Hala, or the He who drove the Tarquins out of Rome.
Ancient Brutus. Adding moreover, that Bibulus had given him a Dagger. This
last deposition appeared but as a mere jest to the Senate, as if Daggers had
been so very scarce at Rome, that no man could furnish himself with one, but at
the hands of a Consul: Besides, Bibulus himself had given Pompey notice to
beware of some Treason which threatened him; it came to pass too, afterward,
that Vettius named Paulus, for the chief of the Conspiracy, and it is very much
to be believed that there were some more particular reasons than ordinary that
moved him to it. Cicero says it was Caesar, who had a mind to bring a reproach
upon Curio, a young man of great expectations, but utterly opposite to his
interest. In short, the Senate committed Vettius to Prison, upon pretense that
he had worn Arms contrary to the Law in that case provided. So that every body
according to their own inclination gave their particular account of this
business: But all disputes of that nature were quickly ended by the fate of
Vettius, who died in Prison, and being one of but obscure condition, there was
no body who took very great pains to enquire how he came by his end. The
management of Cicero in all this business began to render him very much
suspected to the Triumvirate, and he had lost his reputation with them utterly
by a discourse which he made against Caesar in pleading for Caius Antonius, who
had been his Colleague in the Consulship. Caesar thought it not by any means
worth his while to contend with Cicero in ill Language and Railing, and
therefore took another way to revenge himself, and the very same day wrought
the People to give their consent for the Adoption of Clodius. This man who
labored by all means imaginable for the ruin of Cicero, aspired (as was said
before) to the charge of the Tribuneship, and to take away the objection
against that pretense, of his being of the Family of the Patricians, had
procured himself to be Adopted by a man among the People, called Flavius. Now
it was necessary that the People should confirm this Adoption by their
Approbation, and this was brought to pass wholly by the Authority of Caesar.
Cicero was too-sharp sighted not to discern easily whither this matter tended;
but was sufficiently convinced when he saw Clodius made Tribune of the People:
He appealed for Protection to the Senate, and labored underhand among the
order of Knights, with whom he was in very great esteem, in regard that he had
once fallen out with Cato himself, for the supporting of the Farmers in their
Rights of the Commonwealth, who were almost all of them belonging to that
order. But his strongest hope was in the Friendship of Pompey, with whom he had
always preserved a very strict Alliance: But Pompey had already sacrificed
every thing of that kind to the inclinations of Caesar and Crassus, whom Cicero
had mortally offended by that eternal itch which he had to be jeasting. Pompey
assured him nevertheless of his Protection; and Caesar offered to make him his
Lieutenant General: it is true, he had a very good stomach to that employment:
But Pompey advised him not to leave Rome, and Clodius found too a device now to
delude him with false hopes of Reconcilement, by the means of his Sister, (whom
some of Cicero's Friends entirely governed) to the end that he might be
confounded, and born down, ever he could think of any measures for his defense:
In short, all the world conspired to deceive him, the piercing judgment and
delicacy of Apprehension, upon which he was wont so much to value himself,
became absolutely unserviceable upon this occasion, and he knew not what was
contrived against him till it was too late, and impossible to avoid it. Clodius
by the distributions of Corn, which he made of his own free gift among the
Poor, began to get ground in the good Opinion of the People, and afterward
forbad the Censors to set the mark of Infamy upon any man, without the consent
of the Senators, and Roman Knights. At last, which was the principal movement
of all, he proposed the Law for enquiring into all such as had caused any Roman
Citizen to be put to death, without having time given him to make his defense.
And now every one began to see the danger which threatened Cicero; all his
wonted constancy forsook him, and he went up and down the City, soliciting his
Cause from House to House in a mourning Robe, with his Beard grown long, and
his hair unregarded, attended by Roman Knights, to the number of twenty
thousand, all bearing him company, and beseeching in his behalf: Besides, a
great many young men of Noble Families, who had learnt of him the rules of
Eloquence, and amongst the rest the very Sons of Crassus. But Clodius, followed
by a number of armed Soldiers, insulted over him, and reproached him with the
meanness of his behavior, till it almost came to the throwing of stones and
dirt at each other. But the respect which was always had to the Office of
Tribunes, their Persons being held as Sacred, hindered any of Cicero's side from
returning the injuries that were offered, yet nevertheless the Senators were
of Opinion to order a general habit of mourning; but Piso and Gabinius, who
were Consuls, hindered the debate from coming to any conclusion, and Clodius
summoning them to appear before the People, all that Piso said, was, That he
took no delight in Cruelty, but Gabinius condemned the Consulship of Cicero.
His only retreat now was to the favor of Pompey, who was indeed able to have
done him good service, as well by the Alliance he had with Clodius, as also by
his Authority with Gabinius, who depended absolutely upon him: But Pompey would
have nothing to do in the matter, and when Cicero came to prefer his Cause to
him, made his escape by a back door to avoid seeing of him. He found himself
now reduced to the last necessity of taking up Arms for the defense of his
life, which he might easily have done, and would have found a great many
followers. But War was not his Province, or as he said himself, Not being able
to bear the bloodshed of his Contrymen, and Fellow-Citizens, he resolved
upon the advice of Cato and the rest of his Friends, to withdraw himself: so
taking a little statue of Minerva, which he had in his House, he carried it to
the Capitol, and made a Dedication of it there, with this Inscription, To
Minerva the Guardian of the City. So immediately left Rome, and went into
Sicily. After this retreat, Clodius caused Cicero to be banished by the Votes
of the People, forbidding any one to receive, or give him entertainment within
five hundred miles of the City. After this he caused his Palaces both in the
City and the Country, to be demolished, and Dedicated the ground whereon that
in the City stood, to the Goddess Concordia, which was a proceeding never till
then used toward any man, who had not been declared a Traitor to the
Commonwealth. In short, he omitted nothing which might express all that it was
possible for hatred and revenge to inspire.

CHAP. VII. The departure of Caesar for the Gallick War, and the return of
Cicero.
AS we may justly call these Proceedings the Preludes of Civil War, in regard
they were effects of the Union of Pompey and Caesar, which according to the
Opinion of Cato, ruined the Foundations of the Roman Liberty. It will be
necessary that we now come to particulars. Caesar left Rome at this time, and
indeed with something more haste than was ordinary. In regard he was threatened
to be called to an account of his Conduct during his Consulship; some Tribunes
of the People whom he had gained to his Party, opposed the business, in regard
he was then absent upon the Service of the Commonwealth, yet could not carry it
so, but that his Questor or Treasurer was condemned. Caesar was then beginning
the War against the Gauls, whom he afterward Conquered, Pompey remaining alone
at Rome with an absolute Authority, for Crassus appeared wholly taken up with
increasing his own private Fortune, and improving its Revenues; Cicero was
Banished, and Lucullus, who was the only man capable of disputing the first
Post, by his merit, and the great Actions he had done, had settled himself in a
private retreat, where he enjoyed all those pleasures of Magnificence, and
perfect living, upon which the Proverb was afterward grounded of Lucullus his
Meal. Now this opportunity put it into Clodius's head (who was as vain and
extravagant as was necessary for such a Project) to establish his Reputation
upon the Ruin of Pompey's. The happy success of his Designs hitherto, and the
favor of the People, made nothing appear impossible to his hopes. So he
immediately took off Cato upon pretense of sending him against Ptolemy King of
Cyprus. Claudius thought himself injured by that Prince; because, when he was a
Prisoner among the Corsaires, he sent him only two Talents to pay his Ransom:
This Ptolemy was very rich, and having gotten intelligence that the Romans
would declare War against him, put himself to Sea with the best part of his
Treasure. Clodius applied himself next to the business of Pompey, setting the
Sons of Tygranes, over whom Pompey had Triumphed, out of Prison. Gabinius would
needs oppose this mad proceeding, but Clodius guarded by armed Slaves, whom he
had drawn out of the Mountains of Tuscany, attacked him upon the place, broke
the Axes which were carried before him, as Consul, and wounded a great many of
those that followed him. Now Pompey saw by this, that it was high time for him
to take other measures, and upon consideration could think of no man so fit for
the purpose, as Milo, who was then too Tribune, a man fond of any undertaking,
wherein there appeared a prospect of Preferment; besides, he was Cicero's
Friend, and stout to the last extremity: Pompey resolved too to have Cicero
recalled, and to that end used his best interest with his Friends: To this
design, Clodius opposed himself, and was seconded in it by his Brother Appius,
and Metellus Nepos, who was chosen Consul for a little while, and had been an
ancient Enemy of Cicero's: The other Consul Lentulus, whom Clodius hated; for
that he had been against him in the affair of Pompeia, declared himself openly
for Cicero, as did all the Senate. Upon this, Quintus follows with all
diligence the calling home of Cicero his Brother, and Milo was to publish the
Proclamation: Therefore as each of these two Parties supported themselves under
the Authority of one of the Consuls, the Sedition grew to be very terrible. Now
the Romans were wont to be very expensive in the Pomp of their Funerals, and
amongst many other shows, used to exhibit those which were called the Funeral
Sports, where after a barbarous manner the Gladiatours fought to the utmost
earnest, and slew one another in honor of the dead person, whose Memory they
Celebrated: Appius had upon this occasion a great number of these to pay those
last Offices of Duty to one of his dead Relations. Clodius assisted by these
Gladiatours, threw himself among the People that were gathered together for the
recalling of Cicero: Upon which arose the most horrid disorders imaginable:
many of the People were killed, the Tribunes were wounded, and Quintus was
almost overwhelmed with the bodies of the dead, so that the People, unprepared
for such a surprisal, separated themselves and fled. But after a day or two
Milo seized upon Clodius, and carried him before the Pretors, to answer for
those violences, Metellus forbad the Pretors to take any cognizance of the
matter, so that at last Milo gathering together the trustiest of his Friends,
and being guarded by the Gladiatours of Pompey, fiercely Conducted Cicero's
Brother into the public place. This Tribune indeed seemed as if made on
purpose for the opposing of Clodius, for he was every way as mutinous as he,
but at the bottom was stouter, Clodius upon this returns, where it wanted but a
hairs breadth of coming to a downright Battle, but that after a little blood
drawn as well on one side, as the other, Clodius was beaten off, and Mark
Anthony, who was young, and at that time in Cicero's Party followed him with
his Sword in his hand, and had certainly killed him, had he not made his escape
into the house of a certain Bookseller, who concealed him under his Books. So
that Cicero's Friends remaining Masters of the Field, caused a Decree to be
passed for his return, and there appeared at that time so good an understanding
between the Senate and the People, that of four hundred Senators, there was
none but Clodius, who was not for him; we may see in his works the Glory and
Pomp of his return, with what an Air he spoke, and after what manner he treated
those that had injured him, how he transported himself against Piso, Gabinius,
and even poor Clodia too, whose Reputation he Massacred after a most merciless
manner in the defense of Caelius. But this being little to our present purpose,
let it suffice to say, that as he had too much wit not to take warning by
Examples past, he took care to reform his Conduct and his Manners; he therefore
applied himself wholly to Pompey, whom he finding leagued so absolutely with
Caesar, durst not attempt the breach of their Alliance, judging very well (as
he himself has expressed it) that it would have been but folly to have hoped
it, and insolence to have proposed it; He therefore sent his Brother into
Caesar's service, and maintained that way an honest and fair Correspondency. In
short, he took all the measures of an exact Courtier, as well (as he himself
afterward acknowledged) in respect of their present Union, as of the Division
that might in time happen between them.

CHAP. VIII. Cicero unites himself with Pompey, who is chosen Consul with
Crassus. Their union with Caesar after the first Triumvirate.
UPon this return of Cicero, there arose so great a want and scarcity in the
City, especially of Corn, that the People were gathered together twice, and
almost ready to stone the Consul, threatening to fire the Temple of Concord
where the Senate was assembled; Clodius besides exaggerated their madness, by
laying all to Cicero's charge, so that that night they demanded the
distribution of Corn from Cicero, with great noise and clamor, and the next
day again at the very door of the Senate House, which obliged him to propose,
that Pompey might be Commissionated to manage the Provisions of Rome, with an
absolute Authority, both by Land and Sea for the space of five years. Nor could
he better acquit himself of the obligations he had to Pompey, than by putting
into his hands the whole strength of the Commonwealth, and in consideration of
the present exigency, his advice was approved of. But it was believed, and
Clodius took upon him to declare it publicly, that the want of Corn was no
better than a design contrived betwixt them both, for the bringing about that
purpose, since immediately, upon putting the business into Pompey's hands,
there appeared all the Plenty imaginable, and the Authority remained in him
five years. In the mean time, as Caesar's Conquests established him great
reputation at Rome, so his Humanity, and other excellent qualities, absolutely
gained to him the hearts and affections of the Soldiery under his Command;
neither did the business of his Wars abroad employ him so much, but that he had
an eye too toward his affairs at home. He took care to send Magnificent
Presents to the Ladies, and all those that were in any Authority; the
Volunteers, who went with him into Gaul, were entertained by him with a
thousand obligations, and returned home full of the Praises of his Generosity.
He returned afterward to Winter in Italy, a great part whereof, by the name of
the Cisalpine Gaul, was under his command, which is at present all Lombardy
entire, comprehending Piedmont, Milain, the State of Venice in Italy; in short,
all as far as the River Rubicon. Pompey, Crassus, and almost all the Magistracy
of Rome went to visit him at Lucca, where he then resided. They went attended
with These were a sort of Officers like our City Sergeants.
Lictors, to the number of Six and twenty; Twelve whereof carried the Axes
before the Consuls, and the rest waited upon the other Magistrates according to
their quality and rank. It was in this place that the Triumvirate took new
measures for their more strict union, and the strengthening their Authority:
They resolved that Pompey and Crassus should demand the Consulship for the
following year, and that Caesar should hold his Government five years longer.
So that this Union, which they disguised under the name of Friendship, was, in
effect, no other thing, than each Man's private Ambition; and therefore we
ought the less to wonder, if the same reasons that united them now, were now
the causes of their division afterward, when each of them began to think he
was strong enough to set up for himself. Now this resolution of theirs alarmed
all those of the Senate who wished well to the Public; and Cornelius Lentulus
Marcellinus.
Marcellinus, one of the new Consuls, talked very highly upon the occasion,
demanding of Pompey and Crassus, in presence of the People, if they pretended
to the Consulship, to which Pompey replied fiercely, that he would do as he
himself thought best; but Crassus answered in more modest terms, saying, That
he should proceed according to what he judged most for the advantage of the
Republic. This Dispute (as was usual on the like occasions) was improved
almost to blows. And the Senate gave orders for a common habit of Mourning to
be worn, as in cases of a Public calamity, and the reason they gave for it
was, that the Proceedings of the Triumvirate were dangerous to the Government
Established, and contrary to Law. Indeed, as for Pompey, he found out a way to
give sufficient marks of the Nature of his Ambition. He had been affronted, to
the last degree, by Clodius, in the business of Ptolemy King of Egypt. This
Prince having been driven out of his Kingdom by the Rebellion of his Subjects,
was come to Rome to demand assistence, and great Intrigues were set on foot for
the Command of such an Expedition, for Ptolemy offered very large
Capitulations; Lentulus, the then Consul, and Pompey, were those who pursued it
most warmly, and seemed to have the strongest Interest: But Clodius, who loved
neither the one nor the other, opposed them both. So that when the People were
assembled upon that occasion, he appeared, followed by those sort of Men, who
Cicero called Clodius's Working-tools, (it may be, because they had helped him
to demolish his Palace) and there interrupted the discourse of Pompey with
shoutings and clamours; and on the other side, when ever Clodius offered to
speak, Pompey's party were as noisie as their neighbors, and sung out lewd
Lampoons against Clodius and his Sister. This Clodius took occasion to revenge,
not unpleasantly; for, turning about to those who were of his side, he begun to
ask of them, Who was the most effeminate Commander in Rome? they answered,
Pompey. Who was the Ladies Captain? Pompey. Who starved the People? Pompey. And
yet, Who had a mind to go into Egypt? Pompey. And then, when he demanded of
them, Who they would send? they answered, Crassus: who indeed, for all the
friendship between him and Pompey, had privately managed his own Interest that
way having Clodius for him among the People, and Cato in the Senate. Clodius
indeed took care to be well paid for his pains; but Cato proceeded out of
downright honesty, and opposed Pompey for no other reason, than that a Sybill
had Prophesied, That there should come a King of Egypt to ask assistence of
the Romans; That they ought to receive him as a Friend, but not to send him
back with any Troops. Cato had a high dispute with Pompey upon this subject;
and Pompey, after having hinted at Crassus, without naming him, declared, That
there were those who designed against his life, but that he should take care to
guard himself better than young Scipio had done, who was put to death by Carbo.
In fine, Pompey, through all this business, managed himself but very
indifferently, and was outrageous against Clodius. These things happened before
the Interview at Lucca. But Pompey seeing he had need of the People, and
Clodius having a design upon the Office of Edilis, their particular Interests
brought them soon to a better understanding; Pompey promised Clodius to assist
him in his pretensions, and Clodius, in favor of Pompey, hindered the holding
of the Comitia, for the Election of Magistrates (for so the Assemblies of the
People were called.) The design was to reduce the State of Rome to that which
we call an Interregnum, which is that, when the choice of Consuls failed, the
most Illustrious of the Senators should take the charge of the Government by
turns, each whereof had the power of naming Consuls when it was his day; and as
the manner was extraordinary, the usual course of the Law was herein often
dispensed withal. The business succeeded according to their wishes; Domitius,
only assisted by Cato his Brother-in-law, presented himself to the People, in
competition with the two Triumviri, but they having filled the place with those
Soldiers which the young Crassus, Caesar's Lieutenant, had brought on purpose
out of Gaul, a slave of Domitius, that carried a Flambeaux before him, was
killed upon the spot, the Master himself hardly escaping, and Cato received a
wound in his Arm: The year of Rome 699.
so Pompey and Crassus were chosen, but Pompey only stood charged with the
hatred which so unjust and violent a proceeding did really deserve.

CHAP. IX. Pompey and Crassus get themselves Invested in Governments. The Cause
of Division between Caesar and Pompey.
TO pass over the variety of matters which happened at Rome, during the five
last years of Caesar's Government, and which have no relation to the subject in
hand; besides, that the repetition would be tedious, and that it may be, in
some measure, guessed at, by what we have said of the Intrigues about
Elections, the struglings and hostilities before: It seems enough at present
in gross, and without the order of time, to take notice, that Pompey acquitted
himself in what he promised Clodius, even to the hazard of his life. Since in
the Assembly for the Election of Ediles, he had a Man killed so near him, that
his Mantle was covered with the blood. He revenged himself signally upon Cato,
who, when he demanded the Pretorship, Pompey caused his pretensions to be
thrown out; and named, in prejudice of him, one Vatinius, who was one of the
worst and most obnoxious Men of that time. And in process of time too he
brought it about, that Ptolemy was established in his Kingdom by Gabinius, with
a powerful Army, and all this merely by his own Authority, in spite of the
Sybills Prophecy. Gabinius was afterward called to an account for it when he
came back to Rome, but by his Money and Pompey's favor, he escaped a
Condemnation, which he could never have avoided, had his miscarriages been
severely prosecuted. These things (...) now may see plainly have no relation to
the Civil War, otherwise than as they discover the Power and Ambition of
Pompey, which will much more appear in what is to follow, and belongs to the
subject in hand. Now Crassus and he seemed to affect a great deal of
moderation, in regard of those Governments, which, according to Custom, were
to be allotted them, upon the expiration of their Consulship; but yet,
nevertheless, managed matters otherwise underhand, by the Tribunes of the
People, who were to propose for them Syria and Spain, with Africa or Libya, as
it was then called. To each of these Governments Armies were to be added, with
full power and authority to make Peace and War at discretion; which gave
opportunity too to Caesar's Friends to mention his five years. The whole
affair, being privately agreed upon between the Triumviri, passed against all
objection; Pompey got Libya and Spain, and Crassus, Syria, with power to make
War upon the Parthians; so that their Union did still support it self, in
appearance, though it were really already ruined in the foundation, at least
between Pompey and Caesar; nor need we seek for other reasons for it, than the
Jealousy, which the Emulation, of those two great Men, raised of each other.
Pompey had seen himself, for many years, at the head of the rank of Romans,
and, to give him his due, it was not without Justice, for he had enlarged the
Roman Empire farther than any other had done before him. He had Triumphed over
three parts of the World; over Africa, by the defeat of Domitius in Libya; over
Europe, by that of Perpenna in Spain, and over Asia, after having vanquished
King Mithridates, one of the most formidable Enemies Rome ever had, and all
this too without the least disgrace. From this high degree of Glory he looked
down upon all other Romans as his Inferiors. And therefore, as he knew the
Merits of Caesar, and the advantages which accrued to him from his Illustrious
Birth and Education. He could not, without much regret, see, that his great
actions in the Gallick War began to put him in a condition of disputing, even
with himself, for Glory gotten in Arms. On the other side, Caesar having
received, both by Nature and Education, all those qualifications that go to the
Composition of a Great Man, had too much fire, to hear with patience, any Man's
Pride, that affected to appear above him, and therefore, whenever he had an
occasion of showing his abilities, he made so good use of it, that he quickly
found himself in a condition to ease Pompey of that advantage, by which he
thought he deserved so very much above all other Romans. And Fortune too was as
indulgent to him now, as she had been to Pompey before; but she utterly
abandoned Crassus, who could never rise up to the least pretensions, for he was
defeated, and lost his life in the Parthian War; and the death of that
Triumvir, who, while he lived, was as a check upon the other two, left them now
an open field for their Ambition and Emulation to work in.

CHAP. X. The death of Pompey's Wife Julia. The Magnificent Shows he gave the
People. The death of Clodius.
POmpey had now for some time done all that was in his power to diminish the
reputation of Caesar's Conquests, obliging the Magistrates not to publish any
Letters they received, till he had fore-stalled the credit of them, by
spreading false and disadvantageous reports. This gave great cause of trouble
to all those who foresaw the miseries that must attend a Rupture between two so
extraordinary Men; and what augmented their fears more, was the death of Iulia
Pompey's Wife, which happened at the same time: Pompey loved her even with
passion, which one would have thought might have been of consideration enough
to have healed differences between the Father and the Son-in-law. For Iulia had
Wit as well as Virtue, and always a great ascendant over both their
dispositions. The People of Rome gave sufficient testimony of the respect they
bore her, by public demonstrations of their sorrow; and when Pompey would have
carried her Body to one of his houses near Alba, the People opposed it, and
bore it into the Field of Mars, where they paid it the last Rites of Funeral
with all Magnificence: From this moment Pompey resolved to think of nothing but
his own particular advancement; and, for the restoring of himself to the favor
of the People, caused a stately Theater to be builded, which he dedicated to
them by Plays, and other magnificent Shows; which were not at all pleasing to
Cicero, as appears from one of his Epistles: It was reported too afterward at
Rome, That that Theater was not built at the expenses of Pompey, but that
Demetrius, one of his Freed-men had defrayed the charge of it, as a piece of
gratitude and acknowledgment for the Immense fortune he had raised under his
Master, so that Pompey himself reaped little advantage from that undertaking.
The spirits of the People too were sharpened against him, by the extreme
violence which he used, in raising those Troops which were to follow Crassus,
at the time when that General departed upon his unfortunate Expedition against
the Parthians: For it was a thing disapproved of at Rome, and approved by one
of the Tribunes, who, when he could not hinder it, uttered such horrible Cursts
and Imprecations against Crassus, as it was believed called down that
misfortune upon his head, which cost the Romans, a Hundred thousand Men, and
Crassus himself his own life, as well as his Son, whom Cicero takes occasion to
mention with an extraordinary Character. In the mean time Pompey, whose
Government was now expired, took other measures, and pretended, upon the
disgusts he had received, to withdraw himself from any Administration in the
Republic, so that the Government fell into horrible disorders. And the
pretensions to public Offices grew to such excess, that it was apparent, upon
the creation of Ediles, there were deposited Eight hundred Talents for the
packing of Suffrages, and the City of Rome was eight entire months without any
Magistrates. The fury of those Factions, under the names of Clodius and Milo,
produced nothing but daily Murders, till no body durst walk the streets but
Armed; which gave occasion to those of Pompey's party to insinuate, that his
retirement was prejudicial, and a loss to the Public; and, at the same time
proposed, that he might be sent for back, and made Dictatour: Pompey explained
himself very modestly upon the matter; and when the business was mentioned to
him, only said, that it was his opinion the Republic stood in need of the
Authority of some wise and moderate Man. And such an Authority appeared indeed
the more necessary upon the death of Clodius, which happened too at the same
time; which, as it is a matter has been variously reported, and which Cicero
has endeavored to disguise, with all the arts of his Eloquence, we shall here
give such an account of, as seems to come impartially nearest the truth. Milo
pretended to the Consulship, and Clodius to be made Praetor, at the same time;
and as they were two Men, whose Interests were Incompatible, they always
sought, by the best means they could invent, or lay hold on, to ruin one
another. Milo was to take a Journey to A Little Town not far from Rome.
Lavinium, where he was Dictatour, and he departed from Rome in his Chariot,
with his Wife and Family, but well guarded by a great number of his slaves. In
his way, he was to pass by a Countrey-house that belonged to Clodius; near this
house they both met Clodius on horseback and well attended. The Quarrel was
begun on both sides by the slaves, who, having exchanged several blows with
each other. Milo alighted out of his Chariot, and with his Sword in his hand
defended himself vigorously; Clodius in the scuffle received a wound upon his
head, which brought him to the ground. He was quickly taken up by his slaves,
and carried into his house, whither Milo followed him: Appian says, it was to
excuse himself to him, but that were ridiculous to believe, considering the
violent hatred that had long been between them; it may be more reasonably
conjectured, that it was to satisfy himself of the condition of his wounds, or
to give him more if he thought them not enough: In conclusion, when he found
him expiring, he went back to Rome, to prevent what might be aggravated to his
prejudice. The People all entertained the news with unexpressible sorrow, for
Clodius was extremely beloved by them. So that when his Brother Appius caused
his Body to be brought to Rome, and Vibullius.
Rufus and Munatius.
Plancus, the Tribunes, exposed it all bloody, as it was in the public place,
there arose an implacable Mutiny; They ran to Milo's house to set it on fire,
but he repulsed and killed several of the Assailants; the rest returned back to
the place, where they pulled to pieces all the Seats of the Magistrates, made a
The Romans, since the time of Sylla, burned the Bodies of their Dead, instead
of Burying them.
Funeral Pile of them, and set fire to it with so much fury, that all that
stately building where the Senate used to assemble, was burned with the Body of
Clodius; after this the Mutineers dispersed themselves all over the City,
where, under pretense of searching for the Friends of Milo, they committed the
most insupportable Violences. Milo behaved himself in all this affair with his
usual fierceness. He sent for a great number of his slaves out of the Country
for the Guard of his Person, and had the boldness to offer himself to the
People to be Judged. Caecilius the Tribune, by consent, was to be his Accuser,
and he had well assured himself of his Judges. But the People, more transported
than ever, fell upon the followers of Milo, who had much ado to save himself,
with Caecilius, and Murders were renewed again all over the City.

CHAP. XI. Pompey sole Consul. Caesar secures himself of the favor of the
Roman People.
THese things happened under the Consulship of In the year of Rome 701, there
were two Families which bore the Name of Domitius; one surnamed Enotarbus, and
the other Calvinus.
Domitius Calvinus, and Valerius Messala. For Pompey perceiving the name of
Dictatour to be very odious, had caused them two to be chosen, and fortified
himself with that Authority which the Senate had given him, to defend the
Magistrates and their Judgments with Troops allotted him for that purpose;
Nevertheless this appeased not the public disorders. Cornellus.
Scipio, Hypseus and Milo, pretended all at the same time to the Consulship,
and carried on their respective Interests with a strong hand; so that there was
every day to be seen three Armies upon the place: Milo, whose violent
proceeding had accumulated to him the public hatred, was, at last, accused by
Appius; and although Cicero himself undertook to defend him, his fear of
Pompey's Soldiers, who surrounded him as he was pleading, put him out of his
Oration: And the Insolence of Milo, who came before the Judges with a face full
of Threatenings and Menaces, caused him to be condemned; so he was Banished: and
when Cicero afterward sent him that Discourse of his, which we now have
amongst us, and which passes for the choicest of his Works: his Answer was,
That it was happy for him that Cicero was out in his harangue, for that he had
not else fared so well at Marseiles* for that was the place of his Exile. Now
the Friends of Pompey took upon them afresh to solicit his pretensions; And
those necessities which the State of the Commonwealth then lay under, appeared
no small argument for him with the Senate; but the name of a Dictatour would
not be heard of: So that Cato thought fit to propose an expedient, which was,
That the power of a Dictatour might be conferred upon him, but under some
gentler Title; so Pompey was declared sole Consul: New Troops were allotted
him, and a Thousand Talents yearly for the maintenance of them; the Government
of Spain was continued to him for four years longer, and he sent Deputies
thither to Rule in his stead. He strengthened himself too with the Illustrious
Alliance of the House of Scipio, by Marrying Cornelia, a Lady of no less
Accomplishments than Beauty; she understood, even to excellent performance, all
manner of Music; nor was a stranger to Learning and Philosophy, being Mistress
of Geometry, and the other parts of the Mathematics; and all this too without
the least Impertinence, or Womanish affectation. So that Pompey thought he had
nothing now more to be afraid of, and that it would be henceforth an easy work
to overthrow the Fortunes of Caesar; who, on his side, was by no means
negligent of what so nearly concerned him. Some Tribunes of the People had
proposed, the causing of him to be elected Consul with Pompey; but he desired
them, by Letters, to reserve their good Inclinations of that kind for a design
he had to demand a second Consulship, when the employ he was at present in
should be expired. In the mean time, to gain the good will of the People, he
caused a new Market to be set up at Rome, the place whereof cost him a Hundred
thousand Sesterces: He gave also to the Romans certain Plays, and a Public
Feast, in acknowledgment of the Honors they had done to his Daughter Iulia. He
desired the Knights, and such of the Senators as were his Friends, that they
themselves would Exercise and Instruct the Gladiatours, and sent them Rules and
Directions accordingly. Giving order at the same time, that those Gladiatours,
who pleased not the People in their Combats, should be turned out, and others,
more agreeable, put in their places: The Grandeur of his Mein, his
extraordinary Generosity, and the greatness of his Actions, had entirely
engaged to him the affections of his Soldiers, who all loved him, even to
adoration; he caused their Pay to be doubled, and the Corn which used to be
distributed among the Troops, by regulated proportions, was now given to them
without stint or measure. Again, on the other side, a great many of the
Senators stood obliged to him for considerable Sums of Money, which he had
lent them without any Interest; he entertained, with Magnificence, all such as
served under him, even to those slaves whom he loved: and his Army was a
perfect refuge to all manner of Criminals, and such as were burdened with
Debts, a great many whereof he discharged at his own proper expense; but to
those who stood engaged for mighty sums indeed, he used to say, That one Civil
War would make all even. In a word, all stranger Princes, and the best Cities
tasted of his Munificence by considerable Presents. And all this done at the
expense of the Gauls. So that it was not improperly observed by one, who said,
That Caesar conquered the Gauls with the Roman Steel, and the Romans with the
Gallick Gold. Pompey's Friends, to be sure, were not now backward to make their
reflections upon the occasion of these Liberalities, and to exaggerate the
danger that might thence threaten the Commonwealth. Nevertheless, Caesar
resolved once more to try, if it were possible, to preserve the Friendship of
Pompey, and before his last Marriage offered him his Neice Octavia, and
demanded Pompey's Daughter for himself, but Pompey thought fitting to make
choice of an Alliance with Scipio, whom he caused afterward to be joined with
him in the Consular dignity for the last five Months; and as he very well knew
that Caesar was beloved by the People, his business was to establish his
Interest among the Senators. These two Factions have been always opposite,
under the Title of the Nobility and the Populace; And their division had
produced very terrible effects, especially in the Sedition of the Gracchi, and
afterward in the Wars between Cajus.
Marius and Cornelius.
Sylla: The People usually prevailed by their Numbers, but the Senate by their
Authority; and it is, without doubt, that Union of Pompey with the Senate,
which has caused Caesar's Party to be so much decry'd; and the advantages of
Pompey, in all Writings, to be celebrated with so much Passion; that, under the
Reign of one of the most terrible of Caesar's Nero.
Successors, there lived an Lucan.
Author, who durst publish a Work, which we have now amongst us, wherein he
has most barbarously violated the memory of that Great Man.

CHAP. XII. Pompey's Laws. Curio goes over to Caesar's Interest.
THE first appearance of Division began from Pompey, by the two Laws which he
published during his Consulship, the first whereof was for an enquiry into the
miscarriages of Officers in the executing their Charges, for the twenty years
last past, that is, from his first Consulship, down to that which he then held.
Hereupon Caesar's Friends remonstrated that a Law of that kind might be
injurious to several illustrious Men; and more particularly to Caesar, who had
within that time been Consul. At that name he cried out that it was shameful
for them to imagine that such an Ordinance could in any manner have regard to a
man of Caesar's Merits and Virtue, and that his Friends did him the greatest
injury to suspect it, so that no alteration of that Law could be admitted, and
many persons were condemned upon it, amongst the rest, Hypseus, Memmius,
Sextus, and Gabinius himself: yet afterward when Memmius in his turn accused
Scipio, Pompey's Brother-in-Law, Pompey was not ashamed himself openly to
appear against that very Law of his own making to bring off Scipio by his
Authority. The other Law of Pompey, or rather an Article of the Precedent was,
That no man being absent, should be admitted to demand any Employment, these
Laws being approved of, were forthwith engraved upon Copper Tables, and carried
to the public Treasury, after which formality, no change or alteration in them
was to be admitted; Pompey was for an exception in favor of Caesar, but in
regard that it was contrary to Form. Marcus Marcellus, who had succeeded Pompey
in his Consulship, no way respecting any such exception, after giving notice
that he had matters to communicate of the highest importance, proposed, that
since the Conquest of Gaul was now completed, some body might be sent to
succeed Caesar, and at the same time that he might be excluded from demanding
the Consulship; This Declaration allarum'd all Caesar's Friends; Servius
Sulpitius the other Consul, declared himself of the contrary Opinion, and the
Tribunes Caius Caelius, and Vibius Pansa opposed the Decree. Pompey too was at
a loss how to distinguish handsomely upon this Subject. He said indeed it was
great Injury to Caesar to propose a thing of that Nature, at least before the
Kalends of March, since till that time came his Government of Gaul was not
expired, upon which, when it was asked of him what was to be done, if they met
with opposition, it signifies nothing says he, whether or no Caesar obey the
Decrees of the Senate, since he will find those that shall oppose him; but it
was answered again, if he will be Consul, if he will keep his Army? To which
Pompey replied, If my Son should provoke and rebel against me, what would you
advise me to? This discourse sufficiently discovered how Pompey stood affected
as to Caesar's Interest: For all this, matters were managed with all Artfull
and fair Conduct and Intrigue, till the Election of the new Consuls, who were
Emilius Paulus, and Calidius Marcellus, a Kinsman of Marcus. This affair at
that time wholly employed the Senate, and stopped the course of any other
business. Every one expected with impatience how the two Consuls would declare
themselves; the first had been pretty well secured by a Present from Caesar of
fifteen Talents, with which he built himself a sumptuous Palace, and called it
after his own Name, but Callidius was Caesar's Enemy, and being carried on by
the same Spirit with his Kinsman Marcus, followed also his Methods, and renewed
the old Propositions. We have already taken frequent occasion to mention the
privileges of the Tribunes of the People, who were ten, Curio and Marcus
Anthonius were of the number for this year. Curio was in great esteem both for
his Quality and his Abilities, being one of the ablest men which Rome could at
that time boast of for Eloquence and Pleadings at the Bar, he had great Parts
and equal resolution, but stood charged with abundance of Debts, both in his
own Name, and for many of his Friends, among the rest for Anthony, for whom he
had entered into Securities. He had been one of the most violent against
Caesar's Interest: But Caesar, who knew well enough where his shoe wrung him,
quickly found the way to give him ease, and bring him over by furnishing him
with means to quit himself of those encumbrances. Curio afterward made use of
a management that was very refined, forbearing to declare himself of Caesar's
Party, that he might the better enter into the Counsels and Designs of his
Enemies, and after that, he sought an opportunity to break with Pompey. For
this Design he demanded that the charge of overseeing the reparation of the
Highways, might be conferred upon him, which he at the same time knew well
enough would be denied, so that upon the refusal of it, he made known his
resentment, and afterward when the Consul made his report to the Senate
touching the Governments, he praised his Zeal and his Opinion, adding, that it
was but Justice that Pompey and Caesar should be called from their Governments
both together.

CHAP. XIII. Curio declares himself against Pompey. Caesar returns the Legion
that Pompey had lent him.
THE Spirits of this Age were two refined not to apprehend at first sight the
meaning of this Proposition. All that were Pompey's Friends began to grow very
uneasy to Curio. Appius one of the Censors, and who had been raised to his
Authority by Pompey, threatened to expel him the Senate, and proposed it in one
of the Assemblies. Curio submitted to every thing that might be Decreed
particularly against himself, but would abate nothing where Caesar's Interest
seemed to be struck at, and the Consul Paulus withstood the Affront that was
like to have been offered him. Curio imparted upon this his Proposition to the
People, who received it so well, and with such Joy, that they covered him with
flowers, and in that manner accompanied him home to his House: He himself
afterward in an Assembly of the People, when they ordered that Caesar, though
absent, should have power to demand the Consulship. This obliged Pompey to
leave Rome, under pretense of going to his Government, but he went no farther
than to one of his Country houses, where falling sick, he wrote to the Senate
that he was ready to give up all all his Employments when Caesar would ever
consent to part with his, and that he would confirm this upon his return to
Rome. Curio took him at his word, and told him it was his duty to begin what he
proposed, and that he would engage on Caesar's part, that the Example should be
followed. The business was then put into debate, but came to no conclusion,
only it was ordained that two Legions should be drawn out of the Troops of
Caesar and Pompey, to go into Syria against the Parthians, this was only done
to weaken Caesar's Army, for Pompey at the beginning of the War had lent him a
Legion of his. Appius was sent into Gaul to draw out this Legion, and to oblige
Caesar to give another of his own, who though he easily discerned the reason of
this order, by no means in the least opposed it, but surrendered both the
Legions to Appius, and at the same time ordered two hundred and fifty Drams
to be given to every Soldier. Cicero at this time came back to Rome from his
Government of Cilicia, where he pretended for his great Exploits to have
merited the Honor of Triumph. His absence had hindered him from taking either
Party in these differences, and his present Pretensions obliged him to be a
Mediator between both, so he made some Propositions for an Accommodation, but
they would not be hearkened to, for that Appius was returned, and had published
abroad, that Caesar stood very ill in the Opinion of his Army, that he knew
little or nothing of their Inclinations, and that they would certainly come
over to the Senates Party, whenever they recovered this side of the Alps. This
relation gave Pompey great confidence, so that he rejected all Projects of the
least Accommodation; Cicero could not be heard, and when he afterward asked
him what Powers he had wherewith to oppose Caesar, Pompey's answer was, that he
need only to stamp with his foot, and that the Earth would bring him forth an
Army. Many of the Senators began already to talk very meanly of Caesar, and
Cato himself haughtily declared that he would bring him to an account of his
Actions, and that he should be treated as Milo had been used before him.

CHAP. XIV. Caesar sends a letter to the Senate; They declare War against him.
Anthony and Curio the Tribunes of the People go to find out Caesar.
CAesar had written several times to the Senate to beg them, that they would
have some regard to the services he had done the Republic: He proposed
alternately that he might either be continued in his Government as Pompey had
been, or that he might be permitted in his absence to demand the Dignity of
Consul, and when this Proposition was rejected, he requested again that Curio's
expedient might be admitted of; but in these his last Letters he proposed the
surrendering up the Government of Illyria, with two Legions, which Cicero urged
afterward in Argument for a Peace; but as we observed before, his endeavors,
became altogether unprofitable, and Caesar upon the news he received of the ill
success of his pretensions, repassed the Alps with the third Legion, and
marched to Ravenna, from thence he sent Fabius, one of his Lieutenants, with
Letters to the Consuls, who were Cornelius Lentulus, and Clodius Marcellus,
newly chosen: Lentulus refused to read his Letters, but Anthony, and Quintus,
Cassius, Longinus, the Tribunes, obliged them to be read before the Senate;
they contained a Catalogue of Caesar's Services, and an assurance that he would
send back his Troops when ever Pompey should disarm. Lentulus would by no means
admit of any deliberation upon these Letters, only told the Senate, that upon
condition they themselves would be vigorous upon this occasion, he was ready to
serve the Republic with the utmost hazard of his life, but if they suffered
themselves to be remiss and negligent, he knew very well there was another
would take party with Caesar. Scipio declared at the same time that Pompey was
ready to Sacrifice himself for the interests of the Senate, if they would stand
by him, but if they once appeared to be slow or irresolute in their
deliberations, it would after that be vain to expect any assistence from him.
And though Pompey were at this time not in Rome, in regard those who had
Military Commands, were not admitted to stay in the Town. Caesar said, That
considering Scipio was his Brother-in-Law, and altogether in his interests;
This advice seemed to come out of Pompey's own mouth. Some other of the
Senators made a more favorable Construction, among the rest, Marcus
Marcellus, Sulpitius Rufus, and Calidius himself, who was of Opinion that
Pompey ought to go to his Government, for the taking away all pretense from
Caesar, to believe that those two Legions retained at Rome, were designed to
prejudice him. Lentulus refused to make a report of this Opinion, and exclaimed
against Calidius and the rest. In fine, a Decree was formed upon the advice of
Scipio in these Terms; That Caesar should dismiss his Troops within a certain
time; and that if he refused Obedience, he should be declared an Enemy to the
Commonwealth. Anthony and Cassius opposed this Decree, by that means raising
fresh debates, which were managed with a great deal of sharpness, so that the
Assembly did not separate until it was very late. The night was employed in
Pompey's private management amongst his Friends, and Curio's among the other
Tribunes. The next day Piso the Censor, and Roscius the Praetor, demanded five
days time to go to find out Caesar, and give him an account of the state of
these matters, which was refused them. Lentulus commanding the Tribunes to
depart the Senate, so that a Decree was published, which never was usual, but
in cases of the utmost extremity, that the Consuls and other Magistrates should
take care that the Republic came to no damage; in pursuance whereof, Marcellus
the other Consul took a Sword, which he carried publicly to Pompey, who was
then out of Town, accosting him in these Terms, I command you in the name of
the Senate, that you assist the Republic with the Troops now under your
command, and speedily levy more. From this moment there was a Successor
ordered to Caesar, which was Domitius, designed Consul for the year following.
All his Governments were disposed of, whereof Scipio had Syria, and every body
took arms in Rome, and appeared in a habit of War. Caesar failed not of a
speedy account of this from Curio, Anthony and Longinus, who retreated to him
disguised in the habits of their Slaves, in which condition he showed them to
his Army, and took that occasion which the indiscretion of his Enemies
presented him withal, to make appear the Injustice and Violence of their
Proceedings: Ye see, said he, these Sacred Persons forced to conceal themselves
in the habit of Slavery, to shun the fury of my Enemies, and all for
maintaining those Privileges which the Laws allowed them, and which Sylla
himself, who spared nothing else, never durst Violate: But now Pompey, who
boasts himself to have re-established these Privileges, has deprived these Men
of them, and so much the more unjustly, and ungratefully, since it was for
their supporting of my Interest, who have always been true to his, though he
does not this of his own inclination, but it may be easily seen is driven to it
by malice of my Enemies. Adding moreover, That their violence appeared
sufficiently by that Decree which was never heard of, but when the Commonwealth
was in open danger from the fury of the Tribunes, or the Seditions of the
multitude, which did not any ways appear at this time. In fine, tearing his
Robe, and falling even into tears, he conjured all his Soldiers that they
would defend his Honor and his Reputation, after having served nine years
under his Command with so much glory and success. The Soldiers with loud cries
answered him, That they were ready to revenge the Injuries done to their
General, and to the Tribunes.

CHAP. XV. The passage of the Rubicon, and the taking of Rimini.
AMongst the many Warlike Qualities of Caesar, his diligence to prevent an
Enemy, and pursue a Victory, was the most admirable; he had often surprised
others, but was never known to have been surprised himself. He never carried a
Victory, but he made himself Master of the Enemies Camp, he knew well how
necessary, and of what importance such a diligence at this time was. And what
impressions first Exploits make toward the Reputation of any Party. And to add
moreover a secret upon this occasion, he sent some Centurions, and chosen Men
armed with Swords, only to to put themselves as secretly as possible into
Rimini, which was the chief Town on that side of his Government. For himself,
he spent the days in seeing public Plays, and the Combat of the Gladiatours at
Ravenna, and when night came, sat himself at Table amongst his Friends, but
soon rose up again, and desiring his Friends to make themselves welcome, told
them, he would return in a moment, but that was the least of his Designs, for
he had ordered some Mules to be taken out of a Neighboring Mill, and put into
his Chariot, in which Equipage he set forwards toward Rimini, with some few of
his particular Friends whom he had made privy to his Intention, and one Troop
of Soldiers; it was a troublesome Journey, but they resolved to undergo it,
so that sometimes on foot, and sometimes in his Chariot, Caesar arrived upon
the Banks of Rubicon, which is a little River separating the Cisalpine Gaul,
from the rest of Italy. In this place all the misfortunes of that War which he
was going to undertake, presented themselves to his mind. Sometimes he had
thoughts of going back again, and turning himself to Asinius Pollio; We have
now, says he, in our Power to return, but if we pass the River, our only
retreat must be to our Arms. Some Authors, and amongst the rest, Suetonius
himself gives an account of a Miracle which happened to him upon this Occasion,
perhaps they have done it only more particularly to signalize that famous
passage of the Rubicon, by something extraordinary, but however it might be, it
will not be here improper to recount it. Not far from the place where he stood,
there appeared all of a sudden a man of an extraordinary stature, who made very
good Music with a certain Flute or Reed which he played upon; The Novelty of
the sight drew together a great many of the Soldiers, and among the rest a
Trumpet that belonged to Caesar, so soon as they came near to the man, he
snatched away the Trumpet, and sounding a Charge, threw himself into the water,
and went over to the other side; no mention is made what became of him, only
that Caesar without farther consideration passed the River, crying out aloud,
Let us go where the Gods so remarkably call, and where the fury of our Enemies
drives us, the Lot is cast. From thence, without making the least stay, he
marched directly up to Rimini, and possessed himself of it without any
resistance, so with six thousand men only he began that famous War. And after
having secured himself of that place of Importance, sent orders to his Troops
to follow with all diligence.

CHAP. XVI. The amazement of the Senators: They leave Rome, and retire to
Capua.
THIS sudden and unexpected enterprise gave most terrible apprehensions to the
City of Rome. They believed already that Caesar was at their Gates with all his
Army, and it was an odd confusion to see the Country People come for safeguard
into the City, and at the same time the Citizens flying into the Country, no
body knew which side to take; and Cicero himself began to believe that Pompey
had not made the least preparations, that he was not in any condition to make
head against Caesar, and that he had neither Troops, nor place of retreat. For
Cicero found himself under as difficult circumstances as any body, and his
uneasiness appeared in all the Epistles which he wrote upon this Occasion, If I
should stay, (says he, in one of them,) I know not here whom I ought to be most
ashamed to accompany, Lepidus, Volcatius or Sulpitius, neither of these but is
as silly as Domitius, and as inconstant as Appius, but Pompey engages me by the
obligations which I owe him, and not by his Authority; for what Authority can a
man deserve, who could honor Caesar in the highest degree, after we were all
afraid of him, and who believes now, when he begins to fear him, that all the
world ought to declare against him? Thus in few words Cicero gave a description
of Pompey and his Party, in the mean while making his interest with Caesar, by
the means of Dolabella and Caelius, and other of his Friends, to which purpose
Caelius in one of his letters to him (wherein he shows himself a man of very
pleasant observation) advises him this for a Maxim, That in the Divisions of a
Government, while the matter is disputed by words only, every man ought to
espouse that Party which he thinks is the Iustest; but when once it comes to
Arms, te join evermore with the strongest, and to believe that he who has the
best Sword, has the best Cause. Pompey underwent no small regret and
coffeehouse during this Perplexity: His whole Party reproached him that he
had deceived them, demanding of him where his Troops were, and Favonius, who
was grown crack-brained with Philosophical Projects, and pretending to imitate
Cato, told him, That it was now high time for him to stamp upon the Earth with
his foot, and bring forth the Soldiers which he had promised them. At the last
Pompey was forced to tell them that they should not want Soldiers, if they
would but follow him and quit Rome, or indeed Italy, which they were not able
to defend, that it was neither their Houses nor their Provinces that could
inspire them with the love of Virtue and of Liberty. But that Men of Honor
would find it in all Retreats, and that to unite themselves, was the way to put
them into a condition of returning back again to their Houses with Glory. This
discourse, and the affection which they bore to Pompey, made them resolve at
last to quit the City, for though they blamed his Conduct, they knew not how to
hate him, so the Consuls, and almost all the Senate followed him to Capua,
where were the two Legions which Caesar had sent from Gaul. The behavior of
Labienus contributed at this time much to their assurance. This Man was one of
Caesar's Lieutenants, had served in Gaul with a great deal of Reputation, and
was therefore well esteemed by Caesar, but afterward, when his Services, and
the Riches he had gotten in them, began to make him vain, Caesar thought fit to
let him see he would be his General, and not yet his Companion; this caused
Labienus to change his Party, and his deserting made indeed a great show, but
produced very little advantage. No brave Man thought the better of him for it,
and from that time he performed nothing that was considerable, and though the
Example might have been of dangerous Consequence in the beginning of a War of
that Nature, yet Caesar either through his Wisdom, or the greatness of his
Mind, seemed little to value or take notice of it, for he sent Labienus all his
Money after him, and all his Equipage. From this time Pompey applied himself to
take care of his business, and put his affairs in some order, and resolved to
retire into Pollentia.
Pouille. He left Lucius Domitius in Corfinium, and Cicero to command in Capua,
who received the Commission with some reluctance, but as he had left him
neither Men nor Money, he apprehended that that employment would not much
injure his good Correspondence with Caesar.

CHAP. XVII. Some Propositions of Peace between Caesar and Pompey, but without
any success.
CAesar was still at Rimini, where Lucius, Caesar his Kinsman, and whose Father
served at that time in his Army, came with Roscius to find him out. After some
discourses about other Affairs, Lucius told Caesar that Pompey had Commanded
him to wait upon him, and to beg of him that he would do him Justice, in
regard of what had passed between them, that he should think himself very
unhappy, if it were possible for Caesar to think himself injured by him, in
what he had done only in consideration of the Commonwealth; that it had always
been his Maxim to prefer the Public Good before his own particular Interests,
and that it would equally redound to Caesar's Glory also to sacrifice his
resentments to the repose of his Country, and not to drive things so far as by
endeavoring to revenge himself upon his Enemies to give a wound to the
Commonwealth. Roscius too entertained him with discourse much to this purpose:
but these Civilities which were indeed but merely such, and from the Teeth
outward, were of no great weight with Caesar, nevertheless he resolved upon the
dismissing of these Gentlemen, to give them some taste of his sentiments, so he
told them, That since they came in that manner Commissionated from Pompey, it
was his desire that they would charge themselves back again with some
Propositions on his part, especially if they desired to appease the present
Troubles, and quiet the fears of Italy. That he had evermore less considered
his life than the honor and welfare of the Commonwealth, but that he could not
without extreme grief of mind see that his Enemies would take from him those
favors which the People of Rome thought fit to have allowed him, that they
would cut off six months from the time of his Government, to force him to Rome
in spite of the will of the People, who had ordained, That although he were
absent, he should be considered as if he were actually present in the
Assemblies for the Election of Consuls, that he had nevertheless been content
to put up that injury for the sake of the public Peace. That he had desired by
his Letters that all the Generals might quit their Armies at once, but by no
means possible could obtain it. But that on the contrary Troops were levied
throughout all Italy. That they had retained the two Legions which were taken
from him, under a false pretense of going against the Parthians, and the whole
City was up in Arms, and therefore to what purpose was all this designed,
except for his ruin? that for all this he was disposed to reduce himself to
the last extremities, and suffer every thing for the sake of the Republic;
That Pompey should retire to his Government, that the Senators should
discharge their Troops, and that every one should lay down his Arms throughout
all Italy, that Rome should be no more held in Awe, but the Assemblies be left
to their Ancient Liberty. In short, that the full Authority of the Senate, and
the People of Rome should be restored. To this discourse Caesar added, that
matters might be determined better by an enterview between him and Pompey,
whereby they might agree upon a method of putting this in Practice, and take
mutual Oaths of assurance from each other. Roscius and Lucius returned back to
Capua with these Propositions, and made report of them to the Consuls, and to
Pompey. They deliberated upon the matter, and wrote back their answer in these
Terms, That Caesar should return into Gaul, that he should abandon Rimini,
after which, Pompey should depart for Spain, that in the mean while they would
continue their Levies till Caesar gave them assurances that this should be
performed with all sincerity.

CHAP. XVIII. The progress of Caesar. He seizes upon the March of Ancona. The
siege of Corfinium.
IT was not a desire of Peace which carried on this Correspondence, matters
were too far engaged, and the Enmity too openly declared to leave any room for
a sincere Accommodation. Pompey's business was but to gain time, and had great
relyance upon the assistence of the Forces of the East, which were absolutely
in his interest. Caesar too depending upon the valor and affections of his
Soldiers had no design of quitting his Arms, but only to make it appear as
fairly as he could, that he had taken them up with Justice. His Propositions
being but as so many Manifesto's or Remonstrances, for as a Politician of those
times observed, they might easily have come to an agreement, but that was none
of their business, for they both aimed at the Government. Caesar found he had
no reason to obey the Senate, who would have obliged him to retire, and leave a
good Garrison, and disband his Troops, so long as Pompey continued in Arms, and
making new Levies, without any certain day fixed for his departure into Spain;
wherefore without loosing more time, he resolved upon action, and to that
purpose sent Anthony to Aretium.
Arezzo with five Cohorts to make new Levies. In the mean time he seized upon
Pisaura, and Fano, and Ancona, and upon advice received, that Thermus the
Praetor was at Fermo with five Cohorts belonging to Pompey, he sent Curio
thither with three of his, upon whose arrival the Inhabitants revolted, and
obliged Thermus to depart, whose Troops deserted him. In fine, all the Picenum.
March of Ancona submitted voluntarily to Caesar: This Progress of his
redoubled the fears at Rome, whither Lentulus was come back to seize upon the
public Treasures, but upon the report that Caesar was coming, left the
Treasury open, and with Marcellus and several others, betook himself to flight.
In the mean time the twelfth Legion came to join Caesar, who marched to Ascasum.
Ascoli, which Lentulus had possessed himself of with ten Cohorts, he staid not
there for C^sar's coming, but retreated in confusion, a great part of his
Soldiers deserting him also, the rest joined with Vibullius Rufus, who was at
that time too raising new recruits, whereof he composed ten Cohorts, and went
to Corfinium to find out Domitius Aenobarsus, of whom Cicero makes mention, and
who was designed to have succeeded Caesar. This man was of an illustrious
Family, though but of the order of the People, but the Merits of his Ancestors
had raised them to the dignity of Patricians, he was of a fantastical
inconstant spirit, with a fiery and barbarous humor much like that of Nero
after him, whose great great Grandfather he was. He had with him twenty Cohorts
of new raised Troops in Corfinium, besides, the twelve that belonged to Rufus,
with these Forces he resolved to expect Caesar. Now as that place was the first
that durst undertake to make head against Caesar, every body expected with
impatience what would be the success of the enterprise. Caesar made his
approaches with two Legions, and was engaged by five Cohorts, who defended a
Bridge about three miles from the City. They were driven back even to the Gates
of Corfinium, which thereupon was immediately invested. Domitius prepared
himself for a vigorous defense, and wrote word to Pompey, That there was now a
fair opportunity to hem in Caesar, if he would but come up, that it would not
be for his Reputation to abandon thirty Cohorts, besides a great many Senators
and Knights of Rome; Pompey's answer was, That he was not then in a condition
to set the Forces of the Commonwealth, upon the hazard of a Battle that
Domitius had engaged himself in Corfinium, absolutely contrary to his Opinion,
and that he ought to think of making as fair and speedy a retreat as was
possible, and come to join himself with the Consuls and the rest of the Senate.
It was upon this refusal that Cicero became so transported against Pompey, in
one of his Epistles to Atticus. I should have believed (said he) that Pompey
would have had more regard to his Reputation; He himself has nourished and made
Caesar great, and now all of a sudden is grown afraid of him. He will hearken
to no Propositions of Peace, and yet is in no preparation for War. He has lost
the March of Ancona by his own fault, has put himself into Pollentia.
Povilla, and would go into Greece without thinking fitting to make us in the
least acquainted with his Designs. In short, Domitius presses him for relief,
and represents to him how much his Glory is concerned in it, but Pompey
renounces his Glory, and retires to Brundusium.

CHAP. XIX. The taking of Corfinium. Caesar gives Domitius and the other
Senators their liberty; He writes to Cicero.
Domitius thought it his wisest way to conceal this answer which he received
from Pompey, and said, that the General was upon his march to relieve them, in
the mean time contriving with the trustiest of his Friends how to make a
private retreat. The secret could not be so nicely managed, but that his very
face and all his Actions discovered it, so that the Soldiers fell to Mutiny,
and proposed surrendering to Caesar, who had now recruited his Army with the
ninth Legion, and two and twenty Cohorts raised in Gaul, besides three hundred
German Horse which a certain Petty King toward the side of Bavaria had sent
him. Caesar pressed the place with those Troops he had put under the command of
Curio, so that no means of retreat being left, the Soldiers secured Domitius,
and sent Deputies to Caesar to certify him, That they were ready to open the
Gates to him and surrender. This happened at the beginning of the night, so
that Caesar would not make his entry at that time, fearing lest in the dark his
Soldiers might be tempted to commit disorders, and pillage the City; Wherefore
he only caused his Guards to be doubled, and kept his Army at their Arms all
night. At break of day Lentulus called from the Rampart to one of Caesar's
advanced Sentinels, and demanded of him if he might have security to come and
see Caesar. Caesar had notice of it, and sent him his Parole, Lentulus
presently came forth conducted by Domitius his Soldiers to the presence of
Caesar. He began his discourse with praying Caesar to forgive him, in respect
of their ancient Friendship, and afterward enlarged himself upon the favors
Caesar had done him; That he was indebted to him for all the Honors he enjoyed
in the dignity of Pontifex, in the Government of Spain, in the Consulship. Here
Caesar interrupted him, saying, That he was not come from Gaul to offend any
body but only to defend himself against the outrages of his Enemies, to
restore the Honor of the Tribunes who had been ignominiously banished, and to
recover his own Liberty with that of the People of Rome, whom a Cabal of ill
designing men had now enslaved.

Lentulus taking heart at this discourse, desired of him the liberty to return
into the Town, saying, That the favor which Caesar had shown him would be a
great motive toward the assuring of the others, many whereof had taken
desperate resolutions against their own lives, meaning by this Domitius, who by
a certain return of tenderness which Nature has for life, was now seeking for
remedy against some Poison which he imagined he had taken, though he had no
great need of it, for his Physician, had only given him a Vomit, which had its
usual operation. Caesar ordered all the Senators, and the other Noble Romans
that were there, to come forth of the Town, as Domitius, Lentulus, Spinther,
Vibullius, Rufus, Quintillius Varus, and Lucius Rubrius, together with the Sons
of Domitius, besides a great many young Gentlemen and Roman Knights. He forbad
his Soldiers offering of them the least affront even in speech, and after
having told them in a few words, that he never had till now great reason to
value himself upon their acknowledgment of any obligations that they owed him,
he gave them all their liberty to go where they pleased; and to show that he as
little valued the Money, as the lives of his Enemies, he restored to Domitius
six thousand Sesterces, which he had deposited in the Bank of Corfinium, though
he could not be ignorant that it was the public stock. As this action was
diversely interpreted, Caesar thought himself obliged to give some account of
his reasons for it in a letter which he wrote to Cicero upon some praises he
had given him for the business of Corfinium. The letter was in these Terms.

Caesar the Emperor to Cicero the Emperor.
I Am now assured that you know me, since you appear to be satisfied that
nothing is so far from my nature as Cruelty; I have sought nothing in this
proceeding but my own particular satisfaction, but at present I am proud to
find that it deserves your Approbation, and I am no longer troubled to see that
those whom I have spared, should be returned with my Enemies to fight again
against me, since I wish no greater advantage than to let them know that they
will be always like themselves, and I too will as little alter.


The name of Emperor was at this time no other than a Title of Honor which
the Soldiers gave their Generals, after some great Victory, Caesar (the world
knew) had well deserved it; Cicero had gotten it by some little exploits of his
done in his Government of Cilicia, and it was only to flatter him, that Caesar
gave it him in this Letter, wherein he mentions Domitius, Rufus and Varus, for
that they made so ungrateful use of the liberty he had given them; for
Domitius went to Marseilles to seduce that City from Caesar's Interest, Rufus
into Spain, and Varus into Africa upon the same design.

CHAP. XX. New Propositions for Peace. Caesar besieges Pompey in Brundusium.
Pompey retires by Sea.
DOmitius his Soldiers went all over to Caesar's side, but as he could put no
great confidence in them, he sent them into Sicily, and began to march with his
whole Army, which consisted of four Veteran, and two new raised Legions. All
the Towns opened him their Gates, and their Governors fled, being several of
them deserted by their Soldiers who came over to Caesar. Pompey himself did
not think fit to stay for him, but retreated to Brundusium, where the Consuls
immediately embarked to go to Dyrachium.
Durazzo with thirty Cohorts. Pompey remaining in the Town with twenty others;
Caesar soon after arrived, but ever he began to make any Attack, resolved once
more to endeavor an Accommodation: He had taken one Magius an Engineer,
belonging to Pompey, and set him at liberty, with orders to tell his General,
That it might be for the common interest of them both, as well as the good of
the Republic, that they two might have a Meeting, and that they might more
fairly and easily hand to hand come to an agreement, than by the means of any
third Person: Magius brought him no answer back again, which obliged Caesar
uncertain of the designs of Pompey, to endeavor the blocking up the entry of
the Port of Brundusium. To this purpose he caused a Bank or dam to be raised on
each side of the Port where it was narrowest, and they could find ground, and
where no bottom could be reached, he caused two Vessels to be fastened together
thirty foot square every way, and made them to advance over against the entry
of the Haven; they were moored with four Anchors, one at every Corner, and to
these were joined two other Vessels of the same bulk, with design to form a
sort of stacade or chain; the first bridge of these Vessels was covered with
Earth and green Turf, to the end that those who were to defend them might have
firm footing to fight upon, and the two sides were furnished with Hurdles in
the nature of Parapets, and one of these Vessels carried from square to square,
a Tower containing two stories for defending of the work from Attacks, and from
fire. It was easy to judge for what design all this pains was undertaken.
Pompey endeavored to break it, and to that purpose made use of several
Merchant Ships of burden that were in the Haven. He caused there to be raised
Towers of three stories high, which he furnished with Engines and all sorts of
Darts; with these he run against Caesar's Vessels, hoping thereby to separate
them, and hinder the continuation of the work, which occasioned daily some
little skirmishes with Darts and Arrows. All this time Caesar's design was to
seek for a Peace, and having received no news of Magius, caused Caninius one of
his Lieutenants to demand an enterview with Scribonius Libo his Friend, and an
Officer under Pompey. His orders were to exhort Libo to Peace, and that the
surest way to accomplish it would be an interview between Pompey and Caesar,
that Caesar was assured matters might by that means be ordered with equal
satisfaction to both Parties, and that the glory would redound to Libo, if by
his care and mediation they should come to the laying down of Arms; Caninius
proceeded according to his Commission, Libo made a report of it to Pompey, and
returning back to his Friend, told him, That the Consuls being absent no
Propositions of that kind could be received. From this time Caesar lost all
hopes of an Accommodation, and set his thoughts wholly upon the War, half his
business being already done to his hands, by reason the Vessels which
transported the Consuls, and their Troops, were returned from Durazzo, which
opportunity Pompey thought fit to make use of for withdrawing himself, and to
secure his retreat he immediately caused all the Gates of the City to be walled
up, and several Houses to be demolished in the Piazza's, and cross streets. The
Avenues of the Port were cut off by certain Pits which were filled with stakes,
and covered over with Hurdles and Earth, besides, two which were only defended
with Beams, and Joysts made very sharp at the ends, and planted after the
manner of Fraize: After these Precautions, he caused his Soldiers to embark
with all silence imaginable, leaving only some Archers and Slingers upon the
Walls, who had a signal given them to retreat, so soon as his Soldiers should
be gotten on Board, for he caused some Challops, or small Boats to attend them
in a convenient place for their Embarkment also. The Inhabitants of Brundusium
dissatisfied with Pompey's Soldiers, and provoked by the ruin of their
Houses, advised Caesar of their retreat, who immediately put his Troops into
order, and gave command for the planting of Ladders at the same moment of time
that Pompey should give the signal to his Archers, who yet easily secured their
retreat by certain private paths that they were well acquainted with. So that
Pompey got all this Troops on Board, and at the beginning of the night weighed
Anchor; Caesar's Soldiers got over the Walls, and had certainly fallen into
the Pits which were prepared for them, had not the People of the Town given
them warning, so that they were forced to take a large Circuit to come to the
Port; which nevertheless was not so great a hindrance to them; but that they
had time enough with Barks, and some other small Vessels to seize upon two of
Pompey's Ships, who had run themselves a ground in going out of the Haven,
while the rest made all the Sail they could, and saved themselves. Caesar
seeing himself in sixty days Master of all Italy, was now extremely desirous to
attack his Enemies ever yet the supplies they expected from Asia could come to
join them. But wanting Shipping, he resolved to go to Rome, to settle there
some sort of Government, and then pass into Spain, to drive thence those Troops
of Pompey, who had taken possession of it under the Command of Affranius and
Petreius. He sent orders to all his Officers Commanding upon that side, to get
together some Shipping, and send them to Brundusium. He gave Valerius one
Legion to go into Sardignia, and three to Curio for Sicily, with orders to go
forward into Africa so soon as they had brought that Island to Submission, Cato
Commanded there for the Senate, and Aurelius Cotta in Sardignia. They neither
of them staid to attend the coming up of Caesar's Troops. And Cato after having
publicly complained of Pompey's Conduct totally abandoned Sicily.

CHAP. XXI. Caesar goes to Rome, by the way sees Cicero. He seizes upon the
money of the public Treasury, and goes into Spain. The siege of Marseilles.
NOW Caesar having put his Troops into good Quarters, began his Journey toward
Rome, after having written to all those of the Senate, who had not already
declared themselves to meet him there, and assist him with their Councils: But
above all, he desired to see Cicero, and pressed him to come by Oppius and
Coelius, who were Friends to them both, and near his Person. Caesar, the more
to engage him to it, took an opportunity to see him in his Journey. The
Conversation that passed between two so extraordinary men as they were, and
moved each by different Considerations, must needs have something in it very
remarkable. Caesar complained to Cicero of his refusal to go to Rome, and told
him; That by that repugnancy he would make it believed that he blamed his
Conduct, which might give ill impressions, and be of bad Example to the other
Senators. To which Cicero replied, That the reasons he proceeded upon were
very different from those of the others. But Caesar still pressed him, saying,
That he desired his presence at Rome for no other end than the proposing of
some Accommodation; Might I (replied Cicero) here speak my Opinion? I have
nothing to prescribe you, upon that occasion; Then (says Caesar) I will tell
you: You will tell me (answered Cicero) that the Spanish expedition does not
please the Senate, that the Army ought not to go into Greece; In short, I have
much ado to forbear discovering the Compassion I have for the present state of
Pompey's Fortune; Oh (replies Caesar) I cannot understand why things of this
nature should be said to me, whose duty it is to distrust my self. And that is
one reason too (says Cicero) why I would not go to Rome, for it is my duty also
to speak my mind, or else I ought not to appear in the Senate. Caesar left him
to give him time for reflection, but Cicero could not resolve with himself to go
to Rome. But Caesar arriving there, composed a body of such Senators as he
found there, and called them the Senate, and when they were Assembled, made
them a speech in justification of his Conduct. The reasons he alleged may he
easily imagined, the most weighty of them having been already taken notice of.
He proposed to the Senate the sending of Ambassadors to Pompey, without
bogling at the point of Honor, which Pompey had laid down for a Maxim, which
was, That in paying that respect to any one, they attributed to him a Supreme
Authority, and that it was a mark of fear on their part who did it. But there
was no body to be found who would undertake this Commission, because Pompey by
the advice of Domi^^u^, had declared all such Senators Enemies as should
remain Neutrals. Caesar therefore would not insist upon this Proposition of an
Embassy, but began to think of providing himself with Money, his recourse was
to the public Treasury which he would have had opened. But Metellus one of the
Tribunes of the People opposed him upon it, alleging, That the Laws forbad it,
that that money was sacred, and that heretofore most horrible imprecations had
been denounced upon those who should ever touch it for any other occasions than
the Gallick War. Caesar told him, He had removed the reasons of those
maledictions by bringing Gaul under subjection to the Romans. And when the
Tribune insisted still upon the Laws; Caesar being something moved, told him,
That Arms and Laws seldom agre^^ very well together. Therefore adds he, If you
do not like my proceeding, you may please to withdraw, the War will not admit
of this liberty of Contradiction, but when Peace has once obliged us to lay
down our Arms, you may take your time to enlarge your self upon the power and
virtue of the Laws; I relinquish much of my right in vouchsafing to tell you
this; for you ought to know that you are now in my power, with all those who
have provoked the people against me. After this Discourse he went to the Doors
of the Treasury, the Keys whereof not being to be found; Caesar sent for People
to break open the Locks, and when Metellus had still the boldness to dispute it
with him, in a rage laid his hand upon his Sword, and threatened to kill him,
saying, Know young man, that it is harder for me to say this than to do it.
These words and behavior of Caesar so terrified Metellus, that he retired.
Caesar took out of the Treasury 3000 pound weight of gold. And the example of
Metellus was the reason, that during the rest of the War, never any thing was
refused him. After this he departed from Rome upon his Spanish expedition;
having first sent orders to all his Troops to come and join him; he received
news in Provence that Pompey had sent Rufus into Spain, and that by Pompey's
intriguing with their Ambassadors when they were at Rome in the beginning of
the War, the People of Marseilles had resolved to refuse him entrance into
their City, that Domitius was gone thither with seven Galleys filled with the
Slaves, Libertines and Peasants that belonged to his Lands, and that the
Marseillians had called down to their Succor all the Inhabitants of the
Neighboring Mountains. Caesar sent for fifteen of the chief Men of the City,
to desire of them, That they would not begin a War with him, but rather follow
the example of all Italy and submit. They returned back to the City to advise
upon the matter, from whence they sent him this answer: That having understood
that the People of Rome were divided, and that Pompey and Caesar were the heads
of the two Parties, they had resolved to take neither part where two men were
concerned, to whom they had equal obligations. In the mean time Domitius
arriving, was received into the City, so declaring him General, they put their
Navy to Sea; Caesar incensed at their proceeding, besieged the Town with three
Legions, and ordered twelve Ships of War to be built at Arles; which were
completed in thirty days, Decimus Brutus was appointed to command them; and
Caius Trebonius his Lieutenant General was left to continue the Siege.

CHAP. XXII. Pompey gathers together great Forces. Fabius enters Spain with the
Troops belonging to Caesar.
THough Pompey's design had at the first been ill interpreted. He had too much
courage, and was too great a Captain to have proceeded in that manner without
being obliged by very powerful reasons. He knew well the valor of Caesar's
Soldiers, inured by ten years service against Warlike Nations, and by the
merit of their General. Besides, he was willing to preserve his Reputation, and
not put himself to the hazard of being beaten without hopes of recovery, with
Troops but newly raised and unexperienced. Besides, he could not assure himself
of the fidelity of those two Legions which Caesar had surrendered him, and who
for several years had served under a Man who understood all the arts of making
himself beloved. It was this which caused him to go into Greece, there of such
Succors as he could draw out of Asia, which was wholly in his Interest to form
a body that might be fit to make head against Caesar. In effect in a short time
he found that he had a very considerable Army. He applied himself therefore to
exercise his Soldiers, with an able Fleet to make himself Master at Sea, and
to furnish himself with Darts, Engines, and all such Equipage as was necessary
for him. He reckoned much too upon his Army that was in Spain, composed all of
very good Legions, hoping that if Caesar lost not his Reputation, he might at
least lose there the best of his Soldiers, which must indeed have succeeded as
Pompey imagined, had he himself been at the head of that Army, or had he sent
any of his best Officers to command it. But Caesar, who knew the condition it
was in, said with his usual confidence that he went to find an Army without a
General; but that he should come back and find a General without an Army.
Afranius, Petreius, and Varro commanded in Spain for Pompey, and understanding
by Vibullius Rufus, that Caesar was upon his march to attack them; upon this
advice they resolved that Petreius should join with Afranius, and that Varro
with his Troops should guard the inner part of the Country. They making choice
of Lerida for the Post where they would attend the coming of Caesar. Afranius
had three Legions, and Petreius two others, with four and twenty Cohorts of the
Natives of the Country, and five thousand Horse. Caesar had caused the
passages of the Pyreneans to be possessed by three Legions, Commanded by
Fabius, who after having put to flight some of Afranius his Troops that guarded
those Defiles, was advanced into Catalonia, Caesar followed him with three
other Legions, three thousand Horse which had accompanied him all his
Conquests, and as many Gallick Cavalry, composed all of the noblest and bravest
Men of that Nation, besides the Gascons and the Basques. There ran at this time
a report, that Pompey would come by Mauritania to put himself at the head of
his Army, which caused Caesar to use extr^me diligence, and to assure himself
of his Troops by an extraordinary way of proceeding. For he borrowed certain
sums of Money of all his Officers, which he distributed amongst his Soldiers,
by that means engaging his Officers by their own proper interests, and his
Soldiers by his liberality.

CHAP. XXIII. Caesar joins his Army, and marches against Petreius and Afranius.
Ilerd^.
LErida is a City of Catalonia, within twenty miles of the Ebre, situated upon
an advanced ground between the Rivers Segre and Cinga. Fabius had advanced
himself between these two Rivers, and had caused two Bridges to be laid over
the Segre four thousand paces distance from each other, for the convenience of
Forage. The Enemies Generals had done the same thing for the same reason. So
that the Cavalry of both Parties were every day engaged. There happened at the
same time a fierce fight between two of Fabius's Legions, and Afranius with
four of his. The two Legions were commanded by Plancus, and had certainly been
put to the rout, had not Fabius come up to their relief with all his Troops;
Caesar in the mean while marched to join him with eight hundred Horse, and in
two days made that Road which reaches from the Pyreneans down to the Segre.
After that he had understood the disposition of the places, and of the
Country, and that the rest of his Troops were arrived, he gave orders for the
repairing of one of those Bridges which the River had broken down, and left six
Cohorts with all his Baggage to guard the Bridge, and his Camp. Marching
emba^^elled in three Lines, till he came within view of the Enemy. Afranius
appeared with his Troops in Battalia, upon an eminence where he was encamped,
and where Caesar could not attack him, which obliged him to post himself four
hundred paces only from the foot of the Mountain. The Romans never used to
encamp without retrenching themselves within a Ditch, and a Palisade, which the
Legionary Soldiers could throw up in an instant, every one of them besides his
Arms carrying a stake upon his Shoulders for the making of the Palisade. This
was their first work; and this they supported with Earth and Turf for the
forming of a Rampart. Caesar that he might not be disturbed in intrenching,
left his two foremost lines to remain in Battalia, while the third wrought
under the shelter of the two others, and threw up a Ditch of fifteen foot
breadth, so that face of the Camp which looked toward the Enemy, was fortified
ever Afranius could perceive it. Then Caesar caused his Troops to retreat by
the two ends of the Trench. His whole Army were all that night at their Arms,
and the next day he drew up three Legions in Battalia behind the Ditch. As it
was a hard matter to get Turf, he contented himself to cause a Trench to be
thrown up upon the other sides of his Camp, by the three Legions who were not
at their Arms. The work was completed in a few days, though Afranius and
Petreius made some attempts to hinder it, but unsuccessfully, so that being in
so good a condition as it was, Caesar caused all his Equipage to come up, with
the Cohorts that were at the guard of the Bridge.

CHAP. XXIV. The Battle of Lerida.
BEtween the Eminence where the Enemy was Encamped; and the Town of Lerida,
there was a Plain of about three hundred paces, and in the middle of that Plain
a small advanced ground, Caesar endeavored to get possession of this Post, and
fortify himself there, by that means to take away from the Enemy the
convenience of their Bridge, and their communication with the City, from whence
they furnished themselves with all their subsistence. He caused three of his
Legions to advance, which he posted in three different places, giving orders to
the first Battalion of that Legion which was nearest to the advanced ground to
run all together, and possess themselves of it. But the Cohorts of Afranius his
advanced Guard, who had less way to go, got thither first, and repulsed
Caesar's Men. They were seconded with other Troops, so that the Battle grew hot
in that place. The manner of fighting on both sides was very different.
Afranius his Soldiers accustomed to Wars against the Barbarians, who never
keep their ground, charged fiercely at the first, and advanced with a great
deal of Courage, but they took no care of their ranks, but opened themselves in
fighting, and when ever they were pressed hard, thought it no dishonor to give
ground, and abandon their Posts, and this Caesar says happened in regard that
Soldiers easily learn the Discipline of those places where they have longest
served. Caesar's Men on the contrary thought it was for their Honor to fight
Embodied, and to keep their ranks, and never to quit their Colors nor their
Posts.

In the mean time the manner of the Enemies fighting surprised them by its
Novelty, they believed that they should be hemmed in, and the whole Battalion
moved with a great deal of disorder, and the astonishment had certainly reached
the rest of the Troops, who were not accustomed to see themselves push't by
their Enemies, had not Caesar assured them by his presence. He caused a Legion
to go on entire, and it was the ninth, which put a stop to the Attempts of the
Enemy, and charged them so hotly, that they retreated under the walls of
Lerida. But that Legion enraged with the affront they had received, engaged
themselves too inconsiderately in so dangerous a place, upon the steep part of
the rising ground, upon which the City was built. Afranius his Soldiers
returned to the charge, and as they had gotten the advantage of the place, and
Caesar also had recruited his Men, the Battle lasted five hours upon that spot
with great disadvantage to Caesar's Party, who were forced to fight up hill,
and where every Dart from the Enemy did execution, which last obliged them to
run up with their Swords in their hands, and with so much vigor, that they
pushed the Enemies Party which were in the Trenches, and the others also in the
same place. By this time Caesar's Horse were with difficulty advanced to favor
their retreat which they made without any disorder. Both Parties attributed to
themselves the Honor of the Victory. Caesar, because his Troops had maintained
the fight for five hours in so disadvantageous a Post, and that they had with
their Swords in their hands, put the Enemy to flight. And Afranius for that his
being less in number, had had at first the advantage, and that he still
remained Master of the Post for which they fought, and which he caused to be
fortified.

CHAP. XXV. Caesar's Army reduced to great extremities by the overflowing of
two Rivers. Cicero and a great many other Senators go to find out Pompey.
AN Accident which happened two days after this Battle, gave him still greater
hopes. The Rains which fell in abundance, and melted the Snow upon the
Mountains, so swelled up the two Rivers, that the Rapidity of the Waters
carried away both Caesar's Bridges, so that he saw himself shut up between two
over-flown Rivers, and could receive neither Convoys of Provisions, nor those
powerful succors which he expected out of Gaul and Italy: This was at the
beginning of Summer, when the Corn was not yet ripe enough for the making of
Bread. Besides Afranius his Spaniards being well acquainted with the Country,
and accustomed to pass the Rivers in Goat Skins, which they always carried with
them to the Wars, continually met and fell upon Caesar's Men, when ever any of
them were straggling or out from the rest. Afranius, on the other side, had
great store of Corn, and other Provisions, which he still supplied himself
withal out of that part of the Country which lay behind his Camp, and which
had not yet been ravaged. Caesar attempted to repair his Bridges, but the
largeness and violence of the Rivers rendered all his endeavors fruitless;
besides, that the Enemy disturbed the Work with flights of Darts from the other
side of the Segre: by this time the succors from Gaul were arrived, consisting
of Archers and Cavalry, composed of the best and chosen youth of Gaul, all Sons
of Senators, or Knights, whom Caesar had honored with those dignities.
According to the custom of that Nation, they brought with them great
Equipages, abundance of Chariots and Slaves, but all in no order, and without
command. They arrived, in this condition, upon the Bank of the Segre, which
they could not pass; And Afranius being advised of the difficulties they were
in, passed over with three Legions, and all his Cavalry, to surprise them. The
sight of the Enemy made the Gauls to rally, and form themselves into a Body,
which stood and received the Enemies Horse with a great deal of Bravery; but
seeing the Colors of the Legions appearing, they retreated toward the
Mountains, without any more loss than 200 Archers, a few Horsemen, and some
Servants that were with their Equipages. In the mean time the want of
Provisions grew to a great height in Caesar's Camp, and his Soldiers were very
much discouraged, as well with the fears of future miseries, as with the sense
of the present. A Bushel of Corn was sold for Fifty pence, and Fortune seemed
absolutely to declare her self for Afranius, whose Troops enjoyed all manner of
plenty. Both he and Petreius gave an account, by Letters, to Rome, of the
advantage they had gotten; And those of Pompey's Party went in shoales to pay
visits to Afranius his Wife, and congratulate with her upon the news: A great
many Senators, who had till then stood neuters, went to find out Pompey, some
in hopes to make their Court to him, by carrying him the first account of so
good Tidings; others to get what shares they could in the fruit of a Victory,
which they already assured themselves of, by the ruin of Caesar. Cicero was
one of these last in spite of the wholesome advice of Atticus, the endeavors
of his best friends, who were then with Caesar, and Caesar's own Letters to
him, wherein he conjures him, for the sake of their Friendship, to remain
Neuter. It will not be believed (says he in one of them) that the Justice of my
Enemies Cause has prevailed with you to declare against me, but that you have
been dista^ed at some action of mine which would most sensibly grieve me. A Man
of Honor who loves his Country, and its Peace, ought to avoid the taking of
any side in the disorders of a Civil War. The mere consideration of danger has
hindered many men from following those opinions, though they might have perhaps
approved of them. For you, who know by my conduct the extent of my Soul and my
Friendship, you cannot do better nor more for your Honor than to avoid the
engaging your self, by any means, in these Broils. But these reasons were not
of such prevalency with Cicero, as the News he received from Spain. Therefore
he went to find Pompey, who was very glad to see him, but gave him no
Employment, being not very well satisfied with him, for that he had observed in
him some regret to be engaged so unseasonably, and which he could not forbear
giving instances of by his Raileries; For when Pompey reproached him, that he
came in a little late; How late? (answered he) I do not find your affairs in
such forwardness. And another time, when it was told him, that seven Eagles had
been taken in Pompey's Camp, and that it was a happy Omen. It would be very
lucky indeed (said he)* if we were going to make War upon the Magpies: so that
Pompey could not refrain telling of him, That he should get him gone into
Caesar 's Camp, where he would have less reason to Jest, and more to be Afraid.
At last, Cato having remonstrated to him, That he ought to have preserved the
Neutrality which he at first made profession of, and that the Inconstancy of
his proceeding was unworthy of a Man, as he was well acquainted with the
Maxims of True Philosophy. Cicero took the first opportunity of retiring, and
never came up to the Battle of Pharsalia.

CHAP. XXVI. Caesar passes the Segre, and pursues Afranius and Petreius.
THE Joy of Pompey's Party was not very long-lived, but quickly changed with
the Fortune of Caesar; who, after having vainly endeavored to repair his
Bridges, gave orders amongst his Soldiers for the Building some of those sort
of Vessels, the use whereof they had learned in the British Expedition. The
Keel and bottom of these Boats was of Light Wood, and the rest with Ozier,
covered over with Leather: he caused them to be transported in the night upon
Chariots, 22 miles from his Camp, and so passed over his Soldiers to the other
side of the River, who possessed themselves of an advanced ground, where they
retrenched before the Enemy could get any notice of their design. These Troops
were followed by one Legion, and in two days a Bridge was built in that place.
The Succors and Provisions which came from Gaul passed easily over, and their
Soldiers were refreshed. Caesar then caused his Horse to go over, who
surprised the Forragers, a great number whereof they slew, routing their Guard
which consisted of Spaniards, and carried away a considerable booty. At this
time the face of Affairs seemed utterly changed. The valor of Caesar's Horse
had so amazed the Enemy, that they never after durst venture out to fetch in
Forage, and the Towns of Heusia, Callahora, Taragona, Tacca and Vich coming
over entirely to his party, sent him Provisions. Illurgavia another City near
Ebre followed their example, and one Cohort of that City, which was in the
Enemies service, revolted to Caesar's Camp. He then caused an Intrenchment to
be thrown up thirty foot in depth, by that means to make the Segre fordable,
and spare his Horse the pains of fetching a long circuit to find the Bridge.
Pompey's Generals began now, in their turn, to be afraid of the want of
provisions, because that Caesar was much too strong for them in Cavalry. So
they resolve to go into Portugal, where the People held the Name of Pompey in
great Veneration. For this design they furnished themselves with what Boats
they could get in and about the River Ebre, and carried them to Octogesa. This
was a place about Twenty Mile from their Camp, then they commanded a Bridge to
be made of these Boats, and passed the Segre with two Legions. Caesar's Work
and Afranius's Bridge came to be finished much about the same time, with
extreme diligence on both sides, and unspeakable labor on Caesar's part. In
fine, Pompey's two Generals left two Cohorts in Garrison at Lerida, and went
with all their Troops to join the two Legions which were passed over. At the
third Watch all that Army decamped to gain the Ebre; after which, Caesar
sounding the depth of the Ford, and finding it in good condition, commanded all
his Cavalry to pass and fall upon the Enemy; At break of day, from the Eminency
of Caesar's Camp, he could discover that his Horse had joined the Enemy, that
they extremely pressed their Rere-guard, and had put them into disorder, which
was easily to be guessed from the confusion of their motion. The Soldiers ran
about the Camp, crying, that the Enemy would escape, and yet protract the War
longer than there was necessity for it; They desired their Officers to assure
Caesar, that they would refuse no Fatigue to come to a Battle, and that they
could easily foard over where the Horse had gone before them: This eagerness of
theirs was the reason that he left the weakest of his Men, with one Legion, to
guard his Camp. And after having disposed a great many Horse both above and
below the Ford, he caused his other Legions to pass over without their Baggage;
some of the Soldiers were carried away by the swiftness of the Stream, but
were saved by the horsemen. So that all the Army got over without the loss of
one Man. As Soon as they came on the other side of the Ford they drew up in
Battalia, and Marched so fast, that though they were forced to go six Miles
about, and had lost a great deal of time in passing the River, they joined the
Enemy before three a Clock in the Afternoon, who had come away at midnight.
Afranius and Petreius drew up their Troops upon the hill, Caesar kept his on
the Plain, being unwilling, (weary as they were) to expose them to a Battle.
But in the moment that the two Generals moved toward a retreat, he followed
them without resting, and forced them to Encamp much sooner than they had at
first resolved.

CHAP. XXVII. Different motions of the two Armies. Caesar besieges the Enemies
tow Generals.
FRom the place where they were Encamped, there was a Plain of five Miles,
reaching to the Mountains and Defiles which they had a mind to possess
themselves of, to put a stop to Caesar's Cavalry, and go without danger as far
as the Ebre. Caesar understood this design, and that they intended silently to
quit their Camp, so he immediately ordered a cry in his Camp of Load the
Baggage, which was an usual Cry amongst the Roman Soldiers. This noise kept
the Enemy in their Trenches, fearing lest they should be surprised in disorder
upon their march, but at break of day Petreius went to take an account of the
Defiles with a small party of Horse. Decidius Saxa had received the same orders
from Caesar, they both brought back word to their Camp, that he who first got
possession of those Defiles might cut off from the Enemy the passage to the
Ebre.

Afranius and Petreius called a Council of War, whether they should depart that
night, or stay till morning; those that were of the opinion to stay till
morning, carried it, by reason of the hazard they must run, should they be
engaged to a Battle in the dark, where the Soldiers (especially in a Civil War
as this was) would not be retained by the example of their Officers, nor any
sense of their own shame. At break of day Caesar left his Trenches, and marched
with all his Troops toward the Hills, taking a great Circuit without keeping
any certain Road. The Valleys were very difficult of passage, being full of
sharp Rocks, and rough ways. But the Soldiers persuaded that the price of the
Victory, and the end of all their Toils depended upon their diligence, to ease
themselves, gave their Arms to those who were first got over, and so supported
one another in the passage: Immediately Afranius's men having left their
Trenches, and observing the motion of Caesar's Army, which was not toward the
way which led to the Mountains, by reason of their going about, believed, that
pressed for want of Forage, he was upon his retreat, upon which they set up
great hootings, and their Commanders were very glad that they had stayed for
the day, without running any hazard in the night. But when they perceived by
their facing to the right, that the first of the Troops were already got on the
other side of their Camp, they thought it high time for them to depart and
prevent the Enemy, so they cried to Arms, and marched, after having left some
Cohorts to guard the Camp and the Baggage. It was their business to try who
could first get possession of the Mountains. The difficulty of the ways was a
great hindrance to Caesar's Troops; but his Cavalry as much incommoded those of
Afranius. So they already saw themselves necessitated to lose their Baggage to
save themselves, for Caesar's Horse had got between them and their Camp. The
matter of importance was, who should make themselves Masters of the Defiles.
Caesar by the diligence of his Men carried it, where after having passed the
Rocks, which were almost inaccessible, found the Plain where he might draw up
his Legions in Battalia. The two Generals seeing the Infantry before them, and
the Horse behind them, made a hault upon a hill, from whence they detached four
Cohorts of Spaniards, who were disigned to get possession of a Mountain which
seemed to be the highest, and by that means to open themselves a way to the
Ebre. But they were hemmed in by Caesar's Horse, who cut them all to pieces in
sight of both Armies. His Soldiers pressed him that he would take that
occasions to complete the defeat of his Enemies, whose fear appeared by the
disorder their Colors were in, but he would not do it, for he saw the Victory
assured without fighting, and was resolved to spare the blood of his Soldiers,
so he caused his Cavalry to retreat, and gave the Enemy liberty to return to
their Camp, which they had quitted in the morning. Caesar leaving some Troops
at the Defiles, and having blockt up the passage to the Ebre, came the next day
and posted himself in sight of their Trenches. They had but two things to
choose, either to return to Lerida, or go to Tarracona. As they were consulting
upon this, news was brought them that Caesar's Cavalry had fallen upon theirs,
which were gone to get water, which obliged them to send more Legionary
Cohorts, seconded with Cavalry to maintain a work they designed to make, by
throwing up a Trench as far as the Segre. The two Generals divided themselves
for this Design, and as they were busying themselves about it, their Soldiers
left their Trenches, and came to a Parley with Caesar's they almost all of them
knew one another, being of the same City, and most of them either Friends or
Relations. They gave them thanks that the day before they had not fallen upon
them in that disorder they were then in, they bemoaned themselves that they
should be forced to carry Arms against Men who for so many reasons ought to be
dear to them. In short, they demanded surety for their Generals, promising in
that case to surrender themselves to Caesar, to whom also they deputed their
Principal Centurions for a Treaty. In the mean while inviting Caesar's
Soldiers into their Camp, and carrying them into their Tents, where they
offered them such refreshments as they had. Afranius's Son himself entered upon
Capitulation by the means of Sulpitius a Lieutenant General, and there was some
appearance that the two Armies being united, matters might have been brought to
a kind conclusion.

CHAP. XXVIII. Petreius causes several of Caesar's Soldiers to be slain. He
decampeth, and Caesar follows him, but without a design of defeating him
utterly.
UPon the news of this, Afranius returned to the Camp, and retired himself to
his Tent, resolved against all events. Petreius did not so, he caused several
of his Slaves and his Guards to take their Arms, and with some Spanish Horse
ran to the Trenches, driving thence Caesar's Men, and causing his own Soldiers
to retire. Those of Caesar rallied, seeing that he ordered those Spaniards to
charge them, and after having lost some Men, retreated to their Camp. Petreius
being entered into his, went from Quarter to Quarter, and assembling his Troops
together, conjured them with tears in his Eyes to remember Pompey their
General, to whom they had so mighty obligations, and demanded from them a new
Oath of Fidelity, he took it first himself, afterward obliging Afranius to it,
and all the other Officers, and in fine, all the Soldiers one after another.
Then it was ordered that all those that had any of Caesar's Soldiers in their
Tents should bring them forth, some were produced and Massacred in the presence
of the whole Army. They believed that the obligations of that Oath, and that
example of Cruelty, would be so strong an engagement, that the Soldiers would
never after break it; nevertheless, a great many preserved those that were in
their Tents, without discovering of them, and at night helped them to escape
over the Ramparts. Caesar would not imitate this Cruelty of the Enemies
Generals, but sent back all their Soldiers which were in his Camp, at least
all those that would return, (for a great many Officers had taken Party with
him.) The Enemy pressed by all manner of necessity, resolved now to retreat to
Lerida, where they had yet some Provisions, and the next morning they Decamped.
The order of their March was thus, the best of their Cohorts they placed in
their Rere Guard, to make head in the Plain against Caesar's Army, which
followed them afterward as they were passing the Mountain, they more easily
defended themselves, because that those who first got up, could with their
Darts defend them that followed; but upon the descent on the other side they
found great disadvantage, for they could not assist one another, and Caesar's
Cavalry might annoy them with Darts. As they went down to avoid this, the
Legions in a whole body making a hault, charged so fiercely upon the Cavalry,
that they forced them to retire, and after having so repulsed them, ran with
what speed they could into the Valley to get to the other side, where they
might face about, but by reason of what had happened, they were not persued very
fast, and after having marched four miles, Afranius and Petreius encamped upon
an advanced ground, where they made a sort of retrenchment. Caesar posted
himself very near them, and after they had observed that his Horse were gone
out to Forage, they began about Noon to march again. Caesar immediately
followed them with his Infantry, and sent order to his Horse to come up to him
at four of the Clock, they quickly returned, and the Enemy being pressed by his
whole Army, were forced to take another Post very disadvantageous, and far from
any water. Caesar would not for the reasons I have already related, entirely
defeat them, though he might easily have done it, but left them at liberty to
retrench themselves, which they did with all possible diligence, and carrying
on their Trenches from one Post to another, endeavored to advance under the
shelter of their Works. But this only served to hinder them more from water,
which for one whole day they wanted. The next day all their Army marched in
Battalia to seek for some, but no one durst leave the body to go and fetch in
Forage. This gave Caesar to understand the necessity to which they were
reduced, and confirmed him in his design, so he ordered the beginning of his
Line for the blocking of them up. Three days were so employed in removing earth
on every side, during which time they caused all the Beasts of burden in their
Camp to be killed. In the mean while Caesar's work was very much advanced, and
at three a clock in the afternoon, the two Generals drew out to oppose it,
embattelling themselves upon three lines. Caesar for the sake of his Reputation
would not seem to decline the Fight; so he drew up his Troops in Battalia upon
three Lines also. The Cohorts of the Legions upon the right and left, the
Archers and Slingers in the Center, and his Horse upon the Wings. In this order
he attended their motion, resolving himself not to begin the attack. The two
Armies were upon their Retrenchments, which were only carried on for two
hundred paces, and so they remained till night without doing any thing. Caesar
then caused his Works to be renewed, and the two Generals had a design to open
themselves a passage to the Segre, to try there if they could find a Ford; but
this hope of theirs was frustrated by the light armed German Foot, and a Party
of Horse which Caesar had sent on the other side of the River to defend the
passages by Corpse du Guard, which he caused every where to be Posted.

CHAP. XXIX. Afranius and Petreius pressed for want of provision, surrender
themselves to Caesar with all their Army.
AT last having for four days suffered all the inconveniences imaginable, as
want of Corn, Forage, Water, and every thing else that was necessary, Afranius
and Petreius demanded a private Treaty, which Caesar refused them, and obliged
them to speak what they had to offer in presence of both the Armies; Afranius
his Son was given for Hostage, and Afranius himself spoke for his Party, he
excused them, for that they had to the last extremity maintained that fidelity
which they owed to Pompey their General, and said, That they believed they had
given sufficient marks of their Zeal which if he thought a Crime, they were
already sufficiently punished for it by the misery which he had brought upon
them, that they acknowledged their defeat, and begged that Caesar would use it
according to his wonted generosity, and not treat them with the utmost rigor.
He spoke this in a very submissive manner; to which Caesar answered, That
Afranius and his Colleague had less reason than any body to complain and desire
favor, that all the others had done but their duty, that he had refused to
fall upon them when he had the advantage, if possible by such honorable
proceedings to have obliged them to a peace, that his Army being unwilling to
revenge upon their Soldiers the perfidy by which they had put his men to the
Sword, and their Soldiers also testifying their wishes for Peace, in sending
to them to demand it, was a sufficient Testimony that every body did entertain
sentiments of Justice and Amity, except Afranius and his Colleague, who without
having any regard to the rules of truce and intervews, had barbarously
butchered his men after having surprised them by a false show of Friendliness
and good intention, that they being therefore justly fallen into a condition
which such arrogance and obstinacy deserved were reduced to implore that with
submission which they had before refused with contempt; but that nevertheless
he would not pretend to take any advantage either of their submission, or the
favors of Fortune, but only oblige them to dismiss those Troops that for so
long time had born Arms against him. That and something more he added against
the Conduct of his Enemies, and in fine, said, That as he had no design (though
he might easily do it) to make use of those Troops for his assistence, so he
would take care they should not be employed to his prejudice, that therefore
they should quit the Province, and discharge their Soldiers, which was the
only condition of Peace he had to propose.

Afranius's Soldiers approved of this discourse, and testified their joy by
their acclamations; so every thing was ordered accordingly, and those who were
settled in Spain were discharged upon the place, the others were to be
dismissed, so soon as they arrived at the River Avarus, Caesar promised to
furnish them with Provisions till they came to that place, and not to compel
any of them to take Party in his Troops, which was all faithfully performed.
Fussius Calenus, Caesar's Lieutenant General, guarded them with two Legions as
far as Avarus, where they had liberty to depart. It is true that the greatest
part of them engaged themselves voluntarily in Caesar's Service, and the two
Generals went to find out Pompey. Caesar that he might leave himself no Enemy
in Spain, caused two Legions to advance under the Command of Cassius Longinus,
and went himself to Cordova with six hundred Horse. Varro, who commanded for
Pompey, had made some preparations there toward War, after having a long time
disputed with himself which side he should take, but at the arrival of Caesar
all the Towns, and one entire Legion abandoned Varro; this obliged him to
retire to Cadiz, where he had some Shipping: In the mean while Caesar becoming
Master of the whole Province, Varro himself came to seek him out, and
surrendered the remainder of his Forces into his hands, Caesar at that time
leaving Longinus with four Legions in Spain, after having drawn great sums of
Money out of all the Towns, he Embarked himself on board Varro's Ships, to go
to Tarragona, from whence he went by land to Narbone, and so to the siege of
Marseilles.

CHAP. XXX. The continuation of the Siege of Marseilles, and the taking of that
City. Caesar chosen Dictatour. The defeat and death of Curio in Africa.
THAT City still held out against Trebonius, who besieged it by Land, and
Decimus Junius.
Brutus, who attacked it by Sea, and its obstinacy had like to have cost it its
entire ruin. The Inhabitants, under the conduct of Domitius, and assisted by
the Mountaneirs near the City, a fierce People, and very good Soldiers, having
twice given Battle by Sea to Brutus, though with some difficulty, had been
beaten in again. They were also attacked by Land, and blocked up by Lines and
other Works. Necessity had driven them also to make use of Artifices, and under
the pretense of a Treaty, which made Caesar's Soldiers negligent, they made a
strong Sally, in which they burnt a great many Towers and Warlike Engines, and
this was the reason that the Siege lasted so long; besides, Trebonius had
orders from Caesar, not to force the place, for fear it should be utterly laid
in Ruins by the unruliness of the Soldiers. Caesar arrived just as they were
reduced to their last extremity, and when the Plague was already got amongst
the People, who had been for so long time shut up. They sent Deputies to him
for a fair Capitulation, during which time Dumitius made his escape by Sea;
Caesar pardoned them in favor, as he said, of their Name and Antiquity, rather
than for any other merit, upon condition, that they should surrender to him all
their Arms and Engines of War, and give him all the Money that was in the City;
so after having left two Legions there in Garrison, and sending the other into
Italy, he departed for Rome, where the news of his Conquests had caused him to
be chosen Dictatour, by Marcus Aemilius.
Lepidus, who was then Praetor; but that good fortune, which seemed hitherto to
be inseparable from his Party, forsook him in Africa, whither Curio was gone
from Sicily with two Legions and 500 Horse. This young Man, full of fire and
courage, but without much experience in War, had to do with Attius Varus, a
Lieutenant of Pompey's, assisted by that Quintillius Varus whom Caesar had set
at liberty, when he had taken him Prisoner in Corfinium, and Iuba King of
Mauritania. This Prince was a particular Enemy to Curio, by reason, that when
he was Tribune he had proposed the reducing of his Kingdom into a Province:
Quintillius being acquainted with Curio's Soldiers, when they had served in
Corfinium, tried at first to debauch some of them; but Curio preserved their
Faith by his Eloquence, and the consideration of the Name and Victories of
Caesar; and to keep them in employment, led them on to attack the Camp of
Attius Varus, near Vtica, the Battle was very bloody, and at last Caesar's Men
became Masters of the Camp; Varus was wounded, and Curio laid Siege to Vtica,
when Iuba arrived with great Forces within Twenty five Miles of the place.
Curio was much too weak for Iuba, and expecting the coming up of new Troops,
his design was not to expose himself to a Battle, when the African caused a
report to be spread that some Important Affairs called him back into his
Country, and that he would leave Saburra, one of his Lieutenants, with part of
his Forces, to raise the Siege of Vtica; Curio's Youth (says Caesar) animated
with courage, and the good success of his first exploits, made him too easily
to believe that report; so he resolved for fighting, and went to find Saburra
upon the River Bagadra, where he was encamped. At his first coming he surprised
the Enemies Numidian Horse, whereof he made a great slaughter; and as he
understood that Saburra Commanded those Troops, his present joy and future
hopes hindered him from seeking any farther Information: So, with his Troops,
wearied as they were, he marched directly upon the Enemy. Iuba hearing of this,
sent Two thousand Gallick and Spanish Horse, which were of his Guards, to his
Lieutenant, with orders to retreat, (in fighting,) toward him. He was but six
Miles from Saburra, and Marched that hour with his whole Army and Forty
Elephants; Saburra following the King's Command, drew up his Men in Battalia,
and made a kind of retreat, which caused Curio to attack him very fiercely; and
though for mere weariness a great many of his Horse had abandoned him, Saburra
would make no opposition but with his own Cavalry against Curio's, which
consisted only of Two hundred Horse, and with this Squadron, wherever he
attacked them, he made the Enemy give way: The Cohorts of the Legions had the
same success, but the Enemy always Rallied in expectation of Iuba's Succor. At
last the Romans, finding themselves hemmed in by the numbers, which all of a
sudden increased upon them, Curio began to see his fault; He would have made an
attempt to have gained a Mountain with his Foot, but Saburra opposed him with
all his Horse. Then Domitius, who commanded Curio's, would have persuaded him
to have saved himself with what Cavalry he had left, promising not to forsake
him. Can I, says Curio, look Caesar in the Face, after having lost an Army
which he has trusted to my Conduct? At these words he threw himself amongst
the midst of his Enemies, where he was slain, the rest of his Troops were cut
in pieces, and Iuba used the Victory with so much Insolence, that he caused all
the other Cohorts who were in the Camp, and to whom Varus had given his word
for their safety, to be killed in cold blood. So Caesar lost two Legions, and
all Africa entire, which afterward remained for Pompey's Party, whose hopes,
by this defeat of Curio, overcame his despair for the loss of Spain.

CHAP. XXXI. Pompey's Forces. The Defeat of Dylabella and Cajus Antonius,
Caesar's Lieutenants, Brutus goes to find out Pompey.
BY this means almost all the World becoming engaged in the Quarrel of these
two Men, was sensible of the Calamities of War which that division had
produced. Pompey had brought over all the East to his Interest; and during the
time of Caesar's being at Rome and in Spain, had drawn together very powerful
Armies both by Sea and Land: his Land Army consisted of three Roman Legions
effective, without reckoning the other two which Scipio his Brother-in-law
brought him: Three thousand Archers of Crete, of Lacedemonia, and of Pontus,
Eight Cohorts of Slingers, and 7000 Horse, composed (besides the Roman Knights)
of Succors sent from Deijotarus King of Galitia, Ariobarzakes King of
Cappadocia, Cotis and Rhascupolis Kings of Thrace, and Antiochus King of
Comagena; these Troops were distributed into Curazzo and Apollonia, and over
all that Coast, to oppose the coming down of Caesar; the Naval Army consisted
of Five hundred great Ships, without reckoning Vessels that were rowed with
Oars, as Galleys, Brigantines and others; the Principal Commanders were
Pompey's eldest Son, called after his own Name, Decius L^lius, Cajus Triarius,
Cajus Cassius, Cajus Marcellus, Scribonius Libo, and Marcus Octavius, all these
Commanders had their particular Squadrons, and received Orders from Bibulus who
executed the Office of Admiral: Besides these Forces, Pompey had drawn great
Sums of Money out of Asia and Greece; And to recompense himself, in some
manner, for the loss of Spain, had caused Dolabella and Cajus Antonius, who
commanded for Caesar on the Coast of Illyria, to be attached. Dolabella was
easily routed, and Cajus, who came to his succor, not being strong enough to
keep the Sea, was driven into the Island of Corcyra, where Octavius and Libo
besieged him. He defended himself very well; but at last his Soldiers pressed by
Famine, and corrupted by Puleio, one of their Centurions, surrendered themselves
to Octavius, and betrayed also their Commandant into his hands. Some Officers,
who thought to save themselves over Land, being pursued by the Enemy, flew
themselves, and not one Man of all those Troops escaped. These advantages,
which daily kept up the reputation of his Party, still engaged more persons of
consideration to come and join themselves with Pompey, so that he found he had
in his Camp above 200 Senators, whereof he composed a body, and they assembled
themselves in the form of a Senate. In one of these Assemblies, by the advice
of Cato, it was determined, that no Roman Citizen should be put to death out of
Battle, and that no Town subject to the Roman Empire should be sacked. In
effect, this Laudable and Honorable Decree drew the good wishes of the People
upon the Authors of it, and gave the reputation of great Justice and Humanity
to their designs, and was the occasion that the fortune of Caesar hung for a
long time doubtful, and it was upon this pretense also, that Brutus afterward
Conspired against him; Brutus had a great deal of reason to hate Pompey, who
had caused his Father to be put to death. Nevertheless, that Severe Virtue,
whereof he made profession, and the example of Cato, who was his Uncle and
Father-in-law, engaged him in that party which he thought had the most Justice
on its side. And though he would never speak to Pompey, nor indeed so much as
salute him, he nevertheless disdained not then to serve under him, to show,
that he could sacrifice his particular resentments to the Interest of the
Republic. Pompey received him with a great deal of Joy, and did him signal
honors. But Brutus, in consideration of his youth, would take no employment,
but rather chose to leave the Commands to those who were above him in age as
well as dignity.

CHAP. XXXII. A Mutiny amongst Caesar's Troops; he reduces them to their duty
by his Eloquence and Resolution. He is chosen Consul with Servilius, and makes
new Laws.
IN the meanwhile, Caesar being still at Marseilles, received news, that the
Soldiers of the ninth Legion were in Mutiny at Plaisance against their
Commanders, demanding their discharges, and the Money which had been promised
to each of them at the beginning of the War. But that which stuck in their
stomachs, was, that they were prohibited the liberty of Plundering, which they
hoped to have obtained from the need which he had of their service. It was
Caesar's Maxim, never to condescend upon these occasions, but to support
himself by a resolute Conduct, and the Authority which he had gotten. So he
posted to Plaisance with some Troops, and calling the Mutineers together, I
know not, says he, what ill fortune opposes the end of my good Intentions; But
I desire to have no others to bear witness than your selves of the diligence
which I have used in War, which if it be prolonged, it has not been my fault,
but the fault of my enemies, who fly before us. After the Conquest of Gaul,
where every one of you, under my Conduct, got both Riches and Honor, we began
this War by Common Consent, nor was it the effect of any private deliberations.
We have begun and carried it on unanimously; but now when it is arrived to its
greatest height, you seek for a preten^e to abandon me, and instead of obeying
your Officers you would command them. This is that which obliges me to throw
off that mildness and humanity which I have hitherto used, to put in practice
the Maxims of Petreius; and I command instantly a Decimation of the Ninth
Legion, who has rebelled against my Orders. The Mutineers, as much confounded
at these words as if they had been Thunder-strucken, threw themselves at his
Feet, and, with Tears in their Eyes, begged for Pardon, all their Officers did
the same thing: Caesar, for some time, was Inexorable, but at last ordered,
they should cast Lots, and the Lots ^ell on the Chief Mutineers, to the number
of Six and twenty; but Caesar's Anger being over, he was contented that only
Twelve of the most notorious of them should suffer, who were Executed upon the
place: afterward it was found, that one of these was Innocent; and for that he
could not be restored to life, Caesar caused him who had accused him falsely to
be put to death also. Then (after a great many Endeavors to persuade him to
it) he gave leave that the rest of that Legion which he had broken, should
still serve under him. After this he went to Rome, where he held the Comitia,
or Assemblies of the People, in quality of Dictatour; he kept that Dignity
only Eleven days, and caused himself to be chosen Consul with Servilius
Isauricus; and, as his Design was to make himself as many Friends as was
possible; in pursuance of that purpose he proposed several favorable Laws; the
first was concerning the borrowing of Money for the War, as it usually happens,
having ruined all Credit, and rendered a great many Men insolvable, Caesar
ordained, that an estimate should be made of Inheritances, at the same value
they bore before the War, and that Creditours should take them according to
this estimation, so he took away their fear of a general Bankruptry, and
supported the Credit of the Debtours. Besides, he drew to his party all such as
expected to be favored in this estimate, which was the end of that Law. The
other Law was, for the calling home those who had been Condemned during the
time that Pompey presided in the passing Sentences of Justice. Caesar made also
several other Ordinances, and after having quitted the Name and Dignity of
Dictatour, departed for Brundusium.

CHAP. XXXIII. Caesar with part of his Army goes into Greece: some discourse of
Peace, but to no purpose. Two Armies draw toward one another near Durazzo.
HE had already sent Orders to Twelve of his Legions and all his Cavalry for
their Rendezvous at Brundusium; the Legions were grown very thin by the Wars,
and the Marches they had made, as well as by the Diseases of the Autumn, which
this year proved very epidemical. In the mean while, for want of Shipping,
only five of them could embark, who amounted to no more than Twenty thousand
Foot, and Six hundred Horse. He told his Soldiers, That as they were within a
day of bringing all their toil to an end, by a glorious Victory. It was
necessary to leave their Servants and Equipage in Italy, to the end that a
greater number of those Men, who were fit for service, might have room to
Embark, that they might assure themselves of the fruit of their victory, and of
his acknowledgments. They all cried out, that he should lead them where he
pleased; so they went on board with great Joy, and in spite of the rigor of
the season, upon the Fourth of January, Caesar weighed Anchor. This much
surprised the Officers of Pompey's Navy, who could not persuade themselves that
Caesar would venture his Troops at that time of the year when the Seas were so
dangerous. But Caesar timed it so well, that he made his passage in one day,
and came into a Road at the foot of those Mountains, which are called the
Cearaunium Mountains; he made choice of that place, because it was far from the
Ports which were possessed by his Enemies; when, after having landed his
Soldiers, he sent back the Ships to transport the rest of his Army under the
Command of Cale^^^. Bibulus was at Ca^^yra with a Hundred and ten Ships, and at
the first news of Caesar's passage put himself to Sea, and meeting Caesar's
Vessels upon the return, took Thirty of them, upon whom he discharged in
Malice, for he burnt them all, with the very Seamen that were in them, and with
his Fleet took possession of all the Ports and Roads between Salonium and
Orica: He placed every where up and down very strong Guards, and lay himself on
board, notwithstanding the danger of the season. In the mean time Caesar took
possession of Orica and Apollonia, who, at sight of his Troops, surrendered
themselves; by that means to cut off from Bibulus all convenience from Land, so
long as he should stay to deprive him of the advantage of the Sea. Caesar, who
always took great care to justify his Arms, and make known the sincerity of
his Intentions, had still in his hands Vibullius Rufus, whom he had twice taken
Prisoner, first at Corfinium, and a second time in Spain. Him he sent to
Pompey, with whom Rufus had some Credit; and desired him to represent to him,
That Fortune seemed hitherto to have distributed equal loss and equal
advantages to both parties, by that means, if possible, to bring them to some
accommodation. But as each of them was obstinate in his opinion, let
Arbitratours be chosen between them, who should be the Senate and the People of
Rome; that if Pompey would renounce his Interest, and in three days dismiss his
Troops, he himself would do so also. Rufus charged with these Orders, departed
with all diligence, and rid Post to advise Pompey of Caesar's arrival, that
being the main thing which obliged Rufus to make indeed such haste, for he knew
very well Pompey would not commit such an Error as to take the Senate and the
People of Arbitratours, who at that time were absolutely for Caesar. Bibulus at
the same time made another Proposition, which he knew very well how to evade,
which was, to make a Truce, and permit Pompey's Ships to fetch from the Land
Wood, Water and other Refreshments that they wanted: to which Caesar answered,
That as they guarded the Sea against him, he would guard the Land against them;
that if by the means of a Truce, they would have the convenience of the Land,
they ought to leave him the liberty of the Sea, and draw off their Squadrons
which guarded the Coasts. His design was, to gain time for the Transporting the
rest of his Troops: but Bibulus, who knew it very well, would accept of no
Truce upon such Conditions. Pompey was in Macedonia, where Rufus joined with
him, and fearing lest Caesar should take from him Durazzo, Marched with his
whole Army to save that place where all his Ammunitions were lodged. It was in
this March that he understood the difference between new Levies and old
Soldiers; For as he made very great Journeys, abundance of the Men, either
through laziness, or not being able to support the Fatigue, abandoned him; and
at the least noise that Caesar was coming, were in continual disorder, and
appeared as if they were defeated already. Pompey nevertheless came first to
Durazzo, where he Entrenched himself upon the River of Apse, and where Labyenus
found out an expedient for the confirming of his Troops. He caused the whole
Army to be drawn together, and in the presence of all the Soldiers. Swear that
he would never forsake his General, but follow him through all his Fortunes,
all the other Officers took the same Oath, and then the Soldiers one after
another. Caesar being prevented by the Enemy, came also and Encamped himself on
the other side of the River, to cover the City of Apollonia, and both of them
in this manner remained for some time, expecting the Succors that were to come
up to them.

CHAP. XXXIV. Caesar exposes himself alone in a Skiff to go and find the rest
of his Army.
CAesar's Legions who remained in Italy, were most of them old Soldiers, who
had served a long time under him. At the first orders which they received for
their Rendezvous at Brundusium, the proposing of still new toils made them
begin to murmr, saying, That they had worn out their bodies, and drained
their veins in Caesar 's Service, that the weakness to which they were reduced,
and the wounds which covered them ought to make him sensible that they were
neither immortal nor invulnerable; but in the mean while they were dragged from
War to War, till the very Iron of their Armor was wasted with wearing, and
abundance of other discourse which old Soldiers that have done good Service
will venture upon. In effect they took no care to go to Brundusium, but when
they understood that Caesar had passed the Sea, and was near the Enemy; the
love which they had for him could not conceal it self, all their murmurings
were turned into reproaches and complaints against their Officers, that they
had not marched them soon enough, they cursed their sloth, and spent whole
days upon the rocks of the Coast, in looking if they could see the Vessels
returning for their Embarkment. Caesar for his part was as much uneasy; he had
written at first to Calenus the danger he had in passing; all the Coast being
possessed with the Enemies Vessels, and that advice saved his Troops; for
Calenus having caused them to Embark on board those Vessels which he had left,
Caesar's Letter obliged him to stay, and one only Vessel that mistook his
orders, fell into the hands of Bibulus, who again caused all that were on board
to be slain, to terrify others by that example. At last, Bibulus dying of an
illness which he got at Sea, leaving no Commander in chief to succeed him, the
Guards began not to be kept so exactly as before. Caesar saw that opportunity
favorable for the passing of his Troops, and was almost despairing that they
were not arrived so soon as he would have had them, for he had written several
times. At last his impatience drove him upon an action which nothing could
excuse but the confidence which he always had in his good Fortune, neither has
he made any mention of it in his Commentaries, nor of another Action of his,
which Su^tonius takes notice of, where he underwent no less danger, but had
more necessity for it. It was thus, the Gauls having in his absence besieged
his Legions, he took a Gallick habit, and in that disguise went through the
Corpse du Guard, and the whole Enemies Army to come to his Camp, and it is very
remarkable, that this General who could so freely hazard his own Person, never
marched his Army but with the greatest caution imaginable, and after having
first exactly informed himself of all the Defiles and other passages that were
upon his way. Caesar therefore now disguised in the habit of a Slave, without
making any of his people acquainted with his design, put himself on board a
Fisher-mans Bark that was in the mouth of the River Apse, they were to go out
that night, and his design being, when they were out at Sea, to make them row
directly to Brundusium, they went away at the beginning of the night, but a
stiff gale of wind blowing in upon the mouth of the River, made the Sea very
rough in that place, the Master of the Bark made several attempts, with his
Mariners to row out to Sea, but as the storm and the wind increased, he ordered
to forbear. Caesar only opposed this design, and because the man was afraid of
the danger, of a sudden discovering himself, and seeing that the Fisherman knew
him, Fear nothing, says he, for thou carriest Caesar and his Fortune. The
Mariners encouraged by Caesar's presence, behaved themselves so well, that they
overcame the violence of the waves, but the Sea was so rough, and so high
without the mouth of the River, that they imagined they must be all lost, and
were at last forced to return to land. Caesar went back to his Camp, where his
Soldiers running in whole shoals to his Tent, with a great deal of tenderness
reproached him, saying, That he disgraced them by going to seek out new Forces
to fight the Enemy which they had before them, whom they were sure they had
strength and courage enough to overcome whenever he would vouchsafe to put
himself at the bead of them.

CHAP. XXXV. The happy arrival of Caesar's Troops in Greece. Caelius and Milo
raising disturbances in Italy, are slain.
IT was not without reason that Caesar was so disquieted for his Troops in
Italy. Scribonius Libo, was gone from Orica with 50 Ships under his Command,
and posted himself in an Island near Brundusium, where he seized upon several
Merchant Ships which were in the Road, he made also several descents into the
main land, and with success, upon this advantage he sent word to Pompey, that
with his Fleet only he could hinder C^sar's Troops from passing into Epirus,
and that in the mean while the other Vessels might be refitted. Caesar had also
received other news from Rome, which made him very uneasy. Caelius, of whom I
have spoken before, being discontented, with that Party in which his hatred to
Attius, and Curio's Friendship had embarked him, sought all occasions to act
against the Ordinances of Caesar. He was Praetor, with Trebonius, whom Caesar
had put into Commission for taking the estimate of the inheritances; Caelius
proclaimed that he was ready to receive the complaints of all such as had
received any injury, and that he was ready to do them justice: very few came
to make their Complaints, and all Senators opposed the undertaking, which
obliged him to leave Rome under pretense of going to find out Caesar, but it
was to join himself with Milo, who was returned into Italy, and had gathered
together a great number of Gladiatours and Peasants, they reported what they
did was by order from Pompey, but Caesar's good Fortune delivered him at one
blow from this inconvenience, Milo and Caelius being killed at the same time.
Milo besieging a little Town in Calabria, and Caelius by some Gallick and
Spanish Cavalry whom he would have persuaded to desert. Antonius and Calenus,
put Libo also to flight from before Brundusium, after having taken one of his
Galleys, with those Shallops that belonged to their Vessels fortified with
Hurdles in the manner of a Parrapet, and Manned with good Soldiers. Then they
Embarked their Troops, and departed from Brundusium, the weather being very
fair, and the wind South. Caesar had written very earnestly to them upon this
occasion, and commanded them to come and land at Apollonia, they made their
passage in a days time, and when they were arrived within sight of Apollonia,
and Durazzo, Coponius went out with the Rhodian Squadron which he commanded, to
hinder their coming in. The wind was favorable to Caesar's People, and began
to increase in the moment that the Enemy appeared. Coponius was nevertheless
resolved to follow them, and Ceasar's Generals, who were for avoiding a fight
at Sea, put themselves into the Haven of Nimphis, three miles above Lisso. This
Haven was sheltred from the South-East wind, but was exposed to the South, and
by extraordinary good Fortune, the wind which had been at South for two days
together, changed to the South-East in the very moment that they cast Anchor,
so those of Caesar got safe into a good Haven, and Coponius's Squadron was
driven upon the Coast with so much violence, that all his Vessels perished, the
Soldiers and Seamen were most of them drowned, and the rest fell into Caesar's
hands, who afterward gave them their liberty. Two of Antonius's Ships, who
could not follow the rest came to an Anchor near Lisso, whom Ottacilius
Crassus, who Commanded for Pompey, caused to be attacked with Shallops, and
other little Boats. One of the Ships had in her 220 new raised Levies, and the
other 200 old Soldiers, the new raised men being terrified with the number of
the Enemy, surrendered themselves to Ottacilius upon his Parole, who
nevertheless with horrid perfidy, put them all to the Sword; but the Veterans
amusing the Enemy by a feigned Capitulation* made the Seamen run their Vessel a
shore, where they saved themselves, and after having repulsed and beaten six
hundred Horse, whom Ottacilius sent against them, they went and joined
themselves with Antonius: The City of Lisso also revolted against Ottacilius,
who retreated toward Pompey, leaving the place to Antonius, who immediately
took it into his possession.

CHAP. XXXVI. Marcus Antonius joins himself with Caesar in spite of Pompey,
who retreats to Aspargua near Durazzo.
ANtonius had with him three old Legions, two Legions of new raised Soldiers,
and eight hundred Horse. He sent his Ships into Italy to transport the rest of
the Troops, and kept only his flat bottomed Boats at Lisso, which were a sort
of Vessels the G^ul^ were wont to make use of, to the end that if Pompey should
have a design of putting to Sea, Caesar might be in a condition to follow him.
Then Antonius gave him an account of his arrival, and where he was Pompey at
the same time learned the news by those who had seen the Ships under Sail
before Dur^^zo. These two Generals were encamped upon the River of Apse, and as
their Camps were only separated by that River, the Soldiers had frequent
Parley's, which (...) the ^^st Propo^^o^^ that ever (...) made for an
Accommodation. Vibullius Rufus, when Caesar sent him, had made the first
overture, but Pompey by the advice of Libo, of Luceius, and a certain Greek
named Theophanes, who was his chief Confident, st^^d out upon a point of
Honor, at that time something unseasonable, (at least, if we may believe
Caesar in his Commentaries) saying, That he could not bear the thinking that
his life and his return to Rome should appear to the world as a favor bestowed
upon him by Caesar. Nevertheless Vatinius, Caesar's Lieutenant, endeavored to
renew the Conference upon the River of Apse; and on Pompey's behalf, Varro had
promised there should be a Meeting to that purpose. All the Lieutenant Generals
of both Parties agreed upon a day for Conference; when they came to the place
appointed, Labienus advanced, and after having spoke something upon the Subject
they were to treat of, he was interrupted by a great number of Arrows and other
Darts, which were shot at Caesar's Lieutenants. Vatinius was sheltered by the
Bucklers of the Soldiers who were with him, but Cornelius Balbus, Plotius, and
Tiburtius, were wounded, and Labienus cried out with great insolence, That it
was to no purpose to speak farther of peace, if they brought not with them the
head of Caesar: This is what he himself has reported, and that from this
moment he thought of nothing but War, this happened some time before the coming
of Antonius, so the two Generals decamped in the same day. Caesar to join
himself with Antonius, and Pompey to hinder him. He had no River to pass as
Caesar had, but went and posted himself in a place which he thought most proper
for an Ambuscade, which he laid for Antonius, but he being advised of it by the
Greeks of the Country, entrenched himself in a Post, where he stayed and
expected Caesar, who soon after arrived; and Pompey fearing to be hemmed in
between the two Armies, retreated to Aspargua, near Durazzo, leaving Antonius
the liberty of joining Caesar, which he did the same day. So Caesar and Pompey
at the head of all their Troops were in a readiness to dispute the Empire of
the world, and all the glory which they both had gotten in War, and as they
have obscured the luster and reputation of all those who went before them, and
as their names to this day are made use of, when ever we would describe the
qualifications of an able General. The account of all their proceedings cannot
but afford us great use as well as pleasure: We have here taken it out of the
Commentaries of Caesar, who as far as we are able to judge, has reported it
with all sincerity.

CHAP. XXXVII. Caesar offers Battle to Pompey, who refuses it. They both post
themselves near Durazzo. Caesar hemmed in by the lines of Pompey's Camp.
CAesar (after having drawn together all his Army, and knowing that Pompey was
at Aspargua) marched directly toward him, and in his passage forced a Borough
Town, where Pompey had left a Garrison. After three days march he came in sight
of the Enemies Camp, and fortified his own, from whence the next day he drew
out all his Troops to offer Battle to Pompey, who refused it, and came not
forth. Caesar knew from that moment that he must take other measures. So he
decamped the next day to go toward Durazzo, and though he was forced to march
by certain Defiles, which were very incommodious; he had two designs, either to
reduce Pompey to shut himself up in Durazzo, or to cut off his passage thither,
forasmuch as all his Provisions and Equipage of War was there, which last
design in part succeeded. Pompey believed at the first by the motion of
Caesar's Troops, that they were forced to draw off for want to Provisions; but
when he understood his design by his Spies, and those whom he sent to make
incursions into the Country; The next day he began to march, hoping that he
might prevent the Enemy by a shorter way than that which they had been forced
to make use of. But Caesar having foreseen what might happen, and encouraging
his Soldiers by his words and his own Example, left them only a small part of
the night to rest themselves in, and arrived the next morning under the Walls
of Durazzo, when they began to discover the Van of Pompey's Army, who
immediately calling a Council of War, went and possessed himself of a Hill
called Petra, which commanded the Sea, and under which there was a small
shelter for Ships, where very few winds could come to annoy them. They both
immediately entrenched themselves in the Posts they had taken. Pompey caused a
party of his Ships to come under his Camp, and immediately sent into Asia, and
the other Countries which held for him, to fetch Provisions and Ammunition;
Caesar perceiving then that the War might in all likelihood last long, that he
had very little Corn, and that his places of Retreat on the Coasts of Italy and
Spain were very uncertain, sent Canuleius one of his Lieutenants into Epirus:
He caused Magazines to be lodged from place to place, in regard that Province
was a great way off, and ordered all the Neighboring Towns to come out and
work at the Carriages; Moreover he caused what Corn could be found in the
Island, in the Borough Towns of the Parthians, and all the other Castles, to
be brought in to him* But as that Soil could furnish him with very little (
Pompey having already ruined all those places, and taken away the Corn,) the
succors proved to be but very inconsiderable. This put Caesar upon a design
which he conceived might be feasible from the nature and disposition of the
ground. All round Pompey's Camp there were certain little Hills that were high
and hard to climb, these Caesar possessed himself of, and built Towers upon
them in the nature of Redoubts, then causing lines of Communication to be drawn
from Mountain to Mountain, or other works according to the disposition of the
place, endeavored by that circumvallation to block up Pompey. Pompey on his
part endeavored to extend himself, and take in as much of the Country as was
possible with the length of his Works, which he carried on very far, fortifying
from Hill to Hill, so that with four and twenty Redoubts he possessed a space
of 15000 paces, where his Cavalry found Forage, and where also there were
abundance of Fields sown with Corn; We shall not undertake to judge of the
Conduct of these great Men to rashly as other Authors have done, who have
declared that all those Works were of no use nor advantage; for they had both
of them their particular reasons for what they did, and Caesar has reported
some of his, saying, That his design was to cut off from Pompey 's Cavalry the
liberty of going out in Parties, for that they were more in number than his,
and might very much incommode his Convoy's, take from him the convenience of
Forage, and by that means render them unfit for service. Besides, his business
was to beat down that high esteem which kept up Pompey 's Party amongst the
Nations that were Strangers, when all the world should know that he was
invested by Caesar, and that he durst not venture the hazard of a Battle. For
it was that which Pompey could by no means be brought to, nor to go far from
the Sea, from whence he had all his Provisions, nor from Durazzo, where were
all his Engines, his Darts and other Ammunitions of War; and in fine, it
appears with great likelihood that these Leaders both of them accomplished in
the Art of War, and instructed by long experience of the many advantages which
a sudden occasion well managed might offer, especially between two Armies so
near to one another, were both of them watchful for the first opportunity. In
effect, as Caesar's Men daily carried on their Works to prevent their being
attacked in their Rere, those of Pompey did the same to enlarge themselves, and
hinder the Enemy from assaulting them upon the Flancks. They had the advantage
in number; besides, theirs being the innermost circumvallation, was not
extended so far as Caesar's. And though Pompey avoided a general Battle,
nevertheless he daily sent out his Archers and Slingers against the Enemy,
which obliged Caesar's Soldiers to make certain Blinds with Clothes and Skins
for their defense against the Arrows.

CHAP. XXXVIII. A fght between Caesar and Pompey's Troops.
CAesar applied himself principally to shut up the Enemy with his lines, who on
their part endeavored the gaining more ground, which was the reason that no
day passed without some encounter or other. Caesar's ninth Legion had taken
possession of an advanced ground, where they began to fortify themselves, when
from a Neighboring eminence almost level with it, Pompey sent his Lancers
against that Legion, and then caused his light armed Soldiers to advance with
Engines, wherewith he played upon those that wrought. Therefore as it was a
very hard task for Caesar's Soldiers to fight and work both at the same time,
and considering how they were battered on every side, he resolved to draw them
off, but as he was to make his retreat by the steep part of the Mountain it
proved a business very nice and dangerous. The Enemy, who believed that their
fear was the occasion of their retreat, became more fierce, and pressed them so
much the closer; and it has been observed, that Pompey was so far transported,
as to say, That he would be contended to be thought no Soldier, if Caesar 's
Legions got off from that place where they had so rashly engaged themselves
without loss. Nevertheless, this was Caesar's design, he caused a great many
Hurdles to be brought and planted toward the front of the Enemy, upon the
bending of the hill; behind these, he ordered the throwing up of a little
Ditch, and all the Avenues to be entangled and filled up with cumbersome
matter, after this, he drew up his Slingers to favor the retreat, and marched
his Legions through their intervals. This proceeding augmented the fury of
Pompey's Soldiers, who had already thrown down the Hurdles to pass the Ditch,
when Caesar gave the word of Command to face about, and after that Antonius,
who Commanded that Legion, had exhorted them to behave themselves well, he
Commanded to sound a charge, and attack those that were come over; the
Soldiers at their close order discharged their Javelins, and running up with
their Swords in their hands, drove back those of Pompey, and put them to
flight. The Ditch, the Hurdles, and the other encumbrances incommoded them very
much, and was the occasion that a great many of them perished; but Caesar's Men
being contented to have secured their Retreat, returned back, after having
killed a great number of the Enemy, and only lost five Men of their own. This
manner of making War from Mountain to Mountain, was doubtless very
extraordinary, and the design of that sort of siege was no otherways, for
Caesar undertook to besiege an Enemy, who was much stronger than himself, and
who had Provisions and Ammunitions in abundance, when his own Men at the same
time were reduced to the greatest extremity imaginable, at least for want of
Corn, though Epirus had furnished them with flesh, nevertheless they bore all
with most admirable constancy, contenting themselves with Beans and Barley,
moreover, they found the way of making Bread with a Root called Chara, which
they mingled with Milk, and some of this they often threw amongst Pompey's
Soldiers, saying, That they would rather eat the Barks of Trees, than let
Pompey escape, whom they had now in their power. He was extremely surprised at
it, and said, That he did not think he had had wild Beasts to deal withal.
Neither was he without his inconveniences; his Cavalry began to suffer for want
of Forage, both the Beasts and the Men dying in his Camp, had corrupted the
air, and engendered Diseases; besides, they wanted water, for Caesar had either
stopped or turned the course of the Rivers which used to supply them, his own Men
having it in all abundance, and enjoying a very good air, so that the
advantages and disadvantages being equally distributed between the two Armies,
they passed no day without enterprising something or other. Pompey had observed
by the lights which were every night set up in Caesar's Fortifications, where
his Soldiers kept their Guard, then causing some Archers to advance in the
dark, shot flights of Arrows into the Fortifications, that wounded a great many
Men, but for this inconveniency they soon found a remedy, they made their Fires
in one place, and posted their Corpse du Guard in another. But as these little
Skirmishes signified nothing to the main matter, Pompey resolved not to defer
it to the last extremity; and knowing that Casar was one night gone from his
Camp for the management of some Intelligence which he had in Durazzo, went that
very night, with the best part of his Troops, to attack a Castle which was near
Caesar's Camp, and defended by one Cohort, while he caused six other attacks to
be made at the same time in different places.

CHAP. XXXIX. Pompey attacks Caesar's Fortifications; the Valor of Sceva.
Pompey quits his Camp; the Treason of Roscillus and Aegus.
CAesar's Men, notwithstanding their being surprised, defended themselves
beyond imagination; and though they were overwhelmed with Darts and Arrows,
though four Centurions had lost each of them an eye, and that all the
Soldiers, without exception, were wounded, nevertheless, unequal as it was,
they maintained the Fight for above fifteen hours. Sceva, one of the
Centurions, who defended the Castle-gate, being wounded in the eye, in the
shoulder and the thigh, stretched out his hand to the Enemy, as if he made sign
of surrendering himself, and as two of their Officers advanced toward him, he
attacked them both with his Sword, one after another; All the Soldiers behaved
themselves with the same Courage; so that Sylla, who commanded the Camp in
Caesar's absence, had time enough, with two Legions, to come up to their
succor. Pompey's Troops were not able to bear the first charge; And it is
believed, that had Sylla followed his advantage, he might have totally routed
them in their Retreat: but as the duty of a Lieutenant is very different from
that of a Captain General, in consideration that one never acts but by Limited
Orders, when the other is at liberty to proceed according to the best of his
Judgment. Caesar himself excused him for being contented to have repulsed the
Enemy and cleared the Fortifications: There was found within the place Thirty
thousand Arrows, which they presented to Caesar when he came back, with the
Buckler of Sceva, which had been pierced with Two hundred and thirty shots.
Caesar, according to his usual manner, Caressed extremely all the Soldiers of
that Cohort; he caused their proportions of Bread and their Pay to be doubled,
and gave almost to all of them Bracelets, Piles and other marks of honor: as
for Sceva, he had given him for reward Two thousand Crowns, and was advanced
from the Eighth Company to the Command of the First. Pompey drew not his Troops
far off from the Castle, only encamping himself where the Darts could not
reach him; in all his different Attacks he had lost Two thousand Men, and Six
Ensigns; so he made, in a short time, good Works round his Camp, as Redoubts
and Ditches, of Fifteen foot broad, fortified with Pallisadoes toward the
Enemy; and at last, after having caused the Entrances into his Camp to be
filled up, he chose a very dark night, and retreated with all his Troops into
his old Trenches. Caesar, encouraged by this good success, went every day and
presented him Battle within view of his Lines; and though Pompey drew out also
in Battalia, nevertheless he always kept his Troops under defense of his
Ramparts, where Caesar did not think fit to attack him. Pompey had sent all his
Cavalry by Shipping to Durazzo, for their subsistence, and to try to incommode
the Enemy, by making Incursions. But Caesar possessed himself of the two
Avenues, by which only he could send out parties; so Pompey was forced to
order their return to the Camp, by the same way that they went; and here indeed
they suffered much, the Horses being forced to eat Reeds and Leaves shaken
together, which made them very lean; and the Horsemen themselves had much ado
to subsist, by reason that every thing being consumed within, they were forced
to fetch their Provisions from very far. So their General resolved to make one
attempt for all to force the Trenches. Roscillus and Aegus, the Sons of
Albuscillus, a Man of the first quality in Savoy, had served under Caesar ever
since the Gallick War, where they had behaved themselves very well, nor were
they ill rewarded for it. For besides the Senatorian Dignity which he had
bestowed upon them, they had received great marks of his acknowledgment, and
were grown very rich; These two Men relying upon the Friendship of their
General, and puffed up with a foolish and barbarous arrogance, treated all
their under Officers with contempt, cheated their Soldiers of their Pay, and
whatsoever Booty their Troops, met with, still kept it to themselves. This
obliged the Men to make their Complaints to Caesar, acquainting him also, that
though they might have received full Pay, their Troops were never Completed.
Caesar believing this no fit time to make examples in, and that something ought
to be allowed in consideration of the merit of these two Brothers, neglected
the taking any notice of the matter, but did not forget privately to tell them
his opinion, and assure them, it would be more for their advantage to serve him
well. These two men, provoked by this Remonstrance, and believing that though
he slipped it now, he might take another opportunity to resent their ill conduct,
resolved to quit his Service, and go over to the Enemies Camp. So after having
unsuccessfully attempted to kill Volusenus the General of the Cavalry, they
borrowed what Money they could, and carrying away a great many Horses, went and
surrendered themselves to Pompey, who received them with as much Joy, as upon so
extraordinary an occasion might be expected; none of Caesar's Soldiers having
yet come over to Pompey, though every day some of his took party with Caesar.

CHAP. XL. Pompey attacks Caesar's Trenches: great disorder amongst Caesar's
Troops; he confirms them by his presence.
THE Savoyards who knew where Caesar's Trenches were weakest, instructed Pompey
in the particulars of it, which confirmed him in that design he had before
resolved upon. He caused Helmets of Ozier-twigs to be made for all his
Soldiers, and commanded they should fall to digging of Turff; when this was
done he put a great number of Archers and Light-armed Foot on board the
Merchant Ships and Shallops; At the same time he carried Sixty Cohorts, which
he drew out of his Camp and his Fortifications, to that part of Caesar's
Trenches which was nearest the Sea, and farthest from the General's Quarters.
At the same time the Vessels who brought the Turff and the Light-armed Foot
came ashore in the same place; Cornelius
Lentulus Marcellinus the Questor Commanded there for Caesar, but he being
indisposed, Posthumus gave Orders under him. That side of the Rampart which
looked toward the Enemy was Ten foot high, and as many broad, with a Ditch of
Fifteen foot; and Caesar having foreseen that Pompey might, by Sea, make some
attempt upon that Post, had caused another to be thrown up, parallel to it,
Five hundred Paces distance, but it was not indeed altogether so deep. His
design was to have made a third, which should have joined them both upon the
Seaside; But it seeming so cruel a thing to him to harass the Soldiers,
wearied with throwing up Works, which already took up Nineteen thousand Paces
of Ground, hindered his putting of it in execution. In the meanwhile this
negligence had like to have cost him his Fortune and all his Reputation. Pompey
had notice of this fault by the Savoyards, so at break of day he came with all
those Forces I mentioned, to attack the Cohorts of the ninth Legion which were
upon the Guard at the Seaside. They were surprised with the Light-armed Foot
and Archers from the Ships, who immediately surrounded and attacked them with
flights of Arrows. The Ditches were filled with the Turff which Pompey had
caused to be brought thither, so his Legionaries planted their Ladders against
the Rampart, and with their Darts and their Engines overthrew those that
defended it: The Helmets of Ozier which they had defended them from the fall of
Stones, which were the only Arms that Caesar's Men could make use of upon this
occasion: so these Soldiers being attacked on every side, and seeing that the
Enemy advanced to hem them in by that part of the Entrenchment which was not
Fortified quitted their Posts and turned their backs Marcellinus hearing what
had happened, ordered some Cohorts to March to their Relief; but the fear and
confusion of those who fled from the Camp, infected them also; and all the
other Troops which were sent to their assistence served only to add to their
disorder. All the Officers of the first Cohort were lost upon this occasion,
except the eldest Centurion. He who carried the Eagle of the Legion, seeing
himself mortally wounded, calling to him some Horsemen; I have, said he, for
many years preserved this Ensign with the hazard of my life, and now I am
dying, with the same affection I restore it unto Caesar, do not let it be lost
by a misfortune, which is not yet come upon us, but save it to return it to
Caesar. So the Standard was preserved, but the slaughter every where was great.
In the meanwhile Pompey drawing near to Marcellinus his Camp, where the fear
had already got possession, Antonius appeared hard by, upon an advanced ground,
with Twelve Cohorts, which Pompey perceiving made a halt, and Caesar's Troops
began to take heart again: Caesar arrived a moment after with the other
Cohorts, and by causing every where thick smoaks to be made, gave the signal
that Relief was coming. And when he saw that Pompey, who was retired, had
forced those Lines, whereby he thought to shut him up, he found it convenient
to change his design, and immediately caused a Post to be fortified near the
Sea, there to encamp himself, to the end that he might have the liberty of
Forage, and reception for his Shipping.

CHAP. XLI. Caesar, in a great Battle, is overthrown: Pompey loses the
opportunity of totally routing him. Caesar's opinion upon that occasion.
AS these Entrenchments were almost completed, his Scouts brought him word that
there was a Legion Marching on the backside of the Wood to take possession of
Pompey's old Camp. To comprehend this we must understand, that after the Ninth
Legion (as we before observed) had made head against Pompey's Troops, and
repulsed them with advantage, Casar had posted himself in the place where that
action was done; The Camp reached as far as a Wood, and was not above Four
hundred paces from the Sea. Some days after Casar had quitted that Post, and
Pompey took possession of it. And because he had more Legions, he only caused
another Cover to be made to the first Camp, without ruining the old
Fortifications; so this little Camp served only for a Platform or Citadel to
the great one. He also caused a Line to be drawn from the left Angle of his
Camp about Four hundred paces, as far as the River, for a passage to the Water
in safety; but a little time after he also changed his design, and quitted that
Post, the lines whereof were still standing. This was the place whither that
Legion was Marching; Casar's Sentinels gave him an account of it; and those who
from the Hills had observed the motion, confirming the News, he believed that
fortune presented him with this occasion to repair the loss he had before
sustained; so leaving only two Cohorts to make a show upon the Ramparts, he
Marched in all secrecy with 33 Cohorts, in which number was the Ninth Legion,
although it had lost a great many Soldiers and Officers. His Army was upon two
Lines, and he upon the Left Wing. All things succeeded immediately as he
expected, he arrived at the Camp before Pompey could have any notice of it; and
the Wing which he headed Charging fiercely upon the Rampart, put those who
defended it to flight. The Battle was very fierce at the entrance, which was
filled with Turnpikes. Puleio, he who betrayed Cajus Antonius's Army, defended
it with extraordinary Valor, but at last Caesar's Men carried it merely by
their Courage, and having broke the Turnpikes in pieces, they entered within the
first Fortification, and afterward attacked the Platform whither the Legion
was retreated; a great many were killed in this place; and the Action had been
very fine, and of great advantage, if Fortune, who loves to show the power
which ^he usurpes over all things, and especially in War, had not proved
unconstant. The Cohorts of Caesar's Right Wing searching for the entrance into
the Camp, followed the outside of that Trench which led them to the River,
believing that it was the Rampart of the Camp, when perceiving their Error*
they put themselves upon the Rampart, and as there was no body there to defend
it, passed easily; all the Cavalry followed these Cohorts, seeking for breaches
to enter. This unhappy proceeding gave Pompey time to come to their succor
with the Fifth Legion, putting all his Cavalry before him; so that both parts
of the Camp which was attacked, at the same time discovered Pompey Marching
Embattelled with his legions. At sight of this every thing began to change; the
Legion that was besieged, by the hope of this Succor, recovered so much
courage as to make a Sally and Charge those of Caesar. His Cavalry finding
themselves disordered in passing the Ramparts, thought of nothing but how to
save themselves; and his right and left wing being separated, were equally
terrified with seeing the Horse upon the flight, and fearing to be cut in
pieces in that strait place, hurried through the breaches of the Ramparts with
so much disorder, that a great many falling headlong into the Ditches, the
others passed over them to save themselves. The Soldiers of the left wing,
seeing the Succors of Pompey, the overthrow of their Friends, and the Enemy
before and behind them, sought to return through the place where they entered.
At last, nothing but disorder, fear and a total rout was every where to be
seen; so that in spite of all Caesar's endeavors himself, to retain the
Ensigns which fled, abundance of them forsook him, their Colors, Horses and
all, and run away on Foot. One amongst the rest, an able and strong Man, but
confounded with the fear he was in, turned upon him the point of his Lance,
and had certainly killed him, if his Master of the Horse, at one blow, had not
cut off his arm. At last, a Party of Pompey's Horse appearing at the entrance
of the Camp, forced them to make head in that place. Pompey pursued his Victory
as far as Caesar's very Camp, but durst not attack it, in which he committed a
fault which cost him dear in the consequence. Caesar avouches, That his Army
might have been entirely overthrown upon that occasion: and farther adds, That
he had been lost without redress, could Pompey have known how to have made use
of the Victory: For this he gives three Reasons, That Pompey was afraid of
falling into an Ambuscade; That his Cavalry amused themselves too long with
desiring to force the entrance into the Trenches; And that that defeat
happening beyond his hopes, he knew not immediately how to take the right
course: To this we may add, That in all likelihood Pompey's Troops suffered
themselves to be deluded, that in spite of him they would follow the Runaways,
and that he would not engage himself to attack Caesar's Camp, knowing well,
that he left behind him a brave and daring Enemy, with a great part of his
Forces.

CHAP. XLII. Caesar's discourse to his Troops to confirm them; he Decamps to
March toward Thessaly. Pompey follows him.
CAesar lost a great many Men upon these two occasions, which happened both in
the same day. Some have given an account of Nine hundred and sixty Soldiers,
Thirty two Ensigns, and a great many excellent Officers; amongst others
Tuticanus and Felginas, who were both Gauls; another Felginas of Plaisance,
Gravius Sacrativir, and Thirty Tribunes or Centurions. Pompey and his whole
Party were much encouraged with the Victory, and sent the News of it over all
the World, reporting, That Caesar was totally routed, and with what miserable
Troops he had left, fled before them. It is true indeed, that reflecting upon
his conduct, he passed the next night not very pleasantly. But as he understood
the valor of his Soldiers, and knowing that the disorder was occasioned by
themselves, and not by the vigor of the Enemy; having besides been used to the
changeableness of Fortune, and the effects of a panick Fear, where an
unseasonable apprehension intangles the greatest Armies, and the disorders,
which the Imprudence of a General Officer, or the negligence of any particular
Commander may produce, he would not suffer himself to lose either his courage
or his hopes, but he imagined that it might be proper wholly to change the
manner of that War, and to speak to his Soldiers. Therefore he caused them to
quit the Fortifications all at the same time; and when he had re-assembled
them. I see nothing (says he) in this occasion, which ought to trouble you; and
after so many Battles, wherein ye have won glory and advantage, gallant Men
ought not to be discouraged with a little disgrace. We ought to thank Fortune
for our Conquest of all Italy, which cost (...) not a wound; for our subduing
Spain, possessed by powerful Armies, under experienced and able Commanders,
and reducing so easily those rich and fertile Provinces which now lie round us.
Remember still the good Fortune ye had in passing the Sea to come hither, even
through the Fleets of your Enemies, when not only the Havens, but the very
Rivers too were taken up by their Troops. If in this last encounter Fortune
seemed to have forsaken us, correct her Capricio^sness by your own Valor and
Industry; For it is easy to perceive, that her fault, and not your own, has
brought upon us the present misfortune; the place of Battle was well chosen, ye
carried the Enemies Camp at the first onset; ye beat and put them to flight
with your Swords in your hands; and if one little disorder, one error of
Inadvertency, or indeed if destiny it self has deprived us of the advantage we
had gotten, ye ought to endeavor to recover it by your proper virtue; so this
Misfortune shall turn to your glory as it did in Gergoria; and those who in
this Battle have shown the least fear, shall be the first to charge the Enemy
in the next. After this Harangue he Cashiered some Ensigns, but he had not need
to make any other examples; For the Soldiers offered, and would voluntarily
have undertaken great Labors to punish themselves. They desired a Battle,
where they might either all die, or be revenged. Some of the Chief Officers
were of opinion, that this eagerness ought to be made use of: But Caesar
thought otherwise; so he commanded his Baggage, with all the Sick and Wounded,
to March in the beginning of the night toward Apolonia. He gave them one
Legion for their Convoy, with order to make no stop till they came to the
place. These orders being executed, retaining two Legions in his Camp, at Three
a Clock in the Morning he caused all the other Legions to March out by the
Avenues and follow the Baggage* and a little while after, making the usual
Cries according to the Custom of Military Discipline at that time, he departed
at the head of his Two Legions, to join the Body of his Army, which he did with
all speed. Pompey, when he knew the design of his Enemy, lost no time, he
quitted his Camp with all his Army, and sent his Cavalry full speed to put a
stop to Caesar's Troops. But as they were gone a great way before, and Marched
without Baggage, Pompey's Cavalry came not up to them till the end of the
Journey, at the passage of the River G^^uso. Caesar opposed them with his
Horse, and Four hundred others of his best Soldiers, mingled in their Ranks,
who made great havoc amongst Pompey's Men, and forced them to retreat: so he
passed the River, and went and Posted himself in his old Camp near Asparagium;
he kept all his Infantry at their Arms in the Trenches, and sent out his Horse
to Forage, with orders to return again with what speed they could. Pompey also
came and took possession of his old Camp near Asparagium. And his Soldiers
having no Fortifications to make in a place so well Entrenched as that was,
went out, some to fetch in Wood and Provisions, others, who in the haste of
their departure, had forgotten something in the other Camp, which was not far
off, after having laid down their Arms, returned again thither. Caesar, who
imagined s^mething like this might happen, decamped the next day at Noon, and
pressing his Troops hard, had Marched them Eight miles, before Pompey could be
in a condition to follow him: the next morning Caesar departed again at break
of day, always causing his Baggage to March before, that nothing might
incommode the order of his Army. This method he used the days following, and by
that means got over the Rivers and difficult passages without the loss of any
of his Men; for though Pompey followed him with extreme diligence, the
advantage of being a day before him, and the inconveniency of his Baggage
forced him, upon the fourth day, to give over the unsuccessfull persuit.

CHAP. XLIII. Caesar goes into Apolonia, Domitius joins himself with him, the
taking of Gomphes and Metropolis.
CAesar was forced to go to Apolonia to dispose there of his sick Men to muster
his Army, and leave some Troops in their Quarters, by that means to secure his
Allies, spending no more time in this Voyage than was absolutely necessary for
a man who had other business upon his hands, he feared lest Pompey might
surprise Domitius Calvinus, one of his Lieutenants, who was in Macedonia with
three Legions, accompanied with Cassius Langinus. They had thoughts of Metellus
Scipio, Pompey's Brother-in-Law, who Commanded the Legions of Syria with
Favonius and other Officers, and had often endeavored to engage them upon some
advantage. Now Caesar's design was either to draw Pompey far from the Sea, and
force him to a Battle, or if that General should go into Italy to leave
Domitius, and return by Illyria to follow Pompey, or at last if Scipio should
besiege Orica or Apolonia to fall upon him, whom he knew very well Pompey would
not forsake. Pompey thought also to surprise Domitius, before Caesar came up;
so these two Generals marched with all the speed and diligence imaginable, and
Domitius thought of delivering himself to the Enemy; for the news of the Battle
at Durazzo, having turned the minds of the people in favor of Pompey, they had
stopped all Caesar's Couriers to Domitius, who receiving no intelligence of the
marching of the Armies, was come to post himself at Heraclea. This City was
under the Mountain of Cadavia, where Pompey's Army must pass to get into
Macedonia; Caesar's had been retarded by their Voyage to Apolonia, and every
thing seemed to contribute to the loss of Domitius, which had been inevitable,
if some Savoyards belonging to Rostillus and his Brother had not by chance met
with his Couriers. As they had all served together in Gaul, they did not treat
them like Enemies, only with a kind of Vanity, which Soldiers sometime will
be guilty of, told them that Caesar was beaten, that he was retreated, and that
Pompey was coming up with all his Army. This advice saved Domitius, who made
his Retreat so opportunely, that he was not gone above four hours before
Pompey's arrival. He went to Aegeta upon the Frontiers of Thessaly, where he
joined himself with Caesar. This General seeing all his Forces together,
marched to Gomphes, which is the first Town upon the way from Epirus to
Thessaly, the Inhabitants who at first had promised Caesar their Obedience,
changed their minds as others had done before them, upon the report of his
being beaten, being persuaded to it by Aridrostenes, Praetor of Thessaly, he was
then in the City, and after having sent to Scipio and Pompey for succor,
caused the Gates to be shut against Caesar, Scipio was at Lerissa, and Pompey
was not yet in Thessaly, which caused Caesar to attack Gomphes, he ordered
Ladders, great Baskets filled with earth, and Hurdles to be got ready with all
diligence, and after having represented to his Soldiers the benefit of forcing
a place that was very rich, and well furnished he caused an assault to be made
with so much fury, that the Town was taken by nine a clock the same day, he
abandoned it to be pillaged, and without stopping marched his Army to
Metropolis, before the news should arrive of the taking of Gomphes. In effect
the Inhabitants of Metropolis had a design to stand upon their defense, but the
Prisoners which were taken at Gomphes, and whom Caesar caused to be shown to
them, made them Wise by their Example, so they opened their Gates to Caesar,
who took care, and protected them from violence; this Conduct of his brought
back all the Towns of Thessaly to his Party, except Lerissa, which Scipio had
taken into his possession.

CHAP. XLIV. Scipio joins his Troops with those of Pompey's, They post
themselves in the Plains of Pharsalia. The approach of the two Armies. Pompey's
uneasiness.
POmpey arrived at Thessaly within a few days after the taking of Gomphes, and
advanced near Pharsalia, whither Scipio went to join him with his two Legions.
He was received by his Son-in-Law with a great deal of Magnificence; and Pompey
being willing he should share in Command with him, ordered him a general
Quarter, separate from his own, and according to the Roman Custom, the
Trumpets came and sounded every morning at Scipio's Tent as well as Pompey's.
Caesar was all this while giving Orders for the subsistence of his Army, and
making Remarks upon the Inclinations of his Soldiers; Therefore so soon as he
understood that they had forgotten their misfortune at Durazzo, caused them to
advance as far as the Plains of Pharsalia, where Pompey was encamped. The
approach of these two Armies, in which were all the chosen Roman Legions, whose
Valor was to decide the Fate of that great Empire, the hatred and ambition of
the Generals, animated by the Prize as well as the Glory, which must of
necessity accrue to the Conqueror, and the little appearance there was of an
Accommodation, made it easily to be judged that nothing but a general Battle
could be fit to determine that famous quarrel. Pompey's Party encouraged by the
advantages they had gotten at Durazzo, doubted not of success. Every proceeding
which did not seem to tend toward a Battle, was looked upon by them as an
Obstacle to their returning into Italy, they say Pompey let himself be
flattered too much in his Command. Domitius called him Agamemnon, insinuating,
that he Commanded over Kings, and Favonius after his unthinking manner, told
the other Senators, that they must not expect that year again to eat the Figs
of Tusculum. Besides, Domitius, Scipio and Lentulus were ready to fall out who
should have the charge of Pontifex, which Caesar was then possessed of, all
other Dignities were disposed of, a great many having sent already to Rome to
take Houses near the Place, where the Magistrates were to be chosen, so to be
lodged with more convenience, for pursuing the charges they pretended to, and
Arrius Rufus would have accused Afranius, for having (as he said) sold Spain to
Caesar, which made Afranius say upon all occasions, Why do not we go and find
out that Merchant of Provinces. In short, every one set his thoughts upon
sharing the fruits of the Victory without considering how to gain it. But
Caesar took another course, he endeavored to encourage his Soldiers by little
Combats, every day sending out Parties, and exercised the young Men of his
Legions to mingle themselves amongst their Cavalry, and contend for swiftness,
even with the Horses; so though Pompey surpassed in the number of Cavalry, yet
his being assisted by those light armed Foot, were not afraid of them, and in
one Re-incounter they defeated a great number of them, and slew one of the
Savoyards that had deserted. When Caesar understood that his Troops had
recovered their wonted Courage, and were desirous to go upon the Enemy, he drew
out of his Camp and offered Pompey Battle. That General had no design to come
to blows, and thought to have wasted Caesar's Troops by Fatigue and want of
Provision. He drew indeed out of his Camp, but kept himself always under his
Trenches, at the Foot of the advanced ground where he was posted, Caesar could
not attack him in that place without great disadvantage, so that he resolved
the next day to decamp, to the end that by frequent motions he might weary out
Pompey's Troops, who were not so hardened to toil as his, He caused all the
Baggage to be loaded that night, the Tents were already pulled down, and a
March was founded through the Camp by break of day, when he received advice
that Pompey's Army was in Battalia, far enough from his Trenches. Then Caesar
caused all his Troops to hault, and with extreme joy told them Let us defer our
departure my Fellow Sold(...)nd think of fighting, it is that which we have
long most earnestly wished for, therefore let us not lose the opportunity our
Enemies present us withal, perhaps they will not be always of this Opinion,
and it may be hard for us to find them in so good humor another time. After
this short discourse he drew up his Troops in order, and marched them toward
the place of Battle.

CHAP. XLV. Pompey forced to fight against his Opinion. His Discourse with
Labienus. Some Presages.
POmpey was not able longer to hold out against the insolences and murmurings
of his Officers, and in fine, they had so fully persuaded him to fight, that he
promised them that he would defeat the Troops of Caesar, this was in the
Council of War, where he was assisted by all the Senators of his Party. I am
very sensible, said he, that the execution of my promise may appear something
difficult, but ye will not longer doubt of it, when I shall have told you in
what manner I intend to proceed. All my Horse have promised me that they will
attack the Enemy upon the flanks, before they shall be able to discharge one
Dart, so we shall carry the Victory without hazarding our Legions with the
price of one wound, and as you know the advantage which the number and courage
of our Cavalry has over those of the Enemy; I believe there is no man here
present can doubt of the success, but will boldly prepare himself to the Battle
which is desired with so much earnestness, and I hope that ye will maintain the
reputation of your Valor so famous over all the world. After this, Labienus
said a great many things in contempt of Caesar's Troops, And to the Honor of
Pompey, think not (said he) that these are the same Soldiers who conquered the
Gauls, and vanquished the Germans, for I was present there, and speak nothing
here whereof I am not well informed, there is hardly any of those old Soldiers
remaining, many of them have perished in Battle. The Diseases of the last
Autumn have destroyed a great many more, and the rest are gone to their homes.
Those Troops which ye see at present, are but Recruits of some miserable
Peasants, raised in the Cisalpine Gaul, the bravest whereof were slain at the
last Battle of Durazzo. Afterward Labienus took an Oath that he would never
return into his Camp if he were not Victour, and exhorted the others to do so
too. Every one swore in his turn, this new kind of Oath re-doubled their hopes,
and no less their joy, Because, says Caesar, they were persuaded that so great
a General as Labienus was, would not swear to a thing which he had not been
resolved to execute. In the mean time there happened Presages that were not at
all favorable to Pompey. The night before the Battle, he dreamed that he was
at Rome, in a Theater he had built, and that the people received him with great
Acclamations, and went to adorn with Trophies the Temple of Venus the
Victorious. This dream seemed to respect the glory of Caesar, who attributed
the Original of his Family to Venus, at least Plutarch and some other Authors
have so explained it. There was also seen a light like that of a Flambeau,
which kindling it self over Caesar's Camp, came and fell upon Pompey's. And
there happened at break of day one of those false Alarums which they call
Panick fears, Caesar on the contrary had happy Omens, and the Diviner, who
looked into the Entrails of the Sacrifices, told him two days before the
Battle, that he foresaw a change in the present state of his Fortune, and that
that change depended upon his Courage, and the Valor of his Troops.

CHAP. XLVI. The order of the two Armies. The year of the world 4006, since the
foundation of Rome 76, before the birth of our Savior 47.
The two Generals speak to their Soldiers to encourage them to the fight.
POmpey's Army consisted of five and forty thousand Foot, and seven thousand
Horse, being in all five Legions with the Spanish Cohorts which Afranius had
raised after his defeat. These Cohorts, and those of the Legions were in number
112, seven whereof he left to guard his Camp; and all these Troops were upon
three lines, every Legion making three Battalions, ( viz.) The Hasta^i, the
Principes and Triarii, the first Battalion seconding the second, and the second
the third. The Battalions were each of them of sixteen hundred Men, drawn up in
half Cohorts (that is to say) two hunred Men in rank, and eight Men in file.
The Legions of Syria were in the middle, and Scipio Commanded them. The Spanish
Cohorts and Legion of Silicia, whom Pompey principally relied on, were upon the
Right under the Command of Domitius Enofarbus, Pompey put himself upon the
left, where Lentulus Commanded with the two Legions that Caesar had restored in
the beginning of the War. The other Cohorts were in the same order between the
Legions of Scipio and the two Wings. The Auxiliary Troops, at least those who
fought in order, as the Greeks did, made the body of Reserve. For the others,
Pompey had caused them to draw out without order upon the left, with his
Archers, Slingers, and all his Cavalry, his Right being fortified with a River
that was hard to pass. Caesar had only 24 Cohorts, who made but twenty two
thousand Men, reckoning the two Cohorts which he had left to guard his Camp.
His Army was drawn up also upon three lines in the same order with Pompey's,
the tenth Legion was upon the Right, and the ninth upon the Left, and because
that that Legion was weak, the eighth was so near it, that they both seemed to
make but one Body, with orders to second one another. The rest of the Cohorts
being drawn up between these Legions, were in the Center where Domitius
Calvinus Commanded, Sylla having the right Wing, and Antonius the left, Caesar
put himself at the head of the tenth Legion, whose Valor he had often
experienced, and also to be opposite to Pompey, whose design was to fall upon
the flanks of Caesar's Troops, who soon observed it by his order of Battle, so
he drew six Cohorts out of all his Troops, whereof he composed a body of
Reserve, he exactly instructed them in what they were to do, and above all,
gave them to understand that all the hopes of Victory depended upon their
Valor* Moreover, he ordered his third line not to march, till they should
receive a si^nal from him. In fine, his Cavalry to the number of a thousand
Horse, covered the right of the tenth Legion. The Armies being thus in sight of
one another, the two Generals went from Rank to Rank encouraging their
Soldiers. Pompey represented to his the Justice and Merit of the Cause they
defended. The advantage of their number strengthened by the assistence of so
many illustrious Senators, and the Victory of Durazzo. Caesar was contented
only to demonstrate, That he had endeavored by all ways possible to obtain an
honorable Peace, and if his Enemies had been willing, they might have spared
the Republic the blood of so many brave Men. So seeing the impatience of his
Soldiers to fall on, he gave the signal of Battle.

CHAP. XLVII. The Battle of Pharsalia. The fierceness of Crastinus. The flight
of Pompey, and overthrow of his Troops.
HE had a Voluntier in his Army called Crastinus, who the last year was eldest
Brigadiere of the tenth Legion. This man coming up to Caesar, General, said he,
I intend this day to give you reason to speak well of me, whether I live or
die. And then calling to him the Soldiers he had Commanded, Follow me, he
cried, this is the last occasion we shall ever have to acquit our selves of the
duty we owe our General, and recover our Liberty. After these words he
advanced, and was followed with about twenty six Volunteers, there was only so
much space between the two Armies as was just sufficient for the place of
Battle; but Pompey had ordered his Men to remain firm at their Posts, which
Conduct Caesar blamed him for, and we may depend upon his Opinion for it, and
the reasons which he has given in his Commentaries. His Soldiers seeing that
the Enemy would spare them no ground, behaved themselves like Men who very well
understood their business, and of their own accord made a hault in the midst of
their Carriere, and after having taken breath a little, ran on upon the Enemy,
where they first discharged their Javelins, and then drew their Swords, as
Caesar had given them orders. Pompey's Men received the Charge without the
least disorder, and then made their discharge, and drew their Swords also,
their word of Battle was, Hercules the Invincible, and Caesar's, Venus the
Victorious. The Battle was cruel and bloody, as it could not be otherwise
between so many brave Men, animated by their Glory and particular Interests,
both sides had an Ambition either to Conquer the Enemy, or die upon the spot,
without appearing the least disordered, either with the horrible noise of Arms,
or the cries of the wounded and dying Men that fell on both sides. Crastinus
with his little Troop routed the Rank that opposed him, and had charged into
the middle of the Battalion where he was stopped, and born dead to the ground
by a wound with a Sword, which pierced his head through the mouth, and came out
at the nape of the neck, by this means the Victory became doubtful in that
place, when Pompey Commanded his Cavalry to go on. It consisted of the chiefest
of the Roman Nobility, and the Allies all young handsome Men, and such as had
great care of their Persons. At first they made Caesar's Men give ground, and
had got upon the flank of his Army, when causing the six Cohorts to advance,
which were his body of Reserve, he gave them order to march with their Pikes
ported, and in that manner to charge upon the face of their Enemies* This
contrivance disordered those young Men, and the fear of spoiling their faces,
put them into confusion, so that Caesar's Cavalry rallying, charged upon them
and brake them to pieces in a moment. They had not the courage to rally, but
galloped full speed to the Neighboring Mountains. All the Slingers and Archers
being thus abandoned by the Cavalry, were cut to pieces, and Caesar's Men
following their advantage, came and charged Pompey's Troops upon the naked
flank. They had maintained the fight with a great deal of resolution, and
though that Charge had disordered them, the Allies defended themselves on every
side, when Casar gave the signal for his third Line to advance, so those fresh
Troops pouring in upon those of Pompey, who were wearied and attacked on every
side, easily broke them. The flight began amongst the Strangers, who getting
into their Camp, and securing what they well could carry away, fled full speed,
though Pompey's right Wing still stood and kept their ground, but Caesar's
causing a Cry to be given out, Of kill the Strangers, but save the Romans, was
the reason that the Romans laid down their Arms, and demanded Quarter, which
was given them accordingly. But there was a terrible slaughter amongst the
Strangers. Pompey seeing himself, as he said afterward, betrayed by the
Cowardice of those Troops on whom he most depended, the moment that he saw his
Cavalry routed, left the fight, and returned into his Camp, telling his
Officers, who were upon the Guard, That they should take care to defend the
Lines if any disgrace happened, and that he was going to give the same orders
to all the rest. So he retreated into his Tent, to attend what might happen. In
the mean time Caesar seeing the Victory sure, cried out to his Soldiers, That
they ought to pursue the Victory, and take the Enemies Camp. And though they
were wearied out by the extreme heat and fatigue, for it was now high Noon;
Nevertheless, when they saw their General marching on foot at the head of them,
directly to Pompey's Trenches they followed him. The Cohorts that guarded the
Camp, and the Auxiliary Thracians made a stout resistance. But at last being
pressed on every side, they gave ground, and fled toward the Mountains which
were hard by. Pompey upon this occasion showed nothing that was either worthy
of his Courage or Reputation, nor gave the least Order for his Defense, and
when Caesar's Men were already in his Lines, How, (says he) in my very Camp? So
getting on Horseback, he escaped through the Decumane Gate, and fled to
Larissa, where he made not the least stay, but with the same diligence got to
the Sea side, accompanied with thirty Horsemen, and Embarked himself on Board a
Merchants Vessel. Caesar found almost through the whole Camp, Table Linen
spread, and Cuboards covered with Plate, Lentulus's Tent amongst the rest was
trimmed up with Ivy and other Boughs to keep off the heat, by which may be
guessed, the confidence of those Men, who made such preparations for pleasure
after a Victory, which they believed themselves sure of. Caesar begged of his
Soldiers not to amuse themselves with the Plunder, but to complete the
Victory; and by his Authority, and the respect which they bore him, he
prevailed. So he immediately caused a Trench to be thrown up about the Mountain
where the Enemy was Retreated, who, wanting Water, were forced to quit it, and
March to Larissa. After this, he divided his Troops, sending one part of them
to Guard Pompey's Camp, and the other into his own, Marching in Person with the
Fourth Legion to cut off a passage from the Enemy. He drew up in Battalia Six
thousand Paces from that place, which caused Pompey's Men to make a hault. They
were upon a Hill which had a River at the foot of it; and Caesar,
notwithstanding the weariness of his men, and that it was almost night, obliged
them yet to cut off that Convenience from the Enemy by a Trench. This last
necessity forced them to a Capitulation, and some Senators made their escape
in the dark. Caesar ordered all the Soldiers to come down into the Plain and
lay down their Arms, which they obeyed, and falling upon their knees before
him, begged for Pardon, which he granted them with all kindness imaginable, and
commanded his Soldiers not to offer them any affront, nor Plunder their
Baggage. After this he sent back the Troops that were with him, with orders for
fresh ones to come up to him, with whom he Marched toward Larissa, where he
arrived the same day. Thus it was that he knew how to make use of a Victory and
manage his advantages. And though we have all these particulars from himself,
considering they have not been hitherto contradicted, we ought not to call them
in question; but rather consider, whether we ought most to admire his Conduct,
his Courage, or his dispatch, or indeed the Obedience and the respect which his
Troops showed him. He lost in this Battle only Two hundred Men, amongst whom
indeed were Thirty of his best Officers. This little number could not but be
very surprising, for on Pompey's side there were 15000 Men slain, and Four and
twenty thousand who surrendered themselves to Caesar; who, when he perceived the
Field covered with the Bodies of the dead, says he to Pollio. They would have
it so. Caesar, after all his great actions, must have been condemned, had not
he been supported by the Valor of his Troops: there were Four and twenty
Colors brought to him, and Nine Eagles. In short, a great many Officers of the
Enemy's Army fell in this Battle, and amongst the rest Domitius, who was slain
by some Horsemen as he fled toward the Mountain.

CHAP. XLVIII. Some other Presages reported to Caesar.
BESIDES those Presages which happened before this Battle, and seemed no
promise a great Victory to Caesar, he has made a Report of some others equally
as propitious. In a Temple of Minerva a Statue of Victory, which stood looking
toward the Altar, turned it self toward the Door of the Temple the very day
that Pompey was defeated. And at Antioch in Syria, upon the same day there were
heard such terrible Cries, and so great a noise of Battle, that all the People
ran in Arms up to the Ramparts: the same thing happened at Ptolemais; and at
Pergama was heard a Noise of Trumpets, in the most secret place of the Temple,
where none but the Priests had liberty to enter: and besides all this, at
Tralles, in a Temple of Victory Consecrated to the Honor of Caesar, in few
days there was seen a Palmtree growing up between the Joinings of the Stairs of
the Pavement, which reached up to the Roof. Caesar stands engaged for the truth
of these Miracles, since he himself reports them. What follows is taken out of
Titus Livius, and confirmed by Plutarch. Casus Cornelius, a very Learned Augur,
was at Padua when this Battle happened, who observing there the Flight of
Birds, by the great knowledge which he had acquired in that Art, understood so
exactly the moment when it began; that he took notice of it to those that were
with him, and told them precisely how long it would last: and after sitting
down, and making some new observations, all of a sudden rose up, Crying out,
Caesar, thou art Conqueror. But, this surprising news of his not being
received with that credit he desired, taking the Crown from his head, which the
Augures always wear in the Ministry of their Function, Swore that he would
never put it on again, till the truth of what he had said should be confirmed;
which soon after happened.

CHAP. XLIX. Pompey puts to Sea, and takes in King Dejotarus and goes to
Amphipolis.
IN the meanwhile Pompey having left the Town of Larissa, dismissed all the
Slaves of his Train, and went, by the Seaside, through the pleasant Valley of
Tempe, accompanied only with a small number of his Friends, the two
Lentuluses's were with him, and Favonius, who, either out of Respect, or Pity,
rendered him all the Offices of an affectionate Servant, and did it so
handsomely, that Pompey was forced to permit it, signifying his acknowledgments
in a Greek Verse, the Sense whereof was, That every thing became a generous
Man: In this condition, very far different from what he enjoyed the precedent
day, when he was covered with Glory, a Commander of Kings, and all the
greatness of Rome, he found himself reduced to seek for a retreat in a poor
Fisher-man's Cabin; where, having for some time reposed himself, he went on
board a small Barque, to try if he could reach Amphipolis; as he sailed along
by the Shore, his Friends espied a Merchant Ship commanded by Petilius. This
Petilius was a Roman, of the order of the People, and knowing Pompey by sight
only, had Dreamed, that he saw him in a mean condition, far beneath that
Luster with which he had heretofore appeared at Rome: as he was telling this
Dream to his Friends about him, news was brought him, that they discovered a
Barque Rowing toward the Vessel; that those who were in her seemed in
distress: upon this he came up above-Deck, from whence he discovered and knew
Pompey; so he ordered his Shallop to be hoisted out, and Rowed on Board him,
where calling for the General, he gave him his hand to help him into the Boat,
and all those who were with him* forbearing (for the respect he bore him) to
enquire into the Misfortune which had reduced him to that extremity. They had
now hoisted Sail to stand off from the Coast, when they discovered from the
Seaside King Dejo^arus, with stretched-out hands making a sign to be taken in;
they sent off the Barque, which brought him on Board the Ship, and then Pompey
stood over for Amphipolis. In this place he consulted with his Friends what
course he should take; the great confidence with which he relied on the number
and valor of his Troops, and the over-positive hopes of Victory, had hindered
him from thinking of any provision against the Misfortune he was now fallen
into. For though he had been often sensible of the disgraces of Fortune, yet,
as she had never surprised him so lulled in security as now, he had always
found means to recover himself with advantage. But, upon this occasion, as he
foresaw nothing in his mind but an assured Victory, his defeat was therefore
the more intolerable, for that it left him naked, and disarmed of all relief.
Moreover, this was the reason of all the false steps he made at the latter end
of this War, when he left the Seaside to follow Caesar into Thessaly. And his
Misfortune so far infatuated him, that he could not think of laying hold of
those advantages which he yet had by Sea, where he had a powerful and
Victorious Army. Laelius, who Commanded one part of it, had besieged Vattinius,
Caesar's Lieutenant, in the Port at Brundusium, and Cassius, in two
Reincounters, had burnt above Forty of the Enemies Ships, in the narrow passage
within the Port of Messina. But the astonishment Pompey was in, together with
his evil destiny, hindered him from helping himself by the advantage he might
have made of these Victories, if he had headed his Navy. For he stayed but one
day at Amphipolis, where, to disguise his designs, he caused Orders to be
published for all the Citizens of Rome and Youth of Greece to come to him. But
when he heard that Caesar was upon his March, he stayed for no body, and Sailed
toward Lesbos.

CHAP. L. Pompey goes to meet his Wife at Lesbos: he resolves to retire into
Egypt. Achillas, Photinus and Theodotus advised the King to put him to death.
Pompey slain by a Roman called Septinius.
HIS Wife Cornelia was at Metylena, the Capital City of that Island, with their
youngest Children. Pompey's Letters, after the Battle of Durazzo, had given her
great hopes, and she was daily expecting news of the total defeat of Caesar,
when Pompey arriving in the Haven, sent one of his Friends to her. The sadness
with which this Messenger approached her, and the Tears that fell from him,
soon made Cornelia apprehend the misfortune that had happened. She fell down
dead upon the floor, and remained a long time insensible; but at last coming to
her self, and being told that Pompey stayed for her at the Port alone, in a
poor Vessel which he had borrowed, she ran on foot to the place where Pompey
came to embrace her: and that Meeting had something in it more sad and
touching, than can well be expressed. She accused her self of being the only
cause of her Husband's Misfortunes; complaining of the ill destiny which Allied
her to Crassus first, and afterward to Pompey, only to bring about the Ruin
of two so Illustrious Families. Pompey endeavored all he was able to forget
his own grief, and alleviate that of Cornelia; and at last, more by his
tenderness, than any reasons he was able to urge, with much ado appeased her.
But afterward could not forbear complaining against the Gods, and their
Providence, to Cratippus a famous Philosopher, who was then at Metilena. The
Pride of Man having always the property to use God Insolently, even at the time
when they find themselves forced to be humble toward their fellow Creatures.
In fine, Pompey carried away Cornelia, and went with some Vessels that came to
join him into Cilicia, from whence he returned to the Island of Cyprus; there
he learnt the news, that the Cities of Antioch and Rhodes had declared against
him. This made him resolve, after many deliberations, to retire into Egypt,
where Ptolemy then Reigned, the Son of that other Ptolemy, whom he had caused
to be restored to his Kingdom by Gabinius, which made him prefer this Country
above any other else which could be proposed for his Retreat. This King was
very young, and absolutely governed by Achillas, who Commanded his Army,
Photinus the first Gentleman of his Bedchamber, and Theodotus his Tutour: he
was then at Pelusium; with an Army which he was leading against his Sister
Cleopatra, whom these Ministers had driven from the Court. Pompey sent some of
his Friends to the King to desire Succors, and a Retreat within his Country:
which demand much perplexing him, he referred the matter to his Council; and
which means the fate of Pompey the great came to be in the hands of these three
miserable Fellows: Photinus and Archillas were of different opinions, the one
was for sending of him back, and the other for entertaining of him; when
Theodotus, to show his Eloquence, Remonstrated, That neither of those opinions
was according to the Rules of true Policy: that by following the last, they
should make Pompey their Master, and Caesar their Enemy; and by the first
offend them both. Pompey, for being sent away; and Caesar, for letting of him
escape: therefore That they ought to Invite him to shore, and kill him: being
sure, by that means, to obtain Caesar's Friendship, and never hereafter be
afraid of Pompey. Concluding with that Maxim, which is since grown into a
Proverb, That a dead Lion never bites. According to this Resolution, they sent
Achillas, accompanied by Septimius, who was then Tribune, and had been a
Centurion under Pompey, Salvius another Roman, and three or four Soldiers,
they went into a Barque which carried them to the Ship where Pompey was, with
his Wife and all his Friends; this manner of reception appeared a very ill
Omen, especially to Cornelia, who could not refrain from weeping: but when he
saw that the King's Ships had already weighed Anchor, and were coming to
surround his, and that Septimius saluted him with the Title of General, he
resolved to put the best face he could upon a thing which was no longer in his
power to refuse; So giving his hand to Achillas, who had also saluted him in
Greek, he turned toward his Wife and Children, repeating two Greek Verses;
which signify, That he who enters into the house of a Tyrant becomes a Slave,
though he came thither Free: Two of his Captains entered the Barque before him
with Philip and Seynes, the one his Freed-man, and the other his Slave* as they
were a considerable time in passing from the Vessel to the Shore, and observing
that no body offered any Discourse, Pompey addressing himself to Septimius, who
(according to the Roman Discipline, which did not permit any under Officers to
sit down in the presence of their General) stood up; told him, That he believed
he might heretofore have known him. Septimius only answered him by bowing his
head, which was the reason that he drew out his Tablets to consider the Speech
which he designed to make to Ptolemy. In the meanwhile the Barque coming near
the Shore, a great many Egyptian Soldiers came running toward it, and as
Pompey gave his hand to Philip, to raise himself up, Septimius, from behind
him, run him through the Body with his Sword; he fell with the Wound; and
seeing that Achillas and Salvius came at him with their Swords drawn, he
covered his Face with his Mantle, and without showing any mark of fear, freely
offered himself to the Death they brought him.

At this terrible Spectacle, all those who were on Board Pompey's Ships made a
hideous outcry; but seeing the Egyptian Galleys advancing toward them, the
care of their safety made them give over their pity, and save themselves with
all the sail they could make, under a fair Wind, which opportunely freshned
upon them that minute. Such was the end of Pompey the Great, who, after having
escaped so many dangers, where he might have fallen with honor, came at last
to lose his life miserably by the hands of three or four Villains, who were
soon after punished for their Crime by Caesar. He died at the Age of Nine and
fifty years, and upon the Eve of his Birthday.

CHAP. LI. Philip, Pompey's Freed-man, pays him his last Rites of Funeral. The
Misfortunes of Lentulus.
Afterward cutting off his Head, they left the Body upon the Shore, exposed
for some time to the curiosity of the Egyptian Soldiers; and, at last,
Philip, his Freed-man, carried it aside, where he washed it in the Sea, and
wrapped it in his Mantle; as he was gathering together some pieces of a broken
Boat to make a Pile, he was surprised by an old Roman, who had settled in
Egypt, but had served heretofore under Pompey; Who art thou, said he to
Philip, that art making these preparations for the Funeral of the Great Pompey?
Philip answered him, That he was one of his Freed-men: Ah, replied the old Man,
thou shall not have all this Honor to thy self, but suffer me, I beg thee, to
partake in an action that is so Just and Sacred; to the end that among all the
discomforts of my exile, I may please my self, to think, I have had the honor
to touch the Body, and assist the Funeral of the greatest Soldier Rome ever
had. So they gave him the last Rites; the sadness of which Ceremony was very
particular; Lentulus who was coming from Cyprus, without knowing of Pompey's
Misfortune, passed by that place in a Shallop, who seeing the Fire, began to be
very curious about the matter, and caused his Shallop to put in, that he might
speak with Philip, whom he did not know in that condition: after some sad
reflections, Who is the unhappy Wretch, says he, that is come in that place to
finish his destiny; adding with a Sigh, Alas, is it not Pompey the Great? When
he came ashore, he was given to understand by the Freed-man, that his
apprehensions were but too true. So his grief staying him too long upon the
place, he was taken by some Egyptian Soldiers and carried to the King, who
put him to death in Prison. Caesar afterward caused a magnificent Sepulcher to
be built on this place, with a Temple which he called, The Temple of Wrath; and
it is very likely that it is the same place which Travelers to this day call
Pompey's Pillar.

CHAP. LII. Caesar pursues his Victory. Cassius surrenders himself to him with
all his Fleet. Caesar lands in Egypt. The Insolence of Photinus and Achillas.
IN the mean while Caesar, who knew that all the hopes of his Enemies were
wrapped up in the Person of Pompey, followed him with his usual diligence at
the head of his Cavalry, having given orders to one of his Legions to March
after him; when he understood at Amphipolis that Pompey had abandoned Greece,
he resolved to go into Asia, and wanting Ships, put what Troops he had in
Barques; and now it seemed as if Fortune was resolved to take this occasion, to
show still that she would have a share in his elevation. Cassius retreating
into Asia with a Navy of 60 Ships, fell in amongst Caesar's little Fleet. And
that Man who had since the courage to Murder him in the very midst of Rome,
could not have wished for a fairer occasion than now to kill him with honor:
For Caesar was not in any condition to make resistance. In the meanwhile he
walked upon the Deck of his Ship with the Air of a Conqueror; and that
resolute behavior so overawed Cassius (who was otherwise a very brave Man)
that he went aboard his Shallop, and came to throw himself at Caesar's feet; he
surrendered into his hands all the Ships under his Command, demanding no other
favor than his Life, with all the submission of a Conquered Enemy: Caesar
granted it in his usual obliging manner, and then went into Asia, where, after
having dispatched some orders, and prevented the ruin of the famous Temple of
Diana of the Ephesians, whose Treasures Amphius would have plundered in the
name of Pompey, he understood he was retreated into the Island of Cyprus, not
in the least imagining that he could have a design of going into Egypt.
Therefore that he might give him no time to Fortify himself, he went to
Rhodes, where he Embarked with two Legions, which were reduced to 3200 Men,
and 800 Horse. And though those Forces were not very considerable, yet the
confidence which he had in his Victories, and the high reputation they had
gotten him, could not persuade him, but that wherever he came he must meet with
awe and obedience. So he went directly to Alexandria without staying for the
rest of his Troops, to whom he sent orders immediately to follow him; upon his
Landing, he was entertained with the News of the Death of Pompey, whose Head
was presented him, and the Ring, which, according to the custom of the Age, he
was wont to make use of for a Signet. This Mournful Spectacle, the Friendship
which he heretofore had had with Pompey, and the sad Imagination of those
Misfortunes, which attend the greatest Men, drew Tears from his eyes: So he
turned away his Face with horror, and ordered him who brought him the Present,
to retire, keeping only the Ring, upon the stone whereof was ingraved a Lion
holding a Sword in his Paw. Afterward he made his entry into the City as
Consul. The Soldiers who were there in Garrison were offended, for that he
caused the Axes to be carried before him, and said, That it was done in
Contempt of the Royal Authority, which was the occasion that for some days
together several disorders happened, in which a great many Roman Soldiers were
slain. This forced Caesar to send new Orders to his Troops to come and join him
with all speed, with fair Promises and Presents gaining to his side a great
many of Pompey's Soldiers, who were then wandering about that Kingdom, and
wrote word to his Friends at Rome, That the greatest pleasure which he found
from his Victory, was the saving every day the life of some one of those who
had born Arms against him. In the mean while as an argument of his Confidence,
he made great entertainments, and assisted at the Conferences of Philosophers,
who were in great numbers within that City. But Photinus, who was come to
Alexandria with the King, gave him every day fresh marks of his untoward
intentions, he had written to Achillas, who Commanded the Army to come to
Alexandria, and those Succors made him insolent, for he caused musty Corn to
be distributed to Caesar's Soldiers, and one day when Ptolemy treated him in
his Palace, he caused him to be served in earthen Vessels, saying* That the
Gold and Silver Plate was engaged for the payment of the King's debts. This was
because Ptolemy owed Caesar a Milion seven hundred and fifty thousand Crowns,
the seven hundred and fifty thousand Caesar abated in favor of his Children,
but demanded the remaining Milion for the necessity of his present affairs, and
when Photinus told him, That he would do better to think of other matters that
were of greater consequence. Caesar answered him, He was not come into Egypt
to ask Counsel. In fine, the insolence of that Eunuch which provoked him upon
all occasions, and it may be also the reputation of the admirable beauty of
Cleopatra, caused him to declare, That being the first Magistrate of Rome, he
was resolved to enquire into the difference between the King and his Sister.
For Ptolemy the Father had by his last Will named for his Heirs the eldest of
his two Daughters having conjured the people of Rome by the Gods, and by the
Alliance that was between them to see his will put in execution, a Copy whereof
he had sent to Rome, and it was upon this foundation that Caesar proceeded. But
while this matter was in dispute, Achillas came to Alexandria at the head of
his Army. These Troops were very formidable both their number and for their
valor, they were composed in part of Gabinius his old Soldiers, who were most
of them married in Egypt, and had taken upon them the Customs and Discipline
of the Egyptians. The other part was made up of such men as had been disbanded
in Syria and Cilicia, and the other Neighboring Provinces, and the rest were
banished men, and runaway slaves, who were sure of a safe retreat in
Alexandria, and if they took party in the Troops, a certain protection from the
other Soldiers, who frequently rescued them by force of Arms from their
Masters that pursued them. These Troops by a horrible License, (but what was
ordinary amongst those sort of people,) had usurped a privilege of demanding
the head of any of the King's Ministers when ever they thought fitting, and
plunder the richest of their Goods under pretense of augmenting their pay, and
also to depose and set up their Kings. There were here at this time 2000 old
Cavalry exercised in all the Wars of Alexandria, and these were the men who had
restored Ptolemy to his Throne, who had slain the two Sons of Bibulus, and for
a long time had made War upon the Egyptians.

CHAP. LIII. Caesar fortifies himself in Alexandria. He is attacked by
Achillas. He seizes upon Pharos. Falls in love with Cleopatra. He is besieged
by the Egyptians.
CAesar knowing well the valor and experience of these Troops, and finding
himself not strong enough to make head against them in the Field, took care to
fortify those Quarters of the City where his Legions were, and to secure
himself of the King's Person, in whose name he deputed to the Army Dioscorides
and Serapion, who were the two principal Friends of the old Ptolemy, and who
had been Ambassadors at Rome. But Achillas, instead of giving them Audience,
charged upon them in such manner, that one of them was killed upon the place,
and the other saved his life by feigning to be dead. After this act of
violence, Caesar caused the Quarters of Alexandria to be fortified, where his
Troops were retreated, and was the next day attacked by Achillas, Caesar's
Soldiers sustained the first onset, and repulsed the Enemy, whose chief design
was to get possession of the 50 Ships and 22 Galleys that were in the Haven,
which obliged Caesar after a long and doubtful fight to possess himself of
Pharos, and set fire to those Vessels, whose flames being driven by the wind
upon some Houses near the Port burnt them to the ground by a misfortune, in
which we can never enough lament that famous Library belonging to the Kings of
Egypt, consisting as some Authors report, of 700000 Volumes. The Pharos is a
Tower built in the Island, which makes the Haven of Alexandria, and it was
built with so much Art and Magnificence, that it has ever been looked upon for
one of the seven Wonders of the World. There was moreover in the Island several
Houses and other Edifices, being joined to the Continent by a Bridge at the end
of a Peer that was very narrow, and in length 800 paces, the taking of this
Post made Caesar Master by Sea, but he was very close shut up toward the land
by the Troops of Achillas, the People also of Alexandria were against him, and
without any respect to the Person of their Prince had several times attacked
the Palace where they were lodged together. But Ptolemy encouraged to it by
Caesar, appeased their tumult by his Presence. Caesar that he might not have
any longer an Enemy to fear, but those who were without, got himself at last
rid of Photinus, and had sent for Cleopatra, who he said he would marry to her
Brother, according to the Egyptian Custom, and the intent of their Fathers
Will. The Eunuch was killed going from an entertainment at the King's Lodgings
under pretense that he would have taken away the young Ptolemy, and carried him
into the Egyptian Camp, which was not without some ground, for Ganymede the
other Eunuch had taken away Arsinoe, the youngest of Ptolemy's Sisters, causing
her to be acknowledged for Queen, and it was in her name that Achillas made War
against Caesar. But that enterprise which at first perplexed him, turned in the
consequence to his advantage. Ganymede could not longer bear the reputation
which Achillas had gotten amongst the Troops, so he caused him to be slain, and
made himself be declared General of the Army. In the mean time Cleopatra came
to Caesar with a great deal of danger, out of which her own Wisdom and good
management happily delivered her, she embarked her self in a Shallop only with
Apollodorus one of her Domestics, and arriving that night under the Castle of
Alexandria, that man binding her up in a Packet of those necessaries which he
brought along with him, took her upon his back, and by that means deceiving the
Egyptian Guard, carried her to Caesar. It is said that that mark which she
then gave of her Wit, contributed much to the growth of a passion, which he
afterward entertained for that Princess, or at least it is Plutarch's Opinion.
But to say the truth, the Slave may be reasonably supposed to have had the best
part in that Contrivance. On the other side Caesar was too sensible of the
Charms of Beauty, not to be touched with those of Cleopatra. She was then in
the Prime of her Youth, and one of those sprightly Grecian Beauties, where
every feature has its particular Charm. All which was seconded by an admirable
Wit, and a Voice so soft and bewitching, that that perfection only without the
help of her Eyes (for she had the finest in the World) inslaved the hearts of
every one that heard her, nor could Caesar refuse her his, since he had not
been able to defend it before against a certain Moorish Queen, Aunoe, the wife
of Bagud, one of the Kings of Mauritania.
so he became passionately in love, and declared himself at first sight for the
interests of that Princess. Ptolemy quickly found that Caesar, who was to be
Judge between him and his Sister, was become of her Party, and that that change
was the work of love, the uneasiness which he showed for it to the People, made
them again revolt; but Caesar soon quelled it, and as the Roman Consul and
Tutour to the young Princess, in a General Assembly read the Will of Ptolemy
their Father, and promised to put it in execution. At this time Ganymede to
signalise himself in his new Employment, undertook a great and difficult work,
but from the success of it we ought to determine the War on his side. The City
of Alexandria, to express it properly, was built upon a void of empty space,
for such were the many Caves or Cisterns made on purpose to receive the Waters
of the Nile, which were excellent to drink when they were once settled and
purged from the slime which that River carried in its Chanel, and which
occasioned many Diseases amongst the People when ever they were forced by
necessity to drink it as they drew it out of the River. Ganymede was wholly
Master of the Nile, which ran through that part of the City which the
Egyptians were possessed of, so he caused all the Cannals to be stopped up which
carried the Water to that side where he was Master, and then by Wheels and
other Engines, he caused a great quantity of Sea Water to be taken up, which he
put into the Cannals, from whence Caesar's Quarters used to be supplied with
fresh Waters, immediately the chief Cisterns were corrupted with that salt
Water, which caused a great astonishment amongst Caesar's advanced Guards, when
they compared the taste of the Water which they drank with that in the
Cisterns, which were not so near the Enemy, but at last these also became salt
like the others, and that accident had almost made them desperate. They
murmured amongst themselves, and accused Caesar's obstinacy, for thinking that
he was able to fight at once both with Men and Elements. But he assured them by
his Discourse and his Authority, and caused Wells to be dug all along the
Sea side, whereof he was Master, and where he found sufficient stores of fresh
Water.

CHAP. LIVE. Caesar receives succors. A Sea fight. A disorder amongst Caesar's
Troops, upon the Peer. He saves himself by swimming. He restores the Egyptians
their King, who declares War against him.
IN the mean time the four and twentieth Legion was arrived for his relief, and
came to have landed near Alexandria. Caesar went out with all his Ships to meet
them; and in his return was set upon by the Egyptian Fleet, but seconded by
the Ships of Rhodes, easily put them to the rout, taking one of the Enemies
Vessels, sinking another, and killing a great many of their Men, so that had
not the night come on too fast, he must have been Master of their whole Fleet.
Ganymede did all that he was able to take away the Terror which this ill
success had raised amongst them, and put to Sea again another stronger Fleet,
with which he came to attack Caesar. The fight was very fierce, but the Valor
and Experience of Euphranor, who Commanded the Ships of Rhodes, turned all to
the advantage of the Romans, who took two Egyptian Galleys, and sunk three,
the rest saved themselves under the Peer of Pharos* Caesar being only Master
of the Tower, which was the reason that at one and the same time he made an
Attack upon the Island, and the Peer with ten Cohorts of light armed Foot, and
the Gallick Cavalry, which he had chosen out of all his Troops. The Attack
succeeding, the Island and the Peer were taken, and the Egyptians driven
beyond the Bridge, Caesar immediately caused it to be fortified, and with
stones stopped up the passage under the Bridge, that none of the Enemies Barks
might go through. As they were busy at this work, the Enemy came from the
Cityward with Barks and Shallops to attack the head of the Bridge, and the
sides of the Peer. Caesar was upon the Peer in Person to encourage his
Soldiers, when a great number of the Mariners and Seamen belonging to his
Vessels, came thither without any order, partly out of Curiosity, and partly
out of the desire they had to come to a Battle. At first they behaved
themselves well enough with throwing stones, and with their slings. But the
Egyptians taking notice of the disorder they were in, resolved to come down
and attack them; upon this, these Men ran again on Board their Vessels as
unseasonably as they had left them. Their flight raised the Courage of the
Egyptians, who pursued them with great Cries, and which so terrified the
Romans that defended the Bridge, and who believing they were surrounded by
their Enemies, thought of nothing but of saving themselves in their Vessels.
The confusion was great, and in this Rout the Enemy killed at least four
hundred Legionaries. Caesar after having tried all his endeavors to prevent
the running away of his Men, was at last forced to go on board his Ship, but as
he perceived the number of those that followed him, and the danger that might
thence arise, he put himself to swimming, but with so great presence of mind,
that he lost not one of those Papers which he all the while held out of the
Water with one hand, to preserve them from wetting, nor his Coat Armor, which
he carried in his Teeth. So swimming about two hundred paces to his Ships, he
sent out Shallops and Barks to the relief of his People, some of them were
saved, but his own Vessel as he had foreseen, was sunk by the number of those
who were in her, and who all perished. This Disgrace instead of abating their
Courage, served only to provoke Caesar's Soldiers, which appeared whenever
they came upon Duty for the raising of the Works, and forced the Egyptians to
have recourse to Artifices. They sent Deputies to Caesar to demand of him their
King, saying, That they were weary of being Commanded by a Girl, and the
Tyranny of Ganymede, and that they were willing to make Peace with the Romans
under the Authority of their lawful Prince. Ptol^my on the other side
perfectly instructed in the arts of Dissimulation, no less by his own Genius,
than the Lessons which were given him by his Governors, with tears in his Eyes
begged of him to keep him with him, saying, That the pres^^ce of Caesar did
more Charm him than his Kingdom. Caesar was not ignorant of the perfidiousness
of these People, but he believed he ought in generosity to give them their
Prince, to the end he might either gain upon them by that favor, or at least
fight with more Honor against a King, so he restored him to his Army, where he
was no sooner arrived, but he renewed the War with so much earnestness, that it
seems (says Hirtius) the tears which he shed when he left Caesar, were tears of
joy. In the mean time Caesar's Friends were upon their march through Syria to
his relief, and the Egyptians, who were advised of it before him, sought all
occasions to hinder the Convoys from coming to him by Sea, which was the
occasion of another Sea Battle, where the brave Euphranor perished with his
Vessel, they being too far advanced, nor well followed. But the Egyptians
enjoyed not this advantage long, for Mithridates of Pergama, who was very
considerable for the greatness of his Birth and his Authority, and of great
Reputation in War in Cilicia and Syria, had raised an Army for Caesar's
Service, who came with these Troops to attack Pelusium, which he took by storm.
That City was the Key of Egypt by Land as the Pharos was toward the Sea. From
thence Mithridates advanced toward Alexandria for the relief of Caesar, which
forced Ptolemy to divide his Troops to defend the passage of the Nile. That
River as it comes near the Sea, separates it self into many Branches, whereof
the two most considerable leave a large space of Land between them, forming as
it were an Island which the Egyptians call Delta, for the resemblance of its
Figure to that Greek Letter. D.

CHAP. LV. Mithridates defeats the Egyptians. He joins himself with Caesar,
who attacks Ptolemy's Camp. The Egyptians routed. Their King is drowned.
Caesar establishes Cleopatra Queen of Egypt with her Brother.
MIthridates who very well understood the Roman Discipline, received the first
onset of the Egyptians in his Trenches, and when he saw them in disorder,
sallied, and killed a great number of them before they could get to their
Vessels which were upon the Nile. Caesar and Ptolemy were both advised of what
had happened much about the same time, and immediately began their march, one
to join himself with Mithridates, and the other to hinder him. The King went in
his Ships along the Nile, and Caesar to avoid a Sea fight in the Chanel of the
River, went and made his descent above the mouth of the River, toward the
Coast of Asia, and with his usual diligence came to join Mithridates, without
being the least incommoded by the King. By this means matters were reduced to
the hazard of a Battle. Ptolemy was advantageously encamped in a Post which had
the River Nile on one side, behind him a Precipice, and on the other side a
Moor or Marshy ground. There was a River or Canal between the Egyptian Camp
and Caesar's Army. The King commanded all his Cavalry, and a detachment of
chosen foot to defend that passage, the Banks whereof were very high. The
Romans were several times repulsed, at last the shame to see the Egyptians so
long maintain the fight against them, obliged Caesar's Gallick Horse to enter
the Channel in several places, they opening themselves a passage, while the
Legionaries got over upon great Trees, which they had cut for that purpose,
which bold undertaking confounded the Egyptians, who with some loss made their
retreat to the Kings Camp. The next day Caesar causing all his Troops to pass
over, made an attack upon their Camp along the Banks of Nilus, which being the
easiest place for that purpose, was the reason that the Egyptians had drawn
thither their best Troops, and neglected the other part which they thought
inaccessible. This Caesar quickly understood by the stout resistance which he
here met withal, he therefore drew out some Cohorts under the Command of
Carsulenus, one of his ancientest and best Officers to attack their Camp, where
the Fortification was steepest. They there found little resistance, by reason
that onset was so contrary to expectation. By this means they entered, and put
the whole Egyptian Camp into disorder. Immediately every one thought of
nothing but his own safety, and in this confusion the King himself getting on
Board a Vessel, was drowned with all those that followed him, and who by their
numbers sunk the Ship. After this Victory there was nothing found in Egypt
able to resist Caesar. The City of Alexandria was the first that submitted, so
he made his entry as Conqueror, and pardoned the Citizens in favor of
Cleopatra, whom he established Queen with her younger Brother Ptolemy,
according to the intent of their Father's Will, driving out Arsino^ and
Ganymede. The following days he dedicated to the love which he had for that
Princess, and the rejoycings for his Victory. Some Authors report that he went
up the Nile with her a Magnificent Galley, and that he had gone as far as
Aethiopia, if his Army had not refused to follow him. At last he left her with
Child of a Son who was afterward called Caesario, and departed from Egypt to
go into Syria with his sixth Legion against Pharnaces the Son of Mithridates,
the others being left in Egypt by his order to hinder the revolt of that new
Conquest.

CHAP. LVI. Cato retires into Africa, and Cicero into Italy, where Caesar
Pardons him. Pompey's Sons go into Spain; Cato joins himself with Scipio and
Juba. Some broils at Rome.
THE Death of Pompey was so far from bringing this War to an end, that it
served only to diffuse it almost over all the parts of the World. Cato was at
Durazzo during the Battle at Pharsalia, where he Commanded a Powerful Fleet:
From thence he went into the Island of Corsira, meeting there with Cicero who
had not been at the Battle, and many other Senators, who had escaped thither
from it, amongst whom was the Eldest Son of Pompey. Cato, who always was for
governing himself according to the prescription of the Law, offered the Command
of the Army to Cicero, who had been Consul; who, not thinking himself fit for
such a Charge, refused it; which provoked this Pompey's Son, and all the young
Men of his Party against him. They called him Traitor, and drew their Swords
upon him; So that had not Cato's Authority interposed and appeased him, they
had certainly slain him: he escaped in a terrible fright to Brundusium, from
whence he Wrote to Oppius and Balbus, who were with Caesar, to excuse the
choice he had made of an unfortunate Party: and though his Brother Quintus, by
some provocation, whereof he complains in many of his Letters, without
mentioning the Cause, had accused him to Caesar; and though Quintus his Son had
done him very ill offices, nevertheless Caesar pardoned him, and treated him
very kindly in his return to Italy. The others took different Parties, and Cato
retreated into Africa, where he expected to meet with Pompey, whose eldest Son
he sent into Spain. Cassius Longinus, whom Caesar had left there, was very much
embroiled with those People, and with his Soldiers themselves, whom he had
used so ill, that he was wounded as he sat in his Tribunal. This affair had
very great consequences, and Marcellus, though Caesar's Friend, had declared
himself against Longinus, and made War upon him, when Lepidus arrived on
Caesar's part, to inquire into the cause of their Division. Longinus refused to
obey: But as he retreated by Sea, with what Booty he had got together in his
Government, he perished in the Mouth of the Ebre. These Divisions gave time to
young Pompey to practice upon those People, and many of the Roman Soldiers,
who still retained a great veneration for the Name of his Father, and to gather
together some time afterward a considerable Army. When Scipio had joined
himself in Africa with King Iuba and Attius Varus, and by that means enabled
himself to renew a dangerous War in that Province, being assisted by Ten
thousand Men which Cato brought him. The youngest of Pompey's Children had met
him upon the Coasts of Africa, where he understood from Cato the death of his
Father; which obliged him to go and cast Anchor at Cyrena, where he passed the
Winter; from thence he went forward to the Deserts of Lybia, after having
furnished himself with Provisions and Water, and especially of those sort of
Men, who, by sucking, cure the Wounds made by the bites of Serpents, who very
much abound in these Deserts, and who have also the art of Charming them. It
was in this seven days journey that the Constancy of Cato ought much to be
admired, for he Marched always on foot the foremost at the head of his Troops;
always drinking the last, nor that neither, till all the rest of his Army had
undergon the extremest Thirst, and were running to quench it at the Wells which
they found in those Deserts. At last he arrived at Scipio and Iuba's Camp. But
the Insolence of that King of the Barbarians grew soon disgustfull to him, and
caused him to retire into the City of Vtica, after having left his Troops with
Scipio, who, with those of Iuba, formed them into a Body very formidable to
Caesar; who besides had received advice, that his Affairs were extremely
entangled at Rome, whither he had sent Anthony in quality of the General of the
Cavalry. This was the second Dignity next to that of Dictatour, and in Caesar's
absence gave Antonius absolute Command of the Republic. Dolabella was then
Tribune of the People, and Antonius's Friend, and in Caesar's Interest; he had
conceived a Project in his head to cause all the ancient Contracts to be
broken, that so he might be called upon at Rome to make new Tables; and
Antonius at the first assisted his design, but entertaining some suspicion that
Dolabella had gotten too familiar an acquaintance with his Wife, he turned her
away, and joined himself with some of the Senators, who were for opposing the
Tribune. As they were both fierce young Men, and of great Quality, this
Division of theirs had very ill consequences, they came in Arms to the Public
Place, where, after a great Combat, Dolabella was put to flight.

CHAP. LVII. Caesar goes into Asia.
THIS news extremely troubled Caesar, who was afraid lest these Divisions might
at last ruin his Party, and that the Insolence of his Officers might render
him yet more Odious to the Romans. He knew, besides, that the Soldiers which
he had sent into Italy, had thrown off all manner of Military Discipline, and
that his presence only could be of force to bring them back to their duty. So
he resolved to take a Journey into Asia for the establishing of Peace in those
Provinces, and then go to Rome. Syria being in Peace, he left there Sextus
Caesar his Kinsman with one Legion, and afterward embarked himself to go into
Cilicia, where landing, he advanced by great Marches as far as A Province of
the lesser Asia.
Galatia. There Dejotarus the This was a Title which was given to those Princes
who were not really Kings, though they exercised Sovereign Authority.
Tetrarch of that Province, called King of Armenia by the Senate, came to find
him out, and excuse himself for having followed Pompey's Party; Caesar received
him with a great deal of Humanity, and after having something reproached him
with the good Offices which he had heretofore done him at Rome, he caused
Dejotarus to take again those marks of Royalty which he had quitted, and join
the Troops of that King with his own. From thence he marched against Pharnaces,
who had possessed himself of Cappadocia, and the lesser Armenia, under
Dejotarus, and who had defeated Domitius Calvinus one of his Lieutenants. This
Prince, who knew what necessity of Affairs called Caesar to Rome, sought only
to gain time, and to that purpose sent Ambassadors to Caesar, They besought
him not to treat their King as an Enemy for the sake of Dejotarus, who had sent
Troops to Pompey, since Pharnaces had never assisted him neither with Men nor
Money, that at least he would be as favorable to him as he had been to that
Prince, whom he had pardoned, but that nevertheless in what manner soever it
should be his fortune to be treated, he should always observe his Orders.
Caesar answered, That that would be the best way of showing himself a Friend,
That what he said of Dejotarus, had no relation to the affairs in hand, since
all the world knew that he received not less joy in pardoning those many
particular injuries which were done to himself, than in revenging such as had
been offered to the Republic. This was because Pharnaces, pufft up with his
Victory, had treated the Roman Citizens which were in his Provinces with great
Cruelty, putting the men to death, and castrating the Boys. Caesar added
moreover, That he ought to quit Pontus, and restore their Goods again to the
Romans; after which he might accept perhaps of his Present, being a Crown of
Gold, which he had refused* Pharnaces having received this answer, desired time
for the satisfying of these demands. But Caesar seeing through his Artifices,
resolved to get nearer to him, by that means either to bring him to Obedience,
or give him Battle: He had with him only four Legions, one of old Troops, by
their fatigues and marches reduced to a little more than a thousand men, one
belonging to Dejotarus, and two of those which had been beaten under Domitius.
With these Forces he advanced as far as Ziela, a City of Pontus, near to which
Mithridates had heretofore got the better of the Romans. This seemed a
favorable Omen to Pharnaces, who was the Son of that King. Therefore as Caesar
was causing a Hill to be fortified about 1000 paces from the Enemies Camp, this
Prince despising the small number of the Romans, and the Troops which he had
once beaten, quitted his Trenches, and came to attack them; when Caesar seeing
him in the Valley, which separated the two Camps, where his Battalions were one
above another, because the place was narrow, and where, says he, no man of
common sense would ever have engaged himself, he despised his want of
Experience, but when at the same time he saw him coming up the Hill, where he
was posted, admiring his Courage, or indeed rather his Rashness, he gave the
signal of Battle. This surprizal caused at first some disorder amongst the
Romans, which was augmented by those Chariots armed with Scithes, which marched
at the head of the Enemy, and rendered the Battle very bloody; but when Caesar's
People, and especially the Veteran Legion, had recovered their order, they
forced the Enemy to give ground, and defeated them with so great a slaughter,
that Caesar several times could not forbear saying, That Pompey was very happy
to have gotten so much glory at so easy a rate against such an Enemy. It was
also for this Victory that when he Triumphed at Rome, he bore this famous
Inscription, Veni, Vidi, Vici, I came, I saw, I overcame. In effect, this
absolutely put an end to the War, for he took Pharnaces's Camp, who fled into
the remotest places of Asia, he abandoned all the plunder to his Soldiers, and
after having restored Dejotarus his Troops again, giving some necessary orders
to the Neighboring Provinces, where he left two Legions under Cassius
Vinicianus, and establishing Mithridates of Pergama, who had served him so well
in Egypt, King of This is that Country which lies on the other side of the
Channel over against Constantinople.
Bosphorus, he embarked and went into Italy, with a diligence which put all the
world in Admiration.

CHAP. LVIII. Caesar returns into Italy. His Troops Mutiny, he appeases them,
and returns into Africa. More Battles.
UPON his arrival in Italy, Cicero and a great many others of Pompey's Party
came to meet him, and were received by him, as if they had always been of his
Interest. This his moderation and behavior purchased him the favor of the
people of Rome, so that he very easily qualified all Divisions there, and got
himself chosen Consul, but he found not matters in so good a condition amongst
his Troops, who were grown to that height of insolence, that the tenth Legion,
whom for its Valor he had always particularly favored, openly revolted, and
killed Isconius and Galba, two of the Senators, so he sent for other Troops
into Rome to guard the City, and notwithstanding the Counsel of his Friends to
the contrary, went to find out this Mutinous Legion, which was drawn up in the
field of Mars, the pretense of their Revolt was the rewards which he had
promised them before the Battle of Pharsalia. Nevertheless, when he appeared
before them, the presence of a General famous for so many Victories, so brave
as he was, and of so noble a presence, struck them with such respect, that the
most Insolent of them had not a word which he durst utter. So he mounted upon a
Tribunal, and demanding of them, What they had to say to him in relation to
their rewards? They only begged of him to give them leave to quit their Arms,
alleging their age, their wounds, and their long service; It is but just, says
he, I do give you leave, and ye may be gone. This answer indeed surprised them,
for they believing that he had still need of their service, expected that he
would have given them Presents to have kept them together, so that they
continuing yet for some time without saying any thing; As to your rewards (says
he) those I will give you when I have triumphed over the rest of my Enemies.
This word rewards made them recollect themselves a little, they began to
believe that he would have forgotten their Revolt, for they were ashamed to
forsake him, promising themselves yet great advantages under his Conduct,
besides, they saw they should be but a laughing stock to both Parties, there
being no man in Italy who durst put himself at the head of them, for this
reason they expected with great apprehension how he would farther explain
himself, and his Friends about him very much importuned him. When he began to
speak to them, he called them Citizens. This word, which seemed to degrade
them, was like a clap of Thunder in their Ears, so they cried out with
confusion, That they were Soldiers, and as he made an offer to come down
angrily from his Tribunal, they threw themselves at his feet, Conjuring him to
inflict all those punishments upon them which their insolence deserved, rather
than disband them so shamefully. This was the Point which he desired to bring
them to, so he remained a long time inflexible either to their prayers or their
tears, till at last pretending himself overcome by the importunity of his
Friends, he once more ascended the Tribunal, and said, That that Revolt so much
the more surprised him, for that it came from the Legion which he had
distinguished by his particular favors, that for all this he would not punish
them after he had once so much loved them, that he would allow all that he had
promised them, and more than that Lands too for their subsistence, when he
should have completed the War in Africa; but that they should not follow him in
that War, but remain in Italy. This last exception yet more and more afflicted
them, they offered themselves to be decimated for punishment of their fault.
And this submission so entirely appeased him, that he consented they should
have leave to follow him. In this manner by his Resolution and his Address did
he gloriously acquit himself in an undertaking of so much danger. Caesar made
but a short stay at Rome after this action, and when he had re-established
order and quiet in the City, leaving Antonius to Command there, he marched by
great Journeys into Sicily. He would not make his entry into any City, but to
signify the impatience he had to go into Africa, encamped himself so near the
Seaside, that the waves flowed up to the very foot of his Tent, and though the
Winds were contrary, he nevertheless Embarked what Soldiers he had with him,
who consisted of one Legion of new Levies and 600 Horse. In the mean while four
other new Legions, and one more, being a Veteran Legion, came up with about
2000 Horse, which obliged him to send away all his Fleet, whom he soon after
joined, leaving orders with Alienus the Praetor of Sicily, to send him the other
Legions as fast as they should arrive. Now as the Troops of his Enemies
consisted of great numbers, for Iuba had four Legions, abundance of light armed
Foot and Cavalry almost innumerable; Scipio ten Legions, six and twenty
Elephants, and a great many Ships which were in possession of all the Ports of
Africa. Caesar had appointed his Fleet no certain place of Rendezvous, he came
in four days time in sight of the African Coast, and passing with part of his
Navy before the Cities of Clupea and Neapolis, he presented himself before
Adrumetum, Considius Commanded in that place, and Piso guarded the Coast with
2000 Moo^ish Horse. Caesar made show as if he would attack the Port, and
afterward ran ashore a little way off, where he landed only with 3000 Foot,
and 150 Horse. In the first place he Commanded that none of his Soldiers
should straggle from the Body, and advanced his Troops toward the City, where
after having entrenched himself, he sent one of his Prisoners to Considius, who
after having understood that he came from Caesar, caused him to be slain in his
presence, and sent his Letters to Scipio, Caesar, who had no design to attack
that place, marched all along the Coast to Ruspina, being all the way annoyed
by Parties from the Enemy. And it was in one of these occasions that 30 Gallick
Horse beat 2000 Moors, and drove them almost to the Gates of Adrumetum, he
durst not quit the Sea, being uncertain what might become of the rest of his
Fleet, and though he had sent ten Vessels to inquire intelligence, and had
taken the City of Tripoli.
Lepta, from whence having furnished himself with good store of Provisions, he
returned toward Ruspina, and went on Board with six old Cohorts, without
making any discovery of what he designed. When his absence was known in the
Camp, the Soldiers were extremely astonished, and were for a whole night
almost desperate. In the mean while he was Coasting, and by good fortune met
the rest of his Fleet, which came upon the same design, so he returned to his
Camp with great diligence, and drew up his Army in Battalia to receive those
who landed. His presence put an end to their apprehensions, so he decamped the
same hour to advance farther into the Country; he had hardly marched three
miles when his Scouts brought him word that the Enemy appeared: A moment after
he himself discovered a very thick dust which was from Labienus, Scipio's
Lieutenant, who came with a great Army either to hinder his descent, or to fall
upon him as he was in disorder, and in effect whatever Hirtius says in his
Commentaries, almost all other Authors believe that Caesar found himself at
this time in great danger, the number of his Enemies was much greater than that
of his own Troops, and his Soldiers being almost all of them new raised Men,
had not been acquainted with the manner of fighting against the Numidians.
These People, as they do to this day, observe no manner of Order, but being
very well Mounted, used to fight by running out from their main Body throwing a
great many Lances, and retreating at the same time that their Enemy comes forth
against them. Caesar had need now of all his Experience as well as Courage, to
hinder his being totally put to a rout, he fought with his own hands, and
taking by the Collar an Officer who carried the Eagle of that Legion which fled
brought him up into the foremost ranks. At last a Soldier of the tenth Legion,
(whom Labienus affronted, after having known him,) lancing his Horse with a
Javelin. C^^sar, while Labienus was carrying off, endeavored with his
Legionaries to open a passage through the Enemy, who had hemmed him in, and
made his retreat good into his Camp, in despite of the coming up of Petreius,
who it is said spared him upon this occasion, under pretense that he ought not
to take away from Scipio their General the Glory of completing the Victory. A
little time after Scipio came to join his Lieutenant with eight Legions, and
4000 Horse, proclaiming every where that Iuba was following him with yet
greater reinforcement. This report extremely terrified Caesar's new Soldiers,
their fear appeared in their very faces, and in all their motions, and as it
had made them very apprehensive, Caesar to take away that inconveniency, caused
them to be drawn together, where he spoke to them, I am (said he) very glad to
let you understand that in a few days Juba is to arrive with 10 Legions, 30000
Horse, 100000 light armed Foot, and 300 Elephants, so that those who are now so
curious, and dispute so much upon the matter, may be at rest and believe me,
since I ought to know it, else I shall send them on board the worst and oldest
of my Ships, where it shall please the winds and fortune to carry them. This
discourse so full of assurance, inspired them with fresh Courage, and put a
stop to those sort of reports. It is true indeed, that Iuba was coming up, but
Boguo a King of one part of Mauritania, and Sittius a Roman, who was settled in
Africa with a great many of Marius's Soldiers had entered his Kingdom, and made
such Progress there, as obliged him to return, so the War was carried on
between the two Roman Generals, and Caesar, who would forget nothing that might
be for the advantage of his Affairs, knowing that many were of opinion that the
Scipio's seemed as if born to triumph in Africa, chose from amongst his Troops
a man of very small merit, but one who bore that name with the Surname Salutio,
and caused all orders to be issued out in his name, as if he had been General.
In the mean while he wearied the Enemy by different movements, daily
retrenching himself, and besides his Ramparts, which were furnished with all
sorts of Darts, made moreover Ditches filled with stakes, and in this condition
suffered the affronts of Scipio, who came often to offer him Battle; Caesar
contenting himself to let his Cavalry only draw out, and distributing his
Orders with so much security, that he hardly so much as went out of his Tent.
Moreover, as his Soldiers were not yet much inured to War, he took pains
himself for their instruction, showing them how they ought to receive the
on-sets of the Enemy, in what manner they ought to make their Retreat, when
they ought to Charge, and when to recover their Ranks. In short, all necessary
postures with the same care that a Master of Defense instructs his Scholars. He
forgot not also to quicken the succors that were coming up, and which he
expected, by People whom he dispatched express into several places, never being
satisfied with any excuse against the execution of his orders. At last Alienus
sent him from Sicily two old Legions, 800 Gallick Horse, and 1000 Archers or
Slingers, who arrived fortunately at Ruspina; with these Recruits Caesar left
his Retrenchments, and marched toward Vzita, as if he would attack it. Scipio
came to succor that place, and this motion was the occasion of great disputes
without any advantage on one side or the other. Caesar's Cavalry suffered much
for want of Forage, and were forced to feed their Horses with the Moss growing
on the Seaside, which they first washed, to take out the Salt, and then
mingled with quitch Grass, the Legionaries themselves having brought no Tents,
were forced to lodge under very ill Barraques. This inconveniency had like to
have caused a great disorder amongst them by a kind of Prodigy that happened,
which was, that one night toward the time that the Plyades disappear, there
fell in his Camp certain stones like Hail, which wounded a great many, and
overthrew all their Barraques, so that they passed the whole night covered
only with their Bucklers. Nevertheless nothing could diminish the love which
they had for their General. And some old Soldiers being taken on Board a
Vessel at Thapsus, and carried to Scipio, though he made them very advantageous
Offers, refused positively to follow him, and chose rather to see themselves
cut in pieces by Scipio's Orders, than undergo the shame of being called
Deserters. In the mean time Iuba being solicited by Letters from Scipio, having
left Saburra to defend his Kingdom, came up with three Legions, 800 brideled
This distinction is made, because the Numidians carried their Horses to the
Wars without any Bridles, causing them to turn to the right or left with a
certain switch or rod.
Horse, and a great number of Numidians and light armed Foot, with 30
Elephants; his presence added much to the Courage of Scipio's Troops. This King
of Barbarians, causing himself to be respected above the Roman Officers, and
treating them with Contempt. They several times attacked those Parties which
Caesar sent out for discovery, and came often to disturb their Works, insomuch
that one day Iuba, Scipio, and Labienus came at the head of all their Horse, to
affront his Legionaries in sight of his Camp. Caesar's Cavalry, who were upon
the Guard, were forced to give ground, but the Legionaries taking their Arms,
and marching up in order, the Horse returned to the Charge so vigourously, that
had it not been for the darkness caused by the dust, and the coming on of the
night, Iuba, and Labienus had certainly fallen into the hands of Caesar, and
their Cavalry been utterly defeated.

CHAP. LIX. Caesar chastises some Mutineers, and after several movements
defeats Scipio and Juba.
THESE performances very much encouraged Caesar's Soldiers, who were encamped
near Vzita, when the ninth and tenth Legion came up to his Camp, the Insolence
of the Revolters could not be so well forgotten, but that he had still a
resolution to make an example of some of them to the rest of his Troops;
wherefore being informed that Avienus, one of the Tribunes of that Legion, had
taken up a whole Vessel for his own Equipage and Horses, without receiving so
much as one Soldier, he took that occasion, and being well assured of the
affection of the rest of his Soldiers, gave orders that all the Officers that
belonged to the Legions, should be called together. I could well have wished
(said he) that some persons might by this time have reformed their licentious
and insolent behavior, and made some reflections upon my good nature, my
forbearance, and my patience, but since they have not known how to regulate
themselves, I am resolved to make such an example as the Discipline of War
requires. Therefore you Avienus, who have debauched the Soldiers of the Roman
People against the Republic, committed a thousand exactions in the Cities of
Italy, and who are as useless to the Commonwealth as you are to me, seeing that
instead of Soldiers, you thought a whole Ship but sufficient for your
Equipage, and by that means have obstructed the service of the Republic, I
here Casheer you from my Army, Commanding you to leave Africa this very day,
and withdraw your self as far hence as it is possible. You Fontejus, who are a
seditious Tribune, and a base Citizen, I Command you also to depart the Camp.
And you Salienus, Tiro, and Clusinas, who after having by favor, and not by
merit obtained the Posts ye now Command in, have shown as little Valor in War
as Honesty in Peace, and who have always taken more care to make your Soldiers
mutiny against their General, than to behave your selves as Men of Honor ought
to do; I declare you unworthy of any Command in my Army, and here ordain that
this moment ye depart out of Africa. Immediately he put them into the hands of
some Centurions, and leaving them only each a slave to attend him, Commanded
them to be put on Board upon different Ships. On the other side Iuba, who
domineered in the other Party, and who treated even Scipio himself with
Arrogance, having forced him to quit the Coat Armor of Purple, which
distinguished him as General, caused almost daily his Troops to draw out in
Battalia before Caesar's Camp, who thought himself obliged in Honor to quit
his Retrenchments. Scipio had put all his Legions, and those of Iuba upon the
first line, the Numidian Foot upon the second, the Wings whereof appeared to be
doubled, the Elephants being on the right and left upon the Wings, and behind
the Elephants the Numidian Cavalry, all his bridled Horse and light armed Foot
were upon the right, the City of Vzita closing up the left, and this he did
with a design to hem in the Troops of Caesar, who had ordered his men in this
manner, the seventh and ninth Legion were upon the left, the twenty ninth and
thirtieth were upon the right, and four Legions in the Center. The new Legions
composed the second Line, he had also made a third, which took up but half the
left of the second Line, it being covered upon the right with his
Retrenchments. In this place also he had posted all his Cavalry, and as he
thought not fit much to rely upon them, the tenth Legion was Commanded to
second them, his light armed Foot being drawn up in the Intervals of the
Cavalry: In this posture the two Armies remained at about 300 paces distance
facing each other, from morning till four a clock in the Evening, without
fighting, which perhaps had never before happened. But Caesar offering to
retire, all the Numidian Cavalry came thundering upon his left Wing, and his
Horsemen being a little too far advanced, a great many of them were wounded,
and one slain, with 26 of his light armed Foot, the night hindered any farther
proceeding, and Scipio retreated into his Camp with a great deal of Joy. Now
all the thoughts of Caesar were, how he might take away from his People the
fear they had of the Enemy, and especially of their Elephants, wherefore having
some of them in his Camp, he accustomed his Soldiers to approach them boldly,
he caused them to observe the place where those Beasts were most easily to be
wounded, and caused his Cavalry to assault them with blunted Lances, by that
means to inure the Horses to the sight of them. At last, when by these
exercises he found they were grown no longer afraid of them, he decamped,
seeking daily how he might post himself with most advantage. After many
removings, and some skirmishes, wherein Labienus came by the worst, observing
that his Enemies began to fear the Valor of his Legions, he went to attack the
City of Thapsus, where Virgilius Commanded for Scipio with a very strong
Garrison. Scipio, who was afraid, lest in loosing that City, his Reputation
might suffer, came also to post himself about the nine miles from Caesar, where
he and Iuba entrenched themselves in two several Camps. There was near to
Thapsus a Pond of salt water, about 1500 paces distant from the Sea. Scipio's
design was by that interval to put some Troops into the place, but Caesar, who
had foreseen as much, and expected it, had built a Fort there, and left a
Garrison in three places, which obliged Scipio to make some attacks, but
without success, and after having passed a whole night and a day on the banks
of the Pond, set his Troops a work for retrenching themselves toward the Sea,
1500 paces from Caesar's Fort. Caesar about break of day was informed of the
proceeding, so leaving Asprinas to guard his Camp, he marched directly upon the
Enemy by the interval, which was between the Pond and the Sea. He sent also
orders to those who Commanded his Vessels that were before Thapsus, that
leaving only some to defend the mouth of the Port, they should advance with
the rest on the other side of Scipio's Camp, and at the first noise of Battle,
setting their Soldiers on shore, make an attack upon that side with noise and
shouting. Caesar's Army marched upon three lines, the four best Legions on the
front, and the five others making as it were a body of Reserve, five Cohorts
upon the Wings, who were designed to engage the Elephants, with all his Archers
and Slingers, and his light armed Foot mingled with his Cavalry. For himself,
he was on foot, going through the ranks, and animating his Soldiers by his
presence and his Exhortations. He found Scipio drawn up in Battalia before his
Retrenchments, the works whereof he caused daily to be continued, but at the
sight of Caesar's Army his Soldiers began to be much disordered. It was easy
to see how they ran about from one place to another, sometimes into the Camp,
and sometimes out again in all manner of confusion, which extremely animated
Caesar's Men, who nevertheless did what he could to oppose their impatience,
and ran to put a stop to such as he saw most eager, when upon the right Wing, a
Trumpet contrary to his Orders, sounded a Charge, immediately the Cohorts upon
the Wings, in spite of their Commanders, ran on, which Caesar seeing, gave for
the word of Battle, Felicitas, and calling for his Horse, was the first that
charged the Enemy. Scipio's Elephants were immediately put to flight by the
Archers and Slingers upon the right Wing, and overthrowing the Soldiers that
were behind them, ran into the entrance of the Camp. The Moorish Cavalry being
abandoned by the Elephants, were easily dispersed, and Caesar's Legions killing
all that opposed their way, got possession of the Enemies Trenches. The
Garrison of Thapsus had made one sally, but were driven in again by the very
Servants that belonged to Caesar's Camp, so that nothing but disorder and fear
appearing every where, Scipio's Men had nothing to consider of, but flying
toward the Camp, which for two days before they had quitted, but seeing
themselves without any Leader, they threw down their Arms, that they might run
more lightly toward the Camp of Iuba, which those of Caesar's Troops, who had
not been engaged, had already forced, so these poor Soldiers of Scipio
retreated up to a hill, where, though they made sign that they would surrender
themselves, though they saluted Caesar's Men, and had thrown down their Arms,
nevertheless, the Veterans, heated with blood, and transported with fury, after
having wounded and killed some Senators of their own Party, whom they did not
love, and who would have withheld them, they cut them all in pieces, though
Caesar himself were present.

CHAP. LX. The death of Scipio and Juba. Caesar marches toward Utica. The
death of Cato.
PLutarch reports that 50000 Men fell in this Battle, Hirtius reckons only
10000. This Victory, so absolute as it was, cost Caesar but 50 Soldiers. All
the heads of that Party seeing no hopes of farther relief, perished by diverse
accidents, Scipio endeavoring to save himself by Sea, finding his Vessel
taken, ran upon his own Sword. Iuba and Petreius fought one against the other,
where Petreius being slain by the King, he also commanded a death from the
hands of one of his slaves. Afranius and Faustus, the Sons of Silla, were taken
by Sittius, who put them to death. Only Labienus escaped into Spain, and all
Africa submitted to Caesar, except the City of Vtica: Cato Commanded there with
some Troops, and had established a kind of a Senate, composed of 300 Romans
which he had gathered to him, he received the news of the Battle by some of
Scipio's Horsemen, who had rallied together in a considerable number, and as
the Inhabitants of Vtica had always appeared inclined to Caesar, Cato to secure
them, had put them into a Fortification without the City. The Cavaliers would
have taken this occasion to plunder, but Cato went to them, and by his
Intercession and Authority persuaded them not to use any violence. They offered
him to follow him if he would make his retreat with them, but he answered, That
his design was to hold out the siege, though when he returned into the Town, he
found the minds of every body so divided, and so unresolved, that he soon
quitted that design for another more agreeable to his Character, and those
Opinions of Philosophy whereof he had always made profession. In the mean while
he gave out his Orders with most admirable Prudence and Resolution. He sent
away the Cavaliers, fearing lest they should commit some new disorder. He
persuaded several of his Friends to save themselves by Sea, others (as Lucius,
who was a Kinsman of Caesar's) to rely upon his goodness, this last thing he
recommended to his Children, and made a large discourse to the eldest,
exhorting him never to intermeddle with the affairs of the Republic. At night,
according to his usual Custom, he came to Supper, (that is to say) sitting,
for since the death of Pompey, he had never, according to the Roman Custom,
lain down at his Meals. Several of his particular Friends were with him, and
amongst others, some Philosophers. The Discourse ran altogether upon
Philosophy, and Cato defended that Maxim, That the Virtuous only were happy
and free, but wicked men always miserable and in slavery. He grew very warm
upon this Subject, and managed it with so much heat, that his Friends might
easily discover he had something more than ordinary in his mind, nor could they
conceal the grief it gave them, which caused him to change the discourse, and
apply himself to his business, so he gave out several orders, to let them see
that life and he were not yet upon ill terms. A little time after he went to
bed, having first embraced his Sons, and the whole Company, but with so much
tenderness, that it redoubled their suspicions, and caused them to take away
his Sword, which he was always wont to have by him. He took up Plato's Book of
the Soul, and after having read a little while, looking for his Sword, and not
finding it, he called for one of his Slaves, and without the least disorder
only bid him fetch it, but seeing he was not obeyed, he asked for it a second
time, and grew so angry, that he struck the slave with such force, that he hurt
his hand, crying out, He was betrayed, and should be delivered to his Enemies
naked and disarmed. At the noise of this, his Sons and his Friends came into
his Chamber, he spoke to them with some passion, saying, How long is it that ye
have observed me to have lost common sense? And why do ye not try to persuade
me by reason, without obliging me by force to follow other Opinions than those
I have already? Why do not thou (said he to his Son) bind thy Father, and tie
up his hands, that so I may be no longer in a condition to defend my self
against Caesar, for against my self I have no need of the help of a Sword, can
any man miss of a way to death? may he not stifle himself, or beat out his
brains against the Walls? At this Discourse his Sons went out of the Chamber
weeping, and left him with Demetrius, and Apollodorus, who were two
Philosophers, and his Friends, so he renewed the discourse with something more
of moderation, Are not ye also, says he, of the opinion to persuade a man of my
years in spite of himself to save his life? And do not you stay here to sit
like Mutes, and wait upon me for my guard? Or if you bring me any good reasons
to convince me, that having nothing else to rely on, it would not be a thing
unworthy of my self to beg my life as a particular favor from the hands of my
Enemy, why do ye not proceed to prove it to me? That so renouncing all those
Maxims which we have hitherto maintained together, and becoming more wise by
the means of Caesar, we may find our selves so much the more obliged to him; It
is not, added he, that I have yet resolved upon that Subject, I would debate it
with you after having examined those Books and Reasons which Philosophy
supplies us with upon the like occasion. Go, get ye gone, and tell my Sons that
they ought not to think of persuading me by force to a thing which they cannot
convince me of by Reason. After this, Demetrius went out and sent him back his
Sword by a young Slave, he examined the point, if it were good, and would enter
well, and finding it to his mind, he laid it by him, saying, I am Master of my
self, so he took again the Book, which he read twice over, and then fell into
so sound a sleep, that he was heard into his Antichamber: about midnight he
called two of his Freemen, Cleantes his Physician, and Butas, this last he
sentto the Port, to see if those that would embark themselves, were departed,
and made his Physician apply a Plaster to his hand that was hurt. This care of
himself extremely rejoiced all his Family, Butas came back to tell him that
every body was embarked, and that the Sea was very rough. He seemed to show a
great deal of concern for his Friends that were on Board, and sent back Butas
to see if any of them were not driven back, and wanted his assistence. The day
began to appear, when Butas returned to tell him that the Sea was grown calm,
and that no noise was heard upon the Port: so Cato dismissed him, and hardly
was the Freed-man got out of his Chamber, when he took his Sword, and thrust
himself through the Breast, the hurt of his hand so hindered the blow, that he
did not dye immediately, but staggering, fell upon his Bed, and at the same
time threw down a Table, upon which he had drawn some figures of Geometry, at
the noise of this his Slaves came in, and with their Cries brought also his
Sons and his Friends, they found him weltring in his blood, his Bowels out of
his body, and were so confounded with their grief, that they beheld him without
being able to give him any assistance, his Eyes were yet open, which caused his
Physician to ease him upon the Bed, and after having put up his Bowels, which
had not been hurt, he closed up the wound. Upon this, Cato recovered his
Spirits, and being transported with fury, thrust back the Physician, rent open
his wound again, and tearing his Bowels, expired before their Eyes. In this
manner dyed Cato, at the age of 55 years, and though this last action of his
found many admirers, nevertheless Brutus himself, who was his Nephew, condemned
it in a Book which he wrote a purpose, and many reasons there are indeed why it
ought to be considered with horror; Caesar also was of the same Opinion, and
wrote upon the same subject when he heard the news of his death. He said, That
Cato had envied him the glory of saving his life, and it is for that reason,
said he, that I envy his death. He pardoned his Son, who was afterward slain
at the Battle of Philippi, with much more glory than he had lived, having
discovered too strong an inclination for the Wife of a Prince of the blood
Royal of Cappadocia, whose name was Psyche, which in Greek signifies the Soul,
and her Husband's name was Maphradates, which caused a saying amongst the
Romans, That Maphradates and Cato were good Friends, for they had but one Soul,
and moreover Cato is generous and magnanimous, for he has a Royal Soul.

CHAP. LXI. Caesar returns to Rome. The Pomp and Magnificence of his Triumphs.
AFTER the death of Cato, Vtica surrendered to Caesar, he pardoned the
Inhabitants, but as many as fell into his hands of the three hundred that had
usurped the quality of Senators, he put to death. So Africa being entirely
brought into subjection, he returned to Rome to Triumph for all his Victories.
At first, to obtain the favor of the People, he gave them to understand in a
speech he made them, That his last Victory had gained the Republic a Country
so rich, and of such an extent, that it was able to furnish 600000 Bushels of
Corn, and 2000 pounds of Oil yearly. After this he ordered the preparation for
his Triumph upon four successive days, the first designed for the Triumph over
Gaul, showed to the Romans in a great many Tables the names of 300 Nations, and
800 Cities Conquered by the death of a Milion of Foes, whom he had defeated in
several Battles. Amongst the Prisoners, appeared that Vercingentorix, who had
raised up all the Gauls against the Romans, and who had attacked Caesar at the
siege of Alecia, followed by 300000 fighting Men, besides threescore and ten
thousand that were in the place besieged, all the Roman Soldiers followed
their General Crowned with Laurels, and in that Equipage he went to the
Capitol, the steps whereof he mounted upon his knees, forty Elephants being
ranged on each side, carrying great Candlesticks, filled with Flambeaus. This
show lasted till night, by reason that the Axeltree of his Triumphant Chariot
broke, which had like to have thrown down the Conqueror at the time when he
thought himself at the highest Pinnacle of his Glory. The second Triumph was
over Egypt, where appeared the Pictures of Ptolemy, Photinus and Achillas,
which very much rejoiced the People of Rome. The third showed the defeat of
Pharnaces, and the flight of that King, which caused great shouts of Joy
amongst the Romans, and many Ralleries upon the Conquered, and here it was that
he made use of that Inscription Veni, vidi, vici.
whereof we have spoken. But when in the fourth Triumph they saw the
descriptions of Scipio, Petreius, and Cato himself, who was painted tearing his
Bowels, they sighed as much for sorrow. The Son of Iuba, who yet was very
young, was carried amongst the Prisoners, and that Prince coming to be
afterward a very gallant Man, and of great understanding, Augustus gave him
back again part of his Father's Kingdom, and Married him to young Cleopatra,
the Daughter of Marcus Antonius. The Silver, the Vessels, and Statues of
Goldsmiths work which were used in these Triumphs, amounted to threescore and
sixty five thousand Talents, besides a thousand eight hundred and twenty two
Crowns of Gold, which weighed 15033 l. sterling. and were Presents which the
Princes and Cities had made him after Victories according to the Customs of
those times. It was out of this sum that he paid his Soldiers, besides what he
had promised them in the beginning of the Civil Wars. To every one 5000
Drams, as much more to the Centurions, and twice as much to the Tribunes
and Commanders of the Cavalry, and for their retreat after the Wars, he gave
them Inheritances in several places separated from Italy. The People also were
sensible of his Bounty, he distributed to each particular person ten bushels of
Corn, and ten pounds of Oil, and besides the 300 Denarii which he had promised
a 100 more, as for their Arrears; he ordered also in favor of the poorer sort,
that the rent of Houses, which was grown to an excessive rate, should be
reduced in Rome to 2000 Sestertii, and in Italy to 500, and after this he
entertained the whole People at 22000 Tables, and to the end that nothing might
be wanting to the Pomp of these Feasts, caused 2000 Gladiatours to fight before
the People, amongst whom appeared Leptenus and Calpenus, who had been
Senators, and all this under the pretense of Celebrating the Funerals of his
Daughter Iulia. Upon the following days also were seen Comedies in all sort of
Languages represented in several places of the City, where the Children of the
Asian Princes danced Armed. The Cirque was enlarged by his order, and
surrounded with a Ditch filled with Water; and in this place the Children of
the Roman Nobles exercised on Horseback, and upon Chariots, with 2 and 4 in
front; at last being divided into two Troops, they represented that sort of
Game which was called That is, because these Games were instituted by the
Trojans.
Troy, to these divertisements succeeded those of hunting of wild Beasts, which
lasted five days. Afterward, two Armies were shown encamped in the Cirque,
each consisting of 500 Foot Soldiers, 20 Elephants, and 300 Horse, who
represented a Battle. The Wrestlers also took up two days. And after all, upon
a Lake made a purpose in the field of Mars, two Fleets of Galleys furnished
with a 1000 Soldiers, and 4000 Rowers or Mariners diverted the People with the
representations of a Naval fight. These entertainments having drawn so many
People to Rome, that the greatest part of them were forced to incamp in the
public places, a great many being stifled in the press, and amongst the rest,
two that were Senators.

CHAP. LXII. Caesar goes into Spain, where he defeats the two Sons of Pompey,
the oldest whereof is slain.
DUring the time of these rejoycings, the two Sons of Pompey fortified
themselves in Spain, and as that People still passionately affected the memory
of their Father, they soon got together a powerful Army; they had also very
good Officers, and amongst the rest Labienus, which obliged Caesar to go in
person to oppose their proceedings. He was then the third time Dictatour, but
ever he would depart, resolving to take a general review of the Inhabitants of
Rome, as the Censors had formerly done, he found only 150000 heads of Families
remaining of 320000 which had been numbered before the Civil War, which now had
wasted the greater half of them, Caesar nevertheless arrived in Spain sooner
than he was expected. Cneius, the eldest of the two Pompey's, had besieged the
City of Vlloa, and Sextus the younger Brother was in Cordova with a strong
Garrison. Caesar to raise the siege, and give some jealousy to Cneius,
advanced toward Cordova with what Troops he had with him, and those others
that were in the Province under the Commands of Pedius and Fabius his
Lieutenant Generals. This proceeding had its effect accordingly, for Cneius
solicited by Letters from his Brother, raised the siege from before Vlloa, and
came to oppose Caesar, who after having vainly endeavored to draw him to
Battle, went to invest Atecua, that being the place of most importance, which
held out for the Pompey's. Cneius being deceived by those fires which Caesar
had kindled in his Camp, discovered not that he was marched, till it was too
late to follow him, so he retreated to Cordova to refresh his Troops, and came
afterward to take possession of some hills near Caesar's Camp, but the Camp
was so well fortified, that he could attempt nothing upon him. The siege lasted
a long time, and the besieged defended themselves very well, which obliged
Cneius several times to endeavor the putting of Succors into the place, to
which purpose he made diverse skirmishes, and indeed not much to his
disadvantage. At last those of the Garrison seeing themselves pressed,
undertook by a most horrible Treachery to cut the Throats of the Inhabitants,
and then make a general Sally for the forcing the circumvallation of Caesar's
Camp. The Massacre was put in execution, but their Villainy succeeded not, for
they were beaten in their Sally, and driven back into the Town with great
slaughter. At last Minutius, who Commanded there in chief, desired that he
might Capitulate, and surrendered the place almost in the sight of Cneius. After
this, Caesar drew nearer with his Camp, and they disputed for the ground by
several Works which they caused to be thrown up, and which at last occasioned a
great Battle; wherein Caesar's Cavalry were forced to give ground to those of
the Enemy, which advantage seeming a kind of reparation for the loss of Atecua,
very much raised the courage of Cneius, some of his Letters being intercepted,
wherein he gave account, That Caesar had only with him raw and unexperienced
Soldiers, that he durst not put himself upon the hazard of Battle, but that
nevertheless means should be found to force him to it. With this imagination he
went to incamp himself near Sevill.
Hispalis. In the mean while Caesar possessed himself of two Castles, and
knowing that Cneius was encamped in the Plain of Munda, he marched his Army
thither. The two Generals were equally impatient to come to an engagement, so
that Cneius drew up his Troops in Battalia, by break of day he had posted
himself very well upon a Hill, both sides whereof were defended, one by the
City of Munda, and the other by a little River and a Marsh, the exactness of
their order showed his Troops to great advantage, especially his Horse, who
were very well armed, the River also being upon his right hand, and separating
the Hill, where he was encamped from the Plain, which was five Miles in length,
and reached as far as Caesar's Camp. He also had drawn up his Troops in
Battalia, and expected when the Enemy should come down into the Plain to fight
him. But as they never stirred above a thousand paces from the City. Caesar
advanced as far as the Rivolet: now according to the Rules of War Cneius ought
to have engaged him in his passage, but his general Officers were obstinately
of Opinion to defend the Hill. Caesar well perceiving that he could not come at
them without great disadvantage, and that they prepared themselves to charge
him as he came up, caused his Army to hault, as if he intended to fortify
himself in that Post. His Army consisted of 24 Cohorts, and 8000 Horse, the
tenth Legion were upon the Right, the third and fifth upon the Left, and the
Cavalry upon the Wings. Cneius had fourteen Le^gions, the Cavalry and his light
armed Foot amounted to 6000 Men, with an equal number of Auxiliary Troops.
Caesar's Soldiers murmured that he would not let them make use of the occasion
to engage, and the delay so encouraged those of Cneius, that they advanced upon
the declining part of the Hill, so both sides gave a shout, and the Battle
began. The first shock was managed on both parts with so much courage, that
Casar's Men, who had been used to Conquer, found themselves something abated of
their fierceness. The tenth Legion, though extremely weakened in number,
nevertheless pressed hard upon that which it was engaged withal. But Cneius
Commanded a Legion to march up upon the Right to its assistence. During this
proceeding, C^sar's Cavalry charged Pompey's left Wing, who received it in very
good Order, so that all the Troops on both sides being now engaged, every one
was to expect his safety from his own proper Valor. All Authors agree that
Caesar was never in so great danger as now, and he himself has since declared,
That ever before he fought for glory, but at Munda for his life. He threw
himself several times amongst the midst of his Enemies, crying out to his
People, That they ought to take him and deliver him to those Children to save
themselves the shame of being beaten, so well did he encourage them by his
speeches, but much better by a thousand actions of bravery which he performed,
that at last with much ado he overthrew Cneius's Troops, and killed thirty
thousand upon the place, but he lost a thousand of his own Men, and had five
hundred wounded. All the Ensigns were taken, and Varus and Labienus slain in
the Battle. Cneius with 150 Horse escaped to Tariffa.
Carteia, from whence thinking to get away by Sea, he was forced by the arrival
of Didius, Caesar's Lieutenant, to return to Land. He was immediately besieged
within a Tower, and attacked so vigorously, that being wounded in the Shoulder
and the Thigh, having his Heel put out of joint, he was forsaken by his People,
and slain in a Cave, where he had hid himself. The young Sextus had better
fortune, for escaping from Cordova, where he had been during the time of the
Battle, he concealed himself so well, that Caesar could not find him, or at
least because he was so young, mistook him. After this Victory, which put an
end to that famous War, there nothing appeared to make resistance, so Caesar
having given out several Orders, and exacted great Contributions from the
Enemies Cities, under pretense of punishing their Rebellion, he returned to
Rome not a little glad, that he had at last brought under submission that
Commonwealth which gave Laws to the greatest part of the World.

CHAP. LXIII. Caesar's return to Rome. He makes several Laws. The extreme
Honors which were done him, draw upon him the Envy of the Senate.
HE would needs Triumph at his return, but that Triumph was by no means
attended with any joyful Acclamations of the People, who were grieved to see
the Memory of their beloved Pompey insulted over. After this, Caesar applied
himself to regulate the state of the Commonwealth, and pardoned all those who
had born Arms against him. He caused also Pompey's Statues to be set up again,
and Cicero observed very properly upon that occasion, saying, That Caesar by
restoring Pompey 's Statues secured his own. He published several Laws, as that
which limited the expenses of Feasts, which he caused to be observed with all
severity. Another touching the use of Litters, embroidered Robes and Pearls,
which he confined only to certain Persons. That which allowed the right of a
free Citizen to all People of Quality of whatsoever profession, besides, a
great many other very good Ordinances. He sat in Judgment with wonderful
diligence and application, and without suffering himself to be balanced in
favor of any of the Criminals. Moreover, to show that nothing should escape
his care, he undertook to regulate the Roman Year, which was at that time very
much confounded, and as it consisted but of ten months, according to the
establishment of Romulus, and Numa had taken care to add two others, consisting
of sixty five days, nevertheless the year wanted eleven days and a quarter, and
though several remedies had been sought for the reforming of that Error, it
happened out in succession of time that the Festivals came in seasons quite
contrary to their Institution; as for example, those for the Vintages in
Spring, and those of the Harvest in Winter. Caesar, after having consulted upon
this occasion the most able Astronomers, and being himself very well instructed
in that Science, whereof he had written, regulated the Year according to the
course of the Sun, to three hundred sixty five days, and one day more to be
added every fourth year, which was called the Bissextile, and this is the
foundation of that method which we to this day follow. He added to the ten old
Months two others, which are January and February, that so the Reformation he
made might be just and proportionable. In the mean time, as he was no-ways
beloved by those who were greatest in the Senate, though his Ordinances had no
other than the public good, they forbore not to vilify him by their Raileries;
and Cicero amongst the rest, being in a place, where it was said, that the next
day the sign of the Harp would be visible ( Ah, said he) according to the
Ordinance. Now, though Caesar had Information of their discourses, he bore it
all with so great moderation, that when some other People had yet the insolence
to violate his Reputation by Libels, he never so much as inquired after them.
All his designs showed the greatness of his Soul, he made a proposition for
adorning of the City of Rome with a magnificent Temple consecrated to Mars, and
with a Theater. He undertook to drain the Marshes near Rome, and to empty the
Lakes. After these Works, he was for falling upon the Parthians, to revenge the
death of Crassus, and they being Conquered, to enter through Hircania, along
the Banks of the Caspian Sea into Scythia, to open himself a way through
Germany into Gaul, and so return to Rome. But all these Projects ended in his
death. Caesar's good fortune, which had appeared by so many Victories, his
Merit and great Abilities, supported by the affection of the People, and the
love of his Soldiers had raised him to a degree above all other Romans. But as
it usually happens in Commonwealths, where every one valuing himself upon his
own Merit, looks upon absolute Command as a right which he one day in his turn
may pretend to, that advancement had brought upon him the jealousy of all the
Senators, who could respect him no otherwise than the Usurper of a Rank, which
they thought themselves deserved as well as he. It being certain, that in
matters of Ambition as well as Interest, no Man ever thinks any thing too much
for himself. In the mean while in a shameful manner they daily flattered his
Vanity with new Honors, preferring him even in his life time in some sort
amongst the Gods. They thought it not enough to cause him to be chosen Consul
for ten years, and perpetual Dictatour, to give him the name of Emperor, and
Father of his Country, and to declare his Person Sacred and Inviolable; But
they ordained him also a Statue amongst those of the Kings, a Tribunal in the
Orchestria, a Chair of Gold in the Senate, and in fine in the Shows of the
Cirque, a Canopy, a Cushion, and Offerings, as to the Images of the Gods, with
a Temple, Altars, as also a high Priest, and Sacrificers. Some Authors have
reported that he procured these Honors by his Authority, others, that they
were freely bestowed upon him. That which appears most certain is, that they
were so agreed upon in the Senate, and that all those who were then present,
came to him in a body to acquaint him with the Decree they had made, he was
then in the Temple of Venus, and whether it were out of State, or for some
other Reason, he received them sitting without rising up to go and meet them.
Some say that Balbus held him when he would have raised himself, others, that
it was in offense to Tributius, who pretended to tell him what he was to do.
However it was, this neglect offended the Senators, and caused them to
discover their hatred, for from this time they contrived among themselves to
publish abroad, how that he affected the name of King: He had indeed the power
in effect, and did only want the Name, which was odious to the Romans. Caesar,
who very well knew how much that aversion imported, very well defended himself
from it, and one day when some People called him Lord and King, he answered,
That he was Caesar. Nevertheless, he often let discourses fall, which very much
promoted those Reports that were spread of his Ambition. He said, That a
Republic was no other than a name and mere Idea, and that Sylla had discovered
himself to be very ignorant, when he renounced that of Dictatour. All these
Discourses were maliciously improved, and served for great use to those who
envied him. Two Adventures, which afterward happened, contributed also very
much to their Confirmation. As he returned from a public Sacrifice upon the
day of the Latin Festivals, some body had Crowned his Statue with a Laurel,
bound about with a little band of white Linen, which was a sort of Diadem.
Marulla and Cesestius, the Tribunes of the People, took off the Crown, and
Imprisoned him who had placed it there, which made Caesar angry, he went to the
Tribunes, quarrelled with them publicly, and took away their Employments, and
that Affront offered to those Magistrates, who maintained the interests of the
People, provoked them against him. The other accident was yet more notorious.
There was celebrated at Rome a Festival in Honor of the God Pan, which they
called Lupercalls, in that Ceremony the young Romans of the best Quality, and
who were for that year in Employments, ran naked through the City with lether
Thongs, wherewith they wantonly struck all those they met, and by ridiculous
Superstition, the most Virtuous Women were wont to go meet them, and offer
their hands to be touched with these Thongs, believing that that had the Virtue
to procure them a happy Lying-in, and also make them fruitful. Antonius, who
was Consul, appeared upon this occasion, and Caesar assisted at the show seated
upon a Tribunal in a Chair of Gold, and in a habit of Triumph. Antonius passing
through the People, who opened to the right and left to make him way, went up
to the Tribunal, and presented a Crown to Caesar, some there were who clapped
their Hands, as if they approved of it, but when Caesar put back the Crown,
there was a general Applause, Antonius offered it to him a second time, but
still with as little marks of satisfaction from the People, Caesar again
refused it, which was followed with loud Acclamations, Caesar by this
understood their sentiments, which, he made use of this Trial more clearly to
inform himself of, he rose up to carry the Crown to the Capitol, but was not
Master of his disorder, and said that night to his Friends, That if he knew any
man who would out his Throat, he could know offer it to him freely.

CHAP. LXIV. A Conspiracy against Caesar. Presages of his death. He is
murdered in the Senate.
THough he had yet a thousand other Testimonies of the hatred he lay under, he
abandoned himself so utterly to his Destiny, that from this moment he neglected
any manner of security for himself against his Enemies. He was heard to say,
That he had rather fall by Treason once, than be so miserable, as to be always
afraid of it. And another time, That the Republic had more interest than
himself in his preservation, that he had gotten Glory and Power enough, but
that after his death, the Commonwealth would be more harassed with Civil Wars
than ever yet it had been. And one day before his death, being at Supper with
Lepidus, as his Friends disputed amongst themselves, whilst he was writing,
what death was easiest, It is that, said he, turning toward them, which is the
most sudden and the least foreseen. He disbanded his Company of Spanish Guards,
and contented himself to be defended with the protection of his Friends, which
facilitated an enterprise upon his life. Above threescore Senators entered into
this Conspiracy, the Principals whereof were Brutus, whose life Caesar had
saved after the Battle of Pharsalia, and Cassius, who had surrendered Pompey's
Fleet to him in the Hellespont, they were both Pretors and Enemies, because
that Caesar had named Brutus for the eldest Praetor to the prejudice of Cassius,
who was above him in Age and Dignity; the name of Brutus had been famous in
Rome, ever since the Junius Brutus.
Consul so called, who had banished the Kings. There was found written at the
foot of his Statue, WOULD TO GOD THOU WERE ALIVE. And certain Billets were
thrown into the Pretors Tribunal, wherein were written these words, Brutus,
thou art asleep and not a true Brutus. Cassius was Author of most of these
things. He hated Caesar for several reasons, but chiefly, because he had taken
from him the Lions wherewith he intended to have given a show to the People, so
Caesar mistrusted him, and when his Friends advised him to look narrowly into
the Conduct of Antonius and Dolabella, It is not, said he, those perfumed and
plump Sparks that I distrust, but those meagre and pale Gentlemen. He omitted
not nevertheless to prepare his Expedition against the Parthians, and caused
sixteen Legions to march, and Ten Thousand Horse for his going into Asia. His
design was to depart four days after to put himself at the head of them, when
the Conspiratours caused a report to be spread, that according to the Sybill's
Oracles the Parthians could not be overcome but by a King, and that upon this
pretense Cotta was to propose to the Senate the giving of him that Title.
Cassius took this occasion to go and visit Brutus, demanding of him, If he
would go to the Senate upon the Ides of March, when Caesar's Friends were to
propose the declaring of him King. Brutus said, That he would not be there. But
replied Cassius, if you should be called thither, Then said Brutus, I shall
think it my Duty, to speak, contradict, and dye, rather than lose our liberty;
Ah, answered Cassius, what Roman is there that would suffer you to dye for his
Liberty, you are ignorant Brutus, who you are, if you believe that those
Billets which are thrown into the Tribunal, come from any mean* People, and not
from the most Illustrious and bravest Men of Rome. They demand from other
Pretors, Games, Shows, and Gladiatours, but they expect from you as a debt of
Succession the ruin of Tyranny, being ready to expose themselves to all
hazards for your sake, if you can find in your heart to dispose your self to
their Wishes. After this Conversation they parted, and the Name of Brutus,
whose Person was very much Esteemed, engaged a great many in the Conspiracy, so
they resolved to put their design in execution upon the very Ides of March, and
in the Hall of the Senate.

A great many Prodigies foretold this misfortune to Caesar, there was found in
an old Tomb at Cappua, a place of Brass, whereon it was written in Greek
Letters, that when the Bones of Capys should be found, a Man of the Race of
Iulus should be slain by the hands of his Kinsmen, and that his death should be
^evenged by the desolation of all Italy. Word was brought him, that those
Horses which he had Consecrated, and let loose at the passage of the Rubicon,
had not eaten for several days, and were seen to weep. Spurina, a very able
Diviner, told him when he Sacrificed, that great dangers threatened him upon the
Ides of March, and upon the Eve of that day, a Wren flying into the Hall of
Pompey, with a Branch of Laurel in her Mouth, was torn to pieces by other
Birds, who pursued her from a Neighboring Wood. He dreamt the same Night that
he was carried above the Clouds, and that he shook hands with Jove, and his
Wife Calphurnia dreamt also that the top of her House fell down, and that her
Husband was Assassinated in her Arms, the Doors of the Chamber opening at the
same time of their own accord with great noise. This last accident something
confounded him, and his Wife by her Prayers and Tears, prevailed that he would
not go abroad that day. But another Brutus, surnamed Decimus, who was one of
the Conspiratours, though of the number of his nearest Friends, caused him to
change his resolution in remonstrating to him, He was expected at the Senate,
and that it would be a shame for him not to venture out of doors, but when it
should please Calphurnia to dream favorably; so De^imus carried him almost by
force out of his Lodgings, and as every thing seemed to contribute to his
destruction, a Slave, who came to give him advice of the Conspiracy, could
never get up through the crowd of People that surrounded him. Artimedorus of
Cnidus, his Host and Friend having presented him with a Memorial to the same
purpose, he mingled it without reading amongst other Papers that were given
him, and Lena, who was one of the Conspiratours, entertaining him a great while
in private as he came out of his Litter; The others, who believed themselves
discovered, thought already of killing themselves with the Daggers which they
had under their Robes, when Lena quitting Caesar, and kissing his hand, gave
them to understand that he thanked him for some favor which he came to obtain.
The Assembly of the Senate was held in a place which Pompey had caused to be
built for that purpose, and which for that reason was called the Court or Hall
of Pompey, where was to be seen his Statue in Marble, raised upon a Pedestal,
Caesar as he was entering, met Spurina, and smiling, told him, The Ides of March
were come. Yes, answered the Divinor, but they are not past. When he had taken
his place, the Conspiratours turned toward him under pretense of saluting him,
and Tullius Cymber approached to ask pardon for his Brother, who was then in
Exile, Caesar deferred the matter, and put back Cymber, who pressed upon him so
far, as to take hold on both sides of his Robe, and when Caesar cried out, It
was a violent Proceeding, Casca, who was behind him, gave him the first stab
with a Poniard near the Shoulder, the wound glanced, and was not mortal, Caesar
struck Casca through the Arm with his Dagger, crying out, Traitor, what do
thou; Casca on the other side called his Brother, and Caesar would have raised
himself, but he received a mortal wound in the Breast, and all the
Conspiratours charged upon him together with so much fury, that many of them
were themselves wounded, he nevertheless made great resistance, whirling
himself amongst them like a Lion, In the (...) of Rome 710, before the birth of
our Savior* 43.
till perceiving Brutus with his Dagger in his hand, he then covered his Face,
and wrapping himself in his Robe, went and fell at the Foot of Pompey's Statue,
pierced with 24 wounds.

The End of the first Volume.
THE HISTORY Of the Second TRIVMVIRATE. Down from the Death of Caesar to that
of Brutus. Volume II.
CHAP. I. The Troubles and Fears of the Senate, and the People of Rome after
the death of Caesar.
THE death of Caesar brought so much disorder into the Senate, and amongst the
People of Rome, that the Conspiratours soon perceived what they had done was
not like to meet with any general Approbation, all the Senators, who were not
Accomplices, fled from the place of Assembly with such haste, that it had like
to have cost some of them their Lives as they went out of the Doors, and the
People Alarmed at the News, left all their several Employments, some to run to
the place where the Murder had been committed, and others up and down the City
to inform themselves of the circumstances of the matter. The Market place was
plundered, and several Senators, who were retiring themselves in great
Terror, were mischief'd in the Tumult. In the mean time Brutus, who was looked
upon as the chief of the Conspiracy, had done all that in him lay to qualify
their fears, and after the Action had offered himself to declare the motives of
it, but no body would hear him; this proceeding much surprised him, and
astonished also the other Conspiratours, whereof Cassius and he were of the
greatest Authority, as well by the Charges of Praetor, which they then executed,
as by the particular Merit which distinguished them. Brutus by his Father's
side descended from that other Brutus, who had driven the Tarquins out of Rome,
and had laid the Foundations of the Commonwealth, and by his Mother Servillia,
from Servillius Hala, who had slain Melius for having unseasonably discovered
such marks of Ambition, as by no means were pleasing to the Senate, by which
means it seemed as if the hatred of Tyrants had descended into the heart of
Brutus by the blood of his Ancestors, and himself in a Letter written to
Cicero, highly declared, That he could not suffer that even his Father should
have any Authority above the Laws and the Senate. This fierce Opinion, as it
might be natural to him, might also be some excuse for the violence which
transported him against Caesar. That great Man had used him with all the
tenderness of a Father, and though Brutus fought against him in the Battle of
Pharsalia, gave strict Command to all his Officers to spare his life, and after
the Battle having pardoned him, promoted him to the highest Dignities, and one
day showing his Breast to some People, who advised him not to trust him too
far, Do you believe then, said he, that Brutus cares for such poor pillage as
this is? At last, when he saw him with his Dagger in his hand, coming toward
him, he cried out, What my Son, and thou too? These Opinions were caused by the
passion that Caesar had had for Servillia, the Mother of Brutus, he was not ill
received by her, and she took such little care to hide it, that she used to
send him Letters even into the Senate. One day when it was debated there what
punishment should be inflicted upon the Accomplices of Cataline's Conspiracy,
one of these Letters was brought to Caesar, They had both one Mother, but two
Fathers.
Cato, who was Servillia's half Brother, cried out, That it contained some
dangerous matter, when Caesar for his justification gave him the Tablets, which
Cato read to himself, and then threw hem back to him again, calling him
Drunkard, but did not think fit to make any farther mention of the Letter. It
was said that Brutus was born in the height of this Amor, so that it will need
some pains to j^stify what he since did to Caesar, for that thing excepted, all
his inclinations were toward Virtue, he had moderated the heat of his Temper,
by applying himself to Learning, and the study of Philosophy, which though it
was then divided into many Sects, he was yet acquainted with them all. He loved
nothing but Glory, and avoided Pleasures, he was sober, watchful, of an
invincible Courage, Complaisant and Affable in all Conversation, and for these
Qualities was beloved of the People, adored by his Friends, and esteemed even
by his very Enemies. Cassius's Character was of a much different nature, he was
very stout, and in the Parthian War had signalized himself by many brave
Actions. He had a great and fiery Spirit, a quick an sprightly Wit, but his
Warmth often carried him even into Transport and Violence. He was something
suspected of Self-interest, and not over-exactness in doing Justice. In short,
many are of Opinion that he conspired against Caesar, not so much out of the
hatred of Tyranny, as for the particular Quarrel which he had against the
Tyrant.

CHAP. II. Brutus and Cassius endeavor to justify what they have done before
the People, who rise upon them. They retire to the Capitol.
THese two Men went out of the Senate at the Head of the Conspiratours with
their bloody Daggers in their hands, in this condition they presented
themselves before the People, and in the first heat, several, who had no share
in the Action, desirous to attribute some false merit of it to themselves,
joined the Conspiratours with their Swords in their hands, amongst the rest
Aquinius, Dollabella, and Pettilius, who afterward by their death paid dear
for that impertinence, and vanity, for though they caused a Cap to be carried
before them upon a Lance, as a Token of Liberty, and though Brutus depended
upon the great Name and Example of his Ancestors, the People received them
with sadness and with silence, not giving them any of those Acclamations which
they expected; so they thought fit to retire to the Capitol, causing themselves
to be guarded by Gladiatours belonging to another Brutus, surnamed Decimus, who
was also in the Conspiracy. They were not now any longer the People, who
heretofore had defended their Liberties with a Zeal transported even to
Madness, all Opinions of that kind had given place to Interest, and they were
better pleased with some present Gain, than any Whimsey of Dominion, by which
means they were more afraid of Poverty than Subjection. Marius, Sylla, and some
others had taught them these Maxims, and besides, several Strangers, and
abundance of Freed-men being crept in amongst them, had corrupted the purity of
the true Roman blood, and debauched their Noble Thoughts, nevertheless they
came to the Capitol in great numbers, and Cassius himself ventring to come
down, was received by them with Applause; this again assured the Conspiratours,
so they returned to the public place, where Brutus was accompanied with the
most considerable Men of the Senate, even to the Tribunal, wherein he designed
to speak to the People. Several Authors have reported that he came only with
Cassius, and that their Hands were yet besmeared with Caesar's blood. However
it were, all they said, showed a great deal of Resolution. They maintained that
what they had done, was not only just, but that it deserved to be rewarded,
attributing the glory to one another with large and reciprocal Praises. After
this, they proceeded to the Commendation of Decimus, who had so seasonably
assisted them with his Gladiatours, and exhorted the People, To maintain that
Liberty and good Fortune which they had procured them, that they should
remember how their Ancestors had heretofore expelled Kings, whose Government
was no less unjust and violent than Caesar 's had been. In fine, they proposed
the return of Sextus, the Son of Pompey, and to make Celerius and Marullus
Tribunes of the People, who had first dared as they said, To attack the
Tyranny, in taking the Diadem from Caesar 's Statue. The People gave great
attention to their Discourse. But when Cornelius.
Cinna advanced to speak, it soon appeared that their silence proceeded only
from that respect which they bore to the Virtue of Brutus. This Cinna had
received many benefits from Caesar, and even the Charge of Praetor, which was
the second Dignity in the Republic; the Pretors were to distribute particular
Justice, and Commanded also Armies in several Provinces that were assigned
them. Cinna stripped himself of the Robe, which was the mark of his Dignity,
and threw it from him with Contempt, saying, That he would not be honored with
the favors of a Tyrant. He extolled the action of the Conspiratours, and
proposed that they might be rewarded with extraordinary Honors, but his
discourse and behavior appeared so odious to the People, that they were
provoked against him, and interrupted him with Affronts and Curses.
Nevertheless, Dollabella forbore not to present himself to speak after him, he
was a young Man in great Esteem, and Cicero's Son-in-Law, Caesar had designed
to have left him Consul in Rome, when he went to the Parthian War, nevertheless
he condemned the Memory of that great Man, and those, who during his life time
had so much honored him. He applauded the Murder, and transported himself so
far as to express his sorrow for not having had a part in so glorious an
Action. The commotion of the People against C^^^s, taught Brutus and Cassius
what they were to expect. The returned to the Capitol, where Brutus fearing to
be besieged, caused several Senators, who merely in point of Honor had
followed him, to return to their Houses, not thinking it just, that those who
had no share in the Action, should be engaged in the danger.

CHAP. III. Antonius and Lepidus rally Caesar's Friends. Some propositions of
Accommodation.
THIS News extremely rejoiced Caesar's Friends, the chief whereof were Marcus
Antonius and Lepidus. Antonius was very Illustrious both by his Birth and his
Valor, being descended from one of the noblest Families in Rome, which derived
it is Original from Anton the Son of Hercules. He was of a very comely
Personage, upon all occasions Magnificent, and passionately beloved by the
Soldiery. His bounty, and that familiarity wherewith he was wont sometimes to
debauch with them, had engaged them to him. The Critics of his Age have
reproached him for being too much addicted to his Pleasures, but that
inclination never hindered him from behaving himself with great resolution upon
all weighty occasions, and necessity evermore awakened his Virtue. But Pleasure
at last got the better of him, and cost him his life, besides, when ill Fortune
had imbittered his Spirit, he could not forbear discovering some inclinations
toward Avarice and Cruelty. He was engaged in the Fortunes of Caesar, and
Caesar had made him General of the Cavalry, which was the second Dignity of
Rome, when it was under a Dictatour, and at the time of Caesar's death he was
Consul. Now the Consulship was the highest Dignity amongst the Romans in the
time of the Commonwealth, and lasted but for one year, it was executed by two
Persons who had equal Authority, who were chosen by the Voices of the People,
and who Commanded within and without the City. It is true, that the Dictatour
was yet above the Consul, but he was never made but upon extraordinary
occasions of the greatest importance, and he it was who named the General of
the Cavalry. Sylla first, and Caesar after him added to the time and duration
of that Dignity, even at last to make it perpetual, but that was without
Example, and they have been both reproached with it as a Tyrannical Action^
Lepidus also was of Illustrious Extraction, very rich, and no less considerable
in Rom^ for his Civility, and the great Charges that he had executed; he at
this time Commanded the Cavalry by Commission in the room of Octavius, Caesar's
Nephew, whose charge it was. He was much esteemed for his honesty, but he
wanted that resolution which is necessary upon all difficulties, especially
amongst such People as he had to deal withal.

Both these Men were at the Senate when Caesar was slain. It is true that the
Conspiratours who stood in fear of the vigor and courage of Antonius, had
given charge to Trebonius to make use of some pretense to stop him at the Hall
door, but they both got off in the throng, Antonius into the House of one of
his Friends, and Lepidus into the Island made by the Tyber, in the middle of
Rome, where he had a Legion of Soldiers that loved Caesar. He marched them
into a place called the field of Mars, there to expect Antonius's Orders, who
ought to Command by reason of his Dignity. When they understood the
astonishment of the Senate, and how the minds of the People were disposed, they
resolved to revenge the death of their Friend, while Brutus and those of his
Party were consulting what course to take; at last the conclusion was, to send
Deputies to Antonius and Lepidus, To desire them to consider the misfortune
that their division might bring upon their common Country. The Deputies had
orders to handle the Articles of Caesar's Murder with all niceness, That no
hatred to his Person had put them upon that design, but only the love they
bore their Country, who had already been so drained by Civil Wars, that any
new disunion must certainly carry away the miserable remainder, that they
^elieved them also too generous to let any particular hatred transport them to
the prejudice of the Public. Yet these reasons alone were not of force enough
to convince Antonius and Lepidus; but as they feared that Sextus might declare
against them, and lest Decimus, who had obtained from Caesar the Government of
the Cisalpine Gall should fall upon them with a powerful Army, which he had
then under his Command, they resolved to gain what time they could, and
endeavor the debauching of Decimus's Soldiers, upon this resolution Antonius
made answer to the Deputies, That for their particular Revenge they would
joyfully Sacrifice it to the public good, that indeed their Honor, and the
Oath they had given to Caesar, ought to engage them to revenge his death. And
that they were of Opinion it was much more honorable to live without reproach
amongst a few good Men, than to draw upon themselves the miseries that are due
to falsehood, but as they were not obstinate, they would voluntarily consent
that the Assembly should be called, and that then they might easily be governed
by the advice of so many Illustrious and discerning Persons as should compose
the Body of the Senate. Antonius received Commendation and Thanks for this
answer, which the Deputies carried back to the Capitol. In the mean time
Lepidus, by order of Antonius, posted that night Corpse du Guard throughout all
the City, while those, whose interest it was, were soliciting their affairs
with their Friends. Those whom Caesar had employed in his Troops, being every
where heard to utter strange Threats, provided what he had promised them was
not made good. Calphurnia, Caesar's Widow, caused also that night her Money and
Papers to be carried to Antonius his House, who as he was Consul, caused it to
be Published, that he would hold the Senate in the Temple of Tellus near his
own House.

CHAP. IV. The Senate Assembles. Diversity of Opinions amongst the Senators.
Caesar's Ordinances Ratified.
CINNA, who the day before had thrown away his Pretor's Robe in the presence of
the People, was the first that came to the place of Assembly, when Caesar's
Soldiers provoked with his presence, fell upon him with stones, following him
to a House, whither he went for shelter, they would have set it on fire, if
Lepidus had not hindered them, and appeased the disorder. The most violent of
the Senators came not thither, being retired among the Conspiratours, and
Antonius was not at all angry at it, so there appeared through all the Assembly
nothing but Peace and Temper. Nevertheless Opinions were found to be very
different, some praised what the Conspiratours had done, and proposed that they
might be rewarded. Some again said, That it was sufficient to approve of it
without ordering Recompenses, when no body demanded them. Others equally were
for throwing out both the Applauses and the Recompenses, and said, That it was
sufficient if they forgot what was past, and were willing that it should be
pardoned. There were some who declared boldly, That it was an odious action,
but they would not hinder what might be done for the safety of those who had
committed it, because they belonged to the most Illustrious Families of Rome.
To this it was answered, That that indemnity had already been allowed them. And
when it was urged, That what they had done, could not be praised without
wronging the memory of Caesar. Others replied, That the business now in hand
was not to think of the dead, but to consider the living. At last one of the
company brought it to this, That they had but two things to choose, either to
agree that Caesar was a Tyrant, or that those who murdered him stood in need
of pardon. All the Opinions terminated in this, so it was concluded that these
two points should be debated. Then Antonius, whose business it was to draw
advantage from their Division, desired them to consider, That if they condemned
the memory of Caesar, they ought also to Cancel his Orders, that that would
have respect not only to the Empire in General, but almost to every particular
man there present, that some were in possession of Dignities, others of
Employments, others of Governments, and all by virtue of Caesar 's Orders, that
if these Orders were unjust, they ought to resolve to lay aside those honors
which they could no longer think were lawfully conferred upon them. Now the
first debate of all matters of Importance was evermore held in the Senate, and
afterward proposed to the People, who by their advice either confirmed or
rejected the Decree, so these words of Antonius caused a great commotion in the
Assembly, and here one little spark of Interest eclipsed all the plausible and
high resolutions of those grave Senators, they all rose up, crying out in
confusion, That it was insufferable that the Dignities they were invested in,
should come to be Canvased amongst the People. Especially Dollabella, who was
designed Consul, and who indeed had need of a dispensation, being not yet
qualified in age as the Law required, he who found he could not maintain
himself, but by the Authority of Caesar, whose Memory the day before he had
violated, appeared now the most eager in his defense, and charged those with
wrong doing who had praised the Murderers of a Dictatour. Nevertheless,
several Pretors threw off their Robes, which they had hopes afterward to take
up again by the Authority of the Senate. Upon this Antonius and Lepidus left
the Senate, several Senators ran after them, to desire them to return, and
overtook them in sight of the People, who were assembled in a great number
about the Gates of the Temple; then Antonius threw open his Robe, and showed
that he was armed, saying, That he knew no other way to secure his life than
that of Arms. Several cried out, That he ought to provide against those
disorders. Others demanded Peace; And what assurance, says he, can there be in
that Peace, where even the Religion of Oaths was not of force enough to defend
Caesar? Then those who were to revenge, called Lepidus, he came down the stairs
of the Temple, and getting upon the advantage of the ground, I was, says he,
yesterday here with Caesar in this very place, where I now lament his death.
Upon this the outcrys began again, some for Revenge, others for Peace; at last
they desired him to take upon him the Dignity of Sovereign Pontifex, which
Office had been Caesar's, he begged of them, To reserve those kind thoughts
they had for him, and seeing that those who inclined to Peace were the
strongest Party, he said, he would be over persuaded by them against his own
inclination, and returned to the Senate. The Confusion still lasted upon the
place, but Antonius, who came to prove the indifference of the People for both
the two Parties, and who perceived well, that it would be a difficult matter to
bring the Conspiratous to punishment, made a Remonstrance, That if the memory
of Caesar were Condemned, all the Provinces of the Empire, who were governed by
his Orders, would look upon themselves as disingaged of their Oath and their
Obedience, that that would be in effect to proclaim so many Men of Quality as
he had raised, unworthy of their Honors; that that must turn to the confusion
of the Republic, and draw upon them the Contempt of Nations that were
Strangers, that therefore they ought to consent that it was necessary to Ratify
the Ordinances of Caesar; but than to observe how Ridiculous 'twould appear at
the same time to give Praises and Rewards to his Murderers. For all this, he
would not oppose the Compassion which pleaded for their Pardon, in
consideration of their Relations, provided that it might appear done at the
Petition of their Families, that he himself had there consented to it, not that
he by any means thought it agreeable to Justice, but for the public Quiet. So
his advice was followed, and the Decree passed in those terms, there were only
added the names of such who had had employments, and other honors as they
particularly had desired.

CHAP. V. New Divisions occasioned by Caesar's Will. Brutus and Cassius speak
to the People in their own justification. They come to an agreement with
Anthony and Lepidus.
THIS Proceeding redounded much to Antonius's Reputation, for he had discharged
himself of this business with a great deal of Address and Industry, though very
many, and amongst the rest, even Cicero himself were of opinion, That he
thought more of his pleasure than the business of the Commonwealth. The
Senators went home to their Houses very well satisfied, when straight a new
difficulty arose. Piso declared, That having the Will of Caesar in his
possession, he had given it into the protection of the Vestals, with orders to
return it into his hands. It was told him, That the Will must not be produced,
and that it would be very improper to do him Funeral Honors, since it might
produce fresh Tumults. Piso was Caesar's Father-in-Law, and for that reason
engaged both in Honor and Friendship to see his last will put in execution, he
answered, That he would discharge himself of what he owed to his Son-in-Law and
his Friend; and when it was answered him, That what Caesar disposed of, was the
Goods which belonged to the Republic, which by this means was robbed of its
right, and that he should be called to an account for his proceedings. These
threatenings caused him to demand of the Consuls, That they would assemble the
Senators which were yet present. So they returned to the Temple, where Piso
delivered himself in these terms, I am sorry to see that the number of Caesar
's Murderers increases each moment, and that far from being satisfied with the
cruel death which they have made him suffer, they yet desire that the body of a
Sovereign Pontifex should be deprived of the Honors of Funeral, which were
never refused to the meanest Man; they forbid me with Threatenings to publish
his Will, they would divide his Fortune amongst them as the estate of a Tyrant,
and which is most surprising of all, those very men who come to Ratify what he
has Ordained in the Commonwealth, endeavor to suppress what he has disposed
in particular, and though it be neither Cassius nor Brutus themselves that
declare these Opinions, it is easy to believe that those who maintain it, are
influenced by them. However it be, order you what you please as to Caesar 's
Funeral, but for his Will I shall remain Master of that, and so long as I have
breath, will never betray that Confidence and Trust which he reposed in me.
This discourse occasioned a fresh Contest, those who believed they might be
concerned in it, were for the Will, so it was ordered that it should be
Published, and that Funeral Honors should be given to Caesar at the expense of
the Public. Brutus and his Friends were soon advised of these Proceedings, so
they judged it convenient to prevent the minds of the People, and for this
design sent to desire them that they would come to the Capitol. When they were
assembled there in a great number, Brutus presenting himself, said, That they
were not retired to that place as Offenders, who sought a Sanctuary, but to
prevent the misfortunes that might arise from the Affront which had been done
to Cinna, that they had understood how their Enemies spoke of the death of
Caesar, as of a great Crime which broke all those measures that could be taken
with them for their safety, that this discourse obliged them to declare their
Innocence and good Intentions, that since the death of Pompey, Caesar had
always acted as an open Tyrant, that he had disposed of great Charges and
principal employments of his own head, and without the advice of the Senate;
that he had turned two Tribunes out of their Offices, for no other reason than
that they had taken the Crown from one of his Images, that by that means he was
the first that had attempted to violate that respect which was due to Sacred
Persons. Besides, that they did not believe any Oath was of force enough to
oblige the maintenance of Tyranny, that in all other occasions their words
should be Sacred and Inviolable; that for the rewards which Caesar had
promised, they were resolved to allow of them in the name of the Commonwealth,
that those who had already received Inheritances, should continue in the
possession of them, and that such as had had their Lands taken from them,
should have their Losses repaired out of the first money that came into the
public Treasury. This discourse was received with Acclamations, and the People
admired the resolution of the Conspiratours, so by this means their minds being
turned wholly in their favor, the next day in the Assembly of the Senate,
Cicero's Eloquence found it no hard matter to persuade, That all which had
passed might be forgotten. His advice was seconded by Plancus, so an Amnesty or
Act of Oblivion was published. Antonius and Lepidus sent their Children to the
Capitol as Hostages for the Conspiratours security; so Brutus descended with
all his Accomplices. At last for a Testimony of a sincere Reconciliation,
Antonius entertained Cassius at Supper, and Brutus was at home with Lepidus.
These last, who were Wise Men, parted very well in appearance, but as Anthony
was a Laughter, and Cassius given to be Choleric, their Conversation was not
without some sharpness. Antonius asked Cassius, If he had not yet a concealed
Dagger? Yes, answered Cassius, and a sharp one too for those who dare aspire to
the Tyranny, which answer it is believed put a stop to any farther Jesting.

CHAP. VI. Caesar's Will read publicly. Antonius makes his Funeral Oration.
THE fire of Division began to be apparent to all such as could discern any
thing, the minds of the People were so well disposed, that they doubted not but
the Commonwealth would soon recover its ancient Majesty. But those who judged
better were not so deceived, and amongst others, Atticus, the particular Friend
of Cicero, this was a Roman Knight of the first of that Order, which was
distinguished from that of the Senators, the softness of his Inclination, and
the weakness of his Constitution had hindered him from signalizing himself in
Wars, but the qualifications of his Mind, his Honesty and his Sincerity, made
him be considered as a Man of great Merit, and gained him many noble Friends;
and though he had some in all Parties, and that the opposite Interest which
imbroiled them, had raised amongst them mortal hatreds, Atticus behaved himself
evermore with such dexterity, that he preserved his interest in them all. This
management preserved him from the miseries of the age he lived in, and gave him
at last the Honor of seeing his Family Allied to the Caesar's, which
considering the fury of the Civil Wars between Caesar and Pompey, that of the
Triumvirate, and that which followed, and how many noble Persons perished in
those Divisions, I know not where we can find an Example like him. Cicero was
of no great Birth, and had been often reproached for the Novelty of his
Nobility, but the Beauty of his Wit, his Eloquence, wherein he exceeded the
best Orators of those times, when that qualification was in its highest
luster, and a certain kind of Courage which rendered him fearless upon every
occasion, that required not the drawing of his Sword, and where he managed the
interest of the Commonwealth, had raised him to the highest Honors, he
discharged the Consulship with a great deal of Glory, in putting a stop to
Catiline's Conspiracy, so that in speaking of it, he almost made himself
ridiculous and insupportable to his Friends, even Brutus could not forbear
rallying of him for it very sharply in a Letter which he wrote to Atticus, and
which is still extant. Atticus therefore, who knew how little assurance was to
be had from the inconstancy of the People, could not forbear declaring to his
Friends his fears, lest the opening of Caesar's Will, and the public Honors
that were to be done him, should occasion new Troubles. His apprehensions were
but too well grounded, for Piso brought the Will, which was opened in
Antonius's House, and read in the presence of the People. Octavius the
Grandson of Iulia, Caesar's Sister, was by it Adopted to take upon him his
Name, and constituted Heir of nine parts of hs Estate, and Lucius Pinarius, and
Quintus Pedius were also Caesar's Grand Nephews.
Pinarius and Pedius of three other parts. To the Roman People he left the
Gardens, which he had on the other side of the Tiber, and to every Citizen in
particular 24 Drams. Amongst his second Heirs who were to inherit in case
of Mortality according to Custom, he substituted Decimus Brutus, who was one
of the Conspiratours. Several others also who had dipped their hands in his
blood, were named for Tutours to his Son, in case he had left one. At these
Tokens of Caesar's Goodness, and his Affection for the People, none could
forbear their Tears and Lamentations. But Decimus, his being substituted an
Heir, provoked the Indignation of the whole Assembly. After this, Piso caused
the Body to be brought forth with a great deal of Pomp, those who carried it
were all Men in Office, and of the most Illustrious in the Senate. It was set
down in the middle of the Forum, upon a place called the Rostra, with a guard
of Armed Soldiers, in this place there was erected a little Temple of gilded
Wood, according to the Model of that of Venus, which they called the Mother,
because the Family of Iulus, which was the name of the Caesar's, pretended to
have their Original from that Goddess. In this little Temple was a Bed of
Ivory, Magnificently Adorned with Curtains of Cloth of Gold and Purple, at the
head of the Bed was a Trophy, with the Robe which he wore when he was
assassinated. For the Pile, it was prepared in the Field of Mars. All the
People ran to see this sight, weeping and lamenting a new, even those who bore
Arms made a great noise, as if they demanded Vengeance. Now that Custom among
the Romans was, that one of the Kinsmen of the dead Man, one of his Friends, or
at least one of his Brethren in Office, should speak in his Praise. Antonius,
who was Consul with Caesar, when he was slain, was his Friend also, and his
Ally, so he laid hold of that occasion for the improvement of what he designed,
Gentlemen, said he, though I alone present my self to praise the Memory of that
great Man, whose Body you see here before you, methinks I read in your faces
that upon this occasion you are all of the same Opinion with me, and that there
is not one of those who hears me now, but in his heart praises him also. By
this means, when I shall recount to you his great Actions, his Virtues, and
then those Honors wherewith the Senate and you afterward have Rewarded them,
I shall not speak only what I think my self, but moreover as your Interpreter.
Then he made a report of all those Titles of Honor which had been given to
Caesar, his Dictatourship, his being several times Consul, with the Name of the
Father of his Country, from thence he passed on to his Virtues, praising his
Courage, his Eloquence, his Humanity, and his Mildness, which was so great,
said he, that he was never able to withhold his good inclinations, even from
those who had offended him. After this, he repeated the Oath which the People
of Rome had made to C^sar, by which they swore, That his Person should be
Sacred and Inviolable, and took the Gods to Witness, that they would defend it
with the hazard of their lives. But observing at this discourse some alteration
in several of the Senators, he concluded with saying, That what had been done
ought to be forgotten, that it was the Crime of some Demons that were Enemies
to Rome, rather than Men, and that nothing now ought farther to be thought of,
than the Honoring of the Memory of the Illustrious Dead, and placing him
amongst the Gods.

CHAP. VII. The Pomp of Caesar's Funeral. The Rising of the People of Rome, and
their Fury against the Conspiratours.
WHILE this Discourse lasted, one of those who were called Archimimi, (who
assisted where great Men were to attend, and often represented them) as if some
Fury had possessed him, tore Caesar's Robe off from the Trophy, and showed it
to the People, crying out, That it was the spoil of a Person beloved of the
Gods, and reverenced of all the People even to Adoration. He added several
things of the like nature in a terrible Tone, and weeping between while with
Outcries, and strange postures of Sorrow, which stirred up the compassion of
the People. At the same time was to be seen the Figure of C^sar in Wax, which
moved it self by Springs, and showed the Wounds which he had received upon his
face, and in his Body, this sight transported the People even to Madness, they
cried out, They would inflict most cruel punishments on those that had
murdered him. Some proposed the burning the Body in the Capitol, to do him
the more Honor, others said, That that duty ought to be paid him in the Hall
of Pompey, when two Armed Men carrying each of them two Javelins, set fire with
Flambeaus to the little Temple where the Bed was, so every Body ran thither,
some with the first bits of Wood they could get together, others with the
Benches and Chairs of the Magistrates, who held Courts of Justice in that
place, so that the Body, the Bed, and the Temple were all consumed in a moment.
All Authors agree in this, but Plutarch says, That he who showed Caesar 's
Robe to the People, was Antonius himself. Now as the commotion of a furious
People runs always to extremity, many round about the Funeral Pile took up
flaming Brands, and ran to set fire to the Conspiratours Houses, who being all
of the most Illustrious Families of Rome, by the great number of their
Domestics repulsed the Violence, so the People retired with terrible Threats,
which very much affrighted them, they reasonably judged that there was no
longer safety for them in the City, especially after an extraordinary Accident
which arrived at the same time. One of Caesar's Friends, who was a Versifier,
and to his Misfortune, called Cinna, had dreamt the night before that Caesar
had invited him to Supper, and upon his refusal had taken him by the hand, and
forcibly dragged him into a dark place, this dream had given him a Fever,
nevertheless that hindered him not from rising to go and pay his last Offices to
his Friend, he came just in the nick of time, when the People were returning in
rage from the Conspiratours Houses, when some body unluckily called him by his
Name, and that Name so odious for the sake of the other Cinna, who had made an
Oration the day before, was as a signal for them to fall upon him with such
rage, that the poor Wretch was torn in a thousand pieces in a moment. There are
a hundred other instances how much Caesar was beloved, the old Soldiers, who
had served under him, threw into the fire all their Coronets, Pikes, Bracelets,
and other Tokens of Honor which he had given them. A great many Ladies of
Quality also threw in their Childrens Robes and Ornaments, with every thing
which they had of Value about them. All the Strangers who were at Rome, mourned
after their Customs, and particularly the Jews, who watched several nights at
the Pile. At last Divine Honors were given him, and an Altar was erected in
the place where he had been burnt, and where Octavius Caesar, since called
Augustus, caused a Temple to be built, and a Pillar of Jaspar, twenty foot
high, with this Title, To the Father of his Country.

CHAP. VIII. The Artifices of Antonius. He procures himself Guards. Brutus and
Cassius withdraw from Rome. Antonius gets the Government of Macedonia for his
Brother. Cyrene is given to Cassius, and Bithynia to Brutus.
THE Commotions and Fury of the People made the Senators very much suspect the
Conduct of Antonius, who had still need of their favor, so he resolved to
regain it by a desperate undertaking, which happened to please them. Amatius,
who called himself the Son of Marius, committed great disorders in the City
with some People whom the reputation of his Father had gathered about him.
Antonius caused him to be apprehended and slain without more formality. The
Senate approved the Action, since it assured the Conspiratours, amongst the
others Brutus and Cassius, whom those Mutineers had threatened. But the manner
of this Proceeding did not please them, and Antonius's boldness made them
afraid. Amatius his People publicly complained, and Assembled themselves about
the Altar of Caesar, whence Antonius and his Colleague Dollabella caused the
Soldiers to disperse them, and Dollabella erected a Statue with this
Inscription, To the good Father, which very much displeased Cicero. This
provoked the Mutineers, they came together the next day in the same place where
they appeared, washing the foot of the Altar and the Statue with their tears;
at last their Compassion was turned into Madness, and they ran to the place
where the Image which Dollabella had set up, was guarded, to set it on fire,
but Dollabella, commanded them to be fallen upon, where many were killed, and
of those who were taken, the Slaves by his order were hanged, and the others
thrown down Rocks. This Chastisement appeased the Sedition, but it made the
Consuls hateful to the People. Antonius preserved himself well with the
Senate, and to gain them entirely, proposed the recalling of the young Pompey,
and that some Recompense might be allotted him for the loss of his Father's
Estate, and the Command of the Fleets put into his hands. These things
extremely pleased all the Senators to see the safety of Brutus and the other
Conspiratours, as well as the Authority of Pompey's Party established. Cicero
praised Anthony, and in an Eloquent Oration thanked him in the Senate; Anthony
took this occasion to demand Guards for the safety of his Person, nor was there
any who durst refuse it a Magistrate who had sacrificed himself to the hatred
of the People for the interest of the Senate. Upon this pretense he raised
about 6000 Men, all old Soldiers, who had served under Julius Caesar, and
almost all of them Men fit to Command. This was the first, but not the only
step which the Senate made against their own Interest, and it was wonderful to
see the most discerning Persons of so refined an age act with so much
inconstancy as then appeared in all their proceedings. But they soon repented
of what they had agreed to, and it was remonstrated to Antonius, That so great
a number of Guards were but unprofitable as well as odious. He promised to
reduce them when the hatred of the People should be appeased. In the mean time
he gained to his interest Caesar's Secretary, called Faberius, and by that
means made himself Master of all his Memorials. Now there had been published a
general approbation of all that Caesar had ordained, and under this pretense
Antonius by the help of the Secretary brought into the Senate People wholly in
his Interest, he called home the banished Men, created new Officers, and all,
said he, in pursuance of Caesar's Memorials, which he fashioned according to
his fancy; the People laughed at these Officers and new Senators, calling them
By reason of Charon's Bark that Caesar had passed in.
Charonitae, and all this was the occasion that new distrusts arose, and those
of the Conspiratours, to whom Caesar had given Governments, withdrew
themselves, Decimus into the Cisalpine Gall, which is to say, Piedmont, the
Country of Milan, and all that which is called Lombardy, Tribonius into Asia,
Cimber into Bithynia, Brutus and Cassius had Macedonia and Syria. They would
not yet abandon the City and their Friends, so they tried if they could make
their Authority prevail as they were Pretors, but as they could not secure
themselves of the minds of the People, they lived as private Men, and wrote to
their Friends to fortify in their Provinces. The Proceedings of Antonius
increased daily their Suspicions, and that private life of theirs seemed a kind
of dishonor to the Senate, whose Idols (to speak properly) they were, so they
were ordered to go and procure Victualling and Provisions of Corn for the City,
to the end that they might have a plausible pretense of quitting it, and
afterward retire themselves to their Governments, without making their Retreat
look like a ^light. Of this Antonius failed not to make good advantage, his two
Brothers, surnamed Cajus and Lucius, were the one Praetor, and the other
Tribune, so that he being Consul, the Authority of these three great Offices
made him almost absolute in the Government of the Commonwealth. He had an
inclination to the Government of Syria, but he saw very well that the asking of
it would only increase the distrust of the Senate, where already many designs
were on Foot against his Interest, and which also he was very well informed of.
Dolabella his Colleague in the Consulship had been drawn into that business, but
Antonius, who knew his Unconstancy and his Ambition, cunningly persuaded him to
demand the Government of Syria, and the Army which Caesar had prepared against
the Parthians. The young Man ran presently into the snare, and when it was
Remonstrated to him, That that Proposition was contrary to the Ordinances of
Caesar; He answered, That Caesar 's design was to make War upon the Parthians,
that as to his Decrees, Cassius had first mistaken them in permitting the old
Soldiers to sell the Inheritances which had been given them, and which Caesar
had expressly forbidden, that for what remained, it would be an affront to him
to believe that Cassius had any advantage over him either in Courage or in
Conduct. The Senate thus entangled, went another way to work, they resolved to
persuade one of the Tribunes, called Asprinas, to find out some Religious
reason for the opposing of this Proposition, when it should come before the
People under the pretense of Thunder, or some other unlucky Omen. All the Roman
Histories are full of this kind of Superstition, and after this manner the
People fansied to themselves either fortunate or unlucky Presages upon unlucky
Omens, their Assemblies always separated, and the squeeking of a Mouse would
frequently fright them from their debates of the highest importance. The
Cunning Men made the right use of this weakness, when any thing was proposed
which did not please them, and this was the design of the Senate, which they
thought ought to have been promoted by Antonius, he being one of the College of
Augures (who were a certain sort of Dignitaries that judged of these kind of
Omens) and who they imagined wished the Government of Syria for himself. But
these were false measures, for Antonius seized upon the Tribune as an
Impostour, and was the occasion that Dolabella got the Province, and the Army
afterward. He demanded Macedonia for his Brother Cajus, which none durst
refuse him. All that the Senate could do, was to put the Friends of Brutus and
Cassius also upon demanding other Provinces instead of those that had been
taken from them, which they obtained, to Cassius was given Cyrene upon the
Coast of Africa, with that of Crete, at present called Candia, and Bithynia to
Brutus.

CHAP. IX. Octavius the grand Nephew of Caesar, comes to Rome against the
Opinion of his Kindred, he declares himself Caesar's Heir, and takes upon him
his Name.
IN the mean time news arrived at Rome, that Octavius the grand Nephew of
Caesar, whom he had Adopted and declared his chief Heir, was coming to enter
upon his Succession. Octavius, so famous since by the Name of Augustus Caesar,
was of a very Ancient and Illustrious Family in Italy, but he came out of a
branch of that Family which had not been much advanced. He was handsome, and so
very beautiful, that it acquired him Veneration, he had a great deal of Wit,
which was subtle and cunning, a lofty Mind, of extreme Wisdom, and very
insinuating Conversation. Caesar, who had not any nearer Kinsman, took a great
deal of care of his Education, and he improved so well under so good a Master,
that his Merit advanced him to the Empire of the World. He governed with so
great Wisdom and Moderation, that the Prudence and Mildness of Augustus have
been ever since wished to his Successors: though he was now but very young,
his Uncle caused him to exercise the charge of General of the Cavalry for one
complete year, and afterward sent him to Appollonia, a City upon the Coast of
Epirus, to complete his Studies and his Exercises, thither came to him daily
the principal Commanders of the Troops of that Province, and even the Soldiers
also to make their Court to him, and entertain him with Combats and Games;
after having staid about six months in that City, he understood the death of
Caesar, and all his Friends advised to seek Protection from the Troops of that
Province, who had served under Caesar, and still honored his Memory. His
Mother was Married again to a Man of Quality, called Martius Philippus, so they
both wrote to him by way of advice, To undertake nothing that might bring
trouble upon him, but that he would take warning by his Uncle, and come to Rome
to them, where he might lead a quiet and peaceable life, and that they would
take care of his preservation. These different Counsels were enough to entangle
a Man who was now but eighteen years of Age. But of all the Counsels that were
proposed to him, he resolved upon the most honest and the most generous, which
was, To revenge the death of his Uncle, so he put himself on Shipboard, and
came and landed at a certain little Town near Brundusi^m, where he was informed
of what had been done at Rome since the death of Caesar, and though he had
received fresh Letters from his Mother, nevertheless fully resolved to declare
himself Heir to the Fortune and Name of Caesar. With this design he went to
Br^ndusi^m, after being first well assured that none of the Murderers of his
Uncle were in the place, such of Caesar's old Soldiers as were Quartered in
that City, came out to meet him, and did him Honors as the Son of their
General. He made a Sacrifice to the Gods, and after having according to the
Roman Custom taken upon him the Name of his Adoptive Father; all his Friends,
his Slaves, his Freed-men, and many other Soldiers came to him upon the News.
The very Arms, Money and Provision which were sent to the Troops of Macedonia,
were brought to him, and this happy beginning put him upon his march toward
Rome, in his Journey thither he saw Cicero, who avoided the calling of him
Caesar, though every body else at that time did it, because, says he, in a
Letter Philip himself did not do it, and that no good Citizen ought so long as
he is attended with such as threaten our Friends. Nevertheless he remained not
long in this Opinion, and Octavius arriving at last at Rome, declared to his
Friends, That notwithstanding their fears, he could not but think himself
unworthy of life, should he not use his utmost endeavors to revenge the death
of Caesar. It is said, that his Mother embraced him at these words, and
approved of his Design. Now Antonius had sent no body out to meet him, which
coldness of proceeding much augmented the fears of young Caesar's Friends. But
he declared how he thought it very just that a young Man, of but a private
condition as he was, should make the first steps toward Antonius, who was his
Seniour, and a Consul; so he besought his Friends to bear him company to that
visit the next morning, who all attended him accordingly; as he was going
thither, he met Cajus, Antonius his Brother, who was Praetor, and took that
occasion to declare to him his Adoption, and caused it to be registered
according to Custom.

CHAP. X. Octavius visits Antonius, who receives him very ill. His demands, and
Antonius his Answer.
Octavius was forced to wait a great while at Antonius 's Gate, who
nevertheless at last received him with a great deal of Complement and Ceremony,
after which they were come to the Point. Young Caesar began, and highly praised
Antonius, to whom he confessed he had many obligations, after which, he
modestly complained to him, For that he had suffered a Pardon to pass for
Caesar's Murderers, whom he might have punished with as much severity, and as
Arbitrarily as he had done Amatius. That he had also gone farther, and given
his advice for the allotting of them Provinces and Governments, when he himself
presided in the Senate as Consul. He handsomely represented to him Caesar 's
Friendship, and the good Offices he had done him, adding, That Caesar would
have adopted him, had he not been persuaded that a Man, as he was, descended
from Hercules, would have made a scruple of entering into the Family of Aeneas:
He conjured him by the Memory of his Father to assist him in revenging his
death, at least not to oppose the design he had of proceeding in it. He gave
him to understand that he was resolved to satisfy what was stipulated in the
Will, and to distribute amongst the People and the Soldiers what Caesar had
left them. Nevertheless, having little Fortune of his own, he desired him to
deliver him fourteen hundred and fifteen thousand Crowns out of the Money which
Caesar had left, and to lend him as much more out of the public stock as he
should have occasion for. That for the Movables and Goods, them he might keep,
he being contented to allow them as marks and remembrances of Caesar's
affection. Antonius amazed at the young Man's Confidence, and being piqued at
the last Article of his discourse, told him, That there might have been some
reason for what he urged, had Caesar left him heir of the Roman Empire as well
as of his Name and Fortune, but that the Sovereign Authority had no Title of
Succession in Rome, and that therefore he ought not to demand reasons of him
for what he had done in the Government of the Commonwealth. That for the
obligations which he thought he owed him, he was willing to dispense with them,
since what he had done was without any prospect of his Service, and only
designed for the good of his Country. That nevertheless he had not forgotten
Caesar's Friendship, but had secured to him those Honors due to his Memory,
even to the hazard of his own life. That for the rest, he had permitted it,
because 'twas not in his power to have opposed it without declaring himself a
Friend to Tyranny. That nevertheless his want of experience was excusable,
which had hindered him from taking these things into his consideration, though
it would require some to be sensible that the advantages arising to him from
his Succession to Caesar, did only in part belong to him, that he was not at
all jealous of his good Fortune, though by his own Confession, it might as well
have happened to himself, since Caesar would have adopted him, had he not been
of the Race of Hercules. That as to Caesar's Money, it did not amount to so
great a sum as he imagined, a great part of it belonging to the public, which
he had given his orders for inquiring into, since Caesar himself (had he lived)
would not have taken it ill to have been made accountable that another part had
been divided amongst the Officers, besides Dollabella his Brother, and himself,
who had refused the receiving any of it. That in truth he had distributed it
amongst those to whom Caesar had ordained it, and was ready to put the
remainder into his hands, but that if he were Wise, he would employ it for the
satisfaction of such as had reason of complaint either against his Father or
himself, and for the sending back that shoal of followers who accompanied him
into their Colonies, rather than give it to the People, it being a surprising
thing that a man so knowing as he was in the Grecian History, should seem to
rely upon popular affection, which was more unconstant than the Waves of the
Ocean.

CHAP. XI. Octavius falls out with Antonius. He gains the affections of the
People. Antonius sends for the Macedonian Army into Italy.
THese words, and this proceeding of Antonius offending young Caesar, he took
his leave of him, repeating several times as he went out of the door the name
of his Father, so he resolved to convert all his own Fortune, and what more
amounted to him from his Succession to Caesar into ready Money, by that means
to put himself into a condition of satisfying the People, and gaining their
favor, whereof he knew that Antonius had but a small share, by reason of his
Inquisition into the public Money. This design of his made the Senate afraid
of him, though they were not at all disturbed to see him fall out with
Antonius, because they hoped that that Division might weaken them both, and so
make their Ruin more easy, and that the public Treasury would be improved by
what should arrive to it out of Caesar's Estate. Now the time was come, that
Brutus was to give the Games, these Games were certain magnificent Shows which
the Magistrates at the going out of their Offices gave for the Divertisement of
the People. There were to be seen the Combats of Gladiatours bred up and taught
to cut one another Throats on purpose, upon these occasions, the huntings of
wild Beasts, every thing that could be found rare throughout the Provinces,
Comedies, and Music Prizes. In short, the expenses of it would appear
incredible to any who have not been acquainted with the greatness and riches of
Rome. Brutus to be sure had spared no cost for the setting out of his Games,
his Friends hoping that by that Magnificence he might regain the Friendship of
the People. Nevertheless they durst not counsel him to appear there, because
they were advised that a great number of Caesar's old Soldiers flocked daily
to Rome. In effect, young Caesar having sold all he had, and distributed it
amongst the most Factious of the People, proceeded now to selling the Goods of
his Mother and Father-in-Law, forcing Pedius and Pinarius his Coheirs in the
Succession of Caesar, to quit their parts to him, which he also sold, and
immediately distributed accordingly. These things made a great noise amongst
the People, who believed themselves now more obliged to him than to the very
Caesar, who had left them the Money. The Soldiers came also from all parts of
Italy to partake of his liberality; so that though Brutus his Games were very
Magnificent, and the People extremely pleased with them, his Friends no sooner
demanded that he and Cassius might be recalled home, but Caesar's Party put a
stop to the Shows, and would not let them go on till that request were
absolutely rejected. It was easy to perceive that this refusal was the work of
young Caesar, and those who before wondered at his boldness for making Head
against Anthony, were now as much surprised at his Address also and Power. By
this means Brutus and Cassius lost all hopes of returning to Rome, and went one
into Macedonia, and the other into Syria, they pretended that Caesar had
allotted them those Provinces which had since been unjustly taken from them,
and Dollabella, whose interest was Syria, departed with all diligence to take
possession of his Government. Antonius very well knew at this time that he had
need of new Forces, he had his Eyes upon the Army which was in Macedonia,
composed of six Legions of seasoned Soldiers, abundance of Lancers and
Cavalry, with a great Equipage of Engines, and all sorts of Ammunition, he was
afraid lest Dollabella should take these Troops, and carry them against the
Parthians, so he resolved to send for them into Italy, and (to keep them the
mean while in Macedonia) caused a report to be spread, that the Getae had made
an incursion there with great powers. Now as his Brother was already Governor
of that Province, it was his Opinion that the Command of those Troops would not
be denied him for the making head against those Barbarians, when the Senate
made an Order, that some body should be sent to inquire into the truth of that
news. So Antonius taking notice how his Plot had alarmed them, and that they
were afraid lest he should make himself Dictatour, proposed, That that Office
might be abolished for ever with free liberty to kill and destroy whomsoever
should have the boldness to offer at it. This Proposition so agreeable to all
Parties, confirmed the Senate, when at last by underhand management, and
presents which he made, Antonius obtained the Command of the Army. He sent his
Brother Cajus in all diligence to acquaint the Troops with the Decree of the
Senate, with private orders to bring them into Italy, so those Deputies who had
been sent to inquire into the state of that Province, returned and brought word
that the Getae were not yet entered there, but that an erruption of them was
expected.

CHAP. XII. Antonius demands the Government of the Cisalpine Gaul. He offends
young Caesar. The Soldiers oblige him to an agreement with him, Antonius gets
the Government.
IN the mean time Brutus and Cassius made preparations for War, and Tribonius,
whom they had sent into Asia, fortified the places of that Country, while
Antonius Triumphed at Rome, all his Artifices succeeded in the Senate, and he
thought there was nothing now which he might not hope for, Gaul, where Decimus
Commanded, appeared very convenient for his designs, so he was not afraid to
demand the Government of it out of the confidence he had in his Authority. This
Proposition began to open the Eyes of the Senators, who now saw openly the
Ambition of Antonius, so they absolutely rejected his Demands, and sent
Deputies to Decimus, to advise him, To strengthen himself against the
pretensions of Antonius, who was now resolved to obtain that from the People,
which had been refused him by the Senate. But to the end that he might first
try all means of preserving himself in their favor, he took an occasion of
falling out with young Caesar, whose Power already began to be formidable.
Critonius, who was Aedilis, was to give Games to the People, according to the
Custom I before mentioned. It was Ordained, That the Image of Caesar should
assist at all the Shows, placed in a Magnificent Seat, and Crowned with Gold.
Now as his Adopted Son caused the Seat to be brought, Critonius opposed him
upon the place, saying, He would not allow that Caesar should be honored at
his expense. Young Caesar made his Complaints of this to the Consul, who was
Antonius, but he refused to do him Justice, saying, That it was none of his
business to interpose in that matter; at which, Octavius being provoked,
fiercely replied, In spite of the uneasiness of those Men who are thus
impertinently squeamish, my Father's Image shall appear in the place that is
designed for it, nay, and by your own Decree too. These words offended
Antonius, or rather to speak properly, Antonius had a mind to be offended: so
he reproached young Caesar, that all his Proceedings tended to the stirring up
of the People, and threatened him to commit him to Prison, forbidding him at
last to bring his Father's Image, not only to Critonius his Games, but even to
those which Caesar himself was to exhibit in Honor of his Father before the
Temple of Venus. These prohibitions appeared so full of Injustice and Violence,
that they extremely exasperated the People, so young Caesar made the right use
of the Quarrel, for he went into the public Places, where he complained of the
injury done to the Memory of his Father. Wherefore, said he, (as if Antonius
had been himself present) should thy hatred to me extend it self to Caesar, who
has deserved so well of thee? I am ready joyfully to Sacrifice my self to thy
Revenge, provided thou will have regard to the Memory of my Father, who
preferred thee above all other Friendships; I here to thy insatiable Avarice
freely abandon all the Fortune which he left to me, only permit me enough
wherewith to satisfy his last desires, I beg this of thee for the Peoples sake,
and not my own, for I shall think my self rich and honorable enough if I can
but do Justice to his Memory in distributing amongst the People what he has
left them. This discourse was immediately spread all over the City, and made so
great impression, that Antonius began to be desperate, and threatened Revenge.
When Caesar's Friends, and even the old Soldiers, whom Antonius had taken for
his Guards, remonstrated to him, How shameful it was in this manner to wrong
the Memory of their General as well as his own, since it would turn at last to
their confusion, and purchase him but little Honor. As he had need of these
People, he thought fit to hearken to them, and after having complained of young
Caesar's Proceedings, whom he accused of Arrogance, and aspiring to an equality
with himself, who was elder than he, and of an established Reputation, he said,
That he was willing that all things might be forgotten in compliance to the
desires of so many brave men. He had besides this, another reason for his
compliance. He was now to try what Reputation Caesar had amongst the People,
which he pretended he would make use of for his assistence in getting the
Province of Gall, so the Soldiers obliged them to see one another, and they
parted good Friends. Immediately Antonius caused the Law to be published for
his Government, and notwithstanding all the Senate could do with the Tribunes,
Caesar's underhand management with the People, the many Armed Soldiers which
he brought to the Assembly in favor of Antonius against Decimus, who had been
one of his Father's Murderers, and Antonius's Money, wherewith he had
corrupted the Tribunes, made the Law pass, and he got the Government.

CHAP. XIII. New Quarrels between Antonius and Caesar. Cicero declares himself
for Caesar. He offends Antonius in his Orations.
ANTONIUS having now gotten what he wished for, began to contrive according to
his Maxims how to restore himself with the Senate, and whether it were that he
little valued young Caesar, or whether it were by a secret motion of that
Antipathy which afterward so much declared it self, and was at last the cause
of his destruction, he seemed not to take much care how he disgusted him, so he
might reunite himself with the Senate. It is true, that there was a strong
opposition between these two Spirits, but Caesar's had the advantage, and there
runs a story upon this occasion, that a certain famous Egyptian Astrologer
told him one day in the presence of Cleopatra, That his Fortune, which was so
Illustrious at present, should lose all its splendor when it came near to that
of Caesar, and therefore advised him always to shun that young man as much as
possible; because, said he to Antonius, thy Genius is afraid of his. In effect,
notwithstanding all the Alliances which their common interest could form
between them, they were always embroiled till the death of Antonius. The
pretense they now took was this, one of the Tribunes of the People being dead,
Caesar recommended Flaminius to the place, this made the People believe that he
had a mind to it himself, and gave him to understand, That he might easily
carry it by their Votes. This Testimony of their Esteem for him alarmed the
Senate, who fearing lest he should make use of the Authority of that Office for
the revenging the death of his Father, resolved to oppose it, and Antonius
published a Decree, by which he forbad any man to assist Caesar, who not being
yet a Senator, could not according to Law pretend to that Dignity. These
prohibitions provoked the People, who looked upon their Authority by this means
struck at, so upon the day of the Assembly, Antonius had the misfortune to see
his Reputation shaken, as well as his life in great hazard, insomuch that he
was forced to permit the Tribunes to cancel his Decree; so Flaminius had the
Office, and Caesar well perceived that it was now time for him to take measures
against the unconstancy of Antonius, whose credit and assistence was like to
cost more than it was worth; so he sent Deputies to such Soldiers as had
served under his Father, and were now divided up and down Italy, sending also
into the very Army of Antonius, a sort of Manifesto, Copies whereof he caused
to be scattered about the Camp. Besides this, he took a resolution of applying
himself to the Senate, and Cicero, whom Philippus had gained to his Party, with
all his Credit was assisting to the design. Now there was at this time a cruel
feud betwixt Cicero and Antonius, and their hatred had been declared by the
furious declamations which they made against one another in the Senate* those
of Cicero remain still amongst us, and are called his Philippicks, because he
has there imitated Demosthenes, who wrote after the same manner against King
Philip the Father of Alexander. The twelfth is very admirable in its kind, and
from the first we may learn the causes of their Division. Cicero being wearied
with the troubles of Rome, and grieved at the retreat of Brutus, had resolved
to go into Greece, there to lead a more peaceable life. He had been twice on
Shipboard with this design, but the winds were both times against him, and he
was forced to come ashore again at Rhegium: In this place he understood the
speech that Antonius had made for the abolishing the Dictatourship, and the
great hopes which appeared from that action of Re-establishing Liberty; so his
thoughts of retirement soon forsook him, and nothing, as he said himself, could
satisfy his impatience to be once more at Rome. He was received there with
extreme Joy, and almost every body went out to meet him. Now the Senate was to
assemble the next day, but Cicero would not be there, and feigned himself sick.
It was said, That he had received advice of some design against his life, but
when, according to Custom the Senators were called, and one of his Friends
reported the cause of his absence, Antonius, who presided as he was Consul,
said, That he would go seek him, and carry so many People with him as should
bring him away House and all. Cicero in a speech made at another meeting,
complained of this outrage of the Consul; Antonius answered him sharply, and
reproached him, for that upon the day of Caesar's Murder, Brutus holding his
bloody Dagger in his hand, had called upon Cicero, and declared to him the
return of Liberty. This it was that occasioned the Rupture between these two
Men, which appeared more plain in the second Oration, and this disposition of
mind made Cicero so warm for the interest of young Caesar, and laid the
foundations of that Power, to which afterward he raised himself.

CHAP. XIV. Antonius and Caesar meet at the Capitol. They fall out again.
Caesar raises Troops.
WHILE those Libels which were scattered up and down the Camp of Antonius were
taking effect there, the Soldiers who were at Rome gave him to understand,
That they were not well satisfied of the misunderstanding between him and
Caesar, which was like to ruin all hopes of revenging the death of their
General, since they expected that revenge from him and young Caesar, as two of
the nearest Relation and Interest; but that if they proceeded in the course
they had taken, they would but betray themselves to their own Enemies, and
expose their Friends to punishment. Antonius thought he was obliged to justify
himself, and therefore in a long Harangue gave them an account of his Conduct,
letting them understand, That all his proceedings hitherto had tended to
nothing else but the revenge they wished for; he showed them all the turnings
and windings that he had made use of to bring this design about; so that they
no longer found reasons to doubt him, nor indeed did the Senate, who being
informed of this discourse, became perfectly acquainted with the depth of his
intentions, and saw the design of his wicked Policy. At last, those, whose
business it was to reunite Antonius and Caesar, persuaded them to an interview
at the Capitol, where they promised each other Friendship, though it lasted not
long, for some few days afterward, Antonius caused several of his Guards to be
seized upon, saying, That Caesar had wrought with them to kill him. But this
matter has never been well laid open: some say, That it was only a supposition
of Antonius. Others, That it was really truth, and that the Senate, with whom
Caesar was at that time upon very good terms, would gladly have been rid of
Antonius by such a means. There was indeed great appearance of the truth of
this, for the wisest of the Senators, who imagined that when they were once
rid of this Enemy, the other would be ruined more easily, declared, That Caesar
had just reasons to revenge himself upon Antonius, and that the wicked
proceedings which he had made use of, would have provoked any other man as well
as he to resent them. Now Caesar boldly threw this suspicion back in the teeth
of Antonius, he went himself to his Gates to demand Justice, crying out, That
he desired for his Judges no other than his own Friends. The People without
farther inquiry into the matter, condemned Antonius, and some there are who
believe that all this business was agreed upon before hand between those two
Parties for the accomplishment of their designs, so very uncertain are the
judgments of Men in matters of importance. At last Caesar understanding that
Antonius was gone to Brundusium to appease some Commotion which was beginning
there, and to recommend himself to the Troops of Macedonia, whom Cajus had
brought into Italy, and that he would soon return again with a great Guard,
upon advice thereof, resolved to visit such Cities as had been established by
his Father, and bring them entirely into his interest; so he went to Cerere and
Silio, which are two places not far from Capua, where he raised Money, and by
promising 500 Drams by head to every one that would follow him, he raised
about 10000. Men, who were not indeed regulated Troops, but nevertheless were
such as had served in the Wars under Julius Caesar, so he put them all under
one Colors as a Guard for his Person, and thus accompanied, returned to Rome;
now the fear was so much the greater in the City, for that Antonius was
expected there, who brought Troops with him also; so the Opinions of Men began
to be very much divided, some went and took party with Caesar, others declared
themselves for Antonius, and (as it daily happens to those Men, who are so very
wise, that they can resolve of nothing,) a great many upon this occasion were
so afraid of taking wrong measures, that they took none at all. Now a certain
Tribune called Carnutius, who was a great Enemy to Antonius, would have obliged
the Roman People to join with Caesar, so he went to find him out at the Temple
of Mars, which is fifteen Stades from Rome, from whence he brought, and caused
him to lodge in the Temple of Castor and Pollux. Caesar's Soldiers drew up
about the Temple, when Carnutius fell upon declaiming against Antonius, and
praising the Conduct of Caesar. Now there were at this time in Rome several
Soldiers of the Macedonian Army, who could not bear that their General should
be spoken ill of, and declared their Resentments. Caesar's Men replied upon
them. But as they were for the most part without Arms, matters staid there, and
went no farther. This unseasonable accident made him very uneasy, and a great
part of his People asking leave of him to go and get Arms, he granted it,
keeping only three thousand Men about his Person; nevertheless, those who had
quitted him, being accustomed to a Warlike life, could not find in their hearts
to stay at home, so they returned again to him very well appointed, and he
having in the mean time furnished himself with Money about Ravenna, and the
other Cities, he joining them with the other Troops, made a considerable body,
and put them into Quarters about Aretium.

CHAP. XV. Antonius joins his Army, but is not well received. He returns to
Rome. Two of his Legions desert him, and go to Caesar's Army. Antonius's force.
WHILE these matters were transacted, Antonius went and joined himself with his
Army, which was composed of four Legions of those six which had been in
Macedonia. They received him with a great deal of coldness and silence, which
extremely troubled him, for it was the Custom for a General to be always
received with great Acclamations, and to have a speech made to him in the name
of the Army. But these contented themselves to follow him without speaking a
word as far as his Tribunal. Their discontent proceeded from the little care
which he had taken to revenge the death of Caesar, whom those Soldiers loved
most passionately. Antonius was not able to hide the disorder he was under, but
discovered it in the discourse he made to them, and wherewith they were
offended, especially in Relation to what he spoke against young Caesar, he
complained to them, That they had entertained his Messengers, and suffered them
to carry on Intrigues in his Camp without giving him advice of the disorder.
But in the end to flatter them, he promised to carry them into Gall, which was
a rich and fruitful Province, and offered to each Man 50 Drams: These
offers were so mean in the Opinion of the Soldiers, that laughing aloud, they
derided him, and at last went away without hearing of him any farther. This
insolence of theirs re-doubled the anger of Antonius, so he descended from his
Tribunal, saying, That he would teach them Obedience, and immediately Commanded
the Colonels of the Legions to bring him their Rolls, they always had them
about them, and knew the humor and inclinations of their Soldiers, Antonius
picked out the most Mutinous amongst them, and made them an Example, though
their punishment served only to provoke the rest. This Caesar's Emissaries
knew very well how to make their advantage of, so they scattered about new
Libels against the Avarice and Cruelty of Antonius, which he was advised of,
and Commanded that those Men should be delivered into his hands, with terrible
threatenings if he were not obeyed. But all his diligence was to no purpose, no
body would discover them, and he was strangely amazed at that fidelity which
seemed to be a general Conspiracy against him. This joined to the news of what
progress Caesar had made, put him upon making a new trial of the Spirits of his
Soldiers, he excused himself to them, That for the maintaining of Military
Discipline, he had been forced to bring Mutineers to punishment, that the offer
he had made them of 50 Drams ought not to be looked upon by them as intended
for a reward, since i^ was neither proportionable to his liberality, nor their
merit, for that he intended it only as a small mark of his acknowledgment. He
put them into the bargain upon great hopes, but said not a word of augmenting
the sum, lest it might be believed that he had given way to the insolence of
his Soldiers. Julius Caesar had always proceeded in this manner, nor ever gave
way to any Sedition, but on the contrary appeared always to be most bold, when
his Friends were trembling for his safety. Upon these occasions one word only
pronounced with Authority was sufficient to quell a Mutiny, and this was indeed
the effect of such an esteem as is supported by extraordinary Merit.
Nevertheless, this manner of proceeding has not succeeded with every body, nor
did Antonius find it seasonable, though he afterward changed all the Officers,
and put others in their places, whom he thought better disposed toward him; so
he Commanded them to march to Rimini, keeping only a thousand Men about his
Person, with which he went to Rome. He made his entry there in a very fierce
manner with his Soldiers in Arms, causing them to keep Watch and Guard about
his House, as if they had been in the Camp. But as he was designing to go to
the Senate, and there complain against Caesar, news was brought him that one of
his Legions, called the Martial, was gone over to the contrary Party, which
news very much amazed him; so that he doubted whether he ought to go to the
Senate House or not, especially when he understood farther that the fourth
Legion had followed the Example, and was revolted also. Nevertheless, he went
thither, but spoke little, especially of the subject he came about. After this,
he went to Alba, to try if he might reduce those two Legions which were
retreated thither, they refused him entrance, which was the reason that he sent
in all haste, and offered his Soldiers 500 Drams a Man, as Caesar had done
before him. From this place he went to Tibur, where his Ammunitions were
lodged, and where such Troops as he had remaining (being confirmed by the
offers he had made them) came and met him with an addition of the tenth Legion,
which was newly arrived by Sea. The folly of the Senate and Roman People was
again apparent upon this occasion: many of the Senators, a great number of
Knights, and several of the People ran to offer him their services, so that
there became a Question in Rome, In what Country lived the Enemies of
Antonius? They found him busy in receiving the Oaths of his Soldiery, which
they themselves offered also to take. This action gave him great Reputation,
and was the occasion that many of those People who had yet taken no Party, came
and joined themselves with him, so that he marched to Rimini with four Legions
of old Soldiers, a considerable number of Horsemen and Launcers, as also one
Legion of new raised Men; besides this, Lepidus had four more in Spain,
Assinius Pollio two, Plancus also Commanded three in the Transalpine Gall, and
at this time all those Leaders appeared in the interests of Antonius.

CHAP. XVI. Caesar's force. He assures himself of the affections of his Troops.
ON the other side Caesar was at Alba with the two Legions that deserted
Antonius, one of new raised Soldiers, and two of such old ones as had served
under his Father, from this place he sent Deputies to the Senate, who were now
no longer Masters of their own proceedings, for either fear or particular
hatred carried them away, and those very Men who could prostrate themselves
before Antonius, were for applauding Caesar from the very moment that he
appeared powerful enough to make them afraid of him. They would have been very
glad if the deserting Legions had come and offered them their service; but as
there was no Remedy for the present Disease, they approved so heartily of their
proceeding as well as Caesar's, that it became now another Question at Rome, If
Antonious had ever had a Friend there? In the mean while being of Opinion that
it would not become their Wisdom and Gravity to do any thing contrary to
Form, they sent word to Caesar, that they would adjourn all affairs till the
new Election of Consuls; but his Soldiers, who were not altogether so formal,
were for obliging him to take upon him the Quality of Consul or Emperor,
saying, That they had been used to serve under no Generals but who had been so
qualified. And they had already prepared for him the Rods and Axes, which were
wont to be born before those Magistrates. The name of Emperor was not then in
such force as it is now, for it signified no more than the General of an Army,
it is true, that it was given to any man, but after some famous Victory or
great Conquest* and then their Soldiers gave it with great Acclamations, it
being then a mark of Honor, which has since grown into a Title. Caesar refused
it, and seeing they would press it upon him, thought himself obliged to
acquaint his Officers with his Reasons. My Friends, said he, It is not the love
which the Senate bears us that obliges them to declare in our behalf, but the
fear that they have of the power of Antonius, for they would make use of us to
destroy him and the murderers of my Father, who are all their Relations and
Friends, have imagined that this is the way to save themselves, pretending to
fortify themselves in weakening of us: but this is no time to let them
understand that we have penetrated so far into their Policy, which we should
certainly do, should I accept of those Honors which you offer me, and which
they would look upon as an incroachment upon their Authority. We ought
therefore to manage our selves with more subtilty, and persuade them of our
respect by our Obedience, for by that way of proceeding we shall more surely
obtain the thing we wish for, and they will voluntarily bestow a Dignity upon
me, which they well know you are able to give me in spite of them.

CHAP. XVII. Antonius besieges Decimus Brutus in Modena.
AFTER this discourse Caesar went to exercise his Troops, where the Martial and
fourth Legion skirmished before him, he took opportunely that occasion to
engage them by fresh bounty, so he again gave 500 Drams to each Soldier,
and promised as much more if they carried the Victory. These Intrigues had
given Decimus time to fortify himself in his Government, and when Antonius sent
him the Ordinance of the People, by which he was invested in that Employment,
Decimus's answer was, That he had been established there by a Decree of the
Senate; In answer to this, Antonius only gave him a short time for his
departure, but the other demanded from day to day that it might be prolonged,
which Antonius refused him, and he could have easily defeated him, but was
unwilling so soon to use force, and therefore contented himself with seizing of
the best places of the Province. Decimus, who apprehended a general Revolt,
pretended that he had received Orders from the Senate to come to Rome, so he
marched to Modena, which he took possession of with his Troops: this was then a
great and rich City, and Decimus made choice of it to oppose Antonius without
fear of being forced thence. He had one good Troop of Gladiatours, and three
Legions, two of old Soldiers, whom he had heretofore Commanded under Julius
Caesar, and one of new raised Men, Antonius immediately besieged him in the
place, blocking him closely up with lines and other Works.

CHAP. XVIII. Hirtius and Pansa chosen Consuls. The Decree of the Senate
against Antonius. The death of Trebonius. Dollabella declared an Enemy to the
Republic. Honors and Offices allotted to Cassius and Brutus.
THE siege of Modena was looked upon by Caesar, and the Senate as a Declaration
of War, where at last new Consuls were Created upon the first of January, in
the year 711, since the foundation of Rome, which shall serve as a Date for the
rest of the History. These Consuls were Hirtius and Pansa, both intimate
Friends and Disciples of Cicero, who boasts that he taught them the Rules of
Eloquence, they were both also the Creatures of Julius Caesar. Hirtius had
always served under him, and it is he who has given the Relation of the Wars of
Egypt and Africa, which is annexed to his Commentaries, and Pansa made
profession of a particular Friendship with him. They assembled the Senate,
where Cicero, who had then all the Authority, persuaded War against Antonius,
by a discourse which is still extant. We may there read his Reasons, which are
drawn from the Insolence and Conduct of Antonius, as well as Ambition; the
matter, as it usually happens, did not pass without a reply, for Piso
maintained the interest of Antonius, and endeavored to justify him, but
Cicero's underhand management proved too strong, and an Arrest had gone out
against Antonius, if Salvius one of the Tribunes, had not opposed it in the
name of the People. This was the greatest Privilege of those kind of Offices,
for though there were many of them, one alone had right to oppose the general
consent, and that opposition hindered the effect of all debates. It was the
Peoples business to decide this difference, and though nothing was then ordered
as to the business of Antonius, because of the Tribunes opposition: It was
resolved that Decimus should be thanked for maintaining the Authority of the
Senate, that Caesar should be joined with the Consuls, and Command equally with
them, that his Statue should be set up in Gold, that he should be entered in the
Senate, and have power to demand the Consulship ten years, before he came to
such Age as the Law in that case required, to the end that the Legions might be
rewarded after Victory, according as he had promised them. The courage of
Salvius made way for the Mother and Wife of Antonius to solicit his Cause with
her Son, who was yet young, and all their other Friends and Relations. Antonius
his Mother was called Iulia, of Caesar's Family, and in great Esteem both for
her Birth and for her Virtue; his Wife Fulvia, when she Married him, was the
Widow of Claudius. This Widow was very beautiful, and of a popular, but
Ancient Family, Ambitious above the capacity of her Sex, and who absolutely
governed her Husband, she had also some light inclinations to Gallantry, which
was perhaps the effect of her Ambition, for she always loved to deal amongst
the best Quality, at least we may read at this time an Epigramm of Augustus,
where he complains that Fulvia declares War against him, because he could not
have a passion for her, and assist her in revenging the infidelities of her
Husband. These Ladies and all their Family appeared in mourning Robes before
the People, and moved their Compassion. Piso took this occasion to try once
more what could be done in favor of Antonius, but the Eloquence of Cicero
dazzled their minds, and the Decree of the Senate was confirmed, the charge of
drawing it up was given to Cicero, which he performed in much severer terms
than had been resolved upon; the terms of the Arrest were, That Antonius should
immediately raise his siege from before Modena, and that he should quit the
whole Province of Gall, which reaches from the Alps as far as the Rubicon, with
a citation before the Senate in case of Disobedience to give an account of his
Actions. About this time news was come to Rome of the death of Trebonius, whose
Body was brought thither by his Friends, and who was the first of Caesar's
Murderers that was punished for his Crime. To understand the manner of it, we
must recollect that Dolabella departing with great diligence for his Government
of Syria found that Country in commotion by the intrigues of Trebonius, whom
Brutus had sent thither as his Lieutenant, and when he would have entered into
Pergama and Smyrna, the Gates were shut against him. Nevertheless, Trebonius
neglected not to send Provisions to him as to a Consul, and sent word to those
of Ephesus, that they should receive him. Dolabella, who had raised Troops by
virtue of his Office, and was still highly respected, took his way toward
Ephesus, Trebonius sending out some Companies after him to observe his march,
the Consul went so directly toward Ephesus, that it took off all manner of
suspicion, so that a great many of the Men returned again to Smyrna, leaving
only a small number merely for form sake. Then Dolabella turning upon those
who remained, cut them all in pieces, and coming back briskly to Smyrna, took
it by assault. The Soldiers found Trebonius a^ed, who desired them, To carry
him to Dolabella; We will carry you, said the Commander, but your Head must
stay here, so he cut it off immediately, and the body was dragged up and down
by the Soldiers with all manner of Indignity, for though he had not himself
assaulted Julius Caesar, he was one of the Conspiratours, and was the Man that
while the Deed was doing, amused Antonius at the door of the Senate House, so
they showed their hatred to him by a thousand Affronts which they did him.
Dolabella caused the Head to be fixed upon the Tribunal, where he gave Audience,
and whence the Soldiers took it away again, trundling of it up and down a long
time upon the pavement. The Body was taken up by his Friends, and carried, as I
said before, to Rome, where the Senate, according to that folly which they now
showed in every thing they undertook, declared Dolabella a Rebel, and an Enemy
of his Country. With the same madness they made an Order, That Brutus should
have the Government of Macedonia and Illyria, and Command the Armies of those
Provinces, till such time as the Commonwealth recovered its ancient Majesty.
That he might make use of the Fleet which Apuleius had got together, and the
sum of seven thousand Talents, which Julius Caesar had sent into the City of
Demetriades, with abundance of Ammunitions of War for the attacking of the
Parthians. To Cassius was given Syria, and the charge of making War against
Dolabella, and an Ordinance passed, That all such as had Command of any
Provinces or Armies belonging to the Roman People, should receive Orders from
those two Generals.

CHAP. XIX. Antonius's Letter to Hirtius and young Caesar.
ANTONIUS resolved to take this occasion to shake the minds of Hirtius and
young Caesar, who could not be very well pleased with these demonstrations of
good will toward the Murderers of his Father; therefore though the Letter be
something long, in regard it will be for our Instruction in the affairs of that
Age, and that in the consequence it had its designed effect, it will not be
improper here to recite the Original, which was in these terms.

Antonius to Hirtius and Caesar.
I Have not been more pleased at the news of Trebonius's death, than grieved to
understand how it has been received at Rome. We ought to rejoice to see a
Villain justly sacrificed to the ashes of the most Illustrious of Men, and that
ever a year came to an end, the justice of the Gods having declared it self by
the punishment of one of the Paricides, seems to threaten the rest. But on the
other side it is matter of affliction to see Dolabella declared a Rebel for
having punished and Assassinate, and that the Son of one of her meanest Men
should be more dear to Rome than the Father of his Country, and which is yet
more terrible is, that you Hirtius, who have been honored with benefits from
Caesar, he having left you in a state of Fortune which you your self wonder at;
and that you, young Man, who owe all you enjoy to his name, could ever agree
with those who thought it Justice to Condemn Dolabella, and that one who is a
Prisoner ought to escape from those who now besiege him, and that an absolute
power should be given to Cassius and Brutus. Doubtless you look upon these
things with the same Spirit that you saw what passed before, you have given the
name of Senate to the rest of Pompey's Camp, and have put Cicero at the head of
you, though he be reduced to nothing. You have fortified Macedonia with a
powerful Army, and given Africa to Varus, who has been twice a Prisoner.
Cassius has been sent into Syria, and you have suffered that Casca should take
upon him the Dignity of Tribune. That the Revenues which Caesar gave the
Luperci, should be taken from them, and that the Veterans should be drawn out
of their Colonies, where the Law, and the Order of the Senate has established
them. A promise has passed, and by your consent too, that the People of
Marseilles should be restored to those Privileges which the Laws of War had
taken from them. The intent of the Hirtian Law is utterly forgotten, which
prohibits Pompey's Party from pretending to any Honors. Brutus is suborned by
the Money of Apuleius, and the punishment inflicted on Poetus and Menedemus,
who had been honored with City Freedoms, and were Caesar's Hosts, has been
approved of, yet Theopompus is neglected, who was driven out naked by
Trebonius, and forced to fly to Alexandria, while you have entertained Sergius
Galba in your Camp, armed with the same Dagger, wherewith be committed a most
execrable Paracide. In short, you force my Soldiers and the Veterans to the
destruction of their Generals and their Comerades, after having drawn them
together under a pretense of pursuing the murderers of Caesar. By this means
you have approved of nothing, you have done nothing, but what Pompey himself,
were he alive again, would do, or his Son, if he had any power in Rome. It is
reported that no Peace can be concluded, if I let not Brutus go, or if I
furnish him not with Provisions, but is this the Opinion of those old
Soldiers, whose minds and judgments have not been debauched, corrupted with
Flatteries, and poisoned with Bribes like yours? You will say that you marched
to the relief of their Companions whom I hold besieged. I shall give them
pardon and liberty with all my heart, provided that they leave him to Justice
who so well deserves it. As to the rest, you sent me word that a Peace has been
mentioned in the Senate, and that five Consulary Deputies have been sent to me
upon that design. But it is hard to expect any Justice and Moderation from
those Men who so fiercely rejected the fair Conditions which I offered, and
even some whereof I was willing to have abated. Nor is it reasonable to believe
that those Men who have Condemned Dolabella for doing well, will ever pardon me
for being of the same Opinion with him. I therefore leave it to your Wisdom to
examine whether it will be more Honor and advantage to our Party to revenge
the death of Trebonius, or the death of Caesar: And whether it will be more
just that we go together by the Ears to set Pompey's interest on foot again,
which has been so often defeated, or to rally our selves, to prevent our ill
treatment from those Enemies who only wait their advantage when some
misfortune shall arrive to any one of us. Our good Chance hitherto has provided
otherwise, that two Parties of the same interest should not cruelly tear each
other to pieces by Cicero's Orders, who thinks himself very happy in deceiving
you by those false demonstrations of Honor wherewith he boasts that he has
imposed upon Caesar. For my part I will never suffer any outrage either against
my self or my Friends, this is my resolution. I will never abandon the Party
that Pompey hates, nor shall the Veterans ever by my consent be rooted out of
their possessions, and then betrayed one after another to their execution. Nor
will i ever break the word which I have given to Dolabella, nor the Alliance
which I have made with so honorable a man as Lepidus, as well as what I owe to
Plancus, to whom communicate all my designs, if (as I hope they will) the
immortal Gods prove favorable to my just intentions, I shall live with joy:
But if they have appointed me another Destiny, I shall but taste before hand
the pleasure of your punishments, for if Pompey's Party be thus insolent under
their defeat, I shall leave you to make the sad experiment of what they will
come too, when they are Victorious. As for you, I could willingly bear, with
the injuries of my Friends, if they themselves would but forget them, and agree
with me to revenge the murder of Caesar. It will never prevail upon my belief
that Deputies should come with Peace from the same place whence War is
thundering, if they do come, I am ready to hear what they have to propose.

CHAP. XX. The Consuls raise Troops for the relief of Decimus, which was but
one Legion. The manner of laying sieges in those times. Ventidius raises Troops
for Antonius.
IF this Letter had not much effect upon Hirtius, it caused great reflections in
the mind of young Caesar. For what the Senate had hitherto done, might
reasonably be excused, the Ambition of Antonius, and the safety of the
Conspiratours were some sort of pretense for them, but when he found that they
promoted their Commanders to the highest Power, and that they prosecuted all
such as were for revenging the death of his Father, he saw clearly what their
designs were, and what measures he was to take, he well knew that the Consulary
Dignity carried with it all Authority of Command; he saw no Propositions of
Rewards, but to the deserting Legions. Nevertheless, as he thought himself
engaged in Honor to the War, and being willing to establish his Reputation by
some Illustrious Action, he resolved to dissemble all with a Prudence much
surpassing his Age, so that in all this affair he made not so much as one step
against his true Interest. Now it was the custom with Sacrifices to thank the
Gods for any Honors received, Caesar had publicly discharged that Duty, and
in a short discourse gave his Soldiers to understand, That he thought himself
obliged only to them for his Dignity, since the Senate would never have
allowed it him but for their sakes, and that therefore he would magnificently
reward them. So the Consuls divided their Charges, Pansa went into Italy to
raise new Troops, and Hirtius came to Caesar to Command the Army with him. He
demanded of him by a private Order from the Senate those two Legions which had
quitted Antonius, and which Caesar, without any more ado, gave him, so their
next business was to put their Troops into Quarters. A Legion at that time was
much the same thing as a Regiment is now, but something stronger, consisting of
about six thousand Foot, and six hundred Horse, which always attended them, a
certain number of Archers which were called Launcers, each Legion having its
particular Engines and Ammunition. The Constitution too, which was called a
Cohort, consisted of about four or five hundred Men. Now the manner of sieges
in those times was also very different from what is at this day in Practice,
they had no Artillery, nor any other Engines of fire, they always attacked a
Town by Scalings, Sappings, or battering Rams; their Scalings were of two
sorts, either with the help of Ladders, or else when the Wall was not very
high, the Soldiers covered with their Bucklers, made their approaches, those
who were nearest stood upright with their Bucklers upon their heads, those who
followed stooping a little, till the rere Rank, who were either upon their
Knees, or lay flat with their Bellies on the ground, so the others mounted upon
them, and this was that which they called the Tortoise. The Sapping is still in
use; and for the Ram, it was a great Beam armed with a Head of Iron hanging by
Cords upon four Joysts set upright, and fastened together at the top. This
Engine was set in motion, and forced violently against the Wall, which
sometimes took effect accordingly, but when the Wall was very thick, and the
Garrison strong, the last recourse which the Besiegers usually had was to
Famine. And this was that which now pressed the Troops of Decimus, he gave
notice of it by Letters to Hirtius and Caesar, who left their Quarters to go to
his Relief, and came and encamped themselves near Antonius's Lines. He was much
stronger than they, but as it was a difficult Country, full of Ditches, and he
having a River to pass over, durst not attack them. Cicero at this time
governed in Rome with an absolute Authority, and there it was that he made use
of his great Talent of Wit which he employed chiefly in raising Money at the
expense of Antonius's Friends, who were called to account with the extremest
Rigor. Ventidius, who was a Soldier of Fortune, and a particular Friend to
Antonius, upon this Persecution quitted the City, and being well known for his
Valor, and beloved by the Soldiers, he raised two Legions in Italy, where all
Julius Caesar's Soldiers were dispersed in a great number, and with these he
resolved to relieve Antonius. But to do him first one signal service, he
caused several Troops privately to enter into Rome, where he designed to have
feiz'd upon Cicero; this Enterprise occasioned great fear through all the City,
several fled with their whole Families, and amongst the rest, Cicero himself,
sufficiently affrighted, so that by this means Ventidius failed of his design,
and that Man who afterward so gallantly signalized himself by defeating the
Parthians, marched with his Army toward Modena, but Hirtius and Caesar cut off
his passage, and forced him to retreat toward the Marsh of Ancona, where he
raised another Legion to those he had already, which afterward proved a great
succor to Antonius.

CHAP. XXI. A Battle between Antonius's Troops and Caesar's, joined with the
Consuls. Pansa mortally mounded. Caesar's Troops are beaten. Hirtius comes to
their relief, and defeats Antonius.
IN this manner both Parties daily fortified themselves, and Pansa, who had
raised four Legions of new Soldiers, sent word to Hirtius and Caesar to take
care for the safety of his passage, he could not come to them but by narrow
passes through the Woods, which they sent the Martial Legion and their two
Companies of Guards to take possession of; there was a certain Causway which
went across a Marsh, at the coming out of the Woods, and at the end of the
Causway a large Borough Town, called Forum Gallorum, at present Castle
Franco, between Modena and Bulloigne. Into this Town Antonius put his two best
Legions, which were the second and the thirty third, and his Company of Guards,
together with that of Sillanus: before him he placed his Cavalry and his
Archers to entice on the Enemy, and cover his Legions, for he would not have
had them known that he had brought them thither; Galba Commanded the Consuls
Vanguard with Carsuleius, the Colonel of the Martial Legion. Their Soldiers
were encouraged at the sight of the Cavalry, and past the Causway briskly with
the two Companies; Pansa came galloping to the head of the Troops, after having
ordered the two new Legions softly to follow him, he formed his order of Battle
with twelve Cohorts of the Martial Legion, and the Companies of Guards taking
the left Wing, where the Guards were with two Cohorts of the Legion, and
leaving the right with the other eight to Galba. At the same time Antonius drew
his Legions out of the Town, and charged the Enemy ever the new Legions could
come up, the place was blocked up, and the Soldiers very much provoked.
Antonius's Legions were for revenging themselves upon the Martial, who had
deserted them; and on the other side the Martials were as firmly resolved to
maintain their Honor, so that by this means the Battle became a particular
Quarrel between the Soldiers, who immediately fell on with all fierceness,
they could not open their Ranks, but fought at Swords Point, every blow they
gave each other, gave a wound too, no cries of pain were heard, but shouts of
Fury, and in the very moment that one man was knocked down or slain, the body
was carried off, and another advanced into his place, these being all old
Soldiers, who had no need of Commanders to make them understand their Duty. At
last the Consuls right Wing, where Galba Commanded, gave ground to the thirty
third Legion for above a hundred paces. But as Galba saw that Antonius's
Moorish Cavalry gained upon his Flanck, he drew up his Archers against him, and
drew off his Companies. In the mean time Pansa, who on his side had engaged
himself a little too far, was hemmed in, and received a wound with a half Pike
in the Belly, which forced him to be carried off. His being wounded so
astonished the Soldiers, that they possessed themselves of the Causway in
great disorder, when the new Troops, instead of seconding of them began
immediately to fly, and were followed by all the rest of the Army, except
Caesar's company of Guards, who made head upon the Causway with Galba, and were
cut to pieces. Galba saved himself on Horseback, and had like to have been
slain by his own very Party, who were rallied hard by a Fort which Torquatus
the Questor had caused in haste to be thrown up. The Office of Questor was in
the nature of a Treasurer General, but he had also Command over the Troops. The
Martial Legion mad with spite and shame, made head in this place, refusing to
enter the Fort, Antonius admiring their Virtue, durst not charge them under
that Fortification, but having made a great slaughter amongst the new
Soldiers, who fled in disorder, retreated. Caesar was at this Battle, where he
mingled himself even in the midst, but the shoal of those who ran away, carried
him with them, notwithstanding he endeavored all he could to the contrary.
Nevertheless, Antonius has Reproached him since that he lost his Coat of Arms
and his Horse there, and did not appear in two days afterward. Hirtius, who
was near Modena, marched upon the first news of the Battle with twenty Cohorts,
and with so great diligence, that though he had near sixty stades to Travel,
he came up with Antonius's Troops, who were retreating disorderly after their
Victory, he charged them furiously, but those brave men, though so surprised,
made yet a vigorous resistance, but at last were forced to give way, Hirtius
pursuing them Pell-mell even into the Marsh, where he durst not engage himself,
and the night too coming on, forced him to a retreat. The Marsh was covered
with the dead and wounded, and Antonius's Soldiers, notwithstanding the
fatigue of the Battle, remained still all the night a Horseback to fetch off
their wounded Companions, whom they carried some behind them, and drew off
others at their Horses Tails, so that by this means a great many were
preserved. The loss was equal on both sides in the first Battle, but in the
second Hirtius had very few Men slain, having taken two Eagles and several
other Colors, but Caesar's company of Guards being entirely destroyed, were
bewailed extremely.

CHAP. XXII. Antonius defeated by Hirtius and Caesar. The death of Hirtius. The
raising of the siege of Modena. Brutus writes to Cicero.
AFTER the Battle both Armies returned to their Camps about Modena, where
Antonius resolved only to defend his Lines without hazarding a second Battle:
On the other side Hirtius and Caesar were for Engaging, and there daily
happened very severe skirmishes. At last the Consul began to move toward that
side of the Mountain, where Antonius's Camp was least fortified, to try if he
could put any relief into the Town, Antonius immediately opposed them with his
Cavalry, who were beaten from their ground, so that he was forced to cause two
Legions to advance. The Enemy rejoicing at these proceedings, charged those
Troops, when the two Legions giving ground, Antonius sent away for another, but
the circumvallation reached so far, and their Succors were so long a time
coming, that the two Legions were totally put to the Rout. Hirtius followed his
advantage very vigorously, entering the Lines, and was already got into the
Quarters of Antonius, but was there slain. Caesar got great Honor upon this
occasion, he carried off the Consul's Body, and taking the Eagle out of the
Standard bearers Hands, who was very much wounded, carried it himself, till the
very minute that Antonius's Troops were absolutely defeated; the night hindered
his total overthrow, and the two Generals continued a Horseback till morning
with all their Troops. Then Antonius called a Council of his Friends, who
advised him to continue the siege, by reason that the two Consuls were the one
wounded, and the other dead, and that Decimus was reduced to the last
extremity. But he fearing lest Caesar, who had a great many Pioneers, should
carry on his Works between him and the City, and by that means get succors
into the place, was afraid also lest those two defeats might loose him Lepidus
and Plancus; so he raised the siege, and retreated up to the Mountains to go
and join himself with Ventidius. It was doubtless in the heat of joy for this
Victory, that Cicero wrote to young Caesar, desiring him in his Letter, That he
would be contented to spare the Republic Brutus and Cassius. The Letter was
sent by Atticus to Brutus, who was very much provoked at it, and complained
very sharply of Cicero, who had also reproached Casca with the murder of
Caesar. Brutus offended at the proceeding, sent word to Atticus, That that
reproach might be returned upon Cicero himself, who had slain more than one
Citizen in his Consulship, and was therefore a greater murderer than ever
Casca was. Is it, added he, because we do not quote the Ides of March upon all
occasions in and out of Season, as he does his Nones of December, that esteems
us less than him? He boasts that he has maintained the War against Antonius,
without ever having drawn his Sword. What is that to me if for the reward of
defeating Antonius, it demanded that one succeed him? This is not any longer,
said he, to be afraid of Slavery, but of the Master that imposes it. And in
another place, Is it out of fear of Octavius 's power that Cicero believes we
ought to allow him these Honors? That fear, says he, is foolish, which obliges
us to provide against an evil by means that are as bad as the evil we are
afraid of, and which perhaps too might have been avoided. We are too much
afraid of Death, Banishment and Poverty. These things appear to Cicero as great
evils, and provided there he but those that will allow him what he desires,
respect him, and praise him, he reckons an honorable Slavery as nothing, if
such a thing as Honor can subsist with so great Infamy. In short, not to
repeat the whole Letter, he said, That he had no great Opinion of those fine
Arts which Cicero was so much a Master of: For what use do we see him make of
all that he has written concerning the Liberty of his Country, true Honor,
Death, Banishment and Poverty. Brutus wrote also to Cicero himself in terms not
quite so sharp, but full as pressing, but the Letter is too long to mingle with
the body of a History, where it will not appear much to the purpose, besides it
is to be seen amongst many others in Cicero's Epistles.

CHAP. XXIII. Decimus speaks to Caesar, who treats him ill. The death of Pansa.
His dying words to Caesar.
DECIMVS was at Macedonia, and in great disputes with himself in what manner he
ought to proceed with Caesar; but as he knew how irreconcilable a hatred he had
reason to expect from him, he thought it his best way to break down all the
Bridges that were upon the River, and after that precaution he sent a Herald to
Caesar, who in the name of Decimus, Gave him thanks for the liberty which he
owed to his relief, and taking all the Romans to Witness, protested that it was
only by mere hazard that Decimus had been engaged in the unhappy Conspiracy.
At last he begged of him, That he would allow of a free interview, the River
being between them. Caesar received this discourse very surlily, and made
answer, That Decimus owed him no obligation, that he came not thither by any
means for his relief, but to fight with Antonius, who nevertheless might one
day come to be his Friend, but that Decimus should ever be his mortal Enemy,
and that he would neither speak with him, nor see him. Therefore, says he, let
him go wherever he has a mind to go, since those who are at Rome will have it
for Decimus, who was near the River understood this answer, And be^ought Caesar
that he would only for the Letters of the Senate, which confirmed him in the
Government of Gall, and forbad him admittance into the Province. Caesar, though
offended with his insolence, did not think it seasonable at this time to resent
it, though he might easily have done it, so he returned to Bulloigne to see
Pansa, who lay there wounded; they wrote both to the Senate, and at the
instance of Cicero there were ordered 50 days of public Devotions and
Thanksgivings, which had never been done for any other Victory before. The
promise also of 500 Drams to the Legions was confirmed with a farther
Provision, that it should be paid to the Widows or Heirs of those who died in
Battle. Pansa died of his wounds some few days afterward, whose death
occasioned some suspicion of Caesar, at least the Physician he made use of, one
whose name was Glyco, was put into Prison, and accused for having poisoned the
wound; but Brutus answered for the Honesty of the Physician, and wrote in his
behalf to Cicero, yet still Caesar's Enemies spread the suspicions abroad, as
also that he had slain Hirtius in the heat of the Battle. But Pansa himself was
so well persuaded to the contrary, that he desired to see him before his death,
and thus spoke to him, I loved your Father more than my self, and when he was
slain in the Senate, I would have hazarded my own life to have saved his, had I
been furnished with Arms. I would do his Memory Justice in doing you some
Service, which my misfortune hinders me from on this occasion, which should be
by advertising you of what designs the Senate have against you, for it is
nothing but the fear of your Troops which forces those People to caress you,
and they had never allowed you those Honors you are at present possessed of,
but to fire you more to the destruction of Antonius. Their business is to dash
you to pieces one against the other, by that means to re-establish Pompey's
Pa^t^, is being the thing which they most pressingly recommended to Hirtius and
me, but the Friendship wherewith Caesar once honored me, obliges me to give
you such Counsel as I my self would take upon the same occasion, unite your
self with Antonius, for it is the only way to preserve your life and advance
your Fortune. I could not with Honor have given you this advice sooner,
because it would have betrayed the Trust which they reposed in me, but at
present, since Antonius is ouerthrown, Hirtius dead, and I just following him,
I think my self discharged of my Oath, and therefore may acquit my self of what
I owe to the memory of Caesar. I surrender you your Troops, and would also
restore you those which the Senate gave me, did I not fear it might cause their
aversion toward you, for the Commanders are but so many private Spies upon our
Conduct, so I would have you consent that they may be put into the hands of
Torquatus. He died about a quarter of an hour afterward, having given his
Troops to Torquatus, who by orders from the Senate, carried them to Decimus,
and Caesar sent the Bodies of the two Consuls to Rome with great Magnificence.

CHAP. XXIV. Cassius in Syria. He raises great Forces. The Conduct of
Cleopatra. Brutus defeats Antonius's Brother, and takes him Prisoner.
IN this manner the Senate endeavored by all sort of ways to re-establish
their Authority, and the news which came from the East gave them very great
hopes of it. Cassius arriving in Syria, found the Legions in that Province
revolted, by reason of the death of Julius.
Sextus, who was a young Man, and a Kinsman of Julius Caesar, who had left him
there upon Honor to Command a Legion, whereof Cacilius Bassus was Tribune or
Colonel. This young Man lived very disorderly, and when Bassus advised him to
reform his Conduct, he used him ill, so that the Soldiers provoked to see
their Colonel affronted fell to Mutiny, and in the Tumult Sextus was slain.
They well knew that Caesar, who was then alive, would not forgive them that
fault, so they desperately resolved to stand by what they had done, and
debauched also another Legion into their Crime, Caesar sent orders to Marcus to
reduce them to their Obedience with three Legions which he Commanded, but the
Mutineers got the better of him so far, that he was forced to demand the
assistence of Crispus, who had three other Legions in Bithynia, they had
besieged Bassus, who defended himself very well, when after the death of
Caesar, Cassius with the Senates orders arrived in the Province. The Mutineers
were transported with this occasion, so they declared immediately for the
Senate, and Cassius managed it so well, that he brought over Marcus and Crispus
also into his Interest, by that means re-uniting all those Troops under his own
Command. He had also notice that Alienus was in Palestine with four Legions
that Cleopatra had raised, and which she had put into Alienus's hands by the
Command of Dolabella. Cleopatra reigned then in Egypt by the Authority of
Caesar, who loved her, and had placed her upon the Throne after the death of
her Brother, and it was in acknowledgment of those favors, that she had raised
these Troops to offer him their service, when he should march against the
Parthians. The death of this great Man had altered those thoughts to others of
Revenge, so understanding that Dolabella was in Syria, and that he had declared
himself against Caesar's Murderers by the death of Tr^bonius, she sent him
those Legions under the Command of Alienus. Cassius, with his Army marched
against him, which forced Alienus, finding he was not strong enough to give him
Battle with the four Legions to go over to his side, by which means Cassius was
in a short time at the head of 12 Legions. He imparted this good news to all
his Friends, and went afterward to besiege Dolabella in Laodicea, which is a
City of Syria. On the other side, Brutus in Macedonia, the Government whereof
Hortentius had put into his hands, by the means of Apuloius's Money had drawn
to him all such of Pompey's Soldiers as were in Thessaly, and all the
Neighboring Princes, who still had a respect for the Memory of Pompey,
assisted him with their Troops, so that the whole World was again divided
between two Men, for they were no more, since it was in effect the Credit of
Caesar and Pompey which kept up the War between those of their several Parties,
Cajus the Brother of Antonius was gone with one Legion into Macedonia, where
Brutus, who was much stronger than he, might easily have destroyed him, but
resolving to Husband well the lives of his Fellow Citizens, and the Repute
which he had already gotten for great Moderation, he contented himself to weary
him out with moving from one place to another, and it was Cicero's Son who
Commanded the Party against him. He was as yet but a young Man, though of great
expectation, and Brutus praised him extremely in the Letters which he wrote to
Cicero. He got the better of Cajus in two or three little encounters, the ill
success whereof at last was the reason that all Cajus his Soldiers surrendered
themselves to Brutus, and he himself was at last forced to follow their
example. Brutus used him very well, without depriving him of any marks of his
Dignity till the death of Cicero.

CHAP. XXV. Caesar demands the Honor of Triumph, which is refused him. He
attempts the Consulship by Cicero's interference.
THE news of these proceedings was received in Italy with very different
sentiments, the Senate were extremely rejoiced at it, but young Caesar seemed
to have a very little share in their pleasure, the last advice of Pansa wholly
employed his thoughts, and to sound the inclinations of the Senate, he sent to
demand a Triumph, but that Honor was denied to Caesar, who from the very
moment resolved to use his best endeavors to reunite himself with Antonius.
He sent him back all the Prisoners which he had taken at the Battle of Modena,
and amongst the rest Decius, a particular friend of Antonius having first
discovered to him his intentions, he let Ventidius's Army pass, which he might
have destroyed, and also saw him particularly himself, to complain to him of
the Divisions that ruined the interest of their Party. At last he sent to
Lepidus, and Pollio, to give them to understand the same thing, and all this
with the greatest secrecy in the world. In the mean time Decimus wrote word to
the Senate that Antonius was ruined, that he was not able to stand before him,
and that he would undertake in a short time to chase him to the other side of
the Alps, the joy for this news was every where apparent, so without any
farther consideration a Committee was appointed of ten Senators for the
drawing up of a Process against Antonius, and abolishing all that he had done
during his Consulship. This was an oblique blow with which they intended to
wound the Ordinances of Julius Caesar. Those of Pompey's Party solicited
Decimus that he would demand the Consulship in the room of Hirtius and Pansa.
Caesar also had the same design, but discovered it at first only to Cicero, to
whom he sent word, That he much desired to see himself once Consul with him,
that so he might be instructed in those rules and methods which are requisite
for the government of the Commonwealth. That for his part he only desired the
name of Consul, to recompense himself in some measure for the loss of his
Triumph, but that he would leave the Authority entirely to Cicero. He could not
have thought of any thing better to prevail upon the weakness of that Man, all
his great knowledge and experience gave way to that bait of Vainglory, so he
proposed it to the Senate with a great many circumlocutions, which nevertheless
could not disguise it so well, but that his vanity was perceived, and made
light of by the Senate, who laughed at him for his pains, and the Kinsmen of
the Conspiratours hindered any farther proceeding toward the Election of
Consuls.

CHAP. XXVI. Antonius makes his retreat into Gall. He makes himself Master of
Lepidus's Army. He returns into Italy with seventeen Legions.
ANTONIUS began now to understand his true interest, those Friends which Caesar
had sent to him, had opened his Eyes, but he had a mind in the first place
thoroughly to discover the intentions of Lepidus, who was advanced out of Spain
as far as the place where the Rivers of Rhone and Saone meet; the Senate had
given orders to him and Plancus to fortify themselves in that place, and it was
at this time that Plancus laid the foundation of the City of Lions. Antonius
passed over the Alps, having first gained Cule^, who guarded the narrow
passages, in all that march his Army suffered most extremely, and Antonius even
out-did himself in instructing his Soldiers by his own example to endure their
weariness and their wants; at last he came and encamped hard by Lepidus, but
fortified himself not in the least, because he would make it known that he
thought himself near his Friends. Nevertheless Lepidus sent him word that the
Senate had given him orders to prosecute him as an Enemy, but Antonius, who had
let his beard and hair grow, came and showed himself in that condition to
Lepidus's Soldiers, they had all served with him under Julius Caesar, esteemed
him for his Courage, and the Civility of his Manners, so that the condition
they now saw him in, moved them to compassion; he spoke to them several times
between the two Camps, where they would meet him, though Lepidus did all that
lay in his power to prevent it. Antonius Soldiers were daily telling them
stories of the goodness of their General, that he marched the first on foot
into the middle of the Snow himself, comforting those whom he saw were wearied,
which gained the very hearts of them; at last, Lepidus perceiving that he was
no longer Master of his Troops, that they had sent Claudius and Laelius to
Antonius to invite him to come into their Camp, where they would receive him
for their General, and at the same time cut off Lepidus, if he would give them
Orders. Antonius forbad them the doing of him any violence, and the next day
passed over a shallow part of the River, which separated them, and came into
Lepidus's Camp. The Soldiers received him with great Acclamations, and Lepidus
being very much terrified, offered him his Command. Antonius refused it, but
was willing to divide with him, though the Authority should still remain
entirely his. Plancus, who was loath to expose himself to the like disgrace,
past Iserum with four Legions, and retreated into Savoy, as if he had a design
of joining himself with Decimus, but it was indeed to make choice of his Party
according as Fortune should declare her self. By this means Antonius was at the
head of 23 Legions, and above ten thousand Horse, he left six Legions on the
other side of the Alps, under the Command of one of his drinking Companions,
called Varius, but in railery surnamed Cotyllo, (that word signifying a Flagon)
and returned over the Mountains with 17 Legions and all his Cavalry.

CHAP. XXVII. Caesar pursues the Consulship. He speaks to his Soldiers. He
marches toward Rome. The fright the Senate were in.
NOW to make the best use of that amazement which this success of Antonius had
brought into Rome, Caesar resolved once more to set his design on foot of
pursuing the Consulship. The Senate had changed their method, they had declared
Caesar General with Decimus, to make War against Antonius, but at the same time
had offended him by a foolish way of proceeding, in sending ten Commissaries to
carry the Money, which had been promised to the two Legions, without naming
himself for that employment. These Commissaries had private orders to endeavor
to corrupt the Soldiers of the two Legions, and to persuade them to go and
join Decimus, where it was told them their Money should be ready; but Caesar
took care they should be so well looked after, that they could get no
opportunity of speaking to the Soldiers; and when he let them understand how
well he was informed of their design, they were so afraid, that they returned
to Rome without ever so much as distributing the money. Caesar took this
occasion to convince his Soldiers, That what the Senate aimed at, was only
the destruction of his Father's Party by the divisions they endeavored to sow
amongst them; so he unravelled all the secret of that Policy which had caused
so many waverings between him and Antonius. He made them take notice how they
endeavored to raise jealousy amongst his Troops, by that distinction of
Recompenses, and after all, the last attempt which they had made toward the
weakening of Caesar's Ordinances. What security, said he, can ye pretend to have
now for those Houses, those Inheritances, and those Goods which my Father
allotted you? Do ye not believe also that my life must be in danger amongst the
Relations and Friends of those who cruel^y murdered him? But it is not the
care of that which most nearly touches me, I would give it up with
cheerfulness, if that Sacrifice would secure the safety of so many Men of
consideration as have followed my interests; ye know that I am not Ambitious,
and ye have seen me too refuse those mar^s of Honor which ye have offered me,
but I desire some of you at present, in consideration of your selves, the only
way to preserve your Lives and Fortunes, must be the making of me Consul by
your Votes, after that, we will make it our business to secure you in the
possession of those Goods which my Father left you. We will revenge his death,
and shall be in a better condition for the distribution of Rewards. The
Soldiers received this Proposition with a great deal of Joy, and immediately
named Deputies to go and make their demand to the Senate, who returned no
favorable answer, excusing themselves in regard of Caesar's Youth. But the
Deputies being well instructed, alleged Corvinus, the two Scipio's, Pompey and
Dolabella, who had all obtained that Magistracy before they came to Age, and
that Caesar himself had a dispensation from the Senate. They spoke these things
with a certain Souldier-like Liberty, which was not very agreeable to the
Senators, who interrupted them with crying out against it, when a certain
Captain called Cornelius, who was the first of the Deputies, laying his Hand
upon his Sword, said, If ye will not give it him, here is* that shall. After
these words he left the Senate, and returned to give Caesar an account of the
ill success of his Deputation. The Soldiers provoked by their refusal, cried
out, That they desired to be lead to Rome, and that Caesar as Heir to his
Father, had sufficient Authority to make whom he pleased Consuls. He took care
this heat of theirs should not grow cold again, so he marched toward Rome with
eight Legions, and passed the Rubicon as his Father had done before; he divided
his Army into two Bodies, the briskest whereof he took with him, that he might
surprise his Enemies by his diligence, leaving orders with the rest to come and
join him by small marches, and understanding that the Senate had deputed new
Commissaries with the Money, he sent out a party of Soldiers before to meet
them, which so terrified them, that they immediately returned to Rome.

CHAP. XXVIII. The Senates want of resolution. Caesar enters into the City. He
treats Cicero ill, and is declared Consul with Pedius.
NOW there was nothing but disorder to be found in the City, and as it usually
happened upon the like occasions every Senator was for laying the blame of
their ill Conduct upon his Neighbor, but that was now to little purpose, for
some resolution must be taken, so it was concluded, That one half of the Money
which the Senate had promised to the two Legions, should be sent them, together
with a farther promise of as much more to the others. That Caesar only should
have the care of the distribution of this Money, and be permitted to demand the
Consulship, though he were not himself there present. So Deputies were sent to
acquaint him with these Resolutions, but the very moment after they appeared
again too mean as well as too rash. Some foolish remainders of that fierceness
which was natural to those ancient Romans, made them ashamed to yield thus to
the proceedings of a young Man, and the insolence of the Soldiery. By chance
too at the same time two Legions who came from Libya arrived at the Gates of
the City, they were received as a Succor sent thither from the Gods, and it
was resolved with these Troops, and the Legion that Pansa had sent back to the
Senate, joined with such as were fit to bear Arms within the Walls to defend
the City. So Pretors were appointed to Command them, and great hopes there
seemed to be that these marks of their Courage and Resolution might astonish
Caesar. His Mother and his Sisters were in the City, but when the Senate caused
them to be sought for, to secure them as Hostages, they were not to be found,
which was an instance that Caesar had still some faithful Friends there; the
danger that those Persons who were so dear to him were in, had made him to
redouble his diligence, so he sent his Cavalry with all the haste they could
make to seize upon the Gates, and assure the People of his good Intentions,
himself following close at their Heels with his Legions, the sight whereof soon
moderated the Zeal of those Men who appeared so hot for the defense of their
Country, so without any resistance they seized upon the Quirinal Mountain,
where Caesar's Friends, and the most Illustrious of the Senators came to
salute him. The People mingled themselves amongst the Soldiers, bringing them
refreshments, and the next day Caesar, attended by some of the best of his Men
for the guard of his Person, made his entrance into the City, where he was
every where received with the joyful Acclamations of the People, and met by
his Mother and Sisters, who had been retreated amongst the Vestals. His Mother
was called Actia, the Daughter of Actius Balbus, and Iulia the Sister of Julius
Caesar, and his Sisters all bore the name of Octavia, the youngest whereof
afterward Married Antonius, though she proved unfortunate in the Match, by
reason of the madness wherewith Cleopatra had bewitched that Man, though
Octavia had much the advantage of her both in Beauty and Wisdom, which made
her esteemed for one of the most Virtuous Ladies of her time. The three Legions
that were in the City, sent also to offer their service to Caesar, who received
them with the Pretors that Commanded them, all, except Cornutus, who slew
himself with his own hands. Cicero was one of the last in paying him his
Devoirs, and Caesar after some sharp railery, told him, That he was the last of
his Enemies who had visited him. It had been reported to Caesar how Cicero
should say in the Senate, That the young man ought to be praised, honored, and
advanced. The last word bearing in the Latin a double Interpretation, for
Tollere signifies as well to take away ones life, so that the equivocation
seemed something remarkable. The next night several Persons spread about a
report that the Martial and third Legions would take Party with the Senate, who
had no more Wit but to believe it, and sent a Praetor, whose Name was Acilius
Crassus into the March of Ancona to raise Forces. The Senators Assembled
themselves, and Cicero, offended at Caesar's railery, was one of the first who
came to the place, receiving the others as they entered with a great deal of
Joy. But day appearing, soon convinced them of their Error, and Cicero fled
out of the City. It would be hard to believe that such prudent and discerning
Men as were then in the Senate should be so fickle, were we not convinced by a
thousand experiences, that great Interests as well as violent Passions will
disorder the most solid Judgments. Caesar made himself very merry with this
accident, but caused his Troops to approach as far as the Field of Mars, and to
persuade a good Opinion of his moderation, he forgave Crassus, who came to seek
him, and ask his Pardon. After which, he caused the public Money, which was
kept at Ianiculum, to be brought, whereof he paid 2500 Drams to every
Soldier, and promised satisfaction for what was behind, so they proceeded to
the Election of Consuls, and Caesar to leave the People in appearance the
liberty of their Votes, went out of the City and was declared Consul with
Pedius, who had granted him his part of what his Uncle had left them, he
immediately came back again so soon as he understood he was chosen, and it is
said, That as he was sacrificing according to Custom, there were seen twelve
Vultures, being the same number which appeared to Romulus the Founder of Rome.
His first public act was the Declaration which he made to the People of Julius
Caesar's having adopted him according to the intention of the Law in that Case,
so the Adoption was confirmed, and his Fathers ^^eed-men, many whereof were in
possession of great Estates, according to Custom acknowledged him for their
Patron, and afterward did him very considerable service both in their Persons
and their Fortunes.

CHAP. XXIX. Caesar causes Brutus and Cassius to be Condemned, with all those
who had murdered his Uncle. Antonius pursues Decimus, who is at last slain.
AS all the thoughts of young Caesar were intent upon revenging the death of
his Father, he no sooner saw the Sovereign Authority in his hands, but he set
himself seriously to work about the business, so causing the Arrest which the
Senate had sent out against Dolabella to be cancelled, Brutus and Cassius were
accused of Treason and Murder by Cornificius and This man was of no great
Family, but was afterward the chief Favorite of Augustus, by reason of his
Valor and Merit, he married Julia the Daughter of Augustus, the Name of his
Family was Vipsallius.
Agrippa, and the other Accomplices by others of Caesar's Friends, the Accused
were all Condemned for Contumacy, and it is said, that when (as the Custom
was) Brutus was cited to appear, many could not forbear from weeping, and a
Senator named Sicilius, had the boldness to declare, That Brutus was innocent,
and valued himself upon the matter. Caesar took that opportunity to make yet
his moderation more remarkable in pardoning of him for the present, but found a
way afterward to be revenged of him in the Proscription of the Triumvirate.
Quintus Gallius, the Brother of a Praetor, was afterward accused, for that at
the solicitations of Antonius, he had Conspired against Caesar, the People
plundered the House of the Praetor, who was not then at Rome, and the Senate
Condemned Quintus to death, Caesar only ordered him to go and find out his
Brother, but he disappeared in his Journey, and was no more heard of. In the
mean time news was brought, that Brutus, who was in Macedonia, had published,
That he would come and appear to Justice at the head of twenty Legions. Caesar,
who did not desire he should be so well accompanied, was resolved to spare him
one half of the Journey. The Senate had given him the charge of making War
against Antonius and Lepidus, he went from Rome upon this expedition with great
preparation and very good Troops, leaving Pedius his Colleague in the City, who,
as of his own proper motion proposed to the Senate, That all seeds of Division
might be rooted out by Cancelling whatsoever had been ordered against Antonius
and Lepidus. This Proposition was by no means very agreeable, but the Authority
of those who made it, rendered it necessary, so the Senate wrote to Caesar for
his Opinion of the matter, who as if with some violence upon himself, and being
forced by his Soldiers, at last consented to it. In acknowledgment of this
good turn, Antonius sent him word that he would go and find out Decimus, whose
Person was very odious to all Julius Caesar's Friends, and Plancus and Pollio
in consideration of Caesar, joined Antonius's Army with six Legions, Decimus
had ten under his Command, but the four best of them, who consisted of old
Soldiers, were in a very ill condition, by reason of the sickness and other
Fatigues which they had suffered in Modena, the six others were new Men,
without any experience, so that he durst not stay for Antonius with those
Forces, but laid a design of retreating into Macedonia by the way of Ravenna,
and the Adriatic Gulf, but Caesar opposed him there with his Troops, so that
Decimus was reduced to a necessity of thinking how he might pass the Rhine, and
make his retreat good through Germany. The fatigues and dangers of this Voyage
so ill rellished with the new Soldiers, that they deserted him, and came over
to Antonius's Army, Decimus seeing himself by this means abandoned by all his
Infantry, dismissed all the stranger Cavalry who were with him, and out of his
own Purse furnished them with Money for the charge of their Voyage, retaining
only with him three hundred of those who were best disposed to his interest,
with this attendance he marched as far as the Rhine, when being affrighted at
the rapidness of the stream, and the largeness of the River, each man was for
seeking a civil pretense of drawing off, so there remained with Decimus only
ten of his Friends. In this extremity he put on a Gallick habit to disguise
himself, and as he perfectly understood that Language, he believed he might
easily pass for some Cavalier that had quitted the service. But the misfortune
that followed him, or rather the punishment of his Crime brought him into the
hands of certain Moroders, who without taking any Party, were for plundering
all they met withal; he demanded to speak with their Captain, and found by
chance that it was one Camillus, whom he had formerly obliged, this Camillus
received Decimus indeed very honorably, but according to the Custom of those
sort of People, gave advice to Antonius of what had happened; Antonius was
touched with much Compassion to understand the sad condition of a man so
considerable for his Birth, and the great Offices he had born, but as he could
do him no favor, and was therefore resolved not to see him, he sent word to
Camillus to send him his Head, which was immediately obeyed, and when it was
brought to him, he caused it to be buried, so He was called Decimus Junius
Brutus.
Decimus was the second of Julius Caesar's Murderers, upon whom the death of
that great Man was revenged; he had always been of his Party against Pompey,
and Caesar had honored him with a particular Friendship, as appears in his
Will. He had upon many great occasions made him Commander of his Cavalry, and
at last had given him the Government of Gaul, which were things that made his
Action appear by so much the more Infamous and Horrible. Another of the
Murderers called Basilius, perished also at the same time by the hands of his
Slaves, whom he had treated with all manner of Cruelty.

CHAP. XXX. Presages which were before the Triumvirate. The Alliance of Caesar,
Antonius and Lepidus, called the Triumvirate. They meet in a certain Island.
Their Ordinances.
NOthing so much satisfies the Pride of Mankind, as the Opinion whereby they
flatter themselves with being able to foresee what shall happen, since by that
means they imagine they are in some degree equal to the Gods, and it was
doubtless that presumption which first introduced Auguries, Presages and all
those sorts of Divinings, and which so much recommended them to the Romans. All
their Histories are full of them, but more particularly upon this occasion.
They believed that something must have been wanting to the importance of that
great Issue which overthrew the estate of the whole Universe, and laid the
foundation of the greatest Empire that ever was in the World upon the Ruins of
the Roman Commonwealth, if it had not been foretold by Prodigies. Dogs were
heard to howl round about the City like Wolves, and Wolves were seen running
even about the Market place, where they took away the Meat from the Shambles;
an Ox spoke, as also did an Infant, as it was fresh born from the Womb of its
Mother; some of the Statues sweated blood, and others water; terrible signs
were seen round about the Sun. At last showers of Stones fell from Heaven, and
the Temples and Images of the Gods were broken with Thunder. The Senate
terrified with these Prodigies, sent into Tuscany for those Men called Augures,
who professed the explanation of these sort of Prodigies, and out of this
Country it was that this Superstition first came into Rome. The eldest Augure
said, That by these Presages the Gods foretold the restoring of Kings to Rome,
where they should have absolute Command over all men, except, said he, my self,
and at these words he held his breath so obstinately, that he stifled himself
in the midst of the Assembly. The success was but too answerable to his
Conjectures. Caesar and Antonius were united by the means of Lepidus, who
obliged them to see one another for the adjusting of their pretensions; for
this interview was chosen a little Island made by the River Panarus hard by
Modena, hither Caesar and Antonius came, each with four Legions, the River
being between them, Lepidus first went over alone into the Island, to discover
if there were reason to fear any surprizal, when he had satisfied himself, he
held up his Robe, which was a signal for them to approach, Caesar and Antonius
advanced, each with 300 Men a-piece, whom they left at the foot of those
Bridges which had been made there for that present purpose, and only
themselves entered the Island, where they embraced, and afterward sat down in
an open place, where both the Armies might see every thing that passed. Caesar,
as he was Consul, sat in the midst, so they spent about two or three days
there for the regulating their interests. This was toward the end of November,
in the year above dated. At last it was agreed upon, That Caesar should quit
the Quality of Consul, the Title whereof should be left to Ventidius for the
rest of the year, That the Supreme Authority should be divided between those
three in the same manner as it had been executed by Consuls, That they should
keep it for the space of five years under the name of Triumviri, and in the
Quality of the Reformers of the Commonwealth, That they should cause that
Authority to be confirmed by the Roman People, That Antonius should have all
entire on the other side of the Alps, Lepidus that on this side of the Alps,
with Spain, and Caesar Africa, with the Isles of Sardignia, and Sicily, That
Italy should remain in Common, as also the Eastern Provinces, which were at
present in the possession of Brutus and Cassius. In this manner, says Plutarch,
did these men divide the World between them, as if it had been their
Inheritance. The charge of making War upon the Conspiratours was given to
Antonius, and Caesar, while Lepidus was to stay at Rome with four Legions. To
Antonius's Troops were added four more, and three to Caesar's, to the end that
they might each have an Army of twenty Legions; afterward they disposed the
matter of Rewards, and that Article was indeed of great importance for the
retaining of the Troops in their Obedience; then was it ordered, That the Lands
and Houses of 18 of the best Cities of Italy which should be chosen out by the
Triumviri, according as they found reason to be angry with them, should be
abandoned in propriety to the Soldiers. The greatest of them were Capua,
Regium, Benevent, Luceria, Rimini and Vibonia. All this was regulated without
the least contest or dispute, but they appeared something divided as to the
revenge they resolved to take upon their Enemies; Antonius first demanded
Cicero, whom Caesar by some remainders of Friendship which he retained for him
would have preserved; Caesar would have Lucius surnamed like himself, Caesar,
and Antonius's Uncle, and Lepidus was resolved to get rid of his Brother
Paulus, who had appeared so violent in prosecuting his Condemnation, when he
joined with Antonius. At last hatred got the better of Friendship, so Caesar
abandoned Cicero, for Lucius, and Lepidus had permission to put his Brother to
death, and that their revenge too might appear the greater, they resolved to
imitate the manner that Marius and Sylla had made use of. Upon a Tablet was
written in great Letters the name of the Man Condemned, and this Tablet was set
up in the public place, which was the thing they called Proscription. From
this moment any man might kill those who were Proscribed, and as great Rewards
were set upon their Heads, it was very hard for any of them to escape the fury
of the Soldiers animated by their Interests. These terrible Articles being
written and signed, Caesar went to declare them to the Armies, who gave
testimony of their exceeding Joy thereat, and then all the Soldiers of the
three Armies came together, and mutually treated and entertained each other. In
this manner was concluded that famous Triumvirate, the consequences whereof
were so terrible, and which gave the last blow to the Roman Liberty. The
Triumvirate is a Latin word, signifying a Partnership between three Men, that
of a Triumvir serving to express any one of them.

CHAP. XXXI. The Decree of the Triumvirate. The Proscription. Murders up and
down the City.
THE Triumviri having thus established their Authority, drew up a Roll of all
those they resolved should die, wherein though hatred seemed to have the
greatest part, yet Interest also at last came in for her share. They wanted a
great deal of Money for the carrying on of the War against Brutus and Cassius,
who found powerful Succors in the Riches of Asia, and from the assistence of
the Eastern Princes, when on the other side these had only Europe for their
share, and especially Italy, which had been wasted, and drained by long Civil
Wars; they laid great Imposts upon Salt and other Merchandises, but that not
being sufficient, they consulted with themselves to proscribe a great many of
the richest Men of Rome, and so make advantage by the Confiscation of their
Estates, but first they declared only the names of seventeen Persons who were
the most heinous Enemies of these three Princes, Paulus was the first in the
behalf of Lepidus his Brother; Lucius Caesar followed Paulus, by Caesar's
Order, and Cicero for Antonius; after these, were named Plancus and Plotius his
Brother designed Consuls for the year ensuing, the Father-in-Law of Pollio, and
Thoranius, Caesar's Procuratour. The Decree of Proscription began in these
Terms.

Marcus Lepidus, Marcus Antonius, and Octavius Caesar, Chosen for the
Reformation of the Commonwealth. If the Generosity of Julius Caesar had not
persuaded him to pardon those faithless Men, and give them besides the lives
they were unworthy of, Honors also, and Offices which they deserved as little,
after having taken up Arms against his Person, he had not fallen so cruelly by
their Treason, nor should we have been forced to use the ways of Rigor against
those who have declared us Enemies to our Country, but the hateful designs
which they have formed against us, the horrible Treachery they showed toward
Caesar, and the knowledge which we have of their Malice and Obstinacy in their
pernicious Opinions force us to prevent those Evils which may fall upon us. The
rest contained a justification of the Triumvirates proceedings, founded upon
the advantages which Caesar had acquired to the Romans by his Victories, the
ingratitude of his Murderers, who had been almost all of them honored by his
Beneficence, and by his Friendship, the necessity of punishing those Enemies,
who by their Artifices might involve the City of Rome in unhappy Divisions,
while Caesar and Antonius were employed against Brutus and Cassius, and the
Example of Sylla. At last, after having implored the assistence of the Gods,
and good Fortune, they concluded thus, That no man should dare to receive,
conceal, or help to escape any of those who were Proscribed upon any pretense
whatsoever, nor to give them Money, or other relief, nor to hold any
intelligence with them upon pain of being put into the fame state without hopes
of pardon. That whosoever should bring in the head of a Proscribed Man, should
have 2000 Crowns, if a Freed-man, and if he were a Slave, his liberty and 1000
Crowns. That the Slave who should kill his Master, should have besides that,
moreover the right of a free Citizen. That the same reward should be given to
those wh^ should declare the place where any Proscribed Man was retreated, and
that the name of the Discoverer should not be written in any Register or other
Memorial, to the end that it might never be known who he was. The Soldiers
arrived before the Decree, and killed at first four of the Proscripts, some in
their Lodgings, and others in the Streets, after which they ran up and down to
the Houses and the Temples, causing a general Terror, nothing was to be heard
but cries and lamentations, and in regard the Decree was not yet made public,
every one was afraid, and fansied himself in the number of those that were
Condemned, some even became so very desperate, that they resolved to involve
the whole City in their destruction, and set it on fire, Pedius hindered this
disorder by causing it to be published, That only some few of the Enemies of
the Triumvirate were sought after, and that the others had nothing to be afraid
of. So the next day he caused to be posted up the names of those seventeen who
were Condemned, but heated himself so much with running up and down to satisfy
the minds of the People, that he died the night following.

CHAP. XXXII. The entry of the Triumvirate into Rome. Murders committed, and
the sad condition which that City was in.
AFTER this the Triumvirate made their entry into the City upon three several
days, Caesar upon the first, Antonius upon the second, and Lepidus upon the
third* each bringing with him a Legion for his Guard. The Law by which they
invested themselves with Consular Authority for the space of five years, and
declared themselves Reformers of the Commonwealth was published by Titius.
Tribune of the People, and the night following they added the names of 130
Persons to those they had already Proscribed. A little time after they
proclaimed 150 more, upon pretense that they had been forgotten, by which means
the unfortunate number increased every day, till it amounted to 300 Senators,
and above 2000 Knights. No man durst refuse entrance into his House to any of
the Soldiers, who searched the most secret places, and Rome at this time
appeared like a Town that was exposed to waste and pillage. In this disorder
several who had never been Condemned, either by malice or mistake were slain,
and known afterward by their heads not being cut off. In short, all the most
Tragic fury that either revenge, hatred, or interest could produce, and all
the most generous kindness that love and fidelity could inspire, were to be
seen in diverse accidents relating to this Proscription. Salvius a Tribune of
the People, was the first that was slain as he was sitting at the Table, and
entertaining his Friends, because he had too lightly forsaken Antonius's
Interest, whom he had supported against Cicero. The Praetor Minutius was lost by
the folly of those who in point of Honor would follow him, and were the cause
of his being discovered. Annulis and Thauranius were betrayed by their own
Sons, who by Divine Justice were afterward rewarded for it. Ignatius and his
Sons slew each other. The tenderness of a Father was fatal to B^avus, who came
back and willingly suffered death to save his Sons. And Ligarius drowned
himself in despair, for that he could not help his Brother, whom he saw ^lain
before his face. Salassus his Wife betrayed her Husband, and Fulvius was
delivered by a Slave that he kept. Statius at the Age of 24 years, was
Proscribed for his great Riches, which he abandoned to pillage, and setting his
House on fire, burnt himself with it. Coepio, after having made a brave
resistance, died with his Sword in his hand, and Veratinus having got together
a great many more Proscripts besides himself, slew by their help a considerable
number of Soldiers, and made his escape into Sicily. Naso snatched a Sword out
of one of the Soldiers hands, and with it killed the Slave that had betrayed
him. On the contrary, another Slave slew him who Commanded the Party that had
cut his Masters Throat. Aemilius seeing some Soldiers running after one of
these unfortunate People, asked, Who the Proscribed man was? It is your self,
said one of the Soldiers who knew him, and immediately slew him. And Cillius
and Decius seeing their Names written in the Tablet, attempting unadvisedly to
fly, by that means drew the Soldiers after them, and were ^lain. Icillius
joining himself with some People who were carrying a dead Body out of the City,
was slain by the Guards at the Gate, who knew him, by taking notice that there
was one bearer more than the ordinary number. Varus, who had hid himself in a
Mar^h near Minuturnum, was taken for a Robber, but discovering his name to make
himself known, was slain by some Soldiers, who by chance were there. Largus
having been spared by some Soldiers of his Acquaintance, and meeting others
that pursued him, he returned back to those who had saved him, to the end that
they might gain the reward of killing him. The Head of Rufus being brought to
Antonius, who was Proscribed, because he refused to sell a fair House which
stood near Fulvia's, he said, That that Present belonged to his Wife, and sent
it to her.

CHAP. XXXIII. Some stirs amongst the People. The death of Cicero.
NOtwithstanding the fear which these terrible examples had generally caused,
the People forbore not to show some courage. A certain Slave having hid his
Master, took his habit upon him, and presented himself to the Soldiers, who
were in search of him, but another Slave discovered the Fact, and the Master
was slain, upon which the People rose up against this faithless Fellow, and the
Triumviri were forced to cause him to be punished, and the trusty Slave to be
rewarded. Another having betrayed his Master Aterius, and obtaining his
Liberty, taken possession of his Goods, the Children of Aterius, pursued him up
and down the City to do him violence; upon this the People rose again, so that
the Triumvirate restored the Goods to the Children, and put the Slave into
their hands, upon pretense that he had exceeded, the terms of the Decree. There
were a hundred Examples of the like nature, which would be too long to recount:
but the Eloquence of Cicero, and the obligation which all learned Men have to
this day to his Memory, and the Works he has left behind him, deserve that we
insist a little upon the circumstances of his death. He was with his Brother
Quintus at Tusculum, one of his Country Houses, where they understood the news
of the Proscription, so they went both to Astyra to embark themselves for their
passage into Macedonia, but having in their haste and fear forgotten to take
Money with them, Quintus returned and was slain a few days after, together with
his Sons, who suffered themselves to be a long time tormented before they would
discover where their Father was concealed. Cicero went a-board a certain Ship,
but the inconveniences of his Age augmented by the disorders he was in, and the
fatigues of being at Sea forced him to row back to land; there divided between
the hopes which he had in Caesar's Friendship, and the fear of death, he formed
a thousand resolutions, and amongst the rest to go and kill himself in Caesar's
presence, by that means to fasten upon his Person those Furies which revenge
the rights of violated Friendship. In the mean time he could find no way for
his safety, and after all these inquietudes, caused himself to be carried in a
Felluca to a certain House which he had near Capua. It is said, that during
this short Voyage, several Crows coming from a certain Temple of Apollo, which
stands by the Seaside, perched themselves upon the Sails and rigging of the
little Vessel that carried him, and when he was ashore, and in his House the
same Crows came and fluttered about the Window of the Chamber, where he was
retired to rest himself; one of those very Crows came even into the Room, and
with his bill spread the Clothes that covered Cicero: the example of this
Creature was the occasion that his Slaves became sensible of their own
Idleness, in that they took no more pains to save the life of a man for whose
preservation the very Birds of the air seemed to be concerned; so they took him
up almost by force to carry him to Sea, but being so very famous and well known
as he was, every step he made, and all his places of retreat were discovered,
and Popilius Lena the Tribune, with a certain Captain called Herennius, came to
his House the very moment after he had left it. This Lena had had great
obligations to Cicero, who had saved his life by pleading for him when he stood
accused for the death of his own Father, they made use of all manner of
violence against his Slaves, to force them to discover where their Master was,
but they all constantly persisted that they knew nothing of the matter, till
either one named Cirillus, who had heretofore served Clodius, who was Cicero's
mortal Enemy, or else Philologus, Quintus's Freedman, discovered to Lena that
they were now carrying him through the passages of a certain Wood that lead to
the Seaside. Lena got before, with part of the Soldiers, and Herennius
followed the Litter through the narrow paths. Cicero understanding they were
coming, Commanded those who carried him, to stop, and when the Soldiers were
come up, he put his Head out of the Litter, and looked upon them with a great
deal of assurance. This constancy which they expected not from him, and his
face disfigured, as it was, with the troubles he had lain under, was the reason
that several of them stopped and turned away their Eyes while Herennius slew him;
he cut off his Head and both his hands, which were carried to Antonius. As he
was extremely enraged against Cicero for the Orations which he had made against
him, he could not forbear insulting over those poor Members with the most
injurious reproaches, declaring aloud, That his revenge was now completed, and
that he would have no farther to do with the Proscription. But Fulvia's hatred
could not be confined to words, for she pierced his Tongue several times with a
golden Bodkin which she wore in her hair, and afterward Antonius gave Orders
that the Head and Hands should be set up upon a place called the Rostrum, where
the Roman People could not without Horror see those sad remains of a Man who
had so often Triumphed there by the force and Charms of his Eloquence. Thus
died Cicero at the Age of sixty four years, he was a Man of most extraordinary
qualifications, especially those that relate to Civil Matters and Rules of
Government, which had justly advanced him amongst the most Illustrious Men of
the Age he lived in Antonius himself, as Plutarch reports, made some sort of
reparation to his memory, for he put Philologus into the hands of Pomponia,
Cicero's Sister-in-Law, who tormented him to death.

CHAP. XXXIV. The Triumph of Lepidus. The Goods of the Proscripts set to Sale.
Attacks upon the Roman Ladies. Their speech to the Triumvirate.
WHILE these things were performing, Lepidus resolved to Triumph over some
Nations that he had conquered in Spain, the Edict of the Triumph was very
particular, and deserves therefore to be mentioned, it being in these terms, To
all those who shall honor our Triumph with Sacrifices, public Feastings, and
other demonstrations of Joy, Health and good Fortune, but to those who refuse
it misery and Proscription. We may easily imagine how universal the joy was
upon this occasion, for every one stood in awe of the Proscription, and Lepidus
entered Triumphant into the City, where the Ceremony was honored with more
Sacrifices and Feastings than had ever appeared in the like case before. Then
was set to sale the Goods of the Proscripts (that is to say) the immoveables
for the movables had been plundered, but there were found very few Chapmen,
for it was looked upon as a piece of Inhumanity to ruin Families that were
otherwise enough afflicted already; besides, there appeared no security for
Title to any such Goods, nor was any man willing to seem Rich by purchasing in
such dangerous times. Some few, who were not of the wisest sort, were willing
to run the hazard for the sake of a good Market, but that did not satisfy the
Triumvirate, they had need of 200000 Talents for the War, which was a sum not
to be found any where but in the City, they could there reckon up 1400 of the
richest Ladies of Rome, Mothers, Daughters, Kinswomen, or Allies to their
Enemies; these Alliances were very exactly enquired into, and very far fetched,
for to be rich, was enough to belong to one of the Proscripts. These Ladies
assembled themselves, and went to find out the Mother and Sisters of Caesar,
who gave them a very civil hearing. Antonius his Mother did the same thing, and
Fulvia only refused to see them; this forced them to go to the Palace of the
Triumviri, where at first they were repulsed by the Guards of Soldier, but
made so much noise, that at last one of them was permitted to speak, upon
condition that the rest would be silent; this was Hortentia, the Daughter of a
certain Nobleman called Hortentius, who alone of all the Orators had been able
to dispute with Cicero for Eloquence, My Lords, said she, the Ladies which you
see here imploring your Justice and your Bounty had never appeared in this
place, till after having made use of all means that their Natural Modesty and
best understanding could inform them of; We have sought the protection of your
Mothers and your Wifes, but the Respects we paid, could not find favor with
Fulvia, which has forced us here to make a public Complaint, though it be
contrary to those rules of Decency prescribed our Sex, and which we have
hitherto most exactly observed. Ye have deprived us of our Fathers, our
Children, our Brethren, and our Husbands; Ye pretend that ye have been
affronted, but what Injury have the Women done you that they must be
impoverished, if they are as blameable as the rest, why do ye not proscribe
them too? In the mean time none of our Sex have ever declared you your
Countrey's Enemies. We have neither plundered your Goods, nor suborned your
Soldiers. We have raised no Troops against you, nor opposed those Honors and
Offices which ye pretend to. Since therefore the Women have no part in those
Actions that offend you, surely they ought not in Justice to suffer the
punishment which ye impose upon them; Empire, Dignities and Honors are not
made for us. We pretend not to govern the Re-publick, nor is it our Ambition
which has drawn the present misfortune on our Heads. What reason have we to
contribute to a War wherein we have no manner of Interest? War has already
raised this City to that height of glory which we now see her in. In the mean
while there is no Example to be found that the Women ever were concerned in it,
the natural Privilege of our Sex has exempted us from that profession. It is
true, indeed, that in the Carthaginian War our Mothers assisted the Re-publick,
it being at that time in a desperate condition; but for all that, neither their
Houses, their Lands, nor their Movables were sold for that service, some Rings
and some Jewels furnished out the supply, but it was neither constraint,
punishment nor violence that forced them to it, but they did it of their own
good will and generous disposition. What fear at present are ye in for the
City, which is our common Country? What imminent danger threatens it? If the
Galls or Parthians come and attack it, ye shall not find us less Zealous in its
defense than our Mothers were before us; but we have nothing to do, nor ought
to be concerned in Civil Wars, neither Caesar nor Pompey did ever oblige us to
it, Marius and He was called Cornelius, and governed Tyrannically in Rome
during the Wars between Marius and Sylla.
Cinna did never so much as propose it, no, not Sylla himself, who was the
first that ever set up Tyranny in Rome. In the mean time ye come to reform the
State, and ye adorn your selves with that glorious Title. This discourse
appeared so bold a thing to the Triumvirate, and of so dangerous a consequence,
to see that the Women durst speak to them thus in public, when fear had tied
up the Tongues of the Men, that they sent their Ushers to cause them to retire;
but perceiving that that proceeding displeased the People, who began to cry out
against such violence, they adjourned the affair till the next day, and for the
satisfaction of the People, retrenched the number of the Ladies to 400, but at
the same time taxed above 100000 Men, as well Citizens as Strangers, without
sparing even the Sacrificers themselves for the payment of a 50 th part of all
their Estate, and a whole years Revenue. Upon this pretense the Soldiers
committed such horrible violences, that the Triumviri were forced to
Commissionate one from amongst them to hinder those disorders; but not daring
to meddle with the Soldiers, the punishment fell upon some Slaves, who were
disguised in their habits, and so Crucified.

CHAP. XXXV. Several of the Proscripts escape into Sicily to Sextus, the Son of
Pompey. Some extraordinary Adventures during the Proscription.
AS many as could escape the Cruelty of the Proscription, retired either into
Macedonia to Brutus, or into Africa to Cornificius, but the greatest part went
to young Pompey in Sicily, he was the second Son of Pompey the Great, for the
eldest was slain after having lost the Battle of Munda against Julius Caesar.
The youth of the youngest was the reason that he had not been taken notice of,
^ut his Courage and Bravery soon after rendered him very formidable. He lived
for some time as a Pirate, without making himself known any otherways than by
the boldness of his Actions, but when he found himself in Reputation, he soon
declared who he was, and rallied together his Father's Friends. He routed a
considerable Army that Julius Caesar had sent against him, and made himself at
last so powerful, that it was found necessary to give him the Government of
Sicily, and the Office of Admiral, which his Father had executed before him.
His Generosity was at this time a very great succor to many Illustrious
Persons, he sent Brigantines and other small Vessels to all the Coasts of
Italy, to receive such as made their escape, and treated them all with a great
deal of kindness. Lepidus his Brother, and Antonius his Uncle got away by other
means. Paulus was spared by the Soldiers, who were not very fond of laying
violent hands upon the Brother of a Triumvir, and retreated into Macedonia.
Lucius saved himself in his Sisters House, who was Antonius his Mother, and who
generously opposed those who pursued him, the Soldiers would not meddle with
him there, considering he was under her Protection, so she went to find out her
Son, who was with his Colleagues, I am come, said she, to accuse my self for
having taken my Brother into my House, where I am resolved to protect him, till
ye shall think fit to put us both to death together, for I am not ignorant what
punishment is proposed to the Concealers of Proscripts. Antonius answered, That
she had done like a good Sister, but an ill Mother, and Lucius was no more
enquired after, Valerius.
Messala was recalled by the Triumvirate, they by a public Declaration owning,
That he had nothing to do in Caesar's Murder. But he refused to return, and
served under Brutus till after the Battle of Philippi. Bibulus had the same
Fortune, and got himself afterward great employments. Lentulus, Apuleius and
Antius made their escape with their Wifes, who would not forsake them. Reginus
was concealed by his, and when he was going out of the City disguised in a
Colliers habit, his Wife following in a Litter, was stopped by a Soldier,
Reginus turned back to desire the Man, That he would have some respect for the
Ladies. The Soldier who had served under him, knew him again; and said, O save
your self my General, for I shall always call you so, in what miserable
condition soever I shall find you. Coponius his Wife, who was very beautiful,
got her Husband's Pardon by another favor which she paid for it to Antonius.
Geta and Oppius were saved by their Sons, Geta having lost one of his Eyes by
wearing a Plaster upon it too long for a disguise, and Oppius his Son having to
save his Father, carried him upon his Shoulders, was for that Action alone
declared Edilis by the People, and not being rich enough to furnish out the
expenses of the Games, all the Workmen gave him generously their labor for
nothing, and those who assisted at the Show, made him such Presents, that he
became very rich. Ari^nus, and Metellus escaped also by the af^i^tence of their
Children. Restio, Appio, Menetus, and Iunius, by their Slaves. Restio's
adventure was something more than ordinary, he had with a hot iron marked one
of his Slaves in the forehead, that being the punishment they usually
inflicted on such as endeavored to run away; this Slave had discovered the
place where his Master lay concealed, and came thither to find him. Restio
believed that he should be lost, and that the Slave would now revenge himself,
but he assured him to the contrary, saying, Can my Master believe that the
Characters imprinted upon my forehead have made more impression there than the
benefits which I have received from him have done in my heart? After this he
Conducted him to a Cave, whither he daily brought him Provisions. A great many
Soldiers were passing often by the place, and occasioned a thousand fears to
the Slave; at last he followed at the heels of one of the Troops, and took his
time so well, that he fell upon an old Peasant, and slew him before their
faces, the Soldiers ran upon him as a Murderer, but he said, That it was his
Master whom he had killed to revenge himself for the infamous marks which they
might see upon his forehead. The design was too well laid not to succeed, the
Characters were visible, and security enough for him, so the Soldiers took the
head of a Peasant for that of Restio, who by this means was at the liberty of
making his escape more easily. The generosity of the Slaves of Appio and
Meneius is yet more admirable, they suffered themselves to be both slain in
their Masters habits, the one in a Litter, and the other upon a Bed, Appio
himself standing by at the Murder disguised like a Slave. I do not believe
that any thing can be added to these examples of fidelity, and shall conclude
with the bold undertaking of Pomponius, he dressed himself like a Praetor, and
his Slaves like Ushers, and in this condition went out of the City surrounded
by these Slaves, he made his traveling charges all the way upon the public
expense, saying, That he was sent by the Triumvirate to young Pompey. At last
he got himself a good Ship, but still as Praetor, and past easily over into
Sicily. Hirtius, Apuleius and Aruntius made their escape with their Swords in
their hands; This was not he that Triumphed over the Parthians.
Ventidius as a Captain that was sent to search for Proscripts; and another
Senator, wearied out with the daily cares of concealing himself, caused
himself to be shaved, took openly a little School, and kept it publicly so
long as the Proscription lasted, no body imagining that a miserable Pedant
could ever have been considerable enough to have been Proscribed.

CHAP. XXXVI. The Examples of several remarkable changes of Fortune.
THough the story of these accidents may seem perhaps a little too long, as
they relate properly to the Triumvirate. We ought not to pass over two Examples
which are very natural instances of the inconstancy and revolution of Humane
Fortune. Balbinus being Proscribed by Antonius, had with much ado made his
retreat to Pompey, who after several years of War came to an agreement with
Caesar. Balbinus returned to Rome, where he afterward obtained the Dignity of
Consul. Lepidus was at that time fallen from that high estate, where he had
once appeared, Caesar having given him his life merely out of Compassion. It
happened that his Wife and his Son were accused by Mecoenas, Cajus Cilnius
Mecoenas he was the Favorite of Augustus, and the man whose name is so
Celebrated amongst the learned.
the Governor of Rome, for a Conspiracy against the life of Caesar, the Son
was sent Prisoner to Actium, and the Wife forced to give security before the
Consul. Lepidus, who solicited for her, had several times been repulsed at
Balbinus his Gate, at last he got an opportunity of speaking with him, and said
thus, You know very well that I have no share in my Son's Offense, and that it
was not I who Proscribed you, though it were at that time in my power to have
done it, therefore I beg of you to reflect upon the sad alteration of our
Fortune, and to grant me the favor I beg of you, either take my security for
my Wife, or send me with her a Prisoner to Caesar. Balbinus touched with
Compassion to see a Man at his feet, whose power heretofore had been so
formidable, made those reflections he desired, and discharged his Wife. The
other Example is of Cicero's Son, he was with Brutus at the time of his
Father's death, and served under him as a Lieutenant General, and after his
defeat made his retreat with Pompey, who gave him the same employment. Pompey
made his own Peace, and Cicero returned to Rome, where Caesar to show the
esteem he had for his Father, gave him the Dignity of chief Pontifex, and chose
him for his Colleague in the Consulship after the defeat of Antonius. Cicero had
by this means the satisfaction of seeing in his power the memory of Antonius,
who was Condemned by the Senate, all his Images broken down, and a Decree past,
That none of that Family should ever after take upon them the surname of
Marcus. During which time Caesar testified so great a Veneration for the Memory
of Cicero, that having one day found one of his Books in the hands of his One
of the Sons of Agrippa and Julia, called Cajus.
Grandson, who endeavored to hide it for fear lest Augustus should be angry
with him for reading in it, he took the Book, and having read a good while,
returned it to him again, saying, My Son, he was a very knowing Man, and
Zealous for his Country. By this means the death of Cicero was revenged upon
the memory of his greatest Enemy, as was his Eloquence also upon the back of an
impertinent Critic called Coelius, who had undertaken to expose the Works of
that great Orator. Cicero the Son caused his Slaves to whip him, so the
Critic burnt his Remarks, which had brought upon his Bones so scurvy an
answer. Even Brutus had his share too in revenging Cicero, and notwithstanding
his moderation, and the disturbance which the Letter written to Octavius had
given him, he sacrificed to him Cajus the Brother of Antonius, whom Hortentius
put to death by his Orders.

CHAP. XXXVII. The end of the Proscription. War in Africa* Sextius, Caesar's
Lieutenant, overthrows Cornificius, the Lieutenant of Brutus.
AT last the Triumviri came into the Senate to declare that the Proscription
was at an end. Lepidus excused himself for what had passed, and assured the
Senators of a more moderate Conduct. Caesar, who was more Politic, said, That
he would yet reserve to himself the liberty of punishing such as were guilty.
In the mean time he had long disputed with the other two concerning the
Proscription, but it was his judgment now that the Spirits of the People ought
to be kept in awe in the present conjuncture, when Brutus and Cassius became
daily more formidable, and when their Lieutenants still disputed for Africa
with those of Caesar. This was another, and not Caesar 's Friend who had
accused Brutus.
Cornificius was there with Troops in behalf of Brutus, and when Sextius
arrived there on Caesar's part, and published the Ordinance of the People, the
Decree of the Senate was produced in answer to them, so that Arms was the last
recourse for the maintenance of their Rights. Sextius being the weakest,
retreated into a strong place, where he was besieged by Ventidius, Cornificius
his Lieutenant. He defended himself very well, and in the mean time held
intelligence with Arabio, a King of that Country, and a certain People called
Sittians, who were the residue of some Roman Soldiers established in Libya
under the Conduct of Sittius, who had been banished from Rome. The Sons of this
Sittius had been obliged to Julius Caesar, which caused them with Arabio to
assist Sextius. Sextius strengthened with these succors, got the better of
Ventidius, and that done, marched against Cornificius, who expected him near
Vtica. The strength of both Armies consisted in their Cavalry, Laelius
Cornificius's Lieutenant, came with all his to discover the strength of
Sextius, Arabio was detached to oppose him; in the mean time Sextius charged
Laelius upon the flank, and forced him to retreat up to a Hill, where Arabio
had orders to attack him. Cornificius having left his Retrenchments to succor
his Lieutenant, Sextius marched against him, while a Party of Arabio's Troops,
who knew the Country, found a way through the Rocks, and came to rifle
Cornificius his Camp. Roseius, who Commanded there, was slain at the first
onset, and the Camp plundered, Cornificius being pressed by Sextius, would
have retreated toward his Lieutenant, but was cut off by Arabio's Cavalry, who
flew him. When, Laelius beholding the action from the hill, where he was
posted, died by his own hand, the Troops thus deprived of their Commanders,
were easily put to the rout, and that great Victory which got Caesar all
Africa, cost Sextius but a very few Men.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Dolabella is defeated and slain by Cassius.
DOlabella had not the same success in Syria, where Cassius made War upon him
with 12 Legions, and a body of Parthian Cavalry, whom his reputation had drawn
into his service. Dolabella had got together a great Fleet of Ships out of
Lycia, Rhodes and Cilicia, which Figulus Commanded under him: for himself, he
was got into Laodicea, with two Legions, where Cassius besieged him, and sent
orders into Phoenicia, Libya and Rhodes, for the procuring of Ships also. The
names of these Provinces being often mentioned in this History, it will be but
reasonable to give some account in gross of what they are at present. Syria was
a place of great extent, and contained all those Countries which are upon the
Coast of the Mediterranean Sea from the Gulf of Issica, at present called the
gulf of Laiazzo, as far as Egypt, for Palestine, (called at present the
Holy Land) was comprised under the name and Government of the lower Syria, the
largeness of that Province reached as far as Euphrates. The rest of Asia, which
was subject to the Romans, was called Natolia, or the lesser Asia, as it is at
present, and contained a great many Provinces from Laiazzo, as far as the
Euxine Sea, which we call the black Sea, all that Country being at present
subjected to the Turk; it was then very much peopled, though it be not so now,
except upon the Sea Coasts. Phoenicia is that little Country, where stood the
Cities of Tire and Sidon, at present Sur and Said; and Libya contained all
that Coast of Africa, called at present Barbary, from Tripolis as far as
Algier. We may find a more exact description in Geographical Writings, but this
is sufficient for our understanding of the present History. Cassius his orders
were but very ill executed, for the Sidonians only sent him Ships, the
Rhodians excusing themselves, and Libya was wholly submitted to Caesar by the
Victory of Sextius. Cassius with what Ships he had went and attacked the Fleet
of Dolabella, who put him to flight, and took five of his Ships, which forced
him to dispatch more pressing Orders even to Cleopatra, but as the inclinations
of that Queen were not much disposed toward that Party, she excused her self
upon the Famine which at that time raged in Egypt. In the mean time she put to
Sea a powerful Fleet to succor Dolabella, but the Winds and Tempests opposed
her design, and her Fleet being much shattered and indamaged, became of no use
at that time to Caesar's Party. Serapion, who Commanded for her in the Island
of Cyprus, took other measures, he came and joined Cassius's Fleet with a great
supply of Ships, those of Tire sent him some also, by which means he found
himself in a condition to block up Dolabella both by Sea and Land. Cleopatra
afterward disavowed what Serapion had done, but there is great reason to
believe that she managed her self so between both Parties, to see on which side
Fortune would declare her self. The Lycians and Rhodians sent word to Cassius
that they would have nothing to do with the Roman Wars, and that the Ships
which they had lent Dolabella, had no orders to fight. This answer provoked
Cassius, but he judged it was no proper time at present to show that
resentment, which afterward caused the desolation of those two Provinces. He
attacked Dolabella, who made a great defense by land, and fought one Battle
with equal advantage, but his Fleet was entirely defeated, and Cassius having
corrupted some Soldiers of the Garrison took the City of Laodicea by
surprizal. Dolabella caused one of his Soldiers to cut his throat, who when he
had done killed himself, and the City was left to be plundered. Cassius caused
the principal Citizens to be put to death, and forced the others to redeem
themselves at such great Ransomes, that the City was utterly laid desolate.

CHAP. XXXIX. Cassius lays waste the City of Tharsus. He joins himself with
Brutus. They take measures for carrying on the War.
THIS Victory put Cassius upon making new Conquests, and he was threatening
Cleopatra and her Kingdom, when he received Letters from Brutus, who sent him
word, That as the cares which they took to raise such powerful Armies, were
not designed for their particular advancement, but the liberty of their
Country; they ought not so much to think of gaining glory by new Conquests, as
destroying those who sought the ruin of that liberty: that therefore it was
high time to turn their thoughts toward Italy, which now groaned under the
oppression of Tyrants. Cassius, who had great respect for Brutus his Virtue,
quitted his enterprise, and marched directly to him. The City of Tharsus stood
unhappily in his way, it was at that time divided into two different Factions,
which were the cause of its ruin; they had honored Cassius with a Crown of
Gold when he came into Syria, and another Party had done the same Honors to
Dolabella. They had also charged some of Cimber's Troops, who came to join
Cassius's Army, which was the reason that he Condemned them to the payment of
1500 Talents; for the furnishing of this sum, they first sold the Goods of the
Public, and the Ornaments of their Temples, afterward their Children of both
Sexes, and at last their Women and their old Men; and as the Price of all these
things did not amount to the Tax, they found themselves reduced to sell their
young Men, some whereof in despair hanged themselves. This cruel necessity did
at last move Cassius to pity, who remitted them the rest of the payment, but
the City remained in a very miserable condition. Brutus staid for him hard by
Smyrna, and it was in passing through Europe into Asia, that he caused that
famous Medal to be stamped with his own Image on one side, and on the reverse a
Cap, the mark of Liberty between two Poniards, with these words, Eidus Martias
(that is to say) the day of the Ides of March. They met extremely joyful to
see themselves followed by such great Forces, as put them into a condition of
disputing the Roman Empire and Liberty, after having left Rome in a miserable
condition, despoiled of all their Fortune without Money, and without Forces.
Brutus had drained his Finances for the equipping of a Fleet, so he demanded of
Cassius half of that Money which he had raised in Asia. This Proposition
offended Cassius's Friends, who could not take it well that the fruit of their
toils, and the hazards they had run, should be divided for the enriching of
Brutus's Soldiers; Cassius also thought no less, but however durst not refuse
a third of what he had gotten. Then they fell to debating what measures they
ought to take. Brutus was for passing into Greece, where Caesar and Antonius
were expected with forty Legions, and where Decidius Saxa, and Norbanus were
already arrived with eight. Cassius said, That that great number of Forces
ought to render them the less formidable, since they would find in that
Country two Enemies, which were Want and Famine, to fight against them. That
they ought therefore to leave them to be destroyed by those means, and to
attack Rhodes and the Lycians, by that means to leave the Enemy no relief or
retreat behind them. His advice was followed, and the Armies divided, Brutus
marched against the Lycians, and Cassius against Rhodes.

CHAP. XL. Cassius attacks Rhodes. The siege of that City. The taking and
desolation of Rhodes by Cassius.
THAT City was at this time very strong, and in great reputation for its Naval
Forces, they had three and thirty Ships of War, besides a great many other
small Vessels, all which had rendered that People very sturdy and insolent. The
most Wise, and the richest amongst them, who dreaded the Valor of the Romans,
prevailed. Nevertheless, that some body should be sent to Cassius to make an
excuse for those succors which they had given Dolabella, with offers to follow
the orders of the Senate. Cassius answered the Deputies, That they ought to
defend themselves by Arms, and not by such pitiful reasons, that to give proof
of their neutrality, they ought to assist him as they had aided Dolabella. That
in respect of the orders of the Senate, the Proposition which they made of
observing them was ridiculous, since they could not be ignorant that the
greatest part of the Senators were dispersed by the cruelty of those Tyrants
who oppressed the City of Rome. That he should find yet a way how to punish
those Tyrants, and Chastise the Rhodians also if they would not obey. This
answer terrified all those who were capable of any consideration, but the rash
and silly People immediately chose them Captains. They spoke of nothing but the
Victories which they had obtained against A King of Pontus, who made War upon
the Romans 40 years.
Mithridates and A King of Macedonia, and the Son of Antigonus, one of
Alexander 's Commanders.
Demetrius. Cassius (said they) is neither so great a Man, nor an abter
Officer. He had heretofore studied at Rhodes, where his Tutour still lived,
being a learned Man, and of very agreeable conversation, whose name was
Archelaus. He coming to give Cassius a visit, (who still preserved a respect
for his Person) represented to him the glory and virtue of the ancient
Inhabitants of Rhodes, the fidelity which they had ever preserved toward the
Roman People, their Alliances confirmed by so many Oaths. In short, the
Education and good Literature which Cassius had received in that City. Cassius
answered, That Archelaus must have done him wrong, if he had not counseled the
Rhodians to have embraced his interests, but that if he had given them that
Counsel, he came to support them with his Arms. He complained of the succors
they had given to Dolabella, That the fidelity and those alliances which they
alleged, ought to be an obligation upon them to support the liberty of Rome,
and those who defended it. That he demanded succors of them as Praetor, created
by the Senate, and the honestest party of the Roman People, and in the name of
many noble Senators and other Romans who were with him. That if they would not
acknowledge him in that Quality, neither he nor those Senators could look upon
them any otherways than as Strangers and Enemies. After this answer Archelaus
took his leave, the Rhodians immediately put their Fleet to Sea under two
Commanders, whose names were Alexander and Manasses, and came to meet Cassius
as far as Gnidos. This was the same place where they had beaten the Army of
Mithridates, which seemed a favorable Omen to their present undertaking.
Cassius having caused his Fleet to advance, the fight became long and bloody,
by reason of the Valor of the Rhodians, and the nimbleness of their Ships,
till at last Cassius, who was stronger in number, hemmed them in, and rendered
that nimbleness useless, so being forced to lie still as they fought, they lost
five of their Vessels, the rest with much ado saved themselves, but extremely
shattered, and Cassius came before Rhodes, where he had another Sea Battle, in
which the Rhodians being again defeated, Cassius landed with his Troops, and
attacked the City on every side, notwithstanding the many Sallies made by the
besieged. He caused Towers to be raised of Wood near the Walls, from whence
they very much incommoded the besieged, who were forced to demand Composition,
which while it was in Treaty, the rich Party opened the Gates to Cassius, who
entered into the City, where he caused a Tribunal to be raised, and a Lance
planted before him, as it was the Custom of the Roman Generals when ever they
had taken a City by force: he forbade his Soldiers upon pain of death to offer
at any pillage, he caused fifteeen of the most obstinate Citizens to be brought
before him, whom he put to death, he condemned five and twenty more, who had
made their escape, and afterward Commanded, That all the Gold and Silver which
was either in the Temples, or other public places, as well as particular
Coffers, should within a prefixed time be brought to him. And to the end that no
man might dare to conceal any, the Order ran upon pain of death. He promised
also the tenth part to Persons that were free, and liberty to all such Slaves
as should discover any that was hidden. This succeeded with him accordingly,
and after the punishment of three or four who had put their Wealth out of the
way, the terror of death, and fear of Discoverers forced all the rest to bring
to light what they had hidden either in Pits, Tombs, or any other places. By
this means Cassius got together great sums of Money at the expense of the City
of Rhodes, and gave order also that those of Asia should advance ten years of
those Taxes which they paid to the Romans. He sent afterward Marcus, one of
his Lieutenants, with sixty Ships to go and plunder Peloponnesus, and oppose
Cleopatra, who was said to have put a powerful Fleet to Sea in favor of
Caesar and Antonius.

CHAP. XLI. Brutus enters into Lycia. He besieges the City Xanthus.
THE desolation of that famous Grecian City was doubtless the reason why
Plutarch, who was otherways a very good Historian, has written, That Cassius
used this Conquest of Rhodes neither with Humanity nor Modesty. For we cannot
look upon the punishment of fifteen Mutineers as any great mark of Inhumanity,
and for the Wealth of the Inhabitants it did belong to him by the right of War.
But as Plutarch was a Grecian, the love of his Country has in spite of his
Philosophy transported him upon several occasions, so that though his Works be
one of the finest pieces that any of the Ancients have left us, we may observe
to the same purpose that the most Wise and Learned Men (for those were his
Qualities) have not been able sometimes to avoid showing the marks of humane
frailty. Brutus, whom that Author has so highly praised, proceeded much more
cruelly in Lycia. The City of Xanthus was one of the strongest places in that
Province. Brutus after some light Rencounters had forced all those who bore
Arms to shut themselves up there, and then besieged them. Lycia is a Province
of the lesser Asia, and its name seems to be derived from the word Lyces, which
in Greek signifies a Wolf, the stoutness of those People holding much
resemblance with the fierceness of that Creature. The River of Xanthus, from
whence the City had its name, ran through the middle of it, and many saved
themselves by night with swimming under water through that River, where Brutus
laid Nets with Bells tied to them, who by the noise they made, gave notice when
any were plunged into them, the Ditches of the City were very deep, and fifteen
paces broad, and the Xanthians from their Walls launced a great many Darts
against the Romans, who endeavored to fill up those Ditches: against these
Darts Brutus caused Pallisado's to be made, and after having divided his Troops
into several bodies to go and fetch Baskets of earth, he caused so great a
number of them to be brought, that he filled up the Ditch, after which his
Soldiers came to blows with those who defended the outworks of the Walls, and
drove them into the Town. The Wall being fiercely battered by the Rams, and
falling down in several places, Brutus drew off his Men, that he might give the
Enemy time to Capitulate, but the Xanthians looking upon this as an effect of
fear, made a fierce Sally out of the Town to set fire to the Engines, when the
Romans turning upon them, charged them so home, that those who were at the
Gates, were forced to lock them, fearing lest the Enemy should enter the Town
with those who fled; so all those Xanthians who remained without were cut in
pieces, which nevertheless hindered not another Sally about Noon, which was
performed so vigorously, that Brutus's Engines were abandoned and burnt. Upon
this, shame and despite made the Romans Rally, and drive back the Enemy again
to the Gates, who by reason of the former accident were not now locked. The
Romans entered Pell-mell with those whom they pursued, when immediately the
Portcullis was let down, by which means near two thousand Roman Soldiers who
had gotten entrance, were shut up in the City, and being overwhelmed with Darts
and Stones, which were thrown at them from the tops of the Ramparts, they
Rallied themselves, and got possession of the Temple of Sarpedon, who had
heretofore been King of Lycia, and was slain in the Trojan War. The extreme
danger these People were in, put all Brutus's Army upon finding out a way how
they might speedily succor them, the Ladders were burnt, and some were for
making new ones, but that being an expedient which would take up too much time,
they made use of the Masts of Ships to mount by, others fastened great Nails to
a Cord, which they threw up upon the Wall, and when ever the Nail took hold on
any place, got up by the Cord. Thus they tried a hundred useless ways ever they
could find a good one, when a certain people called Inandes, who were
Neighbors and Enemies to the Xanthians, and who were in Brutus's Army,
contrived to get up by certain Rocks almost inaccessible, which were joined on
one side to the Walls of the Town; several Romans followed them, and
notwithstanding the Enemies Darts, which killed them many men, they got upon
the top of the Walls, from thence with their hands they helped up their
Companions, and by that means got in great numbers upon the Ramparts.

CHAP. XLII. The taking of Xanthus. The fury and despair of the Xanthians.
THERE was near this place a Gate shut up and fastened with beams and other
things of that nature, thither the Romans, who were upon the Rampart, ran in
great haste, and soon found out a way to destroy what filled up the Gate; so by
that means Brutus's Troops entered the Town, making horrible Cries to animate
their Companions, and terrify the Enemy, who furiously attacked the Temple of
Sarpedon; but when they perceived that the City was taken, dispersed themselves
in a moment, and retreated every one to his own House. The Romans surprised at
this retreat, were more amazed when they saw several places of the Town in
flames, for these Lycians, driven by a fury which was almost beyond
imagination, resolved to bury themselves in the ashes of their City, either
their natural fierceness having inspired them on a sudden with this desperate
design, or having premeditated and resolved upon it before. The Romans ran
immediately to extinguish the fire, but those mad people repulsed them with
flights of Arrows and other Darts, they cut the Throats of their Wifes, their
Children and their Slaves before the Soldiers faces, and afterward leapt into
the middle of the flames; others ran like wild Beasts upon their Enemies
Weapons, the very Children offered their Throats to their Fathers Swords, or
else threw themselves down from the tops of the Houses into the fire, and after
the Conflagration was over, a Woman who had hanged her self, was found holding
in one hand her Child, whom she had strangled, and in the other a Torch,
wherewith she had set fire to her House. Brutus was not able to see this sad
spectacle, being so touched with it, that he wept, but did all that lay in his
power to save the small remainders of those miserable people, by declaring that
he would give a reward to every Soldier who should bring him a Xanthian,
though all his cares were able to preserve no more than fifteen, who
notwithstanding complained, That in spite of themselves their lives were
preserved. This furious proceeding was it seems no new thing to the Inhabitants
of Xanthus, for they had already made use of it twice before, the first time
when Harpagus, Cyrus's Lieutenant, attacked them, and afterward when they were
besieged by Alexander. From this City Brutus marched against Patarea, but
fearing the same desperate proceeding there which he had found at Xanthus, he
did not press it, only sent a Summons to the Inhabitants that they would not
force him to destroy them, and those Xanthians whom he had preserved, were by
his orders sent into Patarea, to the end that by telling the story of their own
miseries, they might make the others afraid, and serve as well for Example as
Instruction. He also set at liberty several Women who had fallen into his
hands, and by those mild proceedings was at last successful, for the City
surrendered it self, and Brutus according to the example of Cassius, gave out
severe orders, That all the gold and silver that could be found there should be
brought to him; but that which he did better than Cassius was, that he
Condemned a Slave who had given advice of a certain Treasure that his Master
had hidden, the Masters Mother declared, That it was she who had concealed the
Money, but the Slave without being interrogated, maintained the contrary, and
the Master said not a word; but Brutus considering that the insolence of this
Slave proceeded from no other grounds than the hatred which he bore to his
Master, sent him to the Gibbet, and restored to the Mother and her Son both
their Money and their Liberty. Another action of Justice got him a great deal
of Honor. Theodotus was the Man who had the most contributed to the death of
Pompey the Great, by that Harangue which he made at Ptolemey's Council Board.
This Man was in Asia, where he sculk'd about from Town to Town; but Brutus
caused him to be seized upon and put to a cruel death, and the punishment of
this speech-maker was a very welcome thing to all the Princes of that Country,
who had a great Veneration for the Memory of Pompey.

CHAP. LXIII. Caesar and Antonius caused their Troops to pass into Macedonia.
Cassius joins himself with Brutus. Their interview.
IT was much about this time that Lentulas, Brutus's Lieutenant, surprised the
Port of Smyrna, and drew great Sums of Money out of that City. He went
afterward to find out Brutus, who to his own Fleet had joined the Lycian
Ships, whom he had entirely Conquered, and sent them to Abydos to stay there
for Cassius, his design was to unite their Forces with those of young Pompey,
and so act jointly against Italy. But Caesar and Antonius prevented them, and
notwithstanding all the endeavors of Marcus, Cassius's Lieutenant, past their
Troops into Macedonia after this manner; Caesar had caused Salvidienus to
attack Pompey, and while his Land Army was with him at Rhegium, fought a great
Battle in the straits of Messina, C^^sar's Ships being heavy, and not easily to
be managed at first suffered very much, but the Valor of those Soldiers who
were on board, maintained the Combat till night, and was the Cause that the two
Fleets separated with equal advantage, though disabled from any farther service
for a long time. During the time of this Battle, Antonius had besieged Marcus
in a Port near Brundusium, but that Lieutenant being almost equal to him in
number of Ships, he was forced to call Caesar; afterward Marcus retreated and
kept the Sea with a design to annoy those Vessels who were to transport the
Triumvirates Forces, but the Winds broke his Measures, and were so favorable
to the others, both in their going and returning, that not one of them was
taken, so he went to join Domitius, and they made together 130 great Ships,
besides many other light Vessels which were to be employed for hindering the
passage of any Provisions into Macedonia, which must have reduced the
Triumvirate to the utmost necessity, had Brutus and Cassius known how to manage
their advantage. These two Generals had joined each other at Sandis, where
their Soldiers gave them the Title of Emperor, there was at first some
contest between them upon their different interests, which they were resolved
to regulate when they came face to face. The dispute grew very warm between
them, so that they first came to most severe Reproaches, and afterward to
Tears. The discourse was so loud, that Favonius, notwithstanding all the
opposition of their Guards, came into the Chamber where they were. Favonius was
(to speak properly) Cato's Ape, ridiculous as any Imitatour always must be,
with quickness enough indeed, but little or no judgment. In short, the most
famous giddy brain pretender to Virtue and Philosophy, which was in that time;
his Sect (we may well imagine) was that of the Cynicks, he entered the Chamber
with a very grave air, pronouncing aloud a Verse of Homer, which signifies,
Believe me, for I am older than ye both. Cassius fell a laughing, but Brutus
drove him out again, calling him, a Dog and a Counterfeit Philosopher. In the
mean while the Dispute ended, and they went and supped together, where Favonius
was admitted to play the fool for the Company.

CHAP. XLIV. Brutus sees a Ghost. Cassius satisfies him by his Reasons.
THERE happened several other Disputes between them, wherein Brutus evermore
preserved the steadiness of his Character, but as they are wide from the
purpose, we shall only recount here that famous Story of a Ghost or Spectre
which appeared to him in this place. Brutus was very sober, and slept but
little, especially in time of War, he only lay down for a short while after
Supper, and for the rest of the night he was wont to employ one third for the
dispatch of his Affairs, another in Reading, and the last in giving Orders.
According to this Custom he was in his Tent very busy upon some thought which
wholly took up his mind, there was a general silence through all the Camp, and
especially round his Tent, when of a sudden he heard a noise at the door, which
at the same time opened of its own accord, he cast his Eye toward the place,
and perceived the frightfull figure of a hideous Spectre, of a proportion much
more than natural, which presented it self before him, he had nevertheless the
Courage to speak to it, demanding, If it were a God or a Man, and for what
reason it came thither? I am, said the Ghost, thy Evil Genius, Brutus, thou
shall see me again near Philippi. Brutus without being terrified, answered
again, Well, I will see thee, so it disappeared, and Brutus called up his
Slaves, who all told him, That they had neither seen nor heard any thing. He
continued waking all the rest of the night, and as soon as it was day, went to
give an account of what had happened to Cassius, who as to his Philosophy was
an Epicurean, he attributed all the Vision merely to the weakness of the
senses, and the force of imagination, which easily turns them toward all sorts
of Idea's. This he maintained by the example of Dreams, where the fancy forming
different Images, agitates the Organs of the Body after the same manner as they
would be by outward objects. This is that, said he, to Brutus, which has
happened to you, your senses being tired with fatiguing and watching, have been
easily imposed upon by the imagination. As for the rest, that there are any
such sort of Spirits here, and that they have voice, or humane shape, or any
power over us, let us never believe it, though I could earnestly wish it were
so, to the end that we might not only rely upon those many Forces, Arms and
Ships which we have now attending on us, but also upon the assistence of those
immortal Beings who could not but be favorable to designs so Sacred and Just
as ours are. This discourse satisfied Brutus, and he had afterward an Omen
which absolutely assured him, two Eagles came to settle upon the foremost rank
of the Soldiers that marched in Battalia, and followed them till the evening
before the Battle of Philippi. This is a City lying between Macedonia and
Thracia, near the narrow passages of Salapia and Torpida, through which those
who go out of Asia into Europe must of necessity pass. Norbanus, and Decidius
Saxa, Caesar's Lieutenants, had taken possession of those passages with very
strong Forces, so Brutus and Cassius following the advice of Rhascupolis King
of Thrace, resolved to take a long compass round by Lysimachia, and arrived at
the black Golph, called at present Charidia, where they came ashore. From
thence they marched upon two Lines, which took up the whole Land from the Sea
up as far as A City of Thrace.
Enio, and put one Legion on Board their Ships under the Command of Cymber one
of the Conspiratours, by that means to give some jealousy to Norbanus, and
force him to quit those passages before the arrival of Caesar and Antonius, who
were now marching with all speed to his relief.

CHAP. XLV. The Forces of Cassius and Brutus. Those of Antonius and Caesar.
Cassius speaks to his Soldiers.
IT was not without a great deal of terror that every body stood expecting the
success of these two powerful Armies, who were to decide the fortune of the
Roman Empire. The Conspiratours Forces consisted of nineteen Legions, which
made in all 24 thousand Foot, and 20000 Horse. The Triumviri's Legions were but
nineteen, for they had been forced to leave Troops in Italy to make head
against young Pompey. These Legions were better completed than the
Conspiratours were, by which means they were stronger in their Infantry, which
consisted of 100000 Men, but they had only thirteen thousand Horse. Brutus and
Cassius resolved at this time to take a general review, and speak to their
Soldiers. These sort of Actions were of great Reputation amongst the Romans,
being always mingled with Religion, they prepared a Magnificent Tribunal for
their General Officers, and before the Tribunal an Altar, the Sacrificers in
view of all the Army offered up three sorts of A Sow, a Sheep, and a Bull.
Victims which they divided into two parts, and these two parts they ranged on
each side of the way which lead to the Altar. All the Officers and Soldiers of
the Army marched one after another between those pieces of the Sacrifices which
were thus ranged, and went to the Altar to take the Oath. This they called
Lustrare exercitum.
purifying of the Army, and it was in this manner that Brutus and Cassius
proceeded. They appeared upon the Tribunal, having upon their right Hand the
Magistrates and Roman Senators, and on their left those Princes who Commanded
Foreign Troops. The Soldiers were all splendidly attired, and adorned with the
spoils of Asia. This was one of Brutus's Maxims, who was of Opinion, That the
richness of their Habits and their Arms would make an addition of Courage to
the Soldiers; because, said he, those who have them, will fight out of
Covetousness to preserve them, and those who are Ambitious, for the honor of
them. When the Sacrifice was over, Cassius, who was the elder Man, took upon
him to speak, and represented to the Soldiers, That as both the Soldiers and
Officers had in this War but one common Interest, it was just that every one
should reciprocally take such security as Generals always ought to have in
their Troops, and the Troops in their Generals; That the foundation of that
trust might be reasonably laid upon the assistence of so many Noble Romans
Foreign Princes, and Gallant Soldiers, upon the abundance of Money and
Provisions which yet their Enemies wanted, upon their Naval Forces, they being
every where Masters at Sea. And in short, upon the Justice of their Arms, That
they were not liable to any reproach except for the death of Julius Caesar, who
had deprived the Romans of all their Rights, and the liberty of choosing
Magistrates, and who had established Tyranny in their City; That all the Senate
had consented to that action, though only a small number of them put it in
execution. He enlarged himself very much upon this Point, and afterward
proceeded to the Cruelty of the Triumvirate. At last he concluded with assuring
them, That 2500 Drams should be immediately given to the Soldiers, 5000 to
the Captains, and double the sum to the Colonels. The Soldiers were extremely
rejoiced to hear these words, but much more when they saw the Money, they
thanked their Generals, and after having bestowed sufficient Praises upon them,
prepared to march with a great deal of cheerfulness. Brutus and Cassius made
also considerable Presents to the chief Officers and Commanders of the Foreign
Troops, so that the whole Army being very well satisfied, advanced toward the
Plain of Orica, to the foot of the Mountain, where are those narrow passages
which I have before made mention of.

CHAP. XLVI. The two Armies draw near each other. A description of the City of
Philippi and its outworks.
UPON the news of this, Norbanus sent word to Decidius to come and join him,
and when they were together, they fortified themselves so well in the narrow
passages, that there was no possibility of any ways annoying them. Brutus being
very much confounded, consulted with Rhascupolis, who was perfectly acquainted
with all that Country, and that Prince told him, That there was another
passage over those rough Mountains, but that it would take them up three days
march, and moreover they must want water, but that if they would carry it with
them, he would undertake to conduct the Troops by the fourth day to the River
of Arpessa, which was but one days march from the City of Philippi, and by a
way where the very Birds themselves should never see them, because of the
height of the Trees which covered those narrow passages. The Soldiers being
well encouraged, resolved to pass through that place, notwithstanding the
difficulty of the ways* every one provided himself with Water, and Bibulus led
the Vanguard with Rhascupolis. The Troops suffered great hardship in this
march, and began also to want Water, so they were already for accusing the King
of Treason, when their Scouts discovered the River, they immediately signified
their joy to the Army with great Cries, to which all the Troops answered, and
the two Generals who were in their Rere-guard, doubled their speed.
Rhascupolis's Brother, whose Name was Rhascus, served at this time under
Caesar. They had thus divided themselves, to the end that one of them might
partake of the good Fortune of the Conquerours for the preservation of their
Estates. By these great Cries Rhascus knew that the Enemies were passed, and
was much surprised that so great an Army should get through such rough places,
where even the Wild-beasts found many difficulties, he gave notice thereof to
Norbanus, who was afterward forced to quit his Post, and retreat with Decidius
to Amphipolis. Brutus by this means got possession of the City of Philippi, and
Cymber being arrived with his Fleet near the place, they fortified themselves
there. The City of Philippi, which was heretofore called Datos, took this new
name from Philip the Father of Alexander, who fortified it. It is built upon a
little Hill, where are abundance of Springs, having other woody Hills toward
the North, toward the South a Marsh, which goes as far as the Sea, toward the
East the straits of Salapea and Torpida, and toward the West a Plain which
reaches as far as the River Strymon. This Plain was full of very pleasant
Meadows, and near enough to the City stood a little Eminence where Brutus
encamped himself. Cassius went and took possession of an advanced ground about
a League and a half from him, and they drew lines of Communication from one
Camp to the other. This was (as I said) the only place through which there lay
a passage out of Asia into Europe. They had before them the Plain, through
which there ran a little River called Ganga, upon their left hand was the River
Strymon, and the Marsh, the inaccessible narrow passages upon their right, and
behind them the Sea, by which they could furnish themselves with all sort of
Conveniences out of the Cities of An Island near Thrace.
Thasos and A City of Thrace.
Neapoli, where they had settled their Provisions.

CHAP. XLVII. The two Armies retrench themselves. Their different movements,
and some skirmishes. The uneasiness of Cassius.
THE danger which Norbanus was in, caused Antonius to make such extraordinary
haste, that even Brutus himself was surprised at it. The occasion of this quick
dispatch was the City of Amphipolis, where the Triumviri designed to place
their Magazines, and Antonius, when he understood that Norbanus was retreated
thither, was very much rejoiced at it; he left a Legion there under the Command
of Pinarius, and then went and posted himself boldly in the sight of the
Conspiratours, they had very much the advantage of him by the situation of
their Camp, Wood, the Water of the River, and abundance of Provisions. Antonius
on the contrary had no Water but what he drew out of Pits, which he had caused
to be dug on purpose, and his Wood from the Marsh, his Provisions came to
him very far, and were also very scarce. In the mean time his boldness amazed
the Enemies Army, and forced the Generals to make new Works, wherewith Cassius
filled up all the ground which lay between his Camp and the Marsh, by which
means the whole front of their Camp was well fortified, and their flanks
covered, Brutus's by the declining of the hill, and Cassius's by the Marsh and
Sea. These Works produced daily some skirmish or other between the Cavalry that
guarded the Pioneers, wherein the Conspiratours Party had generally the
advantage. At last Caesar, who had lain sick at Dyrrachium, came to the Army,
and his Troops in Testimony of their joy drew out of their Camp in Battalia.
Brutus puffed up with the good success which his Cavalry had had in little
skirmishes, or, as he himself said, impatient to put an end to the miseries of
Mankind by a glorious Victory, or a noble Death, drew up his Troops also, but
Cassius persuaded him to stay in his Trenches. It is but a vain thing to
flatter our selves with that resolution which we pretend to be furnished
withal from Reason and Philosophy, for it evermore abandons us when we have
most need of it, and two Presages were able to overthrow all Cassius's
Epicurean Principles, and which is a greater discovery of humane frailty, those
Presages which appeared so dreadful to him, would seem but very ridiculous to
a great many Men. One of his Officers presented him a wreath of flowers which
he was to wear when he sacrificed, with the inside outward. And he who as the
Custom was, carried a golden figure of Victory at the head of Cassius's
Ensigns, stumbled with the Image, and fell upon his Nose. There were moreover
Crows and other Birds of that kind, seen flying about the Camp, a swarm of Bees
was found there too, which a Man would think should be no very surprising thing
near Woods and Meadows. Nevertheless, these Remarks which a man of common sense
would now despise, were at that time so very considerable, that they utterly
confounded the mind of Cassius, and infected his whole Army with the same
frailty, which occasioned the loss of that Battle upon which the fate of the
Roman Empire depended.

CHAP. XLVIII. Antonius possesses himself of a Post behind the Enemies Camp.
Brutus resolves to fight contrary to the Opinion of Cassius.
ANTONIUS very well understood the reason why the Conspiratours avoided
fighting, he knew that Asia being behind them, furnished them with Provisions
in abundance, whilst Egypt, harassed with Famine, could afford none to the
Forces of the Triumvirate; that Pompey would hinder them from fetching any out
of Spain, and that Marcus and Domitius defended the passage into Italy, so that
their only recourse was to Macedonia and Thessaly, which must be soon
exhausted. Cassius also represented the same thing daily to Brutus and his
Officers; but at last the Courage of Antonius overcame all those difficulties,
he was drawn up against Cassius, as Brutus was against Caesar, and endeavored
to get possession of a Post, which was on the other side of the Marsh behind
Cassius's Camp. He gave orders for the throwing of Earth upon the Reeds, and
upon this Earth spread Stones; and this kind of Causway he caused to be
supported by pieces of Wood driven cross-ways into the Marsh, and where the
Water was too high made Bridges: Antonius every day covered this Work with
Skirmishes, and as it was secretly carried on across the Reeds, the Enemies
could perceive nothing but the Towers and Fortifications which they saw upon
that Post which lay on the other side of the Marsh, Cassius admired the work,
and Antonius's boldness, and that he might in nothing give place to him,
extended his Lines along the Marsh as far as the Sea, and by that proceeding
meeting with Antonius's Causway, cut it off, by which means those of the
Triumviri's Forces, who were already gotten on the other side of the Marsh,
became very much exposed. It was not doubted in the Conspiratours Camp, but
that Antonius would do all that in him lay to disingage his Troops. The only
question was how they should receive him, whether out of their Lines in
Battalia, or only by defending their Lines. Brutus carried the dispute for a
general Battle, chiefly, because some of the Soldiers had already deserted.
This reason prevailed also with all the rest of the Officers, except Atellius,
who still insisted for staying till Winter was over, Brutus asked him, What
advantage he hoped for from such a prolongation; what, said he, to live a year
longer. This answer added to the disorder of Cassius, who heard it, and who
after the Council broke up, went to Supper with Messala. This Messala was a
young Man of Noble birth, who had a great deal of Wit, and was very learned for
a Man of Quality, he became afterward as I have already observed, in great
favor with Augustus, and had the Command of the best and bravest Legion of
that Army. Cassius was sad and thoughtfull all the Supper time, though he was
naturally very gay, and as he rose from the Table, taking Messala by the hand,
Messala, said he, you must bear me witness that I am forced in the same manner
as Pompey once was, to expose the liberty of the Roman People to the hazard of
a Battle; nevertheless we ought to hope well from fortune, but we have taken
ill Counsel. So he retired, after having invited Messala to Supper with him the
next night, the morrow being his birthday.

CHAP. XLIX. The Battle of Philippi. Brutus overthrows Caesar's Troops. Cassius
being defeated by Antonius, in despair kills himself.
AT break of day there appeared the Coat Armor of Purple upon the two Generals
Tents, which amongst the Romans was the signal of Battle, so whilst that the
Troops were putting themselves in a readiness, Cassius was desirous to know
Brutus's opinion of what they ought to do in case matters should miscarry.
Brutus said, That he had heretofore in his Writings condemned the death of
Cato, and maintained (what was indeed very true) that that manner of avoiding
such disgraces as Providence sends upon us, was a horrible attempt against the
power of Heaven, and wicked in the eyes of men; but that he had now altered his
opinion, since being no longer Master of one life, which he had sacrificed to
his Country upon the Ides of March, he was resolved to change it for a happier
if Fortune proved his Enemy. Cassius embraced him, and smiling, told him, Now
we may go on upon the Enemy, for either we will be Conquerours our selves, or
we will have no cause to fear those that are so. This was doubtless a sure
method for the preventing any farther fear, but it is very apparent by this
discourse, that for this resolution they were more beholding to their frailty,
than to that greatness of Soul whereon they so much valued themselves, for it
was neither this Opinion, nor Caesar's death that deserves those Heroic Titles
which Cicero in his Epistles has given them. They afterward appointed their
order of Battle, Brutus had the right Wing with Messala, and Cassius the left.
The Triumviri's Army was already drawn up, Antonius only Commanded, because
Caesar was sick, whose Troops had the left Wing, and Antonius's the right. At
last about Noon he marched against Cassius with the party that he headed. The
inequality of the ground forced his Legions upon such a motion, that Brutus's
Troops believed they were coming against them, so that without expecting the
Word or the Commands of their General, they advanced to receive them. Antonius
avoided the engaging, by a motion which he made to the right to go ^^ainst
Cassius. He lost some Soldiers there, and must have been fallen upon in the
flank, if Caesar's Army had not advanced. Brutus's Soldiers marched without
order, but with so much heat, that at the first onset they overthrew all that
opposed them. Messala followed by three Legions, pushed even into Caesar's
Camp, who had just left it, and was retreated very sick to Antonius's. They
found his Litter, which they pierced several times through and through, so that
a report began to be spread about that he was slain. He has since written, That
one of his Friends called This was a Physician.
Artorius, persuaded him to this retreat upon the occasion of a dream. The
slaughter was great in Caesar's Camp, and there fell in it 2000 Lacedaemonians
who fought on his side. Three of his Legions were also cut to pieces upon the
spot, and Brutus must have obtained an entire Victory, could he possibly have
governed the fury of his Soldiers, who would needs engage themselves too far.
Antonius knew well how to make his advantage of this Error, and without
changing, went directly upon Cassius, who expected him in Battalia upon the
advanced ground, the Combat was very rough, and after several takings and
re-takings of each other, they fell together Pell-mell with their Swords in
their hands. In the mean time a Party of Antonius's Soldiers opened a passage
through the Lines, at the bottom of the Marsh, and when they came up, charging
Cassius's Troops upon the flank, overthrew them with great slaughter. Antonius
Commanded four Legions to pursue the Victory over the Marsh, hastening the
others to Cassius's Camp, which was very ill guarded, by reason that all the
Soldiers were come forth to the Battle, he soon made himself Master of it,
which raised so great a consternation in the rest of the Army, that they
immediately dispersed themselves. Cassius did upon this occasion all that could
be expected from a man of Courage, he returned several times to the charge, and
took himself the Eagle out of an Ensigns hand, who was running away, and held
it a long time before him, but he forgot the duty of a General, when he so long
tamely expected Antonius, whom he ought to have charged at the same time that
Brutus went on. At last his Guards forsaking him, he was forced to retreat up
to an advanced ground near the City of Philippi. He had lost eight thousand
Men, reckoning the Sutlers that were killed in his Camp. But there were once as
many slain on Caesar's side, from whom there were taken three Eagles, and
several other Colors, by which Brutus believing he had gotten an entire
Victory, led back his Troops laden with pillage to his Camp, when observing
that in Cassius's Camp the Tents were thrown down, and perceiving by the
number, and the Arms of those Soldiers who were within, that they were
Enemies, he immediately detached a body of Cavalry to hasten to the relief of
his Friend, though by misfortune that relief did but add speed to his ruin.
Cassius was short sighted, and besides, the dust which the fight had raised all
over the Field, hindered him from distinguishing Brutus's Troops. Nevertheless
he saw confusedly some Cavalry marching, and sent Titinius, one of his Friends
to discover what they were. He was received with great cries of joy by Brutus's
Cavalry, who embracing him, asked him, What news of his General. Cassius
perceiving this from the place where he was, and believing that those men who
ran to embrace Titinius, had taken him Prisoner, Alas, said he, to preserve the
remainder of a miserable life, I have exposed my best friend to be taken. At
these words he went into a Tent with the Gentleman of his Horse, whose name was
Pindarus; we have no very good account of what passed there; but Cassius was
found dead of a wound in his Neck, and Pindarus never appeared afterward.
Titinius arrived within a moment with the Cavalry, and all rejoicing, but their
joy was soon turned into a sad affliction, and Titinius after having accused
himself of folly and laziness, slew himself upon the body of his Friend.

CHAP. L. Brutus's Melancholy. His Fleet defeats that of Caesar and Antonius,
and Brutus knows not of it. He speaks to his Troops to confirm them.
BRUTUS was extremely sorrowful for the death of his Companion, whom he called
the last of the Romans, and causing his body privately to be removed, sent it
to Thasos, to pay him the last Offices of Funeral. In the mean time he told his
Friends, That he thought him very happy in that he was now beyond the reach of
those misfortunes which remained yet for them to suffer. In effect, his death
utterly discomposed the whole affairs of the Conspiratours, and it will not be
improper to say that Cassius killed himself in despite of his good Fortune.
Several have reported that he knew of Brutus's Victory, and that the same day
whereon they fought at Philippi, they overthrew Caesar's Fleet, which was
carrying Provisions to the Triumviri, together with a strong relief, consisting
of two Legions, and Caesar's Company of Guards. Marcus and Domitius had
performed this good service against another Domitius surnamed Calvinus, who in
this fight either by the Sword or by fire, lost the best of his Soldiers, and
almost all his Ships. This defeat must have ruined the Triumviri beyond all
hopes of recovery, had Brutus but been informed of it, but the negligence or
malice of some of his Officers hindered the giving him any account of the
matter, and his own vexation and impatience hastened on his ruin, or to speak
more properly, the Divine Providence did it, which now seemed resolved to put
an end to the Civil Wars, by appointing a Master over the Roman Empire. The
next day after the fight, Brutus called together the Soldiers of both Armies;
where after having praised the Valor of his own men, and the Victory they had
gotten, he exhorted them, To show once more how obedient they could be, and
observe their Generals better than they had done before. He gave them to
understand the necessities the Enemies were reduced to, And that that was the
only cause of their boldness and courage, since they would never have sought
to have fallen in Battle, had they not been afraid of being starved by Famine.
He caused also 1000 Drams to be given to every Soldier, with a promise,
That after the Victory, they should have the liberty of plundering the two
Cities of Lacedemon and Thessalonica, by which, in the judgment even of those
Authors who have appeared most zealous for his memory, he strayed very wide of
those sentiments of humanity and moderation which he had all his life time
affected. Antonius also having occasion to speak to his men, made a good use of
the death of Cassius, It is, said he, an unanswerable proof that our Enemies
are defeated, they can never dare to dispute the Victory with us, since the
bravest and most able of their Generals has been driven to so desperate a
proceeding; but it is our business to force them themselves to this Confession,
and offer them Battle. If they shall be so faint-hearted as to refuse it, ye
shall see that they will acknowledge themselves Conquered. He did not moreover
forget to speak of Rewards, and promised 5000 Drams to every Soldier,
after which he marched his Troops in Battalia, till they came in sight of
Brutus's Lines, who did not draw out, so that though Antonius were himself at
the point of despair, he omitted not to make his Soldiers sensible how
fearful their Enemies were, and daily to endeavor the bringing of them to a
Battle. Brutus had moreover other troubles in his Camp, Cassius's Troops would
hardly obey him, and the shame of their having been beaten, began to make them
Mutinous, this forced him to rid himself of what Prisoners he had taken, so the
Romans he set at liberty, and put the Slaves to the Sword. At last Antonius and
Caesar, (who now began to be fit for action) being pressed by the ill condition
that their Troops were in, who by the Rains and the Frost that followed,
suffered extremely in those deep places, where they were encamped, made an
attempt, which succeeded to their wishes, and decided the matter.

CHAP. LI. Brutus utterly defeated by Antonius and Caesar.
BRUTUS had since the last Battle quitted an advanced ground, which was within
the compass of Cassius's Camp, Caesar immediately took possession of that Post
with two of his Legions, who fortified themselves there. Afterward he sent ten
other Legions about a quarter of a League from thence toward the Sea, with a
design to cut off any Provisions from coming to the Conspiratours. Brutus on
his part caused diverse Works to be carried on, by which means they were several
days disputing for the ground foot to foot by their Works. At last, Brutus's
Soldiers mutined, they got together in Troops up and down the Field, and
demanded, What Cowardliness their General had lately observed in them, that he
could suffer the Enemy daily to come and brave them with safety, that he would
give them leave to make use of those Arms, and that Courage which their Enemies
had been so often made sensible of. Brutus for some time dissembled his
resentment, and afterward fearing lest they should forsake him, which he began
already to have strong suspicions of, he all of a sudden gave way to the
impatience of his People, and resolved to put an end to his as well as the
Romans inquietudes, by the fortune of Arms. It is reported that the Spectre
which had appeared to him, came to him again the night before this great
Battle, but that it only appeared without saying any thing. That the Eagle
which belonged to his first Legion, was covered with Bees, and that a certain
sweat in the nature of Oil, which had the perfume of Roses, came from the Arm
of one of his Captains in such quantity, that it wet several handkerchiefs. The
Authors of those times also report, that the first man whom Brutus's Troops
met withal as they drew out of their Camp, was a Negro, whom they cut to
pieces with their Swords. The Soldiers of both parties were encouraged from
different reasons, those of the Triumviri saw that they must either Conquer or
die with Famine. And Brutus's men were resolved to maintain the honor of their
first Victory, and that boldness wherewith they had demanded Battle contrary to
the Opinion of their General. Brutus was in the foremost rank very well
mounted, Fellow Soldiers (said he to his People) ye have desired to fight
contrary to my Opinion, when the miseries which our Enemies were reduced to,
might have assured us the Victory without any hazard, but that did not appear
honorable enough for you, ye are for buying glory at the price of your blood,
and now it lies upon you to complete the business, and not to deceive that
trust which I have reposed in your Valor. On the other side Caesar and
Antonius said to their Soldiers, Thus ye see now our Enemies in a place where
we have a long time wished them, they are now no longer covered with those
Fortifications which made them so bold before, so that their destiny is in your
own hands, though ye have but one thing to choose, which is to overcome, or
perish by the most miserable of deaths, which is that of Famine. After this the
two Armies advanced within the reach of their Darts, when in the very moment
appeared two Eagles in the Air, who began a cruel fight together, and drew the
admiration of all the Troops, that which was on Brutus's side was beaten, and
fled away, which so animated the Soldiers of the Triumviri, that they gave a
great shout, and marched on with fury, they lanced their Javelins as it had
been only for fashion sake, and the Legions came immediately hand to hand. The
fight was long and bloody, the right Wing, which Brutus led, drove back that of
Antonius, but at the same time his left recoiled before Caesar's Legions. There
was afterward no more giving of ground, and what was won was won by force of
Arms, like a heavy Engine that can hardly be removed. At last Caesar's Cavalry
having repulsed those of Cassius, who behaved themselves very ill, gained the
flank of the Conspiratour's left Wing; the fear of being hemmed in made them
open their Battalions to the right and left, that they might make head every
way. Caesar's Men charged into intervals and broke them to pieces, then that
Line gave way, and turning upon the second, produced nothing but fear and
disorder, a proceeding contrary to what had been used in the first Battle,
caused at this time the loss of Brutus; for those Troops terrified and pressed
hard by Caesar, came tumbling upon the Wing which Brutus commanded, and
notwithstanding all that he could do to rally them broke it in pieces. Cato's
Son, who commanded under him, seeing that all must now inevitably be lost, ran
into the thickest of the Enemy's Battalions, and uttring aloud his own Name and
his Father's, was there slain. Caesar and Antonius neglected none of their
advantages, and on every side charged those Troops which were in disorder.
Antonius took care to follow the victory, and Caesar not being able to do it,
commanded Norbanus to go to the Enemy's Camp, where a great slaughter was made
of those who confusedly were retreating. Almost all Brutus's best Officers
perished in this fight, by endeavoring to save the person of their General. A
body of Thracian Cavalry, commanded by Rhastus, persued him very hard, and must
have taken him had it not been for Lucilius, who was his best friend. This Man
charged the Thracians and stopped them, till seeing himself encompassed round,
he cried out that he was Brutus, and demanded Quarter, desiring that they would
carry him to Antonius. These Cavaliers, transported with their good fortune,
sent word of it to Antonius, and brought him their Prisoner: He notwithstanding
all his hatred could not but be concerned at this adventure, which cost him
many reflections. He was extremely confounded to think how he ought to be* have
himself to those that brought him the news, and who appeared before him with
different opinions of the matter, when Lucilius showing himself in the midst of
those who conducted him; No Man (said he to Antonius) shall ever have the
honor to take Brutus alive, nor will the Gods permit that Fortune shall have
such advantage over his Virtue, but he will always be found, whether dead or
living, in a condition that becomes his Courage. I have here delivered my self
up to save him, I am now in your hands, and you may dispose of my life just as
you please. Antonius could not but admire the virtue of the Man, and told the
Thracians, that they were much happier than they believed they were, since in
stead of the enemy whom they thought they had brought him, they had made him a
present of a friend. Indeed Lucilius was afterward one of his first friends,
and to the day of his death discharged himself with an inviolable fidelity.

CHAP. LII. Brutus's last Words and Death. Messala goes over to Caesar with all
his Forces.
THIS contrivance of Lucilius and the night together gave Brutus time to pass
over a little River, and make his retreat up to an advanced ground which was
hard by. There (lifting up his eyes to Heaven) * unhappy Virtue, said he, I
follow thee as a solid good, but thou art only a thing merely talked of, a
vain empty name, or at best a slave of fortune. He afterward repeated several
times another Greek Verse which signifies, Punish, great Jove, the author of
these evils, by which it was thought he designed Antonius, who afterward
remembered it when he was driven to that extremity by Caesar after the Battle of
Actium. Afterward, with abundance of praises as well as sighs, he repeated the
names of all those of his friends whom he had seen perish upon that occasion.
One of those who was still with him complained that he was thirsty, and the
Soldiers running to the River fetched water in their Helmets and brought it.
Voluminous a noble Senator, who had been gone out to discover what might be the
reason of a certain noise which they had then heard, returned at this time, and
asking if there were any water, We have all drank, (said Brutus to him smiling)
but do not you be troubled, for the spring is not far off, so the Soldiers
returned to the River, but had much ado to get back again, and were several of
them wounded, which gave Brutus to understand that he was invested; then he
exhorted those that were with him to make some attempt to get to their Camp,
which yet held out; but they had lost all their courage, and told him that he
would do better to think of saving himself. I know very well (answered he)
that I ought to do it, but it is with my hands and not with my feet. Then
Statilius, one of his Officers, offered to go by himself to the Camp, and that
if it were not taken, to advance a lighted Flambeau in the air for a signal.
The Flambeau appeared, which gave some hopes to Brutus, so he expected a long
time, saying, Statilius would come if he were alive. But he was slain in his
return by some Soldiers belonging to one of those Corpse du guard which the
Triumviri had every where posted. At last Brutus, wearied with expectation, and
seeing that the day approached, whispered something in the ear of one of his
Domestics, whose name was Clitus, and who answered him nothing, but fell
aweeping, which made Brutus call Dardanus, who served him as General of his
Horse, to him also he said something and addressed himself afterward to
Voluminous, who has written all these particulars. But seeing they only
answered him with their tears, he raised himself up and made them a short
discourse to thank them for that fidelity wherewith they had so generously and
to the last extremity followed his fortune. He said he looked upon himself much
happier than any of his Conquerours, since he should enjoy that reputation
which always follows Virtue, and which Tyranny and Injustice can never deserve.
He conjured his friends to think of preserving their lives, since he hoped that
Caesar and Antonius being satisfied with his death, would not pursue their
cruelty any farther. He afterward went aside some few paces with a certain
Greek, whose name was Strato, a very learned Rhetorician; and for that reason
by him highly esteemed, he begged of this man, by that strict League that was
made between them, to do that office for him which those other friends had
refused, and seeing that he could not resolve upon it* he called for a slave.
Ah! (then said Strato) it shall never be said that Brutus in his last extremity
stood in need of the assistence of a slave for want of a friend, so turning
away his head, he presented the point of his sword to Brutus, who threw himself
upon it with such violence that it pierced him through, and he died
immediately. Thus did this Man, The year of the World 4012. since the building
of Rome 712. before the birth of our Savior 41.
born with so great advantages and qualified so well, by a tragical end pay for
that horrible ingratitude wherewith he had dyed his hands in the blood of a Man
to whom he stood indebted for the highest favors. It is a crime which can
never be washed off from his memory, no not by all the Virtue which he so ill
employed, both in that action and at his death. Several have reported
circumstances otherwise, but all agree in this, that Messala a long time
afterward presenting Strato to Augustus said, See here, Caesar, the Man who
paid the last offices to my Brutus, and that Augustus extremely cherished
Strato, who afterward served him very faithfully. Antonius hearing the next
day of Brutus's death, went to the place where the Body still lay, and covered
it himself with a rich Coat of Armor which he wore, and when news was brought
him afterward that some body had stripped him, he caused the Thief to be taken
and put to death. The Body was burnt by his orders, and the ashes sent to
Servilia, Brutus's Wife, whose name was Porcia, and was Cato of Vtica's
Daughter, so that having such a Father, and such a Husband, we may easily
imagine what were the maxims of that Virtue which she so openly made profession
of; and she was resolved to give proofs of it by a death by which she out-did
the fury of those two Men whom she most tenderly loved. And though since the
death of her Husband she was so strictly observed, that it was impossible for
her either to make use of Poison or Dagger, she swallowed so many hot Coals and
Ashes that she choked her self. Though, to speak the truth of the matter,
there is a great deal of reason to believe that this kind of death was rather
invented by the Wits, who were desirous to report that tragical adventure in
all its circumstances, and make, as they have done, a Subject for a good Mart.
l. 1.
Epigram; since Plutarch assures us that he had seen some of Brutus's Letters,
wherein he complains of his friends at Rome for suffering Porcia to die of
Melancholy. Brutus's Friends and his Officers took different parties, all those
who knew themselves guilty of Julius Caesar's death, slew themselves with their
own hands; the others rallying with Messala, Bibulus and Cornificius, sent
Deputies to Caesar and Antonius for an honorable composition, which the two
Generals frankly allowed of, so they went into their Army with 14000 Men, who
yet might have made a great deal of disturbance in a fortified Camp, and that
was the reason which facilitated the Capitulation. And the Camp was afterward
given up to be plundered. By this famous overthrow the Triumviri at last
established themselves in an authority, which none were found powerful enough
to dispute with them, and which gave the last blow to the Roman liberty. The
death of Caesar was revenged, and by this Victory did his Son begin to lay the
foundations of an Empire, which at last for its grandeur and extent has never
yet been equalled.

THE CONTINUATION OF THE HISTORY OF THE Second Triumvirate.
CHAP. I. After the Battle of Philippi, Anthony and Caesar bring their Enemies
to punishment. They part the Forces of Pompey. Caesar goes into Italy.
AS the love of Liberty was the most predominant passion the Romans had, so
never any people defended with more vigor that good which they valued more
than their Lives. It was this that bred so many divisions among them, and was
the cause of such bloody Wars; in which one of the parties always had the
specious pretense of upholding the public Liberty: But as the last sighs and
groans are usually most violent, so the Battle of Philippi, which was the last
effort of the dying Commonwealth, was the greatest struggle that ever she had
for the maintaining her authority. The Sedition of the Gracchi was the first
where the Blood of Roman Citizens was shed, however that seemed to be but only
a Popular Commotion, seeing it was decided in the Forum in an hours time. The
Wars that were kindled afterward between Marius and Sylla had longer and more
fatal consequences: But then Italy, or rather Rome, only was the Theater of
them; and what animosity soever appeared between the two Parties the rest of
the World felt nothing of it. The division of Caesar and Pompey went much
farther, the whole Roman Empire was shaken by it: But although all its Forces
had fought at Pharsalia, they were not comparable to those that appeared
afterward at the Battle of Philippi, where above 200000 effective Men were in
Arms, commanded by the greatest Generals of that time. Besides too, in the
forementioned Commotions, several Senators thought they might very well stand
neuters out of their respect to the Commonwealth, whose name at least in
appearance was still reverenced, whereas in this last occasion, the mask being
laid aside by the proceeding and declarations of the Triumvirs all management
and conduct was useless, and there was an absolute necessity of taking one side
or the other, for Liberty or against it. But that was utterly ruined by the
defeat of Brutus, and from that moment Caesar and Anthony began to act as
Sovereigns and divide the Roman Empire as theirs by Conquest; for though
Lepidus had his share of the Government, yet as he had had none in the danger
of the Wars, he was but very little considered, all the love of the Soldiers,
which was the firmest prop of their Empire, being turned in favor of those
that had headed them upon all occasions. The following days after the Victory
were employed by the Triumvirs in punishing their foes; Anthony sacrificed
Hortensius to the memory of his Brother Caius, and put Varro to death, who
reproached him with his debauches, and in some sort did then foretell the
miserable end he himself should come to. Livius Drusus, the Father of that
Livia who was afterward married to Augustus killed himself in his Tent, and
Quintilius Varus adorned with all the marks of the honors and dignities he had
passed through, made himself be slain by his freedman. Caesar upon this
occasion appeared much more cruel than Anthony, whether it were that the pain
and uneasiness of his sickness had sowred his humor, or that he really had a
bent to cruelty, or what is more likely had his temper so much at command, that
he put on gentleness or severity as in policy was necessary. He sent the Head
of Brutus to Rome to be thrown at the Feet of his Father's statue, and forced a
Senator and his Son to draw Lots for their lives, but they both refused it;
the Father voluntarily gave up himself to execution, and the Son stabbed himself
before Caesar's face. To another that begged of him that he might have the Rites
of Burial, he said that that would soon be at the disposal of the Ravens; these
and such like bitter words, joined to the rigor of his punishments, rendered
him so odious to the rest of the Prisoners that were brought fettered before
them, that they saluted Anthony with respect, but loaded Caesar with injuries
and bloody reproaches, which none did with more violence than Favonius, who at
his death took all the liberty of speech and railing freedom of a Cynick
Philosopher. After having thus satisfied their revenge, the Triumvirs thought
upon establishing their authority. Anthony undertook to go into Asia to gather
Money in those Provinces that were tributary to the Romans; and Caesar took
upon him to lead the old Troops into Italy to put them in possession of the
Lands that were promised them. This Commission was an undertaking both nice and
full of danger. Caesar had to do with Soldiers who thought they had right to
give Laws even to their Commanders for the great services they had done them,
and who would never have wanted welcome entertainment from the other side; for
the remainders of the contrary Faction did still subsist in the persons of
Domitius and Staius Murcus, the Lieutenant-Generals of Brutus who had both very
powerful Fleets; for Cassius of Parma had joined them with thirty Rhodian
Ships assisted by Clodius Forulus and young Cicero, so that they were able to
make a considerable progress had they remained united, but their ambition
divided them. Domitius, who would be independent and head of the Party, quitted
Murcus, who thereupon went and joined with Pompey, the most dangerous Enemy of
the Triumvirs. He was Master of Sicily, and very strong at Sea, and if he had
had but as much conduct as he had valor, he would have been able to dispute
the Empire of the World with them, or at least have shared it; but for want of
good education, learning and knowledge, he was of so irresolute a temper, that
though he had a brisk and ready wit, he so wholly abandoned himself to the
management of his freedom, that he seemed rather to be their Slave. Among them
Menas and Menecrates were of most authority, they commanded his Troops made up
of fugitive Slaves, and of those Soldiers that the fury of the Triumvirs had
driven out of Italy: but that which more maintained the reputation of this
Party was the great number of noble persons that were proscribed, who had fled
for refuge into Sicily, like those driven by storms, to whom a small shelter or
an open Road appears a safe harbor. The arrival of Murcus increased his
Forces; nevertheless he did not oppose Caesar, who returned into Italy with
five Legions and 4000 Horse, Anthony having kept with him 10000 and six
Legions. They had disbanded the rest of their Army, after they had satisfied
them with what Money they had left, and what they found in the Conspiratours
Camp. They were all old Soldiers whose time of service was expired, and who
besides that pretended to the rewards and inheritances that had been promised
them; 'twas this that was the most perplexing business and important care of
the Triumvirs. Though the 43 Legions they had in the beginning of the War were
by this time reduced to 28, they had still need of vast sums to pay according
to their promise 5000 Drachmas to every private Soldier, almost 100 li. and to
the others in proportion; this was the principal motive of Anthony's expedition
into Asia, he had besides the Legions 4000 old Soldiers, Volunteers, who
served him as his Guards, and as many remained with Caesar in the same post.

CHAP. II. Anthony goes into Grecia, he stays at Athens, he goes into Asia,
where he is honorably received, his Speech to the Deputies.
ANTHONY loved his pleasure above all other things, and upon the least respite
he had from business he always followed his natural bent and inclination. After
the achievement of such a famous Victory that seemed to be gained wholly by
him, he could not refuse himself the satisfaction of seeing Greece, it being
the Country of the World where flattery was managed with most delicacy; to
gain the hearts of this People, he would needs dis-robe himself of all kind of
Majesty, that rendered him any ways formidable to them, he was familiarly
present at the conferences of the Philosophers at Athens, and made great
Presents to that City, and never was better pleased than when he was called the
Friend and Patron of the Greeks, or a lover of the Athenians. He administered
justice with great gentleness and equity, and was always giving them some taste
of his rallying humor, as when those of Megara earnestly desired he would go
and see the place of their Assemblies, imagining he would admire the structure
of it; he went thither and after he had intentively viewed it, when one took
the boldness to ask him what he thought of it, it appears to me, says he, to
be very little, and ready to fall to ruin. He took the measures of the Temple
of Apollo Pythius, out of a design to finish it, as he had promised the Senate;
and then leaving Marcus Censorius to command in Greece, he went over into Asia
with all his Troops. There all the Princes of the East that acknowledged the
Roman power, came to make their court to him, and the fairest Princesses strove
to gain his favor either by the charms of their Beauty or the magnificence of
their Presents. This crowd of Sovereigns that daily waited in his Antichamber
with their praises and submissions did most agreeably flatter his ambition, but
the manner of his reception at Ephesus wrought it up to intolerable pride. The
inhabitants went to meet him dressed like Fawns and Satyrs, the Women like
Bacchanals, armed with Thirses, crowned with Ivy, and covered with Tyger's
Skins; all this was accompanied with a pleasant consort of Flutes, Hoboys and
other instruments. They called Anthony Bacchus, Father of the Graces and
Gentleness; and indeed the name suited him well, but not in respect of every
body. It Is true indeed he pardoned all those of Brutus's Party that surrendered
themselves to him, except Petronius and Quintus, the first was charged with
being one of the Conspiratours against Caesar, and the other with betraying
Dolabella in Laodicea, but then he took away the Estates of several rich
Citizens to enrich his Flatterers and Bouffons, who making people that were in
perfect health believe they were dead, very impudently went and begged their
Estates: Among others a Cook of his, for dressing him a Supper that pleased
him, got the House of a wealthy inhabitant of Magnesia. In the mean time, being
pressed by the necessity of giving his Troops satisfaction, he assembles all
the Deputies of all those that were either subjects or allies of the Roman
Empire in Asia, and harangued them after this manner. Gentlemen, ye must needs
be sensible of the advantages ye have enjoyed under the Government of the
Romans, and with what gentleness they have governed you ever since Attalus at
his death bequeathed you to them; they freely remitted all those Taxes ye paid
to that Prince and his predecessors, till the ambition of some of our
Citizens, making them rebel against us, we were obliged to draw some supply of
money which we wanted from these Provinces; but it was with such moderation
that the Tax was much beneath what ye were able to give. As our design was not
to ruin you, we only demanded a part of your revenue, that at least we might
have our share of your assistence as well as our Enemies, who, far from
treating you with the same lenity, exacted much more from you by downright
violence, and against the authority of the Senate. Ye may very well remember
that Julius Caesar generously forgave you the third part of the impost ye
granted him, and having regard to your Petitions and complaints, gave leave
that ye your selves should gather the Taxes among your own Subjects, yet all
these testimonies of his clemency and humanity have not been able to hinder
some ill-minded Senators from making him pass for a Tyrant; they declared
themselves our enemies because we endeavored to revenge the murder of him,
who was both our friend and our General, but ye, notwithstanding the great
obligations ye owed him, have not been ashamed to assist his murderers with
vast sums of Money. And since that ye would needs run their fortune in the War,
and that the Gods have been pleased to grant the Victory, not according to your
wishes but their own justice, there is all the reason in the world we should
treat you as the allies, or indeed as the accomplices of our Foes, and that we
should impose some punishment upon you. But as we are willing to believe that
this fault is rather the effect of their violence than your will, we shall not
proceed against you with any cruel or insupportable punishments. Ye know
without doubt we owe our Soldiers large recompenses, as the reward of the
Victories they have gained, and for this we have engaged both our Words and
Oaths. These rewards ought to be given in Money, in Lands and in Houses. We
have 28 Legions, which make 170000 Men, besides some other Troops, not counting
the Cavalry, nor the Veterans that have obtained their dismission, so that ye
may judge of our occasions by the number of our Soldiers. 'Twas this that
obliged Caesar to go into Italy to distribute these rewards in Lands and
Houses. Even whole Cities will scarce be sufficient for this design, which at
the same time will alter the state and circumstances of that Province: But
because we will not take your Cities and inheritances from you, nor drive you
from your Temples and the Sepulchers of your Forefathers, all the punishment ye
have deserved shall be imposed in Money, without forcing you however to give us
all ye are worth. But even this proceeding too is displeasing to us, it seems
too rigorous; and we are resolved to do nothing but what shall be approved of
by reasonable and uninteressed Persons. We demand of you only what ye gave our
Adversaries, which is ten years Tribute; but as ye paid it to them in two years
time, we require it of you in one, for our occasions that press us constrain us
to decree it so; and besides the love and esteem ye seem to have for us should
make you have the same sentiments. This is all the pain ye shall endure, seeing
the Laws of humanity permit not always that the punishment should be
proportionable to the crime. All those that were present threw themselves
weeping at the feet of Anthony. They remonstrated to him that Their assisting
Brutus and Cassius could not be laid to their charge as a crime, because they
were forced to it, and that by such intolerable usage, that they were rather
objects of mercy and pity than punishment. That they should esteem themselves
even too happy to be able to assist those to whom they were so much obliged
with all they were worth; but since their Enemies had taken not only all their
Gold and Silver that was coined, but all the Plate and ornaments of the Cities
and Temples, they were reduced to the utmost extremity. This Discourse not
being able to satisfy Anthony, the Orator Hybreas told him boldly enough, My
Lord, If you would exact from us in one year what we are but able to pay in
two, you should that year give us two Harvests and two Vintages. This liberty
of speech did not at all displease Anthony, for he loved a thing well said; and
the same Hybreas upon another occasion said to him, Asia has already paid to
you 200000 Talents, if the Money did not come to your hands bring them to an
account that received it, but if it did and you have none of it left we are
undone. At length after many contests, these Deputies beseeched Anthony to be
contented with the Tax of nine years to be paid in two, which he granted them.
So all the tributary Kings and Princes of Asia, with the free Cities, and all
the People in general were obliged to contribute to the payment of this sum.
Anthony after this went a progress all about ^he Country, where he gave
extraordinary demonstrations of his generosity and good nature. He pardoned
Lucius, Brother to Cassius, and several others of his Enemies, whom the report
of his clemency drew out of the places where they were hid; only he spared
none that had a hand in the death of Caesar, or were of the number of the
Conspiratours. Lycia that was laid waste by Brutus he exempted from the
contribution. He persuaded the Xanthians to rebuild their City; to the Rhodians
he gave Andros, Tenos and Gnidos. Those of Tharsus and Laodicea enjoyed freedom
from the imposition in consideration that they had been severely used by
Cassius, and set at liberty those of these two Cities that had been made
Slaves. Amongst the rest he was not unmindfull of the Athenians, but gave them
the Isle of Egina; so that the whole weight of the contribution fell heaviest
upon the People of the lesser Asia, Syria, Phrygia, Mysia and Gallatia, who
were extremely harassed, as likewise were the Provinces of Cappadocia, Cilicia
and Palestine. Anthony then made himself sovereign Judge of the differences
between the Kings of those Countries, as in Cappadocia between Ariarathes and
Sysenes, for whom the beauty of his Mother Glaphyra was so powerful as to
carry the Crown from his Competitour. At this time he received very favorably
the Embassy from Hircanus, King and High Priest of the Jews, and began to give
Herod marks of his favor for the services he had received from his Father
Antipater.

CHAP. III. Cleopatra Queen of Egypt her Character, she comes to Anthony,
their interview, Anthony puts Arsinoe the Sister of Cleopatra to death.
AMong those Sovereigns whose destiny depended on the absolute will and
disposition of Anthony, Cleopatra, Queen of Egypt, by her conduct found she
had reason both to hope and fear: She had managed her self like an adroit
Politician in the time of the War, assisting Dolabella at the same time that
Serapion, her Lieutenant in Cyprus, ^ought for Cassius; she knew well enough
that this had not been very pleasing to the Triumviri, considering what she
owed to the memory of Julius Caesar. The love of that great Man and her was
sufficiently known to all the World, but as if she had been resolved to conquer
and triumph over the Romans in the Persons of their Generals; she had received
the Addresses of Pompey's eldest Son, so that never Beauty was ever signalized
by more illustrious conquests. The amorous passions she had inspired when she
was very young gave her such an opinion of her Charms as she hoped she easily
might revive that flame in Anthony's heart of which heretofore he had given her
testimony, when he commanded the Cavalry of Gabinius in Egypt. But above all
it was her Wit that maintained this hope in her, for though her Person was very
charming, and the beauty and brightness of her Eyes was not to be withstood,
yet there were at Rome those of her Sex that did not yield to her in the least
for Mein nor Beauty, but none could compare with her for the agreeableness of
her Wit and her charming conversation; it was such a pleasure to hear her talk,
and all her Discourse was animated with such an air as was not to be expressed,
that it made an extraordinary impression upon all those that heard her; the
very tone of her Voice, accompanied with the loveliness of her Eyes and the
liveliness of her Wit never failed both to please and persuade. Then she
expressed her self with so much facility in so many several Languages, that
even that was enough to pass for a Prodigy. The most Barbarous Nations with
wonder heard her answer their Ambassadors without an Interpreter; she
understood, besides many others, the Ethiopian, the Troglodite, the Hebrew, the
Arabian, Syrian, Median and Parthian Tongues, and it was the more admirable in
her by reason several of the Kings her Predecessors had not been able to learn
the Egyptian, and some of them had forgot the Macedonian, their own Mother
Tongue. The great confidence she put in these her extraordinary accomplishments
gave her more assurance to go to Anthony, who had sent Dellius to cite her to
give an account of her conduct to him. Dellius was a Man of Wit and Learning,
and a famous Historian, but one of very ill principles: Messala called him the
Vaulter of the Civil Wars; for he went from the service of Dolabella to
Cassius's side, and then quitted Cassius for Anthony, and at last traitorously
left Anthony and went over to Caesar: And his character and disposition was
suitable, being of the number of those Fellows who have always a base
compliance for all the inclinations of their Masters. And as he very well
understood the humor of Anthony, he had no sooner beheld the Beauty of the
Queen, and was sensible of the address and power of her Wit and understanding,
but he easily judged what sentiments she was likely to inspire him with. It is
reported too that he was so sensible of Cleopatra's Charms as to engage his
Heart, and that she was not displeased with his Love (and indeed in the time of
Seneca, there went about Letters of his to that Queen, written with a little
too much familiarity) however, he omitted nothing that might please her; he
assured her that Anthony was the best natured and most Gentile humoured Man in
the World, to Persons of so extraordinary merit and such admirable
qualifications, and that she had nothing to apprehend, unless it were making
him too much in love with her, which she did not fear in the least. She then
prepared to meet him, but in so gallant a manner, that at first sight it made a
most pleasing impression upon his Soul. Anthony waited for her in Cilicia.
Cleopatra arriving at the mouth of the River Cydnus, embarked her self upon a
Vessel whose Poop was of Gold, the Sails of Purple Silk, the Oars of Silver,
which gently kept time to a Symphony made by a consort of excellent Music. The
Queen was laid under a Canopy of rich Cloth of Gold, dressed like Venus, rising
out of the Sea, about her were lovely Children like Cupids fanning her, the
handsomest of her Women habited like Nereids and Graces were leaning
negligently on the sides and shrowds of the Vessels; the sweets that were
burning perfumed the Banks of the River, which were covered with an infinite
number of People, who ran thither with such earnestness that Anthony, who was
mounted on a Throne to make a show of Majesty, was left quite alone whilst all
the Multitude that flocked to the River shouted for joy, and cried that the
Goddess Venus was come to visit the God Bacchus for the happiness of Asia.
Anthony thought himself obliged in civility to desire her to land and sup with
him, but she replied it would be better if he supped with her, which he did not
refuse lest he should appear ill bred. He was surprised at the neatness and
magnificence of the entertainment, but that which he most admired was the
ingenious placing of the Lights, which both adorned and enlightened the Hall,
being so disposed as they made a hundred several delightful figures. The next
day he in his turn would treat her, and endeavored all he could to outgo her
in a sumptuous entertainment, but he himself soon perceived he was far short of
it, so that turning all to railery, he first began to laugh at the want of
contrivance and ingenuity in his Attendants. All his mirth and jests were blunt
and Souldier-like, which extremely pleased Cleopatra, and soon made her
understand Anthony's true character and humor; but she carried on the railery
with all the delicacy and dexterity imaginable, till at last taking a more
serious air in her Discourses, she told him, that she came not thither to clear
her self but to be recompensed for the Services she had done him and Caesar:
She insisted much upon the Forces she had sent with Ali^nus to the Assistence
of Dolabella, and valued her self upon the Fleet she put to Sea in spite of
Cassius and his Generals, which she commanded in person when it was scattered
by storms, and underwent so many dangers in that expedition; in short, so many
excellencies and charms both of Wit and Judgment appeared in her conversation,
that Anthony could no longer defend his Heart, but from that moment entertained
such a Passion for her, as was the cause of all the misfortunes of his life,
and which ended not but with it. The first Sacrifice he made her was her Sister
Arsinoe; he put her to death though she came to beg his protection, after she
had taken Sanctuary in the Temple of Diana at Miletus, and made Serapion give
her up the City of Tire. He drove away a false Ptolemy, whom (for his likeness
to Cleopatra's Brother, who was defeated by Julius Caesar, and drowned in the
Nile) those of Aradus had acknowledged for their King.

CHAP. IV. Caesar's Sickness. He comes to Rome. His difficulties in
distributing Rewards. The dangers he run upon this occasion.
THIS Passion so fatal to Anthony was no less to all the Roman Empire, and
Italy first of all began to feel the effects of it. Caesar being landed there
found himself so ill at Brundusium that the news of his death was reported
every where; however, he wrote to the Senate that he should shortly be at Rome,
and ordered thanks to be given to the Gods for the defeat of the Conspiratours.
This news was received according to the different inclinations of the
Senators. Those that loved him were afflicted at his Sickess and wished his
return, which others as much apprehended, out of fear, that the report that had
run of his death was a trick to discover their intentions; and the terror of
these last was so great that some of them began to think of making away
themselves; therefore to prevent the consequences of these different
agitations, Caesar came to Rome as soon as his strength would permit him. In
persuance of the agreement they had made when they parted, the Lieutenants of
Anthony delivered him up two Legions, and the Government of Africa, which
Caesar left to Lepidus, having been convinced of the sincerity of his
intentions (for some secret enemies of his had accused him to his Colleagues of
intelligence with Pompey. But the most pressing and difficult affair was to
content the Soldiers without provoking the People; it was absolutely necessary
either to abandon the several Towns destined for their recompense, or else to
satisfy them with Money to establish themselves elsewhere. The public
Treasury was exhausted, and Caesar saw no help from thence; almost all the
Inhabitants of the Towns concerned in this matter were come to Rome. Women with
Children in their Arms, whose young years and innocence drew every ones
compassion, daily filled the Temples and public places with their
lamentations. The People said openly, that this War had not been undertaken for
the public good, but only in persuance of the Triumvirs private interest, and
that since they had reaped the advantage of it, it was but reasonable that they
should bear the charges, and not reward their Soldiers with the oppression of
the poor People. Those that thought themselves more politic, discoursing
concerning this management of the Triumvirs, said, that by establishing Troops
in the Cities their intent was wholly to bring them under, and reduce them to a
kind of slavery. Caesar all this while was not ignorant of these complaints,
and patiently bore these murmurings; but then he borrowed Money on all hands
for his Men, and when that was not sufficient he was forced to give them Places
for their inheritance. The Town of Cremona was one of those that suffered most
in this distribution, for being so well affected to Brutus's side, and Mantua
only by reason of her neighborhood had more than her share in these
misfortunes, in which the Muses choicest Darling, and the greatest Wit and best
Poet that ever Rome brought forth had like to have perished. This was the Poet
Virgil, who was a party concerned in this public calamity, for defending the
possession of his small Estate from Arrius the Centurion, encouraged to it I
suppose by the knowledge of his own merit and the friendship of some great Man
at Rome; but the Soldier as little knew the one as he valued the other, and
therefore the Poet was forced to fly and save himself from the Centurion, who
persued him with his drawn Sword, by swimming cross a River. The happy Fate
that attends on Learning saved him; and it is probable that this adventure
contributed to his reputation, since it is the Subject of that excellent
Eclogue which is the first of his Bucolicks. Caesar himself was not exempted
from danger, for both Soldiers and People were equally mutinous and
exasperated against him; for it happened that a private Soldier, being seated
among the Knights in the Amphitheatre to see the public Shows, he made him be
pulled from thence by an Officer; Caesar's ill-willers immediately gave it out
that he was drawn to punishment, the other Soldiers in great fury immediately
mutined against him, and he had had difficulty enough to save his life from
them if their Fellow had not presently appeared untouched. He was forced to
endure all these insolences by the necessity he had of the Soldiers to
preserve his dignity, which he could not maintain without their assistence, and
they too having all their hopes depending on their Generals, were for their own
sakes absolutely obliged to protect them; and for this reason they kept in Arms
and very well united among themselves. However, Fulvia, Anthony's Wife, made
her advantage of these disorders to bring her designs about; the report of her
Husband's unfaithfulness to her bed inclined her to be revenged on him in like
manner: She would willingly had Caesar partake in this piece of revenge, but he
was not inclined to it, which drew upon him all the rage of this Woman,
agitated at the same time with such a furious passion as jealously, and more
exasperated by the frustrating her desires.

Lucius, Brother to Anthony, was then Consul; he had all the defects of his
Brother, and not one of his virtues, at least if one would believe the Authors
of that age, who living under the Empire of the Successors of the Caesar's,
took care to make their Enemies odious in the characters they gave of them. But
to say truth, if we consider the resolution he showed at Perusia, there is
reason to imagine that this account of theirs is extremely to his disadvantage.
He was very much obliged to Fulvia, for having got him the honor of Triumph,
for his conquering some Nations in the Alps; he was besides assisted by the
counsel of Manius, Anthony's Friend, who was indeed a Man of sense, but very
dangerous to deal with. To them did Fulvia represent that Caesar doing all in
his own name attributed to himself all the applause, as well as the conferring
all manner of recompenses and exemptions. She made Lucius sensible that it was
convenient they should go together to the Quarters of Anthony's two Legions
that were delivered to Caesar, and with her she carried her Children. There
they publicly declared that there was no need of depriving innocent persons of
their Estates, since the possessions of the Triumvirs open and declared Enemies
were sufficient to recompense the Soldiers. This discourse gained them the
good Wills of all those who thought themselves unjustly driven out of their
inheritances, by reason they were not at all concerned in the Civil War. Caesar
saw well enough to what end these transactions tended, but as yet was not able
to oppose them. Lucius proposed to him the staying for Anthony ever he
distributed the rewards, but the impatience of the Soldiers not allowing them
time enough for that, he then agreed to appoint Commissioners in his name for
that purpose, that so by that means he himself might gain the esteem of the
Soldiers. They then therefore began to put Anthony's two Legions in possession
of the Lands assigned them, but not till Lucius and Fulvia had exhorted them
not to forget their General, who had always been a father to them, and to whom
the honor of the Victory at Philippi was due, besides the Commissaries that
were deputed, privily advised the Soldiers to use their own discretion, and
do what they pleased; which carried them to commit strange insolences, and
enlarge their bounds much beyond what was set them, even to the laying waste
whole Towns. Caesar in the mean time was the object of their complaints, and
loaded with their curses, and on the other hand he found himself hemmed in by
powerful Enemies; for on one side Pompey hindered the importation of
Provisions into the Ports of Italy, on the other side Domitius and Murcus were
Masters of the Sea with their Fleets. 'Twas in these circumstances doubtless
that he found he had need to use all the prudence and address he was master of.
He therefore exempted from the distribution the Lands of the Senators, and the
Dowries of Widows, as likewise those Lands that could not maintain such a
certain number of Soldiers; but then to content the Soldiery to whom these
exemptions were not at all pleasing, he granted that the next kindred of those
that were slain in the last Battles should have their share in the
distribution. Thus he was forced to manage them by all the ways of gentleness
he could, for the vigorous and bold actions of his Father Julius were now
impracticable. The Troops were now sensible of the absolute necessity there was
of them, and for that reason were obedient neither to their Superiors nor
their Discipline, but as they themselves pleased; so that Caesar was cautious
how he dealt with them in so dangerous a conjuncture, especially after what had
happened to him upon this occasion. He had appointed a day of Rendezvous to his
Soldiers in the field of Mars that there he might proceed to the distribution
of the Lands. They there met before day, and finding he came not soon enough
among them, they began to grow mutinous and talk very scurrilously against him;
upon this Nonius, one of the Tribunes, ventured to remonstrate to them their
impatience and the indecency of their carriage, but his speeches were straight
laughed at, and from jeers they soon came to injuries and blows. The Tribune was
forced to fly for it, and seeing no other means to escape, he threw himself
into the Tiber and was there drowned. The Mutineers drew out his Body and
exposed it in the way by which Caesar was to pass to the Field of Mars, to
instruct him what he was to trust to by this fatal example: His Friends gave
him notice of this disorder, and counseled him to avoid it; he would not
however follow their advice, telling them his absence would encourage and carry
them on to greater insolences. He therefore went to them, and seeing the Body
of Nonius laid out, he only turned a little on one side. Being come into the
midst of the assembly, he seemed to believe that this piece of Cruelty
proceeded only from some of Nonius's particular Enemies, exhorting the
Soldiers not to carry on their hatred and revenge so far another time; then
without mentioning it any more, he passed to the distributing the Lands and the
marks of honor that were due to those that had signalized themselves in any
action. Some that had not deserved any presented themselves, he though he knew
them well enough did not refuse them, but accepted them without the least sign
of displeasure. The Soldiers by these testimonies of prudence and bounty in
their General were touched with so much shame and repentance that they required
the authors of Nonius's murder might be punished; he answered that they would
be punished enough by the reproaches of their Conscience, and by the remorse
that would follow so ill an action. This Answer of his quite gained their
hearts, so that all their fury was turned into praises and acclamations of joy.
In this place we must not forget two important reflections of Appian upon the
causes of the insolence of the Soldiery, because they sufficiently mark the
wisdom and penetration of that Historian. He says, that as in those times the
Praetors and other Officers that commanded the Troops were not created by the
suffrages of the People according as the Laws required, so their authority had
no longer that awful respect which the Laws usually stamped upon it; and that
besides, the Soldiers were not present at assemblies to offer their service to
their Country, but to him that promised them most for their assistence, not
against Enemies and Strangers but their own Fellow-Citizens; so that they did
not look upon themselves as Soldiers bound to the Republic by Oaths and Laws,
but as Friends who out of a mutual affection assisted their Friends upon
occasion, seeing even their Generals who employed them for their own particular
interest, considered them only as such. The other reflection is, that Deserters
being heretofore by the Roman Laws punished with death without any hope of
pardon, they now instead of that were well paid and rewarded with honors for
their deserting; and seeing on all sides the same Ensigns, the same Language,
and the same Discipline, and every one of the Generals pretending to be
authorized by the Laws, and to fight in behalf of the Commonwealth, they did
not imagine they betrayed their Party what side soever they took, and under
this pretext passed from one Camp to another without any scruple at all; that
this ill princip and disorder was the cause why whole Armies sometimes forsook
their Commander in chief, this baseness being countenanced by the example of
most remarkable Men of either party; so that it was no longer the Laws that
kept Men in the service, but the hopes of interest and profit, which falling
short of their expectation, was the cause that carried them on to such
insolences, and was the original of so many Mutinies and Seditions.

CHAP. V. Misunderstandings between Caesar, Fulvia and Lucius; They come to
open War. The Negligence of Pompey.
ROME was not at all exempted from those ills that afflicted the rest of Italy.
Provisions were extreme dear by reason Pompey stopped all the passages by Sea
from abroad, and at home the Troops consumed all the increase of the Land.
Besides this, they daily committed a thousand insolences in the City, so that
all Trading ceased, and the Artizans durst no longer open their Shops. Lucius
seemed to be very much grieved at these disorders and detested the Triumvirate
as the source of all these miseries. Caesar on his part used all the means he
could to assist, or at least to pacify the poor Country People that were
driven from their Possessions. He heard their complaints and promised to do
them justice, which incensed the Soldiers that were Anthony's, being yet more
stirred up to it by the artifices of Fulvia. Caesar openly complained of this
Woman, declaring that she wholly acted against the interest and true sentiments
of her Husband; but she hearkened to no Body but Manius, who persuaded her that
nothing but a War could force Anthony from Cleopatra 's Arms, and bring him
into Italy. As for Lucius, he had no other sentiments but what were influenced
by these two. Caesar having left Rome, Lucius would have gone with him and
carried Anthony's Children; but understanding Caesar had sent some Horse into
Abruzzo to hinder the landing of Pompey's Troops, he made as if they were sent
against him, and so retired himself unto the Lands of Anthony, where he
assembled the Soldiers; publishing that Caesar hated his Brother and designed
to ruin him. He on the contrary declared, that he was bound to Anthony both by
the obligations of interest and friendship, and that Lucius only practiced
this means to dissolve the authority of the Triumvirate, which was the only
engagement for the Soldiers recompenses. Their Officers then assembled and
agreed upon certain Articles which were never executed, only Salvidienus,
Lieutenant of Caesar, passed the Alps for Spain without any hindrance from
Asinius Pollio, who commanded for Anthony in Gallia Narbonensis. In the mean
time Fulvia and Lucius were retired to Preneste, for fear (said they) of Caesar
and his ambition, which they made out by the example of Lepidus, who had not
the least authority in Rome. The Officers of the Veterans went to Rome, where
they inspected the Treaty and Articles that were made between Anthony and
Caesar, and after they had perused them they engaged themselves by oath to
judge impartially the differences of their Generals, according to reason and
equity, and to that end sent Deputies to Lucius. He then was moved by their
remonstrances, but Manius represented the face of things otherwise, that whilst
Anthony was laboring to get Money for the Soldiers, Caesar dealt underhand
with them for his own private interest. That he had set Gaul at liberty, which
was part of Anthony's Government, that he had overrun all Italy with his
Soldiers, although there were but eighteen Towns destined for them; that
instead of twenty eight Legions who were to be rewarded, there were thirty four
that appeared with their pretensions; that he had sacked and ravaged even the
very Temples of the Gods to give them the riches of them, and all under
pretense of marching against Pompey, which as affairs stood now was impossible,
for what of Provision and Ammunition; but that his real purpose was by this
profusion to engage them to his side against Anthony. It was to this intent too
that he sold every thing that belonged to the Triumvirs in common so cheap,
that indeed he rather gave than sold; and therefore if he was desirous of
Peace, he ought to give an account of what had passed through his hands, and
for the future to act jointly with them, since they had regard only to the
public good. These accusations and complaints of theirs were absolutely
against one article of the Edict of the Triumvira^e, which in express terms
mentioned, that what one of the Triumvirs ordained should be consumed by the
other two. Caesar was too wise to let this pass without insisting upon it,
taking his measures accordingly for the War, which he plainly foresaw. As all
the actions of great Men are exposed to the reasonings and censures of the
Politicians, several of them have imagined that this War was only an effect of
his cunning, that he might force his secret Enemies to declare themselves, and
so by the confiscation of their Estates, make a fond for the payment of his
Soldiers. Part of Anthony's two Legions who were at Ancona, troubled at these
Divisions, deputed to him some of their Officers to propose an agreement
between them, and put an end to these Factions. Caesar gave them a gracious
hearing, and assured them that he both honored and loved Anthony, and that he
would never part interests nor alliance, but that Lucius had not the same
sentiments for him. These Deputies then manifested to Lucius this Declaration
of Caesar's, and plainly told him, that if he were not contented to acquiesce
in the judgment of those equitable and uninterested Persons who should be
chosen by the two Armies, they then knew well which side they ought to take.
Lucius was very sensible of these last expressions, and agreed to a Conference
with Caesar, and to this end made choice of the Town of Gabii, between Rome and
Preneste. There then were placed two Tribunals for the Generals, who were in
Person to lay down their Reasons, and seats for the Judges. Caesar came thither
first, and sent out a Party of Horse on that side that Lucius was to come, who
also had done the same; these two Detachments met and charged each other, so
that on Lucius's side some Cavaliers were killed, who upon this was so frighted
that he could never after be persuaded to go any farther. Perhaps Caesar
knowing his weakness had given such an express command to engage, that so he
might break off the Conference. Whatever the matter was, Lucius came not,
whereupon the Judges gave it against him, and engaged themselves to serve
Caesar against him. This first act of hostility was taken as a Declaration of
War, which began by very sharp Letters Caesar and Lucius sent each other.
Lucius had under his command six Legions during his Consulship, and eleven
others of Anthony's, commanded by Calenus. Caesar had four at Capua, with some
others about his Pers^n, and six that Salvidienus brought him; so that their
Forces were near upon equal. Lucius drew Money from those Nations to whom
Anthony had granted freedom, and Caesar from the Provinces that fell to his
share, excepting Sardignia, besides what he took by way of Loan out of the
Temples where the public Treasuries were kept, as at Rome in the Capitol, and
in the Towns of Aneona, Livininm, Nemausus.
Nismes and Tibur. The other Provinces were not able to give him any
assistence; for Pompey, assisted by all the banished Persons who hated the
Triumvirate, had laid them waste, and if he had rightly understood his interest
and known how to manage to his own advantage the affection the People had for
his Father's memory, he by these Divisions might very easily have made himself
Master of all Italy; for Murcus was come up to him with two Legions, twenty
four Ships and abundance of Treasure; he had besides received a considerable
re-inforcement from Cephalonia, and his Forces did daily increase by addition
of Fugitives that fled to him for refuge; but withal he had this misfortune,
that he had never a faithful Friend to animate and push on his irresolute and
changeable Temper by vigorous daring Counsels. He was contented to be upon the
defensive only, and calmly see his Enemies dispute an Empire to which he had
only pretensions sufficient to make both Parties when united fall upon him
with their joint Forces.

CHAP. VI. Fagius, Lieutenant of Caesar, is overthrown in Africa by Sextius,
Anthony's Lieutenant. Caesar and Lucius make preparations of War against each
other.
SExtius, General of the Horse to Anthony, governed in Africa, and in persuance
of the Triumvirate agreement had very frankly given up his Forces and Province
to Fagius, Lieutenant General to Caesar. As Soon as he understood by Letters
from Lucius, that Fulvia and all Anthony's Friends were fallen out with Caesar,
and that this difference was likely to end in an open War, he believed that
Fagius would deliver him his Troops again with the same justice and gallantry
that he had received them, but he found he had to deal with a brutal Man that
had neither. Upon his refusal he prepared to fight him, and by the reputation
he had among them drew to his party several Africans which joined to the Romans
that had still remained with him, made up a considerable Force, and with it
marched against Fagius; he waited for him, and they came to a fierce
engagement, in which Fagius seeing the two Wings of his Army beaten, and that
his Men forsook him, he killed himself with his own hand; so victorious Sextius
retook the Government of the two Lybias. Bocchus, King of Manritania, Lucius's
Friend, encouraged by this success, drove Carina, one of Caesar's Party, out of
Africa. On the other side Domitius with eighty Ships, manned with two Legions,
and a great number of Slingers, Archers and armed Gladiators, cruised in the
Ionian Seas, and pillaged all the Coasts that obeyed the Triumvirs. He came up
even to Brundusium, and there took several of Caesar's Ships, who therefore was
forced to send a Legion thither, and sent for Salvidienus to him; in the mean
time he drew together all the old Troops dispersed throughout Italy, and
demanded assistence of those Princes that were of his Party. Lucius on his side
used the same diligence; and besides, he found he had the Peoples favor, who
considered him as the Protector of their Liberty. Therefore for this reason
Caesar assembled the Senators and Roman Knights; he told them that his Enemies
despised him, because they thought that it was out of fear that he delayed to
attack them, but that now he intended to let them know the true reasons of this
his conduct. As for his Army, that daily was increased and strengthened with old
tried Soldiers, who breathed nothing but War, but that he had an extreme
regret to come to that extremity, as unwilling to act over again the horrors
of a Civil War, of which not Thrace or Macedon was to be the Seat, but Italy,
which must alone endure all the calumities that would follow this Division:
That he could not blame Anthony, who in like manner had no reason to complain
of him; th^^ with all earnestness and passion he destred to live in amity with
Lucius, and that he desired them to use their endeavors to incline him to
reason, but that if by this he could not be influenced, he would soon make him
know that his Patience was the effect of his Goodness and Virtue, not of his
Fear; that in the mean time, he conjured them they would bear witness to
Anthony of his sincerity, and assist him against Lucius, who so unjustly
attacked him. Upon this the Senate and People deputed some of their Body to
Lucius, who answered them that Caesar had not done fairly, but concealed
several things from them. Manius showed them some Letters of Caesar's, (which
were supposed to be fictitious) in which he requested them to assist him to
maintain his dignity and authority by violence and force of Arms; thereupon the
Deputies demanding who they thought those were that would oppose him, received
nothing but vain equivocating Answers, upon which they retired. Then both
Parties betook themselves to their Arms. Caesar went out of Rome, and left
Lepidus to command there; he sent home Clodia, the Daughter of Fulvia by her
former Husband, whom he had betrothed when he first made alliance with Anthony.
Fulvia outraged at this affront, to manifest her greater resentment of it, went
to the Camp, where she appeared at the head of the Troops with a Helmet on her
Head, and a Sword by her Side. And at the same time two Legions of Anthony's,
who were in Garrison in Alba, mutined; which obliged Caesar and Lucius to march
thitherwards to reap some advantage from that disorder. Lucius got thither
first, and quelled the Sedition. Caesar in his march meeting with Furnius,
Lucius's Lieutenant, who was carring him a great reinforcement charged him as
he recreated to a Mountain; the Night hindered his defeat, and gave Furnius an
opportunity to get into the Town of Sentia, where he was immediately besieged
by Caesar. Lucius seeing him engaged in this Siege, took the occasion to return
to Rome, and sent thither his Cavalry, which was there received by Nonius, and
a little after he arrived there himself with the rest of his Legions. Lepidus
durst not stay his coming, since he had openly declared himself against the
Triumvirate, but fled and saved himself in Caesar's Camp. And in effect, Lucius
before the People declaimed against the Triumvirate, which he plainly called
Tyranny: He told them that Caesar and Lepidus should soon be punished for their
violences, and that his Brother would renounce this unjust power to take the
more lawful one of Consul. This Discourse pleased the Romans, so that they
saluted him with the Title of Emperor. Caesar having notice of this
inconstancy of the People, left his Lieutenant to carry on the Siege, and
marched to Rome, where Lucius durst not expect him. In this while Caesar's
Lieutenant took the Town of Sentia, which Furnius quitted to follow Caesar.
Lucius when he was got out of Rome, increased his Army with Anthony's
Soldiers* who daily joined him: But as a great misfortune to his designs,
Barbatus, Anthony's Treasurer.
Questor, arrived in Italy, having left his General by reason of some distaste.
Several Persons demanded of him what were Anthony's sentiments of these
transactions in Italy when he was informed of them by Fulvia's Letters. The
Questor told them that Anthony did not at all approve of the measures they took
to quarrel with Caesar for what he did to maintain the authority of the
Triumvirate. This report immediately spread it self, and quite changed the
affections of many, so that believing they should not disoblige Anthony by
making their Court to Caesar, without any hesitation adhered to Caesar's Party,
where they were convinced all the authority of the Triumvirate was united.

CHAP. VII. The Forces of the two Parties. The Characters of the principal
Officers, as Agrippa, Salvidienu^, Ventidius and Pollio. Lucius is besieged in
Perusia.
THE Forces of each side consisted in three distinct Bodies, which besides the
two Heads of the Parties, were commanded by very able Generals, and who
afterward performed very extraordinary actions. These were Agrippa and
Salvidienus on Caesar's side, and Pollio and Ventidius on that of Lucius. But
Pollio had this advantage over the other three, that he was a Man of Letters
and an excellent Orator; yet though he had a great passion for Learning and
Arts, he was no less a good Soldier and skilled in the art of War. He
professed himself besides an exact Man of honor and a steadfast Friend: It was
this last Virtue that made him a Partizan of Anthony's, being bound to him by
all the bands of Friendship which they had contracted when they served together
under Julius Caesar. Both he and the others were but meanly born, and
particularly Ventidius was reproached for being a Slave; for in the War of the
Allies his Mother was led in Triumph by Strabo, Pompey's Father, carrying her
little Son in her Arms; afterward mere necessity reduced him to hire out
Mules to the Magistrates that were employed in the Provinces, this gave him an
opportunity of doing a service for Julius Caesar, which gained him the favor
of that great Man. He then received him under his Command, where Ventidius by
his valor making himself remarkable, he came afterward to be Tribune of the
People and then Praetor. In this dignity he by his interest with the Soldiery,
was a great help to Anthony's affairs, whom he assisted very powerfully.
Anthony out of gratitude used all his interest and authority to get him the
charge of Chief-Priest and Consul; whereupon the People were very much choqued
at his preferment, and published Lebels against him. Some of the Verses were to
this purpose: Assemble your selves and consult, O ye Augurs and Southsayers,
upon this extraordinary Prodigy, he that curried the Mules is become Consul.
But for all this, this very Man, so despised by the Romans, was the only Man
that ever revenged that signal shame and affront given them by the Parthians in
the overthrow of Crassus. He defeated them in three Battles, killed their
King's Son, and was the only General of all the Romans that ever had the
honor and happiness of triumphing over that Nation. And indeed the Romans,
though late, were sensible of the justice they owed to his valor, in ordaining
magnificent Funeral Rites for him at the charge of the public. Agrippa had no
less merit, and his virtue was less envied; he particularly signalized himself
wherever he had any command, but above all in the defeat of Pompey, and the
Victory over Anthony at Actium. He had besides ever the chiefest place in
Augustus his favor, and had the honor to be his Son-in-law, and to leave
Emperors of his posterity. He justly passed for the greatest Captain of his
time, and never did Man show more obedience to his Prince, nor more ambition to
command others. He was a great enemy to all delays, and had no sooner formed
any enterprise but he immediately put it in execution; withal he was generous,
sincere, and above all affected a frank liberty of speaking his mind, so that
he even spared not taxing his Prince of some actions that were displeasing to
him, as savoured too much of cruelty. Salvidienus his character was very
different from this; he was no better born than the others, or to say better,
much worse; for he was but a poor Peasant, forced for want to look after
Cattle: whilst he was such, there happened to him something that appeared a
prodigy, his Head seemed as if all in a slame; this moved him to list himself
in the Army, where by his valor he rose to the most considerable commands, but
then he was carried on by an unmeasurable ambition to undertake any thing to
satisfy his unreasonable desires; he was of a depraved mind, and of an ill
turned mischievous temper, those wicked inclinations made him most ungratefully
conspire against Caesar, who had made him Consul against the received rule,
without being a Senator; but Salvidienus was punished for this Treason as he
deserved, and so his Death was as infamous as his Birth. He had now repassed
the Alps, and was marching to join Caesar in spite of Ventidius and Pollio,
who were at the heels of him with their Armies. As this joining was a matter of
very great importance, Lucius chiefly strove to hinder it; and Salvidienus had
been utterly lost if Agrippa had not advanced between Lucius and him, and
attacked the Town of Sutrium, which he carried by storm. This Town had showed
it self very affectionate to Lucius, and the danger it was in moved him to turn
head and relieve it; which gave Salvidienus opportunity to join Agrippa, and so
they made themselves Masters of the Passes and Defiles, through which the
Armies of Ventidius and Pollio were to march, and Lucius not being strong
enough to oppose them retreated into Perusia, and there expected his Generals.
Caesar having news of this strait, made thither and rallied Agrippa and
Salvidienus to besiege Lucius in that place. It is seated in that Country
which was formerly called Hetruria, and now belongs to the Ecclesiastical
Dominion; it was strongly situated, as being built upon a Hill, which made
Lucius hope Caesar would ruin his Army by this Siege: he then dispatched
Manius to Pollio and Ventidius to oblige them to come to his relief; and at the
same time sent out Trissinius with 4000 Horse to ravage those Towns that were
for Caesar. Pollio and Ventidius were none of the best Friends, for each of
them would have commanded in chief, neither being willing to submit to his
equal. Besides too, they were not certain what sentiments Anthony would have
upon this occasion of this War, by reason Lucius had openly declared himself an
enemy of the Triumvirate. As for Fulvia, she was always governed by her own
passion; she had raised Forces under the command of Plancus, and by her Letters
never ceased pressing Pollio, Ventidius, Ateius and Calenus to succor their
General's Brother. But there happened a disgrace to her, that mortified her
extremely, for as she was going to Rome to manage some new Broil, she met with
a Legion of Caesar's, who charged her Convoy that guarded her, defeated it and
took all her equipage. At length Pollio and Ventidius took a resolution to
advance toward Perusia in two distinct Bodies. Caesar having intelligence of
their motion, with Agrippa marched against them, hindered their joining with
Plancus, and forced Ventidius into Ariminum, (now Rimini) and Pollio into
Ravenna, or according to Velleius, into that Isle where Venice now is, and
Plancus into Pollentia, and leaving sufficient Forces to maintain the several
Blocades he returned to his Siege.

CHAP. VIII. The Siege of Perusia. Caesar in danger. The extreme misery of the
besieged.
AS Caesar could not pretend to force so great an Army in a place of that
importance, so neither would he make a formal Siege of it, but resolved to
reduce it by Famine; to this end he drew about it a Line of contravallation of
fifty six stadiums in compass, and withal, carried two Trenches to the River
Tibur to hinder any attempt or relief of the Enemies on that side, this Line he
strengthened with a Rampart, flanked with Towers at equal distances, and at his
return he sunk the Trenches thirty Foot deep, and covered it with a Wall, upon
which he placed wooden Towers, 1500 in number, distant one from the other sixty
Foot; and these were all fortified with great Beams, and filled with Archers
and Slingers and all sorts of offensive Engines. The besieged strove to hinder
these Works by frequent and fierce Sallies, and Lucius having abundance of
Gladiators with him, had always the better of it when they came to
'handy-blows; but then Caesar's Men had the advantage of them by their
Artillery and missive Weapons, at which they were very expert* It was in one of
these actions that Caesar ran an extreme hazard by a very extraordinary
accident. Lucius seeing his Provisions daily diminished, resolved to make one
great attempt on a famous festival night, believing that the besiegers would be
busied in the celebration of it, and by that means be less upon their guard.
Caesar was then offering Sacrifice very near the Walls of Perusia; the Diviners
inspecting the entrails of the Victim, found nothing but fatal presages in
them, at which Caesar was much concerned, while at that instant Lucius's
Gladiators made a Sally, the Sacrifice was left, the Sacrificers fled, and
Caesar had certainly been either slain or taken Prisoner, if the Legion that
was upon the guard in the nearest Trenches had not speedily advanced to his
relief; in the mean while the Gladiators carried away the Victim, Entrails and
all the preparation of the Sacrifice: these were reinforced and backed by more
Troops, so that they charged to the Trenches where the same Legion made head
against them; and Caesar rallying some Cohorts of his Guards, charged them in
the Flank, and beat them into the Town. Whilst this general distraction was in
the Army, for Caesar's safety, the Diviners alone came to him very joyful, and
told him that the Gods were propitious to him, and that all the misfortune
threatened by the ill-boding Entrails of the Victim, concerned only the Enemies
that had them in their possession. Perhaps Caesar himself did not believe it
so, however the thing was well imagined, and adroilty turned to re-assure the
dismayed Soldiers, and indeed afterward the event confirmed this prediction.
The City of Rome had her share in the calamities of this War, Corn was
excessive dear, and the rabble that upon these occasions observe no measures
nor duty, understanding that Caesar's Officers had laid up great stores, rose
and plundered the Magazines and several of the wealthiest houses in the City.
Now Ventidius, Pollio and Plancus believed they were obliged in honor, not to
let Lucius be any longer besieged, and resolved by agreement to march and force
Caesar to a battle or else to raise his siege against them; he detached Agrippa
and Salvidienus with a Body, who could not however hinder their joining and
advancing to Fulsina distant from Perusia 160 Stadiums. Lucius having notice of
their approach by the Signals they made him in the night by fire was extremely
rejoiced at it, not doubting in the least but they would make some great push
for his relief. This was indeed the intention of Ventidius and Pollio, but
Plancus who always abounded in reasons and cool counsels, when they were to
avoid fighting, remonstrated to them, that Agrippa who was as strong as they
upon their least motion would charge them in the rere, and having Caesar before
them there was no avoiding the defeat of their Troops, for which they alone
were responsible to Anthony; this Counsel which was not without ground, added
to the dislike they had of Lucius his conduct made them think of a retreat,
which put the besieged into utter despair, they attempted another Sally though
with as little success as the former, for all the fight lasted from nine at
night till next morning. Then Lucius made a review and an inventory of all the
provisions that were in the place, that he might the better distribute by
measure amongst the Soldiers, without any consideration of the Slaves, and to
hinder them that they should not desert, he set Guards upon them lest they
should inform the enemy of the extreme necessity they were in: These poor
wretches reduced to this horrible misery, wandered about the works to seek out
herbs, grass and roots, and some fed upon the vilest Ordurci which only served
to make an end of them the sooner, for almost all of them died and Lucius made
them be buried in ditches on heaps, not being willing to burn them, as well for
that the besiegers should not have any notice of it by the fires, as not to
corrupt the Air by the stench of the burning Bodies. At length the Soldiers
pressed by the want and famine which daily increased, begged him to give them
leave to make a general Sally, as desiring rather to dye with their Arms in
their hands, than to perish by so terrible a death as starving. Yet they hoped
to behave themselves so gallantly, as to put an end to all their sufferings by
a glorious Victory over their enemies. Immediately Lucius approved of this
resolution of theirs, telling them, that they had nothing else to trust to now,
but either to dye or Conquer; they resolved therefore to sally at break of day
to avoid the disorder that might happen in the dark, and provided good store of
iron Crows, Mattocks, Spades and other tools to break Caesar's wall, and they
had Ladders and long Hooks to scale the Walls and pass the Trenches, and so
oppose the enemies Towers, which had beams and timbers in them to fling upon
the Walls in the nature of Bridges, with such like preparation these brave
Soldiers with an amazing resolution fiercely attacked Caesar's lines. The
ditch was immediately filled up, and the Palisade pulled down, so that they
came to the Wall which they undermined on all sides, while others strove by the
help of scaling Ladders to get upon it; the rolling Towers advanced, raining a
dreadful storm of Darts and Arrows upon the besiegers, who were astonished at
this furious assault, for the Soldiers of Lucius fought as men reduced to
despair, death appearing nothing so terrible to them as famine, and though they
fought with all the disadvantage imaginable, and though they were struck
through with Darts and Arrows, with which the enemies flanked them from the
Ramparts; they still vigorously employed both Crows and Beams to make a breach
in the Wall, openly exposing themselves to the enemies shot, by though great
numbers fell, yet the rest were not in the least dismayed. By this time the
nimblest that had mounted the Wall came to handy strokes with the foe, and the
battle grew warmer, no body could retreat without falling headlong down, and
the besieged fought with that unexpressible fury, that when they wanted arms
like wild Beasts they used their hands and teeth, and doubtless this obstinate
bravery had gained them an absolute Victory had the forces been any-ways equal;
but Caesar having more men than Lucius, he from time to time reinforced them
with fresh reserves, which at last beat the tired besieged with their Engines
from off the Wall; these gallant men though stunned at their fall still clung
to the Wall with their hands, and either strove to pull out the stones, or else
by their words encouraged their fellows who still fought. Lucius moved at so
extraordinary a valor and fidelity, and knowing he had very great reason to
preserve them, whose courage now only served to destroy them, commanded a
Retreat to be sounded: Caesar's men immediately gave loud shouts of Joy, and
according to the Romans custom when they gained a Victory struck their Swords
against their Bucklers, the others raging at this with all haste and fury got
together those Ladders that remained and returned to the attack, resolved
either to carry the Rampart or be buried in the Ditch, if Lucius had not
withheld them, and by his Prayers and even moving them with his tears made them
retreat. At last they obeyed him, though with that regret as cannot be
expressed. Caesar at night doubled his Guards and Watches fearing another
attack, and gave his orders for the speedy marching of relief in case of
necessity. As for the besieged their weariness and vexation scarce gave them
leisure to think of placing advanced Guards, so that it gave opportunity to
many Soldiers, and several considerable Officers to go over to Caesar.

CHAP. IX. Lucius resolves to treat with Caesar. He Harangues his Soldiers,
and sends Deputies to Caesar.
LVcius finding himself reduced to the utmost extremity, and finding no
probability of relief, concluded at last to give way to this cruel necessity,
and think of capitulating: He therefore communicated his intentions to his
chief Officers, and though among them some particular enemies of Caesar opposed
it, yet he persisted in his resolution; but fearing that the Soldiers might
deliver him up to Caesar, he drew them together and told them, That in all this
War he had no other design, but by abolishing the Tyranny of the Triumvirate to
set his Country at liberty, which he undertook with more Justice, by reason
all pretenses to this pernicious League were ceased by the defeat of Brutus and
Cassius; that Lepidus had in a manner quitted his part of the Empire, and
Anthony in Asia minded nothing but his delights and heaping up money, but that
Caesar alone bouyed up the remains of that unjust power, which had moved him to
lay hold on the Troubles occasioned by the distribution of Lands, to restore
that rightful Authority to the Commonwealth which had been so usurped from it,
and that he had the greater obligation upon him to do it, by reason he was
Consul. But that Caesar to overthrow so just a design, had loaded him with the
ill Will and hatred of all the Soldiery, maliciously taxing him of
endeavoring to oppose and hinder them of the rewards they had deserved, in
favor of the Peasants; that at first he knew nothing of these reports, and
that when he did he despised them, that he had besides deputed Commissioners to
divide the Lands, and so he might have hindered the Veteran Soldiers joining
Caesar, and fighting against their own Interests, as they would plainly see by
the event: knowing therefore we were ruined by Famine, not by the Valor of our
foes, and since our Officers abandon us; I could have made use of several
expedients for my own security, besides the satisfaction I felt for doing my
duty and behaving my self like a man of honor: But however, this is none of my
intention, I consult your safety before my own Glory, and am now sending to the
Conqueror to offer him my Life and Person, provided, in making me the object
of all his hatred and revenge, he spares you, ye that are Roman Citizens, ye
that have formerly served under him, and who in maintaining a just and noble
Cause, are not vanquished by the force of his Arms, but by extreme Famine.
After this discourse, he chose out three of his chief Commanders to go to
Caesar, which the Soldiers saw with a great deal of regret, and withal were
full of Praises of the Virtue and Goodness of their General. These Deputies
represented to Caesar, that as the Soldiers and Officers on both sides had one
and the same Country, that they were all of them allied to one another, either
by kindred or friendship, having served together under his Father and under
him, the besieged hoped he would not treat them as objects of his revenge;
since it was not any aversion against him, that made them take up Arms, but out
of a motive of pure affection to their Country; taking example of those noble
Romans that were their Ancestors. To this they added many other reasons, to
moderate Caesar's resentments. Caesar who was well informed of the several
Interests and Inclinations of his Enemies, and knowing that there were several
among them that had never born Arms but against him, and others that entered
into this party only to have their share of the Lands, answered very
discreetly, That he pardoned those who had served under Anthony, but as to the
others they should yield upon Discretion: this he said in public, but he
privately told Furnius one of the Deputies, That he intended not the least
injury to Lucius and his Soldiers for what was past, but only to some Enemies
of his, who out of Malice to him had been the occasion of all these disorders:
When the Deputies returned to Perusia, all those that judged Caesar's hate by
what they bore him, were extremely enraged with Furnius, for his private
conference with Caesar. They represented to Lucius, that they were intended as
Victims to Caesar's cruelty, because he knew their affection to their Country,
and that they should capitulate for their safety, or else resolve all to dye
with their Arms in their hands. Lucius moved with Compassion for so many
People, saw there was a necessity of sending other Deputies, but he knew none
more proper than himself, and therefore immediately went without taking any
hostage or caution for his security. Caesar advertised of this went to receive
him, and to show his earnest desire he had to put an end to this War, was the
first that came out of his Camp: As soon as ever Lucius espied him, he
commanded those that were with him to make a halt, and he alone advanced to the
brink of the Ditch. They were both of them clad in their Ornaments of War, and
adorned with all the marks of their Dignity; after the first complements and
actions of Civility; Lucius spoke after this manner.

CHAP. X. Lucius Speech to Caesar, his Answer.
IF I had not the honor to be a Roman I should now appear full of Confusion,
for being Conquered and yielding upon discretion, having that in my hands that
would keep me from that shame; but after I had fought against a Roman for the
common good of our Country, I do not in the least think my self dishoured by
being vanquished by a General that is a Roman. I do not speak this to avoid
whatever you decree against my Person, for you see I am come alone into the
midst of the Troops to surrender my self to your disposal, without any
conditions for my self, or demanding any security, or making any other request
than for the pardon of those that have served me in this War; even the
reasonableness of the thing may be a motive to it, and your own interest
requires it: and therefore to convince you thoroughly of this, I will first
speak as to my self, and after of those that followed me. I do not pretend to
conceal from you, that I alone am the Author of all that has been acted
against you, and therefore think it just that all the resentments should light
on me, and if I seem to make some excuses, it is not that I vainly hope for any
assistance from my Brother or his Friends, for that is now too late, but that
it is necessary you should know the truth which I will not now disguise or
palliate. When I undertook this War, my design was not to usurp your Authority,
but to re-establish that of the Commonwealth oppressed by the power of the
Triumvirate, and you your self must needs yield this truth, since by the very
Edict of the Triumvirate, you owned your Authority was not lawful; but that
you had this Pretext, that you were forced to take up Arms against Brutus and
Cassius. Now they are destroyed and none of their party are in a condition to
oppose you, what pretense have you to be in Arms, unless it be to make your
selves feared and obeyed? I saw the five years of your League expired, and
hoped to restore the Consular dignity, and the rightful and lawful power of
the other Magistrates. I own that in persuance of this, I had less
consideration for my Brother than the Republic, my intent being to force him
if need were at his arrival to concur with me in this design, and as I
passionately desired this Glorious action should be done in my Consulship, and
you might have had the honor of it in renouncing your Authority, but seeing
all your motions tended otherwise, I came to Rome to force you to it, knowing*
my self a Roman, and considerable both by birth and for the Office I bore:
these therefore are the true reasons that carried me to take up Arms, and not
the Counsels of a Manius and Fulvia, much less the division of the Lands you
allotted the Soldiers that fought at Philippi, nor was it any Compassion for
those that were driven from their Houses and Inheritances; quite contrary, I
had named Commissioners for the distribution, who had order to strain a point
in favor of the Soldiers against the Peasants, this however is the pretense
you have used to animate the Veteran Soldiers against me, by making them
believe I opposed it: it was this that moved them against me, and that has
taken away all the Confidence that I had in them, and all the Will they had to
serve me, by which I confess you have your own interest in the intention you
had of making War with me, and I have mine in declaring War to compass my
intent. And since I have put my self into your hands, I do not in the least
fear to tell you plainly the true Sense I had and still have of your Conduct,
whatever you please to decree against me: It is this as I have already told
you, that moved me to come to you my self, and as to what concerns my Kindred,
my Friends and my Troops, if you will but take it in good part, I will now give
you advice that shall turn both to your Glory and advantage; and this is not to
show any resentment for what has passed in this difference, but to consider the
unconstancy of fortune that depends on the chance of War, not to fright the
Soldiers by punishing them, but by Gentleness draw them to serve you upon
occasion, as they have already against the Conspiratours, and show them by your
usage of them, that their greatest security will be to follow the Conqueror.
But if this Counsel is suspected as given by an Enemy, I conjure you not to
impute as a fault the fidelity they have showed me, nor the misfortune that has
followed it, but to turn all your Vengeance against me, as the only cause of
these ills: it was this that obliged me to speak to you in private, to take
away all the suspicion they might have had, that in seeming to affect speaking
for their interest and safety I might only consult my own. This discourse that
showed a resolution and greatness of Soul, worthy of an ancient Roman was not
very pleasing to Caesar, but he took care not to testify all his resentment
against him, that was the brother of Anthony, whom for several reasons he was
obliged to have a consideration for. As he had a great presence of mind and a
ready Wit, he thus answered him. As soon as I understood you came to me, I
advanced out of my Camp to meet you, to give you full liberty of explaining
your Thoughts; the Submission you have shown in yielding your self to me as
those ought to do, that are touched with remorse, keeps me from remarking the
Crimes you unjustly charge me with, and the disguising so many known truths,
though this discourse of yours injures me more than your former Actions; but
since you frankly give me up both your self, your Friends and your Troops, this
generous proceeding hinders me from acting what I ought, both as Conqueror and
injured. You have by this quite disarmed my Choler and my Power: I therefore
return you yours in letting you enjoy the conditions of our former agreement,
though the Law of Arms might oblige you to obey without resistance, the Will of
the Vanquisher. I will however do what is worthy of me, and for the respect I
owe the Gods, my Dignity and your own Person, which so nobly you abandon to me,
I will not at all betray the trust you have placed in my Goodness and Clemency.
As these discourses are not Fictitious or merely Ornamental, and that Appian
who reports them, assures he took them out of very faithful Memoirs which
remained concerning this War, it is hoped the length of them will not be
displeasing, what intention soever there were of not being engaged in the
recital of Speeches.

CHAP. XI. Lucius and Caesar part. Lucius delivers up the Town. Caesar speaks
to the besieged Soldiers with indignation, he punishes the Senators of
Perusia, the Town is pillaged and by accident burnt. Tiberius continues the War
in the Kingdom of Naples, from whence he is driven by Caesar.
THE two Generals parted well enough satisfied with each other in appearance.
Caesar could not forbear praising Lucius his great courage, which all his
misfortunes had not been able to abate. Lucius above all things esteemed
Caesar's great moderation, and his manner of expressing things of such moment
in so few words; he commanded all his Officers to go and receive their Orders
from Caesar, and carry him their muster Rolls, as was usual with the Romans,
who when they took Orders from the General always showed the muster Rolls of
the Legions. Caesar in giving it out commanded them on their side to keep a
Guard, and he did the like on his. The next morning by break of day he offered
Sacrifice, and Lucius marched out his Troops in good order, who saluted Caesar
as far as they could discern him: He commanded them to halt upon the ground he
showed them, the old Legions who demanded their share of the Inheritances on
one side, and the new raised ones on the other. The Sacrifice ended, Caesar
crowned with Laurel mounted on a Tribunal, and commanded all the vanquished
Soldiers to lay down their Arms; he then reproached the ingratitude of the old
Legions with terrible threats, and though they had notice before he would do
so, it filled them all with fear. Caesar's Soldiers, whether by permission of
their General, or moved with Pity at their dejected Companions, advanced to
them, and embracing them with tears begged mercy for them. Caesar as very much
moved, fiercely told them, they always opposed his Intentions, and though in
truth he knew them to be very brave, yet he would fain know of them what injury
they had received from him, or what advantage they hoped for from his Enemies,
that should make them bear Arms against his Person, his Soldiers, and indeed
against themselves, since he only labored for their interest; but that he
would not insist upon this any farther, and therefore in consideration of his
Soldiers he pardoned them, and for the future would not look upon them as
Enemies, but Soldiers that would follow none but himself. This Speech was
followed by general shouts of Praises and Acclamations; he then ordered his
Officers to receive those of Lucius into their Tents, and his Soldiers to
encamp where they were, till he had resolved upon what part to send them to,
and what Officers should command them. Afterward without coming down from his
Tribunal, he sent to Lucius to come out of Perusia: This Consul then appeared a
little after accompanied by his Lieutenants, and all the Senators that were of
his party, who were very much cast down at this revolution. Caesar's Troops
entered Perusia, and seized upon all the Posts and places of Arms: he caused
Lucius to seat himself by him, and his chief Officers received all the
Senators with orders to use them well, but withal to look well after them. In
the mean time the Inhabitants of the Town were upon the Walls, from whence with
lamentable Cries they sued for pardon. Caesar ordered they should all come
forth, except those that composed the Council of the City, and it was against
these that he employed all his vengeance and severity; it is said, that when
they were brought before him laden with Chains and begging for mercy, he
replied only these terrible words, Ye must die, and then made three hundred of
them be slain as Victims near an Altar, erected in honor of his Father upon
the Ides of March the same day he was murdered; one only named Lucius Emilius
was spared, because being at Rome after the murder of Julius Caesar, he
counseled the Conspiratours should be put to death. The Town was going to be
pillaged, when one of the noblest Inhabitants called Macedonicus, put fire to
his own house and stabbed himself; this fire carried on by a high wind spread
it self from house to house, and in less than an hour laid all Perusia in
ashes, except the Temple of Vulcan. Appian reports, that this Macedonicus was
one of Lucius his Soldiers named Cestius, who had this Surname given him,
because he had served a long time in Macedon: Thus ended this fatal War which
threatened Italy with utter desolation. For although Pollio, Ventidius, Plancus,
and other Commanders of Anthony had still thirteen Legions and fifteen hundred
Horse, whether it were that there was no good understanding among them, or that
they did not approve of Lucius his Conduct, they all withdrew and retired
themselves; some to Brundusium, as Plancus, who left the two Legions he
commanded to Agrippa, others to Tarentum, and some to Ravenna. Pollio alone
made an honorable Retreat, and went and joined himself to Domitius. Fulvia
desperate with these misfortunes saved her self at Brundusium, and from thence
passed over into Macedon. Tiberius maintained the remainders of the party a
long time after near Naples. He was a man illustrious for his Family, but much
more considerable for his Valor and Wit; he had been Praetor, and was then High
Priest, yet his name had remained in Oblivion had it not been for his marriage
with Livia: She was of a noble Family, a branch of the Claudian entered by
Adoption into the Livian. She was Mistress of abundance of Virtue and Beauty,
but of much more agreeableness and address. The Friendship of Tiberius with
Lucius had engaged him to his party, and his defeat had not discouraged him, he
endeavored all he could to repair this misfortune, even to set Slaves free and
make them Soldiers: Caesar to quench this fire in the beginning marched
toward Naples with diligence, and attacked Tiberius so briskly, that all he
could do was to save himself in Sicily. One may here with Velleius reflect
upon the strange turns of Fortune, which may learn us, that as to what regards
the future, fears are often as false as hopes. Livia flying the fury of Caesar
waited on only by one servant, and carrying her Son in her Arms after she had
made prodigious escapes from danger, was forced to get into a little Boat to
get to her Husband; her Son who was then but two years old had like to have
been the innocent cause of death to her that gave him life, by discovering
twice by his crying. This extremity of theirs, and the small hopes they had of
Caesar's Clemency gave them but very slender hopes: However, after the return
of Tiberius to Italy by the Treaty made with Pompey, Livia was so fortunate by
her beauty to Conquer the heart of Caesar; he married her and loved her
passionately to the very day of his death: And this Woman, whom Caligula was
wont to call Ulysses in Petty-coats, so well knew how to manage Caesar's Temper
by her cunning, that she obtained of him the Empire for her Son. Since
therefore there appeared to Enemy in Italy after the defeat of Tiberius, Caesar
went to Rome, where he entered in Triumphant Robes, and Crowned with Laurel.
There were celebrated public Feasts, and it was ordained, that whatever
General should hereafter merit the Honor of Triumph and should be Crowned,
that Caesar should have a share in all his Honors.

CHAP. XII. The diversions of Anthony and Cleopatra. The Prodigality of their
Entertainments. The ingenuity of Cleopatra.
ANthony was still fixed at Alexandria by the Charms of Cleopatra, and thought
of nothing but enjoying those Pleasures, she every day presented him with, in
some new and delightful shape: Never did any one possess like her the Art of
refining and heightning them by the Charms of Novelty. She introduced them in
the most serious business, and even the most inconsiderable trifles when
managed by her, received such an Air as made them agreeable Diversions; so that
whether they played or treated one another, or hunted, this Queen still made
one, and was the Soul of all intermingling by some lively piece of Wit. She
would often run about the Town with Anthony in disguise, and go into Tradesmens
shops, and jeer and scold with them, where they many times met with very
pleasant replies, and sometimes blows. 'Twas on these occasions that Cleopatra
showed all her Gayety and Wit, whether it were in maintaining or retorting
Raillery, or in telling the story of such Adventures, with an unparalled
grace: these ways however were very odious, and disgustfull to the graver and
soberer sort of People. But the Egyptians who in general have a great deal of
Wit, were not at all displeased with this familiar Carriage of theirs, and said
pleasantly, that Anthony showed them his Comical Countenance, and kept a
Tragical one for the Romans. The Queen had besides invented a Society, they
called the Inimitable life, and those who made the most sumptuous
Entertainments carried away the Prize. The expense of these Treats were
excessive, as appears by these two examples. A Greek Physician Friend to
Anthony's Clerk of the Kitchen, came one day where the Meat was dressing, and
among abundance of other provisions, he saw eight whole wild Boars a-roasting;
he imagined that these were making ready for a great number of Guests, and
asking his Friend, he told him smiling, that there were to be but twelve at
this Feast, but that the exact hour being uncertain, and the Meat to be served
at a punctual nick of time, when it was exquisitely dressed, and that being past,
others of the same kind were prepared to be ready when called for. This
Physician being afterward in the service of Anthony's eldest Son, was one day
at his Dinner, whither there came a canting kind of Mountebank, who as it is
usual with such sort of Fellows, tired every body with the impertinence of his
talk; the Physician put him this Argument, there is some kind of Ague, wherein
cold Water is good. All those that have Agues, have some kind of Ague,
therefore cold water is good for all those that have Agues. The Quack remained
silent and non-plust, and Anthony's Son was so pleased with it that he said to
the Physician, I give thee, Philotas, for this Jest all that thou see there,
pointing to a Cupboard of golden Plates of a great value. Philotas thanked him
for this favor, believing he was only obliged to him for his Good will. But
he was very much surprised the next day, when he saw the rich Vessels brought
home to his house by Slaves, followed by an Officer of the young Prince, who
bid him put his mark upon them, and as he excused himself out of a belief some
inconvenience might happen to him, what says the Officer to him, do not you
know that he who makes you this Present is the Son of Anthony? But however, If
you will take my Counsel accept rather of the value in Money, for it may
happen, that his Father may be concerned for the loss of some of them, because
they are antic, and of the hands of excellent Masters. The other example did
not happen at this time, but yet it sits our subject too well to be omitted.
Anthony by that time he returned from the Parthian War, was grown a great
proficient in the Egyptian sumptuousness and Luxury, and daily carried it on
with greater delicacy and expense; yet Cleopatra affected being nauseated, and
looked upon his Entertainments with a despising Air, only to oblige him to ask
her, as he did, What she could add to the Magnificence of his Treats. I will
said she, give you one that shall cost 10000 Sesterces; 52000 l.
he judged the thing impossible, and out of pure curiosity would lay a Wager
with her of a considerable Sum. Next day she made a noble Feast, but it had
nothing in it extraordinary. Anthony then believed it was his turn to Rally
her, and already demanded his Wager, when the Queen desired him not to be so
hasty, that this was but the first Course, and that she would sup alone on that
Sum; bring in said she the second Course, they brought in only a golden Cup
filled with a very strong dissolving Vinegar. Anthony was waiting all this
while for the end of this Mystery. Cleopatra had two Pearls for her Pendants of
an inestimable price, never was there any thing seen more beautiful, either
for the water, the largeness, or the shape of them. She then took off one and
put it into the Cup, which when it was immediately dissolved she drank it up.
Plancus that was judge of the Wager, presently laid hold on the other which she
was taking off, and condemned Anthony to loose the Wager, who was extremely
troubled for the loss of such a Jewel. The remaining Pearl after the death of
Cleopatra came into the hands of Caesar, who caused it to be cut asunder, and
made of it two Pendants for the image of Venus, which he thought gloriously
adorned with half of this prodigal Queen's supper. In this manner did this
witty Egyptian Charm this great man, delightfully carrying him from one
Pleasure to another, and as she had an admirable turn of Wit, she sometimes
changed her pleasantness into an agreeable serious Moral. Anthony loved
Fishing, but had never any good luck, and he seemed to be troubled at it, which
indeed was a very pleasant subject for a man of his Character; but in this he
was of the Humor of all Lovers, who are out of all patience when they do any
thing ill before those they love, and Cleopatra as has been said was at all his
Diversions; he made some Diverse go under water and fasten Fish they had ready
to his hooks, in this manner he pulled up his line two or three times well
laden, with an extreme satisfaction. The Queen though she soon understood that
trick, seemed to admire his good fortune: She laughed heartily at it at night
among her Favorites, and invited them to the same sport the next day, every one
came and they took Boat to begin to Fish. Anthony threw out his line and
presently felt it loaded, over-joyed he plucked it up, but was ready to fall
down for shame, when he saw a piece of old Saltfish at his hook, which the
Diverse had fastened to it by Cleopatra's order, every body laughed at this
pleasant adventure, and the Queen ingeniously told him, Leave, my Lord, the
Line and Nets to us Egyptians; fishing is our business, who are Sovereigns of
Pharos and Canopus, yours is to take Cities, Provinces and Kings.

CHAP. XIII. Anthony receives the news of his Brother's defeat. He resolves for
War, and makes an alliance with Pompey. Caesar marries Scribonia. The death of
Fulvia. Anthony is Master of Domitius his Fleet which yields to him.
THere was more than need of such important News as he then received to draw
Anthony from the Charms that held him so sure; he understood that his Brother
had been overthrown by Caesar, that his Wife and all his Friends had quitted
Italy, that Caesar had made himself Master of Gaul which belonged to him, and
that he had constrained the Son of Calenus after the death of his Father to
deliver him up eleven Legions which he commanded in that Province. From another
part they sent him word, that the Parthians under the command of Pacorus their
King's Son, assisted by Labienus and Barzapharnes had made themselves Masters
of Syria. That Antigenus the Brother of Hircanus High Priest of the Jews, had
brought them to Jerusalem, which they sacked, and carried away Prisoners,
Hircanus and Phasactus, and Herod's brother who was himself fled into the
mountains of Iudaea. These successes so disadtagious to Anthony's affairs made
him think of War, and to this end he got together two hundred Ships, his intent
was immediately to fall upon his Enemies; but the earnest instances of Fulvia
and his Friends forced him to turn toward Italy. He went from Alexandria to
Tire, from whence passing by the Isles of Cyprus and Rhodes he came to Athens,
where he met Fulvia: He was extraordinary angry at what had happened, and above
all with Manius, whom he accused as the cause of all these disorders. Libo,
Pompey's Father in-Law, with Saturninus and some other Senators, tried to make
a League between these two Generals, for that Pompey had received Iulia
Anthony's Mother with a great deal of respect, he told them, that he was
extremely obliged to Pompey for his Civility, and that he would let slip no
occasion of returning it, and that he would join Interests with him if Caesar
came to an open breach, but that if he kept to the Agreement they had made, he
would engage Caesar to grant him his Friendship. Caesar advertised of his
intentions was very willing to it, but withal forgot nothing that might make
for his own interest. He underhand animated the Veterans against Anthony, under
pretense that Pompey who was engaged with him, would hinder them of their
rewards which they enjoyed: though they had reason to believe that Pompey would
do so, yet the reputation that Anthony had gained at the Battle of Philippi,
made them have a great Veneration for his Valor; so that though Caesar knew
himself stronger at Land, than both Anthony and Pompey joined together, having
no less than forty Legions, yet as he was not well assured of the affection of
his Soldiers, and that he wanted ships of which they had great store; he
thought it convenient to hearken to an accommodation. Scribonia the Sister of
Libo was a rich Widow, very considerable for the Dignity of the two Husbands
she had had, but she was one of those perverse Women, whose uneasy vexatious
Pride is a great plague to a Husband. Caesar did not stick at preferring her
before the fairest and noblest Ladies of Rome, that he might gain the
Friendship of Libo who esteemed himself very much honored by this alliance,
and sent his free Consent from Sicily. Among the Legions of Caesar there were
six, who were very affectionate to Anthony's interest; and as Lepidus lived now
in Italy as a private Person, Caesar made as if it were unbecoming the Majesty
of the Triumviri, and so sent him to Africa, the Government whereof was
designed for him, with these six Legions. After he had got rid of Lepidus and
the suspected Legions, he set himself to flatter Lucius, and in all their
Discourses praised his great Courage and his Zeal for his Country, and finding
he valued himself very much upon this particular, even to the saying that he
was ready to take up Arms against his own Brother, if he would not submit his
Authority to that of the Commonwealth, he gave him very great praises for this
high piece of Gallantry, and said it was not reasonable he should be employed
against his own Flesh and Blood, and to that end desired him to go and Command
in Spain, but gave him such Lieutenants, as in effect were real Guards upon
him. The merit and Character of Caesar, was very extraordinary, and the World
must own that he is with all Justice ranked among the greatest Princes that
ever were. Suetonius and the rest of the Historians give sufficient testimony
of it; but they have none of them penetrated to the bottom of this exquisite
Politician's designs, which in this place appear in their greatest excellency,
and contributed full as much to his Rise as his own proper deserts: it is true
indeed that this great Cunning was joined with great Virtues and very noble
Qualities, for without them it would be but a kind of sordid Craft, which
commonly raises men only for their greater confusion. Anthony, informed of
these Transactions, advanced toward Italy, without showing the least concern
for Fulvia whom he left sick at Sicyonia; this last neglect and scorn of her
Husband finished what his infidelity had begun, she was not able to bear so
many misfortunes at once, but dyed in that City lamented by very few. Anthony
was now in a very great perplexity. Domitius cruzed the Ionian Seas with a
Fleet much more powerful than his, and there was a necessity of fighting his
passage. At Corcyra.
Corfu they met, and here Anthony showed that all the delights of Egypt had
not in the least diminished that great courage which he had signalized in so
many actions. He commanded his whole Fleet to lie by upon their Oars, and with
five Galleys only made up to that of Domitius. Plancus, who was none of the
bravest, by no means approved of this conduct of his, terming it an extravagant
piece of rashness; telling Anthony, It was impossible that ever Domitius would
be his friend, who had been engaged in the Conspiracy against I. Caesar. In the
mean time the Vessels stood their course notwithstanding all his politic
reasons, and he was ready to dye with fear to see himself almost in the midst
of an Enemy's Fleet that came up in a fighting posture. One of Anthony's
Guards, who stood upon the Prow of his Gally, fiercely called to those of
Domitius to strike their Flag to Anthony, who was of a higher quality than
their Commander in chief. They immediately obeyed; and after they had with loud
shouts and all tokens of respect saluted him General, drew up round Anthony.
The Soldiers on both sides saluted each other, and Domitius himself came on
board Anthony, and delivered him up the command of his Fleet. In this manner
Appian relates this action. But Velleius with more probability says, it was
thus managed by an Intrigue of Pollio's, who by this acquitted himself of all
the Obligations he owed to Anthony. The two Fleets being joined came to an
Anchor at Palante, a Town in Epirus, from whence they stood over to Brundusium.

CHAP. XIV. Anthony arrives at Brundusium. He is refused entrance. The Veterans
force Caesar and him to agree. They come to a Treaty by the mediation of
Cocceius. Anthony marrys Octavia. The Punishment and Death of Salvidienus.
IN this City Caesar had five Legions which shut the Gates against Anthony, and
stood upon their guard, not against him they said, but Domitius, Caesar's
declared Enemy; upon this refusal, he made himself Master of the Haven and
Isles, and blocked up the Place. This Town is almost encompassed with the Sea,
except one avenue on the Land side, which Anthony defended by a Trench
fortified by many Towers. He sent to Pompey, to advance with his Forces and
enter Italy. Anthony's Troops besides took Sigionte in Ausonia, and Pompey
besieged the Cities of Thuria and Cosance. Caesar marched with his Army in all
haste, after he had detached Agrippa, against Pompey. Agrippa re-took Sigionte,
and beat Pompey from Thuria. The Veterans were vexed at this War, and while
they were drawn together by order of Caesar to go against Pompey, as soon as
they knew Anthony and he were joined, they refused to march. Caesar, though he
found they were so distasted, made them follow him, which they did but only
out of a design to come to an agreement. In the mean time Anthony had sent for
his Army from Macedonia and hardly pressed the besieged. He had besides manned
several Vessels with Peasants and useless People, and brought them into the
Port of Brundusium which did much intimidate the besieged, thinking he had been
reinforced with considerable Succors. He had here a misfortune which yet he
fully repaired by his Valor. Servilius, one of his Officers, with 1200 Horse
which he commanded, went over to Caesar. Anthony received this News as he was
at Table; he with all his friends that were with him immediately rose, and
marched with only 400 Horse to Iria, where Caesar had placed a body of Cavalry
of 1500. These men, astonished with the presence of Anthony, whom by reason of
the Victory of Philippi they believed invincible, yielded to him, and he
brought them to his Camp. The advanced Parties on both sides came up to the
very Works, and reproached each other: at length Caesar's Soldiers declared to
Anthony's that they were come thither to no other end than to oblige their two
Generals to a Peace; and that if Anthony would not yield to it, though they had
always a great veneration for his Valor, yet they were too much obliged to
Caesar, not to serve him till death. As Anthony very well knew their Valor and
Experience; these Discourses made him seriously reflect upon the Consequences
of these Jarrs. It happened, the year before, Caesar had sent to him Cocceius and
Cecinna; the former of these was a very wise, well-meaning man, and equally
obliged to Anthony and Caesar; he easily foresaw there might arise some
difference between them; he therefore sent back Cecinna, and staid himself with
Anthony. When they came to Brundusium, he asked permission to return to Caesar,
offering to carry any Letter from him. Anthony refused to write, telling him,
That Caesar was his Enemy, That he had nothing to send to him but Reproaches
for his foul dealing, which he had already told him by Cecinna: however added
laughing, If you please, I Will send twice as many Letters by you to the same
purpose. Cocceius answered, That he ought not to account Caesar his Enemy who
had had so much consideration for his brother Lucius and his other friends.
It Is then, replied Anthony, out of pure friendship that he shuts the Gates of
Brundusium against me, debauches my Soldiers, and seizes upon the Provinces
that are fallen to my share; for, as to his Civilities, we understand the
motives of them well enough; he uses my friends well, that by his
self-interested Liberalities he may make them my Enemies. Cocceius finding him
too much moved, would insist upon it no longer, but went to Caesar, who
appeared amazed at his return and reproached him with his long stay among his
Enemies. After some Excuses, which Caesar took in good part, Cocceius laid
before him the Reasons Anthony pretended he had to complain of him, upon which
Caesar to clear himself said, He had not taken the Command of the Army from the
Son of Calenus, a young man and unexperienced, but only to hinder the design
of Lucius, who intended to re-establish the Authority of the Commonwealth; and
that it was contrary to his Orders that the Gates of Brundusium were shut
against him; but that those who commanded there thought they were obliged to
it, seeing Anthony allied with Pompey their common Enemy, and accompanied with
Domitius one of the Assassines of his Father Julius, and who had declared
himself his Enemy by several acts of hostility. Cocceius answered, It was true,
that by their Treaty they engaged themselves not to enter into any Alliance
with the Murderers of Julius Caesar, and that Anthony had not, neither would
he ever forget the respect he owed to his memory; that Domitius was none of the
Conspiracy, not being named in the Decree made against them: It was true
indeed, he had followed Brutus; but if he intended to call in question all
those that had done the like, he would have enough to do: As for Pompey,
Anthony had not called him to the War but for his assistence in case he were
attacked, or to bring them to accommodation, if he found Caesar disposed to it.
That besides, He thought himself obliged to tell him, that he himself was
partly the cause of their joining, by his making War with the friends of
Anthony in Italy, without which, none durst ever have entertained any
correspondence with Pompey. Says Caesar then, Since you speak of Italy, you
should not forget the War that Fulvia and Manius kindled against me, though all
this while Pompey had never the courage to enterprise any thing upon this
Country, only now he ravages the Coasts, backed with the assistence of
Anthony. There is, replies Cocceius, something more than this, which I will not
offer to conceal from you, It Is not the Encouragement of Anthony that gives
Pompey this boldness; It Is his positive and particular Command: He' has order
to make a descent, and land his whole Army, which is very considerable, and not
barely to amuse himself to spoil the Sea coasts, but bring the War into the
very heart of Italy, if you do not quickly make Peace'. Caesar saw well enough
whither these Discourses tended, and did not in the least take it amiss from
Cocceius; he only told him that Pompey had not yet any reason to value himself
for his brave Exploits. Cocceius then told him of the Death of Fulvia, caused
by her vexation, and the neglect and scorn of her Husband; and added that, this
Obstacle being removed, there wanted nothing but to come to a clear
understanding of each other, to make a perfect Reconciliation. Caesar kept
Cocceius at Supper, and made him lodge with him, but he could not be prevailed
upon to write to Anthony; he only complained of Iulia, because she chose
rather to retire into Sicily, than give him an opportunity of showing her the
respect he always had for her, as being his Kinswoman; and that he would honor
her no less than his own Mother: he prayed Cocceius to assure Iulia of his
Sentiments to her, and so sent him back to Anthony: as he went, he saw Caesar's
chief Officers and many old Soldiers, who all testified the earnest desire
they had of an Accommodation, because they were not willing to bear Arms
against Anthony: he therefore informed him of the Intentions of Caesar's
Soldiers, and advised him to cause Pompey to retire to his Island, and send
away Domitius. Iulia by her Authority seconded his Councils, so that Anthony
desired Pompey to carry back his Troops to Sicily, and sent Domitius to command
in Bithynia: Upon this the Soldiers of both Armies named three Commissioners
to mediate the Accommodation. Pollio was appointed on Anthony's side, Mecoenas
by Caesar, and Cocceius who had the greatest share in this negotiation, had the
honor to be the Arbitratour. Mecoenas, so well known by the praises of Virgil
and Horace, was a Gentleman of an exquisite well-turned wit, of a very gentle
taking humor, his merit joined with expertness in business made him be much
loved by Caesar, whose favor he shared with Agrippa. The latter rendered
himself considerable by his great services, the former by his wit; the one had
his esteem, the other his affection. Mecoenas was of an illustrious race, which
he derived from the ancient Kings of Hetruria, however he contented himself
with the degree of a Roman Knight, making all the end of his Ambition to merit
the Favor of his Master, and protect and advance desert wherever he found it.
The testimonies of this generous and bountiful disposition are seen with
admiration in the Works of the greatest Men of his Age; he heaped his
Liberalities upon them to that degree till they were obliged to say, they had
nothing more to wish for: this Generosity of his has appeared so great an
example to those that have pretended to be eminent for wit or learning, that in
all Ages since, their Protectours have been honored with the Name of this
illustrious Roman, to excite them to follow his Example. The Mediators had
order to propose to the two Generals a perfect Oblivion of all matters of
complaint; to enter into a perpetual firm Bond of friendship; and to establish
it yet more by the ties of blood, the Soldiers desired Anthony should marry
Octavia, Caesar's sister: she was the Widow of Marcellus, by whom she had a Son
who afterward dyed very young, when his merit and virtues were preparing for
him the Government of the World, by succeeding Augustus in the Empire: It was
of him that Virgil said, the Destinies had only shown him to the Earth, and
taken him away, fearing lest Rome should have had too much vanity for the
possession of so much good. Caesar had an extreme love and tenderness for his
Sister, though they were not by the same Mother; and, to do her justice, never
any of her sex deserved so much esteem for her excellent qualities: her beauty
was the least thing that Octavia prized in her self, which yet outshined all
that was glorious both at Rome and elsewhere, and even Anthony himself yielded
that Cleopatra could not dispute even this with her: she only valued her self
upon her virtue, all her Sentiments were generous and noble; and though all her
actions were animated by an incomparable grace and carriage, yet her greatest
charm was sweetness and modesty, this gallant Character she always maintained
with a most admirable constancy notwithstanding all the debauches of her
Husband. All these Conditions of the Treaty were agreed to; Caesar and Anthony
had an enterview and embraced in the middle of the two Armies, who by their
Acclamations testified their Joy for it: but these rejoycings lasted not long,
for Caesar's Soldiers addressed to Anthony for the recompenses he had promised
them after the Battle of Philippi, and because he gave them a fierce denial and
repulse, they had used some violence to him, if Caesar with large Promises had
not appeased them. These two Generals then made a new Division. Anthony had all
the Provinces of the East to Euphrates, from a line drawn through the middle of
the Ionian Sea, from Cadropolis a City of Illyria to Cyrene in Africa; all from
that line to the Ocean fell to Caesar. Lepidus remained in possession of
Africa. It was concluded, that Anthony should make War with the Parthians and
Caesar with Pompey, if he refused to submit to reasonable conditions; that
Caesar should give Domitius the same assurance that Anthony had, and pardon all
those that had born Arms against him at Perusia. This plainly manifests that in
a Civil War, the Heads for the most part consider their own Interests, by which
alone they regulate their hatred or their friendship. To these Conditions they
added also that the Triumviri might in Italy levy as many Soldiers as they had
occasion for. Anthony sent Ventidius against the Parthians, and Helenus,
Caesar's freed-man, went into Sardinia, where Menas made War with Lucius,
Caesar's Lieutenant. Menas had already destroyed and spoiled the Coasts of
Tuscany.
Hetruria, and taken Titius, who was gathering Forces in Gallia Narbonensis.
Pompey pardoned Titius in favor of his Father who was with him in Sicilia, and
because his had the name of Pompey written on their shields; but afterward we
shall see that Titius requited this favor with a piece of horrible
ingratitude. As for Menas, after some skirmishes, he beat Lucius and took
Helenus, whom with the other Prisoners he sent to Caesar; but he, provoked with
the loss of Sardinia, would not hear of any Accommodation with Pompey. The two
Triumviri went to Rome, where Anthony married Octavia with a dispensation of
the Senate, because Widows were forbid to marry till the tenth month after
their Husbands decease. All Reconciliations between great Men are ever made at
some body's cost; whether it is they imagine their confidence to be more firmly
established by these Sacrifices they make one another, or that a Secret is
burdensome to them, or that they vent their common fury and discontent upon
some unfortunate perfidious person, who by taking his measures on both sides,
and Trimming, thinks to make his fortune; but so it was, that Salvidienus was
the Victim of this Reconciliation. Anthony revealed to Caesar, that this Man
had offered him his Troops and his Service when he sent him into Gall, and had
repeated these Offers to him at Brundusium. Caesar, mortally offended at this
perfidiousness, accused him before the Senate; he was by it declared Foe to
Caesar and the People of Rome, and dragged to punishment; there were public
Prayers made and Thanks given to the Gods for the discovery of this Treason.
Anthony was blamed for discovering this, and censured for being too fond of a
new-made friendship: he on his part would make his Justice remarkable in
putting Manius to death, who had been the principal Author of the War of
Perusia and Instigatour of the ungoverned Passions of Fulvia.

CHAP. XV. Rome afflicted with Famine; the People mutiny against Anthony and
Caesar; they agree with Pompey; his Generosity.
THE People of Rome had but very little share in the rejoicing for this
marriage; they were reduced to a very great extremity by the dearth of Corn.
Pompey who was Master of Sicilia hindered the traffic and importation from
Greece and the East, and his Lieutenants in Sardinia stopped that of Africa and
Spain. One cannot but wonder that this People who treated all other Nations as
Slaves, at this time were dying of hunger, without their assistence; such a
dependence they were reduced to, which was without doubt by reason of the
incredible number of the Inhabitants and the Desolation the Wars had made in
Italy; and this is no ordinary Example of the revolution of humane things, that
at this time Africa was the refuge, and as one may say, the Nurse of Rome.
Anthony pressed Caesar either to an Accommodation with Pompey, or to a vigorous
open War with him, to open the Trade; but they wanted Money, which obliged them
to lay on two Impositions, the one of four drams and a half for every
Slave, the other upon Successions and Legacies left by Testaments. The People
irritated by want, rose up in opposition to these Edicts, and assaulted Caesar
in the Forum; and Anthony going to his aid was at first spared by the Rabble,
who cried out, and bid him retire while he advised them to be peaceable; but
when he endeavored to scatter the Mutineers, they threw Stones at him too, and
he had like to have been slain, if he had not drawn some Troops which were
encamped just without into the Town, who charged the Mobile and killed several
of them, and the Soldiers threw their bodies into the Tyber. This chastising
of them quelled the Mutiny, but not the Famine; and therefore Anthony was
forced to write to Libo, to desire him to come to Rome. Pompey, as was said
before, was Libo's Son-in-law, and Caesar had married his Sister. Libo came as
far as the Island of Ischia.
Aenaria, where he expected his Pass-ports; no sooner was his Voyage known at
Rome, but the People tumultuously assembled to demand Peace of the Triumviri,
and threatened Mutia, Pompey's Mother, to burn her in her own house if she did
not incline her Son to it. It was no less desired on his side. Murcus, whose
credit with him was very great, advised it with all earnestness. Menas alone
opposed it for his own particular interest, because he was only valued by
Pompey for his experience in War: he wrote to him, that Murcus aspired to the
Sovereign Authority, which Pompey too easily believed upon the instigation of
this enfranchized Slave. Murcus by his usage soon perceived it, which made him
retire to Syracusa, where he was murdered by some Slaves, whom afterward
Pompey executed, to clear himself from the Murder. It was believed however
that he was the Author of it, or that Menas had done it by his order. This
Action very much displeased the Senators that were retired to Pompey, who by
this saw themselves exposed to the capricious humor of a Man governed by
Creatures whose base originals and condition made them capable of all sorts of
Villainy. In the mean time Libo came to Rome, and persuaded Caesar and Anthony
to an enterview with Pompey, that they in person, face to face, might put an
end to their differences. Pompey at the earnest solicitation of all his
Officers, not being able to refuse this, with his Fleet advanced to Puzzolo.
Puteoli, there was a kind of a Mole made, where the Mount Misenus runs into
the Sea, for the convenience of the Conference. Pompey and Libo in a Gally, and
the two others upon the Peer. Pompey immediately demanded to be an Associate
in the Empire instead of Lepidus, which was absolutely refused, as a piece of
injustice they scorned to use to their Companion that was absent; there was
much contest about this Article, and they parted without doing any thing. The
following days they treated by Deputies. Pompey then let fall this Pretension,
so that all the difficulty of the Negotiation was reduced to these three
Articles. 1. That those who were Accomplices in the Assassination of Julius
Caesar should be only banished into some Place they would make choice of
themselves. 2. That those who for other causes were proscribed, should have
liberty of returning to Rome. And, 3. That these last should be restored to
their Estates. Anthony and Caesar rejected the two first Articles, and only
granted the Proscripts, who were none of the Conspiratours, leave to buy their
Estates. Those who were about Pompey, terrified by the Example of Murcus,
consented to return to Rome upon this condition. But he was very much
displeased with them for it, and tearing his Clothes for very rage and spite,
called them Deserters and Fugitives; and said that of all his friends Menas
alone had given him faithful and ^ninterested counsel. In the end, the People
of Rome pressing on one side, and Mutia and Iulia on the other, they had a
second enterview, and the Treaty was concluded upon these Conditions; That from
this moment the War should cease both by Sea and Land; That Commerce and
Navigation should be free; That Pompey should withdraw his Troops from Italy;
That he should not retain the Slaves that fled to him. That he should suffer to
Inroads or Descents to be made upon the Coasts or in the Ports of Italy; That
he should build no more Vessels than those he had already; and that he should
immediately send all the Corn he had stored up to Rome: upon this Condition
they granted him for five years Sicilia, Sardinia, Corsica, and all the Isles
which he was in possession of, and Peloponnesus. All the rest of the Roman
Empire to remain to the Triumviri. They agreed besides, That Pompey might in
his absence, by any of his friends, demand the Consulship, and that he should
have the dignity of Pontifex or High Priest. As for those who were proscribed,
all those who had not had a hand in the Conspiracy might return to Rome; those
who had not committed any Crime, but were fled to Pompey only for fear* should
enjoy all their Estates, and the culpable the fourth part only. The Slaves
which had served under Pompey should be declared free; and the free Soldiers,
after their time of Service was expired, should have their share of the
division of Lands, as those of Caesar and Anthony. This Treaty was signed by
the three Chiefs, and after it was sealed they sent it to Rome, to be deposited
in the hands of the Vestals. They then agreed to treat each other, as a mark
and token of their sincere reconciliation. Pompey chose to begin, and when
Caesar and Anthony asked him where he would receive them; showing them his
Galley, answered pleasantly, In my Vessels. The word Carinas in Latin
signifies Vessels or Ships, and was likewise the name of a Place in Rome where
Pompey the Great had a noble Palace, which Anthony had seized on by right of
Confiscation* He understood the Raillery well enough, but here we must allow
that Caesar and he extremely forgot their prudence upon this occasion; and this
entertainment had like to have cost them dear, if Pompey had not had a generous
great Soul: as he was at Table with Caesar and Anthony, and they began to
railly Anthony upon his fondness for Cleopatra, Menas approached Pompey, and
whispering him in the Ear told him, My Lord, You may now revenge the death of
your father and brother, and make your self master of the world; it is but
cutting the Cables, let me alone for the rest. The blow was sure, and the
temptation violent. Pompey had there all his Fleet in Battalia, and the Troops
of the other two were ashore. He, after a little pause, answered him, Menas may
violate his faith, that may be fit for him, but not for Pompey. We have already
mentioned, that it was a very unfortunate thing to have the Character of great
men only from Historians, who either through fear or flattery decryed the
Enemies of the Prince they followed. Velleius, who wrote in the time of
Augustus, gives us a very ill Portraicture of Pompey. It Is easily perceived he
had not all the prudence and dexterity of wit that Caesar had, that was rather
a defect in his education; but that nobleness of mind which he drew from his
birth and disposition, and which he showed here against his own Interest, is
enough to cover all his defects, and ought to oblige them to treat his memory
more favorably, which even this action alone is sufficient to render
illustrious. Plutarch relates this adventure somewhat differently, he makes
Pompey give this answer to the Proposal of Menas; You should have done it
without telling me, but now I Am of opinion we ought to keep our word, and keep
inviolable that faith we have engaged. We may perceive by this Answer that so
considerable an advantage joined to the pleasure of Revenge, at first surprised
his Generosity, but it was only to make it break out with greater force, and
triumph the more in rejecting a perfidious action, what profit soever might
accrue, and for this reason this act of his deserves no less praise.

CHAP. XVI. The People's Joy upon the first News of the Peace. Caesar goes into
Gaul, and Anthony stays at Athens.
THese Diversions did not hinder them from thinking of more firmly establishing
their Authority by Alliances. Pompey promised his daughter to Marcus Marcellus
the Son of Octavia, and they named the Consuls for the four following years.
Anthony and Libo were declared the first, on condition that Anthony might
exercise his Office by the deputation of one of his friends; Caesar and Pompey
were designed the second; Domitius and Sosius the third; and Anthony and Caesar
were appointed to succeed them for the fourth. Upon this they parted. Pompey
returned to Sicilia, and the two Triumviri to Rome. This Peace, which put an
end to all the Civil-wars, was received and welcomed through all Italy with an
incredible Joy; the People wherever they past offered public Sacrifices; they
ran in Crowds before them, giving them a thousand Thanks and Praises. The
Romans above all witnessed their satisfaction by Bonefires, Games and public
Feasts: they had prepared them a magnificent entry; but Anthony and Caesar
refused that honor, and went into Rome by night: those only were troubled at
the Peace, who had made their profit and advantage by the Confiscations of the
banished persons which they had usurped, and which got them powerful Enemies,
for all the proscribed persons returned to Rome after they had assured Pompey
of their eternal acknowledgments and obligations to him. Thus had he the glory
of preserving many illustrious members of the Republic, as Tiberius, Silanus,
Sentius, Arontius the Son of Cicero, and other Senators; their return
redoubled the Romans Joy, who for this gave public thanks to the Gods. Caesar,
to keep his Soldiers exercised and in military discipline, of which Idleness
is the greatest plague and destruction, sent one part of his Forces into
Dalmatia, and led the rest himself into Gaul, where some Rebels had begun to
make some stirs. Anthony, who remained at Rome, left it some time after, to go
to the Parthian War. Before he went, he caused to be ratified by the Senate all
he had done in Asia; and besides, approve all he had designed to do for the
future. The Kings he had established were confirmed by Ordinance of the Senate
in their several Kingdoms, as Darius in Pontus, Pharnaces in Idumaea, Herod in
Iudaea, Amyntas in Pisidia, and Polemon in Cilicia. One part of his Troops was
sent into Illy^ria, another against the Dardanians, and the rest into Epirus.
The City of Athens he chose to pass the Winter away in with Octavia, in this
place he pleased himself so much, that he entirely gave himself over to his
pleasures and diversions, quitting all the tokens and marks of his Authority to
live like a private person. At the public Games and Exercises he assisted clad
in Grecian habit, and took the pains himself to part the Combatants. In his
Court there was no business talked of but only Learning and Philosophy. He
often visited the Academia, the Lyceum, and those places destined to the study
of Philosophy which have given so much reputation to that famous City. He spent
whole days to hear their Disputations and their Conferences; their Feasts and
Entertainments always ended these pleasing Diversions, and these Treats were
not made with the Profusion of the Egyptians, but according to the Sobriety
and Modesty of the Greeks. Octavia went with him every where: In this charming
Wife he enjoyed all the delights of Cleopatra, and those excellent Virtues
besides, which the Egyptian had not. Octavia had certainly been Mistress of
his Heart, if she had not had the misfortune of being his Wife: but Anthony was
one of those who think all innocent pleasures insipid. But Octavia had not
only this Rival, the extravagance of the Athenians went as far as heaven to
find her out another; however ^ordid Flatterers were never better served;
Anthony they always called Bacchus, and in this quality all mortals were much
below him; they proposed he should marry Minerva, the Patroness of their City.
Anthony accepted of the match; but for the more honor of such an Alliance, he
asked a thousand talents for her portion; but says one of the Match-makers
pleasantly to him, My Lord, Jupiter asked nothing with your Mother Semele.
Anthony, however he laughed at this Jest, would bate nothing of the Sum. It was
levied upon all the Inhabitants, who revenged themselves according to their
custom, that is, by raillery, of which the Love of Cleopatra was the principal
subject. Under the Statue of Anthony they wrote these words, Octavia and
Minerva, to Anthony, take the baggage again, and let us part. He laughed at
their Jests, but took their money, though Dellius, to mortify them the more,
made as if he seriously told him he acted against the Roman Laws, which allowed
three years for the payment of a Portion. As soon as the Winter was passed,
Anthony reassumed with the marks of his dignity all the Majesty of an
Emperor; he was no more seen but in the company of his Commanders. Athens was
filled with Soldiers, who soon scared away the Muses. He received the
Ambassadors of all the Princes, and thought of nothing but putting his Fleet
to Sea, building of Galleys, and preparing all things necessary for the War he
was going to undertake.

CHAP. XVII. New Causes of breach between Caesar and Pompey. Caesar marries
Livia. Several Fights between the Lieutenants of Caesar and Pompey.
THE Treaty of Peace between Caesar and Pompey had regulated their pretension,
but not their Ambition; it had not extinguished in them that Enmity which was
in a manner natural to them, considering what fatal effects it had produced
between their Fathers, whose animosity yet subsisted in the minds of their
adherents: the apparent subject of their difference was Peloponnesus. Caesar
pretended that the sums due upon account by that Province were by the Treaty
due to the Triumviri; that Pompey ought to be responsible for them; and either
recover it, or permit them to do it. Pompey maintained that, in giving him
that Country, they gave it him exempt from all Charges: he had still a very
formidable Fleet, which by the Council of Menas he daily augmented; this was
another subject of Complaint for Caesar, who, at taking some Pirates, they
owned that Pompey had given them Commissions to pillage the Coasts of Italy: It
happened that the Senators that were about Pompey, offended at the insolence of
his freed-men, killed some of them; and Menas, not thinking Pompey concerned
enough for it, was disgusted with him. Philadelphus, the Freed-man of Caesar,
had an opportunity of seeing Menas in the heat of his resentment and dealt with
him to draw him to the service of Caesar; promising him the Government of
Sardinia and Corsica, with three Legions. Caesar immediately disowned his
freed-man, not being willing, as he said, to begin the War; he wrote to Anthony
to return to Italy to regulate all these differences by his Authority: but
though Caesar seemed entirely taken up by such important affairs, he found some
in another place which were much more agreeable; and Livia was the subject of
them. The beauty of this woman, joined with a refined and dextrous wit, made
the greater impression upon his heart, which was disgusted at the bitter
insupportable humor of Scribonia, since it is a known truth, that there is
nothing makes a Mistress appear more advantageous to the eyes of a discontented
husband, than the reflection he makes upon the opposite disagreeable manners of
an ill Wife. Caesar could not long hold out against so many charms on one side,
nor against the daily vexations Scribonia gave him on the other; he divorced
her, and his love for the other was so violent, that either by his entreaties
or his authority he obliged Tiberius to yield him Livia, although then big with
child; but as this great belly was an obstacle to his passion, he consulted the
Priests, to know if it was lawful to marry her in this condition. The Answer
was, that if there was any doubt who was the Father of the child, it was
unlawful to marry the Mother, but that the Virtue of Livia leaving no room for
doubt, Caesar might lawfully receive her from the hands of her Husband,
according to the custom of the Roman Laws, which permitted divorce. Perhaps,
says Dion, this Answer was founded upon the ancient Law; but if it had not,
they would have been cautious to have decided it otherwise. In the Ceremony of
marriage Tiberius performed the office of Father, and there then fell out an
accident which was very pleasant. Livia had with her a little child who usually
diverted her by a hundred pretty prattling stories, and seeing she was at Table
near Caesar, and that Tiberius was in another place farther off, said to Livia,
What do you do there, Madam? Look, There Is your Husband; showing her Tiberius:
this was not the only Jest upon this Subject; for Livia being delivered at his
house at the end of three months, they said at Rome that every thing favored
the fortunate; since their very children came in three months time. In the mean
while, the Lieutenants of Caesar had got together a great number of Vessels at
Ravenna, and the Forces were recalled from Gallia when Anthony arrived at
Brundusium; but Caesar not being there at the time appointed, he returned into
Greece, whether it was because he was ill attended, or that he had some
mistrust from Caesar's Fleet which was very strong, or terrified by prodigies,
is uncertain. One of his Sentinels was devoured by Wolves, who left nothing of
him whole but his Face, and the main Guard which was near perceived nothing of
it; and the Inhabitants of the City told Anthony that, at break of day they had
seen a Wolf come out of his Tent. Whatever his reasons were, he went back and
left Letters for Caesar, whereby he exhorted him to keep to the Conditions of
the last Treaty, and claimed Menas as belonging to him from the succession of
Pompey the Great, which was allotted to him. This freed-man without any more
deliberation went over to Caesar to have his protection, and delivered him up
Sardinia and Corsica: he was very well received by Caesar, and they granted him
all the rights and privileges of one freeborn: this his deserting broke all
the measures that were possible to be taken for an accommodation. Caesar wrote
to the Senate to justify his conduct, he harangued his Army, and made his
Lieutenant Calvisius advance, and he soon after followed accompanied with
Menas. Pompey was then at Messana, from whence he sent out his Fleet commanded
by Menecrates, a mortal foe to Menas; the two Fleets came up to each other
about Sun set, near the Island of Aenaria. Caesar's Fleet passed the night in
the Bay of Cumes, and Menecrates rode at Anchor without: in the morning he made
up to the enemies who lay near the shore, either to force them to fight or to
run foul upon the Rock. Menecrates was the more advantageously posted by reason
he might receive assistence from the Sea-ward, and the others were shut up
between the Fleet and Shore, and had nothing but their valor to trust to; as
for Menas, he was courageous even to rashness; who as he had distinguished
Menecrates, he made down upon him with extraordinary fury. The use of Cannon
was not known in those days, so that Sea Fights were decided by handy-stroaks,
grappling the Vessels, and coming board and board, after they had born the
first shock, which was usually very violent, because the beak or spur of their
Galleys was armed with Iron or Brass; the weakest went often to the bottom by
this first onset, and almost all their Ships of war had Oars in the nature of
our Galleys to go with greater force. The first brunt of these freed-men was
very terrible; Menas lost the beak head of his Gally, and Menecrates had his
rudder broke. Then they grappled; and, as if this Fight between them were to
decide the fortune of the Battle, they fought with desperation, the hatred of
these men animating them as much as glory did others. Menecrates his Vessel was
h^gher than the other, which was a considerable advantage to him for the
lancing of darts, which were thrown downright upon that of Menas, who, by his
extreme courage, seconded by the bravery of his Soldiers maintained a stout
Fight, though he had a pile through his Arm, which he pulled out without
quitting his post; in this instant Menecrates was hurt in his Thigh by a barbed
Dart, which put him from fighting himself; and, though he still encouraged his
men, yet Menas's made more bold by this advantage boarded his Gally so
vigorously that they soon made themselves Masters of it. Menecrates, in despair
for his Defeat, threw himself into the Sea, rather than fall into the hands of
his Enemy, who sent the conquered Ship toward the shore, and he himself bore
down to help Calvisius, who fought in the starboard division or the right wing
of the Battle. This Lieutenant or Vice Admiral had at the beginning of the
engagement broke the larboard division or left wing of Pompey; but, as he too
closely persued those that ran, Demochares, Menecrates's Vice Admiral, rallied
and pressed the remainder of Calvisius's squadron so warmly that he took some of
them, and forced the others to buldge upon the Rocks, where he burned them.
Calvisius, though a little of the latest, perceived his error, came up to the
assistence of his squadron, and saved some of them, and, night coming on,
retired into the Bay of Cumes, although the loss fell heaviest on Caesar's
side. Demochares, astonished at the death of Menecrates, retreated to Sicilia,
which gave opportunity to Calvisius to go out of this Gulf in a very ill
equipage. Caesar was then with a powerful Fleet at Tarentum, from whence he
went to Rhegium to attack Pompey, who had only four Sail in the Port of
Messana. Caesar, against the Advice of his Officers, would stay for Calvisius,
in the mean time, Demochares joined Pompey, who made Apollophanes, his
Rere-admiral; they were both of them freed-men, and certainly these fellows,
whom he preferred before so many noble Romans, had either a great deal of
gallantry and desert, or a very great influence over him: In this Place Caesar
received the News of the Fight at Cumes, and resolved to pass the Strait or
Phare of Messina to meet Calvisius. Pompey, seeing him engaged in this narrow
passage, engaged the rere-most Vessels, and forced the others to draw up close
aboard the shore to make head against him. Demochares, having a Port behind
him, attacked them with great advantage in this narrow strait, where every Ship
of Caesar's had two Enemies upon the Bow, without being able to be relieved by
the others, several of them ran a-shoar either purposely or forced to it.
Caesar himself was constrained to throw himself a-shoar, and never did he run
more risque than at this time; and as he went upon the coast to rally his men
that saved themselves out of the shattered Vessels, he perceived some
Brigantines that came close along the shore, he imagined them to belong to his
own Fleet, and did not perceive his Error till he was surrounded by the
Enemies that landed. The knowledge that he had of the turning ways of a
neighboring mountain, at that time preserved him from that danger to throw him
into another no less hazardous. A Slave of Emilius Paulus, who was then with
Caesar, and whose Father had been banished, believed that a fit opportunity
offered it self of revenging his Master. He came near to Caesar, as they
marched in disorder, and stroke at him with his Sword; the darkness of the
night made him miss his blow, and he was immediately killed by the Soldiers
upon the Place; so that Fortune, or, to speak more properly, Providence
preserved in one day from three imminent dangers the Man that was destined for
the Empire of the World. When he had gained the top of the Mountain, he rallied
as many of his Soldiers as he could. In the mean time Cornificius, who
commanded under him, still maintained the Combat by his bravery and example, he
had given the Galley of Demochares so rude a shock that he sank it, and as that
freed man went aboard another, he perceived Calvisius and Menas, who came to
Caesar's assistence: This made him sound a Retreat, to the great wonder of
Caesar's Army, who were reduced to extremity, and did not see the arrival of
this succor. The weakness of the Soldiers, and the ill plight of the Vessels
hindered them from pursuing the Enemies. They went a-shoar, and there made great
Fires. This night was very painful to the Soldiers, but no body past it* with
more perplexity than Caesar himself in the disquiet, to know the fate of his
Fleet: these Fires, which he descryed from the top of the mountain, gave him
some Hopes, which he endeavored to inspire the Soldiers with that were with
him. But incertainty and doubt are very vexatious, and the state he left his
Fleet in gave him mortal apprehensions. His Troops that were spread along the
Coast had no less, hearing no news of their General. By good fortune the
thirteenth Legion, which was nearest him, perceived the Fires he had lighted on
the top of the mountain: they were detached to know what it was; and when they
understood who it was, the Soldiers of this Legion mounted the Rocks without
following any Path, and came to him: he had then none of his household about
him; so that night he was waited on by the Soldiers: he sent every where to
learn news of his Troops; and knowing Calvisius was safe arrived, he passed the
rest of the night with more tranquillity.

CHAP. XVIII. The wreck of Caesar's Fleet. The arrival of Anthony at
Brundusium. He agreed with Caesar, by means of Octavia.
THE day appearing Caesar saw his Vessels stranded upon the Coast, some half
burnt, others quite consumed, the Sea was all covered with the Wreck; but that
which afflicted him most was, to see the Enemy approach to finish his Defeat.
He sent to Calvisius to put the remainders of his Fleet into a fighting
posture; and he himself prepared to assist him. The Enemies were ready drawn up
in battalia, without moving, waiting to engage Calvisius as soon as ever he
began to work: When immediately the Sea began to run very high with a Southerly
wind. Pompey retired into the Port of Messana. Menas, who had a perfect
experience in Sea affairs, stood into the Ossin with his Vessels, where he rode
with all his Anchors down, and stemmed the head Sea with the force of his Oars:
so the greatest fury of the Storm fell upon Caesar's Galleys, who were anchored
close by the shore, and had ran out Booms betwixt them and it, to hinder their
striking. But the Wind increasing, and the Sea rolling upon them very
furiously, all fell into disorder, and after the Cables broke and gave way,
some were buldged against the Rocks, and others stranded. The noise of the
Storm hindered the Pilots from being heard: they could no longer work the Ships;
so that in this confusion falling foul of one another, the weakest were split
by the stronger. There one might see Soldiers, Sailors and Officers swallowed
by the Waves, or else half dead striving to swim to land. Night came on and
increased the horror and disorder: there was nothing heard but lamentable
Cries mingled with the noise of the Waves and Wind. One cried out for help,
another called to his Comrade; almost all of them bewailed their miserable
state and invoked the assistence of the Gods: the most courageous silently
waited their destiny; but there were some that, moved by a fantastical kind of
despair, killed themselves, as if in Death they expected something worse than
Death it self. At the return of the Sun the fury of the Wind slackned, and some
time after the Storm ceased. The Inhabitants of those Coasts affirmed that in
the memory of Man there had not been felt any so terrible as this. In this
Caesar lost two thirds of his Fleet, with what he lost in the Fight: to shun
the sight of this dismal spectacle, he went to Vibonium. From this Place he
sent Orders to his Lieutenants, to double their care and their guard, that
Pompey upon this advantage might not attempt some considerable Enterprise,
which he thought not on in the least, for which oversight he was very much
blamed; nay, he was so negligent as to let the rest of Caesar's shattered Fleet
pass by him to Vibonium; but this carelessness of his was the utter ruin of all
his Designs and of his Reputation. Caesar went into Campania very much
afflicted at his loss: he now found himself without Ships or Money, and the
People of Rome famished and in general crying out against this War: he
dispatched Mecoenas to Anthony, to demand his assistence, and to explain
himself upon some small occasion of complaints between them, and at all hazard
resolved to transport his Army into Sicilia upon Ships of burden and Hulks,
and attack Pompey in his Isle. In the mean time the City of Rome was much
terrified with the Prodigies which happened at that time: from Africa there came
News, that at Clypea a shoal of Dolphins had fought with so much fury, that
they were all killed; that it had rained blood: it was besides observed at
Rome, that on a very great Festival none of the Senators had eaten in the
Capitol that day, which was taken for a very ill omen. One of these Prodigies
only was welcome to Caesar, because it was very pleasing to Livia; as she was
in the Country, an Eagle let fall into her lap* a milk white Hen, who held a
branch of Laurel in her Bill: She was no less glad than surprised at so
extraordinary an adventure. She bred up the Hen, and planted the Laurel, which
thrived so well in a short time, that it afforded crowns to all those that
triumphed afterward, from that time till Nero; under whom this Laurel and all
the young shoots of it withered all on a sudden, and at the same time ended the
race of the white Hens, which presaged the Death of that Emperor, who was the
last of the Caesar Family. But, in spite of all these dire Portents, Caesar
had intelligence of two things, which very much re-assured him; the one was,
that Anthony was coming to his aid, and that in Agrippa he had quite routed the
Gauls in a very great Battle. This turn of good fortune, as it is very usual,
confirmed several of his Party to his Interest, who by this time began to
waver. Every one strove to offer him Money and Vessels, by which means he set
forth a gallant Fleet, which at this time very much raised his hopes. Anthony
arrived at Brundusium with three hundred Sail, giving out, he came to assist
Caesar in this War. Caesar could very well have dispensed with it. He thought
he was already too powerful, and therefore sought all manner of Pretenses to
excuse his going to meet Anthony, who was not over-well satisfied with his
Proceedings. He had need of Soldiers, to make War with the Parthians; and
willing to spare the charge of a Fleet, he designed Caesar should take his
Fleet and give him Landforces. Octavia offered to go to her Brother, to clear
all their doubts and suspicions, and induce him to give her Husband this
satisfaction. As soon as Caesar saw her, he gave her a large account of the
Dangers he had run in his War with Pompey; very much amplifying them and
Anthony's negligence in assisting him. Octavia presently stopped his
Accusations, telling him, Mecoenas had already received full satisfaction as to
this point; and that he had assured that there should be no more said of it.
Caesar twitted her, that Anthony had sent Callias to Lepidus to engage him to
make War against him. She replied, Callias had no Commission, but only to
propose a Match between his son and Anthony 's daughter, and offered to deliver
him up the man, that he might draw the truth from him by torture. And finding
Caesar began to hearken to her, she endeavored to gain his Ministers, the
chief of whom were Agrippa and Mecoenas: they had both of them a profound
respect for Octavia, being very sensible of the influence she had over her
Brother's humor. You see, said she, Octavia, a woman of the greatest quality
in the world, just upon the point of being made the most miserable of her sex,
if by your care and good counsels you keep her not from these misfortunes. All
the Roman Empire has their eyes upon me, as being the sister of Caesar and wife
of Anthony; if my evil destiny should carry them to make war, you have a chance
of fortune in favor of you; but what side soever falls, I shall be
unfortunate, and shall be reduced to the cruel necessity of bewailing the loss
of a husband or a brother. This moving Argument, joined with the affection
Caesar had for his Sister, obliged him to come to an interview with Anthony.
For this end they chose a place between Metapontum and Tarentum, upon a River
that bears the name of the latter. Anthony came thither the first, and as soon
as he saw Caesar coming, he leaped into a Boat, to go and receive him on the
other side the River. Caesar, not to be behindhand with him in Civility,
hastily advanced in another Boat; they met in the midst of the River, where,
after they embraced, they had a very obliging contest, on which side they
should land; Anthony was earnest to land on Caesar's, and he on Anthony's:
Caesar at last prevailed, under Pretense of waiting on his Sister who was
returned to Tarentum: they walked together to this Town, where Caesar spent the
night without any other Guards about his person than those of Anthony, who next
day went likewise without Guards, and lay in Caesar's Camp; upon which Appion
says very well, that this excess of confidence was as great a sign of their
Levity, as the differences they had upon every slight occasion. They concluded
that Caesar should put off his Enterprise against Pompey till Spring, because
Anthony could no longer defer his expedition against the Parthians, that he
should give Caesar 120 Sail, who should furnish him with two Legions of Italian
Soldiers; and Octavia, upon her own account, gave her Brother twenty great
Vessels, the best that were in her Husband's Fleet, and Caesar complemented her
with 4000 old Soldiers, to increase the number of her Guards; and the five
years of the Triumvirate being almost finished, they prolonged it five more
purely by their own Authority, without valuing the consent of the People or the
ratification of the Senate. But that which is most surprising in this Argument
is, that Anthony, who found Octavia so amiable, who so much admired her virtue,
and who owed to her care all the advantages he reaped by this Treaty, would
leave her and a daughter he had by her in Italy; and, for all this, Caesar did
not blame the injustice of his Proceeding. The reasons they both had for their
proceeding thus are not come to our knowledge, and therefore the Historians
have left us the liberty to guess at them. It Is not very hard to divine, that
Anthony, returning into the East with his Soul filled with the imagination of
those pleasures with which Cleopatra had so long charmed him, he look^d upon
his Wife but only as an obstacle to his pleasures, upon the false principle of
men of his character; that all the honor and reputation is the Wife's right,
but the heart and affection the Mistresse's. And as he knew Octavia's virtue
would remain unshaken in spite of all his ill-usage and infidelity, he knew he
could leave no body near Caesar who would inspire him with better Sentiments
for him and his interest. As for Caesar, whose reach was so extraordinary,
although he were very sensible of this injury, he knew well enough the noise
Anthony's usage of his wife would make in the World, and how it would load him
with all the hatred of the Romans, who had a great veneration for his Sister;
and therefore, it may be, was very glad of the occasion of so just a pretense
of a breach with Anthony, when he saw it was most for his advantage. At this
time Menas, incited by his natural levity and inconstancy, or outraged he was
not considered as he deserved, abandoned the party of Caesar, and returned to
Pompey with his Galleys, without Calvisius perceiving his revolt; which made
Caesar take from him the Command of the Navy, to give it to Agrippa.

CHAP. XIX. Caesar puts a powerful Fleet to Sea, commanded by Agrippa. He
attacks Pompey in Sicilia. Lepidus comes to Caesar's assistence. Several
Actions.
AGrippa, the better to acquit himself with honor in this Command, resolved to
have a potent Navy at Sea, and to fit it out with more ease and convenience, he
made use of two Lakes, the Lucrinus and the Avernus. The Lakes were Reservoirs,
of a prodigious extent, made by incredible labor and expense in places where
the Sea working over the banks in foul weather had naturally formed a kind of
Basin or Pool: in these Places, Art assisting Nature had hollowed these vast
Receptacles, and made them capable of holding a great Fleet: here too were used
and fattened those Oisters, Lampreys and other Seafish, which were made so
famous by being made the chief ingredients of the Roman Luxury: these Places
had communication with the Sea by Sluices. Caesar had given freedom to Twenty
thousand Slaves, upon condition they were to serve at the Oar. After Agrippa
had employed the remainder of this year and all the next to build several
Vessels, and fit out the other, he daily exercised his Soldiers and his
Chiorme, sometimes by Prizes which he gave the best Rowers, otherwhiles by
Mock-fights, wherein he put in practice all the necessary motions that belonged
to Sea Fights: by this means he trained up expert Mariners and good Soldiers:
and Caesar, who knew his zeal and active diligence, entirely relied on him. But
as the Loss he had formerly sustained was believed to be an effect of the anger
of the Gods; he resolved to appease them with great Sacrifices. He assembled
all his Navy at Puteoli, where the Ministers designed for this function were
also met: they raised Altars on the Sea-shoar, which were sprinkled with the
Seawater, in sight of all the Soldiers who were in the Vessels in a profound
Silence: after which the Sacrificers in Pinnaces offered up Victims, and,
accompanied by the principal Commanders, rowed round the Fleet, carrying the
limbs of the Sacrifices; they beseeched the Gods, that all the misfortunes the
Fleet was threatened with might fall upon those Victims then offered; and at the
same time threw some into the Sea; the rest were burned: and then, they
returned to the Altars, which they perfumed with Incense and sweet odours,
while all the Assistents offered up their Vows, Prayers and Supplications. In
this manner the Romans used to bless and purify their Ships before they
undertook any great expedition. Caesar had taken order to assault Pompey on all
sides, in his Fort, that is, in Sicilia. Lepidus, whom he had sent for, was to
land on the South of the Isle, at Lilybaeum. Taurus, who was at Tarentum,
attacked him on the East side, and Caesar himself on the West: he made choice
of the day of the New moon dedicated to the honor of I. Caesar in the month of
July (which yet retains his name) to weigh his Anchors and set sail. Pompey on
his part prepared to make a very vigorous defense: he sent Pliny to Lilybaum
with eight Legions and a great number of light armed Foot; he guarded all the
Coasts of Sicilia and the Isles of Lipari and Carcyra, to hinder Caesar from
seizing on them, he himself kept in the Port of Messina with his best Ships, to
carry Succors where it was necessary. Lepidus was come from Africa with twelve
Legions and Five thousand Numidian Horse upon eighty Ships of War and a
thousand Barks. Taurus had a hundred and two Vessels that were Anthony's; and
Caesar, followed by Appius who was his Lieutenant General, was come from
Puzzolo with a favorable gale. But it seems that neither the Sea nor Winds
were appeased by the Sacrifices. Lepidus, by a Southerly wind which sank
several of his Barks, was thrown upon the Coast of Sicily, where he landed with
much pain and hazard: However he put his Troops in good order; and, after he
had taken several small Places, he besieged Pliny in Lilybaeum. Taurus,
foreseeing the Storm, retired to Tarentum: but Caesar suffered most of all; his
Lieutenant, cast upon the Rocks near Catanea, had the best part of his Vessels
split and bulged; he himself with the loss of one Galley made in to a Gulf near
Eleata; but this Bay lying open to the Southerly wind, which more and more
increased, Caesar's Fleet was so beaten by stress of weather that he was forced
to save himself a-shoar, with so violent a displeasure that, they say, he cried
out that, however, in spite of even Neptune himself, he would get the Victory.
He lost six of the great Ships that Octavia had given him, twenty six others,
and many light Brigantines or pirating Boats called Liburnicae. He omitted no
care nor diligence to repair this Misfortune. He sent Mecoenas to Rome, to
hinder all commotions this accident might cause in favor of Pompey, whose name
the People had respect for. He encouraged the Veterane Soldiers by fresh
Promises of Rewards. And after he had visited Taurus at Tarentum, where his
Ships were in good order, he came to Vibonium, where he gave order for the
re-establishment of his Navy; but, to show the weakness and misfortune of these
men thus clouded by a false Superstition, he would never forgive Neptune this
last disgrace, and made his Image be taken from among the other Divinities the
day the public Games were celebrated in the Circus. On the other hand, Pompey
gave thanks and offered Sacrifices to this God, and trusted so much to his
assistence, that he never minded taking any advantage from his Adversaries
disorder; he said that, these repeated Shipwrecks in Summer when the Sea is
commonly calm were visible tokens of the favor and protection of Neptune. And
he was so vain as to adorn himself with a Robe of Yellow, the Color
consecrated to this God instead of a Purple one, the usual Ornament of Roman
Generals. In the mean time Caesar refitted his Fleet with incredible diligence,
which soon made Pompey be of another mind; convincing him of his false hopes he
had flattered himself with, that so many losses would discourage Caesar. He
therefore sent Menas, with the Squadron he commanded, to see what posture the
Enemies were in. This freed-man, whose courage and experience deserved better
than to be joined to so inconstant and perfidious a mind, already repented he
had gone back to Pompey, whose Fleet he thought to have commanded, but was
disappointed. Therefore he resolved to perform some remarkable Exploit, to make
himself considerable and be courted; so, after he had gained the affection of
his Soldiers by the Money he distributed among them, in three days he made
1500 Stadiums, and fell upon Caesar's guard Ships. He took three immediately,
sank some Victuallers, burned others; and by these brave Exploits astonished
the whole Fleet of Caesar, which at that time had no Commander in chief. He,
besides, made use of this Strategeme, he ran his Galley into a kind of Bay,
which had owzy ground, as if he had been drowned and stranded, the Soldiers of
the Legions who were a-shoar ran to seize upon it; but when Menas saw them
within reach of his Darts, he threw an infinite number among them, and stood
out again to Sea, laughing at and mocking them with Shouts. When he thought he
had made himself sufficiently formidable, he sent a man to Mindius, an Officer
of Caesar's, to speak with him. Mindius went, and Menas told him that he was
willing to return to Caesar's service, which the hatred and injustice of
Calvisius made him forsake. Mindius told Messala of it, who being a Man of
honor only, scorned his Inconstancy. However he made Caesar acquainted with
what Mindius had done with him. Caesar gave him what Security he desired, but
it was rather to weaken Pompey's Party, than strengthen his own by a Man who
was not to be trusted. Menas came and threw himself at Caesar's Feet, who
pardoned him, without leaving him any Command, and displaced and changed all
the Officers of his Vessels. However, if we will believe Horace, Menas retired
himself with great wealth, and served afterward in the Post of a military
Tribune.

CHAP. XX. The Actions of Agrippa against Pompey, who beats Caesar's Fleet.
A Little after this, Messala, by order from Caesar, went for Sicilia with
three Legions, which he encamped near the Bay of Taurominum above Lepidus his
Camp. Three other Legions were sent to Stilide, on the other side. And Taurus
went from Tarentum with all the Squadron he commanded, to make himself Master
of the Cape of Squlazzo, over against Taormina; in the mean time four of
Lepidus his Legions, who came out of Africa in Barks, were defeated by Papias,
Pompey's Lieutenant. Two of these Legions were utterly lost, except some few
Soldiers that saved themselves and got to Lepidus his Camp. The other two went
back into Africa. Caesar was then with all his Navy at the Isle of Strongyle,
from whence he saw the Coast of Sicily defended by Pompey's Forces who were at
Pylorus, Miles, Tindaride, and other Places. He left Agrippa to command the
Fleet, and returned to Vibonium, from whence going into Sicily he marched
toward Taurominum with Messala's three Legions. Agrippa, who longed for an
opportunity of signalizing his Valor, seeing himself Commander in chief of so
mighty a Fleet, besieged Hiera upon the Coast of Sicily; and after he had taken
it, he had surprised Demochares with forty Sail in the Port of Miles, if
Pompey had not sent Apollophanes with forty five others to his aid, whom he
some time after followed with eighty. Agrippa had left half his Fleet at Hiera,
and went with the rest to intercept Papias, who intended to get into the Port
of Miles, when at the same instant he discovered Apollophanes and Pompey, who
made toward him. He then commanded the Ships that were at Hiera with all speed
to come up to him, and dispatched a light Brigantine to let Caesar know what
danger he was in. But that he might not be hemmed in, he resolved first to
engage Papias, who was nearest hand. Papias his Galleys were light and well
manned with Rowers; Agrippa's were heavy, but stronger and loftier, and his
Soldiers all brave and men of service; which gave them great advantage in
boarding; for no sooner was one of Pompey's Galleys grappled but it was taken;
therefore they avoided this way of Fighting, and only attacked Agrippa's by
surprise, bearing upon their Quarter, breaking their Rudders and their Oars.
Pompey advanced with his Vessels to encompass Agrippa before the rest of his
Fleet came to his relief from Hiera; while Papias made a brave Fight, though
his Galley were split by Agrippa's and he forced to change his Ship. Pompey
seeing the Vessels come from Hiera, judged his would be too weak for them, and
therefore thought of a Retreat; and though he endeavored it with all order
imaginable, he could not hinder Agrippa from taking thirty Galleys, with the
loss of only five of his own. The Swiftness of Pompey's Vessels was the
occasion of saving the remainder, because they ran into places where Agrippa
durst not follow them, because his drew more water, and would have been
aground. Agrippa was minded to block them up but his Officers represented to
him that it was not convenient to hazard the honor of so brave an action, by
exposing the Fleet to the danger of the Winds and Seas, which they had but too
much experience of already. he followed their advice, and retired* Pompey,
seeing his Soldiers much discouraged by this ill success, thought it was not
in the least proper for him to show any signs of discontent himself. Quite
contrary, he praised their Valor, and laid the blame of his misfortunes upon
the weak building of his Ships: nay, he gave rewards to those that had behaved
themselves well, as if they had gained a Victory; and this management of his in
this conjuncture was a great reason of assuring him of the affection of his
Troops: These differences thus balancing the Successes of both Parties were
very convenient for the designs of Lepidus; he was then in Sicilia with a great
Army, as if he were only come to be a peaceable Spectatour of the Battles, and
to see both Parties Ruin by the fury and length of this War. This Trimming of
his gave Caesar great occasion of suspicion, but it was not now time to show
it. He was at Squlazzo with Taurus and Messala's Legions when he heard the News
of Agrippa's Victory, and thereupon attempted to take Taormina, thinking Pompey
was blocked up by Agrippa, and could not come to relieve it. It was a Post of
great importance; and Pompey, who had foreseen this design, left his Fleet with
Demochares, and came to Messina, where he drew into a Body all his Forces: his
absence gave Agrippa an opportunity to assault Tindaride, from whence being
repulsed he took some small places on the Seaside. Caesar going on Shipboard
with the greatest part of his Army, leaving the rest with M^ssala, came before
Taur^minum and summoned the Garrison. Pompey's Soldiers answered him as became
men of honor, and upon their refusal Caesar with his Fleet stood over to the
other side of the mouth of the River O^^^balm, and disembarked them near a
Temple of Venus, and from thence went and encamped at Artemisa, a Temple of
Diana, which he fortified, the better from thence to attack Taurominum. Whilst
his Army was drawn up in Battalia, staying till their several Quarters were
allotted them, they saw the Army of Pompey appear both by Sea and Land. Caesar
was extremely surprised at this, and his Troops were seized with so great a
fear that, seeing Pompey's Horse charge their advanced Guards, they put
themselves into disorder. Upon this occasion Pompey wanted both conduct and
counsel; for Caesar had been utterly defeated, if he had been but warmly
attacked. The night that came on was the pretext of Pompey's Retreat which he
made toward the Mountain Coccineum, from whence he sent all his Foot to
Phenice, not daring to encamp with it so near Caesar in an open Country.
Caesar fortified his Camp with extraordinary diligence* so that he quickly put
himself out of danger of being forced. He had with him three Legions, five
hundred dismounted Horse, a thousand light ^rmed Foot, and two thousand
auxiliary Forces of the Allies. The Fault Pompey had committed confirmed him in
the opinion he had of his want of experience; and, to make some advantage of
it, he put aboard his best Soldiers, and went and engaged the Enemies Fleet.
The Fight was very hot, but unfortunate for Caesar. Pompey soon made him
sensible that, if he wanted Conduct, he did not want Valor; so that he took
several Vessels, and burned others, and had quite put an end to this War by a
glorious Victory, had it not been for the assistence of Cornificius, who
commanded Caesar's Army on Land. The Battle was fought not far from Land, so
that most of the Soldiers saved themselves on Shore; but Caesar lost many
Galleys in this Defeat: he was left alone with only one Attendant in a
Shallop, which landed him at the Port of Abal^. These great misfortunes, joined
to his extreme fatigues, brought him so low both in body and mind, that he laid
aside all care of his preservation, and endeavored to forget his troubles by
the assistence of Sleep, which the solitude he was in with only one Slave, and
the risque he ran of the Enemies, could not hinder him from. In this state he
was found by his Officers, who were along the Coast to meet with him, and
a-sleep as he was, without waking him, they carried him from one Boat to
another, till they had brought him safe to Messala's Camp: here a Prodigy
happened to him, which gave him great hopes: a great Fish threw himself out of
the Sea upon the shore, and expired at his feet; and as the Romans were
superstitious and gave great credit to these Presages, Caesar believed this
betokened Victory to him, as if the Sea by this tribute and submission had
acknowledged his Power.

CHAP. XXI. Caesar gives new Orders for the fighting of Pompey, who in a
general battle is entirely defeated.
THE first care of Caesar was, to preserve the Forces he had left under the
command of Cornificius; he therefore dispatched away Courriers to his men that
kept the Passes of the mountains, with positive order, to come up to that
General, to whom he sent a Brigantine, to bid him be ready to receive them.
After this forecast he took a little rest, and then came to Stilide with great
diligence. Carinna, Messala's Lieutenant, had orders to go to Lipara. Agrippa
was to send aid to Cornificius, and Messala to return to Pu^eoli, to make
Recruits, and bring the first Legion to Vibonium. For had he not used all the
Precaution, Cornificius had been utterly lost; for Pompey having declined to
fight him when he offered him Battle; he had retrenched himself in sight of his
Camp, and cut off all Provisions from him; he was at length constrained to
decamp, and by Pompey's Numidian Cavalry was forced into a place called by the
Inhabitants of the Country the fiery Brook. This in all appearance was some
place near mount Etna; and the Land all here about, being burnt and breathing
out sulphurous exhalations, dryes up the Torrents that fall, so that all is
covered with only ashes and dust. Here the Troops of Cornificius had perished
with thirst, if the Succors that Agrippa sent to him by Aronius had not come
in very good time to disengage him in this Extremity. However, Cornificius was
so much puffed up with vanity for this Retreat, that when he returned to Rome,
as a mark of honor to himself, he never came home from Supper from his friends
houses but mounted in triumph upon an Elephant. At the appearance of Agrippa's
Legions the Numidians retreated, and Cornificius joined Agrippa, who had taken
Tindaride, whither he afterward came with all his land Forces, which consisted
of one and twenty Legions, two thousand Horse and five thousand light-armed
Foot. Pompey was not so strong by Land, but had a better Fleet than Caesar.
They made several motions, and had some slight skirmishes; but at length,
Caesar, s^izing upon all the passages of Provision by land, made Pompey's
Forces retire, and reduced him to the necessity of finishing their differences
by a Sea-sight; though Caesar was not very willing to it, because the Sea had
never been favorable to him. However, he found himself obliged to it in
honor, and by the confidence he placed in the Conduct and Valor of Agrippa.
They fixed an appointed day of Battle, and both sides prepared for it. The two
Generals were to meet, each with four hundred Vessels. Agrippa, contriving all
ways to get the Victory, invented a kind of Engine, which succeeded very well:
This was a Grappling hook, made of a piece of Timber five cubits long, covered
over with Plates of Iron, at each end whereof was a Ring of Iron; to one end
was fastened a Scyth, or rather a great Hook, to the other several Cables to
draw it home when any Vessel was grappled. The impatience of the Generals made
them come very betime to the place of Battle between Miles and Naulocus. Their
Soldiers carried on by an equal ardor soon came to handy-blows, and as they
had sufficient leisure to prepare for it, Darts, Piles, Stones, Arrows and
Fire-pots were all employed. That which more particularly appears in Civil wars
you may be sure happened here, where the animosity of particular persons made
the Combat more bloody than if between neighboring Nations, only for the
motive of Glory and Conquest. All the Galleys were grappled by this Invention
of Agrippa, nor could those of Pompey avoid this disadvantageous way of
fighting. The land Forces of both Parties stood as Spectators on the shore
waiting for the event of it with a great deal of apprehension. The Victory was
long dubious, but at last by the bravery of Agrippa it turned in favor of
Caesar. None could behave themselves better than he did upon this occasion. He
was every where. He over-set the Enemies Galleys with the shock of his, which
was the best and strongest of the Fleet, and put several of them out of
condition of fighting, and performed such gallant actions that Anthony
afterward reproached Caesar, that he had not the courage so much as to see the
Navies in Battle order, but lay down in his Gally with his eyes to Heaven, as
one besides himself and frighted out of his senses, and did not rise to show
himself to the Soldiers till after Agrippa had put his Enemies to flight. The
truth of the story is, that at the time of the Engagement Caesar was overcome
with so profound a Sleep that his familiars were forced to wake him to give the
word and the signal for the Charge, and this is the ground of Anthony's
reproach. Caesar, upon this occasion, behaved himself like a man of prudence
and courage. Nevertheless, he gave all the honor of it to Agrippa, whom he
honored with a blew Standard and a rostral Crown. This was so total a Defeat
that Pompey had only seventeen Galleys left of all that great Fleet, with
which he fled to Messina. Caesar only lost three that were sunk; but there
were sunk of Pompey's twenty eight, the others were either burnt or taken. This
great Victory had this remarkable in it, that the same day it was published at
Rome by a Soldier, who, no doubt inspired, proclaimed it aloud, and ran to the
Capitol and laid his Sword at the Feet of Jupiter's Image, as if he had no more
need of it. Pompey, who had so often neglected his advantages in prosperity,
and had no more good conduct in adversity, left his land Forces at the
discretion of the Conqueror, instead of going to them and reassuring them by
his presence; so that Tistenus, who commanded them, went with all his Troops
into Caesar's service. Upon this Pompey forsook the marks and habit of a
General, and sent to those of Messina, that if they intended to retire and save
themselves, they should speedily embark. Pliny had eight Legions at Lilybaeum,
and was marching to assist him according to the Orders he had received. Pompey
was in Messina, a very strong place, and able to maintain a long Siege; but he,
not staying for his Lieutenant, bore through the strait, to throw himself into
the Power of Anthony, whose protection he hoped for in requital of that he had
formerly given his Mother Iulia.

CHAP. XXII. Pompey's flight. Lepidus endeavors to make himself Master of
Sicily. His Soldiers forsake him to serve Caesar, who orders the Affairs of
Rome with great prudence.
LEpidus as we have already mentioned quietly watched the success of this War,
at the head of fourteen Legions in very good quarters. As soon as he heard of
Pompey's defeat he came near to Messina, which had been already assaulted by
Agrippa. Pliny had put himself and Forces into it after Pompey's departure, but
seeing there was no way but surrendering, he sent to the two Generals to
capitulate. Agrippa entreated Lepidus to stay till Caesar's arrival, which at
farthest would be next morning which Lepidus refused, and as he was the
strongest upon the place he received Pliny upon Composition, and added his
Troops to his Army, after which he abandoned the Town to the pillage of the
Soldiers. Caesar arriving at break of day, sent to Lepidus to complain of
these proceedings, as also for his seizing upon several places in Sicilia.
Lepidus fiercely answered, that Caesar had taken upon him all the authority of
the Triumvirate, whereto he had as much right as himself, but the event showed
that if he ever had he knew not how to maintain it. Caesar was one of those
extraordinary Persons, whose wit and gallantry in so high Advancement keep
firm, and still raise them higher; whereas in men of vulgar Spirits it often
happens, that either their wit prejudices their courage, or their valor
their understanding: He went alone to Lepidus his Camp without any other
assistence than that of his own merit, and the Authority he had gained by his
Victories. The Soldiers of Pompey looked upon him with respect, and drew round
about him. Lepidus being told of it, makes haste thither and scatters the
Soldiers, and made them charge Caesar, who was hurt by a Dart thrown at him,
which yet did not hinder him from going to the place where the Eagles of the
Legions were planted, taking one of them which he advanced in the Air,
whereupon all the Legionary Soldiers ran in crowds and saluted him as their
General. Lepidus being the second time abandoned by his Soldiers, quitted all
the marks of his Authority which he could no longer keep, took a mourning Gown,
and after he had remained a good while unregarded in the throng of those who
flocked to salute Caesar, he came and threw himself at his feet. This was a
terrible mortifying spectacle worthy of reflection to see a Tri^^vi^, who had
disposed of the Lives of many noble Persons, to be reduced to beg his own, of
one whom he had so lately insulted over Caesar des^ised him too much to take it
from him, he pardoned him, but took from him the Rank and Authority, and only
left him his Estate and the Dignity of sovereign Priest. The Greek Historians
to give more honor to Caesar's prudence take from his Courage, they report
that he was already assured of the greatest part of Lepidus his Officers before
he went into his Camp, and that he had with him a Troop of Horse, and that
being charged by Lepidus he was hurt, and his Esquire killed close by him, and
that in his retreat he cut to pieces a Cohort of Pompey's; who insulted at his
misfortune. That the next day Lepidus seeing his Army march in order with their
Ensigns advanced to yield themselves to Caesar, he offered to seize upon an
Eagle that a Soldier carried, who insolently told him he must endure it, or it
would cost him his Life: however it was, they all agree that Lepidus came to
Caesar to beg his Life, which was granted him with his Office of Priesthood and
Estate. Su^tonius alone says, that Caesar banished him to Cyrceum. In this
manner the Authority of the Triumvirate without any Competitor, came wholly
into the hands of Caesar and Anthony, and though between them they shared the
greatest part of the world, even that would not suffice their Ambition. Caesar
would not suffer Pompey to be persued, whether it were, that he feared that
carried on by the^r heat in the Chase of him, they would ^o beyond the bounds
of his Dominions, and that Anthony would be offended at it, or that he was
willing to spare the Life of one who was not an Accomplice in the murder of
his Father. These are the reasons he gave out, but those who look into the
bottom of his Politics, believe that he was willing to leave an unfortunate
Wretch upon Anthony's hands, who might be a considerable mischief to him, but
of no use at all; for if he received him kindly he took a Companion, who might
become very uneasy to him, and whenever Caesar thought fit would be always an
occasion of a quarrel, On the other side in putting him to death, he would draw
upon himself the aversion of the Romans, and the particular hatred of all the
party of Pompey the Great. Never any Roman General was ever at the head of so
great an Army as was at this time in Sicilia, he had there forty five Legions,
twenty five thousand Horse, one hundred and sixty thousand light armed Foot,
with six hundred ships of War, without counting the Barks and smaller Vessels
which were without number, and which Caesar restored to their particular
owners, from whom they had been taken. With so much power as this, he saw
himself in a state of being able to undertake any thing, if he had not now been
checked by the insolence of his Soldiers, who out of season always gave him
some occasion of disgust to interrupt the satisfaction of his Victories. Though
he had distributed among them great sums of Money, and promised them much more,
though he had given great store of military Crowns, and other marks of honor,
the Soldiers were not content; when they begin to reflect on their great
number they no longer are obedient to Discipline, and think it a disparagement
to obtain that by Prayers which they carry by force: it was in this manner that
Caesar's Soldiers asked their dismission, and the same rewards that were
granted to those who fought at Philippi. Caesar brought himself out of this
plunge, partly by prayers and partly by threats; he deferred the distributing
their recompenses, till the return of Anthony, and told them the Illyrians had
declared War, and that they were to be vanquished before any thing else were
done; the Legions refused to march before they had satisfaction. Caesar
commanded to bring out more Crowns, Spears and Bracelets, and even purple Robes
for the Officers, giving them the Dignity and rank of Senators; but a Tribune
named Hostitius insolently told him. He might keep those Bawbles for Children,
that the Soldiers had need of nothing but Money and Land, all the Army shouted
at this saying: Caesar thereupon in great anger came down from his Tribunal and
retired. Hostitius with other mutineers went even up to his Tent; but the next
morning the Tribune was not to be found, which terr^fied the Soldiers, and
made every one c^nsult his own safety. At length Caesar dismissed those who had
been at the Wars of Modena and Macedonia, the others he pacified by large
promises, and gave every one five hundred Drachmas which he got out of Sicilia,
that was condemned to pay him six hundred Talents; he established Preton for
his Lieutenant in Africa and Sicilia, where he left the one half of his Troops.
He sent all the ships he had of Anthony to Tarentum, and kept the others with
him to carry him into Italy, his return to Rome was celebrated with all the
honors the Senate and people could invent. The Senators in a Body received
him at the Gates of the City, and conducted him to the Capitol followed by all
the people, Crowned with Garlands of Flowers; where after he had given thanks
to the Gods, they waited on him to his Palace. Seeing himself rid of so
formidable a Rival as Pompey, he thought of establishing and confirming his
power, and to give it stronger Foundation, he would begin with the hearts and
inclinations of the Romans themselves, putting in practice those wise and great
Maxims which rendered his Reign so happy, as justly to acquire it the name of
August. He went to the Senate House, where he gave an account of his actions in
a very Elegant studied Speech, which he caused afterward to be published, the
conclusion of it was, That after he had undergone so many toils, and ^^^t
through so many dangers to put an end to the Civil Wars, be thought himself
very happy, to see his country in profound Peace and perfect Union, and that
to make it sensible of some advantage by it, he remitted all the Arrears that
were due to the public Treasury of what nature soever the Debt were; as for
the public Honors they offered him be only desired the Permission to
sacrifice in public on those days on which he had won his Victories, and a
golden Statue in the Forum with an Inscription which should declare that the
Senate and people of Rome had decreed him that Honor, for having given them
Peace and quiet both by Sea and Land: He refused the Office of Pontifex Maximus
which Laepidus yet enjoyed, and rejected with anger and scorn the Proposition
that was made to put him to death, as an Enemy to his Country. He sent Letters
to his Lieutenants with orders to open them exactly all at the same hour which
he specified, and at the same time execute the Contents of them, this concerned
the Slaves who were lifted under Pompey, and who were declared free by the last
Agreement made with him; they were all seized at the same time. Caesar restored
them to their owners, or their heirs, those whose Masters were not to be found,
were hanged upon Crosses near the Cities, from which they had escaped: last of
all to secure the public Peace, he ordered Sabinus with his Troops to pursue
and bring to punishment all the Thieves that were to be found in Italy and
Sicily, and established at Rome some Companies for the Guard of the City. All
this was executed with so much order and diligence, that the Romans began to
have an extraordinary Veneration for a Man who had so great a prudence at the
age of twenty eight years. Some Cities in Italy, went even to the erecting
Altars to him, especially after one gallant thing he did; he found among the
Papers of Pompey a great number of Letters and Memoirs of the chief Senators,
which were sufficient to occasion among them very troublesome Affairs. He
brought them all into the Forum, and before all the people threw them all into
a fire, protesting that he there Sacrificed all his private Resentments to the
Commonwealth, with a design to give up his Authority as soon as Anthony should
return from the Parthian expedition; if this action appeared pleasing unto the
people, the Protestation which followed it absolutely gained the hearts of the
Romans; they praised him to the Skies, and to show that they desired always to
obey him, they chose him Tribune of the people for all his Lifetime. Besides,
by this they thought to oblige him, to quit the more odious Dignity of
Triumvi^; though Caesar understood their meaning well enough, he did not
decline accepting the Office of perpetual Tribune, which rendered his Person
sacred and inviolable; as for the suppr^ssion of the Triumvirate, he deferred
that till Anthony's return, and sent Bibulus, to communicate to him this
resolution, and after he had disposed of the Government of the provinces he
went against the Illyrians.

CHAP. XXIII. Pompey goes into Asia, where he makes War. The Lieutenants of
Anthony fight and take him. The death of Pompey.
POmpey was at this time at Mitilene, where he understood Anthony was engaged
in a War against the Parthians, who in some encounters had the better of him;
and as Pompey was a man of no great reach, he presently imagined that he might
take Anthony's post in the East, or at least come in for a share of his Empire.
In persuance of this design he sent to the Kings of Pontus and Thracia, and to
draw them to his party proposed great advantages to them; he sent also some of
his Friends to the Parthian King to offer him his Service and his Person, which
he supposed they made great account of by reason of the Reputation of his
Father's name. The return of Anthony to Alexandria did not make him change his
intentions, he resolved only to send to salute him, and desire his Protection:
But all this while he still got Ships together, and levied Soldiers under
pretense of defending himself against Caesar. Anthony advertised of these
doings, ordered Titius to take the Army and Fleet that lay in Syria, and go to
Pompey and make him explain himself what he intended to do; and either to
fight him, or to treat him with all honor and respect if he yielded himself.
In the mean time, those whom Pompey had sent to Anthony, had executed their
Commission very well, they omitted nothing that might incline him to favor
their Master; they laid before him the unmeasurable Ambition of Caesar and the
Protection that Pompey had afforded Iulia, Anthony's Mother; to this they added
that reason of state absolutely required, that Anthony should put a stop to the
progress of Caesar, and withal the deposing of Lepidus and the Consequences of
that example were not forgot, and the forces of Pompey which they magnified,
besides the Glory of protecting the Son of the greatest Man among the Romans.
Anthony, thoroughly informed of the truth, to all these discourses only
answered, That if what they told him of Pompey's intentions were true, he would
soon confirm it himself by coming along with Titius, whom he had sent to him.
But by misfortune to Pompey it chanced, that his Envoys he sent to the Parthian
King, were taken with their instructions. Anthony showed them to these Deputies
who were terribly surprised. They begged Anthony, he would not impute this
perfidiousness to them, and that he would suspend his Resentment against
Pompey, till he had seen what would pass between Titius and him. Furnius,
Anthony's Lieutenant in Asia, had been obliged to Pompey, and not being yet
instructed how Anthony was inclined, had received him with respect, but seeing
he d^^ly gave new occasions of suspicion he sent word of it to Anthony, and
caused Domitius with his Troops to approach: Upon this Pompey complained that
they looked upon him as an Enemy, and yet ^o all this while carried on a
private Intrigue, to gain Pomilius by the means of Curious who was in his Army;
but Curious being taken and executed as a Traitor, Pompey immediately made away
with Theodorus one of his fre^^ Men, who only was privy to the whole secret,
and when he believed, that it was quite smothered and hushed up, he seized upon
Lampsacus a strong City, and well peopled with Italians, with whom he augmented
his Forces: he had already on Foot three Legions and two hundred Horse, which
gave him the boldness to besiege Cy^icum; being beaten from thence, Furnius who
was much stronger than he in Horse charged him in his retreat. Pompey laid an
Ambuscade for him, where Furnius lost some men, and this advantage which passed
for a great Victory, drew into his Service several vagabond Soldiers out of
Mysia and the Propontis. These succors made him think on vast designs: He
assaulted and took Nice and Nicomedia, where he got good store of money but no
provisions, which he stood most in need of, because Furnius with his Cavalry
cut them off from him every way. And as soon as Titius arrived at Procon^^sus
with a strong Army and a great many Ships* Cassius of Parma, Nas^di^s,
Saturninu^, Thermus and Antistius all noble Romans treated with Titius, and
yielded themselves to Anthony; but that which quite made an end of ruining him,
was the defection of Fannius and Libo his Father-in-Law, who were a great stay
to his party, by their credit and their merit; he would have retreated through
the plains of Bithynia, but Titius, Furnius and Amyntas opposed his retreat,
and as they were much stronger than he, it gave them so much Confidence, that
they would not take the pains to fortify their Camp. Pompey undertook with
three thousand Legionary Soldiers to force it, and charging them in the night,
he put them into so great disorder, that there could be no reason given, why he
did not utterly defeat them, unless it were his unlucky fate. They after had
time to rally, and hemmed him on every side, which forced him to demand a
conference with Furnius. Pompey offered to yield himself to him or to Amyntas,
who was a foreign Prince. Furnius told him, That neither he nor Amyntas would
receive him in prejudice of Titius, who had orders concerning him from Anthony,
and that in the condition he was then, he had more need to think of saving
himself, than of sowing Division among them. Pompey then reproached Furnius
with the favor he had done him, in saving him when he was in his hands, and
very much insisted he should not yield himself to Titius, who treated him very
ungratefully. Furnius though he had an extreme regret could not consent to it;
and Pompey retired quite besides himself with grief. He forbid any fire should
be made in his Camp, and fiercely marched away with the most resolute of his
Soldiers, with a design to burn Titius his Ships; and it may be, this
enterprise might have succeeded if by a total excess of misfortune, he had not
been betrayed by Scaurus. This persidious man left him to yield himself to the
Enemies whom he advertised of Pompey's design, which he only conjectured at.
Amyntas was detached with fifteen hundred Horse to pursue him, and soon
overtook Pompey who had only foot with him; all his Soldiers abandoned him,
so that he was forced to yield upon discretion to Amyntas, who carried him to
Titius: all the rest of his Forces surrendered themselves to this General, who
sent Pompey to Miletus, where he sacrificed him to his Resentment. For which
the Romans conceived such a hatred to Titius, that some time afterward they
drove him out of the Circus, where he gave them public Games, and in effect it
was always doubted, whether Titius received orders from Anthony, or whether
Plancus who commanded in Syria, did not abuse the Name and Signet of his
General, to put Pompey to death, out of fear, left Cleopatra should save him
for his Father's sake, or to make use of him for an occasion of division
between Caesar and Anthony. Thus fell the youngest Son of Pompey the Great at
the age of forty years, after he had for some time maintained and kept up his
Father's faction; as much by his own valor as the assistence of that great
Name: Beside that, Wisdom did not go along with his courage; he had to do
with two, whereof one was the wisest, and the other the bravest Captain of
their time. He had too the misfortune of having none about him, but people
whose Souls as mean as their extraction were not capable by their Counsels to
raise his vulgar Genius. This is was that made him loose so many fair
opportunities, and at last precipitated him into his destruction at last.

CHAP. XXIV. The causes of the division between Anthony and Caesar. Anthony's
unfortunate expedition against the Parthians; his return to Alexandria.
IT was believed, that the death of Pompey would have established a Peace
through all the World, especially since Anthony and Caesar might in the extent
and riches of the Roman Empire, find all that was capable of satisfying their
Ambition. It was very probable too, that their distance might take away all
occasions of jealousy that daily grow between Persons, whose Authority is
equal, and who are often together. But yet by their management of Affairs it
was quickly seen, which has been confirmed by so many examples, that the desire
of reigning observes no measures, and the most sacred things. The Passion of
Anthony for Cleopatra, and the gifts he daily gave her of the Provinces that
belonged to the Roman Empire, served Caesar for a pretext to renew the War, and
free himself from a Competitor, who was so formidable, both by his valor, and
his Reputation in the opinion of he Soldiery. Anthony had added to Egypt,
Phoenicia, the lower Syria, the Isle of Cyprus and a great part of Cilicia,
besides Arabia the happy and that part of Iuda^, where the true Balsame grows,
and all this before he went to the Parthian War. These Presents that he made to
a foreign Princess at the Romans cost, very much displeased them; and as they
had nothing of ^^^ir ancient Liberty left them, but the privilege of censuring
the actions of their Governors, there were daily published at Rome very
scurrilous discourses of Anthony's prodigality. Caesar abetted these
murmurings, and privately encouraged them who were discontented, whenas they
farther heard at Rome, that Anthony had given foreign Names to the Children he
had by Cleopatra, calling the Son Alexander, and the daughter Cleopatra; and
adding to them the Sirnames of the Sun and Moon. Anthony had yet remaining in
Rome several Friends, who gave him notice of the discourses that went in his
prejudice; whereupon he published an Apology for himself, wherein he affirmed,
that the Grandeur of the Empire of the Romans was not more conspicuous for the
Conquests, they made than for the liberality they practiced in bestowing the
conquered Provinces, and that true Nobility was multiplied by the posterity
that sovereign Princes left in several places; and that was the reason that
obliged Hercules, from whom he derived himself, not to subject himself to the
single tie of a Lawful wife, but to leave the foundation of several
illustrious Races in all parts of the Earth, where he extended his Conquests.
These false reasons with which he endeavored to justify his Passion seemed
abominable to the Romans, who made profession of a stricter Morality. At this
time too, it was that Anthony marched against the Parthians with thirteen
Legions, ten thousand Gallick or Spanish Horse, and above thirty thousand other
light armed Foot and Horse; but this great preparation that made all the East
tremble, served only to render his retreat more shameful, and to make him
loose that great Reputation which he had gained in all other occasions; at the
very first the Parthians slew one of his Lieutenants, and entirely defeated two
Legions, and even Anthony himself was reduced to such extremities, that he
often despaired of his own safety. At last after he had lost the fourth part of
his Troops, and all his baggage and Engines of Artillary, or Engines, he saved
himself in Armenia, by the advice of a Roman who had been a Prisoner among the
Parthians ever since the death of Crassus. This man counseled him to leave the
Plains and gain the Mountains, where though the ways were difficult, yet he was
free from the insults and attacks of the Enemy, all whose force consisted in
their Cavalry. But though Anthony in this War behaved himself with his usual
bravery; nevertheless the loss he sustained of his best Soldiers, and the
shameful retreat of such a General as he, who in all likelihood was once able
to have conquered his Enemies, made an end of ruining his Reputation. It is
said, that all these misfortunes were the consequences of his Passion for the
Queen of Egypt, for that he had begun the War in a wrong season; and that he
finished it too soon; and lastly, that he had taken no measures rightly, but
those that might hasten his return to Cleopatra, even to the neglecting all
that advantage that was offered him by the division of the Parthians and the
Medes. But that which principally outraged the Romans was, the taking Art^bazus
King of Armeniae, whom Anthony led in Triumph into Alexandria: the Pride of
Rome could not bear, that a Roman General should impart that honor to a
foreign Nation, and that she should be deprived of the advantage of insulting
over vanquished Kings, which for so many years she had enjoyed. Caesar made all
these faults of Anthony be taken notice of, and above all exaggerated the
little value he had for his Country; when he found their spirits sufficiently
exasperated against him, he resolved to send Octavia to her Husband, to the end
he might have a plausible occasion to declare War if he should offer her the
affront of sending her back without seeing her. Anthony was then at Leucopolis,
between Tire and Sidon, where he stayed for Cleopatra with an impatience he was
not able to conceal: what means soever he used to amuse himself and forget her
in the pleasures of his Debauches, he daily left the Table to run to the
Seaside, to see if the Queen were not coming: at last she came, bringing with
her great quantity of Clothing for the Soldiers and a vast Sum of money; at
least Anthony gave her the honor of it when he distributed it; though it is
believed it all came out of his own Pocket. Almost at the same time Niger
arrived, sent by Octavia, who stayed at Athens, from whence she sent him word
that she had brought him Clothes and Arms, Horses and Presents for his
Officers; and that she had brought him 2000 chosen Soldiers all well armed.
This was very heavy news for the Queen: she feared with a great deal of reason,
that the virtue of Octavia joined with the consideration of her brother would
deprive her of the Heart of Anthony, and that she could not prevail against so
powerful a Rival, the moment she appeared. She bethought her self to feign a
deep Melancholy: she abstained from almost all kind of food on purpose to make
herself lean; and when she was near Anthony, she beheld him with languishing
eyes, after a very passionate manner, as one quite besides her self with Love;
she let fall Tears in his presence, and turned away her Face, as if she desired
to hide from him those marks of her grief. And besides all this, their
Flatterers told Anthony, that he was very cruel and hard hearted to let a
beautiful Princess, who loved him with so much Passion, languish so for him;
that her sorrow was ready to take away her life, which she only kept for his
sake: that Octavia ought to be contented with being considered as his Wife,
though he married her but by constraint and upon a politic account; whereas
such a great Queen as Cleopatra had no more but the title of his Mistress, and
yet thought he did her a great deal of honor, if he would be so gracious to
her as not to send her from his presence, which she could not bear without the
loss of her life. These Flatteries prevailed so much upon Anthony's weakness,
that they quite turned his thoughts in favor of Cleopatra. He broke off his
enterprise against the Parthians notwithstanding all the instances of the King
of the Medes who offered to join with him and oppose the Enemies with his
Cavalry accustomed to their way of Fighting, who when they were backed by the
Roman Legions would have totally defeated them. He only contented himself to
make a match between one of the Sons he had by Cleopatra and a Daughter of that
King. And after he had sent word to Octavia she should return to Rome, he
waited on Cleopatra back to Alexandria, where he passed the Winter in all kind
of Pleasures.

CHAP. XXV. Caesar accuses Anthony in the Senate. He declares War against
Anthony. His Forces.
CAesar was not at all surprised at the Contempt Anthony showed for Octavia,
but yet he testified an extreme Resentment for it. As soon as ever his Sister
came to Rome he ordered her to leave Anthony's house where she had always
lived; and it was upon this occasion that Octavia made her virtue be admired:
She said, Though she had a great respect for her brother, yet she could not
dispense with her self to obey him; and therefore conjured him not to force her
to quit the house of a person she would always honor as her husband, in spite
of his inconstancy; and begged him to forget all the resentment he might have
for an injury which only reguarded her alone; adding moreover, that her
interest ought not to oblige him to declare himself Anthony 's enemy, since it
would be a very shameful thing if it should one day be said, that the love of
one woman and the jealousy of another had carried two persons that governed
such a great Empire to plunge the Romans into the mischiefs of a Civil-war.
Caesar left his Sister at her liberty, to do as she pleased; and indeed the
carriage of Octavia did not belie her words. She always kept at Anthony's
house, and took an extraordinary care of the education of his Children, without
making any distinction between her own Children and those he had by Fulvia. She
took into her protection all those whom her Husband sent to Rome to sue for
Offices. She assisted their Pretensions with the Authority she had with the
People; and never left importuning her Brother till she had obtained for them
what they desired. But nothing did more prejudice Anthony's interest than this
behavior of Octavia, though it were quite against her intention; this great
generosity of hers made her Husband's ill usage of a person of her worth seem
the more odious, was that which purchased the general hatred of the Romans;
which was yet more confirmed by what he did at Alexandria. Anthony intending as
it were to spite the Romans, to dispose of the Provinces of his Dominions in
favor of Cleopatra and her Children, erected a Throne of Silver in the
Gymnasium, the place where the young men performed their bodily Exercises: Upon
this Throne were two Seats of Gold, one for him, and another for Cleopatra; and
there in presence of all the People he declared her Queen of Egypt, Cyprus,
Lydia and lower Syria, associating with her Caesarion, the Son she had by I.
Caesar. To the Children which he had by her he gave the Title of King of Kings;
and for their Dominions, to Alexander, the eldest, he allotted Armenia, Media
and Parthia, which he pretended to conquer in a little time, Ptolemy, the
younger, had Phoenicia, upper Syria and Cilicia: then they appeared, Alexander
in a long Median Vest, with a high Cidaris and Tiara, which was the mark of
Sovereignty among those Nations. Ptolemy had Grecian Buskins, a royal Mantle
and a large Hat adorned with a Diadem, after the manner of the Macedonian
Kings, the Successors of Alexander. Thus habited, they came to thank Anthony
and Cleopatra, who embraced them, and immediately two Companies of Guards, all
chosen handsome persons, the one Armenians* the other Macedonians, were drawn
up near these young Princes. But that which appeared most remarkable in this
Solemnity was, that Cleopatra appeared dressed like the Goddess Isis, and ever
after, when she appeared in public, she always wore that habit; and all her
Edicts and Decrees were ever after received as Oracles of the New Isis. Caesar
then thought it was a convenient time openly to declare himself: he accused
Anthony of all these Attempts against the Majesty of the Roman Empire before
the Senate and the People of Rome. Anthony sent to Rome to make his defense,
and to complain of Caesar. He said, He had seized upon all Sicily, without
giving him any share; that he had dispossessed Lepidus, and kept all his
Governments for himself; and that he had divided all Italy among his Soldiers,
and reserved nothing for those that served in Asia. To these Accusations Caesar
answered, That, as for Lepidus, he was obliged to depose him for his conduct,
for which he was justly punished: for the Conquests he had made, he was willing
to share them with Anthony, when he would divide Armenia which he had
conquered; and for the Soldiers that served with Anthony, there was no
likelihood that they would desire some pitiful lands in Italy after they had
conquered Media and the Empire of the Parthians by the great Exploits they had
done in following their General. Anthony was so nettled with this Jear, that he
ordered Canidius, who commanded his Army, to march without intermission toward
the Seacoasts with sixteen Legions to pass over into Europe, and he himself
with Cleopatra came to Ephesus, where his Lieutenants had got together eight
hundred Vessels, whereof Cleopatra furnished two hundred with Three Millions.
twenty thousand Talents and Provisions for all his Forces. Anthony, by the
Advice of Domitius, resolved to send back the Queen into Egypt till the War
was ended; but she, fearing lest Octavia should make an advantage of this
opportunity to come to her Husband and make a Peace, she, by great Presents,
gained Canidius to represent to Anthony, That it was not just to drive away a
Princess with disgrace, who alone maintained almost all the expense of the War.
That, besides, her departure would deprive him of the assistence of the
Egyptians, who were the best part of his Navy. And that he knew there was no
King among the Allies to whom Cleopatra yielded in prudence or understanding,
as it appeared by the manner of her governing so mighty a Kingdom; besides the
experience she had gained in her long acquaintance with Anthony, whereby she
had perfectly instructed her self in the management of the most important
affairs. The good fortune of Caesar and Anthony's evil destiny caused this
Counsel to take place. Cleopatra stayed, and they went to Samos, where, for
preparation for so great an enterprise, they began with all the pleasures that
could be devised; their care was very pleasantly divided; on one side all the
Kings, Princes and Nations from Egypt to the Euxine Sea, and from Armenia to
Dalmatia, had order to send Arms, Provisions and Soldiers to Samos; on the
other, all the Comedians, Dancers, Musicians and Bouffons were obliged to come
to his Isle: so that sometimes a Ship that was thought to be laden with
Soldiers, who conveyed a considerable succor of Arms and Ammunition, proved to
be laden with Players, Scenes and Machines, for the Stage; and whilst all the
rest of the World was in extreme desolation, Joy and all kinds of pleasure
ruled here, as if they had all made choice of this place to retire to: But how
magnificent soever their entertainments were, they wanted their chiefest relish
which was confidence, for Anthony's displeasures had sowred his temper to that
degree that he, as to make him suspect Cleopatra her self, ate of no thing with
her without a Taster: but as this Precaution seemed to be very injurious to
Cleopatra, she undertook to let him see that it was in vain to stand upon his
guard against her adress. She always added life to the entertainment by her
pleasant company, so that once at a meal she proposed a new kind of diversion
of drinking one another Garlands, which, according to the mode of those times,
all the Guests were crowned with, dipping the Flowers of them in the Wine.
Anthony applauded the Frolic, and would begin it with Cleopatra's Garland, as
she very well foresaw; all the outside Flowers of it were poisoned, the Garland
was pulled to pieces and put into a golden Cup full of Wine which Anthony was
just carrying to his Lips when Cleopatra told him, My Lord, said she, now know
Cleopatra better and learn by this example; that all the Precautions signify
nothing against her, if her heart were not interested in your preservation;
whereupon by her order a Criminal was immediately brought, who drank the
poisoned Wine, and expired upon the place. This Action cured Anthony of his
suspicion, or at least made him leave off troublesome Precaution, which it
seems was but useless against the art of this Princess, who could so skilfully
mingle inevitable Snares of death among her pleasures. Every City of Anthony's
Empire had a share in these Sacrifices and sent an Ox thither to be offered:
and the Kings who accompanied him contented who should make the noblest
entertainments; so that it was asked by one, What rejoicing they would make for
a Victory, who made such magnificent Treats just before a bloody War.

CHAP. XXVI. Anthony (with Cleopatra) goes to Athens. Plancus and several
others of his Friends forsake him.
THE stay Anthony made at Samos was very favorable; for Caesar had made no
provision for the War, by reason all Italy mutinied against him, because of the
imposition he laid upon the People. The news of Anthony's approach with such
formidable Forces had augmented this disorder and quite astonished the Romans:
but when they saw that all these Preparations served only to fill the public
Places and the Theaters of the Isle of Samos, Caesar reassured them; and after
he had appeased the People, who grumbled according to custom when money was
demanded; though when they have paid, they never think of it afterward: He
put himself into a posture of disputing the Empire with Forces equal to his
Enemy. And now Cleopatra, envying the honors she had received at Athens, had
likewise a desire to see that City, and was carried thither by Anthony; she
distributed great Gifts to the Athenians, who in recompense were not
behind-hand with their usual Flatteries: they accorded honors beyond the
condition of mortals; and the most noble Citizens were deputed to carry her the
Decree. Anthony, in the capacity of a Citizen of Athens, would be the chief of
the Embassy, he was Spokesman and harangued the Queen in the name of the
People: At length, to give her the utmost of his Passion, he sent order to
Octavia to go out of his house: she obeyed, without murmuring at this horrible
piece of injustice, and retired to her own house, and all Anthony's Children
with her, except Antyllus, who was with his Father. She only lamented her hard
fate, because she was forced to serve for a pretense to a War, whose
consequences must needs be fatal to her. Several of Anthony's friends not being
able any longer to bear with his disorders, abandoned him: but it was not this
nor the choice of a better side that made Plancus leave him, only Inconstancy,
the natural disease of his mind: he had been the basest and most sordid of
Cleopatra's Flatterers, and had abased himself to the lowest employments about
Anthony; even to the writing his bawdy Letters and being his Pimp. And though
he had been Consul, General of an Army, and Governor of a Province, he was not
ashamed to appear at a Feast among the Actors in a Play and represent Glaucus,
a Sea God. It was doubtless a very pleasant spectacle to see a man of his
quality naked and painted green, and crowned with Reeds, with a long Beard down
to his middle, and a huge Tail of a Fish, dancing upon his Knees, and making a
hundred ridiculous postures: nor did this Action fail of making him be scorned.
Anthony abused him and reproached him for some Extortions whereof he was
accused, which soon made him resolve to go to Caesar with Titius who was his
Nephew. When he came to Rome, he accused Anthony before the Senate of several
Crimes with so much heat, that Coponius could not forbear saying to him, Sure
you never observed these Crimes of Anthony but the evening before your
departure: by which he reproached either his baseness in enduring those Crimes
so long, or his sottishness not to find them out sooner. But Pollio's
proceeding was as generous as Plancus's was infamous. Pollio had retired into
Italy after the Peace was made at Tarentum; nor had he ever seen Cleopatra or
served under Anthony since his Intrigue with that Princess: yet when Caesar
pressed him to follow him in this War, he frankly said, I have served Anthony
better perhaps than he has rewarded me; but however the Courtes^^s he has done
me are more known than the Services I have done him; and therefore, without
engaging my self in your quarrels, I intend quietly to stay here, and be at the
discretion of the Conqueror. Anthony's Will and Testament was at Rome, in the
hands of the Vestals, and Plancus it was who gave Caesar notice of it, who, as
he would omit nothing that might serve his designs, demanded the sight of it:
the Vestals refused to deliver it into his hands; but by an equivocating turn
they told him, If he would come and fetch it, they would not hinder him. Caesar
went and took it; and when he had it, he chose out the Places that were most
odious in it, and read them in full Senate. But this action was not approved of
at all. They said, It was against the course of nature to punish a man whilst
living for what he ordered to be done when he was dead. Caesar chiefly insisted
upon Anthony's disposing of his Sepulture: he ordained, That if he dyed in
Rome, his body should be carried in funeral pomp through the principal places
of the City, and then sent into Egypt to Cleopatra. But all the bustle that
Caesar made upon this occasion did not succeed according to his wish; so that
he was forced to go to work another way. Calvisius accused Anthony publicly,
That he had given Cleopatra the famous Library of the Kings of Pergamus
composed of two hundred thousand Volumes; That he had trod on her Toe at a
public entertainment, and permitted the Ephesians to give her the quality of
their Sovereign in his presence. But more particularly he insisted on two
Articles: One was, That Anthony, having received Love Letters from Cleopatra,
he had read them in his Tribunal, where he sat judging the differences of
several Kings of Asia. The other, That one day, when Furnius the most eloquent
Orator among the Romans was pleading before him, he left the Orator and the
Audience to follow Cleopatra 's litter that by chance passed by. Nothing gives
us a truer Image of the Roman gravity than this Passage in the History. The
heads of this Accusation, that at present appear frivolous and ridiculous, were
all nevertheless seriously proposed by Calvisius. Nay, Plutarch affirms, they
were such shrewd ones, that the Accuser invented one part of them. Certain it
is that they appeared of that moment and weight to Anthony's Friends, that they
began to bestir themselves and solicit in his favor, to hinder the Decree of
the Senate, by which he was to be declared an Enemy to the Senate and People of
Rome. Therefore they sent Geminius to Athens to make the last attempt upon his
Temper. The arrival of this man so much alarmed Cleopatra, that she offered him
a hundred signal Affronts and several very abusive Jears. But he not being
mortified at it, she caused Anthony one day to ask him the cause of his coming.
Geminius answered, That things of that nature were not to be talked of over a
bottle; and, that it was necessary to be sober and fasting when they were to be
examined; but this he was sure of, that both before and after a Debauch he saw
matters would go well enough, if Cleopatra were sent into Egypt. Anthony was
troubled at this discourse, and Cleopatra said to Geminius, You do very wisely
to own the truth, without staying till it is extorted from you by torments.
Geminius did not think it convenient to stay for the effect of this Threat, but
fled to Rome, followed by several other Romans who were disgusted at the
audaciousness of Cleopatra and the insolence of her Parasites. The most
considerable persons of those who forsook them were Syllanus and the famous
Dellius, who at a meal where the Wine was not to his mind said, That they made
them drink Vinegar there, whilst at Rome, Sarmentus drank Falernian Wine. This
Sarmentus was a kind of a Bouffon to Caesar. As there is in all Courts some
certain moments when every thing that is spoke is interpreted to have a secret
meaning in it; This raillery of Dellius was so ill taken by Cleopatra, that she
gave order to have him murdered. Dellius, who had notice of it, and not being
willing to hazard himself to gain the reputation of a resolute man upon this
occasion, was it may be glad of the opportunity to follow his inclination, and
justly deserve the name of Vaulter, which afterward Messala gave him at Rome.

CHAP. XXVII. The Forces of Caesar and Anthony. They write sharp Letters to
each other. Caesar approaches Anthony's Army which lay at Actium.
NO sooner did Caesar find himself strong enough to carry on the War, but he
publicly proclaimed it against Cleopatra, and abrogated the Authority of
Anthony, who had already in a manner parted with it in favor of that Princess.
The Decree implied besides, That Anthony was no longer Master of his own will,
by reason Cleopatra with her Philtres had taken away the very use of his
reason; so that he was not to be accounted as any body in this War, which was
only managed by Mardion her Eunuch, and Iras and Charmia her Women, who
absolutely governed Anthony 's Empire. The Prodigies too were not forgot: The
Town of Pisaurum that Anthony had rebuilt on the shore of the Adriatic Sea was
swallowed up by an Earthquake. At Alva a Statue of this Triumvir sweat for many
days together. The Temple of Hercules at Patras was burnt by Lightning. And at
Athens the Image of Bacchus that stood among several other Images of the Gods
was alone ^verthrown by the Wind. The same thing happened to two Colossus's
called the Antonii. Last of all, The Swallows that had built their nests in the
Poop of Cleopatra's Admiral Galley were driven away by other Swallows who
destroyed what the former had made. All these were explained very justly, but
'twas after Anthony's Defeat. The Forces of the two Triumviri were answerable
to the Empire they shared between them; nor were there ever seen two so great
Powers oppose each other. Anthony commanded over all the Provinces from Armenia
and the Red Sea to the Adriatic Gulf and the Euxine Sea; and Caesar had all
those from Sicily to the Ocean. All the Kings of Asia that were Allies to the
Romans followed the fortune of Anthony; namely, Tarcondemus King of Cilicia,
Archelaus of Cappadocia, Philadelphus of Paphlagonia, Mithridates of Comagena
of Thrace, these Princes were in person in his Army. But Polemon King of
Pontus, Malchus King of Arabia, Herod King of the Jews, and Amyntas King of
Galatia, only sent their Troops; besides these, Bacchus King of Mauritania,
who brought his along with him; all these together made an hundred thousand
Foot and twelve thousand Horse, The Navy was composed of five hundred Ships of
War, whereof some had eight or ten Banks of Oars. Caesar in his Party had no
foreign Princes, and his Army amounted to b^t eighty thousand; but he was as
strong in Cavalry as his Enemy. He had but two hundred and fifty Vessels, all
light, and very well manned with Sailers, Rowers and Soldiers; whereas those
of Anthony were vast, high and heavy, and wanted Rowers; so that he was forced
to take up all the Artisans and Laborers of Greece to employ them at the Oar.
Then their Hatred showed it self by very bitter Letters; and when Caesar
reproached Anthony with his Love for Cleopatra and the Prodigality of his
Feasts, he on the other side put him in mind of the famous Feasts of the twelve
Gods, where Caesar and the other Guests were clad as they represented the
Deities they adored. To this he added his hasty marriage with Livia, and the
shameful divorcing of Scribonia because she would not bear with the Insolence
of that new Mistress; and all the Roman Ladies with whom Caesar had ever had
any Gallantry or Intrigue were brought upon the Stage. He even proceeded to tax
him with Cowardice at the Battles of Modena and Sicily, with all those
scandalous Circumstances that were mentioned before; whereupon Caesar wrote to
him, That it was needless to fight any longer with the Pen. That if he would
advance with his Army he should have Ports in Italy where he should land
without any molestation; and that Caesar would draw his Troops far enough from
the Seaside, to give Anthony the liberty of encamping, and putting his Army
into Battalia. To make a return to this Bravade; Anthony, though he were much
older, challenged Caesar to fight a single combat; or if he liked not this, he
offered to give him Battle in the Plain of Pharsalia, where I. Caesar and
Pompey had formerly decided their Differences. So each of the Generals
endeavored to manage it to his own advantage, in striving to make his own
Dominions the field of Combat. But Fortune ordered it should be otherwise. At
that time Anthony was at Actium, where, while he spent his time to no purpose,
Caesar went from Tarentum, where his Fleet lay, and surprised Toryne, a City
near Actium. This Exploit astonished Anthony's Soldiers, because his Legions
were not yet arrived. But Cleopatra, to re-assure them, made flight of it, and
said, What matter is it if Caesar has taken the Scummer, alluding to the word
Toryne which signifies so. The Town of Actium, which this action has made so
famous, was seated upon a point at the entrance of the Gulf of Ambracia on the
Coast of Epirus, between the Islands of Corcyra and Cephalonia. Anthony had
retired all his Ships into the Gulf, whither Caesar, the next day after the
taking of Toryne came and offered him Battle. Anthony was at a grievous plunge
because his Vessels wanted Soldiers to man them. But that drew them into their
fighting posture with the Oars a-peek, as if he intended to bear down upon the
Enemy. This strategeme had its effect. Caesar, who durst not engage him in that
narrow passage, retreated off to Sea, but the other came not off the Gulf, and
as he perfectly knew the Country thereabouts, on every side he cut off the
Water from Caesar's Camp, which threw his Army into great distress. Agrippa
omitted not to take the Cities of Leucadia and Petras, and seize upon Corinth.
These happy Successes occasioned Amyntas and Dejotarus to declare for Caesar.
Domitius, carried on by their Example, saved himself in a Cock-boat, and came
to Caesar, whose side he did not much favor by his revolt, because Anthony,
according to his natural generosity, sent him his People and all his Equipage,
though it were against the opinion of Cleopatra her self, which so sensibly
touched Domitius who was sick already, that he was not able to outlive the
grief of abandoning a man who by kindness revenged himself for his
perfidiousness. In the mean time Canidius arrived with the Legions, who as he
saw the danger nearer, he changed his mind concerning Cleopatra: He would have
had Anthony send back the Queen, and himself go into Macedonia, and fight by
Land with so much more advantage, because Dicomes, King of the Getes, promised
him a powerful assistence. Then said Canidius, One ought not to regard a false
kind of shame, in having Caesar Master of the Sea, where his Soldiers had
gained a great deal of experience during the War with Pompey. That it would be
a renouncing both sense and reason, to put to the hazard of the Sea and Winds a
Victory which by Land they were certain of by the Valor and Experience of
their General, who to this day had kept up the title of Invincible; and by the
Courage of their Soldiers whom he had tried in so many dangers. Anthony was
very much inclined to follow this Advice; but Cleopatra biased him the other
way, and obliged him against his will to hazard both his Empire and his Life in
a Sea Fight. Here also it was that Anthony had like to have fallen into a very
great danger. And this may serve for an Instruction to persons of his rank, not
too freely to expose themselves, when they are near the Enemies. They had made
a kind of Causey, which ran out very far into the Sea, to go from Anthony's
Camp to his Fleet; as he passed often in this place without any distrust, and
slenderly accompanied; some of Caesar's Soldiers having notice of it by a
Slave, made out a Party to carry him off; and came so near, that they took the
Officer that marched before him: they had likewise taken Anthony, if their
Impatience had not discovered them too soon; he had much a-doe to save himself;
and Caesar's men retreated with their Prisoner, extremely troubled at their too
much haste.

CHAP. XXVIII. The battle of Actium. The retreat of Cleopatra. The flight of
Anthony. Caesar makes himself Master of Anthony's Navy and his Landforces.
ANthony having taken a resolution to fight by Sea, burnt all his ships of
burden, except sixty that belonged to Cleopatra, and of his Men of War kept
only those that had from three to ten Rows or Oars, which he manned with twenty
two thousand Foot, and ten thousand Archers. As he was putting his Fleet into
order of battle, and going about to give his necessary orders, an old Officer,
a very brave man, and all covered with Scars, thus spoke to him aloud, My noble
General, Do you despise this Sword and this Arm, which my very wounds have not
been able to weaken: That you will place your hopes in brittle Boats* Leave the
Egyptians and Phoenicians to fight at Sea, but put us ashore where we are used
to meet or give death with a firm foot and an assured look. Anthony answered
nothing* he only made a sign with his head, as if it were to encourage him,
though he himself did not seem as if he were very well assured, for when the
Commanders of his ships propo^ed taking away the Sails he opposed it; saying,
He would not have one of the Enemies escape: for four days together, the Sea
ran so high, that it was impossible to fight the fifth; the Wind was down, and
then the two Fleets advanced toward each other with their Oars in very good
order. It was a terrible but a very noble sight, and worthy the reward they
contended for, to see on one side the Shore, where there were two hundred
thousand Men all at their Arms, and on the other side the Sea covered with an
incredible number of Vessels filled with Men; who were just ready to employ
both Fire and Steel for each others destruction. Anno ab U. c. 721. Thirty one
years before Jesus Christ.
Anthony was at the right Division of his Navy, where Publicola commanded:
Calius was upon the left, or according to other Authors Sosius. Marcus
Octavius with Insteius was in the Center. Agrippa Caesar's General kept in the
middle of the Fleet, having Carius upon the right, and Aruntu upon the lef^:
Caesar himself only kept the Command of a reserve to carry relief where it was
needful; they tell us nothing more of the order of the two Fleets, but we may
believe; that the Vessels that Caesar commanded made a second Line or Division,
and that Cleopatra with her Galleys did the same in Anthony's. This General in
a Brigantine went about encouraging his Men with the remembrance of so many
Victories they had gained under his Conduct. He told them, That this day he
expected the Empire of the World from their valor, and that they might promise
themselves answerable rewards; that the largeness of his Vessels gave them
opportunity of fighting as firmly, and with as much assurance as if they were
on Land; and for this reason he ordered the Pilots not to quit their Posts, but
expect the Enemies at the entrance of the Gulf. Caesar on his side gave no less
hopes to his Soldiers, but with more confidence in regard he was animated by a
happy Augury. At break of day coming out of his Tent to go on board, he met a
Countreyman driving an Ass before him; moved by I know not what Curiosity or
instinct he asked him his Name: My Lord, says he, my name is Eutyches, and I
call my Ass Nicon; the first of these Names in Greek signifies Happy, and the
other Conqueror. This rencounter made Caesar so glad, that he no longer
doubted of the Victory, and published the adventure through the whole Army; and
when afterward he erected a Trophy for the Victory, with the Spurs and
Breakheads of Anthony's Galleys; the Statues of the Man and the Ass were made
in Brass. When Caesar's Fleet was drawn up, he went to the right Wing and staid
to see how the Enemies would work to give the Onset; their Galleys lay as if
they were at an Anchor in the entrance of the Gulf, and lay so till Noon, when
a fresh gale carried Anthony's left Division out of the Gulf. Caesar made his
right, where it was, fall a Stern, to draw them farther out to Sea, that he
might encompass them with his Vessels which were lighter and much better
fitted; his design succeeded, and the battle began here but in a different
manner than usaul. For there was no shock, because Anthony's Galleys were too
heavy, and those of Caesar avoided it; fearing splitting against those huge
Vessels, fortified with thick Timber and iron Spikes, so that this fight
resembled rather an assault. Caesar's Soldiers attacked the Enemies with
Pikes, Javelins, Piles and Fire pots, and they defended themselves with Arrows
and Darts thrown from their Engines planted on wooden Towers Agrippa, whose
experience out-went all the Commanders of his time, stood out with the point of
his left Division to flank Anthony's, which made Publicola advance to hinder
it. Aruntius laying hold on this occasion, bore into the midst of the Enemies
Fleet which he put into some disorder; but the valor of the Soldiers made the
Victory yet doubtful: as they were all of them chosen Troops, they defended
themselves with invincible Courage, and made a great slaughter of the Enemies
that attempted to approach them. When straight they saw Cleopatra's sixty
Ga^lies advance between the two Fleets with all their Sails abroad, this
movement equally surprised both Navies. Anthony's was already in some disorder;
and when he expected some great action from these Galleys which were the best
of his Fleet; he was amazed to see them all of a sudden tack about, and run
toward Peloponnesus withal the Sail they could bear: thus the Historians
relate it after Plutarch, without giving any other reason of this baseness of
the Egyptians, than the timorousness of their Queen; that which they add is
yet more surprising. Anthony had given too many proofs of his Courage, ever to
be suspected of Cowardice; and in this occasion, not only the Empire of the
World, but his own Life was at stake; and there was nothing to make him despair
of Success, for quite contrary the resolution of his Men, and their firmness in
maintaining the Combat, seem to assure him of the Victory, if they had been
but well led on. But when he saw Cleopatra fly, he forgot the care, both of his
honor and safety, to make himself an Accomplice of her Cowardly flight; and as
if he had nothing more to apprehend than her absence, he thought of nothing
then but to run after her. He threw himself into a Gally, with only Scellus
and Alexander the Syrian, abandoning his Soldiers, that so generously exposed*
their lives for his interest, and followed the Course that Cleopatra stood. She
soon knew him, and put a flag abroad at the Prow of her Gally; he came near,
and when he was aboard, he retired to the Prow without so much as seeing the
Queen, and was a good while alone leaning his head upon his hand. The Gallantry
and Fidelity of his Soldiers cannot be enough admired upon this occasion,
although the General had left them, and the report of his flight was spread all
about the Fleet; they acted like people that would not believe it, and still
fought with the same eagerness, as if he had still been at the head of them,
and perhaps they might have got the Victory which they disputed till five in
the Evening, if the Wind that rose had not separated them, and given the
Enemies the advantage to beat them by piecemeal, for want of a Commander to
rally them. Three hundred Vessels yielded to the Conqueror, but there were but
five thousand Men killed on the beaten side; Caesar having done all he could to
spare the Lives of those brave Soldiers, whom he looked upon as his Subjects:
He made Anthony's flight be every where published, and those that obstinately
defended themselves, he asked who they fought for now. He drew off his
Soldiers, whom he saw too eager after the slaughter, and gave here such marks
of his Clemency, as served to efface the memory of the battle of Philippi, and
the horrible Proscriptions of the Triumvirate. He granted a general pardon
before it was desired, and satisfied himself with the Punishment of a very few,
and those his particular declared Enemies. Caesar lay in his Gally upon the
place, and the next day went ashore. The Legions of Anthony testified no less
faith and affection to their General, than the Soldiers of his Fleet. Though
several of them had seen his retreat, yet they could not tell how to believe
that he, who so often had experience of the inconstancy of fortune, and had
still surmounted all his misfortunes with greater Courage, should be capable of
leaving all, having sufficient Forces to dispute the Empire, there remaining
nineteen Legions entire, and twelve thousand Horse; they still hoped he would
come and put himself at the head of them, and try a second battle; and though
at last they lost that hope, and were quite surrounded both by Sea and Land,
they kept themselves yet seven days in their Camp; but the flight of Canidius
and all their chief Officers, so broke their measures that they resolved to
accept of the conditions that Caesar offered them. Thus the Roman Empire so
long torn by the Ambition of three men, at last with much Joy submitted to the
Command of one alone, hoping to see an end of all the mischiefs that were
caused by the Divisions of the Triumviri; all whose Authority by this Victory
was united in the Person of Caesar.

CHAP. XXIX. Anthony 's displeasure against Cleopatra. He retires into Libya,
and returns into Egypt.
Anthony was still taken up with those Melancholy reflections, the present
condition of his fortune inspired him with, when he perceived some light
Galleys of Caesar's that rowed up to him; in spite of all his despair, he
could not bear that his Enemies should come and brave him without being able to
defend himself. He therefore commanded the Pilot to tack about and face them;
this dispensed them all except one, whereupon there appeared a man with a
Javelin in his hand, that came up to him very fiercely, threatening him; Who art
thou, cries Anthony, that have the Insolence to dare pursue them? I am,
answered he, Eurycles the Lacedemonian brought hither by the good fortune of
Caesar, to revenge my Father whom you put to death. This was Lachares whom
Anthony had punished for his extortions and oppressions: however Eurycles durst
not engage Anthony's Gally, but attacked Cleopatra's Admiral, and gave him so
rude a shock, that he ran him all on one side, and easily took him and another
Vessel laden with all that Princess's Equipage. After he retired with his
Prize, which was very rich, Anthony fell again into his Melancholy, and
continued so three days without seeing the Queen, hindered either through shame
or anger. They arrived so at Tenarus, where Cleopatra's women so bestirred
themselves, that they brought them to see one another, and to eat together; in
this place several of Anthony's Vessels came to him, and some of his Friends
who informed him of the total defeat of his Fleet; but believing his Legions
held out yet, he sent to Canidius to retreat through Macedonia, and return into
Asia. Then he purposed to retire into Africa, and assembled his Friends, to
exhort them to retire and take their measures for their safety. After which, he
made a Vessel draw near wherein was all his Money, and what else he had of
value, which he gave them to divide among them. They all refused his Presents,
and weeping told him, They would always follow his Fortune. This testimony of
their Fidelity moved him so much to Compassion, that he could not refrain
Tears: Complaining of his fortune that put him out of Capacity of giving them
tokens of his acknowledgement and gratitude, who had given him such signal
marks of their affection; he added that he should very much injure them, if he
should suffer them any longer to be entangled in his Misfortunes. So he
absolutely Commanded them to retire themselves, and wrote to Theopilus
Governor of Corinth, to grant them refuge till they had made their Peace with
Caesar. After he had given these orders he went into Africa; from whence he
sent Cleopatra into Egypt, and remained almost alone, wandering through the
Deserts of Libya, without any other company than Aristocrates and Lucilius; one
a Greek, and the other a Roman, both excellent Rhetoricians. Lucilius was he
that saved Brutus, from being taken at the battle of Philippi; and ever since
following Anthony, even to his death continued his affection. But Anthony then
heard that the Governor had revolted to Caesar, which put him into such a
violent despair, that he attempted to kill himself. His Friends hindered him
from that fatal resolution by their Prayers and Remonstrances, and persuaded
him to return to Alexandria, where he found Cleopatra about an enterprise, that
showed the greatness of her spirit. As that neck of Land which joins Asia and
Africa is but three hundred furlongs over, this Queen drew her Galleys upon
Carriages into the Red Sea; where she designed to embark her self withal her
Treasures, and the most affectionate of her Subjects; and go and plant her self
in some remote part of the World, far from the dangers of War, and the fear of
slavery. But the Arabians near the City of Petra, that were Enemies to the
Egyptians, burned those Vessels that were first transported thus, which made
Cleopatra abandon that design, and apply her self to fortify the avenues of
her Kingdom, which were of very difficult access. Anthony's behavior was very
different, he showed nothing but a shameful weakness: He shunned all Company,
and built a house near the Pharos, far out into the Sea; where he shut himself
up without either Friends or Domestics, to imitate Timon, as he said, since he
had no less reason than that Athenian to hate mankind, that seeing himself
betrayed by those whom he had most obliged, this perfidiousness gave him
occasion to suspect and hate all others. In this retirement Canidius brought
him the News of the loss of his Legions, and here he heard how Herod King of
the Jews, and all the other Kings of Asia had quitted his party, to take
Caesar's side. He could no longer force his natural Temper, and as debauching
is a great relief to people of his humor against all their troubles; he
quitted his Cell, to fall a-feasting upon the Solemnity of Caesarion's being
received into the degree of young men, and Antyllus, his Son by Fulvia, his
putting off a Gown all of one color, and without any ornament; for the Romans
distinguished the ages of their Children, by peculiar habits; the first was the
Praetexta or painted Gown, like our flowered Stuffs, which they wore till
fourteeen; the Pura or white Robe, which was worn till eighteen or twenty, and
then they took the degree of young men, and every one wore Clothes according to
his quality. All this was usually performed with great Ceremonies, which served
Anthony as a pretense to set on foot again the Society or Club they had
formerly, but instead of the name it had of the Inimitable Life, they called
it, (...), Synapothanoumen^i, that is, of those that dye together. In the mean
time Cleopatra made trial of all sorts of Poisons upon Criminals, even to the
biting of S^^p^^^s; they say, that after many Experiments, they found that the
sting of the Asp gave the quickest and easiest Death, and there is reason to
believe, she from that very time made choice of that kind of death, if her ill
fortune should drive her to an extremity.

CHAP. XXX. Caesar goes into Italy. He pacifies the Soldiers, and besieges
Alexandria.
CAesar was yet in Italy, whither he was recalled by Agrippa's Letters, after
he had passed one part of the Winter at Athens and the other at Samos. The
occasion of his return into Italy was the Mutiny of his Soldiers whom he had
sent to Brundustum after the Victory. After their usual Custom they asked
their Rewards and their Discharge. In his passage he had like to have been a
Castaway twice; the first time upon the Coast of Italy, and the other near the
Ceraunian Mountains, where he lost several of his Vessels. He stayed at
Brundustum but twenty seven days, to appease the Soldiers and give orders,
after which with his Navy he sailed into Syria, while his Army marched a^long
the Coasts of Africa to attack Egypt on the other side. All the Kings of Asia,
Allies to the Romans, came to assure him of their obedience; but none appeared
more forward than Herod, who went as far as Rhodes to lay his Crown at Caesar's
Feet, and offered him his Person and his Troops. This Prince had very great
obligations unto Anthony, from whom he held both his Kingdom and his Life, and
for that reason he had maintained his Interests in the East with so much Zeal
that it was not doubted, but Caesar would treat him as one of his greatest
Enemies. Herod himself had so little hopes of the success of his voyage, that
in persuance of his natural bent to Cruelty, he left order with two of his
Confidents to put his Wife Mariamne, whom he passionately loved, to death, in
case he miscarried, and Caesar were not disposed to pardon him. This Secret was
revealed to Mariamne by one of his Instruments, which she no^ being able to
keep, but reproaching her Husband with it at his return to Iudaea, was the
cause of the death of this unfortunate Princess, who for her admirable beauty
and her noble race, which was that of the Maccabees, deserved a gentler
destiny. Caesar to give a famous instance of his Clemency, pardoned Herod, gave
him his Crown, and received him into the number of his Friends. Yet he refused
him the Pardon of Alexander the Syrian, who was one of Cleopatra's most
dangerous Flatterers, and for that reason very much esteemed by Anthony, whom
he betrayed after a very base manner. Anthony had sent him to the Kings of
Asia, to keep them in his Interests, and this perfidious Villain was the first
that persuaded Herod to follow the Fortune of Caesar; to whom this Treason
seemed so odious that he put him to death notwithstanding all Herod's
Entreaties. Anthony and Cleopatra, seeing themselves abandoned by all their
Allies, resolved though too late to send Euphronius, their Childrens Tutor, to
make some Proposals to Caesar. Cleopatra asked the Kingdom of Egypt for her
Children, and Anthony desired he might live as a private man at Athens, if
Caesar was not willing he should tarry in Egypt. He absolutely rejected
Anthony's Propositions; and sent to Cleopatra, That he would refuse her nothing
that was just and reasonable, if she would rid her self of Anthony or drive him
out of her Kingdom. With this Answer Euphronius returned, and with him Thyreus,
a freed-man of Caesar's, he was a man very cunning, and very fit to manage an
Intrigue; who coming with a message from a young Emperor to an ambitious
Princess possessed with a great opinion of her own beauty, had no difficulty of
access to her. But these secret Conferences between him and Cleopatra, and the
honors she did him, threw Anthony into such a furious Passion of Jealousy,
that he made poor Thyreus be taken and cruelly scourged, and in this pickle
sent him to Caesar with Letters, That he had chastised Thyreus for his
Insolence, and because he insulted over him at a time when his ill fortune had
put him into an ill humor: But added he, If this proceeding of mine offend
you, you have Hipparchus, one of my freed-men, in your hands, whip him, or hang
him if you please, and so we shall be even. But this was a pleasant way of
being revenged upon Hipparchus, the Son of Theophilus, Governor of Corinth,
who was the very first of Anthony's freed-men that went over to Caesar.
Cleopatra omitted nothing to clear Anthony's mind of Jealousy and Suspicion;
she redoubled her Fondness and Caresses; and whereas she used to celebrate her
Birthday with great Feastings and Solemnities, she neglected that; but on
Anthony's Birthday she made such a noble entertainment, that all the Guests
were even enriched with the Presents she made them for Anthony's sake. In the
mean time Caesar, having got all his Forces together, surprised the City of
Pelusium, which was delivered to him by Seleucus, and the report went, that
this Governor had received such order from the Queen, who, to justify her
self, delivered his Wife and Children up into Anthony's hands. Cleopatra, near
the Temple of Isis had built a stately building which she designed for her
Sepulcher: into this place was carried by her order all her Treasure; as Gold,
Jewels, Pearls, Ivory, Ebony, Cinnamon, and other precious Woods of those
times. It was filled besides with Torches, Fagots, Tow and other combustible
matter; so that Caesar, who had notice of it, was afraid lest out of despair
she should burn her self in it with all those vast Riches: as he always kept
some kind of correspondence, he sent People to her to give her hopes, that she
might expect all good usage from the esteem he had for her. But in this time he
advanced with his Army and encamped in sight of Alexandria.

CHAP. XXXI. Anthony defeats Caesar's Cavalry. He is forsaken by his men. His
Despair. He wounds himself. Is carried to Cleopatra. His Death.
THE Pretense of so formidable a Rival revived all those sparks of Generosity
in Anthony's breast that seemed to be quite extinct. Caesar's hatred was
declared too well, to let him hope for any thing but dying like a true Roman,
and this Anthony resolved upon. He rallyed all the Troops he had, and made a
Sally upon Caesar's Horse which was advanced. This action showed what Anthony
might have hoped if he had fought by Land as he was advised. He beat this
Cavalry, and forced it home to Caesar's Camp, which he put into disorder; nor
did he ever show more Courage and Conduct than now. After this Victory he
entered Alexandria as in Triumph, and went all armed as he was to Cleopatra, to
tell her the News of his Advantage. He presented one of his Cavaliers to her
which had behaved himself very bravely in the Fight. The Queen rewarded his
Valor with an Armor of Gold; but that very night, this ungrateful wretch
went to Caesar. Anthony was very much troubled with this Man, that showed such
a dangerous Example. He tried to provoke Caesar's Generosity, and proposed a
Duel to him; but he very coldly answered, Anthony had ways enough to dye
without seeking that. He resolved then to make the last Push both by Sea and
Land, with a design to conquer or dye bravely. He ordered his People to treat
him with more magnificence than usually they did. Perhaps, said he to them,
this may be the last Service ye may do me, for it may happen that to morrow
you may have another Master, and ye may see me no more. However, added he, I do
not pretend to lead you where death is more certain than victory. The following
night was troubled by a Prodigy; there was heard a great noise of Voices,
Instruments and Cries, like those of Bacchanals, all this passed through the
City of Alexandria, and went out of the Gate that looked toward the Enemies
Camp. As Anthony had all his life time affected to imitate Bacchus, this
prodigy was interpreted to his disadvantage; and it was said, that this God
abandoned him. At break of day Anthony posted those few Troops that were left
him upon the rising ground near the Town, from whence he sent orders to his
Galleys to engage the Enemy. They advanced in order of Batttel; but as soon as
Anthony's Soldiers came near they held down their Arms and saluted Caesar's,
who returning the Salute, both Fleets joined and moved against the City. All
his Cavalry seeing this left him, and went over to Caesar's Camp. This
unfortunate General, forsaken by his men, and seeing he could not be so happy
to dye with glory, his Arms in his hands, he was forced to go back to
Alexandria quite besides himself with rage and spite, crying out, Cleopatra
had betrayed him, in favor of those whom he had not made War with, but upon
her account. This being told the Queen, the fury and despair of Anthony
terrified her so that she retired to her Monument or Sepulcher, and fastened up
the doors, and let down the Portcullis, the Place being very strong; and then
made a report be spread, that she was dead, which was told Anthony: this sad
news recalled all that tenderness he had for this Princess; Miserable man,
cried he, what do thou stay for longer, when fortune has deprived thee of
all that is worth living for? At these words he entered into a Cabinet, where,
laying aside his Armor, Cleopatra, cried he, my greatest grief is, not that I
am separated from thee, for we shall soon meet; but that I, who have commanded
so many gallant men, should be outdone by a woman in Courage. In this moment
he called Eros, the most faithful of his freed-men, whom he had engaged by
Oath to kill him when he was reduced to a necessity of dying. It was to perform
his Promise that he called for him. Eros drew out his Sword, as if he intended
to perform that fatal Duty, and turning a little a-side gave himself a wound,
which made him fall dead at his Master's Feet. Dear Eros, said he, I thank thee
for showing me what I should do. He then gave himself a blow in the Belly with
that Violence that he fell backward upon a Bed that was near; though the wound
were mortal, yet the blood was stopped by the situation his body was in as he
fell, so that he came to himself, and begged of his friends who were come to
him, that they would dispatch him. But they all ran from him, leaving him in a
condition to move the most insensible to pity; the anguish of his wound, and
the rage to be so cruelly forsaken made him cry out and tumble about the
strive, when Cleopatra hearing of it sent Diomedes to bring him to her. Anthony
understanding Cleopatra yet lived, ceased lamenting, to beg his Officers, who
were then returned, in the most moving manner in the world, to carry him to
her: with much-a-doe they lifted him up to the door of the Tomb. Cleopatra
durst not or could not open it, for she had no body with her besides two of her
Women, but she threw out some Cords from a window. All the People of Alexandria
were present at this sad spectacle, and owned there could be nothing more
lamentable than to see this great man, renowned for so many Victories, bathed
in his Blood and exspiring, holding out his hands to Cleopatra, and weakly
endeavoring to raise himself; and her holding her Head down, and her Body
almost out of the Window, striving with the help of her Women to pull him up.
All the Spectatours showed no less sorrow by their several motions: they
encouraged her, and seemed to assist her with their Cries, for that was all the
help they could give her. At last, after much pain, she drew him up to the
Window, where she embraced him, and laid him on a Bed. Anthony had loved her
too much; and the state he was in was too moving, not to show a real grief. She
tore her Clothes and her Face, and beat her Breast, calling Anthony her Lord,
her Husband, her Emperor; and though she had her self great occasions of
grief, yet that deplorable object before her eyes was more than all the rest.
Anthony conjured her to stop her tears and moderate her transports, and asked
for some Wine; whether it were that he was thirsty or that he thought it would
the sooner end him. After he had drank, he exhorted Cleopatra to endeavor to
save her life if she could do it with Honor, and to that end she might put
more confidence in Proculus than in any else about Caesar; that she should not
make too much reflection upon the cruel turn of Fortune which he felt at the end
of his days, but think what glory he had lived in, famous for so many
Victories, Triumphs and Dignities; and after he had been the first man of the
world, and the worthiest of the Romans, he was overcome by a Roman. He expired
in finishing this Discourse in the moment that Proculus arrived from Caesar.
Dercetes one of Anthony's Guards had given notice of the Death of his Master,
and had carried the Sword with which he slew himself, yet stained with his
Blood. This sad Sight forced Caesar to retire into his Tent. And now the strict
friendship he had had with Anthony, their Affinity, the Dangers they had past
together came into his thoughts. All this joined with his Noble extraction, his
Fame for so many Triumphs and Dignities, followed by such a deplorable end drew
Tears from him. He called his Friends in and laid before them how he had not
contributed any thing to the overthrow of Anthony by any hatred or ambition. He
showed them the Copies of the Letters he had written to him, which contained
nothing but reasonable and just Proposals, and Anthony's Answers full of
Passion and Disdain. After this he sent Proculus to employ all his Art and
Address to seize upon Cleopatra. Caesar passionately desired in his Triumph to
expose to the sight of the Romans, this Queen who had so long triumphed over
one of their Emperors, and was also very desirous to save her Treasures.
Cleopatra would not let Proculus enter; she spoke to him through the Chinks of
the Door. She was heard to ask the Kingdom of Egypt for her Children; and
Proculus exhorted her to put an entire confidence in Caesar's Clemency, and the
affection he had for her. And all this while he considered well all the Avenues
of this monument: when he had taken good notice of them he returned to Caesar,
who the same instant sent Gallus to make her other Propositions; while Proculus
with two others entered by the Window they drew Anthony in at: the Queen was
earnest in discourse with Gallus, when one of her Women perceiving Proculus
make hastily up to her, cried out, Poor Princess, you are taken. At this Cry
Cleopatra turned her Head, and drew out a dagger she had at her Girdle, to
strike it into her Heart: but the Roman caught hold of her Arm. Madam, said he,
will you with the same Crime injure both your self and Caesar, in depriving him
of the most illustrious testimony he can give of his generosity; and make the
best and gentlest of Princes pass for Cruel? He then took the dagger from her
and searched all her Clothes with Care lest she should have any Poison
concealed about her.

CHAP. XXXII. Caesar enters into Alexandria. He visits Cleopatra. Her Death.
The Posterity of Anthony.
THIS News gave Caesar an extreme satisfaction. He saw himself Master of the
World by the Death of his Enemy; and had in his hands that haughty Queen, who
had lifted the Crown of Egypt above the Empire of the Romans. He commanded
Epaphroditus to guard her with exactest care, and yet serve her like a Queen.
He then made his Entrance into Alexandria. And as in all his actions he still
had something of the Politician, he chose Arius the Philosopher to be near him,
who was of this City; and during that Solemnity to give him more respect,
Caesar almost always talked to him, sometimes very familiarly, holding out his
hand to him. He went thus to the Place of Exercises where all the People were
assembled by his order. The Majesty of Caesar followed by so many armed
Soldiers, who breathed nothing but destruction threw the Egyptians into a
mighty fear. They all fell on their Knees and implored his Pardon; and when
Silence was made, Caesar told them he pardoned the People in consideration of
their illustrious Founder Alexander the Great, for the Beauty of the Town which
he admired, and for the Friendship he bore to his Friend Arius their fellow
Citizen: he would needs see the Tomb and Body of Alexander which he honored
with a Crown of Gold and covered it with Flowers according to the custom of
those times. But when they asked him if he would see the Sepulchers of the
Ptolemies too. He answered, He desired to see a great King, not dead Corpses
that were not. Egypt was reduced into a Province, and Caesar caused his
Soldiers to cleanse the Channels of the Nile, which very much contributed to
the fertility of that Kingdom which abounded in Corn. Several Kings, Princes
and Roman Senators begged of him the Body of Anthony to pay their last
respects to it, but he would not deprive Cleopatra of that satisfaction. She
performed it with a great deal of magnificence, and Caesar took care to furnish
her with what was needful for the Pomp of the Funeral. She appeared here with
excess of grief; though Caesar strove to moderate her affliction by the kind
usage of her Children whom he esteemed as his Allies. Only Antyllus, the
eldest of Anthony's Children by Fulvia, was partaker of his Father's
misfortune, as being of an age capable of Resentment, and having been always
bred up with his Father, had imbibed his Sentiments; he was betrayed by
Theodorus, his Tutor; who betrayed him, to rob him of a stone of great value.
Antyllus threw himself at the Feet of an Image of I. Caesar, but this Sanctuary
stood him in no more stead than his Prayers and Tears, for he was by the
Soldiers taken from thence and slain. The traitorous Schoolmaster did not long
enjoy the fruits of his Treason; for he, not confessing his Theft, they
searched him, and found the stone sowed up in his Girdle, and Caesar made him
be fastened to a Cross, where the People of Alexandria, with Joy saw him expire.
Casarion, the son of I. Caesar and Cleopatra, was also delivered up by Rhodon,
to whom this Princess had trusted him. This Son whom she tenderly loved and
sent him with a great Mass of Treasure to Ethiopia; it was for this that this
perfidious Governor deceived Caesarion by the showing him feigned Letters by
which Caesar recalled him to put him upon the Throne of Egypt. When he came to
Alexandria, Caesar was sometime in suspense between policy and humanity, till
Arius made him resolve by this saying, It is not safe to h^ve many Caesar's;
this was an allusion to a Verse in Homer, which was ill cited by this
Philosopher, since it was the cause of Caesarion's death. This death not being
till after that of Cleopatra, and Antyllus slain before was none of her Son,
she had no cause for the increase of her afflictions; but the greatness of her
Courage, made the loss of her Liberty insupportable to her. This Melancholy
with the blows with which she had bruised her Breast, put her into a slow
Fever, which gave her hopes she should soon end her sorrows with her Life; she
had besides resolved to abstain from eating, if Olympius her Physician who
wrote this story had not discovered this secret she had trusted him with to
Caesar. They threatened to put her Children to death, if she persisted in this
obstinacy, this was the only thing she could be sensible of; so she suffered
her self to be dressed, and took all they desired her: then Caesar resolved to
see her; by his Civilities to re-assure her mind. He found her upon a low bed
very plain, and as soon as she perceived him, she rose in her Smock to throw
her self at his feet; her hair was in disorder, and torn in some places, her
face bleeding and scratched, and her breast bruised, her eyes were red with
weeping, and her voice weak and trembling. But yet all these accidents had not
defaced that great beauty, nor the brightness of her eyes, nor the charming air
of her face. Caesar civilly lifted her up, and sat down at her Beds-head. She
began to enter into a justification of her Conduct; but there were too palpable
Proofs against her, so she turned her discourse into humble Prayers and put
into his hand an Inventory of all her Treasure and Jewels. Seleucus,
Cleopatra's Treasurer had followed Caesar, and by a barbarous ingratitude
maintained the Queen had concealed several things which were not in that
account. Cleopatra's choler cannot better be expressed than by the effects of
it, she threw her self out of bed, and ran and took this persidious Officer by
the hair and beat him severely; her anger might be real, but the Character of
this woman may give a suspicion, that it was but a protence to show Caesar her
beautiful shape and body, which she had too great a Confidence in. He did not
appear moved by it, he only laughed at this action, and led the Queen to her
Bed. Caesar, said she to him, after the honor you have done me, to visit me
notwithstanding of the miserable condition I am reduced to, is it not very
cruel, that a vile Slave should accuse me of a Crime, because I laid aside some
trifles; Not, alas, to adorn my self, but to present to Octavia and Livia, to
make use of their intercession to obtain your favor? This discourse very much
pleased Caesar, who believed that they employed a desire she had to preserve her
Life. He assured her, She might keep her Jewels, and that he would keep her yet
more generously than she could hope for, and then retired very well satisfied
with his Success. The fame of Cleopatra's great beauty had inspired all the
young Gentlemen in Caesar's Court with a desire to see her. But above all the
rest, Dolabella one of the greatest Quality, whether moved to it by love or
pity showed the greatest concern for her, and certain it was, that it was he
who informed her of Caesar's intentions, to return to Rome through Syria, and
that he had resolved within three days, to send her and her Children away. Upon
this news, Cleopatra desired Caesar, that he would permit her to pay certain
Funeral Rites to the memory of Anthony, which he granted her; she then caused
her self to be carried to the stately Sepulcher before mentioned, where he was
laid, and there without any other attendance but her two women, she was a good
space without doing any thing besides embracing the Tomb, and pouring forth
abundance of tears; at length the excess of her grief thus broke forth, My
dearest Anthony, said she, I was a Queen and free, nor did these arms of mine
wear chains when they received thee in this Monument; but now I offer thee
these Sacrifices in a base state of servitude, nor dare I even print the marks
of my grief upon this captive Body, that, it seems, is reserved to be an
ornament of the Triumph of thy Enemy; expect therefore no more oblations of
sorrow from thy Cleopatra, she is ready to be forced from thee, and this is the
last token of her love and duty she is able to give thee: No chance was able to
separate us while we lived, but I am afraid our cruel destiny will part us in
our deaths; and as by a strange turn of fate Egypt has afforded thee a Tomb,
so Rome will me, which will be the only courtesy I shall receive from thy
Country: Yet I hope the Deities of those happy abodes, where thou now art (for
those who govern here below, have delivered us up to our Enemies) will not
abandon thy yet living Wife to their insolence, nor shall a proud Conqueror
have the pleasure of Triumphing over thee in her Person; hide me therefore
here, and receive me into thy Tomb, for the greatest Woe I have ever yet
endured, has been the little time that I have lived without thee. After she had
ended these sad Lamentations, she crowned the Tomb and covered it with Garlands
and Flowers, every moment embracing it, as if she designed to grow to it, till
her women took her from thence to carry her into a Bath; when she had bathed,
she attired her self very richly, which she had not done since her Misfortune,
and was served at Table by Caesar's order, with as much Magnificence as if she
had still been seated on her Throne. While she was eating, a Countryman came
and desired to speak to the Queen; the Guards stopped him, and would know what
he carried in a basket that he had in his hand. The Egyptian turned up some
leaves and showed them very large and lovely Figs, and offered some of them to
the Soldiers in so innocent a manner, that they let him go in. As soon as
Cleopatra had dined, she commanded all to void the Room except Iras and
Charmion who had always attended her. These two women shut the Gates after the
Queen had sent her Tablets carefully sealed up to Caesar, who as soon as he
opened them imagined what had happened: She there complained of her sad fate, and
begged him to lay her body by Anthony. He immediately sent people in all haste
to prevent the mischief he feared; they found the Guards very quiet, and ran
hastily into the Queens Chamber, and found her laid upon a Golden bed, adorned
with her Royal Robes in the posture of one a-sleep. Iras was laid dead at her
feet, and Charmion who was yet breathing, was placing her Diadem right; one of
Caesar's Messengers very angrily said to her, Is this well done Charmion? Very
well answered she, and as becomes a Princess descended from so many Kings; she
said no more, but expired at her Mistress feet. It is yet uncertain which way
Cleopatra killed her self so suddenly and so easily, it was believed, it was by
the poison of an Asp that bit her, and Caesar seemed to confirm this opinion by
her image he carried in Triumph with an Asp fastened to her Arm. They say that
this Serpent was brought her hidden under the Figs, as she had contrived, that
it might sting her as she put her hand into the Basket, and that perceiving it,
she said, holding out her Arm, Thou art there then; others say she kept one on
purpose, and enraged it by pricking it with a golden Needle, but all this is
but conjectured, as that she carried poison in a hollow Bodkin she hid in her
hair. For there appeared on her body no spots or marks of Poison, but only two
small pricks on her Arm scarce to be perceived, and no Asp was to be found in
the Sepulcher; but they imagined they found some kind of track in the Sand on
that side next the Sea. Caesar was extremely troubled at her death, as being by
it deprived of the noblest ornament of his Triumph: however, he could not but
admire the greatness of her Courage, who notwithstanding the weakness of her
sex, preferred death before the loss of Liberty. He ordered her a very
magnificent funeral, and her body as she had desired was laid by that of
Anthony; and her two women were interred with Pomp in memory of their Fidelity.
Thus this Princess, whose Wit and Beauty had made so great a noise in the
World, died in the flower of her Age, at thirty eight years old. She reigned in
Egypt twenty two years, fourteen whereof she past with Anthony, and all that
while had a total ascendent over the Soul of that Emperor. Caesar preserved
her Statues entire, but beat down all those of Anthony; but the consideration
for Cleopatra's memory did not contribute so much to the preservation of her
Images, as the thousand Talents which Archibius one of her Friends gave Caesar
for that end. Those therefore erected to Anthony's memory were entirely
demolished both in Egypt and Rome, where the Senate pronounced his memory
infamous, and decreed that none of his Family should bear the name of Marcus.
He died at the Age of fifty three, or as some say fifty six years, and by his
three Wives left seven Children. The fortune of Alexander and Ptolemy his Sons
by Cleopatra is unknown, but for his Daughter young Cleopatra, Octavia took
care and bred her up with her Children, and married her to Iuba King of
Mauritania one of the most learned and most virtuous Princes of his Age.
Antyllus his eldest Son by Fulvia, was slain as before mentioned, and Julius
Antonius the youngest, was very much esteemed by Caesar, to that degree that
Octavia, whose Generosity for that unfortunate Family was without bounds,
married him to Marcella, one of her Daughters by her first Husband. He
afterward indiscreetly engaged himself in the intrigues and debauches of
Iulia, Augustus Caesar's Daughter; which Crime was the cause of his death:
Octavia had by Anthony only two Daughters, who were both called Antonia. The
eldest married Domitius, Nero's Grandfather, and the youngest who inherited
both her Mothers beauty and virtue, was married to Drusus the Son of Tiberius
and Livia, and Son-in-Law to Caesar. From this Marriage came Germanicus, who
was esteemed the greatest General of his time, and the most accomplished Person
among the Romans, and Claudius who was Emperor before Nero, Caius, Surnamed
Caligula, the Son of Germanicus, did also govern the Roman Empire three years
after Tiberius. So that Anthony's Family in spite of their unfortunate
destiny, possessed the Throne and gave three Emperors to the Romans.

FINIS.

