Diaphanta: OR, Three Attendants on FIAT LUX. Wherein Catholic Religion is
further excused against the opposition of several Adversaries. 1 Epistola ad
Odoenum, against Dr. Owen. 2 Epistola ad Croesum, against Mr. Whitby. 3
Epistola ad Ampibolum, against Dr. Tailor.


And by the way an Answer is given to Mr. Moulin, Denton, and Stillingfleet.

Quare fremuerunt gentes, and populi meditate sunt inania.

1665.

The occasion of this first Epistle.
THe Author had wrote a little book called Fiat Lux, to show that wrangling
about Religion is irrational. A Protestant, understood afterward to be Dr.
Owen, set forth Animadversions against that book. And this Epistle acquaints
the Doctor with some of the ill qualities of those his Animadversions.

I. An Epistle to the Author of the Animadversions upon Fiat Lux.
SIR,
I Was in my Journey in the North, far enough from London, when your
Animadversions upon Fiat Lux came forth. Nor did I ever set eye upon them, till
my return in February, about half a year after: which I tell you Sir, to excuse
my silence. And now in brief: For your labor I thank you; for your endeavor I
pity you; for your purpos I pardon you: that being as I beleve, intended for
Gentlemen's satisfaction, the othet for Fiat Lux his confutation, this for the
Authors confusion.

I may not go about to reply unto you; because this would be against the very
end and principles of Fiat Lux it self, which speaks forth nothing more then
this, That Controversies about Religion are vain and fruitless. And lest this
should not be able to detain me from any such reply, you add your own threats,
That if I shall dare to write again, you will make me know what manner of man
you are. However Sir, let we crave leave to thank you for the pastime your
Animadversions have given me since my return.

But Sir, you mistake the very drift and design of Fiat Lux, which makes you to
err ever and anon, throughout your whole Book, whiles you take that as spoken
absolutely which is only said upon an hypothesis of our present condition here
in England, distraction, disputes, and wars, in order to a contrary end of
unity, love, and concord, designed by Fiat Lux; and the Prosopopeia's brought
in by me, as Solomon in his Ecclesiastes makes the fool and atheist ever and
anon to speak their minds, these you conceiv to be my doctrine. By virtue of
these capital mistakes, what by me is said of the obscurity of God, Nature, and
Providence, is with you impertinent; that of Light and Spirit, impious; that of
Plea of Parties, frivolous; that of Reason, dissonant and to no purpos; that of
Scripture blasphemous; that of the History of Religion, no less inconsequent
than untrue. In a word, this thing, that thing, every thing, a wild, dishonest
illiterate discourse.

Some would wonder, that he who writes in confutation of a Book, should be
himself the only man that understands it not. But the reason is apparent: It is
your only advantage to mistake. The whole discourse of Fiat Lux chained
together, one part with another, from that which is supposed to that which is
designed, would breath so much of charity and sobernes, that my Commentatour
could not have told how to make any mad versions upon it. It is not yet too
late. Now that you have finished your Animadversions, or Comment, or Notes upon
it, you may do well to take my Book again into your hands; read it calmly, and
understand it.

That which you speak so frequently of Fiat Lux his ignorance, is not
altogether amiss: for he pretends not much to learning, although he knows what
he says. But yet Sir, if you had defied and villified him with less violence,
and more seldom, and not so universally in every point of history, language,
and philosophy, nor just then when you had least cause, it had been more for
your honor. A third part of your Book, which is taken up in talking of my
ignorance and other qualities, might well have been spared, had you had
arguments to demonstrate it.

And in my mind you too much forget your self, when you recount so often with
regret and anger, that some gentlemen of the land should through their own
inconsideration, have any liking of a Book which you judge so slight, aerie,
vain, fallacious, and simple. As if they had none, and you all the judgment of
discerning. Gentlemen, Sir, must be allowed a sens of Religion as well as
Ministers; and their portion of reason must not therefore be less, because their
Blood is more noble, the company they keep more accomplished, and their
education better. They have the body, although they wear not the Cloak of
Religion, and masters they are of their own reason, tho not of yours. This is
one difference between Catholic countries and ours; that there the Clergyman
is only regarded for his virtue and the power he has received, or is at least
believed to have received from God in the great ministry of our
reconciliation. And if he have any addition of learning besides, it is looked
upon as a good accidental ornament, but not as any essential complement of his
Profession. So that it often happens, without any wonderment at all, that the
Gentleman Patron is the learned man, and the Priest his Chaplain of little or
no science in comparison. But here in England our Gentlemen are disparaged by
their own Black Coats; and not suffered to use their judgments in any kind of
learning, without a gybe from them. The Gentleman is reasonles, and the
scribbling Cassock is the only Scholar: he alone must speak all, know all, and
only understand.

I cannot but smile to see you turn so dexterously every thing that is said in
Fiat Lux, to your own use. His discourse of innocence and moderation, gives you
occasion to speak, and amply dilate of wars, murders, adulteries, lies,
hypocrisies, villainies: And when he cries, Peace, Peace, it is motive enough
for you to cry, Guns and Daggers. You rave and rage against him and the whole
earth; you load your pen and pages with the tyrannies, desolations, disorders
have been aforetime in the world, not heeding that you had not so much as heard
at this day of any such abuses, if their holy and renowned Clergymen, who
still declaimed against the vices of their times, had not left them upon
record; or so much as considering, that even now in these best times of
Reformation are as grand disorders in all kinds as ever were in the worst
times of Popish corruption.

Nay there was never any crow or magpie so pecked and cawed upon the back of a
sheep, as you do upon Fiat Lux; and if he do but stir or wag, you threaten, if
I understand you right, to peck out his eyes. And all this, because Fiat Lux
endeavors to show, that animosities about matters of Religion are groundless,
prejudicial to peace and neighborhood, ruinous, desolatory, endless, and
consequently vain, fruitles, and sinful; (there may indeed be some advantage on
the Defendants side, which is not in the Plaintiff or Actour, but this at
present I am not to take notice of) nay finally, that they have ever don much
harm in Kingdoms, but never good. In all this Sir, you do like your self, you
love nois and whirlwinds, and when you hear of Peace, prepare your self to
Battle: so ill do you understand the sound of a retreat, or, because it suits
not with your ends and inclinations, will not.

But all this discourse of Fiat Lux, tends, say you, to Popery. A fearful thing,
and ungrateful news to Ministers; for whose foolish, endless, and ungrounded
quarrels, we have lately engaged our honor, peace, livelihood, lives, and all
that is dear unto us; and yet we are still, but where we were before we began.
Nay, we are ten times farther off from any reconcilement, unity, or
satisfaction then before. And such success have all wars ever had, where the
alarm was given in the Pulpit. But why must it tend to Popery? Because that Fiat
Lux is bold to say, that Popery in its own likeness is not so ugly as we imagine
it. Lord! what a strange thing is this, that either Fiat Lux or any else should
presume to say, that we in England, or other Nations may be carried by the
reports of some interested men, to think wors of a thing then it may deserv;
especially considering that we com all to Church to hear Gods Words, and there
meet with a man, who in the first opening of his lips, cries, Hearken my
Beloved to the word of the Lord; and so having with that airy honeycomb
sweetened the edges of our ears, pours into them afterward what poison of his
own conceived interests he pleases; all which we his dearly beloved let down
greedily into our hearts, as that precious word of the Lord which he at first
proclaimed. By which fallacies, we have been in the time of these our late
wars, so far inveigled, (I speak to men now alive, who all know I speak true)
that it became then a most dangerous thing, yea, treason it self, to say, God
save the King, who was by this our Pulpit rhetoric made as odious then
throughout the land, as Popery, what ever it be, ever was or can be. And are
not neighbors thus abused daily almost in every thing? Where is that man, who
has not by such like means been one time or other induced to think amiss, even
of his most innocent and dearest friends, till himself by trial found the
contrary? O but God forbid, you will say, that ever we should come by trial to
know what Popery is. Sir, may it be far from us, so long as heaven pleases. But
in the interim, what harm can it be to us to mitigate our passions? which if
there be no mistake, are prejudicial notwithstanding to our own peace; and if a
mistake there should be, are double injurious, and desperately sinful before
God and man. Oh but mistake there can be none! Sir, let me tell you roundly. By
your own Book of Animadversions I do as clearly see, as ever I beheld Sun in
the Firmament, that you do not your self understand what Popery is; even no
more, then the poorest meanest peasant in the Parish. But who is able to make
this good and clear unto you? no body Sir, so long as you are in passion, in a
calm of indifferency your very self. Nor could I without that serenity, have
been ever able to discern it. But yet, there is one thing more, which will
hinder your acknowledgement, although you should come to know it. It is their
interest to justify themselves, and yours to condemn them.

Had not you with your threats so much frighted me from any thought of writing
any more, I could I think my self, who am in your judgment one of the greatest
ingrams in the Land, make it yet appear, that the present Popish Religion, if
to pleas you they will give me leave to call it so, is not only less ugly then
we conceive it, but far more innocent and amiable then I have made it. And, if
there were not so much as one Catholic, or Romanist, or Papist upon earth, yet
so far am I from any interest herein, that in that judgment I would
notwithstanding die alone. Nor had I set before my eyes any other end in that my
Fiat of moderation, against which you write your hot Animadversions, then the
peace and welfar of my Country, which under the pretended shadow of Popery,
inflamed by the alarms of Vicars and their Wives, for whom we fight as it were
pro aris and focis, hates and mischiess, strikes and destroys one another
without end. And yet, which is a strange thing, whilst every one conceits
himself to fight for Purity of Gospel against Popery, they fight all for Popery
against Purity of Gospel. And this you must affirm your self, if you do but
remember what in your Book of Animadversions you so frequently assert; that
what good soever the Papists or Roman Catholics either do or have amongst them,
they have and do the same as Christians and not as Papists; and that Popery is
it self nothing else, but pride, interest ambition, tyranny, worldly respects,
thirst of blood, affectation of dominion, etc. As I am sure on the other side,
that grace, charity, and peace is the pure quintessence of Gospel, and the very
extract of true Religion. Either then I had reason to tell you, that you
understand not what Popery is; or if you do, you must needs acknowledge, that
those who here in England, betwixt the years of 1640. and 1660. with guns and
daggers, as you often phrase it, with field rhetoric and pulpit cannon,
subverted all before them, even Church and State too, let them call themselves
Puritans, Independents, Presbyterians, or what they pleas, were all of them by
this your own rule, as arch Papists as ever trod upon the earth. Nor is it of
concernment, so they have the reality of the thing, whence they may borrow
their name; whether some man upon earth be their Pope, or whether the Devil be
himself their ghostly father.

And I fear Sir, you were your self some part of that dismal tempest; which in
the last years of our woeful Anarchy overbore all before it, not only Church and
State, but reason, right, honesty, all true Religion, and even good nature too.
The very flashings of your pen move me to this thought. The whole physiognomy
of your Book speaks the hot and fiery spirit of the Author. First, you cannot
abide to hear of moderation, it is with you most wicked, hypocritical, and
devilish, especially as it coms from me. And for this one thing Fiat Lux
suffers more from you, then for all the contents of the Book put together. My
reason is your passion; my moderation inflames your wrath; and you are therefore
stark wild, because I utter so much of sobriety. Secondly, your so frequent
talking of sword and blood, fire and faggot, guns and daggers, do more then
show, you have not yet let go those hot and furious imaginations. It is a
phrase so ordinary with you, that when another writer of your own judgment
would have told me, that my words are false or besides the purpos, or the like,
you in a phrase of your own tell me still that I speak guns and daggers. If he
mean, say you of me, p 27. that there is in good works an intrinsecal worth,
etc. he speaks daggers, and does not himself beleev what he says. And again,
p. 94. For men to come now in the end of the world, and tell us, That we must
rest in the authority of the present Church, etc. is to speak daggers and swords
to us, upon a confidence that we will suffer our selves to be befoold. So
likewise p. 340. He tells us, say you of me, it is good to prefer a Translation
before the Originals. What shall we do with those men that speak such swords
and daggers, and are well neither full nor fasting. I pray Sir where did you
borrow this trope? had you it from the school of Aristotle, or Mars his camp?

Thirdly, your prophetic assurance so often inculcated, that if you could but
once com to whisper me in the ear, I would plainly acknowledge, either that I
understand not my self what I say, or if I do, beleev it not, givs a fair
character of those fanatic times, wherein ignorance and hypocrisy prevailed
over worth and truth; whereof if your self were any part, it is no wonder you
should think that I or any man else, should either speak he knows not what, or
beleev not, what himself speaks. It was the proper badg of those times, when
after the alarm sounded in the Pulpit, that our people thereupon went forth in
troops to battle, neither did the peasant understand, nor the man in black
beleev, although the sound rung generally in their ears, that it was the sword
of the Lord and of Gideon, which they brandisht against the loyal band, their
foes. Measuring me it seems by your self, you tell me no less than seven times
in your book, that I beleev not, and I think seaventy times, that I understand
not what I speak my self. It is a kind of charity in you to think your
neighbor is as you know your self to be. But I do not much care for that
charity, except you were better than I find you are.

Fourthly, your pert assertion so often occurring in your book, that there is
neither reason, truth, nor honesty in my words, is but the overflowing of that
former intemperat zeal: and the more frequent it occurs, the less approbation
it will find. Fifthly, your sharp and frequent menaces, that if I write or speak
again, I shall hear more, find more, feel more, more to my smart, more than I
imagine, more than I would, rellishes too much of that insulting humor our
bleeding Land then groaned under, the many years of our anarchical confusion.
Sixthly, the absence of your name in the frontispiece of your book, which I
have never before observed in all my life of any Protestant writer, that has
ever in my time set forth a book here in England against Popery, givs no small
suspicion that the Author of our Animadversione is no such Protestant as he
would be thought to be. Lastly, that I may omit other special reasons, your
other general trick of charging me then most of all with fraud, ignonorance,
and wickedness, when in your own heart you find me most clear from any such
blemish, thereby to put a vail upon your own cause, which would otherways be
disparaged, makes me smell a fox, a notorious one. Sic notus Ulysses. This has
been too often acted here in England to be soon forgotten. The better the cause,
the louder still was the cry against those who stood for it; that the
blustering nois of calumnies might drown all report of their innocence. And by
all this I cannot Sir but suspect, that if the description of Popery your
Animadversions givs us be right, you are a Papist your self, and no true
Protestant, a notorious Papist. But as it is, so let it be.

Thus much I only tell you, that you may see I am neither neglective of your
book, nor idle; but have perused and read it over. And although what for the
threats of your Animadversions, and what for the reasons of my own Fiat, I may
not enter into controversy: yet I hope I may let you know that I have seen
your work. And that you may the better credit me, I will give you a short
account of it, first in general, then in particular. And this is all I mean
here to do.

The whole design of Fiat Lux you do utterly mistake, throughout all your book
of Animadversions; so that you conceiv that to be a controversy, which is none;
that to be absolutely asserted, which is but hypothetically discoursed out of
the exceptions of other men; that to be only for one side, which is
indifferently for all; although I speak most for them that are most spoken
against, and am in very deed absolutely against all speaking, quarrelling,
disputing about Religion. If you will but have patience to hear my purpos and
design, which to all men not interested and blinded with a prejudice, is clear
enough relucent in the whole context of my Fiat, what I say will easily appear
to your self. Fiat Lux says one thing, and supposes it; another thing he
desires and aims at: that he dislikes; this he commends. We are at this day at
variance about Religion, this Fiat Lux supposes. But it were better to have
peace; this he aims at and desires. And both these things are intermingled up
and down in my book, according to that small faculty that God has given me,
though not according to the usual method that is found now adays in books.
Here Sir in few words you have the sum of my Fiat. And I hope you will grant
that to be the scope of my book, which I made it for. That we are now at
variance is most clear and certain; by me supposed, and not to be denied. And
that it were better to have peace, is as absolutely expedient, as the other is
evidently true. These then being things both of them which no man can resist;
either by denying the one, or disliking the other; I thought them better
intermingled then set apart; and with more reason to be supposed, then
industriously proved. Yet to superinduce a disposition unto peace, my only work
was to demonstrate an uselesnes, an endlesnes, an unprofitablenes of quarrels,
which I labored quite through my book; beginning it with an intimation of our
quarrels, which St. Paul calls the fruits and works of the flesh; and ending it
with a commendation of charity, which is the great fruit and blessing of Gods
holy Spirit. Now the easier to persuade my Countrymen to a belief both of the
one and the other, first is insinuated in Fiat Lux, both the ill grounds and
worst effects of feuds; then is the plea of parties specified; their
probabilities acknowledged; and lastly an impossibility of ever bringing our
debates to a conclusion, either by light or spirit, reason or scriptur texts,
so long as we stand separated from any superior judicative power, unto which
all parties will submit, is I think with a strong probability, if not
demonstrative evidence concluded. And therefore is it thought by Fiat Lux to be
more rational and Christian-like, to leav these endless, groundles, and ruinous
contentions, and resign our selves to humility and peace. This is the design and
whole sum of my book. And although I speak up and down, here for Papists,
there for Protestants, elsewhere for Presbyterians or Independants, commonly out
of the very discourses they make for themselves; yet do I not defend either
their ways, or their arguments. Nor do I teach any doctrine at all, or hold
there any opinion. But I only giv to understand in that one little book, what
is largely discoursed in a hundred, That all parties do make out to themselves
such a probability, which as it stands joined with the actours resolution, and
separated from any superior visible power to which they will submit, can never
be subdued. And has not long experience proved this as true as any thing else?
What then is there in Fiat Lux that can be denied? Is it not evident that we are
now at variance? and too long indeed have been. Is it not also clear, that
peace, charity, and neighborhood is better then variance, dissension, and
wars? Do not parties strongly plead for themselves, so far persuaded each one
that himself is in the right, that he will not yield, the truth to be with any
but himself. Is not all this evident? I am sure it is; and all England will
witness it.

And if any one should be able to evince, that any reasonings made in Fiat Lux
either for Papists, Protestants, or others, be not certain, or perhaps not
probable; yet he does nothing, except he be able to prove likewise, that they
are not probable to Fiat Lux, or to those that use them, whether Protestants or
Papists; which he can no more do, than he can pull a star out of the firmament.
I say Sir again, and mark I pray you, what I say. If you should chance to
evince that the reasons brought by Fiat Lux either for the doctrine or practices
of Papists or others, be either not probable or untrue, yet is your labor all
in vain, except you be able to demonstrate likewise, that they are not probable
to Fiat Lux, or to Papists and others who use those reasons; which you can no
more do, then any thing that is absolutely impossible. By this time Sir, you
may discern how hard it is to deal with Fiat Lux, and impossible to confute
him. Since he speaks nothing, but what is as clearly true and evident, as what
we see at midday. Nor do I in this any way exalt the ability of the Author,
whom you are pleased so much and frequently to disable. A Tom-fool may say
that, which all the wisemen in the world cannot gainsay: as he did, who said
the Sun was higher at noon, than any other hour of the day. It was Fiat Lux his
fortune rather then chois, to utter words which will no sooner be read, than
acknowledged. And it was your misfortune Sir, to employ your greater talents in
refuting evident truths; perhaps for no other reason, but because they issued
from the pen of a man, who is not so great a friend to faction, as you could
wish. And although you proceed very harsh and furiously; yet am I verily
persuaded, you now discern, though too late for your credit, that you had all
this while, according to our English proverb, good Mr. Doctor, a wrong sow by
the ear. Thus far in general. Now briefly to give you some account in particular.

You spend four Chapters, and a hundred and eighteen pages, which is the fourth
part of your book, before you com to the first line and paragraff of mine, The
applaus and honor of this world, etc. And it is not unwittily done. For being
to be led, as you heavily complain, out of your ordinary road of controversies,
by the wild chase of Fiat Lux, it behoved you to draw some general common
places of your own, for your self to walk in, and exercise your rhetoric and
anger, before you pursue a bird that flies not, you say, in any usual tract.

Preface from page 1. to page 19.

Your preface, wherein you speak of my subtilty and your own pretense, affords
me nothing but the beginning of your own mistake, which will run quite through
your book.

1 Chap. from page 19. to 29.

Your first chapter beats me about the pate, for saying that I conceal my
method, with a terrible syllogistical dilemma, He that uses no method, say
you, cannot conceal it, and if he has concealed it, he has used one. But I
must pass by store of such doughty stuff, being only fit for the young Oxford
Scholar, who being com home to take air, would prove before his father and
mother, that two eggs were three. Then going on you deny, that Protestants ever
opposed the doctrine and merit of good works; which at first I wondered at,
seeing the sound of it has rung so often in mine own ears, and so many hundred
books written in this last age, so apparently witness it in all places, till I
found afterward in my through perusal of your book, that you neither heed what
you say, or how much you do deny. But you perhaps love to talk of them better
than your forefathers did, though your thoughts be all the same. And you will
all equally bless your selves from building of Churches as the Papists have don,
however your prattle goes.

2 Chap. from page 29. to 110.

Your second chapter collects out of Fiat Lux, as you say, ten general
conclusions, spread all over like veins and arteries, in the body of that my
book. And this you do, that you may make your self a campus Martius to sport
in, without confinement to my method. But you name not any page of my book,
where those principles may all or any of them be found. And you do wifely: For
in the sense those words do either naturally make out, or in which you
understand them, of all the whole ten I cannot own any one for mine own, set
down in my book. The first of my principles must be this, That we received the
Gospel first from Rome. In your sense I never spoke this. We, that is, we
English first received it thence. But you talk against it, as if I meant that
Brittans had it first from Rome. We had it not first from Rome, say you, but by
Joseph of Arimathea from Palestin, as Fiat Lux himself acknowledges. Sir, if
Fiat Lux say both these things, he cannot mean in your contradictory falls
sense, but in his own true one. We, that is, we Englishmen, the now actual
inhabitants of this Land, and progeny of the Saxons, received first our Gospel
and Christendom from Rome; though the Brittans who inhabited this Land before
us, differing as much from us as Antipodes, had some of them been Christened
long before us. And yet the Christendom that prevailed and lasted among the
Brittans, even they also as well as we, had it from Rome too: mark this
likewise. But you reply, Though persons from Rome did first plant Christianity
among the Saxons, was it the Popes Religion they taught? did the Pope first
find it out? or did they Baptize in the name of the Pope? Good Sir, it was the
Popes Religion, not invented by him, as your cavil fondly imagines, but owned,
professed, and put in practice by him, and from him derived unto us by his
missioners. You add, Did not the Gospel come to Rome as well as to us? for it
was not first preached there. Sir, properly speaking, it came not so to Rome,
as it came to us. For one of the twelve fountains, nay two of the thirteen, and
those the largest and greatest, was transferred to Rome, which they watered
with their blood: we had never any such standing fountain of Christian Religion
here, but only a stream derived to us from thence.

My second assertion must be, From whom we first received our Religion, with
them we must still abide. This principle as it is never delivered by Fiat Lux,
though you put it upon me, so is it in the latitude it carries, and wherein you
understand it, absolutely falls, never thought of by me, and indeed impossible.
For how can we abide with them in any truth, who may perhaps not abide in it
themselves. Great part of Flanders was first converted by Englishmen, and yet
are they not obliged, either by Fiat Lux, or any lux whatsoever, to accompany
the English in our now present ways. If Rome first taught us Christianity, she
may then rather plead a power to guide us, than we her. This or some such like
thing I might speak, and rationally speak it. But that we or any other should
be obliged still to abide or rather to follow them who first taught us
Religion, though they should themselves forsake their own doctrine, as you would
make me speak, is a piece of folly never came into my thoughts. And you may be
ashamed to put it upon me: Why do you not set down my own words, and the page
of my book where I delivered this principle.

My third must be, The Roman Religion is still the same. This also I do no
where formally express, nor enter into any such common place: You will say I
suppose it. But does this justify you who say here, that I assert it as a
principle; let it then be supposed, for I do indeed suppose it, because I know
it has been demonstrativly proved a hundred times over. You deny it has bin
proved, why do you not then disprove it? Because you decline, say you, all
common places. Very good, so do I; let us com to proper ones. You fall then
upon my Queries in the end of my book. The Roman was once a true flourishing
Church, and if she ever fell, she must fall either by apostasy, heresy, or
schism, etc. So I speak there. And to this you reply, that the Church that then
was in the Apostles time, was indeed true, not that Roman Church that now is.
So, so; then say I, that former true Church must fall then, some time or other;
when did she fall, and how did she fall? by apostasy, heresy, or schism?
Perhaps, say you, neither way: for she might fall by an earthquake. Sir, we
speak not here of any casual or natural downfall or death of mortals by plague,
famine, or earthquake, but a moral and voluntary laps in faith. What do you
speak to me of earthquakes! You add therefore the second time, that she might
fall by idolatry; and so neither by apostasy, heresy, or schism. Good Sir,
idolatry is a mixed misdemeanour both in faith and manners: I speak of the
single one of faith. And he that falls by idolatry, if he keep still some parts
of Christianity entire, he falls by heresy; by apostasy, if he keep none. At
last finding your self pusled, in the third place you lay on load; She fell,
say you, by apostasy, idolatry, heresy, schism, licentiousnes, and prophanenes
of life. And in this you do, not much unlike the drunken youth, who being bid
to hit his masters finger with his, when he perceived he could not do it, he
ran his whole fist against it. But did she fall by apostasy? By a partial one,
say you, not a total one. Good Sir, in this division, apostasy is set to expres
a total relaps; in opposition to heresy, which is the partial. Did she then
fall by heresy, or partial apostasy, in adhering to any error in faith, contary
to the approved doctrine of the Church? Here you smile seriously, and tell me,
that since I take the Roman and Catholic Church to be one, she could not indeed
adhere to any thing but what she did adhere unto. Sir I take them indeed to be
one; but here I speak ad hominem, to one that does not take them so. And then,
if indeed the Roman Church had ever swerved in faith, as you say she has, and
be her self but as another ordinary particular Church, as you say she is; then
might you find some one or other more general Church, if any there were,
possitively to judge her; some Ecumenical council to condemn her; some fathers
either greek or latin, expressly to write against her, as Protestants now do;
some or other grave solemn authority to censur her; or at least some company of
believers out of whose body she went, and from whose faith she fell. Since you
are no ways able to assign any of these particulars, my Query remains
unanswered, and the Roman still as flourishing a Church, as ever she was.

The fourth assertion, frequently, say you, pleaded by our Author is; that all
things as to religion were ever quiet and in peace, before the Protestants
relinquishment of the Roman Sea. This principle you pretend is drawn out of
Fiat Lux, not because it is there; but only to open a door for your self, to
expatiate into some wide general discourse, about the many wars, distractions,
and factious altercations, that have been aforetime up and down the world, in
some several ages of Christianity: And you therefore say it is frequently pleaded
by me, because indeed I never speak one word of it. And it is in truth a falls
and fond assertion. Though neither you nor I can deny, that such as keep unity
of faith with that Church, can never so long as they hold it, fall out upon
that account. If you had either cited the place, or set down my own words, they
would have spoke their meaning. I might say perhaps, that our Land had no part
of those disturbances upon the account of religion all the thousand years it
was Catholic, which it has suffered in one age since, or the like. But that
all things should ever be at quiet throughout the world, that there should no
heresies rise, no seditions, no wars any where; this is a fansy that was never
in my head; and I wonder how it should drop into my paper. But you are a
martial man, and resolved to bring me in with pikes and guns, as the red-coat
soldiers did the Cavaliers in the time of our late anarchy, to suffer not only
for the good they acted, but for the ill they never thought of.

Fifth must be, that the first reformers were most of them contemptible persons,
their means indirect, and ends sinister. Where is it Sir, where is it, that I
meddle with any men's persons, or say they are contemptible, or their means
indirect, or ends sinister? Where do I say all this? Do I speak any word of
Reformers of Religion in general, as you make me to do. But this you add of
your own, in a vast universal notion, to the end you may bring in the apostles
and prophets, and kings, into the list of persons by me surnamed contemptible,
and liken my speech, who never speak any such thing, to the sarcasms of Celsus,
Lucian, Porphiry, Julian, and other Pagans.

So likewise in the very beginning of this your second chapter you spend four
leaves in a parallel betwixt me and the pagan Celsus, whereof there is not any
one member of it true. Does Fiat Lux, say you, lay the cause of all the
troubles, disorders, tumults, wars within the nations of Europe upon the
Protestants? Does he charg the Protestants, that by their schisms and seditions
they make a way for other revolts? does he gather a rapsody of insignificant
words? does he insist upon their divisions? does he manage the argument of the
Jews against Christ, etc. So does Celsus, who is confuted by learned Origin,
etc. Where does Fiat Lux, where does he, does he, does he any such thing? Are
you not ashamed to talk at this rate? I give a hint indeed of the divisions
that be amongst us, and the frequent argumentations that are made to embroil
and pusle one another, with our much evil, and little appearance of any good,
in order to unity and peace, which is the end of my discourse. But must I
therefore be Celsus? Did Celsus do any such thing to such an end? It is the end
that moralizes and specifies the action. To diminish Christianity by upbraiding
our frailties is paganish: to exhort to unity by representing the inconvenience
of faction, is a Christian and pious work. When honest Protestants in the
Pulpit speak ten times more full and vehemently against the divisions, wars,
and contentions that be amongst us, than ever came into my thoughts; must they
therefore be, every one of them a Celsus, a pagan Celsus? what stuff is this! But
it is not only my defamation you aim at, your own glory coms in the rear. If I
be Celsus, the pagan Celsus; then must you forsooth be Origin that wrote
against him, honest Origin. That is the thing. Pray Sir, it is but a word, let
me me advise you by the way, that you do not forget your self in your heat, and
give your wife occasion to fall out with you. However you may, yet will not she
like it perhaps so well, that her husband should be Origin.

My sixth principle must be, That our departure from Rome has been the cause of
all our evils. This is but the same with the fourth, in other words, but added
for one to make up the number. And it is, you say, every where spread over the
face of Fiat Lux. Sir you may say what you pleas, to be in his face, but I know
best what is in the heart and bowels, both of Fiat Lux, and his Author. And
sure I am this never came into my thoughts. Our dissentions in faith may well
multiply, as we see with our eyes they do, by our further departur from unity;
and this may cause much evil. But the branches of our too too manifold evils
found among the sons of men, spread all, as Fiat Lux also speaks, from that
fertile root of our innate concupiscence, which by evil customs rises up into a
thick bole of vicious inclinations, while we study not to impair, but rather to
augment and nourish it. However I must give you leave to number this among my
silly principles, to the end you may talk more copiously of the disputes, and
wars and broils that are and have been in several parts of Christendom, and
fall again into your much affected and often iterated strain. So the Pagans
judged the Primitive Christians, etc. And I must still be the Pagan, and you
the Primitive Christian.

Seventh is, There is no remedy of our evils, but by a returning to the Roman
Sea. This and the principle foregoing, had not you warily cloven a hair, had
been all one, and both are equally mine. But Sir, that may remedy our
difference in faith, which neither can nor will prevent varieties in philosophy
or other worldly judgments: nor considering the infinite diversity of men's
humors, is there any one thing equally prevalent with all men, and at all
times, to the like good effect; and if it do certainly help one evil, it is not
therefore a remedy for all. But it seems you have yet a little more mirth and
choler to vent, and therefore I must permit you to add this principle for mine,
that you may smilingly consider, how the Romans should cure our evils, that
cannot prevent disorders, differences, and sins amongst themselves. I can tell
you Sir another remedy of our evils, that we suffer about dissentions in
Religion, besides that. If the King and Parliament would pleas to give back all
the ecclesiastical livings into the hands of secular gentlemen, who out of a
blind zeal, as you phrase it, gave them up aforetime unto the pious uses of
spiritual men now no more extant, all our controversies and the evils thence
ensuing would soon ceas. Even you zealous Sir, would be then as quiet, as a
wolf tumbled into a pit-fall. Other remedies I could yet acquaint you with,
more than one or two. If you did Sir really, and not in words only acknowledge
any one superior governor in the land, unto whose power and judgment you
would heartily all of you resign, the word of that Oracle would solve all
doubts, and end all your quarrels. But you will never do it. The very genius of
the Reformation is wholly set against it.

The eight follows, That Scriptur on sundry accounts is insufficient to settle
us in the truth. And in this you flourish and triumph most copiously for
fifteen pages together, as the champion of the word of God. But Sir, you speak
not one word to the purpos, or against me at all, if I had delivered any such
principle, which I never did. Gods word is both the sufficient and only
necessary means both of our conversion and settlement as well in truth as
virtue. But Sir, the thing you heed not, and unto which I only speak, if I any
where hint at such a thing, is this: If the Scriptur be in two hands, for
example of the Protestant Church in England, and of the Puritan, who with that
scriptur rose up and rebelled against her, can the scriptur alone of it self
decide the business, how shall it do it, has it ever don it? or can that written
word now solitary and in private hands so settle any in a way that neither
himself nor present adherents, nor future generations shall question it, or
with as much probability dissent from it either totally or in part, as himself
first set it. This Sir is the case, unto which you do neither here nor in all
your whole book speak one word. And what you speak otherwis of the Scripturs
excellency, I allow it for good. What is not against me, is with me. But no law
whatsoever, whether divine or humane can be a sufficient rule to men, if no
judge oversee it.

Ninth, The Pope is a good man, and seeks nothing but our good. This also I no
where aver. I might mention the care and industry of that Sea, and affirm it to
be unworthily traduced. But I never saw any Pope, nor have I any such
acquaintance with him, as to know whether he be a good man in your sense or no,
free from pride, anger, covetousnes, etc. though in charity I do not use to
judge hardly of any body. Much less could I say, that he whom I know to have a
general solicitude for all Churches, seeks nothing but our good. Sir, if I had
pondered my words in Fiat Lux, no better than you heed yours in your
Animadversions upon it, they might even go together both of them to lap pepper
and spice, or some other yet more vile employment.

Tenth, that the devotion of Catholics far transcends that of Protestants. But
Sir I never made in Fiat Lux any comparison between their devotions, nor do I
remember that I ever so much as mentioned the devotion of Protestants. But you
are the maddest Commentatour I have ever seen, you first make the Text, and
then Animadversions upon it. Here at length you conclude your chapter, and
would, say you, your book also; if you had none to deal with, but ingenious and
judicious readers. It seems what follows, is for readers neither judicious nor
ingenious. And because I knew you took me for one of those, I went on in my
view. Indeed, had I not undertaken to give you an account of your whole book, I
could have been well content to stop here with ingenious and judicious readers,
and look no further. Doubtless in this affair good wits will jump. You would
write no more, had you none but judicious readers; and these will read no more,
because they are judicious. But I poor ass must jogge on.

3 chapter from page 110. to 119.

Your third chapter concerns my preface, which in part you allow, and partly
dislike. And I am equally content with both.

4 or 5 ch from page 119. to 148.

Your fourth chapter by mistake of press is named fifth, and so I must here call
it. It begins my book, and takes up five of my paragraffs at once. You have
loitered long about the gate like a trifling idlesbee, and means now it seems,
when you come to my own words, to go nimbly over them, as of lesser concernment
than your own forestalled conceits, which you have hitherto made sport with.
You first set up a may pole, and then danced about it, and now at length half
tired, and almost out of breath, you come home to me.

My first paragraff about Diversity of feuds you do not much except against.
But I see you do not affect the schoolmen, happily for the same reason the French
love not Talbot, having been used in their infancy to be frighted with that
name. However you think I have good reason to make honorable mention of them,
because they were, say you, the hammerers and forgers of Popery. Alas Sir, I see
that anger spoils your memory; for in the twelfth and thirteenth chapter of
that very book of your Animadversions, you make Popery to be hammered and
forged not a few hundred of years, before any schoolmen were extant. You check
me also for saying, that reformation of religion is pretended by emulous
Plebeians, as though, say you, Hezekiah, Josiah, and other good Kings and
Princes also of our own were emulous Plebeians. But Sir, when I say in Fiat
Lux, p. 20. what glory the emulous Plebeian sees given to higher spirits, etc.
I only speak of the times of vulgar insurrection against authority; as all men
see except your self, who will not.

My second paragraff of the Ground of quarrels you like well enough, and
explicate it with a text to help me out. I could not happily tell, how to cite
James, the fourth chapter, the first and second verse of that chapter, without
your help. However, it is kindness though it be but course, as Sir Thomas Moor
told his maid, when she kissed him as he was going to execution; and so I take it.

My third paragraff about nullity of title, would, you think, every period of
it confute my self. But that saying of S. Paul, An a vobis verbum Dei
processit, an ad vos solos pervenit, which I make use of to stop the mouths of
all vitilitigatours in religion, was cited by me, you think, in an unhappy
hour; because, say you, there is not any one single text of scriptur more fatal
to papal pretensions. And why so Sir? Because the Gospel you say, came to Rome
as well as it came to us here in England. And this is all you say, to prove
that text to be so fatal to papal pretensions. To this Sir I have already told
you, that it came not to us as it came to Rome: and now I tell you again, that
it came to us from Rome, and not to Rome from us. And therefore is that text
fatal to us, not to them: It may open their mouths, but I am sure it stops ours.

Heats and resolutions, the subject of my fourth paragraff, which your self
will not countenance, you will not permit me to dislike. You may talk against
them, and I may not. But I may be excused; for I knew not then, such a man of
art as your self, would speak of that he understood better then I do.

The motives of moderation in my sixth paragraff you laugh at; and I will not
stop your merriment. But in all this say you Fiat Lux has a secret design,
which your eagle-sighted eye has discovered. And in vain is the net spread
before the eyes of a thing that has a wing. And I must know, that the author
of Animadversions, is that thing that has a wing.

6 chapter from page 148. to 177.

Your sixth chapter, which meets just with my sixth paragraff of the Obscurity of
God, in the beginning, where you declare the sufficient knowledge we have of God
by divine revelation, whereunto by our humble belief we have subscribed our
consent, is right and good; but not at all against me, who there treat a case
of metaphysical concernment, which you apprehend not. It is no wonder then, you
should so much dislike all that my plea of uncertainly, not only before any
teacher appear, but after too; whiles you take the teacher and his words as
they walk hand in hand actually linkt together with our belief in him; which
actual belief my supposition suspends and separates, to the end I may consider
whether any such teacher can appear so accomplished as to move us, who live in
this present age, and coin religion anew, to a belief invariable: so that
through your too much haste, you utterly mistake all my whole discourse, and
speak nothing at all to the case I treat of. I speak wholly there, as in other
parts of Fiat Lux, upon a supposition of the condition, the generality of
people are now actually in, here in England, where every one lets himself loose
at pleasure to frame opinions and religions of themselves. And so cannot be
thought to speak of a settled belief, but only of settling one, or one to be
settled; which there and elsewhere in that book, I endeavor to show impossible
to be so fixedly stated by any private man, but that himself and others may
rationally doubt it. And that therefore our only way is to beleev and not
dispute, to submit to the old way we have formerly received, and not to surmise
a new. This is the very substance, scope and purpos not only of that paragraff,
but of my whole book, which you do as utterly swerve from, as ever any blinded
man, put to thrash a cock, misplaced his blow. Perhaps it is hard for you to
conceiv your self in a state you are not actually in at present: And if you
cannot do this, you will be absolutely unfit to deal with such hypothetik
discourses, as I see indeed you are. Bellarmins little catechize had been a
fitter book for you to write Animadversions upon, than my Fiat Lux. There is
good positive doctrine, signed hic and nunc, and specified to your inclination
and capacity. I meddle not with any; I deliver no positive doctrine at all; I
never descend to any particular conclusion or thesis of faith; I defend no
opinion but only this, That every opinion is defensible, and yet none
impregnable. Do you not blush Sir, to see your own gross mistake. God is my
witness, when I find you, misled by your own error, so furiously to tax me
with ignorance, fraud, blasphemy, atheism, I cannot but pity you. And
generally you talk at random, as well in this chapter as others. Let me give
some little hint of it in particular, for this once.

Where I in my foresaid paragraff say, that differences of faith in its
branches are apt to infer a suspicion in its very root, and consequently
atheism. To this you reply, that That discourse of mine is all rotten: that
Christian religion it self might thus be questioned: that it is the argument of
the Pagan Celsus: that such contests have ever been: that Protestants are
resolved: that Catholics turn atheists as well as others: that our religion is
the same yesterday and to day: that our evils are from our selves, etc. Does
this talk concern or plead to my assertion? I know all this, as well as you;
but that it is nothing to the purpos, that I know, and you it seems do not.
Though all this you say be true, yet still it remains notwithstanding as true
and certain as it was before, and that is certain enough, That difference of
faith in its branches are apt to infer a suspicion in its very root; and
consequently atheism. You have but beaten the air.

So likewise unto all that discourse of mine, If the Papist or Roman Catholic,
who first brought us the news of our Christianity, be now become so odious, then
may likewise the whole story of our Christianity be at length thought a
Romance. You speak with the like extravagancy; and mind not my hypothetick at
all, to speak directly to my inference, as it became a man of art to do. But
neglecting my consequence, which in that discourse is principally and solely
intended, you seem to deny my supposition; which, if my discourse had been drawn
into a syllogism, would have been the minor part of it. And it consists of two
categories; first, that the Papist is now become odious: second, that the Papist
delivered us the first news of Christianity. The first of these you little
heed, the second you deny; That the Papist, say you, or Roman Catholic first
brought Christ and his Christianity into this land is most untrue, I wonder,
etc. And your reason is, because if any Romans came hither, they were not
Papists, and indeed our Christianity came from the East, namely by Joseph of
Arimathea, etc. And this is all you say to my hypothetick or conditional
ratiocination; as if I had said nothing at all but that one absolute category,
which being delivered before, I now only suppose. You use to call me a civil
logician, but I fear a natural one as you are, will hardly be able to justify
this motion of yours as artificial. A conditional has a verity of its own, so
far differing from the supposed category, that this being falls that may yet be
true. For example, if I should say thus: A man who has wings as an eagle, or
if a man had wings as an eagle, he might fly in the air, as well as another
bird. Such an assertion is not to be confuted by proving that a man has not
the wings of an eagle. Yet so you deal with me here, a great master of arts
with a civil logician. But, that I may go along with you, we had not Sir our
Christianity immediately from the East, nor from Joseph of Arimathea, as I have
already told you, we Englishmen had not. For as he delivered his Christianity
to some Brittons, when our land was not called England but Albion, or Brittany,
and the inhabitants were not Englishmen but Brittons or Kimbrians, so likewise
did that Christianity and the whole news of it quite vanish, being suddenly
overwhelmed by the ancient deluge of paganism: nor did it ever come from them
to us. Nay, the Brittons themselves had so forgot and lost it, that even they
also needed a second conversion, which they received from Pope Eleutherius. And
that was the only news of Christianity which prevailed and lasted even amongst
the very Brittans: which seems to me a great secret of divine providence in
planting and governing his Church; as if he would have nothing to stand firm
and lasting, but what was immediately fixed and seated upon that rock. For all
other conversions have vanished, and the very seats of the other Apostles
failed, that all might the better cement in an unity of one head. Nay the
tables which God made with his own hand were broken, but the other framed by
Moses remained, that we might learn to give a due respect to him whom God has
set over us as our head and ruler under him, and none exalt himself against
him. I know you will laugh at this my observation, but I cannot but tell you
what I think. To return then to my former discourse; when I speak good Sir, of
the news of Christianity first brought to this land, I mean not that which was
first brought upon the earth or soil of this land, and spoken to any body then
dwelling here; but which was delivered to the forefathers of the now present
inhabitants, who be Saxes or Englishmen. And I say that we, the now present
inhabitants of England, offspring of the English or Saxons, had the first news
of our Christianity immediately from Rome, and from Pope Gregorius the Roman
Patriarch, by the hands of his missioner St. Austin. And this all men know to
be as true, as they know that Papists are now become odious. Since then the
categorick assertions are both clear; namely, that the Papist first brought us
the news of Christianity; and secondly, that the Papist is now become odious
amongst us; what say you to my consequence? that the whole story of
Christianity may as well be deemed a Romance, as any part of that Christianity
we at first received, as now judged to be part of a Romance. This consequence
of mine it behoved a man of those great parts you would be thought to have, to
heed attentively; and yet you never mind it.

You add in the close of your discourse, that many things delivered us at first
with the first news of Christianity may be afterward rejected for the love of
Christ, and by the commission of Christ? But Sir, what love of Christ dictates,
what commission of Christ allows you, to choos and reject at your own pleasure?
what heretic was ever so much a fool, as not to pretend the love of Christ,
and commission of Christ for what he did? How shall any one know you do it, out
of any such either love or commission? since those who delivered the articles of
faith now rejected, pretended equal love of Christ and commission of Christ,
for the delivery of them, as of any other. And why may we not at length reject
all the rest, for love of something else? when this love of Christ, which is now
crept out into the very outside of our lips, is slipped off thence. Do you think
men cannot find a cavil against him, as well as his law delivered unto us with
the first news of him? and as easily dig up the root, as cut up the branches?
Is not the thing already don, and many become atheists upon that account? Pray
speak to me something of reason. Did not the Jews by pretens of their love to
that immortal God, whom their forefathers served, reject the whole Gospel at
once? and why may not we possibly as well do it by peece-meals! Let us leav
cavils: Grant my supposition which you know you cannot deny: then speak to my
consequence, which I deem most strong and good, to infer a conclusion which
neither you nor I can grant. I tell you plainly and without tergiversation,
before God and all his holy angels, what I should think, if I descended unto
any conclusion in this affair. And it is this: either the Papist, who holds at
this day all those articles of faith which were delivered at the first
conversion of this land by St. Austin, is unjustly become odious amongst us; or
else my honest Parsons throw off your cassocks, and resign your benefices and
glebe-lands into the hands of your neighbors, whose they were aforetime: my
consequence is irrefragable.

If any part, much more if many parts, great substantial parts of religion
brought into the land with the first news of Christianity, be once rejected (as
they are now amongst us) as Romish or Romancical, and that rejection or
reformation be permitted, then may other parts and all parts, if the gap be not
stopped, be looked upon at length as points of no better a condition. Nay it must
needs be so: for the same way and means that lopt off some branches, will do the
like to others, and root too: A villification of that Church, wherein they find
themselves, who have a mind to prevaricate, upon pretens of Scritur and power
of interpreting, light, spirit, or reason, adjoined with a personal obstinacy
that will not submit, will do it roundly and to effect. This first brought off
the Protestants from the Roman catholic Church; this lately separated the
Presbyterian from the English Protestant Church, the Independent from the
Presbyterian, the Quaker from other Independents. And this last good man heeds
nothing of Christian religion but only the moral part, which in deed and truth
is but honest paganism. This speech is worthy of all serious consideration.
And I could wish you would ponder it seriously. See if the Quaker deny not as
resolutely the regenerating power of baptism, as you the efficacy of
absolution. See if the Presbyterian do not with as much reason evacuate the
prelacy of Protestants, as they the Papacy. See if the Socinian arguments
against the Trinity, be not as strong as yours against the real presence in the
Eucharist. See if the Jew do not with as much plausibility deride Christ, as
you his Church. See if Porphiry, Julian, and other ancient pagans, do not as
strongly confute all Christianity, as we any part of it. He is a fool, that
having a will and power enough, cannot find out as plausible a pretense for the
pulling down of Churches, as we had any for the destroying of Monasteries. There
be books lately set forth, and by more then one author here in this land,
which do as powerfully dissipate the conceit we once had of hell, as any ever
did elude Purgatory. Did we not lately find out texts and reasonings against
our King and monarchy, as many as we found out long ago against Pope and
popery? Gods providence and our souls immortality if any list to deny, he may
have more abundant argumentations every where occurring, than any other piece
of popery now rejected ever felt. If one text of scriptur be by a trope of
rhetoric made to speak a sens, contrarty to what was believed in catholic
times in any one point, cannot another text by some such slight be forced to
frustrate another. I am sure it may do so, and has done so. And thus when all
articles are at last by such tricks of wit cashiered, can there be wanting
several appearing incongruities, contradictions, tautologies, improbabilities,
to disable all holy writ at once. And cannot the Jew afford us at last
arguments enough, to dissipate at length the very name of Christ out of the
world, which after the whole extirpation of his law, will but float on men's
lips like an empty shadow, till it quite vanish. These things Sir, are not only
true, but clear and evident. And nothing is wanting to justify them, but a
serious consideration.

These few words Sir, which I have bestowed upon you by way of supererogation,
above what I needed, will somewhat inlighten you to discern the goodness and
necessity of my consequence. If the Papist who first brought us the news of
Christianity be now become odious, then may all Christianity at length be
thought a Romance, etc. Religion like a house, if a breach be once made and not
repaired to former unity, will by degrees all moulder away, till no one room be
left entire.

7 chapter from page 177. to 188.

Your seventh chapter finished in five leafs, runs, or flies over two or three
of my paragraffs at once, which make up above fifty pages, concerning the
obscurity of Nature and Providence. All which discourse of mine is, you say,
nothing to my purpos, but foisted in for a blind to entertain my readers. But
Sir, those judicious readers you lately left behind you, who discern my purpos
better than I see you do, will tell you, that it is so much to my purpos, that
nothing could be more. At least you let all pass without either censure or
commendation, till you meet happily at length with a word or two of mine (let
fall in my ninth paragraff called Help) about scripture. This makes your heart
leap; it is a common place you know how to sport in, and you never meet with
that sound, but it makes you dance. Your chapter then, which is written against
all my philosophical discourse of nature and providence, is called scripture
vindicated, as though I had industriously wrote against scripture. And therein
you sweetly dilate upon the excellency and goodness of the word of God, as if I
had any way diminished it, or wrote against it; just according to the tone of
our late dismal times, Lord, I am for thy cause Lord, I am left alone to plead
thy cause Lord against thine enemies. But Sir, the few words I there speak, only
incidentally, in the end of that my paragraff called Help, concerning the
surmises that men have about scriptur, as they be but a small part of the many,
which I know to be now vented up and down the land in this our present state of
separation one from another; so if I had not given some touch of them in that
metaphysick abstracted discourse of Fiat Lux, which proceeds, as I have said
upon a supposition of our choosing and making religions here in England at
pleasur, unto endless differences and divisions, it had been a maimed and
imperfect work, and no ways satisfactory unto those judicious readers unto
whom I write, though you do not. And I cannot but tell you, what soever you
think of your self, you are in truth, except you dissemble and mistake on
purpos, but a weak man, to take that as spoken absolutely by me, and by way of
positive doctrine, which I only deliver upon an hypothesis apparent to all the
world besides your self. You would make a mad commentatour upon Solomon's
Ecclesiastes. I speak upon a supposition of doubting, which these times have
brought upon us, of interpreting, accepting, rejecting, framing, forging
religions and opinions to our selves; and you reply against me words and
discourses that presuppose an assent of believing. If a man beleev, he cannot
doubt. And if he doubt not of the scriptures truth, he cannot make exceptions
against any of its properties. But if any begin to question this or that, or
other part of doctrine contained in scriptur, and delivered by those who first
brought it, as every one does who swerves from the Church he found himself in;
then I suppose such a one doubts. And being now thereby separated from that
body of believers to which he before by faith adhered, he cannot now left to
himself, but proceed, if he give attendance to the conduct of his own surmising
thoughts, to more suspicions then I was willing to express.

But Sir, what you say here, and so often up and down your book, of Papists
contempt of scriptur, I beseech you will please to abstain from it for the time
to com: I have conversed with the Roman catholics of France, Flanders, and
Germany; I have read more of their books, both histories, contemplatives, and
scholastic divines, than I beleev you have ever seen or heard of. I have seen
the devotion both of common people, colleges of sacred priests, and religious
houses, I have communed with all sorts of people, and perused their councels.
And after all this, I tell you, and out of my love I tell you, that their
respect to scriptur is real, absolute and cordial even to admiration. Others
may talk of it, but they act it, and would be ready to stone that man that
should diminish holy writ. Let us not wrong the innocent. The scriptur is
theirs, and Jesus Christ is theirs, who also will plead their cause when he sees
time.

8 chapter from page 188 to 198.

In your eight chapter, which falls upon my paragraff of Reason, you are
absolutely in a wood, and wonder more then ordinary, how that discourse of mine,
concerning reason to be excluded from the imploiment of fraeming articles of
religion, can any ways concern Protestants, or be a confutation of
Protestants. As though Fiat Lux were written to any such concernment against
Protestants. Your head is so full, it seems of that controverting faculty for
Protestants against Papists, that if Popery be but mentioned in a book without
an epithet of detestation, you conclude presently, that the book is written for
Popery against Protestants. And if every thing therein contained, answer not the
idea of your brain, then it is impertinent with you, it is silly, it is besides
the purpos. And this censur you have given, still as you have gone along all my
whole book hitherto, of every part and parcel of it, even from my preface to
this present paragraff of Reason. You cannot see how all that vain flourishing
discourse of mine, concerning diversity of feuds, ground of quarrels, nullity of
title, heats and resolution, motives to moderation, obscurity of God, nature and
providence, or the like, should confute Protestancy, or any way concern
Protestants. And therefore it is wholly impertinent. Thus the famous Knight, when
he had once conceived an idea of his own errantry, every flock of sheep must be
an army and every windmill a giant, or else it is impertinent to Don Quixot.

9 chapter from page 198 to 213.

Your ninth chapter upon my paragraff of Light and Spirit; is wholly spent,
neglecting all my other discourse, in solving the Jewish objection, which I
answer my self. And if you have added any thing better than mine, I shall be
thankful for it as soon as I see it. But I fear your vaunting flourishes about
scriptur which you love to talk on, will not without the help of your Credo and
humble resignation, solve the argument; which that you may the eassier be quit
of, you never examine; but only run on in your usual flourishes about the use
and excellency of Gods word. I told you in Fiat Lux, what the Jew will reply to
all such reasonings, but you have the pregnant wit not to heed any thing that
may hinder your flourishes. But Sir, if you were kept up in a chamber with a
learned Jew, without bread water and fire, till you had satisfied him in that
objection; I am still well enough assured, for all your aerie vaunts, that if
you do not make use of your Credo, which here you contemn, you might there stay
till hunger and cold had made an end of you. But I beleev you love not such dry
blows; however you may be delighted with pen encounters at a distance, where
after your suppositum has been well inspired with the warm spirits blown hither
out of the fortunate islands, you may cavil revile and threaten at your
pleasure, and knock down the shadow of your adversary which your own spirits
have raised up, and presented to you in your chamber.

10 chapter from page 213 to 228.

Your tenth chapter runs over two of my paragraffs, which speak the plea of
Independents, Presbyterians, and Protestants. That you esteem idle, the other
sensles, the last insufficient. And to make this last good, you endeavor to
disable both what I have set down to make against the Prelate Protestant, and
also what I have said for him. I said in Fiat Lux, that it made not a little
against our Protestants, that after the prelate Protestancy was settled in
England, they were forced for their own preservation against Puritans, to take
up some of those principles again, which former Protestants had sast down for
Popish, as is the authority of a visible Church, efficacy of ordination,
difference between clergy and laiety, etc. Here first you deny that those
principles are popish. But Sir, there be some Jews even at this day, who will
deny any such man as Pontius Pilate, to have ever been in Jury. I have other
things to do, than to fill volums with useles texts, which here I might easily
do, out of the books both of the first reformers, and catholic divines and
councels. Then secondly you challenge me to prove, that those principles were
ever dented by our prelate Protestants. And this you do wittily and like your
self. You therefore bid me prove that those principles were ever denied by our
prelate Protestants, because I say, that our prelate Protestants here in
England, as soon as they became such, took up again those forenamed principles,
which Protestants their forefathers both here in England and beyond the seas,
before our prelacy was set up, had still rejected. When I say then, that out
prelate Protestant affirmed and asserted those principles which former
Protestants denied; you bid me prove that our prelate Protestant ever denied
them.

Thus you contradict what I say is pleaded against our prelate Protestant. And
again you do as stiffly gainsay what I plead for him my self. You laugh at me
even with head and shoulders, and tell me, that the prelate-Protestant has far
better arguments for themselves, then either mine is, or any I can bring; nor do
they need the help of such a weak logician as my self, in this their cause. Sir
give me leav to tell you here once for all, that I thought it sufficient for my
design, to set down either for Papist or Protestant, when occasion required,
such reasons as appeared plausible to my self; and to say all for them that can
be said, was neither the work of my small ability, nor any purpos of my design.
And it is enough to me, that I know no better. But let us see what my argument
is, and how you crush it.

The Church, say I, must have a bishop, or otherwise she will not have such a
visible head, as she had at first, etc. This that you may evacuate, you tell
me, that the Church has still the same head she had, which is Christ, who is
present with his Church by his Spirit and laws, and is man-God still as much as
ever he was, and ever the same will be: and if I would have any other visible
bishop to be that head, then it seems I would not have the same head, and so
would have the same and yet not the same. Thus you speak.

But Sir, I cannot in any reason be thought to speak otherwise, if we would use
true logic, of the identity of the head, than I do of the identity of the body
of the Church. This body is not numerically the same: for the men of the first
age are long ago gone out of the world, and another generation com, who yet are
a body of Christians of the same kind; because they adhere to the same
principles of faith. And as the body is of the same kind, though not
numerically the same; so do I require, that since Jesus Christ as man, the head
immediate of other believing men, is departed hence to the glory of his Father,
that the Church should still have a head of the same kind, as visibly now
present, as she had in the beginning; or else say I, she cannot be completely
the same body, or a body of the same kind she was. But this she has not, this
she is not, except she have a visible bishop, as she had in the beginning,
present with her, guiding and ruling under God. Christ our Lord is indeed still
man-God, but this manhood is now separate; nor is he visibly now present as
man, which immediately headed his believers under God, on whose influence that
nature depended. His Godhead is still the same in all things, not only in it
self, but in order also to his Church, as it was before, equally invisible, and
in the like manner believed; but the nature delegate under God, and once ruling
visibly amongst us by words and examples, is now utterly withdrawn. And if a
nature of the same kind, be not now delegate with a power of exterior
government, as at the first there was, then has not the Church the same head
now, which she had then, nor is she the same polity or body she was before: Qui
habet aures audiendi audiat.

And here by the way we may take notice what a sincere English Protestant you
are, who labor so stoutly to evacuate my argument for episcopacy, and leav
none of your own behind you, nor acquaint the world with any, although you know
far better; but would make us beleev notwithstanding those far better reasons
for prelacy, that Christ himself, as he is the immediate and only head of the
invisible influence, so is he likewise the only and immediate head of visible
direction and government among us, without the interposition of any person
delegate in his stead, to oversee and rule under him in his Church on earth:
which is against the tenor both of sacred gospel, and S. Paul's epistles, and
all antiquity, and the present ecclesiastic polity of England; and is the
doctrine not of any English Protestant, but of the Presbyterian, Independent,
and Quaker.

Christ then in your way is immediate head not only of subministration and
influence, but of exterior direction and government to his Church. Pray tell
me, is he such an immediate head to all believers, or no? if he be to all, then
is no man to be governed in affairs of religion by any other man; and
Presbyterian Ministers are as needless, as either Catholic or Protestant
bishops. On the other side, if he be not immediate head to all, but ministers
head the people, and Christ heads the ministers, this in effect is nothing else,
but to make every minister a bishop. Why do you not plainly say, what it is
more than manifest you would have. All this while you heed no more the laws of
the land, than constitutions of gospel.

As for gospel; That Lord, who had been visible governor and pastor of his
flock on earth, when he was now to depart hence, as all the apostles expected
one to be chosen to succeed him in his care, so did he, notwithstanding his own
invisible presence and providence over his flock, publikly appoint one. And
when he taught them, that he who were greatest among them should be as the
least, he did not deny but suppose one greater, and taught in one and the same
breath, both that he was over them, and for what he was over them, namely to
feed, not to tyrannize, not to domineer, abuse, and hurt, but to direct,
comfort, and conduct his flock, in all humility and tenderness, as the servant
of all their spiritual necessities. And if a bishop be otherwise affected, it
is the fault of his person, not his place.

As for the laws of the land, it is there most strongly decreed by the consent
and authority of the whole Kingdom, not only that bishops are over ministers,
but that the Kings majesty is head of bishops also in the line of hierarchy,
from whose hand they receiv both their place and jurisdiction. This was
established not only by one, but several acts and constitutions, both in the
reign of King Edward and Queen Elizabeth. So that by the laws of the land there
be two greeces between ministers and Christ; which you cut off, to the end you
may secretly usurp the authority and place of both, to the overthrow at once
both of gospel and our law too.

By the laws of our land our series of ecclesiastical government stands thus.
God Christ King Bishop Ministers People
the Presbyterian predicament is this. God Christ Minister People.


So that the Ministers head in the Presbyterian predicament, touches Christ's
feet immediately, and nothing intervenes. You pretend indeed, that hereby you
do exalt Christ; but this is a mere cheat, as all men may see with their eyes;
for Christ is but where he was; but the minister indeed is exalted, being now
set in the Kings place, one degree higher than the bishops, who by the law is
under both King and bishop too.

You will here say to me, What is the Papists line of Church government. There
the Pope must sit next Christ, and Kings under his feet. Sir, I have not time
in this short letter to discourse this subject as it deserves. Nor does it now
concern me, who have no more here to say than only this; that my argument for
prelacy, howsoever in your words you may disable it, is not weakened by you in
deeds at all, and as far as I can perceiv, not understood. Yet two things I
shall tell you over and above what I need in this affair also.

First is, that Roman catholics do more truly and cordially acknowledge the
respective Christian King of any Kingdom to be supreme head of his catholic
subjects even in affairs of religion, than any other, whether Independents,
Presbyterians, or even prelate Protestants have, if we speak of truth and
reality, ever done. And this I could easily make good both by the laws and
practices of all catholic kingdoms upon earth in any age on one side, and the
opposite practices of all Protestants on the other. Second is, that for what
reasons Roman catholics deny a prince to be head of the Church, for the same
ought all others as they deny it in deeds, so, if they would speak sincerely as
they think and act, to deny it in words also as well as they. For catholics do
beleev him to be head of the Church, from whom the channel of religion and all
direction in it is derived and flows; for which reason a spring is said to be
head of a river. But neither does any King upon earth, except he be priest and
prophet too, ever trouble himself to derive religion, as the Pope has ever don:
neither does either Protestant, Presbyterian or Independent, either in England
or elsewhere, ever seek for religion from the lips of the king, or supplicate
unto him when any doubt arises in those affairs, as they ought in conscience
and honesty to do, for a final decision, any more than the Roman catholic does.
So that whatever any of them may say, all Protestants do as much deny the thing
in their behavior, as catholics do in words; and catholics do in their
behavior observe as much, as Protestants either practice or pretend. What is
the reason that Roman catholics in all occurring difficulties of faith, both
have their recours unto their papal Pastor, (unto whom Kings themselves remit
them) and acquiesce also to his decision and judgment, but only because they
beleev him to be head of the Church. And if Protestants have no such recours,
nor will not acquiesce to his Majesty's authority in affairs of religion, but
proceed to wars and quarrels without end, the prince neglected as wholly
unconcerned in those resolvs, they do as manifestly deny his headship, as if
they professed none. Nay, to acknowledge a headship in words, and deny it in
deeds, is but mockery. By these two words Sir, it may appear, that the Kings
majesty is as much head of the Church to Roman Catholics as to any Protestants;
and these no more than they either derive religion or decision of their doubts
from the kings chair,

Ith interim it is a shame and general scandal to the whole world, that we in
England should neither supplicate nor acquiesce in affairs of religion to his
Majesty's judgment, whom in words we acknowledge head of the Church, but fight
and quarrel without end; and yet have the confidence to upbraid Roman catholics
with a contrary belief, who although they ever looked upon their papal
patriarch as spiritual head and pastor and deriver of their faith, unto whom
they so submit, that he who after his decision remains contumacious forfeits
his Christianity, yet have they notwithstanding in all ages and kingdoms
resigned with a most ready cordial reverence unto all decisions, orders and
acts of their temporal princes even in spiritual and ecclesiastical affairs, as
well as civil, so far as their laws reached, as supreme head and governors of
their respective kingdoms. And all kings and princes find in a very short
space, however others may utter hypocritical words of flattery, that indeed
none but catholic subjects do heed and fear and observe them universally, in all
whatever their commands, being taught by their religion, of which they alone
give account at times appointed for penance, to hearken and obey for conscience
sake all higher powers, constituted over them for good.

That catholics do universally observe their King in all affairs as well
ecclesiastic as civil, I need not, to make it good, send you Sir either to the
testimonies of civil law and Codex of Justinian, or the other various
constitutions of so many several provinces and kingdoms, as are and have been
in Christendom, our own home will suffice to justify it. Were not the
spiritual courts, both court Christian, Prerogative court and Chancery, all set
up in catholic times, about matters of religion, and affairs of conscience, and
all managed by clerks or clergymen under the King? In brief, where ever any
civil coaction or coactive power intervenes, be it in what affair it will, all
such power and action who ever uses it, has it autoritatively only from the
King. For neither Pope, nor Bishop, nor any Priest ought to be a striker, as S.
Paul teaches: nor have they any lands, or livings, or court, or power to compel
or punish either in goods or body, but what is lent or given by princes and
princely men, out of their love and respect to Jesus Christ and his holy
gospel, whose news they first conveyed about the world; although a just
donation is, I should think, as good a title, as either emption, inheritance,
or conquest, if it be irrevocable. The King is the only striker in the land ex
jure, and the sword of the almighty is only in his hand; and none can compel or
punish either in body or goods, but only himself, or others by his commission,
in any whatever affair. He can either by his authority and laws blunt the sword
of those who have one in their hand, whether by pact or nature, as have masters
over servants, and parents over children; or put a civil power into the hands
of those who otherwise have none, as prelates, priests, and bishops. So that
although the Pope derive religion, and chiefly direct in it, yet is the King
the only head of all civil coercition, as well in Church affairs as any other,
which his commands and laws do reach unto.

So that the line of Church government amongst catholics, since the conversion
of kings, runs in two streams; the one is of direction, the other of
coercition. That of direction is from Christ to the chief pastor, from him to
patriarchs, then to metropolitans, arch-byshops, bishops, priests, and people:
and in this line is no corporal coaction at all, except it be borrowed; nor any
other power to punish, but only by debarring men from sacraments. In the other
line of corporal power and authority the King is immediately under God the
Almighty, from whom he receivs the sword to keep and defend the dictates of
truth and justice, as supreme governor, though himself for direction and faith
be subject to the Church from whose hands he received it, as well as other
people his subjects; after the King succeed his princes and governors in
order, with that portion of power all of them, which they have from him their
liege sovereign received. This in brief of papal Church government, which we in
England by our canting talk of the Lord Christ, to the end we may be all lords
and all Christ's, have utterly subverted.

Indeed in primitive times the channel of religion for three hundred years ran
apart, and separate from civil government which in those days persecuted it.
And then the line of Christian government was unmixt. None but priests guided,
defended, governed the Church and Christian flock; which they did by the power
of their faith, virtue, secret strength, and courage in Jesus their Lord
invisible. Afterward it pleased the God of mercies, to move the hearts of
emperors and kings of the earth, to submit unto a participation of grace;
which they were more easily inclined by the innocence and sanctity of Christian
faith, especially in that particular of peaceful obedience unto kings and
rulers, though aliens, and pagans, and persecutors of religion. And now kings
being made Christian were looked upon by their subjects with a double
reverence, more loved, more feared, more honored than before. Nor could
Christian people now tell, how to expres that ineffable respect they bore their
Kings, now coheirs of heaven, with them, whom before in their very paganism
they were taught by their priests to observe as gods upon earth, not for wrath
only or fear of punishment, but for conscience also, and danger of hazarding
not only their temporal contents, but their eternal salvation also, for their
resisting authority though resident in pagans. And Kings on the other side, who
aforetime by the counsel of worldly senators enacted laws, such as they
thought fit for present policy, and defended them by the sword of justice,
wielden under God to the terror of evil doers and defense of the innocent,
began now, as was incumbent on their duty, to use that sword for the protection
of Christianity, and faith, and the better way now chalked out unto them by
Christian priests, from Jesus the wisdom and Son of God. And by the direction
of the same holy prelates, abbots, and other priests, who were now admitted
with other senators into counsel, did they in all places enact special and
particular laws answerable to the genetal rule of faith, which they found to be
more excellent and perfect, than any judgment they had by natural reason
hitherto discovered.

Thus poor Christians, who had hitherto but only a head of derivation, of
counsel and direction, which could but only bid them have patience for Christ's
sake, and conform themselves to his meek passion, when they suffered from
aliens, and when they suffered injury from one another, could only debar the
evil doer, if he gave not satisfaction, from further use of sacraments; those
Christians I say, who could hitherto have no other comfort or assistance in
this world under their spiritual pastor, than what words of piety could
afford, had now by the grace of heaven princely protectours, royal defenders,
and head champions under God, to vindicate and make good all Christian rights,
discipline. and truths now accepted and established from faith, as well as
other civil rites and customs dictated aforetime from mere reason, equally
revengers upon all evil doers indifferently, that were found criminal in
affairs, as well purely Christian as civil, still using the advice and
direction of their prelates and Christian peers in the framing and establishing
of all those laws they were now resolved to maintain. So it was don in England;
so in all places of the Christian world. And then the line of Christian
government ran mixed, which before was single. And Christians now had a Joshua
to their Aaron, who were only led by Moses before. And although Aaron was head
of the Church, yet Joshua was head and leader, prince and captain of all those
people who were of that Church. The chief bishop is an Aaron, and every
Christian king a Joshua. And as it is a content and support to Aaron to have a
Joshua with him, to fight Gods battles, and keep the people in awe; so is it
not a little comfort to Joshua to have an Aaron by him, with whom he may
consult. And indeed no kingdom can have a perfect accomplishment without the
presence of these two swords, civil and spiritual. Ecce duo gladij hic! satis
est.

And although Christians even at this day, when any heresy or novelty arises,
have still recours unto the same head of their religion for a decision of the
doubt, whom they consulted before, (for as the channel of Christianity is and
must be still the same, so must the springhead be the same also) yet when the
thing is once decided, they have none but kings and governors under him, to
see the direction executed, as the only overseers with coactive power to do it.

And thus you see in brief how the Pope is head of the Church, and the King
head likewise, and both immediately under God; but with this difference, that
the king only governs Christianity established in his own royalty by law; the
Pope without further law rules and guides all the streams and rivulets of
religion, where ever it flows. He is head of primary direction; the king of
sovereign execution: he of guidance and spiritual authority only; the king of
civil and natural power invested in his place and dignity from God above, to
maintain any laws as well purely Christian as civil, which himself shall
accept, establish, and promulgate. The Pope persuades; but the King commands:
and although the Pope should formally command, yet vertually and in effect such
a command amounts only to a persuasion; and he that obeys not, feels no smart
for it, except the king be pleased to espous his cause, and punish the
contumacious; which if he justly do, then have kings a just authority in those
affairs; if otherwise, then has the Pope no means of help or defense in this
world, any more after the conversion of kings than before it; and help himself
he cannot any other way, than only by putting people out of his communion, who
care not for it. The Pope is obeyed for conscience and love only to his
religion; the King for wrath and conscience too: the Pope delivers the rule but
in general only, and blunt on one side; the King particularises it, and gives
it an edg: the Popes headship is exercised in Ought and Should be; the Kings is
Will and shall be: the Pope directs, but the King compells: the Pope secludes
the contumacious from heaven, which he that believes not feels not; the King
over and above that, cuts off malefactors from the face of the earth too, and
they shall be made by feeling to beleev it.

And these two defend and secure one another, and keep both Christians and
their faith inviolate. And while Christians themselves do both tenderly love
their Pape and chief pastor, and springhead of their religion, which is
believed beyond him to flow invisibly from God the great ocean of truth; and
withal do honor fear, and observe their King and princely governor, who only
bears the sword of justice, and not in vain, to take revenge upon all those,
whom the love of religion and spiritual sword of their pastor will not keep in
awe, they do their duty as they ought, and shall find happiness therein. I must
make haste, and can say no more at present to this business, which as I have
told you is somewhat besides my purpos.

Only one thing I must needs tell you before I pass on. Although a King is in a
good and proper sense styled head as well of Church as State within his own
dominions, as for all coersive power therein; yet head of the Church
absolutely, or head of primary direction in faith, is so proper to the chief
Prelate, that no man upon earth besides himself has ever so much as pretended
to it: and that for five reasons. First, because head of the Church absolutely,
intimates an universal right over the guidance of religion, not in one kingdom
only, but all, where ever that religion is. And the King of France, for
example, neither did nor can pretend to be head of the Church of England, much
less of Hungary, Spain, Africa, Italy, Greece, Asia, etc. Yet such a head there
must needs be, to the end the Church may be one mystic body, at unity in it
self. And that head must be unlimited to time and place, as the Church it self
is ever permanent, and universally spread; nor must the government alter, as
governments of particular kingdoms do. Secondly, head of the Church absolutely,
involves a primacy both of conveighing and interpreting faith: and all princes
in Europe received their faith at first from priests, who sent for that end
from their spiritual superior converted their kingdoms; but they never gave
faith either to them or their pastor, Thirdly, he that is head of the Church
absolutely, must be of the same connatural condition with the whole hierarchy,
to confirm, baptize, ordain, preach, atone the almighty by sacrifice, impose
hands, segregate men from their worldly state unto his own spiritual one, and
in a special manner to exercise those priestly functions, unto which he
segregates them. Fourthly, head of the Church absolutely is to be indifferent
unto kingdoms and all sorts of government, as the religion also is, and keep it
like it self in all places unaltered in its nature, however in its general
dictates it may concur to the direction and good of all people and governments.
And therefore he cannot be confined to one place or government, but must be as
it were separate and in a condition indifferent to all; as a general by shop,
whose sole care is to heed those eradiations of faith spread up and down the
world, may be and is; when princes heed but their own particular kingdoms, and
care not how religion goes in another, any more then their wealth or polity.
Thus the sunbeams, though they fall upon several soils diversely affected, yet
they keep their own nature unaltered, by virtue of one general fountainhead of
light which is indifferent to every kingdom, and dispenses, distributes, and
keeps the rays unchanged. The ends and ways of religion are quite of another
nature from all worldly businesses, and therefore require a particular
superintendent set apart for them; as indeed they ever have had since the time
of religions first master, who as he did educate his in order to a life eternal
in a government apart, being himself a man distinct from Caesar, so used he to
speak of religious duties as separate and differing from others; Reddite, says
he, quae Caesaris sunt, Caesari, and quae Dei, Deo. In very truth, the Church
and Christianity, as it is a thing accidental to all worldly states, so is it
superinduced upon them as an influence of another rank and order, unto a
particular end of future bliss; whereas all states do of themselves aim no
further then the peace and happiness of this life. And so for the particular end
and means answerable thereunto, which religion uses, it will require a
particular and special overseer. Thus Aristotle, though he conceited the
celestial orbs to be contiguous, and so all rapt together in a motion from East
to West, yet because they had special motions of their own, he therefore allowed
them particular intelligences to guide those motions. So we see in ordinary
affairs, a man that has several ways and ends is guided by several
directours, in this by a lawyer, in that by a physician, by a gardener, by a
tradesman, etc Fifthly, because head of the Church absolutely must be one that
succeeds in his chair, whom Jesus the master left and appointed personally to
feed his flock. No King upon earth ever pretended to fit in that Fishermans
chair, or to succeed him in it, which the Pope to my knowledge for sixteen
hundred years has both challenged as his right, and actually possessed. And
Catholics are all so fixed in this judgment, that they can no more disbeleev it,
then they can ceas to beleev in Jesus Christ.

11 chapter from page 228. to 246.

Your eleventh chapter falls directly upon my fifteenth paragraff of Scriptur.
And therefore I may here expect, you should insult over me to the purpos. But Sir
I told you before, and now tell you again, that I know no other rule to
Christians either for faith or manners, no other hope, no other comfort, but
what scriptur and holy gospel affords. But this is not any part of the debate
now in hand, however you would persuade the world to think so. When four or
five men Sir of several judgments collected from the very scriptur you and I
talk of, rise up one against another with one and the same scriptur in their
hands, with such equal pretense of light, power, and reason, that no one will
either yield to another, or remain himself in the same faith, but run endless
divisions without control: does scriptur prevent this evil? does it, has it,
can it remedy it? can any one man make a religion by the authority of scriptur
alone, which neither himself nor any other, upon the same grounds he framed it,
shall rationally doubt of. This is our case Sir, and only this; which you do
not so much as take notice of, to the end you may with a more plausible
rhetoric, insult over me as a contemner of Gods word. Nor do you heed any
particle of my discourse in this paragraff, but according to your manner,
collect principles to the number of seven, out of it, you say, which I do not
know to be so much as hinted in it; that as you did before, so you may now
again play with your own bawble, and confute your self. And they are in a
manner the very same you sported with before in your second chapter. 1. from
the Romans we received the gospel. 2. what is spoken in scripture of the
Church, belongs to the Roman. 3. the Roman every way the same it was, etc. of
all which I do not remember that I have in that my paragraff so much as any one
word. Sir, either speak to my discourse as you find it, or else hold your peace.

As if then you had overheard me aforehand, to give you this deserved check,
at the close of your chapter, you bring in some few words of mine, with a short
answer of your own, annexed to the skirts of it; which I here set down as you
place them your self. No man can say, speaks Fiat Lux, what ill popery ever did
in the world, till Henry the eights days, when it was first rejected. Strange,
say you in your Animadversions, when it did all the evils that ever were in the
Christian world. With the Roman catholics unity ever dwelt. Never. Protestants
know their neighbor catholics, not their religion. They know both. Protestants
are beholding to Catholics, for their benefices, books, pulpits, gospel. For
some, not all. The Pope was once believed general pastor over all. Prove it.
The scriptur and gospel we had from the Pope. Not at all. You cannot beleev the
scriptur, but upon the authority of the Church. We can and do. You count them
who brought the scriptur as liars. No otherwise. The gospel separated from the
Church can prove nothing. Yes it self. This short work you make with me. And to
all that serious discourse of mine concerning scriptur, which takes up sixteen
pages in Fiat Lux, we have got now in reply thereunto, this your
Laconick-confutation. Strange. Never, Know both, Some not all. Prove it. Not at
all, Can and do. No otherwis. Yes it self.

12 chapter from page 246. to 262.

Your twelfth chapter meets with my history of religion, as a flint with steel,
only to strike fire. For not heeding my story which is serious, temperate, and
sober, you tell another of your own, fraught with defamations and wrath,
against all ages and people: and yet speak as confidently, as calm truth could
do. First you say, that Joseph of Arimathea was in England, but he taught the
same religion that is in England now. But what religion is that Sir? Then, you
tell us that the story of Fugatius and Damian missioners of Pope Eleutherius
you do suspect for many reasons. But because you assign none, I am therefore moved
to think they may be all reduced to one, which is, that you will not acknowledge
any good thing ever to have come from Rome: Then, say you, succeeded times of
luxury, sloth, pride, ambition, scandalous riots, and corruption both of faith
and manners, over all the Christian world, both princes, priests, prelates and
people. Not a grain of virtue or any goodness we must think, in so many
Christian kingdoms and ages. Then did Goths and Vandals, and other pagans
overflow the Christian world. To teach them we may think, how to mend their
manners. These pagans took at last to Christianity. Happily, because it was a more
loose and wicked life, than their own pagan profession. These men now
Christened advanced the Popes authority, when Christian religion was now grown
degenerate. And now we come to know, how the Roman bishop became a patriark
above the rest, by means namely of new converted pagans. It was an odd chance,
they should think of advancing him to what they never knew, either himself, or
any other advanced before amongst Christians, whose rotten and corrupt faith
they had lately embraced. And yet more odd and strange it was, that all
Christendom should calmly submit to a power, set up anew by young converted
pagans; no prince or bishop either there or of any other Christian Kingdom,
either then or ever after to this day excepting against it. Had not all the
bishops and priests of Africa, Egypt, Syria, Thrace, Greece, and all the
Christian world acknowledged by a hundred experiments the supreme spiritual
authority of the Roman patriarch in all times, before this deluge of Goths and
Vandals? But why do I expostulate with you, who write these things not to
judicious readers, but fools and children, who are not more apt to tell a
truth, then beleev a ly. But what follows next. Toward the beginning of this
lurry, say you, were the Brittons extirpated by the Saxes, who in aftertimes
received Austin from Rome, a man very little acquainted with the Gospel. Here Is
the thanks good S. Austin has, who out of his love and tenderness to our
nations welfare, after so long and tedious journeys, entered upon the wild
forest of our paganism, with great hazards and inexpressible sufferings of
hunger, cold, and other corporal inconveniences, to communicate Christ Jesus,
and his life and grace unto our nation. After this, say you, religion daily
more and more declined till the Reformation rose. This is the sum of your
story; which if I like not, I may thank my self, say you, for putting you in
mind of it. Indeed Sir, it is so falls and defamatory, and laden with foul
language, not only against all nations, ages and people of all conditions, but
against the honor of sacred gospel it self, which must utterly dye, and have
no life or power in the world for so many ages together, that I think neither
I, or any else can like it, that bears any respect either to religion, modesty,
or truth. You say in this your chapter that I am better at telling a tale then
mannaging an argument: But I shall now beleev, that you are equally good at
both. Popery then is nothing but vice, and Protestancy is all virtue. I would
we could see where this Protestancy dwells.

13 chapter from page 262. to 278.

Your thirteenth chapter takes up my three following paragraffs about the
history of religion; wherein, after that according to your wonted manner you
tell me, that I do not my self understand what this thing, that thing, the
other thing means, although it be part of my own discourse, you say at length, that
there is no such matter, as I speak; make another story of your own of the same
mettle with your former, imposing afresh upon popery (by which I do not indeed
know what you mean) a wain-load of adulteries, drunkenness, atheism,
poisonings, avarice, pride, cruelties, tumults, blasphemy, rebellions, wars,
crimes, and yet threatening to say, if you should chance to be provoked, far
harder things then these. Sir, may no man provoke a wasp, nor force you to your
harder things. You are a terrible man of arms.

But if this be the right character of Popery, which here and elsewhere up and
down your book you give us, I tell you first, it will be a difficult matter to
know in what age or place popery most reigns; secondly, that it is a thing I am
so far from excusing, that I wish it back to the pit of hell from whence it
issued; thirdly, that Roman catholics, if you be indeed against this popery,
are all on your side; for to my knowledge their religion is as opposite to it,
as light to darkness, or God to Belial; lastly, that you need not be so tenderly
fearful for the spreading of popery; for honest men will be ready to stone him
that teaches it; and knaves, hypocrites, adulterers, traitors, thieves,
drunkards, atheists, rebels, if you have given a right description of popery,
are all Papists already; these need no conversion, the other will by no
rhetoric be moved to it. Indeed you fright us all from papistry. For though
some love iniquity as it is gainful or pleasursom, and must needs suffer for it
when they are condemned at the sessions, and cannot avoid it; yet is no man
willing to suffer either loss of goods or imprisonment, death or banishment,
for the bare name of popery, that has neither good nor gain in it. In a word,
wicked men will act your popery, but not own it. And they which own a popery,
which I see you are not acquainted withal, will not only dislike others, but
hate themselves, if through any frailty or passion they should ever fall into
any article of your Popery here described. Good Sir, take heed of blaspheming
that innocent Catholic flock, which the Angels of God watch over to protect
them. Be afraid to curs them, whom God has blessed, or impose that upon their
Religion, which it detests.

14 chapter from page 278 to 286.

Your fourteenth chapter, which is upon my title of Discovery, labors to show
that some of the contradictions, which I mentioned in Fiat Lux to be put upon
popery, are no contradictions at all; and labor may. Well Sir, although
slanders put upon them be never so contradictory and opposite, yet must they
have patience. All is true enough, if it be but bad enough. While our Kings
reign in peace, then the Papists religion is persecuted, as contrary to
monarchy: when we have destroyed that government, then is the papist harassed,
spoiled, pillaged, murdered, because their religion is wholly addicted to
monarchy, and papists are all for Kings. Have not these things been done over
and over, within the space of a few years here lately in England? All men now
alive have been eyewitnesses of it. These things as put upon papists ceas to
be contradictions: And if they should be contradictions, both parts are therefore
true in our country logic, because they are put upon papists. Is there not
something of the power of darkness in this?

One latin word of mine which shuts up that my paragraff of Discovery. Ejice
ancillam cum puero suo, because I english it not, you translate it for me, or
rather interpret it, Bannish all men out of England but Papists: this according
to your gloss must be my meaning. And you seem to exult, that Fiat Lux, who in
outward show pretends so much moderation, should let fall a word that betrays
no little mischief in his heart. Good Lord whither does passion hutry man's
spirit! All that period of mine in the end of the foresaid is but merely
coppied out of one of Saint Paul's letters, which he wrote to the Galatians, the
fourth chapter of that Epistle, wherein those very words, alluding to a passage
in Moses his pentateuch, are expressed. Do you either read in your English Bible,
Bannish all men out of England, or understand any such meaning of Ejice
ancillam cum puero suo? Gal. 4.30. Pray peruse the ten last verses of that
chapter attentively; and see if I have not in my discourse so coppied out their
meaning and very words too, so far as it behooved; that I have done nothing
else. Abraham had two sons, says St. Paul, one of a handmaid, the other of a
free woman, etc. These things are an allegory, etc. But as then, he that was
born after the flesh persecuted him that was born after the spirit, even so it
is now. But what says the scriptur? Cast out the bondwoman with her son: for
the son of the bondwoman shall not be heir with the son of the freewoman,
etc. Pray tell me soberly; Did the apostle mean by those words, Cast out the
Bondwoman with her son, that the sons of Ishmael should be put to the sword,
or banished out of their kingdom? Now pray hear my discourse which I coppied out
of that original; If my reader here be cautious, he may easily discern a
reason, why all these sects are so loisterous one against another, and every
one of them against the Roman catholic. Ismael disturbed the whole house, and
was ever quarrelling and bustling against Isaac. The reason is the same both
here and there. I smael was a natural son, and Isaac the legitimate heir. And
natural sons be generally seditious, violent and clamorous. As I smael therefore
was Isaac his natural brother; so is a Protestant Minister but the by-blow of a
catholic Priest; the Presbyterian likewise to him: and so forward, till you
com to the Quaker, who was begot by a delusion, and brought into the world by a
fright: his hand is against every man, and every man's hand against him. The
remedy and only means of peace is, Ejice ancillam cum puero suo. These be my
words out of S. Paul; and what is his meaning, the same is mine. But you will
have me in spite of my teeth, because I speak nothing but good, still to mean
some evil. I thought S. Paul had meant by those words, if I must needs discover
my understanding to you, that the peaceable Isaacs were the only sons of Gods
promised love and favor, the inheritance of which blessing boisterous Ishmaels
can never work out to themselves, by all their persecutions and bustling
contentions. And according to this meaning I concluded, that to consider and
think seriously of this, were the only remedy and means of peace amongst us
here in England. Ejice ancillam cum puero suo is an antidote against all
contentious emulations, which are a suspicious mark not of an elect, but of a
reprobate. But whatever I say, I must neither think, nor mean, but what you
will have me to do; and that shall still be something that is odious. An emblem
hereof was the rod of Moses, which in Moses hand was a walking-staff, but out
of it a serpent.

15 chapter from page 286 to 304.

In your fifteenth chapter, upon my paragraff of Messach, you are in a mighty
plunge what this Messach should be, and what the etimology of that word. Latin
it is not, greek it is not, and you are sure it is not hebrew; surely it is,
say you, some uncouth word, like that of the Gnostics Paldabaoth. Alas good
Sir, it is English, a pure English word; used here in England all the Saxons
time, and some hundred years after the conquest, till the French monosyllable
had by little and little worn out the last syllable of the word. And you may
find it yet in the old Saxon laws which I have read my self, those especially
of King Ina, if I rightly remember the name, which be yet extant, wherein strict
care and provision is made, that a due reverence be kept by all people in the
Church all the time of their Messach, which now we call Mess or Mass.

Then having laughed at my admiration of catholic Service, you carp at me for
saying that the first Christians were never called together to hear a sermon;
and to convince me, you bring some places out of S. Paul's Epistles, and the
Acts, which commend the ministry of the word: This indeed is your usual way of
refuting my speeches; you flourish copiously in that which is not at all
against me, and never apply it to my words, lest it should appear, as it is,
impertinent. I deny not that people were by Gods word converted, or that
converts were further instructed, or that the preaching of Gods word is good
and useful many ways; but that which I say is, that primitive. Christians were
never called together for that end, as the great work of their Christianity.
This I have so clearly proved, both in the second dialogue of the Reclaimed
Papist, and also in the foresaid paragraff of Messach, that you divert from
that, to declaim of the necessity and excellency of preaching, and bring
neither text nor reason that may reach to my words at all.

You go on, and wonder much, that we should hear nothing in scriptur of this
Christian sacrifice, if any such were. Sir, you will neither hear nor see. But,
say you, the passion of our Lord is our Christian sacrifice. Do not I say so
too? But that this incruent sacrifice was instituted by the same Lord before
his death, to figur out daily before our eyes that passion of his, which was
then approaching, in commemoration of his death, so long as the world should
last; this, ^ho I plainly speak it, you take no notice of it. But the Judaical
sacrifice, say you, is said by the Apostle in his Epistle to the Hebrews, in
this to differ from the sacrifice of Christians, that ours was don but once,
theirs often. It is true, the sacrifice of our Lords passion, of which the
apostle in that whole discourse only treats, in opposition to that of bulls and
goats, was so don but once, that it could not be don twice. But as the
sacrifices of the old law, were instituted by almighty God, to be often
iterated before the passion of the Messiah for a continual exercise of
religion; so did the same Lord for the very same purpos of religious exercise,
institute another to be iterated after his death; unto which it were to have
reference, when it should be past, as the former had to the same death, when it
was to com. And it has a reference so much the more excellent, as that it does
by the almighty power of the same Messiah, exhibit to the faith of his
believers, that very true real body as crucified amongst us, whereof the former
Mosaical sacrifices gave merely a shadow. Did not our Lord do this? Were not
the apostles according to this rite (...) sacrificing to our great Lord God,
when S. Paul was by imposition of hands segregated from the laiety for his
divine service, as I clearly in that my paragraff evince out of the history of
the Acts of the apostles. No, say you, the apostles were not then about any
sacrifice, but only preaching Gods word, or some such thing to the people, in
the name and behalf of God. But Sir, is this to be in earnest or to jest? The
sacred text says, they were sacrificing to our Lord, liturgying, and
ministering to him. You say, They were not sacrificing to God, but only
preaching to the people. And now the question is, whether you or I more rightly
understand that Apostoloicall book. For my sense and meaning I have all
antiquity, as well as the plain words of sacred text, you have neither.

16 chapter from page 304 to 313.

Your sixteenth chapter upon my paragraff of the Virgin Mary, which is, you
say, the most disingenious of all my book, is spent in an invective against
calumnies, which brings you upon your often iterated common place of Pagans
reproaches of Christians. And whatever my paragraff may be, this your chapter
seems to me as ingenious as the very best of your book, and absolutely
frivolous. And must you invegh against calumnies, whose whole book is nothing
else? It is a bundle of slanders, and a mere quiver of fiery darts of desolation
and malice.

17. chapter from page 313 to 325.

Your seventeenth chapter upon my paragraff of Images or Figures, nibbles at
more of my discourse made in that one paragraff, then you have taken notice of
in ten of my others. A man, say you, may indeed have such thoughts of devotion,
as Fiat Lux speaks of, upon the sight of images, which be sees banging in
Churches, if he be a man distraught of his wits, not if he be himself and
sober. So then; mad men it seems can tell what figures represent, sober and
wise men cannot. Again, The violation of an image, say you redounds to the
prototype, if it be rightly and duly represented, not else. And when then is
Christ crucified, for example, rightly and duly represented? Are you one of
those mad men can tell what figures represent, yea or no. The hanging up of
traitors in effigy is don, say you, only to make a declaration of the fact,
and not to cast a dishonor upon the person. So you say: Because you know it don
long after the fact has rung all the whole Kingdom over; and don, not in places
of concours, but ignominy; not in the Exchange, but Tyburn; not with any
characters declaring the fact, but with a halter about his neck, to denote the
death and ignominy inflicted, as far as is possible, upon him. You go on.

Where the Psalmist complains of Gods enemies breaking down his sculptures, he
means not thereby any images or figures, but only wainscot or carved ceiling.
Surely the Prophet wanted a word then to express himself, or translatours to
express the Prophet. If we must guess at his meaning without heeding his words,
one might think it as probable, what also holy scripture tells us, that the
house of God was ordained with sculptures of Cherubims, and other angels, to
represent his true house that is above; as with the circles, quadrats,
triangels, rhombos, and rhomboides of wainscot. The eye, say you again, may not
have her species as well as the ear, because God has commanded the one and not
the other. This Sir you only say. Fiat Lux makes it appear, that God commands
and commends both, and the nature of man requires both: nor can you give any
reason, why I may not look upon him who was crucified, as well as hear of him.
You add. Nor is the sole end of preaching as Fiat Lux would have it, only to
move the mind of the hearers unto corresponding affections. Why do not you say
then, what else it is for? you deny my words, but declare your self no other
end, but what I have in those short words expressed. You may happily conceal in
your heart some other end of your preaching, which you are loath to speak; as to
procure applaus, to vent your rhetoric, to get good benefices, to show your
fine cloth and silks, your pure neat white starched bands and cuffs, buttoned
handkerchiefs and ladies gloves, to inflame factions, get wives, or the like;
but I could not think of all things at once; nor needed I to express any more,
then that one end of preaching which is connatural, apostolical, and legal. You
go on.

God indeed commanded the Cherubims to be set upon the ark, but those cherubims
were images of nothing; of what should they be images? Nor were they set up to
be adored. Besides God who commanded them to be set up, did no more gainsay his
own prohibition of images to be made, than he contradicted his own rule which
forbids to steal, when he commanded his people to spoil the Egyptians. But Sir,
since the real Cherubims are not made of our beaten gold, those set up by Moses
must be only figures. And of what else should they be figures but of those real
ones. Nor is it either to my purpos or yours, that they are set up to be
adored. For images in catholic Churches, are not set up for any such purpos;
nor do I any where say it. No man alive has any such thought, nor tradition, no
council has delivered it, no practis infers it. Christian Philosophers or
Schoolmen have indeed raised a philosophical question; Whether any respect may
be terminated upon the figure, purely as it such an absolute entity in it self,
besides that relative one that falls only upon the prototype: But what they
question, or what they talk, or what they resolve, does no more belong, because
they say it, unto catholic faith, then if they had been asleep and said
nothing. All catholic councels and practis declares such sacred figures, to be
expedient assistants to our thoughts in our divine meditation and prayers: and
that is all that I know of it. And the relative respect that is given to any
figur as it is such a figur, whether in a glass, or in any more fixed postur to
supply the defects of a mirror, that it terminates naturally upon the sampler
or prototype is evident to right reason and philosophy. And it cannot be
otherwise.

That which you speak of the Israelites spoiling the Egyptians by Gods command,
has some species of an argument in it. But Sir, we must know, you as well as I,
that God who forbids men to steal, did not then command to steal, as you say he
did, when he bad his people spoil the Egyptians under the species of a loan.
Many things legitimate that their act of spoil, and clear it from any notion of
theft or robbery or stealing. First, they might have of themselves a right to
those few goods, in satisfaction of the long oppression they had unjustly
undergon: and it may be that in that their great haste, their own allowance was
not then paid them. But secondly, because it is a thing of danger, that any
servant should be allowed to right himself, by putting his hand to his masters
goods, though his case of wrong be never so clear, therefore did the command of
God intervene to justify their action. And the absolute dominion of the whole
earth and all that is in it, being inseparably in the hands of God, made that
by Gods express command to be truly now and justly the Hebrews right, which by
an inferior and subordinate title, such as is in the hand of creatures,
belonged to the Egyptians before. So that the Hebrews in taking those goods
with them, did not steal: nor did God command them to steal, when he bad them
carry those goods of the Egyptians with them; for that upon that very command
of God they now ceased to be the Egyptians any more. But this can no ways be
applied to the business of Images: nor could God command the Hebrews to make any
images, if he had absolutely forbidden to have any at all made. For this
concerns not any affair between neighbor and neighbor, whereof the supreme
Lord has absolute dominion, but the service only and adoration due from man to
his maker, which God being essentially good and immutably true, cannot alter or
dispens with. Nor does it stand with his nature and deity to chang, dispens, or
vary the first table of his law concerning himself; I mean as to the substance
of it, by commanding us now to have but one God, then to worship two; now not
to take his name in vain, and then to blaspheme it, as he may do the second,
which concerns neighbors; for want of that dominion over himself, which he
has over any creature, to give or take away its right, to preserv or destroy
it, as himself pleases. God may disable my neighbors right, and enable me to
take to may self that which before was his, but he cannot command me to commit
idolatry or dishonor himself. If he should deny himself, he would not be God.
From hence it must needs follow, that if it be the sens and mind of the
almighty, that to set up any images in Churches be derogatory to his glory,
then could not God possibly command any to be there set up. For these two
precepts, Thou shall set up images, and Thou shall set up none, are not only
contradictory in terms of the law proposed, enounced and promulgated, but infer
also in God himself that contradiction, opposition and self-denial, which is
inconsisting with such an unchangeable veracity. God may possibly allow me
either to curs or spoil my neighbor, or in a case expressed not to help him; but
he should deny himself, (which the deity cannot do) if either he should command
me to blaspheme himself, or the honor due to him either to refuse it him, or
give it to another. When therefore one and the same God so often forbids his
people to make to themselves any images; and yet in the same divine law commands
them to set up Cherubims in his own temple; it cannot, being a concernment of
his worship, be otherwise meant, than that they should make no sculptures or
figures, but what himself commands, and which may assuredly represent persons
dear to himself, as Fiat Lux interprets it. And if an image in it self be
opposite to Gods glory, as Anticatholiks think; then could not God possibly
command the making or setting up of any, in his holy temple or place of divine
worship. But you go on.

Fiat Lux says, God forbad foreign images, such as Moloch, Dagon, and
Astaroth, but he commanded his own. But Fiat lux is deceived in this as well as
other things, for God forbad any likenesses of himself; and he gives the
reason, because, says he, in Horeb ye saw no similitude of me. Sir, you may
know and consider, that the statues and graven images of the heathens, toward
whose land Israel then in the wilderness was journeying, to enter and take
possession, were ever made by the pagans to represent God, and not any devils,
although they were deluded in it. And therefore were they called the gods of the
mountains, the gods of the valleys, the gods of Accaron, Moab, etc. There was
therefore good reason, that the Hebrews, who should be cautioned from such
snares, should be forbidden to make to themselves any similitude or likeness of
God. What figur or similitude the true God had allowed his people, that let
them hold and use, until the fullness of time should com, when the figur of his
substance, the splendor of his glory, and only image of his nature should
appear. And now good Sir, since God has been pleased to show us his face, pray
give Christians leav to use, and keep, and honor it. If you be otherwise
minded, and take pleasur in defacing his figurs, I think they have good reason
on their sides, who honor them. You proceed.

It is a pretty fansy in Fiat Lux, to say we have as well a precept, Thou shall
make graven images, as we have, Thou shall not. I wonder where Fiat Lux finds
that precept, since all ancients have it, and all translations read it, Thou
shall not. What is that It they have, what is that It they read? Do you think
that Fiat lux reads one and the same text, both Thou shall and Thou shall not.
Moses his making, and the command given him to make Cherubims, is a rule good
enough to Fiat lux, that some images may be made, and set up in Churches: as
also is that precept, Thou shall not make to thy self any images, another rule
to show him, that some images we are not to make to our selves on our own heads,
in imitation of pagans.

No less whimsical, say you, is that relation Fiat lux says an image has to
some one Prototype, for example, to S. Peter rather then to Simon Magus: for
there can be no relation, but what the imagination either of the framer or
spectatour makes. Sir, speaking as I do of a formal representation or relation,
and not of the efficient cause of it, I cannot but wonder at this your illogical
assertion. Is the pictur made by the spectatours imagination to represent this
or that thing? or the imagination rather guided to it by the pictur? By this
rule of yours the image of Caesar, did not my imagination help it, would no
more represent a man than a mous. I know the imagination can, for want of real
picturs, make fantastical ones to its self; in the clouds, walls, air, or fire,
etc. But when she has real ones, made her either by art or nature, she cannot
make them to be otherwise then they are; nor think or say, except she will
abuse her self to derision, that a cat is a dog, or an ox a hare. Nor does it
help you at all, that there may be mistakes; for we treat not here of the
errors but natures of things. And you will not I hope maintain, that there is
no real heat any where, but what the imagination makes, because the good poor
man of Norway sent out of his own country upon an errand, stood warming his
fingers there, at a hedge of red roses.

18 chapter from page 325. to 365.

Your eighteenth chapter, which is upon my paragraff of Tongues or Latin
service, has some color of plausibility. But because you neither do, nor will
understand the customs of that Church, which you are eager to oppose; all your
words are but wind. I have heard many grave protestant divines, ingeniously
acknowledge, that divine comfort and sanctity of life requisite to salvation
which religion aims at, may with more perfection and less inconvenience be
attained by the customs of the Roman Church, which gives the sense, life, and
meaning of Gods word to the people, without the hard shell of the letter, than
that of ours, which gives it in the shell to break peoples teeth. Religion is
not to sit pierching upon the lips, but to be got by heart, it consists not in
reading but doing; and in this, not in that, lives the substance of it, which
is soon and easily conveyed. Christ our Lord drew a compendium of all divine
truths into two words, which his great apostle again abridged into one. And if
the several gospels for every day in the year, which are or may be in the hands
of all catholics, the chiefest particles of divine epistles, books of sacred
history and meditation upon all the mysteries of salvation, and spiritual
treatises for all occasions and uses, which be numberles amongst catholics,
adjoined to the many several rites of examination of conscience, daily and
continual practis of prayer and fasting, and an orderly commemoration of the
things God has wrought for us throughout the year, which all by law are tied
to observe, and do observe them, may not give a sufficient acquaintance of what
concerns our salvation, and promote them enough toward it, I am to seek what
it is that can; or what further good it may do, to read the letter of Saint
Paul's epistles, to the Romans for example, or Corinthians, wherein questions,
and cases and theological discourses are treated, that vulgar people can
neither understand, nor are at all concerned to know. And I pray you tell me
ingeniously, and without heat, what more of good could accrue to any by the
translated letter of a book, whereof I will be bold to say, that nine parts in
ten concern not my particular, either to know or practis, than by the conceived
substance of Gods will to me, and my own duty toward him? or what is there now
here in England when the letter of scriptur is set open to every man's eye, any
more either of peace or charity, piety or justice, than in former catholic
times, when the substance of Gods word and will was given people in short, and
the observance of their duty prolixly pressed upon them. What did they do in
those ancient catholic times? they flockt every day in the week to their
Churches, which stood continually open, there to pray and meditate, and renew
their good purposes; they sung psalms, hymns, and canticles all over the land
both day and night; they built all our churches, that we have at this day
remaining amongst us, and as many more, which we have razed and pulled down;
they founded our universities, established our laws, set out tithes and
glebe-land for their clergy, built hospitals, erected corporations; in a word,
did all the good things we found don for our good in this our native kingdom.
But (...) Quid agitur in Anglia? Consulitur de religione. The former Christians
practiced, and we dispute: they had a religion, we are still seeking one: they
exercised themselves in good works by the guidance of their holy catholic faith
which leads to them; all these works we by our faith evacuate as menstruous
rags: they had the substance of true religion in their hearts; we the text in
our lips: they had nothing to do but to conform their lives to Gods will; all
our endeavor is to apply Gods word to our own factions. Sir mistake me not:
The question between us, is not, Whether the people are to have Gods word, or
no? but whether that word consists in the letter left to the peoples disposal;
or in the substance urgently imposed upon people for their practis. And this
because you understand not, but mistake the whole business, all your talk in
this your eighteenth chapter vades into nothing.

Where Fiat Lux says in that forenamed paragraff, that the Pentateuch or
hagiography was never by any High Priest among the Jew^ (...) into a vulgar
tongue, nor the Gospel or Lit^ out of greek in the Eastern part of the
Christian Church, or latin in the Western: You slight this discourse of mine,
because hebrew, greek, and latin was, say you, vulgar tongues themselves. I know
this well enough. But when and how long ago were they so? not for some hundreds
of years to my knowledge. And was the Bible, Psalms, or Christian liturgy then
put into vulgar tongues, when those they were first writ in, ceased to be
vulgar? This you should have spoke to, if you had meant to say any thing, or
gainsay me. Nor is it to purpos, to tell me that S. Jerome translated the
Bible into Dalmatian; I know well enough it has been so translated by some
special persons into Gothish, Armenian, Ethiopian, and other particular
dialects. But did the Church either of the Hebrews or Christians, either greek
or latin, ever deliver it so translated to the generality of people, or use it
in their service, or command it so to be don, as a thing of general concernment
and necessity? So far is it from this, that they would never permit it. This I
said, and I first said it, before you spoke, and your mere gainsay without
further reason or probability of proof cannot disposses me.

Dr. Cousins, now bishop of Durham, lately sojourneying in Paris, when he
understood of a grecian bishops arrival there, did with some other English
Gentlemen in his company give him a visit, and with the same or like company
went afterward to see him. The articles of our English Church were translated
into greek, and shown him. Many questions were asked him about the service of
the grecian Church, praying for the dead, invocation of Saints, real presence,
confession, etc. Dr. Cousins can tell himself what answer he received from that
venerable grave prelate Cyrillus, archbishop of Trapesond; for that was his
name and title. In brief, he owned not those articles, as any way consonant to
the faith of the Greeks, who believed and had ever practiced the contrary. He
also told them distinctly and openly, that Mass or Liturgy was, and had ever
been the great work of their Christianity all over the greek Church; that
confession of sins to a priest, praying for the dead, invocation of saints, and
such like points wherein we in England differ from papists, were all great
parts of their religion, and their constant practis. Finally, he let them know,
that all the Liturgies, both those of St. Basil, St. Chrysostom, St. Gregory
Nazianzen, were ever kept in the learned greek, differing from the vulgar
language. And withal showed his own greek book of Liturgy, which he used
himself at the altar. Dr. Cousins did himself see him officiate with his
lay-brother a monk of St. Basil, belonging to St. Catherins monastery in mount
Sina, ministering to him at the altar; and found both by his words and practis,
that in all those and other essential parts and observances of Christianity the
Greeks agreed perfectly with the Roman Church. This testimony, Sir, of a
venerable arch-byshop, to such a worthy person as Dr. Cousins, might I should
think suffice to justify my words, and make you beleev with me, that Christian
Liturgies have ever been used, as Fiat Lux speaks in a learned language
distinct from the vulgar. But we need not go far from home for a testimony.
Neither the Bible nor Service Book was ever seen here in England for a thousand
years space in any other language but Latin, before Edward the sixth days,
(except happily the Psalter, which the Saxons and almost all people, have ever
had in their own tongue, being a chief part of Christians devotion) nor in
British or Welsh, before the bishop of S. Asaphs translation. And yet the
people all that while wanted no know-knowledge of Gods will, or comfort of his
word.

You mightily insult over me in your 336 page, for saying, that the bible was
kept by the Hebrews in an ark or tabernacle, not touched by the people, but
brought out at times to the priest, that he might instruct the people out of
it. Here, say you, the author of Fiat Lux betrays his gross ignorance and
something more: for the ark was place in sanctum sanctorum, and not entered but
by the priest only once a year, whereas the people were weekly instructed. But
Sir, do I speak there of any sanctum sanctorum, or of any ark in that place?
Was there, or could there be no more arks but one? If you had been only in these
latter days, in any synagogue or convention of Jews, you might have seen even
now how the bible is kept still with them in an ark or tabernacle, in imitation
of their forefathers, when they have now no sanctum sanctorum amongst them.
You may also discern, how according to their custom, they cringe and prostrate
at the bringing out of the bible, which is the only solemn adoration left
amongst them; and that there be more arks than that in sanctum sanctorum. If I
had called it a box or chest or cupboard, you had let it pass. But I used the
word Ark as more sacred.

19 chapter from page 365. to 386.

I discerned in your nineteenth chapter, which is upon my paragraff of
Communion in one kind, a somewhat more than ordinary swelling choler; which
moved me to look over that my paragraff afresh. And I found my fault: there is
in it so much of Christian reason and sobriety, that if I had since the time I
first wrote it, swerved from my former judgment, of the probability I conceived
to be in that Roman practis of communicating in one kind, I had there met with
enough to convert my self. And therefore wondered no more, that you should load
me so heavily with your wonted imputations of fraud, ignorance, blasphemy, and
the like. I ever perceiv you to be then most of all passionate, when you meet
with most convincing reasons. When the exorcist is most innocent, his patient,
they say, then frets and foams and curses most. There is not a word in this your
chapter, which is not by way of anticipation answered in that my of Fiat Lux,
against which you write.

20 chapter from page 386. to 402.

There is in your twentieth chapter, which prosecutes my paragraff of Saints or
Hero's, one word of yours, that requires my notice. I say in that my paragraff,
that the pagans derided the ancient Christians for three of their usages.
First, for eating their own God: Secondly, for kneeling to the Priests
genitals: Thirdly, for worshipping an asses head. This last you except against,
and impute my story to my own simplicity and ignorance, if not to something
wors; for that imputation, say you, was not laid upon Christians at all, but
only upon Jews, as may be seen in Josephus, etc. But Sir, you may know, that in
odiosis the primitive Christians were ever numbered among the Jews; and what
evil report lay upon these, was charged also upon them, though sometimes upon
another ground. And although Josephus may excuse the Jews, and not the
Christians; yet a long while after his time, if not even then also, that
slander was generally all over the pagan world charged upon Christians also, as
may be read in Tertullian, and other ancient writers; yea and very probably, by
the very Jews themselves, who bitterly hated them, cast off from themselves upon
the poor Christians on another account, which I specified in Fiat Lux. And
through the whole Roman Empire did the sound of this scandal ring up and down
for some ages together. Insomuch that Tertullian himself conceited, that as the
Christian religion was derived from the Jews; so likewise that the imputation
of the asses head, first put upon the Jews, might from them be derived upon
Christian religion. And the same Tertullian, in his Apologetick adds these
words: The calumnies, says he, invented to cry down our religion grew to such
excess of impiety, that not long ago in this very city, a pictur of our God was
shown by a certain infamous person, with the ears of an ass, and a hoof on one
of his feet, clothed with a gown, and a book in his hand; with this
inscription, This is Onochoetes the God of Christians. And he adds, that the
Christians in the city, as they were much offended with the impiety; so did
they not a little wonder at the strange uncouth name the vaillain had put upon
their lord and master; Onochoetes forsooth, he must be called Onochoetes. And
are not you Sir a strange man, to tell me, page 393. that what I speak of this
business is notoriously falls, nay and that I know it is false, and I cannot
produce one authentic testimony, no not one of any such things. But this is
but your ordinary confidence.

21 chapter from page 402. to 416.

I must not marvel that my following paragraff, called Dirge, is so wantonly
played upon, in your one and twentieth chapter. You think of no body after they
are dead; nor does it at all concern you, whether they be in hell, or heaven,
or some third place, or not at all. But Sir, were not all the ancient monuments
of the foundations of our churches, colleges, and chapels in England now
destroyed, you would find your self with that wretched opinion of yours,
absolutely incapable to enter upon any benefice, cure, or employment in this
land. But the times are changed, and you have nothing now to do, but to eat,
drink, and preach; for to morrow you shall dye.

22 chapter from page 416 to 435.

In your two and twentieth chapter, which is of the Pope, you do but only
repeat my words, and not understand, and deny, and laugh.

23 chapter from page 435. to Finis.

Your last chapter is upon my paragraff of Popery, wherein I set down eleven
other parcels of catholic profession, all of them innocent, unblamable and
sacred. You only bite at the first of them; and having it seems enough filled
your self with that, your wearied bones go to rest.

With Mas comedido, the title of my last paragraff you meddle not at all: It is
doubtless to you who understand not the English word Messach, another Gnostick
Paldabaoth. But I would you had Mas comedido by heart.

You cannot but marvel, that I have taken so little notice all this while, of
your only one strong and potent Argument, your stout Achilles that meets me in
every paragraff and period, and beats me back into the walls of Troy. Wherever
I am, whatsoever I say, your (...) is upon me. All the discourse of my whole one
and thirty paragraffs, is by it felled to the ground, miserably bruised and
battered with that one and the same (...). But I hope you will have me excused.
I have not leasur; I am not willing; I want ability to answer it, or give you
any corresponding satisfaction. The like to our Author, say you, for
flourishing empty words and cunning sleights of subtilty has been seldom, etc.
Here our Author falls into a great misadventure, etc. Here our Author
discovers not only his gross ignorance, but something more, etc. Our Author
believes not a word of all this, nor can, etc. We find our Author never to
fail so palpably and grossly, as when, etc. Our Author speaks notoriously falls,
nor has he, etc. Our Authors history, philosophy and reason all alike, etc.
Our Author speaks boldly, though he know it is not so, but, etc. Our Author,
if I could com to speak to him, would not own any this, etc. Never any such
cunning dissembling hypocrite as our Author, etc. It is no mervail our Author
should still fail both in philosophy, antiquity, etc. who has not, etc. In
these and such like arguments, which occur almost as often as the pages of your
book, you rout Our Author utterly. I am in all this not able to say boh to a
goos. Although I be not conscious of any either fraud in my breast, or fault in
my book, or lie in either; yet in all such talk you must, and will, and shall
have both the first and last word too.

Another argument of yours expressed in twenty places of your Animadversions, by
which you would dissipate at once great part of Fiat Lux into the air, does as
finely cant, as this does coursly defy. The religion, say you, that is now
professed in England, is that and only that which was first in ancient times
received here, etc. This you speak, and the more confidently do you speak it,
the less significant you know your words be, and yet sounding well enough for
your design. What do you mean I pray you Sir, by that religion that is now
professed in England? Why do you not specify it? Speak it in downright language.
Is it Popery that has been peaceably professed in the land for almost a thousand
years, and did all the good things we now find in it; as yet professed by some?
No; this you will deny. Is it Prelate-Protestancy that for threescore years
oppressed Popery here? If you had said this, you had praised that too much, which
your self approves not. Is it Presbytery that warred the last twenty years, and
utterly destroyed the foresaid Protestancy? In saying this you had to your own
danger disabled the English Protestant Church, now to the great heart-burning
of the Presbyterians established again by law. Is it Independency, that for six
or seven years curbed the Presbyterian here, in -- Tectour Olivers time, and
had almost past an Act for the abolishing of the three P. P. P. Papish,
Protestant, and Presbyterian. It is Quakery, that is now far enough spread, and
openly professed by many, and judges the Papist stark naught, the Protestant half
rotten, the Presbyterian a quarter addle, and other Independents imperfect? Is
it some general abstracted religion, that is common to them all? If it be so,
then Popery as well as any other may be justly styled the religion here first
received. For that common notion in whatever you shall say it consists, so it
be positive as it ought to be, will be found first and principally in the
Papists faith. But this you have not thought good your self to expres, that you
may seem to expres something, that may be thought good to your self, and ill to
me. But you must deal heartily with me: I am an old ox that has fixed his
foot firmly, and am not to be out-braved either with your canting words or
passionate execrations.

I had told you Sir, of all your tricks from page to page in particular, if
nothing had been required at my hands to write, but only my own reply: but
being, if I should do so, obliged to set down your talk too, I think it not
worth either my charge or labor to reflect upon you such your voluminous
impertinencies. And I have I assure you taken notice of all in your book, that
may seem to have any appearance of reason in it, (though really there be none at
all against me) and is not either manifestly untrue, or absolutely improper.
This is all.

And now good Sir, I could wish you had given me the first letter of your name;
that I might have known how to salute you. I have been told of late, that the
Author of the Animadversions upon Fiat Lux is one Doctor O. N, a Protestant
against Popery which you found down, a Presbyterian against Protestancy which
you threw down, an Independent against Presbyterianry which you kept down. But
whether you be Doctor O. N, or to turn your inside outward, you be N. O
Doctor; since I cannot be assured, it shall be all one to me. All that I have
undertook at this time is to let you know, who ever you be, that I have read
over your Animadversions upon my Fiat. And I thank you for your book; for it
confirms Fiat Lux, and all the whole design of it, I think irrefragably. It
shows to the eye and really verrifies by your own example, what Fiat Lux did
but speak in words: namely that controversies of religion are endless for want
of some one thing to fix upon, which may not be depraved; that they are fraught
with uncharitable animosities, which darken the understanding and deprave good
manners; that they are mutable as men's fancies be, which can never be fixedly
stated, since every man has a spirit, has a method, has an opinion of his
own, and says and denies with endless diversity; that they are guileful and
delusory, sometimes falls on both sides, ever on one, and yet still made out
with subtle words, so plausible to the eye and ear, that men employed in the
multitude of affairs and troubles of this world, can never be able to
disintangle those knots of pro and con; then especially at a loss, when they
consider, that such as manage those disputes are all of them interested
persons; fifthly, that they are mad and irrational, while all parties pretend
one and the same rule of holy scriptur, and yet will admit of no exterior
visible judge in their visible exterior contests: lastly, that they are
mischievous and fatal to all places where they rise: as they have been of late
to this our distressed Kingdom of England, where disputes and controversies
about religion raised to a height, by the inferior scribes against their
prelates, drew after them pikes and guns to make them good for twenty years
together, with much desolation and ruin; which times I think I may not unjustly
call the Vicars Wars. For the inferior priests and levites, envying the
dignities, glory and revenues of their prelates, when they could not otherwise
get them into their own hands, by their lamentable tones in Eloimi, raised up
the people of the land, to further their design. This trick of theirs they
learned from wolves. For these, when they spy a waifaring man whom they would
devour, and yet by a narrow search perceiv him to be too strong for them,
starting aside upon some hillock; there set upon their tails, they howl for help.

And if any will not beleev Fiat Lux, that such be the fruits of disputes and
controversies, and such their nature and genius, let them beleev the Author of
Animadversions, who as he says what he pleases, and denies what he lists; so
to his frequent reproaches, villifications and slanders he adjoyns his own
Menaces of terror, to make my words good, and justify Fiat Lux.

You frequently threaten me, that if I write again, I shall hear more, far more
than you have said in your Animadversions; but I promis you Sir, if you write
again, you shall never hear more from me. For now the flies begin to com into
my chamber, which may happily expect I should heed their flight and hearken to
their buzz; and I must not leav those greater employments to look upon your
Animadversions, or any your other books. Farewell.

Given this V. of the Ides of April in the year of our Lord MDCLXIII. J. V. C.

EPISTOLA AD CROESVM, AGAINST Mr. Whitby.

The occasion of this second Epistle.
Doctor Pierce had preached a Sermon in the Court upon that text, In the
beginning it was not so; from whence he took occasion to speak of Popery, which
in this and that and the other particular, he said in the beginning was not so,
and consequently all of it a novelty. This sermon was afterward printed, and
not a little applauded by those who are taken with such airs. Mr. Cressy a
Catholic Gentleman, the Authors friend, then sojourning in London, wrote a
book called, Catholic doctrine no novelties, in confutation of that Sermon, and
went presently away to Paris. But after his departure Mr. Whitby set forth a
huge bulk of a book against Cressy. The Author in this his epistle gives
notice to Mr. Cressy his friend then in France, of the contents and tenor of
that his adversaries book.

Epistola ad Croesum, against Mr. Whitby.
SIR,
IT is now about a year, since Dr. Pierce made his pretty featous Sermon in the
Court: where, by virtue of those few words of his text, In the beginning it was
not so, Matthew. 19.8. he confuted all Popery in the space of one hour, as a mere
bundle of novelties. The Treatise you left here in the hands of some friends,
before your departure to Paris, to prove against the tenor of the said Sermon,
That Catholic doctrines are no novelties, printed afterward by I know not what
good hand, gave us here in England, after your departur, a great deal of good
satisfaction. This book of yours about a month or two after it was extant, was
seconded by another, against Dr. Pierce penned by Jo. Sim. a small, but a very
quick and lively piece, to invalidate his reasons. So that Pierce had now two
adversaries against him.

The latter J. S. hears not yet of any reply. But your book Sir is lately
answered, not by Dr. Pierce himself, (who has other irons in the fire, and
meets now with something in his own life, which in the beginning was not so) but
by one Mr. Daniel Whitby, a young man, of a forward spirit, and possessed as it
seems of a fair reformed library, who has undertaken, or is willing atleast to
undergo the quarrel. This book of Whitbyes, whereof my ancient love and
friendship has here invited me to give you a brief account, is a great volum
of 512 pages, so fruitful is the seed of controversy, when it is once sown, to
increase and multiply. A compendium it is, I think, of his whole library.

Whether this book of his be made up all by one hand, by reason of the unity of
the name, and diversity of styles discerned in it, is not easy to guess. But
that Mr. Whitby, if he had many coadjutors with him, either in his own chamber
or abroad, should by their mutual consent, alone reap the honor of all their
labors, whereof his own part may happily be the least; you need, Sir, neither
grutch, nor fear, nor envy, nor any way dislike. The book is of that nature that
it more behoovs, it should be thought to issue from one young head, then many
old ones; that the insufficiency, when it shall appear, may be rather
attributed to the weakness of the Author, then cause he pleads for. Of this, Sir,
I may out of Whitbyes own words in his Epistle Dedicatory, and the whole
progres of his book, assure you; that this volume of his, is wholly made up of
the many several replies of diverse Protestant writers, who have stretched their
wits to the utmost in this last age, to evacuate the Catholic faith, and all
their grounds, autorities and reasons for it; not only such as have written
here in England, which are not a few, but those also beyond the seas, who are
all met friendly here together, though never so much differing in their ways,
twenty at least or thirty of the chiefest, to help to make up Mr. Whitbies book.

These writers he tells us in his Epistle, some of them, who they be; Hammond,
Field, Salmasius, Baron, Usher, Fern, Dally, Tailor, Crackanthorp, Hall,
Andrews, Calixtus, Plessis, Chamier and Chillingworth. But he does not there
mention Pareus, Blondel, Baxter, and several others, whom in the context of his
book he makes as much use of, as any of those he there honors with the title
of Champions, with whose sword and buckler he means to defend himself, and
knock you down. You may easily guess the reason. Although indeed, even Chamier,
Plessis, and Dally, his first and chiefest three, were as great Puritans, as
Baxter, Pareus, or Blondel, and no less enemies to the English Protestant, then
Roman Catholic Church. And Baxter himself, if he will but do so much as dye,
shall seven year hence, if not sooner, be put into the next calendar, and sit
among the Champions of the English Church, cited no more then, as guilty of
faction and heresy, but as a Protector and Patron of the truth, famous Baxter,
incomparable Baxter. So p. 230. he cites Dr. Reynolds, as a great Champion of
his Church, who was indeed a Champion of the Puritans against it. Every
non-Papist is a good Protestant, especially when he is dead. When they fight
for their wives and children against catholic traditions and faith, then are
they all holy zealous champions: But they are damned, and swerv notoriously
from the truth, if they may be themselves believed, when they contest with one
another; which ever happens after the first great victory with the common enemy
obtained.

One thing is singular in this book of Whitbies, that he frames no answers out
of any judgment of his own, ripened by a long and serious consideration of the
things he speaks of, in this his reply; but recurres presently to the books of
those his forenamed masters, in his libra^y; and against your reasonings, only
opposes their words and fore-studied evasions, such as they had invented, each
one his own way, upon semblable occasion; not heeding at all, whether your
discourse, against which he writes, has anticipated those shifts aforehand, as
generally it does, yea or no; nor how far they evacuate one another. This if he
had pondred well, which perhaps poor man he could not do, it had prevented much
of his collections, and sunk his huge book into a far smaller bulk. To this,
quoth he, has Chamier told you, that, etc. Can you not see what incomparable
Chillingworth has taught you, that, etc. You will still be impertinent,
although great Plessis has informed you, that, etc. Where were your eyes, when
reverend Hall has so plainly told you, that, etc.

And he brings sometimes, not only four or five several answers of one author to
the same thing, all I suppose he found there written in his book, but half a
dozen of those his authors, with all their manifold evasions to one single
catholic ground; and for the most part so confusedly, that the first answer of
the first author has presently another first, as consisting of two parts; and
the first of them may happily have another first; so that three succeeding
periods begin oftentimes with three firsts, one after another, according as he
penned them hand over head out of the books he wrote, venting his reasons, as
some young children void worms, three or four, head and tails together. Nor
heeds he at all, whether these his authors do chance to contradict one another,
in those affairs for which he brings them in so unnaturally together; one
affirming what the other denies, one rejecting what the other allows, one
distinguishing what the other absolutely grants, etc.

This benefit he will reap by this confused interlocution of his masters; that,
if he com to be challenged upon any of the answers, which he makes by their
lips, he shall not need, when he finds them either weak or falls, or any way
prejudicial, to own then for his, what he had openly professed beforehand, to be
another man's replies. So that they will serve a bird all bedecked with the
feathers of many a fowl, for pride and pompous show unto such as will admire
him, and to such as shall question him, for a present remedy of excuse, This is
not my feather, but the Cuckows. It is not my saying, but Chamiers. It is the
reply of Chillingworth: It is the speech of Dr. Hammond, and not any assertion
of mine, etc. What can any one do, Sir, to such a man, but neglect him?

Truly I look upon Whitby, as a kind of master of Revels, that appoints other
men who are to speak, every one their parts, and gives them their qu of
entrance, whilst himself stands in some private place to look on, and see how
they do perform.

And he provides commonly against any one of your catholic grounds or reasons
for it, four or five Protestant speakers, by their several ways to disable it:
whereof one shall happily say, that the authority you bring is good, but carries
another meaning; a second shall affirm, it is naught and forged; a third stands
indifferent, whether it be admitted or no, but is sure It makes against you; a
fourth acknowledges it for your purpos, but disparages the author, whence it
is taken; a fist admits both the authority of the author, and truth of his
words, but cells you it is only one of his errors; Whitby himself not saying
all the while, which of all these replies he holds himself for good; but
imagining you wholly oppressed and overwhelmed with his various collection of
contradicting drollery, he passes on exulting to your next point or following
reason, in the same mode and method to be crushed.

And truly Sir, one may see in this one book of Whitbies at a view, what a
judicious examiner, who loves to read and ponder all things seriously, cannot
but observe in all the writers since the reformation, put together. One admits
the catholic ground and authority; another rejects and villifies it; another
accepts the words, but by some trope or other turns the sens; another allows
the natural sens, but says it is one of his errors; another will not have
that, nor any other authority upon earth, to be of any force in those affairs,
etc. And thus they do about every particular of ancient faith; still laughing,
and hugging one another fancies, though never so much contradictory, as well
to one another, as to the common faith they all impugn.

What a strange confusion would this cause in the world, if the like proceeding
were countenanced in civil, as here in spiritual affairs; and men might be
outed of their estates and possessions by half a score witty lawyers, with
cunning querks and subtle sophistries deluding his right and tenure, no judge
admitted to give sentence. And indeed although this contest begin in spiritual
affairs, yet it ever ends in civil. When they have once outed a Land of their
old religion, and the prosperity and peace attending it, men's persons, estates,
dignities, nay the very laws of the Land are apprehended, and brought into the
power of these reformers, to the utter desolation of a Kingdom.

And as this book of Whitbies, Sir, is a compendious mirror of all
Anticatholiks dealing with the old Roman faith; so will I give you in civil
affairs a perfect emblem of all Whitbies book: That all may clearly see, if
this proceeding be allowable, what confusion and injustice must needs follow.

The Emblem of the old Roman religion I make Caius the seventeenth Knight, for
example, of his family, which has continued in the state time out of mind. A
faction rises, to dispossess him of all that he and his ancestors had so long
and peaceably enjoyed. They tell him in general, that his ancestors were
intruders: but differ very much about the time, when the invasion was first
made. One says 200 year ago, another 800, another 500, several men, several
ways, and cannot agree. They com at last to his own particular title. Caius
shows his forefathers succession legally descending, and quietly possessing for
so many generations; and an evident testament also for himself, wherein it is
expressly said, Ego Gonvillus, etc. constituo Caium filium meum heredem bonorum
meorum omnium, etc. I Gonvil do constitute my son Caius heir of all my goods,
etc. The adversaries, put case Chamier, Dally, Plessis, Blondel, Baxter,
Hammond, Hall, etc. laugh at this, and tell him it is all impertinent, and
proves nothing.

1 Alas quoth Chamier, these words are plainly corrupted. It was not written
Caium but Saium: And the corruption is easy, only the bottom of the first
letter being razed out. 2. Let it be as you will, quoth Dally, this testament
can be of no value. For it proceeds upon an uncertain, if not falls,
supposition. Who can say assuredly, that either you are his son Caius, or that
Caius is indeed his son. 3. Either, quoth Chillingworth, you must be his son
and actual heir, while he was alive, or when he was dead. Not while he was
alive; for the right can be but in one at once: Not when he was dead, for no
man can be a son to one that is not; no more then any person that is alive, can
be a father to one that has no being. 4. Were this right, quoth Baxter, which
is conveyed to you, in your father only, or in some others also besides
himself? If in himself alone, why does he say constituo, which signifies simul
statuo, or I appoint together with others. 5. It seems to me, quoth Blondel,
that this testament, Mr Caius is rather against, then with you. Either you
pretend to be his son, before his testament was made, or after. If before, your
own evidence witnesses against you; Constituo Caium filium meum, I make Caius
my son. If after; then by this testament you are made his son, but supposed
only an heir: and a title for that here is none at all. 6. He does indeed,
quoth Plessis, make him truly his heir. But of what? not of his estate, which
we contend about; but only of his goods, all his goods. And can you think Mr.
Caius, that a dying man would speak improperly? surely no. The goods of the
mind, virtue, prudence, temperance, these, as Aristotle witnesses, are proprie
bona, properly are only to be called goods: But the goods of the body, and
goods of fortune, these are improperly and falssy so called. 7. Let it be what
kind of goods you will, quoth Hall, this very word meorum, Mr. Caius, quite
overthrows all your pretensions. These are your fathers words you say; well
then, if it be so, either the state you plead for is now his, or now not his.
If it be now his, then it is not yours; if it be now not his, then the very
title you rely upon is false. 8. A testament is to be taken in its strict and
rigorous sens, quoth Field, and so the word omnium spoils your plea Mr. Caius.
You must either have all his goods or none; but you have neither his good face,
nor other his good endowments, etc. 9 Com, com, quoth Crackanthorp, we needed
not have gone so far, or used so many words. Caius pretends, that his father,
who made this testament, is the last of seventeen Knights of his family. Out of
his own mouth I will condemn him, and with the very first word of his will he
says his father made, which is Ego. For it is clear enough, that Ego is the
first person, and not the last. And all these are ushered in by a young Whitby.
To this has Chamier told you, that, etc. Can you not see what incomparable
Chillingworth has taught you, that, etc. You will still be impertinent, though
learned Plessis has informed you, that, etc. Where were your eyes, when great
Dally has told you, that, etc.
In these few words Sir, I have given you a clear Emblem, not only of this book
of Mr. Whitbies, but of all the writings have been made against catholic
religion, since the reformation. There is no evidence so clear for that ancient
religion, but it is endeavored several ways to be made frustrate: Although
unto Catholics, who understand their religion, those evasions signify no more
then these I have specified, against a title most irrefragable and firm. Yet in
that contest children and unexperienced people, would judge poor Caius to be
utterly lost. And so indeed he will, if those crafty Lawyers may determine the
business without recours to any Judge: as is don in all our affairs and
controversies of religion. How many sophistical evasions is he to answer about
one and the same thing? How many captious snares to incur, in any one of his
answers? to be overwhelmed without doubt, while no Judge interposes, either with
their multitude of words, or force of arms. But enough of this, which indeed
can never be too much thought of.

Mr. Whitby, Sir, begins and ends his book just as you begin and end yours,
against which he writes. For as you in the conclusion of your book set down some
rules, which you desire him that shall reply unto it, for more clearnes and
order, and substantiallity of discourse, to observe; so Whitby in the end of this
his reply against your book, wherein he has not heeded to observe so much as any
one of those your good rules, does also prescribe laws for you, if you mean to
answer him again, whereof the first is, That you consider all the answers he
has given to any of your arguments: and that otherwis, if any one single
answer remain, your agument must be invalid, p. 501. This is the first and
wittiest of his conditions. For the several shifts and evasions of above twenty
men, which he makes use of, about most of the substantial points of
controversy, being all put together and multiplied, as they be, to some
thousands, would, if they should be all spoken to in particular, though never
so briefly, raise such a bulk of a book, as has been seldom seen, and would
never be read. But being, as I have already told you, contradictory one to
another, and ten to one excessively childish, would no less disable the repute
and gravity of that man, who should so much as take notice of them, then to
play with boys at spancounter in the streets.

And as he ends his book with the same method of prescribing laws, as you
concluded yours; so does he begin his in the very selfsame words as you enter
yours. I cannot forbid my self to wonder that, etc. So begins your book. I
cannot forbid my self to wonder that, etc. so begins this book of his, which he
writes against you, imitating and repeating your very words for many lines
together, and returning them hand over head upon your self, by the method of
our good women of Billingsgate, not caring, so he say again what you speak, how
true or falls, just or unjust his words be.

Thus much in general, I shall say more by and by, after I have briefly told
you, what he does in each particular chapter of his book.

His first chapter from page 1 to 7.

Is a bitter invective against Papists, whom he concludes for their cruelties
and disloyalty, unworthy of mercy or any affection. He acknowledges indeed,
that Catholic religion cannot stand justly charged with any such crimes, p. 2.
But yet he lays the crimes upon them all notwithstanding, so indefinitely, and
only upon them, that he excludes universally all professors of that religion,
and them alone, from all compassion and love: Although he knows in his heart,
both that the religion, the very religion of some others in this land, stands
justly charged with those crimes, whereof he acknowledges catholic religion
free; and that Papists also or Roman Catholics, are the only men, that have
universally exhibited themselves unblamable, toward that breast of love and
mercy, from whence he would have them all excluded.

And to make these Papists odious, he names some wars and troubles of theirs in
Ireland, Poland, Bohemia, Savoy. Indeed he needed not have wandered so far as
Bohemia or Poland. The story of our own England would have afforded a large
volum of matter, if all that Papists have ever don must be attributed to their
religion, for wars and broils enough to tire a reader. How many battles have
there been here between the Scot and English, between the Sax and Norman,
between the Norman and Britton, between the English and French at Agencourt,
and all over France, with much bloodshed and slaughter; between the two houses
of York and Lancaster at home, when all these parties were Papists, and no
other religion known amongst them. Is there no other principle to attribute all
these disorders unto, but that religion, which endeavors, as much as it is
able, to stifle all these evil fruits of concupiscence amongst men; which some
time or other will shoot up, notwithstanding all the heavenly endeavor of that
divine seed, implanted in men on purpos to suppres it. Must or can Protestants
be justly charged, with the treasons, murders, robberies of all such as have
been imprisoned in our Jayls, or hanged at Tyburn, since the reformation? And
yet thus we deal with poor Catholics, to add affliction upon affliction, and
extinguish that small sparkle of life which is left in their bodies.

It is surely a general fault in Protestants, that we think in our hearts,
whatever we speak outwardly, that Roman catholics are, as they should be, all
Saints, all spotles in their lives, all of them unblamable, universally
unblameable. And hence it is, that if ever we discover one traitor, fool, or
knave amongst any of that profession, we exult and make bonefires for joy, and
record it in our books one age after another; that all the world may know, and
ever remember, that even some of them have been transgressors. We do not wonder
so at our own Protestants, though thousands of them should prove traitors
together and many are continually hanged, and some also burnt for their wicked
crimes. I am sure the Papists have not themselves, any such opinion of men of
their own religion, that they should so necessarily be honest and good, as that
it is impossible any should be otherwis. But even in catholic countries, they
have their whips and stocks, and gibbets and prisons, and torturs, provided for
malefactors, as well as we have here. And Princes will there go to wars, as
well as we. Did not the Kings of Israel and Judah do so? And the people too
think themselves bound, even by their religion, to follow them. Nor have any
people rose in rebellious herds, to do mischief, but they would sometimes
pretend religion for it, although they act indeed against the dictamen not only
of other men's religion, but perhaps their own too. Catholics know their
religion is good, and pure and holy, and apt to make all men so, that walk
according to its direction. But if any swerv, they pity indeed, and pray for
their serious repentance; but they wonder not, as we do at it; much less do
they rejoice, when any of our Protestants are taken and hanged for treason; nor
do they write, or spread it abroad in books, nor make bonefires, or keep
holy days for joy of a thing, which is indeed the object of their grief and
pity.

But Mr. Whitby speaks here so much of equivocations and mental reservations,
as proper and peculiar only unto Papists, which render them, although they
should promis and swear allegiance never so seriously, not at all to be
believed or trusted; that I began to doubt, whether all London, and the whole
Land, may not happily be Papists, although I thought not of it. One thing I am
sure of, and all men are of my mind, that when we go into a shop in London, or
into any market or fair in England to buy wares, when they tell us, yea and
swear too, that the thing we cheapen cost them so much out of their own purse,
we do not beleev a word they say, but think they have either some reservation in
their mind, or use an equivocation or ly. And even Mr. Whitby himself, must
either be a Papist too, if mental reservation be peculiar only unto them, when
he says so often in his book, of which I treat, That there is not one reason
in Mr. Cresseys book that is pertinent, not one authority but corrupted, not
one instance but ushered in with disadvantages to the truth, and forgery: or if
he be not a Papist, he must in these and several other passages in this his
book, wherein he either secretly equivocates, or openly lies, at least
papistare, and act that, which he says only Papists practice.

To give one example, he says p. 237. That one general council calls the
respect given to images a hundred times by the name of worship. I have good
reason to think, that one Council would not use that word much above fourscore
times, if they be rightly numbered. So likewise he says here p. 4. That the
whole college of Jesuits in London said, that they would rather promote the
late Kings ruin then hinder it, lest the Puritans should make use of his
distresses to any advantage. o too too foolish and malicious calumny! For
surely, this is something more then an equivocation. They rather promote then
hinder it! How could they do either the one or the other? Thus some of our mad
countrymen were not ashamed to tell it abroad, about ten years ago, even in
catholic countries where they traveled, that they who sat in Court, and
condemned our gracious King, were most of them Papists and Jesuits. And did all
the whole college of Jesuits in London conclude this, so generally, that there
was not any one against it? Who took the votes, that he could be so assured of
this great scret? And where is this college of Jesuits in London? Who ever
heard of any such thing? Will ever any of this wild talk pass for other, then
the dream of a man in Bedlam? We shall ere long be frighted by such as Whithy
and Baxter, from hanging our pot over the fire, lest the whole college of
Jesuits in the moon, should conspire together, to water down upon our heads,
and spoil our pottage. They would never tell us these things, or hope to be
believed, were not the opinion they have of our reason as small, as the
confidence they have of their own audacity is great? And what will the college,
the whole college of Jesuits here in London determine next? If they should
chance to decree, that no whale, or cod or herring should ever com into the
North seas, as now it is not unlikely they may, they will undo many a family.

In the end of this his first chapter, are cited some Councils severity against
heretics, wherein Mr Whitby thinks himself concerned with much regret and anger.
One of these, says he, was kept at Lateran, the other at Leyden under Pope
Innocent. I suppose concilium Lateranum is the council he says was kept at
Lateran: though his Dictionary of proper words will not help him to understand,
in what country that town of Lateran is to be found. And concilium Lugdunense
is that which he englishes the council of Leyden; all the history and reading
Mr. Whitby has, not been able to distinguish betwixt Ludunum Batavorum, and
Lugdunum in Gallia; betwixt Leyden in Holland, where never any council was
kept, and Lions in France, where Pope Innocent held that council, whilst he
sojourned in Burgundy. But though he be yet but raw, you shall find him a
greater proficient by and by.

As for that council of Lateran, wherein is a confiscation of goods and other
penalties decreed, upon such as run into disturbing heresies; it touched only
exterior discipline or temporal statutes, and no article or business of
religion. Nor did the Church make any such constitution by her own authority,
but declared only, what secular power may justly do, when they think it
expedient and necessary, to prevent further evils. What power have Priests and
Bishops over men's estates and lives? But the Emperor and Kings were willing to
have it so ordained in that venerable assembly; that with a more plausible
color they might be able to provide for their Kingdoms peace, even in those
affairs which they themselves were to execute, though not to determine. Nor does
any King in Christendom think himself any further obliged by that decree, to
put such laws in execution, then he shall with his private council think fit.
And all secular princes, will by the advice of their peers proceed to such
penalties, when they pleas, whether any synod decree it or no. Nor is it the
wors, if a council do say that in some cases may be don, which princes in their
discretion think expedient.

His 2 chapter from page 7 to 9.

Tells us, that Mr. Whitby is here in a trembling sweat, good Sir, for your
faults. I tremble, says he, to consider that our Author should be so imprudent
to say no wors, to call God to witness to his soul, that he has studiously
avoided all caveling distortion of texts, etc. And then he adds with a new
fervor, That all Fathers are miserably corrupted by you, and allegations most
disingeniously forged. And if it be not so, quoth he, I will forfeit presently
my life. Good man, he engages very far, as you see, for you. He will die, die
presently; if Fathers, all the Fathers, be not corrupted, miserably corrupted,
by you. And this he will do without any trembling, if he do not make that good
which he trembles to think of. But it is no wondrous matter I think, to hear
him utter such daring words, although he use here none of his mental
reservations. he knows himself as safe as a thief in a mill; and that it will
never be put to a Jury, to find whether he be guilty or no.

His first chapter was fuming wrath; this second a shivering fear: And so he
proceeds, from one passion to another, quite through his book, even to the end,
to verify his own words in his Epistle to his Patron, where upon the sight of
your book, he says, that he found himself put into such a passion, as vented
it self into this reply. But these passious of his, and the various
vilifications both of your book and person, wherewith this reply of his, and
assault against Catholics is stuffed, or any other of his calumnies and bitter
invectives against Papists, which are many and heinous. I shall not trouble you
with now. You must have patience, and let them pass, as other good people do,
where ever you meet them. Ministers, good men, fight for their wives and
children, either those they have or hope to have, which will be undon and lost,
if the odium of Popery, and of all such as any way excuse and defend their
innocence, be not smartly kept up. My adversary OeN did as much to innocent
Fiat Lux, which had no other fault, but that it had excused the faultles. To do
well and hear ill, this must be the lot, as that is the endeavor of all good
men in this world.

In his 3 chapter from page 9. to 17.

The challenge of Bishop Jewel for the first 600 years against Papists, which
all his graver brethren disliked, Mr. Whitby, if his word here be of any worth,
will make it good, yea and enlarge it with Perkins, White, Baxter, and
Crackanthorp to 800, yea 1200 years, wherein there was not, they say, any such
creatur as a Papist in the world. And he cares not a pin, though Beza,
Melancton, and Luther, acknowledge to the contrary, that Popery has the
prerogative of Antiquity, before all other ways. Beza, says he, and Melancton
are strangers to us. Must we be accountable for Luthers words? And yet all over
his book, he makes more use of strangers, and gives more credit to them, then
any of our own, and would have us do so too. Are not Chamier, Dally, Plessis,
Grotius, Blondel, as much strangers, and of as little credit, as Beza,
Melancton, and Luther. But what if our own Dr. Willet speaks for the Papists
antiquity above others? What i^ our own Whitaker say, that to beleev by the
testimony of the Church, is the very heresy of the Papists? O then his answer
is ready at hand. What is all this to the purpos? did ever any Protestant say
otherwis? do they therefore confess their antiquity? The stripling fears no
colors. If any or many both of our own and foreign Protestants do acknowledge
the Papists antiquity, why, what then? If some deny it, then it is so. It is as
they say, who say as he says. And if any say otherwise, it is otherwise. It is
not so.

There is one assertion in this his third chapter, that deserves I think to be
written in capital letters. For p. 16. having told you Sir, that Protestants
either affront the evidence of Scripture against Fapists, or the intent of the
Apostles, or rather of God himself, etc. he thinks therefore, that Protestants
rejection of Popery may well be excused, and especially, says he, (these are
his words so much remarkable) When you Papists know, we hold that in all
matters of faith, it is all one withus, to be praeter Scripturam, and to be
contra. That is, in plain English, what is not in Scripture, that Protestants
hold to be against it. And is this so?

First, it is hard to say, how far matters of faith reach. There is one sort of
people now in England, that would have all things acted and disposed even in
civil affairs, only according to the tenor of Gospel. And what is beside it,
they conclude by this very axiom to be against it. And so they decry all our
Courts, our very Justices of peace and Constables. But in ecclesiastical
affairs, the proper businesses of the Church, and matters of religion, as
distinct from civil, this is the plea which the good Quakers use against the
Bishops and Priests, of not only the Roman, but even this our English Church,
which Whitby defends. Why, say they to them, why are we harrassed, imprisoned,
beaten and spoiled so many ways, by your instigation, who have made your
selves drank with the blood of Saints? Do not we either confront the evidence
of Scriptur against you, or the intent of the Apostles, or rather of God
himself, and tell you expressly, that you oppose the evidence of Gods word, in
your observances and ordinations, in your tithes and Lents, and Mass-tides, in
your lawn sleeves and cassocks and canonical girdles, in your Pulpits,
Universities, and Steeple Houses, in your Chapters and Deanaries, in your
orders and degrees, in your oppressions of conscience and jurisdictions, in
your surplices, copes, and preaching for hire, etc. Is it not enough to show
our innocence, in not accepting these things, because in the beginning it was
not so? nor were any of these things to be found amongst the apostles.
Especially when you know, we hold, and we know also you hold, that in matters
of faith and religion, it is all one, to be beside Scriptur, and to be against
it. Are your Chapters and Deanaries, your lawn sleeves and surplices, your
Lents and common prayers, your tithes and livings of five or six hundred a
year, your universities, and steeple houses in Scriptur and Christian Gospel,
yea or no? If they be there, show it us. If they are besides scriptur or not in
it, then are they by your own confession here, against it.

Chapter 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. from p. 17. to 90.

These five following chapters speak against ecclesiastical Supremacy, either
amongst the apostles or any other succeeding prelates. And with so much
earnestnes and little heed does Mr. Whitby whiff away all your defense of it,
that he strikes off that authority, not only from the Popes head, but from any
Prince or Prelate whatsoever; not caring so the Roman fall, if the English
Prelacy sink too. So earnest indeed is he bent against it that he professes p.
39. he would sooner persuade himself of the truth of Mahomets fables, then any
such pretension. Thus well is he disposed against the coming of the Turk.

These few propositions he advances here amongst others. 1. That the apostles
had an equality of power and jurisdiction or dignity over the rest. But whence
then comes our English Hierarchy, of bishops, arch-byshops, ministers, and
deacons? Whitby himself denies, that our Kings are the root of Episcopal
jurisdiction here in England; Who ever thought so, quoth he, p. 88. I think I
could show him out of the statutes and laws of the Land, that our English
Episcopacy, and their whole jurisdiction, is from the King, as the sole
fountain and root of it. But if it be not so; and no such subordination, as
here he affirms, was ever found amongst the apostles, whence is our English
Hierarchy? If it neither come from God nor from the King, it may not
irrationally be suspected, to be from an insufficient if not an ill original.

His second is, that such an ecclesiastical jurisdiction is useles, and unable
to prevent schisms, whether they rise from breach of charity or difference of
judgment, p. 20. And if it be useles for that, for Gods sake what is it good
for? Third is, that to submit to one, is to slight the judgment of thousands,
that may be as wise as he; and to endanger the very being of religion. Ibid.
And is it so indeed? why then are so many millions here in England subjected to
one Bishop, much people to one minister, all the people, ministers, and bishops
to one King? Is this to slight all that are subjected, or to endanger the very
being of religion. Fourth is, that general causes cannot be dispatched by one
supreme governor over all, as may particular by inferior superintendents. And
other such like fanatic assertions he has; which do as much evacuate the
subordination of our English as the Roman Church, and civil government as well
as ecclesiastical hierarchy. I am sure they have done both, even in this our
Kingdom, and in our own days: a thing which will not be soon forgotten. And
little did I think to see any prelatick minister broach such whimsies again
here in our land, so lately made desolate thereby. What he means by it I cannot
tell. But I am sure he is not so unadvised, but he understands the consequence.
For p. 423. upon his grant of a liberty of judging to particular persons, in
matters of religion; whence all our wars and animosities here in England do
first flow, even so far as to deny obedience thereupon to their spiritual
superiors, he speaks thus: Would a gracious King, think you, presently condemn
all those to the utmost severity, who in such cases after consultation and
deliberation duly made, by reason of some prejudices or weakness of reasoning,
should be induced to think it their duty to follow the mutinous party? he
craftily uses the phrase of utmost severity, the better to palliate his more
secret judgment, who by his own principles here and elsewhere not obscurely
expressed, must needs conceiv them liable to no severity at all.

But that you may see, Sir, this adversary of yours, what a lively spark he is,
he makes in his 5 chapter the very Popes themselves, when significantly they
would express their own supremacy, either to say nothing for it, or altogether
against it. If Pope Agatho speak of his own solicitude over the Churches of
God, even to the utmost bounds of the ocean. Whitby hence infers, that his
headship therefore is not universal, because it is bounded. Is not this witty? And
thus the great Prophet, when he describes the vaste unlinited extent of the
Messiah his dominion (dominabitur a mari usque ad mare, and a flumine usque ad
terminos orbis terrarum) must be understood to limit and confine it.

Again, if Pope Julius defend his acts of power and jurisdiction, by ancient
cannons and custom; Whitby concludes from thence, that it is not therefore of
divine institution; for custom and cannons are but humane. Witty still. Thus a
master, when sending his servant on an errand, he tells him he may well go, for
that he gave him lately a pair of new shoes, loses thereby all his other claim
of commanding him.

Again, if St. Gregory prefer the Apostolical See before other Churches. That
is, quoth Whitby, not for it self, but for the Emperors seat. And for the same
reason must the Bishop of London or Abbot of Westminster, if any now were, be
preferred before the Bishop of Canterbury.

If Pope Leo derive his authority from St. Peter prince of the apostles, That
may infer, quoth he, a precedence of order, but not any dignity. A Prince, it
seems, signifies only one that is to go before, not one, that has any dignity
or power to command those that follow after. Thus will your adversary put
authorities into his mouth, and draw them in an instant, most nimbly out of his
throat, without ever touching his stomach. Can we think him unable, by such
Hugonot evasions, to whiff away all the four gospels and apostles creed, as to
its former sense and meaning, if there should once be a necessity urging him to
submit to Mahomets fables, or reconcile them and his creed together? Who dare
say he cannot do it, and do it as wisely too, as perhaps he ever did thing in
his life.

I think it not amiss Sir, to give you yet a little further taste here of our
Author; your adversaries nimblenes, only some little of much; for I mean to be
very breef.

Does emperor Valentinian establish, that whatsoever is decreed by the Sea
apostolik, which is raised upon the merits of St. Peter, dignity of the city,
and authority of councels, should have the force of a law to all Bishops?
Valentinian, says Whitby, was a young man and easily seduced. What does this
conclude for the Popes supremacy, etc. The laws then of Kings and Emperors are
to be weighed, it seems, by the age of the lawmakers. And if he should be a
young man, they signify nothing against any delinquent or transgressour, if he
have but the wit to plead here with Whitby, that the King was young, when that
law was made. This easily seduced young man's law was in force notwithstanding,
in following times, and put into the code by the old mature grave man, and not
easily seduced Emperor Justinian: And no man either young or old ever excepted
against it, for the youth of the legislator. Young Princes do not make laws as
boys tell tales, only by strength of their own wits. Valentinian was a young
man, and his laws therefore, according to Whitby, not to be regarded: And what
then shall we think of our English protestancy, which was here first publikly
set up by King Edward the sixth, a child.

Does an ecclesiastical cannon say, that no decree can be established in the
Church, without the assent of the Roman bishop. That is, quoth Whitby, except
the Roman Bishop be present. What does this make for supremacy? etc. But if he
have no authority there, why may he not as well be absent. There is no certain
number required for the making of a decree: and that bishop does no more, it
seems, then make up a number.

Does the council of Ephesus refer the judgment of the Patriarch of Antioch his
cause to the Pope? for that the Church of Antioch had been ever governed by the
Roman. That was, says Whitby, not to use his authority, but only to know his
mind, etc. And what matters it, I pray, what his mind may be, if the others
never mean to heed it. We consult any that are presem, whether equal or
inferiors, to know their minds, and yet do our selves what we list: but we
never trouble men a thousand miles off for that. Surely when a judgment is
referred by parties to another power so far distant, with great expense and
long expectation, and only upon this ground, that they are subject, and have
ever been governed by that power, they cannot be thought only to require his
mind, but use his authority. Our honest Quaker will not be unwilling thus to
have his cause referred to the judgment of our English Bishops; not to use their
authorities, but only to know their minds.

Does the Sardican council ordain, that in a controversy between bishops,
Appeal should be made to the Bishop of Rome, to appoint Judges, and renew the
process. That cannon, says he, is against the Papists; for it permits the Pope
to receiv, not to command appeals, etc. So then: Papists, it seems, think the
Pope may command, not receiv appeals. And besides, says he, the appellation
was there ordained ad Julium Romanum, not ad Papam Romanum: Not to the Pope who
then was Julius; but to Julius who then was Pope. We have here surely another
Hudibras; In logic a great critic, profoundly skilled in Analytick; he can
distinguish and divide a hair twixt South and South-West side. Appeal to Julius
Pope, not to Pope Julius! And what does he think to gain by this subtilty? The
cannon he hopes will ceas forsooth, when Julius dies. O the wit of some men
above other some, especially when it is assisted by French Hugonots who drink
good wine. Our English ale could never have made us out so subtle a distinction
as this is.

Does the council of Arles send their decrees to the Bishop of Rome, from whom
all Christians are to receiv what to beleev and practis? Here is something of
trouble, quoth Whitby, but nothing of jurisdiction in the Pope, etc. Can any
thing hang more tight then this? Conciliar decrees must be sent to Rome, from
whence all Christians must receiv what they are either to beleev or practis.
But this is not to acknowledge his power, but to trouble his patience.

Does St. Basil say, it is convenient to write to the bishop of Rome to
conclude affairs, (...) and to pass his sentence? O, quoth he, (...), does not
signify to give sentence, but advice. Here you have a spice of his grammar to
mix with his logic; (...) signifies counsel, and (...) is greek for a
juridical sentence.

Does Athanasius fly to Rome against the Eusebians, and Pope Julius appoint a
day in his behalf (...), for plea and judgment, (...), following therein the
law and method of the Church. He followed that law, says Whitby, not in citing
them, but in not condemning them uncited. etc. He was just then, in not
condemning parties uncited. But by what authority he either cited or judged
them, we must not here know. Is there any law of the Church, that justifies a
condemnation of persons cited to judgment, when they are neither cited nor
judged by any legal authority? And it is to be observed here, Sir, all this
while, and quite through his book, that Whitby has forgot the fearful
execration he made upon himself in the beginning, that all fathers are
miserably corrupted by you, and allegations most disingeniously forged, etc.
This I say he has quite forgot, even so far forgot, that there is not one
authority in a hundred, that he does so much as challenge either of forgery or
corruption. And is therefore in danger to forfeit presently his life. But he was
then in his own heat, now he is amongst his Protestant authors, who afford him
other kind of evasions. And we must leav him to their wits, when he has lost
his own memory.

Does S. Augustine witness, that the cause of the Donatists in Africa was judged
by Pope Melchiades in Rome. This was, says Whitby, a brotherly, not an
authorative decision. I make no doubt it was brotherly, but why not
authorative? Mr. Whitby has seen perhaps some elderly cockerel, to part the
frayes of younger chickens; and thinks tribunals of bishops do no more. The
Pope, it seems, was ever a loving brother at least, still ready to decide the
frayes of all Churches and Bishops upon all occasions; which was a pious and
good work, and not belonging to Antichrist. He would do well Sir, to part this
fray of yours with Mr. Whitby, which otherwis will never be ended.

Is the Roman Patriarch said, to have the care of all the Churches? Any one,
says Whitby, may have that repute; for he that serves one Church serves all.
And if Whitby get but the cure of any one little Chapel here in England,
though it be but to read prayers in an hospital, he must then be believed to
have the solicitude of all the English Churches upon him.

In brief, does S. Chrysostom, to declare a supremacy among the apostles,
affirm, that St. James obtained the throne of Jerusalem, but St. Peter was
constituted master and teacher, not of one throne, but of the whole world,
(...). That text, says he, is in all likelihood by negligence of transcribers,
or some other way, mistaken. However it makes nothing for supremacy: were not
all the apostles so? He gathers they were all so, because the peculiarity of the
title, master and teacher of the whole world, is there attributed unto one,
exclusively to all the rest. Every minister is a bishop or overseer, if we mind
only the signification of the word, but is he therefore so in the whole meaning
and peculiarity of the title?

Finally, does our Mr. Whitgift acknowledge, that the apostles were all equal as
to their function, not as to government; equal quoad ministerium, not quoad
polititiam; which is a plain and manifest assertion, Sir, of the supremacy you
plead for? What is this, says Whitby to the purpos? He finds never a word in
that speech of Dr. Whitgift, which begins with s. u. p. and therefore cries out,
What is this to the purpos? what is this to supremacy?

You must not expect, Sir, that in the succeeding chapters, I should give you
any more account of the particular quicknesses of your adversary. They are all
like these which I have here briefly hinted to you in this first controverted
point of Supremacy; only that you may see, that he, or the several champions
rather, which he makes use of, have more distinctions than one. But by such
evasions, distinctions, and shifts, wherewith most men are now made so
acquainted, that they can use them nimbly against any laws and authorities
either divine or humane, are the people of our distressed Kingdom carried up
and down, like a cork in water, or gossimor in the air, with every wind and
billow of a fancy, now here, now there, being removed once from their ancient
stability, unto endless disquiet. Cannot a man in this manner and method,
evacuate, slight, and frustrate every thing? What authority, law, or custom,
either human or divine, can stand in force, if it may be thus by Whitbean
Sophomorismes laughed out of countenance? I will be bold to say, that the witty
Presbyterian does more substantially refute all prelatick principles and
practices, then these answer the Roman. Nay these in answering the Roman, have
made way for the Presbyterian: And yet they will still be scribbling.

But you must know Sir withal, that Mr. Whitby in his intervals or cooler
moods, allows the Roman Patriarch, a priority of order and honor, although he
will not afford him any authority or jurisdiction. A (...), or uppermost seat he
shall have, although no supremacy or power. For he says p. 52. The bishop of
Rome was to do it, (judge causes he means, receiv appeals, and the like) more
especially for the dignity of his seat, which made him prime in order or
Bishops. And again p. 66. St. Basil calling the Bishop of Rome (...), the head
or apex of Western Bishops, makes him only, says he, the chief in order, and
most eminent Bishop of the West, which title we can very well allow him. So
that the Pope, if he should come hither to us, either for love or hospitality,
although our bishops will not allow him authoratively to visit, keep chapter,
make laws, or punish any of them for transgressing the ecclesiastical cannons,
yet will they give him a (...); and suffer him, if Mr. Whitby be any legal
master of ceremonies, to sit at the upper end of the table. And St. Peter, it
seems, had no more. Nor had he any power, so much as to command any man to rise
from the table, if he behaved himself unmannerly at his meat.

And such a precedence he allows his own chief Superior, the Arch-byshop of
Canterbury; and no more. A Metropolitan, says he, p. 23. has no jurisdiction
over bishops: He can do nothing, etc. And again page 33. His grace of
Canterbury has no power of jurisdiction over bishops. And this he speaks
boldly; although he assert withal, that a bishop has jurisdiction over
parish priests, and these over their parishioners. So that according to Whitby,
that authority, dignity, and power which is in the lowest, must be wanting in
the highest degree of hierarchy; which must, if this be true, end with power,
and begin with feeblenes; contrary both to common reason, and that famous
speech of learned Porphyry, In summis est unitas cum virtute, in infimis
multitudo cum debilitate. Mr. Whitby has no hope perhaps ever to be made
Metropolitan, although he may possibly see himself a bishop; and will not
therefore divest himself aforehand, of the dignity he may one time or other
arrive at, although the for call the grapes, he has no hopes to reach, unsavory
and sour stuff.

But his grace of Canterbury, has he no jurisdiction, Mr. Whitby, over
bishops? What law, custom, or tradition gives bishops a power over
parish priests, which allows not a Metropolitan as much over bishops? And if he
have only a precedence of place, then can these have no more: And it is as
easy to say the one, as the other. And is all our hierarchy com only to a
precedence of honor? Here will be fine work for a Quaker, who will as
resolutely deny the honor, as you the power. How coms that eminent person to
be styled his grace of Canterbury, but only for his power, dignity, and
jurisdiction over the venerable bishops? And this power and dignity has, I am
sure, belonged to the Sea of Canterbury ever since the first planting of
Christianity among the English, which inables that bishop to make laws, to
visit his province, to call together his bishops, to censure, to punish even
Prelates themselves, if they transgress the cannons: which is as much as any
bishop can do to his parish priests. Is it not a strange presumption in a young
man, thus to disable his own chief prelate before his face, and say
peremptorily, that a Metropolitan can do nothing; that his grace of Canterbury
has no jurisdiction. I know, and am fully assured, there is not one of those
poor catholic priests who were lately banished out of England, but would have
defended even to extremity, if need were, this one most certain verity, That a
Metropolitan has a jurisdiction, as solid and good a jurisdiction over
bishops, as any these can have or plead for over parish priests. And by as firm
and good and ancient law is the one established as the other, and indeed by the
very same; whilst a minister of his own presumes to tell the Arch-byshop his
own prelate to his face, that he has no jurisdiction at all.

His 9 chapter from page 91. to 169.

Is wholly fanatic. There he tells us plainly, That neither Convocations,
Bishops, nor Parliaments are judges of our faith: That the English Church does
not punish for difference in opinions, nor require that all should beleev as
she believes, or submit to her determinations, but leaves every man to the
liberty of his own judgment, so he do not make factions against her. Who ever
urged men. says he, to beleev as the Church believes? p. 101. Also, that no
decrees of any Church are further to be admitted, then they appear to
particular men's judgments to agree with scriptur. That every private man must
make use of his own reason, to judge or reject doctrine and rites propounded,
though scriptur be his guide. That the business must there end, without
resigning to any further authority, which is all as fallible as we be our
selves: That points fund amental are as perspicuous as the sunbeam, and points
not fundamental, the Church does not determine them; and if any dispute should
rise about them, she silences indeed, but expects not her children, should be
of her opinion, only would not have them gainsay her: That that Church does but
mock us, which expects a belief to her proposals, because she pretends to guide
her self by scriptur. For if scriptur must bend to their decrees, and we must
have no sense of scriptur, but what they think fit, then their decrees and not,
scriptur is our last rule: And it is a pretty devise, quoth he, first to rule
the rule, and then be ruled by it, etc. Can a good Quaker say more for himself,
or desire more to be said for him. If we be not bound to beleev, we are not
bound to hear. Nay, we are bound not to hear any such Church, lest we should
chance to beleev what aforehand we condemn, and they themselves dare not
justify.

He has much of this talk up and down in his book; Faith, says he p. 439.
cannot be compelled. By taking this liberty of discretion from men, we force
them to become hypocrites, and so profess outwardly what inwardly they disbeleev.
And again p. 450. We allow not any man openly to contradict the Churches
decrees. But when he thinks contrary to the determination of our Church, he
must keep his judgment to himself, only refusing obedience with all humility,
till he be better informed. No fanatic will desire to refuse obedience any
longer.

Thus does this champion deliver up himself and Church, unto the will and
disposal of all whatever sects; and cares not, so he may avoid catholic
obeisance, to make himself a prey to those, who upon these grounds here laid
down, will soon turn him out of Church and pulpit too, and strip him not only
of his cloak, but his coat also.

At last he answers the catholic arguments for the Churches assured and
infallible guidance, just as he did before your others for supremacy. Seeing
him there, you see him every where.

Finally he brings in, for a certain testimony of the Churches liability to
error, the two opinions so rife in old time, about communicating infants, and
the Millenaries thousand years of blessedness with Christ in this world, after
doomsday: Which are both of them now condemned, says he, by a contrary belief
and practice of the present Church, although they were held by not a few very
ancient Fathers in the primitive times. And in this he triumphs exceedingly.
Surely without cause I should think. Those primitive doctors, we may be assured,
knew something more then their Catechism, and committed to writing, something of
that they conceived, beyond their Christian faith, as well as the present
Fathers and Doctors of the Church now do. And if there were so great varieties
of opinion among them concerning those two things, as there are now adays
among catholic doctors about a thousand others, it is a sign that those two
points did not belong to their Catechism of faith, then assuredly known, but
only to scholastical Theology, especially since they had neither clear scriptur
or general council, nor assured tradition for either side.

And it is of no moment, that some of them should be so confident of their
opinion, as to think it to be a right firm Christian belief. For so I have
heard my self, many a school Divine in catholic countries, to say of his Thesis
or school position, the better to countenance his own divinity, that it was
either faith or very near it. Besides I do not know, that the present Church
has ever declared, in any cannon of her faith, either that the faithful shall
not reign upon earth a thousand years with Christ, after doomsday: or that we
may not communicate the Eucharist to children; although this last is declared
not necessary.

His 10 chapter from page 169. to 180.

Is against prayer for the dead and Purgatory. Where, both by the testimonies
which you, Sir, do cite in your book, and by the authorities he brings himself,
Mr. Whitby acknowledges that praying and offering for the dead is a very
ancient and general custom amongst Christians. Nay, that S. Paul himself prayed
for his deceased friend Onesiphorus: This I say he plainly grants p. 182. But
he adds, that all this does not infer Purgatory, or that Purgatory is a place
under ground near hell, where is fire and darkness, or that all are in pain and
torments there. And so he pusles to the end of his chapter; acknowledging
faith, and denying only theology. For whether Purgatory signify any one place,
as our imagination is apt to fancy, or only a state and condition of some souls
departed out of this visible world, I see Mr. Whitby understands not, that it
is no Christian faith, but a mere scholastical divinity. But that our prayers,
offerings, penances, and good deeds, do benefit the souls deceased; this the
very testimonies cited by Mr. Whitby himself, as they do sufficiently evince,
so do they confirm catholic faith, though they touch not upon theology at all.
And so while he oppugns the divinity of some catholics, he establishes the
catholic faith of all Divines.

In the interim he ought to remember, although in this he often forgets
himself, that by the very testimonies, not only which you Sir do bring for
Purgatory, but those also which Mr. Whitby has against it, we may see
manifestly, that our Protestant Church has much swerved from the ancient
primitive practice of former Christians. For Protestants have neither priests,
nor altars, nor offerings, nor sacrifice, nor satisfactions, nor expiations for
the dead, which those authorities speak of.

Chapter 11. from page 188. to 203.

The real presence under the elements of the Eucharist, Mr. Whitby here will
not by any means endure. And he has one shield of a word, which consists of
almost as many syllables, as Ajax his buckler of bulls hides, to repel all
autorities that may witness it. Representatively, that is the word. Thou see,
says St. Chrisostom, upon the altar the very body which the wisemen saw and
worshipped. Representatively, says Whitby. Again, The most precious thing in
heaven I will show thee upon earth, says the same father. It is showed
representatively, says Whitby; it is seen representatively. I dare not adore
the earth, says St. Augustine, and yet I have learned how the earth is to be
adored; because flesh is of the earth, and our Lord gave us his flesh to eat,
which no man eats except he first adore. It is Christ, says Whitby, who is
adored representatively. And if any words will not bear that distinction, then
are they all spurious. Nay, if any should say expressly, that not only Christ in
heaven, but his very Sacrament is worshipped, this man will tells us presently,
who has as many shifts in readiness, where one will not serve his turn, as
Achelous had to slip out of the hands of Hercules, that (...) and adoro have
other significations.

But he has, poor man, no very good memory. For after he had in this one
chapter, spent many of his pages, to show that the real presence was not the
former faith of Christians, and that they never adored the Eucharist, he lets
fall a word by chance in the very close, which spoils all; by giving us to
understand, that this was so universal a belief and practis among Christians,
that it came even to the notice of Infidels; and that it was withal of so
great concernment amongst believers, that it expressed their whole religion, as
the abridgment of their faith, and great capital work of their devotion.
Quandoquidem Christiani adorant quod comedunt, sit anima mea cum Philosophis.
It was the speech of Avicen, says Whitby, although I think it was Averroes,
who well enough understood both of them the nature of Christian religion, not
only by what they saw themselves, but what they had read from more ancient
writers, both Christian, pagan, and Mohammedan up and down the world, concerning
the religion of Christians. Since the Christians worship that which they eat,
says that Infidel, let my sold be with Philosophers.

Chapter 12. from page 203. to 218.

Labors much for the general use of the Cup in all Communions. But neither
does Mr. Whitby, nor can he distinguish, as appears by his discourse, wherein he
says, that otherwise there would not be a representation of Christ's death,
which is the wisest word he speaks in all this whole chapter; I say he knows
not, and cannot distinguish, that there is in that one Eucharistian liturgy a
double action, the one of sanctifying and offering to God, the other of giving
or communicating to the people. In the sanctifying and offering of the sacred
simbols does only the sacrifice, which is a representation of Christ's death,
consist. But the communicating of these symbols to the people, is only a
consequent of the former, and no formal representation of our Lords death at
all. But he does not know, and you need not heed what he says.

The concomitance of our Lords body and blood, where ever it be in any one or
other of the species or symbols, which may enough justify communion in one
kind, he tells you very roundly, it is a figment. But if he had heeded the
very practis of his own Church, which indeed he never does, he would have
forborne those words. For when the Protestant minister gives the people first
the bread, and says, Take, and eat this in remembrance that Christ died for
thee, and feed upon him in thy heart by faith with thanksgiving; Do not the
ministers words there imply a concomitance before the cup come; even as perfect
a concomitance, as you Sir can plead for? I think they do. For surely they
intend not, to feed only upon one half of him.

Chap. 13. from page 218 to 230.

Declares, that alms-deeds and preaching of the Gospel is a sacrifice. But the
Eucharist he will not allow to be any true sacrifice at all. Although to put by
your arguments and solid reasonings for it, he grants it may be called a
Symbolical sacrifice. And so he has caught hold of another distinction, which
runs quite through this matter; or rather put the same distinction into other
characters. And if any ancient writers, as there are enough, do give testimony,
that our Lords body and blood in the Eucharist is offered, immolated, and
sacrificed on Christian altars, by the priest, for our atonement; It is to be
understood, says Whitby, to be offered symbolically, immolated symbolically,
sacrificed symbolically, figuratively, significatively, representatively. And
though you beat his head never so much with your autorities and reasons, so
long as symbolically remains there, you do but beat the air.

But where are any altars in our English Churches, or any sacrifices offered,
or immolated thereon? And how comes it to pass, that all these hundred years of
our separation from Roman unity, our people have never been told, that they
have priests still amongst them, and altars, and sacrifice, although they be
but symbolical ones; symbolical sacrifice, symbolical altars, and symbolical
priests. For sacrifice is the very form and essence of all religion. And they
that know so much, would have been much satisfied, to hear, that they have yet
a sacrifice, at least a symbolical sacrifice amongst them. I will be bold to
say, that not one man of a million has ever heard of any such thing in an
English pulpit, or ever read it in a catechism. The minister of the word and
word of the minister, that is all we ever hear of. But it is thought perhaps,
that symbolical Priest would make but a jarring sound, like two voices in a
defective octave, which have a semblance and shadow of a perfect concord, but
coming short of it, produce the harshest and worst of discords in our ear.

That our Lords death upon the Cross was a true and real sacrifice to God for
mankind, all Catholics know well enough, and our Ministers need not put them
in mind of that, which already they beleev. But as the sacrifices of the old
law were instituted by almighty God, to be often iterated, before the passion
of the great Messiah, for a continual exercise of religion, in order to his
future death: So did the same Lord, for the very same purpos of religious
exercise, institute another to be iterated after his death, unto which once
past, it was to have reference, as the former had a relation to the same death
and passion when it was to com. And this the very gospel, if we would but
understand it by the ancient practis of the Church, which interprets all
written words, sufficiently declares.

And though this great sacrifice be exhibited in Eucharistian species and
symbols, yet do all Fathers and ancient Councels speak clearly, that it is a
real, true, and propitiatory sacrifice, though accompanied also with a figur;
and not only a figurative and symbolical one. A child may be the figur of his
father, and yet is he not rightly said to be only a figurative and symbolical
child. A sacrifice only symbolical, a figurative altar, and representative
priesthood, make only a symbolical, figurative and representative religion.

Chap. 14. from page 230 to 247.

Rejects images and sacred figures, as both useles and sinful: And Mr. Whitby
seems here (good Sir pardon me) to have got indeed a real vantage over you.
Doubtless you were somewhat overseen, when you wrote in your book, most advised
in other things and serious, these ill pondered words to Protestants. Were
there represented to any of you, thinking of other matters, a pictur of our
Lord hanging upon a Cross, could you possibly avoid the calling to mind, who
our Lord was, and what he has done and suffered for you? etc. And again, Ask
your heart, and you will find, that you would not place St. Peter's pictur or
the Kings in an unclean place, etc. I say you are to blame, Sir, to think men
of that way so scrupulous, or prone to devotion. For Whitby confutes you by an
evident demonstration. Alas, quoth he, I see every day Crucifixes in our
College windows, and yet never find any such effect wrought in me, as you talk
of. Indeed neither those Colleges, nor windows in the colleges, nor
Crucifixes in the windows, were ever set up by their good Catholic founders,
for any such students, as Whitby is, who finds, it seems, no effect wrought in
him there, by the sight of any thing, but his good chamber, distributions, and
dinner provided for him in the hall.

So likewise the connatural respect you plead for, as due to figures by force
of their representation of respected persons, by an example of a Kings pictur,
he confutes it nimbly. I would not fear, quoth Whitby, to tear his Majesty's
picturs, which sometimes may be found in smoaky Alehouses, etc. he puts them in
smoaky Alehouses, the better to cover his own rudenes; nor would I scruple,
says he, to put a piece of Popish Mass, wherein were happily an Epistle or Gospel
extant, unto an unclean use. And here also, he puts the Gospel in a Mass Book,
as before he set the Kings pictur in a smoaky alehouse, to prevent offense,
that some tender one amongst themselves, might take at his uncivil talk.

In brief, he will not allow any figur or image, though it were a Crucifix, to
have any influence upon our minds unto good thoughts, any more then the pictur
of Bradshaw or Cromwell, hell or the devil. Sometimes he says they cause bad
thoughts, but never any good ones. And yet he adds, that Protestants do keep
up picturs notwithstanding, though the cries of fanatics be never so loud
against them, because of the historical use they have. What historical use can
they have, in the name of God, if the sight of them, as Whitby himself here
speaks, can bring no part of sacred history to our minds; nor the very Crucifix
have so much influence upon us, as to mind us who our Lord was, or what he has
don or suffered for us,? Unles he will say, according to his usual method of
answering, that they bring into our minds the history of the civil wars betwixt
Caesar and Pompey. But surely, if these kind of sacred images and figures cause
only evil thoughts, and no good ones, the cry of fanatics against them,
notwithstanding any historical use, which according to Whitby, although he talk
of it, is none at all, will not be judged unjust.

In conclusion he will needs have the Papists both to worship their Images, and
pray to them. And this, because they use them commonly in their Oratories,
whither they retire from places of worldly business, to recollect themselves, and
pray, when time and devotion invites them to it. But if for this the Papist
must suffer his doom, what will Whitby say, when he shall be accused himself,
for worshipping the roof and rafters of the Church, toward which he casts up
his eyes, when he stands in his pulpit to pray, before and after his sermon.
Even the poor Jews were derided by the Roman Satyrist, as adorers of the Welkin
and clouds. And who can escape the censur, whether he have some pious
representation before him, to fix his fancy, or turn only to the wall and
stones. He must still kneel before something, whether he be within door, or
without in the open air. And if he have the assistance of his crucified
redeemer represented before him, it is probable enough it may help to recollect
his mind, to humble his spirit, and fix his fancy; at least it can do no hurt.
And if I may and needs must frame an idea or pictur of him in my mind, why may
I not have it in mine eye too?

But Mr. Whitby will have it, whatever you, or the whole world knows to the
contrary, that Papists pray to picturs, and consequently make a God of them.
And he will not have them any more excusable, then those Israelites who
worshipped God in a Calf. Here Sir I learn what I never knew before, that the
idolatrous Israelites worshipped God in a calf. He that shall worship a calf
for God, I could never in my life yet conceiv how he should worship God in a
calf. Moses worshipped God in a flaming bush. And why? Because God was by a
peculiar presence in that bush or flame, to terminate that worship. Nor was he
blamable in worshipping God so present there. But God was not so present in
that golden statue of the molten heifer, which the Hebrews had set up in Moses
absence, as the very God which brought them out of Egypt, that they could be
said to worship God in it. And if he had been so present in it, they might
surely as well have fallen down before him there, as any where else. The
heathen, whom the holy Prophet rebuked so earnestly for worshipping the stars
and host of heaven, did they also worship God in the stars or heavens? surely
then they were not blameworthy. Where ever God is by a peculiar presence, as
in heaven and Moses his flame, there may and ought he to be worshipped. And so
Christians worshipped God even in the man Jesus, our great and blessed Lord.
But his figur or effigies has no more of Gods presence in it, then the wall it
hangs upon; save only the reflection of his outward effigies, to recollect the
fancy. And the respect, if we will speak properly, does not terminate upon the
pictur, but upon the person whom it represents; which infers a worship of God
in it, not by it.

Chap. 15. from page 247 to 273.

Is very earnest for scriptur and liturgy in a vulgar tongue. This plea of
Protestant ministers makes a plausible sound. And they know it well enough. For
it was the first thing that by their rhetorical colors cast upon it, commended
them to the people, after the Apostasy of the first reformers; by whose
persuasion, the people was then made to beleev, they should now be as gods, all
of them, knowing good and evil. The word of God, says Whitby, is kept from the
knowledge of the vulgar people in the Roman Church. And thus they all say and
ever will say; be they never so much satisfied by Catholic writers to the
contrary: because it is to their own advantage it should be so thought in
England, and all other places, where Protestants have invaded, and now actually
sit upon the Catholic Clergies benefice and byshoppricks.

But is there any part or particle of Christian faith or religion, or of the
word of God, that is kept from Catholics, or not made known to them, in Books,
Catechismes, Sermons, all in their own language, and in daily practis of that
Church, whereof they are members? Do they not hear, and read, and see all the
mysteries of our Christian faith, Christ our Lords birth and passion,
resurrection and ascension into glory? what he acted, what he suffered, what he
taught, what he constituted and ordained for our salvation; what we are to
hope, what to beleev, what to practice in order thereunto, set before their
eyes, not only by continual sermons, made to them, all over the catholic world,
in their own vulgar tongue, but by their Gospels and Epistles, which they have
lying by them, collected for the course of the whole year, and translated into
their own language, together with several pious treatises, and meditations upon
all these rules and mysteries of faith, unto so ample use, that if they do but
walk accordingly, which is all that religion intends, they cannot miss
salvation. Is not all this Gods word? It is nothing else. And what is there more
of the word of God, except we will count letters and syllables? The word of God
then is not kept from the knowledge of the vulgar people in the Roman Church.

But why have they not the Bible translated, as it lies, in all languages,
where catholic faith is professed? Because it is obscure as it lies, in that short
and ambiguous phrase, and under so many several tropes of rhetoric, and
schemes also of logic, wherein it was wrote, apt thereby to be perverted and
misunderstood, as we see by experience to be true, unto endless factions. Nor
does the word of God consist so much in letters and syllables, as in the marrow
and meaning of his will. And not the sense and meaning, but the letter of the
scriptur is that which makes heretics.

But is not that the word of God which is kept from the people? It is the word
of God, but not kept from the people. For it is but the same with that, which
is delivered and made known unto the people. So much as it contains, whatever
it be either of faith or morality, either of what is to be believed, or hoped,
or practiced, they have it all; but disintangled from those artificial schemes
of logic and rhetoric, whereof the holy writ is fuller then any book was ever
writ by man, which there inwrap and render it obscure. There is no instruction,
no rule of piety, no particle of comfort, either for this world or the other,
in St. Paul's epistles, for example, but Catholics have it; they read it in
their own language, if they be able to read, they know it all. And they have it
in a better and more facil manner, then they could find it out, by perusing
those high theological discourses of his, which the learned of men can
hardly, and very hardly understand. The like I say of other portions of holy
writ. Only the disputative part, with the interwoven systems of rhetoric, this
may exercise great and more sublime divines, who by help of their various
litterature may consider, not only the plain truths therein contained, which are
common to them with other vulgar believers, but the nature of the Metonymies,
Synechdoche's, Metaphors, together with the several modes of argumentation,
refutation, objections and inopinate transitions in the context. This, if my
adversary OeN had understood, it had saved one fourth part of his
Animadversions upon Fiat Lux; and Whitby here had been utterly silent. But it
is their only advantage both in this and other controverted points of faith
with Roman Catholics, either to be ignorant, or dissemble their knowledge. And
therefore I have good reason to think, they will never seem to understand. But
God grant they may.

The wonder is, that English Protestants should still be as fiercely eager in
this point, when they write controversies, as ever they were; when they do
themselves most heartily repent, (I have heard several great clergymen amongst
them speak it) that they had ever given the Bible in that short ambiguous
phrase it is penned, into the hands of people in their own tongue, to be thus
perverted, as it is, every one his own way, unto endless and irreconcilable
schisms. It would glad their hearts, no doubt, to see the Roman Church do
indiscreetly as they have don. But that will never be.

Holy catholic Church has revealed, translated, and several ways made known
the will of God to her people, appointing most divine ways and methods, such
as she had her self received from God, to inure and keep them in the practis of
that their holy faith. And the disputative and sublimer divinity, or, as I may
so speak, the philosophical part of holy writ, such as can may read on Gods
name, and the Church will commend them for it; while these, with all the rest,
attend unto those duties and good works, every one in his calling, which their
holy faith prescribes.

These are and ever were the ways and method of the now present and ancient
catholic Church, most wise and holy. And her subjects and believers have
profited thereby, many thousands of them, unto angelical sanctity; and all of
them unto something more, than otherwise they would have had: whilst others that
swerv from these ways, promote themselves unto wildness and schism without
end, missing indeed the word of God in the very scripture they read, and never
attaining to the true life and power in that form of words, which they use not,
unto intended sanctification, but by their own misinter pretations wrest and
deprave daily unto their own destruction. Nor will people be ruled now by their
ministers, but thinking it their own right to interpret as they pleas, make it
their only work to read, and cant sentences, and coin opinions as they list.

Excepting only this one fruit of our vulgar reading of scripture, as it lies,
which in all men's judgments is an evil fruit, I do not see, nor can I know,
what our Protestants can have, if all other things were equal, above vulgar
Catholics by their scriptur translated, as it lies, in its own phrase. Do they
know any more of the mysteries of salvation, Sacraments, or hopes of a life to
com, or sincerity of a pious life, then the other? I am sure they do less,
whatever they know, and are so taught to do. Or does any Protestant, after he
has read a chapter, know any more of what is expedient for salvation, then
before he began it. It renews, you will say, and moves devotion. Devotion to
what? Are they not taught by the Reformation, that the good works there
commended to our practis, are all mortal sins? And therefore do our people so
read and hear, that in hearing and reading they wholly acquiesce, and trouble
themselves no further. And they do wisely in it. For who would chastise his
body, or mortify his appetites, or give alms, and sin so many ways, with so
much expenses and trouble, when he may as well do nothing, and sin less. And do
not the sacred gospel, which Catholics read in their own language, with pious
meditations annexed for that very purpos, which also they are taught to read
for no other end, move devotion too? And this I judge to be right piety. Whereas
to read, only to say that I have read, or to find out new ways, or strengthen
my self therein, is but vanity and sin.

After a duty is once known, Catholics conceiv then no further thing remains,
but only their corresponding practis, which is with all their forces to be put
in ure, according to the dictates of that their rule of faith, now sufficiently
understood, unto their sanctification and merit. Whilst others think nothing
behind, but only to read over again what they knew before, that they may have
words in their head to talk of. Which of these is right Christianity, he knew
well enough who said, Fidelis sermo, and de his volo te confirmare, ut curent
bonis operibus praeesse qui credunt Deo: It is a faithful saying, and of this I
would have you to be strongly confirmed, that such as once have believed in
God, attend unto good works: These things are good and profitable to men, but
other questions, controversies, and contentions, (which are the only fruit of
our vulgar reading of scriptur in its own short ambiguous phrase) these do thou
avoid; for they are useles and vain. This is St Paul's mind, and I think he had
the Spirit of God in him.

As for the sacred liturgy which Mr Whitby would also have in a vulgar tongue,
if he knew what the Messach or Catholic Liturgy is, which here I do not intend
to teach him, he would know that it could no more be understood in English then
in Hebrew, Latin or Greek. For in it the Priest does but offer and pray
submissively for the peoples atonement, unto him who equally understands all
languages; and people offer with him, as they are taught, and know well enough
to do, all their several necessities, either with words or without them, in the
mediation of his blood, who reconciled the world in his flesh to God, which
reconciliation is figured and repeated in their Messach, for their religious
exercise and comfort. And the great capital work of a true religion ought to be
common unto all, not to those only who hear, and speak, and see, but even to
the deaf and blind and dumb; how ever these may fail in other inferior and
less necessary duties.

Chapter 16. from p. 273. to 369.

Maintains very stoutly, first, that the Saints and Angels of God do not pray
for us in heaven, either in general or in particular: Secondly, that they do
not assist, help or protect us by their presence on earth. And thirdly, that to
trust to any such help, is to rest in them, as our final end, and to make them
our Gods. Though the two first be as much dissonant to any true religion, as
the last to reason; yet will Mr. Whitby hold them all three. And he has an
evasion for any grounds or reasonings you or any Catholic can make; an evasion
at hand as smart and senceles, as any of those he gave before against
Supremacy, etc.

But this your catholic doctrine about Angels he buts and runns at it, with most
frightful and horned dilemma's. So many millions of Angel-guardians, quoth he,
if for example upon the festival of St. Peter, they go up to heaven to St.
Peter with their pupils prayers, who guards their persons? and if they do not
go up, who presents their prayers? Again, When, says he, these Angel
messengers com so may thousand of them at once to tell the Virgin Mary of her
new suitors, how can she have any quiet to say her prayers? And if she say her
own prayers quietly, how can they tell her continually of so many new suitors?
Again, Have all the houses in London, and all the Papist houses in Rome, so
many Angels as will guard them, and keep the Devil from setting them on fire,
or not? If they have, then are the Angels finely employed: If they have not,
why does not the enemy set a fire on them every night? Again, Had Jobs cammels,
oxen and asses there Angel-guardian, or no? If not, why then did Satan complain
he could not com at them? If they had, then must we allow our Author Mr. Cressy
one. Is not this notable divinity? Surely Hudibras was but an ass to Whitby.
This, this is the man of whom the poet sings Canto 1. This is he, In school
divinity as able, As he that height irrefragable, A second Thomas, or at once,
To name them all another Duns. But all this country divinity Mr. Whitby
gathered, I know well enough, a sensibilibus, from the nature and property of
his serving-boy, who cannot go of an errand and stay too; cannot sup and blow
together; cannot tell a tale and whistle both at once; cannot speak of Jobs
asses, but he must remember Mr. Cressy.

In truth, though Mr. Whitby be thus extravagant, yet can I not persuade my
self, that other graver Protestants are so likewise. For when Christ our Lord
comforts his poor believers, and terrifies their oppressing adversaries, with
this his divine ratiocination, See that you do not abuse or contemn any of
these my little ones. For I say unto you, that their Angels do always behold
the face of my Father who is in heaven, he seems apparently to speak something,
that serves directly for the catholic belief, and is consequently against these
three assertions of Whitby to the contrary. For those angel-guardians, whom our
Lord calls their angels, the angels of his believers, and of his little ones,
either they must be so perspicatious, as one way or other to see even in
heaven, where they behold the face of God in glory, all the persecutions and
necessities of them whose angels they are: or at least, whilst they are present
on earth, with them whose angels they be, they must still see and enjoy the God
of glory who is in heaven: Both these things are possible; and, whether it be
this or that, they must needs be both so potent and good, as to be able and
willing, when they see time, to assist and help them in their afflictions and
need, whose angels they are, either by praying for them in general, or in
particular, or by strengthening, comforting, protecting their persons. And
lastly, poor man may comfort himself in this invisible assistance, whatever it
be, and however it be wrought, without making those angels his gods, or relying
upon them as his final end.

And all this must be intended by our Lord and Savior in that his comfortable
ratiocination, I should think, if it conclude any thing. If they be not there
insinuated, it is very hard to say what it may conclude. If the angels do
neither pray for us, nor any way assist and help us, nor we can without danger
of sin rely on any such assistance, then surely to say, Let none abuse my
little ones, for their angels, etc. would be a ratiocination as impertinent, as
to say, Let none abuse, etc. for the North and South poles are half the heavens
distant: and far more dangerous. For man could hardly be persuaded by such a
speech, to put any trust in that distance of the poles, as here he cannot but
be moved to take comfort in that acquaintance and nearnes we have with angels,
which any way to rely on, Mr. Whitby tell us, is to rest in them as our final
end, and make them our gods.

I could wish Mr. Whitby would first consult his own reason, whether any way to
rely on the comfort of second causes visible or invisible, infer necessarily,
that we do rely upon them as our ultimate end, and make them our gods, as he
affirms more then once in this his 16 chapter: And again, I desire him, that he
would be more wary, and take heed how he speaks against the angels of God, and
deride those hosts of heaven, in whom our Lord Christ advised us, if I
understand him right, to take comfort; lest they strike him, as some others they
have don, with sudden death. Poor Catholics are yet in their pilgrimage and
place of sufferance, who must therefore patiently endure all scoffs, contumelies
and slanders, for their futur merit. But the Angels of God are in glory, and
blessed, and therefore not to be blasphemed or mocked at by insolent dust; or
their protection and assistance to be slighted.

What is the essence of Angels, what their presence, or how great their power,
we cannot here under our thick corporeal veil conceiv. They may, for ought we
can tell, be as completely present all at once, both here on earth, and heaven
too, unto any effect of perceiving or operating, as a man is present within the
four walls of his chamber. At least if our Lord whom we pretend all of us
equally to beleev, has so clearly allowed us, to support our selves in their
assistance, however it be wrought, no man I should think, who bears the name of
Christian, can with any modesty affirm, as Whitby does here, that they neither
pray for us in heaven, nor assist us on earth; nor that we can any way support
our selves in any comfort from them, without making them our gods.

Chapter 17. from page 369 to 410.

Is very bitter against the celibacy and single life of priests, and exclaims
on the contrary, with very broad language, that you may see he is very sensible
of what he says, against the uncleannes of the clergy, not excepting any, nor
allowing so much as a possibility to do otherwise. And I doubt not, says he,
p. 378. whether such advocates of Celibacy, as M. C. if strict inquiry were
made, might not be often found where the Card. of Crema was. Where that man was
found, I do not know. In all likelihood it was in some place where Jobs asses
use to graze, for he lately made you, Sir, one of them.

Good Sir, do not hate the man, as he deserves, but pity, pardon, and pray for
him. He has mocked away his own angel-guardian, and cannot therefore be civil
toward men. Mr. Whitby understands not the several ways and means prescribed
by catholic religion, as a preservative against the incursions of that, or any
other sensual temptation. He is unacquainted either with their frequent
fastings, or disciplines, or hair-cloth, or continual and hourly exercise of
psalms, hymns, and canticles, which take up in a manner all the whole life of
the Roman Clergy. That man who uses heartily such like exercises, commended by
catholic religion, will easily subdue any whatever temptation, if ever it
should assault him, as they know well enough who practis that their religion
seriously, and prevent oftentimes its very assault. But if any will be so
forgetful of his own welfare, as utterly to neglect those sacred means, he may
fall deservedly into a lower religion, and become a Whitby. Ministers are either
in bed with their wives, or thinking happily after one, when the catholic clergy,
if they correspond with their duty and calling, are watching and saying their
sacred mattins, which consist of many divine lessons, psalms, anthems,
responsories, hymns; canticles, which put divine and spiritual thoughts into
their minds. When ministers are feasting, they fast: When they are caressing
their mistrisses, these chastise their body with disciplines: When they, got
out of their beds, are at their mornings draught, these are saying their Lauds
and Prime, and devoutly disposing themselves by prayer and meditation upon
their knees, unto their sacred liturgy: When they are eating and drinking, and
mannaging worldly affairs about their wives and children, these are at their
Sext and None, and Vespars, and Compline, that they may fulfill their daily
task of prayers and devotions to their Redeemer. I say no more, but of this I
am and will be consident, that if Mr. Whitby had ever practiced, or seen the
lives and conversations of Roman Priests, those visible angels of God, or been
otherwise acquainted therewith, he would not have so boldly affirmed as he
does, even against the very tenor of gospel, (which says, that some are made
eunuchs by men, and some again make themselves so for the kingdom of heaven) that
it is impossible to be chaste. Nor would he so universally calumniat all
professors of chastity for the wickedness of some few, who have in some
particular ages and places given offense by their evil lives unto Catholics,
whose testimony Mr. Whitby uses against them. But commonly men judge of others
as they act themselves. And he that keeps himself chaste, will in charity think
so of other men.

When you say Sir, and all catholics with you, that it is indeed a doctrine of
devils both pernicious and falls, to forbid marriage absolutely as evil and
unlawful in it self, as did the Encratites, Montanists, Marcionites, and
Manichees; but yet relatively and upon some particular account may some persons
notwithstanding be withheld from marriage for diviner purposes, as catholic
Church uses. For so the women, which were particularly addicted to the service
of the altar, St. Paul would have them to be elderly and mature, lest being
young, they should grow wanton from Christ, and desire to marry. This
distinction will in no wise serve Mr. Whitby.

For says he with his reverend Hall, the doctrine thus stigmatized by the
apostle as the doctrine of Devils is in general of such as do forbid marriage,
and not upon this or that particular account. And the act is all one whether
the prohibition be relative or absolute, as poison is poison whether absolutely
or conditionally taken. Thus speaks Whitby with his reverend Hall, thence
inferring, if I understand him, that it is as full and truly the doctrine of
devils to forbid marriage to any one upon any account, of serving God more
purely and the like, as it is to forbid it absolutely as evil and unlawful in
it self; as poison, etc.

But is this true? Poison conditionally taken, or taken upon condition, either
of a preservative against it, or of some diseas, whereof it is a proper remedy,
may not poison or hurt the man that takes it, but rather help perhaps and cure
him. And if it do not poison but help, then is it no poison to him, but physic.

And do they forbid marriage as in it self unlawful, who do relatively prohibit
it? Or is it equally the doctrine of devils to withhold it, as unlawful to all,
or only to some upon a special occasion? Do they condemn it in it self who
withhold it in relation to some times or persons? That I may omit other several
reasons, which may convince this assertion of folly and falsehood, how coms our
Church of England to forbid marriage in Advent and Lent, and some other times of
the year? Is not this a relative prohibition? And does our Church of England
therefore absolutely forbid it in it self, because she relatively forbids it? I am
sure the prohibition is as much relative, to forbid marriage to all persons at
some times, as to forbid it to some persons at all times. And if the doctrine be
stigmatized in general, upon what account soever it run, then does the Church
of England hold and teach the doctrine of devils, when upon this or that
particular account, she prohibits marriage, although she absolutely allows it,
as the Roman Church does.

The rubric of our English Church now put into our Almanac runs thus.

Times prohibiting Marriage.

Marriage comes in the 23 of January, and by the 7 of February it goes out
again until Low Sunday, at which time it coms in again, and goes not out till
Rogation Sunday from that time it is unforbidden until Advent Sunday. But then
it goes out, and coms not in again till the 23. of January following: All which
in the phrase of Dr. Pierce and Whitby his champion runs thus.

Times commanding the doctrine of devils.

The doctrine of devils goes out the 23 of January, and by the 7 of February it
comes in again; until Low Sunday, at which time it goes out again; and coms not
in till Rogation Sunday; from that time it goes out until Advent Sunday. But
then the doctrine of devils coms in; and it goes not out again till the 23 of
January.

The same is also to be said about abstaining from flesh in Lent. For this
prohibition is equally stigmatized by the same Apostle in the very self-same
text, as the devils doctrine. And a dispensation to eat flesh in Lent, cannot be
obtained in our Bishops Courts, without a sum of moneys; and generally to
abstain from the doctrine of devils we give an angel, either a gold angel or a
silver one.

Truth is; it is no devils doctrine or evil counsel to refrain either from flesh
or marriage, or any way to bridle, and mortify our carnal appetites, which our
holy apostles have counseled us carefully to do, but a blessed angelical
conversation. For the angels of God, says Christ our Lord, do neither marry
nor are given in marriage. And the flesh of bulls and goats neither does God
nor his angels feed on. And both the counsel and practis of Christ and his
apostles lead us that way. When the Bridegroom is taken away, then, says
Christ, shall my disciples fast; that is, they shall then enter upon their
austerities of life after their solemn profession in Pentecost, which now in
their noviceship I will not put upon them, while they are yet weak in faith.
Unto those very same disciples he also persuaded continence and coelibacy, both
by his own example and words of counsel. And devils are all friends to the
contrary uncleannes and gluttony.

But why then are these two abstinencies so opposite both of them to the devils
will and inclination, called by St. Paul Doctrina daemoniorum; whereas devils
were never known to move any man to those abstinencies, but rather to the
contrary excesses, being enemies themselves to all cleanlines and temperance?
Does the devil approve of that which our Lord advises us to follow? Or does he
labor to promote Christ's counsel and practis? No, in no wise. But whatsoever
he may pretend of good, he ever does it to some evil end, and for snares and
subversion. He likes not of continence, he loves not temperance, he hates
cleanlines. But so to praise that which himself indeed dislikes, and persuade
men to beleev, that such an act of high virtue and counsel is also of such
necessity, that no man can be a Christian without it. This is one of his
demoniacal subtilties.

The Greek has two several words to expres those evil spirits in general,
Daemonium, and Diabolus, the one speaks his crafty subtilties, the other his
malicious will. But we in English have but one, and it renders properly the
last. For the old Saxes our forefathers called that evil spirit Deuvill or
Doill, which relates to the will or practice. But Daemonium or Demon, for
which we have no English word, has a reference to the understanding, and to the
perverting of it. And it signifies intelligent or knowing.

Now this doctrine of abstinence from meats and marriage as things unlawful, is
called by St. Paul doctrina daemoniorum, the doctrine of demons, or of those
evil spirits, not as they are wicked practisers, but cunning seducers; not as
they corrupt the will, but delude the understanding. They hate continence, and
never have or will move any man toward it. But if under color of its
excellency, they could once persuade men to beleev, that salvation is not
possible for married people, as in primitive times of Christianity they did,
then have they acted the part of demons or cunning seducers indeed, and brought
much ruin and disorder and snares upon the Christian world, which, it is
indifferent to them, what way it suffer, so it receiv a damage.

This craft of demons consists generally in this, that to make themselves and
temptations plausible, they still advance one ability or virtue, to depress
another. In primitive times of the Church they exalted that of the right hand,
to depress the left; in these later times they exalt the virtue of the left
hand, to depress the right. Thus marriage is good, and continence also is good;
they are both good: Nay S. Paul says, that continence is better, or the virtue
of the right hand: For he that is unmarried only cares, says he, how to serve
God well, and pleas him; but he that is married is solicitous for many worldly
affairs concerning his wife and children, and so is distracted and divided two
ways. To exalt then the one of these two, which are both good things, unto
such a monopoly of goodness and excellency, that the other shall be thought
unlawful and evil; this is doctrina daemoniorum, the doctrine of demons, who
were cunning seducers from the beginning.

Thus faith is good, and other works of piety, justice, and sobriety, unto
which Christ and his apostles exhort us, are good also, and necessary and
healthful. He therefore that so magnifies the one, as to evacuate the other,
teaches doctrinam daemoniorum, the doctrine of demons, who were cunning seducers
from the beginning.

Meat is good, and fasting is good; good to eat with thanksgiving; and good in
times and occasions to abstain. But that man, who so exalts the one, as to
exclude the other out of Christianity, is a seducer, and teaches the doctrine of
demons. So likewise does he, who either so highly magnifies free will, as to
exclude Gods grace; or so defends grace, that he abolishes all concurrence of
free will unto works of piety and merit, teach both of them equally the doctrine
of demons, who were cunning seducers from the beginning.

In a word, not to mention more examples, wherein I might be copious, so to
commend continence, as to make marriage unlawful, is the doctrine of demons, who
were cunning seducers from the beginning. And so again, to set up marriage, as
to teach continence to be both sinful and impossible, is the doctrine both of
demons and devils too, implacable enemies both to truth and continence. And
Christ is equally crucified between both the thieves.

Chapter 18. from page 410. to 420.

Begins to justify the departure or schism of the English from the Roman
Church, as good and lawful. For if Schism, says he, be a crime, it lies upon
the Church, not which separated, but which gave the cause of separation, the
Roman, not the English Church: Causal schism, which gives the occasion, bears
all the blame; but formal schism, which separates from an offensive society,
is an action of necessary virtue. Nor can there be, quoth he, any necessity of
communicating with others in wicked actions; but a necessity rather of going
out of Babylon. Nor does every schism turn the Church of Christ into a
synagogue of Satan, but only schism in sundamentals, which fundamentals, he
says elsewhere, are as clear and perspicuous to all men, as that twice two make
four. These Sir be his capital assertions in this chapter, which how little
they will serve his purpos against the Roman Church, he that seriously reads
your book against which this reply is made, will soon perceiv: But how much
they will disadvantage him before the Presbyterian, Quaker, and other ways
here in England, who separating from our English Church, do thus justify their
schism, either by mincing the fault, or laying it upon her from whom they have
revolted, it behoovs him well to consider.

Chapter 19. from page 420 to 428.

Endeavors yet more to diminish the fault, and justify the secession.
Schism, says he, that proceeds from weakness, in persons that desire to know
the truth, and endeavor after it, is free from crime. And again, External
unity is not essential to the Church. And schism that is contrary to that
unity, divides not from Christ's body in things absolutely necessary to be
united, but only in things not so necessary, as in the same liturgies or
ceremonies about matters not fundamental, wherein an union is neither necessary
nor yet possible. This is, I am sure, the voice of a Presbyterian, and no
Prelatick Protestant, as Whitby speaks himself to be. And if it be indeed the
sense of our English Church, as her spokes-man here would make us beleev it is,
then are surely our English Bishops in charity all obliged, earnestly to
intercede with his royal Majesty, who for civil respects has forbidden all
meetings out of ordinary Churches and Chapels, that the poor Quaker, who
endeavors after truth and light with an innocent and unfeigned heart, may be
permitted for religious respects to meet at Bull and Mouth, and other such like
places, where they may think fit, being now resolved never to resort more to
Protestant Steeple Houses, or to any of their liturgies or ceremonies; which
communion is neither necessary unto any unity, any substantial unity in Christ's
body, nor yet possible; that they may declare amongst themselves the sons of
light, the power and truth in simplicity of heart, without impeachment of the
wicked.

Chapter 20. from page 428. to 448.

Falls again to speak against Infallibility, which he had battered before in
his whole 9 chapter of above 30 pages, and that with as much earnestness here,
as if nothing had been yet said of it. But this chapter was written happily by
some other hand, which knew not what the former had performed; till coming
together both of the papers to the Press, it was perceived they might both pass.

And here all general Councels, and their determinations are disabled, as
destitute of any assurance of truth. Is this Infallibility, quoth he out of
Chillingworth, in the Council alone, or Pope alone, etc. What shall we do, if
they run counter, etc. To whom must we hearken when many pretend to the
Popedom, etc. What if the Popes misdemeanour be the thing to be judged, etc.
How can we be assured that any one is true Pope, not Symoniacally ordained, not
illegally elected, not invalidly baptized, etc. which are, says he,
uncertainties propounded by Mr. Chillingworth, not possible to be resolved.
This kind of discourse fills up this whole chapter.

By virtue of these uncertainties, we can never tell, whether Mr. Whitby be any
minister or no; or whether he be a Christian, or so much as a Whitby. If
titulus coloratus and moral evidence may not suffice us, we can be sure of no
authority either spritual or civil in this world. And if any one should learn
by this wise master, thus to except against the obliging power of acts and
decrees of King or Parliament. Is that power in the King alone, or in the
Parliament alone, etc. What if they run counter etc. What if they should not be
rightly chosen, etc. would he not talk as wise as this man and his little
Doctor Chillingworth? It ought to suffice an honest man and a good subject,
that an authority is set over him and peaceably accepted, whom he ought
indefinily to obey, not only for wrath but conscience. It is not his part to
weaken due loyalty with these seditious querks and quibbles, Who can tell
whether he be legitimatly begotten, or rightly baptized, or legally elected,
etc. Catholics have as much ground for their obedience to civil and spiritual
Superiors, as they have for their observance of their own natural father. And
I think that is enough. If we had it not promised in Gospel as we have, that
Christ would preserv his Church from failing and error; yet the very belief we
have in his divinity, would naturally infer such a confidence, as Catholics
have in the Churches truth.

But Mr. Whitby understands not in whom this infallibility does originally
reside, as I perceiv by his fond interrogatories, nor consequently what it is
If he had ever had the happy hour to read the System of that learned Doctor
Franciscus Davenport, by whose light I have lately, Sir, since your departure
hence to Paris, sufficiently declared in our English tongue, all this whole
business of infallibility, he had saved a multitude of idle words drawn out of
his famous fanatic Mr. Chillingworth. Catholic Divines may several ways
defend and declare this business of Infallibility, as well as other points of
religion, according to their several conceptions and abilities, and may go some
of them so far, as to defend even an intrinsecal inherent Infallibility either
in the Pope or Council. And although this may suffer more difficulty then the
extrinsecall one of Gods providence and guidance, yet do I not see how any one
can disprove a possibility of it. However faith does not require so much at
their hands. If God be but infallible, and Christ be true, the Church is safe.

Very many bitter books have been written against Catholics and their religion,
injuriously diminishing both them and it, upon the mistake of this one business
of Infallibility, perhaps a wilful one; two very lately by Mr. Moulin and
Denton, to the great hurt and damage of the innocent, if men beleev them. It
is a very pious and good rule, that of the Canon and civil law, Cum sunt jura
partium obscura, reo favendum est potius quam actori. But I doubt much whether
the people of England, who may read these invective books against Papists,
follow that rule or no. When the right of Parties is obscure, says the law,
the defendant is rather to be favored than the plaintiff. If it were so here,
we should not have been by such bitter books, so highly incensed, as I see we
are, against poor Catholics; but against those rather who slander them.

Mr. Moulin would prove, that Catholic religion and not Protestancy, is guilty
of sedition; and he does it by a relation of passionate words and actions of
some Popes recorded in stories. And this he takes to be a sufficient proof that
Catholic religion is guilty of sedition. It were indeed to be wished, that all
Popes words and actions were answerable to their religion and rule. But that is
hardly to be expected in this world. The very place, and honor that has ever
been given to that seat, is no small temptation of pride, or other passions
incident thereupon into a mind not more then ordinarily furnished with all
Christian virtues. But if we will beleev histories concerning them, we shall
find no series or succession of men in any one place or dignity of this world,
to have held forth so many lights of virtue, as that one chair has don. And if
some have been faulty, they gave no doubt much cause of grief or scandal, but
none of wonderment to the world. They may surely fail in a greater temptation;
since other Christians who have the same means of grace, do fail in lesser. But
Catholics, says Mr. Moulin, are bound by the very tenor of their religion to
hold for good and justify, all that any of their Popes have ever said or don.
This would be very strange, why so? Because, says he, they beleev them
infallible. Who believes them infallible? How infallible? that they can neither
do nor speak amiss? Who ever thought that? Infallible is a word taken up lately
by schoolmen, to expres the sovereign power and indeficiency of Gods Church,
and not any inherent endowments of a Pope, who is brought up when he is young,
like one of us, in the Catechize and practice of Christian religion, and when
he is ripe and placed by Gods providence in that supreme chair is eminently to
practice those holy ruses, and carefully to keep and maintain that depositum
fidei, the treasury of faith which he has received; and if he fail therein,
shall give an account and suffer for it in another world, as severely as any
other for their faults: Nor are his words and actions a rule to other men of
Christian religion, but Christian religion is a rule to him both for his
actions and words. And all that Infallibility which Catholic writers, to expres
more than one thing in one short word, make use of in their discourses with
Protestants, is only an extrinsecal providence of God watching over his Church,
to preserv the primitive apostolik spirit in her, and to keep her always even
to the consummation of the world from error and deficiency, notwithstanding
any opposition from without, or the misdemeanors of any one or other within
her self; even the providence of that good God, whose property it is not only
to prevent evil from the good, but even to work good out of evil; that his
Church which he has promised to preserv may be ever safe. And if ever this
infallible providence do show it self, it must surely be then, when the ship is
ready to be split by heresies and schisms, that rise from some violent spirits
breaking unity with that body so dangerously, that Prelates are called together
from all parts of the world as a help extraordinary, in a general Council to
prevent the ruin. And this is that which Divines mean, when they say, that the
Pope is infallible in Cathedra, in the Chair, that is to say, in consessu
Seniorum and Presbyterorum ecclesiae, in a general convention of Christian
Prelates. So that Moulin speaks not one word to the purpos.

But Doctor Dentons book is not any such mistake, but pure malice. He intends
to show, that Papists were never punished for religion, but for treason. And
his book is altogether made up of several stories of men, Papists men, sent
over hither from beyond seas, as he says, to kill, poison, and destroy people.
Some, when they had read his book, took the Author for a fool; but I heard
afterward, that he is Physician. And upon that account I had him excused. For
if he be as bad at physic, as he is in affairs of religion, he had cause to be
angry with them, who came hither from foreign parts, to take his office and
emploiment out of his hands, kill and poison people. If the villains, who ever
they were, had been only sent over to make folks sick, they had don him some
service; but to poison men, and kill them downright, that may give the
Physician a just cause of wrath against those intruding empyricks. He begins his
book thus. I suppose it is a matter of faith with all Papists, that the Pope is
infallible, and that he can depose Kings, etc. Thus does that wise man open his
mouth and begin his Recipe. Two things very seldom seen in any Academick
conclusions, when students defend a whole body of divinity in the schools, but
never delivered in Gospel or declared in Councels, or heard or thought of by
any one Catholic in the world, as any thing of his religion, these Mr. Denton
supposes to be matter of faith with all Papists. I would ask Mr. Denton,
whether he thinks it a matter of faith among Papists, That the earth moves, or
no. If one Catholic hold those two assertions, which in his sense I cannot tell
whether any one do or no: I will be bold to say, a thousand hold this. The next
book Dr. Denton writes against Papists, will happily begin thus: I suppose it is
a matter of faith with all Papists, that the earth moves. And then he may go on
with his moon-stories, and build castles in the air, and Dentonise, as here he
has done.

Chapter 21. from p. 448. to 456.

Allows that general Councels, although they be not infallible, are highly
notwithstanding, both themselves and their decrees to be esteemed; provided that
they keep to Gods rule; that clear reason be not against them; that men of
worth do not gainsay them; and that their proceedings be legal. Not otherwis.
Thus he recalls himself and mends the matter. All these four things, if general
Councels observe, they shall be observed themselves, notwithstanding they may
happily be a company of bastards and buffoons, neither legitimately begotten, nor
rightly baptized, nor validly elected, nor legally ordained. And whether these
specified conditions be, or be not in councels and their decrees, every man, as
Whitby here and several other places of his book speaks, is to judge according
to his own pleasur and discretion. So that according to his rule, the
discretion and will of particular men is the final resolv of all religion,
faith, and practis. Whence it will follow, that if there be as many religions
as men, they must be all good.

When you object Sir, that such a liberty as this will be destructive even of
all articles, canons, and acts of Parliament, in order to our established
Protestancy or other affairs. To this Whitby replies according to his custom,
very hotly. Does it become a confuter of Mr. Chillingworth, says he, thus to
trifle? Has he not told you that others may make the same defense as we? as
murderers may cry not guilty, as well as innocent persons; but not so justly,
not so truly. For Gods sake who trifles here? when both Chillingworth and
Whitby too, had put into every private man's hand an equal power of judging,
admitting or rejecting the decrees, orders, and laws of their superiors, he
now distinguishes with Chillingworth his fanatic Master, that some do it justly
and truly; others not so justly, not so truly. But who shall pass judgment upon
the final and only irrefragable judge, or aver such a thing of any one, who has
an equal and unlimited power beforehand, to take and reject what himself
pleases. Both truth and justice must solely be in his will, who may admit and
refuse as himself wills.

But the party now esteemed faulty will be meal-mouthed we must think, and not
dare to say, he both truly and justly does what he does; or to affirm, that he
uses his own discretion, in that which he takes or refuses by his own liking.
The Protestant forsooth, separated from the Roman, both truly and justly: but
the Presbyterian, Independent and Quaker, these refuse the Protestants
communion, not so truly, not so justly, although they do it upon the same right
and title, and by the same principles the other used himself, and allows to
other men. The Protestant shall reject the Parliament of Prelates, who
established Catholic religion, and do it justly and truly, only for this reason,
that they do it upon their own discretion; but another if he shall except
against a Council of Lords and Commons, that shall set up Prelate Protestancy,
although according to Whitby they be no judges of our faith, he does it not so
justly, not so truly, though he do it by his own discretion allowed him to be
his final resolv. What is this but to do wickedly, and talk fondly? First to
subjugate all degrees of authority to every man's judgment, as the final and last
rule; and then to question that rule, which he made subject unto nothing.

But that we may understand what a worthy respect Mr. Whitby has for general
Councels, he tells us here, that it is neither impossible nor improbable that
general Councels may err. Nay our writers, quoth he, do not acknowledge
general Councels to be infallible even in fundamentals. And Whitby writes, we
all know by this time, what his writers writ before him.

I cannot but marvel at this his talk. For Whitby in several places of his book
affirms himself, that fundamentals are so perspicuous and clear, that no man
can be so ignorant, if he be not a natural fool, as to mistake therein. We,
says he p. 104, distinguish between points fundamental and not fundamental.
These are clearly revealed, and so of necessary belief. And to determine their
sense, there is no more need of a judge, then for any other perspicuous truth.
What need of a judge to decide whether scriptur affirms that there is but one
God, that this God cannot lie, that Jesus Christ was sent by his commission
into the world, that he was crucified and rose again, that without faith and
obedience we cannot com to heaven. These and such like are the truths which we
entitle fundamental. And if the sense of this needs an infallible judge, then
let us bring Euclids elements to the bar, and call for a judge to decide whether
twice two make four. So he likewise avers, p. 441. that fundamentals are as
perspicuous, as if they were written by a sunbeam. He reckons not the Trinity
amongst his fundamentals; perhaps he does not take it for one; or will have no
fundamentals, but what are perspicuous.

I could make it easily appear, that even fundamentals have been denied; and
that with as great reason, as any he calls otherwis, are denied now. But I must
be brief. That which I here note is this; What is as perspicuous as a sunbeam,
as certain as Euclids elements, as evident as that which is most clearly
revealed, as notorious a known truth, as that twice two make four, so clear
that there needs no judge to determine it; This the Prelates of the Christian
world met together, which none but a natural fool can mistake, must not be able
to discern. They and none but they, can err in fundamentals.

And yet, which does not a little encreas our admiration, he acknowledges
withal p. 439. That general Councels have 1 a greater assistance of the Spirit
of God, 2 greater means of finding out the truth, 3 better reason of
discovering what is the opinion of the whole Church, 4 an authority delegated
from Christ to decide controversies. After all this, and with all this, it is
neither impossible with him, nor unprobable, that general councels may err,
even in fundamentals, which himself affirms as perspicuous, as if they were
writ with a sunbeam, as clear and evident as that twice two make four.
Prelates, Christian Prelates, these must be the only natural fools of the world.

Chapter 22. from page 456. to 465.

Descends to Patriarchal Councels, which says he, may be disobeyed and
rejected, because such conventions are fallible, and may obtrude heresies and
unlawful practices upon the world; and that a judgment of discretion is to be
allowed unto private men, whether they are to submit to their determinations or
no.

This whole chapter might well have been spared. For if a greater, much more
may a particular and lesser Church obtrude heresies and unlawful practices upon
men. But Mr. Whitby is desirous, that all should be made plain, and not any rub
lie in the Presbyterian and good Quakers way, when he shall plead an excuse for
his separation from a Metropolitan Church here in England, which he has made
with a judgment of discretion here allowed him.

Chapter 23. from page 465 to 478.

Says that the Protestant never separated from the internal communion of the
universal Church, which unity is only essential, but only from external union
with some. And such an union external with any Church on earth, is no ways
necessary to any ones being a member of the Church.

Why then is the poor Quaker so grievously persecuted, imprisoned, and beaten,
only for separating from an external communion with other Protestants?
Especially since he separates from it, for no other end, but to have the
internal communion in pure faith, and light, and grace, and charity, more
perfect. Let any man read the Quakers books, which are now not a few, and see
if they speak not for themselves, as Whitby here does for his own cause.

But the professed errors of the Roman Church justify the Protestant
separation. And does not the Quaker justify his separation both from Roman and
Protestant too by the same argument of notorious abuses, errors, sins,
falsities, disorders, superstitions, excesses, of ministers, priests, bishops,
deanaries, chapters, lawn sleeves, universities and steeple houses.

Chapter 24. from page 478 to 494.

Endeavors finally to justify the English reformation upon the account, that
it was made here by the supreme magistrate, who may reform the Church either
with a Synod or without it.

And that supreme power I hope then may be permitted to set up the Presbyterian
or Quaker, at least to give them freedom of Conscience, if himself pleas,
without any bishops consent, no man daring to gainsay or murmur against it,
which not a few do heartily wish to see in this Land.

Chapter 25. with the Appendix, from p. 494 to 512.

Prescribes conditions and forms of disputing and replying, with some additions
to his former discourses.

Thus have you, Sir, the particular design of each several chapter of Mr.
Whitby's book; the negative part whereof denies your Church, and the positive
betrays his own. Why he gainsayes yours, it is not hard to read. But why he
should so much endanger his own, I cannot so easily say, whether it be
ignorance, malice, or necessity moves him to it. Surely no Son of the English
Church, as Whitby professes himself to be, could thus open a gap for the
incursion of all sects, who are now ready to swallow her up, if he be in sound
senses, but he must either not have what he may, or not will what he should, or
not know what positively he ought, to affirm and teach for her better
preservation. This book of Whitbies can never bring any man to that Church; nor
keep any in that is there. If an enemy attempt the subversion of a house, it may
chance to escape. But if the owner and inhabitant begin once to pull it down
himself, he that passes by may not improbably conjectur it will not long stand.
Well may the Church of England take up that heavy complaint against this her
either ignorant or malicious son. If an enemy had don me mischief, I could have
endured it. And if one who openly hated had maligned me, I could have kept my
self from him. But thou man! thou my intimate friend! thou my leader and
acquaintance! Thus unworthily to be betrayed by her own White boy, must be no
small aggravation to the mothers sorrow.

I might easily gather out of Whitbies own words, consequently put together, a
complete play for all the several ways that are now of late risen up against
our English Church; even so complete, that they never have nor ever need to say
more. This sad fate accompanies erroneous ways, that even in defending they
destroy themselves.

If witty Presbyterians assisted him in his book, they did their own work not
his. And if he did it himself by some Presbyterian principles, received
accidentally from them, he has don thereby not his own work, but theirs.

Notable is this Gentleman's art in citing of authorities, which he does in most
of his chapters, against the points of catholic belief, which are either not
expressed in his book, where they may be found; or not there found, where they
are expressed; or express no such thing, as he cites them in his book to utter. I
had in my chamber but one of those many authors which Whitby cites for himself:
and I found in it all this to be true. But this Sir, to spare here partly the
man's modesty, and partly my own pains and expense of time, I now omit. And
indeed, what would it avail, to give you or the world to understand, that
Whitby never read the authors himself cites, or understood not, or wilfully
wrested them. Let him live and learn. And God give him grace to make use of his
time, to his own advantage.

This thing I may assure you of, that Whitby is an enemy not only to Catholics,
but Protestants also of all profession, here in England: or if you had rather
have me so speak, an equal friend to all. For he will not have the Church of
Christ to be any organical body, as he calls it, or company of people linked
together in Sacraments, lyturgy, belief, and government; but to be only such
and all such people, who hold God and a life to com, and some other
fundamentals, which he names not himself, all of them: and therefore, as I
suppose, leaves unto others, each man as he pleases, to determine. Nor will he
have men bound either to an internal belief, or any exterior conformity to any
Church. This himself avers in many several places of his book, that we may not
miss his meaning. This new way of his I think he borrowed of some French
Hugonots. For all the ways that be here now in England concur each one unto a
body, an organical body; not only Roman Catholics, but our English Prelacy and
Presbyterians too. Yea, the very Quakers to my knowledge esteem none to be so
much as Christians, who assemble not with them. And they have with them some
ministers of the gospel too, though extemporary ones.

A wary reader may obsery, by the sole mirror of this book of Whitbies, which
is a collection of most of the chief authors that have written against Popery,
since the Reformation, how unsettled all Protestants be in all the controverted
points of religion, whereof there is not any one by some of them denied, but is by
some others of them affirmed. They know what Church to oppose; but how much of
her doctrine they should evacuate, they could never yet unanimously agree, nor
what answer to fix steadily to any Catholic ground.

He will find also amongst other things, that our present Protestants now
adays do generally swerv from the first reformers, almost in all points both
of discipline and faith; about supremacy, good works, free will, possibility of
keeping Gods commands, the real presence, prayer for the dead, tradition, etc.
which former Protestants for the first forty years would not abide to hear of;
but now they are all in a manner so allowed by most Protestants, that there
appears little difference between their way and catholic faith; but only, that
this stands unchanged, the other may alter again to morrow. Indeed every
Protestant writer is in one thing or other a new reformer, as Whitby is here.
And every half-score years brings forth new scenes; nor is there any now that
heeds any Protestant writer that is gone, if he speak contrary to him, though he
were never so eminent, even in the very point and business of Reformation. This
is enough for Whitby.

I heard Sir above half a year ago, that Dr. Barlow had made ready for the
Press another book of his own against Mr. Cressy: and therefore detained this my
letter with me, till I might give you an account of his with it. Truly Sir, I
watched as earnestly for it, as any cat watches for a mous. But it will not yet
appear. In the interim, one Mr. Stillingfleet has lately written a great book
against Popery, even so big a book in folio, that none may buy it, but only
such as hate Popery more than they love sixteen shillings. And he also proceeds
this new french Hugonot way, insisted on by Whitby. He is only for a Church
diffusive, that holds fundamentals what ever they be, and makes no account of
any Church organical. Whereby he utterly disables not the Roman Hierarchy only,
but even our English Protestant Church and government; if men do but understand
what he says. And yet this man is mightily applauded by our English bishops:
which I cannot but marvel at; and do thence conclude, that they all begin now
to think, our English Church it self, that it may be made good, must be pulled
down. Councels he holds with Whitby, that they can have no authority to move our
assent, although they be general, as there has never been any he says, these
thousand years. And what is there then for Gods sake shall move the
Presbyterians, Independents, and others here in England to approve of the
constitutions and government of our English Church, set up by a far lesser
assembly.

In a word, this whole book of Stillingfleets is a large discourse against a
Theological argument of some Catholic disputant. The argument it seems was
this; Christian faith cannot be divine, except it have its birth from an
infallible proposer; and consequently the Church must either be infallible, or
else our faith is not divine. The answer of this argument is the very life and
vitals of Mr. Stillingfleets whole book. That same argument of the Catholic
Gentleman is indeed a pretty theological ratiocination: and Stillingfleets
answer, evasions, and distinctions, both concerning the argument in general,
and all the particulars it runs into are not unwitty. But this is no part of
our business. Alas we in our controversies about religion are not come thus far.
Such a discourse had been handsomely fitted to theological schools, and very
proper amongst learned divines there: but here not so: What is it to our
business in hand, whether faith can or cannot be divine, except the proposer be
infallible, and as it were divine. This is a mere theological dispute. And he
that answers Stillingfleets book, defends not faith immediately, but an
argumentators syllogism. Religion indeed, as soon as ever it is questioned or
disputed, runs presently into Philosophy. And therein, if great heed be not
taken, it is quite lost. And thence it comes to pass, that most part of our
controversy books is about school philosophy and human reasonings. I blame not
the Catholic Gentleman, who ever he was, for his argumenting. Nor will
Stillingfleet be blamed for defending his place. But I let my countrymen,
spectators of the contest, understand, that in deed and truth, so often as we
dispute, we are beyond the business. All writers of controversy speak more then
faith, when they either defend or oppose it. And in reading controversies we
see not so much the nature of the faith, as the wit of him who opposes or
defends it; and so much this some times, that the other is nothing at all
discerned.

This the world must know and understand well; or else they will be miserably
mistaken, as indeed I see all men are. When two lawyers plead about a case of
right, perhaps three hours together; all that three hours talk is not law, or
the right they talk of, but only their ratiocinations about it. And such are
all our controversies about religion. And he does best therein, who still puts
his adversary in mind what is his talk, and what is the faith they talk of. But
he that defends both of them equally, forgets himself. And thus I see that
generally men do miscarry on both sides: the Protestant by calling that
Romanish doctrine, which is but a Catholics discourse for it; and the Catholic by
maintaining that talk of his, which it is not a pin matter whether it stand or
fall. For faith is firm and constant, though all my talk for it be miserably
weak.

Now all the whole business of faith, which Stillingfleet and his adversary talk
of, is, as I take it, only this; That the Church of Christ has by Gods divine
promis of being ever with her, a power to oblige her subjects to hear and obey
her, if they mean to be happy in their way. The Catholic affirms this:
Stillingfleet with his Protestants deny it. And this is all the faith that is
in it: which is not here touched. And a theological business of Infallibility
only spoke of. And therefore Stillingfleet is much to blame, when he speaks so
often in his book, of the Romanists way of resolving faith; the Romanists
arguments for their faith; the Romanists doctrine about infallibility not
divine, but as it were divine; the Romanists tenet about fundamentals; the
Romanists motives of credibility; the Romanists doctrine about the material and
formal object of faith, etc. For all this and several such like talk is but the
theological discourse of that Catholic Gentleman, and of it self no Romanists
doctrine at all. For I know well enough what Stillingfleet means, and would have
meant by Romanists doctrine. And all his Protestant readers understand thereby
only Catholic religion: and he knows it well enough.

I should take it ill and be sorry, and look upon it as an injury to the Church
of God, if any one should call my way of defending her faith, the Romanists
way; or my talk, the Romanists doctrine: however the thing it self defended or
excused by me is Roman or Catholic faith. The Church has no one way, but
several methods, and several schools, and several ways to declare and
explicate, and defend her religion. And every writer does it according to his
personal endowments and judgment; some better, some wors, though the religion
so explicated, defended, and declared be still and ever, one and the very same.
And if indeed I had been to speak in that business, I should never have made any
such argument as that Catholic Gentleman did: nor will another man think
himself obliged to discourse as I do, although he and I defend both of us the
same thing. This if Mr. Stillingfleet consider as he ought, he will soon
perceiv his own pitiful childishnes. But thus Doctor OeN dealt with me to my
very great pity and regret. Ever and anon, Is this your Roman doctrine, quoth
he? Who would have thought, that the Romish Church should dare to utter so
wicked blasphemies, etc. First misinterpreting my words, and calling that a
doctrine which was none at all, but only a prosopopy of atheistical objections;
and then stiling that a Roman doctrine, which was but the talk of a particular
man. So that what he called Roman doctrine, and Romish doctrine, was neither
Romish nor doctrine neither. But ministers care not what they say. And so much
the more wary does it behove all men to be, who deal with them. Too much care
cannot be taken with such men, who either cannot or will not distinguish
between general faith and particular men's doctrine; between religion, and
several school-methods of defending it; between the faith of the whole Church
of God, and discourses of writers concerning it. So ignorant they are all of
them, or wilfully malicious. I find in my heart even a longing desire to expres
to you in particular the various shifts and misdemeanors of Stillingfleet. But
here is now no time or place for it; and such a thing if it were done, would be
but of little use to morrow. I mention him only, to let you know, how much the
French Hugonot religion begins here to prevail by means of Whitby,
Stillingfleet, and others, to the overthrow of our own Protestant Church here
established; and to let posterity, who shall happily see any of these small
writings, have some little glimmerings of these our present times. They
doubtless will be glad to see the general course of things now done, even as we
are to read the ways of former reformers: although neither we nor they can
take any great pleasur in any long particular narrations of their fallacies
either against logic or morality, when the men are once past and gone.

Dr. Jeremy Tailor has also put forth lately a very bitter, insulting,
injurious book against Catholic religion, which he calls a Disswasive from
Popery. Reddet illi dominus secundum opera ejus. And God will bless his
Catholic believers who trust in him, and walk according to their holy rule, in
his fear and love, unblamable, the very contumelies of adversaries working at
length to their greater good. And I beseech God, who revives all things, and
Jesus our Lord, who gave his testimony under Pontius Pilate, a good confession,
that they may ever observe the commandments of God, and the Church his Spous,
possessing their souls in perfect patience, unreprovable unto the coming of
Jesus Christ our Lord, whom in his own times will the blessed God show forth,
the only potent one, the King of kings, and Lord of Lords, who alone has
immortality, and inhabits light inaccessible, whom no mortal man has ever
seen, nor yet can see him; to whom be all honor, domimion and power for
evermore. Amen. This is the earnest desire and prayer of

Sir, Your real friend, J. V. C.
Given in the Nones of March. 1664.
EPISTOLA AD AMPHIBOLVM. AGAINST Dr. Tailor.

The occasion of this Epistle.
THe first epistle was written to an adversary: the second to a friend: this
third to a neuter; who after he had began to think more moderately of Catholic
religion, returned, upon his reading of Dr. Jeremy Tailor his Disswasive from
Popery, to his former misconceit. And he is by this Epistle given to
understand, that the said Disswasive is of that nature, that it can have no
such force upon any judicious man.

Sermo Horatianus inter Davum and Herum.
D. IAmdudum ausculto, and cupiens tibi dicere servus
Pauca reformido.

H. Davusne?

D. Ita Davus, amicum
Mancipium Domino, and frugi, quod sit satis: hoc est
Vt vitale putes.

H. Age, liberate Decembri,
Quando it a majores voluerunt, utere. Narra.

D. Pars hominum vitiis gaudet constanter, and urget
Propositum: pars multa natat, modo recta capessens,
Interdum pravis obnoxia. --

H. Non dices hodie, quorsum haec tam putida tendunt
Furcifer?

D. Ad te inquam.

H. Quo pacto pessime?

D. Laudas
Fortunam and mores antiquae plebis: and idem,
Si quis ad illa Deus subito te agat, usque recuses:
Aut quia non sentis, quod clamas, rectius esse:
Aut quia non firmus rectum defendis, and haeres,
Nequicquam coeno cupiens evellere plantam.
Non horam tecum esse potes: non otia recte
Ponere, teque ipsum vitas fugitivus, and erro.

H. Vnde mihi lapides?

D. Quorsum est opus?

H. Vnde sagittas?
Aut insanit homo aut versus facit. Ocyus hinc te
Ni rapis, accedes opera agro nona Dunano.

Epistola ad Amphibolum, against Doctor Tailor.
SIR,
YOu were pleased to say, upon your reading of Fiat Lux, that Popery may, for
ought you knew, be more innocent then commonly it is reputed, and no ways so
odious as some would make it. But now, upon the reading of Dr. Taylor's
Disswasive, which you desire me to peruse, I perceiv you look toward your
former thoughts concerning this maligned. Popery, and invite them home again.
To deal freely with you, I was amazed my self at the reading of that book,
though not Sir with your amazement, but another of my own. You startled at
Popery, whose uglines was there set before your eyes with such fresh colors. I
at those ugly colors which so injuriously defaced that Religion, that most
innocent Religion, which under the name of Popery lies here traduced by the pen
of her own ungrateful Scribe.

(...)! What; Doctor Tailor against Popery? And such a Disswasive as this! But
my amazement, Sir, is now blown over. The Doctor appeared to me after some
serious thoughts, to be for a special reason, that touches none so much as
himself, in some manner excusable. That none should love Popery, or ever come
to know it, concerns not only his wealth and dignity, and life of ease, which
is the common cause of others also with himself, but all the honor and fame he
has hitherto got by transcribing popish, as now he calls, but in former times
named Catholic, authors. For, having bin twenty years and upwards deeply
plunged in reading and transcribing some of the in-numerous spiritual books,
that are amongst Catholics, not only in Latin, but other languages of several
Kingdoms where that Religion flourishes, he has culled out thence many fine
treatises, which he has set forth in his own name and language, to his much
renown, and no small wealth and dignity amongst us. Nor is it to be doubted,
but that he means for his yet further glory, reaped from other men's labors,
and that spirit of piety which thence he got into his own pen, to write out yet
one book more. The same storehouse that furnished him with the life of Christ,
will dictate to him also the lives of his twelve Apostles, and many other
raptures of divine love, and heavenly devotion. And if people be but kept from
Popery, as he hopes and labors they may, it will never be known, whence he
gathers those his fragrant pieties. It was not handsome, yet a piece of wisdom
it was in the Grecian Cynick, to spit in the dish which pleased him best, lest
others should taste how good it was, and deprive him thereby of some of his
content.

This book of Doctor Tailors called a Disswasive, printed in Dublin, and as I
understand, reprinted here in London, (I suppose in the very same words by
reason of the Authors absence) is large enough, containing 173 pages in quarto,
marvellously bitter, and contumeliously insulting over that Religion, which he
cannot but know he misreports. Indeed, Sir, there is more popery in one page of
Dr. Tailors Life of Christ, which he transcribed from popish Authors, than is
in all this whole book which he writes against those Authors popery: that is
owned by them to be their religion; all this he puts upon them under the notion
of popery, throughout his whole hundred and seventy three pages, except happily
some three or four words, whose sense also he perverts, no Catholic upon earth
acknowledges for any parcel of his faith. Is not this strange disingenuous
dealing? How he comes to act thus, and what is the feat he makes use of, to
discolor their Religion, you shall hear by and by, when I have first opened
his book, and the things contained in it.

His Disswasive has three chapters, and each chapter several sections. The
first chapter is entitled thus; The Doctrine of the Roman Church in the
controverted articles is neither Catholic, Apostolik, nor Primitive. The second
thus; The Church of Rome as it is at this day disordered, teaches doctrins, and
uses practices, which are in themselves, or in their true and immediate
consequences, direct impieties, and give warranty to a wicked life. The third
thus; The Church of Rome teaches doctrins, which in many things are destructive
of Christian society in general, and of Monarchy in special: both which the
Religion of the Church of England and Ireland, does by her doctrins greatly and
Christianly support.
These three be things of importance, and must either be great notorious crimes
in the Defendant, or monstrous slanders in the Plaintiff. A Religion that is
new, impious, and unsociable; that is against antiquity, piety, and society, is
hardly good enough for Hell. Who is he that shall dare to profess or
countenance such a religion upon earth. But let us see in order how all this is
demonstrated to us by an old, pious, and sociable Doctor.

His first Chapter.

First then; That the doctrine of the Roman Church in the controverted Articles
is neither Catholic, Apostolik, nor Primitive, he declares in eleven sections,
which make up that his first chapter. First section says, that the Roman
Church pretends a power to make new Articles of faith, and doubtless uses that
power, and for that end corrupts the Fathers, and makes expurgatory Indices to
alter their works. The second, that this power of making new articles is a
novelty, and yet believed by Papists. Third, that the Roman doctrine of
Indulgences is unknown to antiquity. Fourth, that Purgatory is another novelty.
Fifth, Transubstantiation another. Sixth, Half-communion another. Seventh,
Liturgy in an unknown tongue another. Eighth, Veneration of Images the like.
Ninth, Pictures the same. Tenth, the Popes general Episcopacy likewise. And the
eleventh and last speaks almost as many more all of a heap, to make up his one
last section; as Invocation of Saints, sufficiency of scriptures, absolving
sinners before penance, simple Priests giving Confirmation, selling Masses for
nine pence, circumgestation of the Eucharist, intention in Sacraments,
Mass-sacrifice, and supper without Communion. All this is Popery, all new, and
therefore the Roman Church is neither Catholic, Apostolik, nor Primitive. This is
the sum of his first Chapter.

What in the name of God does this Author of the Disswasive, your learned
Doctor, mean by the Church of Rome, and by the doctrine of the Roman Church?
This Sir, is a main business, and ought, if he had meant sincerity, to have been
firmly stated, before any thing were treated, either of the one or the other.
But this he utterly here omits, which he should principally have heeded, that
he may speak loosely and hand over head, any thing he may deem fit to black his
own paper and other men's fame. If he take them as he ought; the Church of Rome,
for that universality of Catholic believers, who live in several kingdoms of
the world united in faith and sacraments under the Spirit of Jesus Christ, and
one visible Pastor; and the doctrine of that Church, for the body of faith and
religion handed to them from age to age, as taught and delivered from Christ
and his Apostles, which they call in the phrase of St. Paul Depositum fidei, or
treasure of faith: I say if he mean this by the Roman Church, and doctrine of
that Church, as he ought to do, I will be bold to aver, that there is not any
one claus or period in his book true, and three parts of his book absolutely
impertinent. If he mean otherwis then Catholics themselves conceiv or profess,
he was bound in honor to make his mind known, that the renown of an innocent
Religion, and worthy persons might not suffer prejudice by his ambiguous
speech. But perhaps he studied how to abuse that Religion, that he may be
thought worthy of the dignity and wealth he has now obtained in another, slipped
our of it. But concerning the way he takes to villifie the Roman faith and
Church, which is indeed the comm on road of all her adversaries, I shall speak
more fully, if I have time, by and by. Now I hasten to his text, which I shall
give, and my own judgment of it very briefly.

. 1. Which is about Novelties in general.

Says, that the Protestant has the word of God, and Gospel, and Apostles
writings, and if need be, the four first general Councels, and cannot be
therefore doubted to be Apostolical; but the Roman Church cannot so much as
pretend, that all her Religion is primitive, since she pretends a power of
making new articles of faith: for Turrecremata, Triumphus, Ancorano, and
Panormitan affirm she can do it. And this power Pope Leo the tenth challenged,
when he condemned Luther for denying him to have it. To further this their
pretended power, the Papists corrupt, and alter the Fathers works: insomuch
that Saurius the correctour of the Press at Lions, complained to Junius, that
he was forced to blot out many sayings of St. Ambrose, which had been in a
former edition printed there. For this care of purging Catholic writers Sixtus
Senesis commends Pope Pius. Nay, they correct the very Indexes made by
Printers, as those of Probens and Chevallonius.

Thus the Doctor begins his book: and I cannot but commend his wit. For he
wisely assumes that to himself, which is the very one great business, wherein
every particular controversy sticks, and which, if it were once agreeed on,
would put an end to all controversies, that either now are, or ever shall be in
the world. For they all com at length to this question, which of the many
Professors of Christianity, now so much divided in their ways, have the
Gospel and word of God on their side, in this, that, and the other particular.
We, says Dr. Tailor, we Protestants have the word of God, we have the Gospel
of Christ, we have the Apostles writings with us and for us, and therefore our
Religion is for certain, both ancient, primitive, and Apostolical. This is,
Sir, a very good consequence. That Religion must needs be ancient, which has
God for his Author, that must be a primitive Christianity which Christ founded,
and what the Apostles writings confirm, must needs be Apostolical faith. But is
it proved here by the Doctor, that Protestants and not Catholics have the word
of God and of Christ, and of his Apostles on their side? No, it is all
supposed: and his whole endeavor is to tell us, that the religion which issued
from God and Christ, and his holy Apostles, must needs be Apostolical,
primitive, and ancient. He supposes Protestancy, as distinct from Catholic
faith, to have com all of it from those divine hands, which is the only thing
to be proved: and declares at large, that a religion which came from such
hands, must needs be ancient and primitive, which is a thing no man can ever
doubt.

It is certain and manifestly known, that Protestants received both Law and
Gospel, and Apostles writings, from the hands of Roman Catholics, who had kept
and canonized, and lived by those rules fifteen hundred years before
Protestancy rose up in the world, and all the whole hundred years since. The
only question is about the sense and mind of that holy writ, in the many
particular points now controverted in the world. He has the law, that has the
mind and purpos and meaning of the law; not he that has the form of words
without it. This is the great business, and the very extract and quintessence
of all controversies: which your quick Doctor assumes as granted on his side,
without any more ado. We, says he, we Protestants have the Law and Gospel, and
Apostles writings, and the old Councels too if need be, and therefore is not the
ancientness of our Religion to be doubted. But the Papists! what of them? the
Papists Religion cannot so much as be pretended to be Apostolical, old, or
primitive. Why so? Have not they the law and Gospel, and Apostolical writings?
He does not plainly say they have not, but he hopes his reader will think so.
What then of the Papists? They, says he, can make new Articles, and therefore
cannot their Religion be ancient. Sir, although they could make new articles,
so long as they do not, their Religion may be old still for all that. A man may
live in an old house, although he be able to build a new one. And this seems
indeed to be the case here. For the Disswader in confirmation of his speech,
brings in, although unjustly, the testimony of some Catholic Doctors, who
should say, The Church can make new Articles; but not one that says she has
made any. That I may yet go further; although the Church should make new
obliging Articles: so long as these do not contrary the former, but declare
them more amply in such and such circumstances, they annull not, but rather
confirm and explicate the old ones. Is not our Law the same old Law of England,
and we the same polity our forefathers were, although the King and Parliament
upon occasion of new disorders, make new acts and statutes continually? But let
us go on, yet one step more.

The Roman Church does plead, Sir, whatever your Disswader would have you
think, that her religion is Catholic, Apostolik, and primitive: because all her
Councels, by which that Church is governed, have openly and continually
declared, when they came together to decide any affair which had raised new
disturbance in the Christian world, that they must firmly adhere to that which
is Primitive, to that which is Apostolical, to that which is Catholic, to that
which has been delivered and received from forefathers. And by that rule they
decided the difference. How then can this Church pretend to make new Articles?
Does your Doctor bring any General Council, which is the loud voice of that
Church; or any Tradition, which is the Churches still voice, to speak it? No,
not any at all. But this he ought to have done, if he would prove that Church
to pretend any such power. What then? Wy, Turrecramata and some other doctors
says, she can do it. But Sir, if some one or other clergyman should think
that the Church can make new articles, does it therefore follow, that the Church
it self does pretend any such power. Surely the voice of one or two Ministers
here in England cannot in reason be thought the voice of our whole Protestant
Church, especially when they speak against the tenor of her doctrine and
practice. But your Disswader has been many years picking in cobweb holes, and
obscure writings, that he might, where he could find any half sentence apt to
be wrested from the common judgment of Catholic Religion, mark that out for
Popery; to the end it may be thought either naught or new. This is the chief
ingredient of your Disswaders Policy. Catholic Doctors, Sir, though they may
have written many other most excellent, catholic, and pious things, yet through
humane infirmity, in this and that particular, may they at one time or other
trip and fail. And particular men's failings are to be rectified by the
straightnes and integrity of the General Canon; but they are not to be esteemed
that Canon, as your Doctor Tailor, not inclined to mend things but mar them
rather, would here have them to be, thorowout this whole book of his
Disswasive; where whatever he can read or hear of amongst the writings of any
one in the Catholic world, that may either swerv or be wrested from the
universal judgment and belief of Papists, that he calls Popery: and what they
speak, that the Roman Church must pretend. O the strange perverseness and
wickedness of man's heart! And yet this book of his thus made up, has carried
away, not the weaker sort of men only, but it seems has made even your
discretion, Sir, to stagger. For when I gave you lately a visit, I perceived
within a while, that I had but gone forth to see a reed shaken with the wind.

What the Church can do, is but one of the Questions of School Divinity, and no
Catholic faith: Consequently no Popery. And if two or three in the Schools
should chance to aver this power in the Church, where more then two or three
thousands deny it, why should not the opinion of three thousand Papist doctors
be esteemed Popery, as well as that of only three. Whilst all of them agree in
their faith, which is, that the Church has a power authoritatively to decide
controversies, and dispute only of a further power then their faith reaches
unto, I should think, that the opinion of three thousand Papist doctors is
rather to be esteemed Popery, if one of them must be called so, rather then the
single opinion of two or three, if any such be to the contrary.

But truth is, there is no such opinion of any one I know to the contrary. Nor
does Turrecremata, nor any else teach, that the Church has power to make new
articles, in that sense your Dr. Tailor means, who thereby would infer, that
Catholic faith is therefore not primitive, but new. Nay, it is rather Popery, and
a part of Catholic faith, that no new articles can be made. For General
Councels have determined, that nothing is to be believed or held, but id quod
traditum est, that which has been received from Christ and his Apostles. Nor
can the Religion otherwise be the faith of Christ, or Christian Religion. Sir,
if you do but seriously peruse the last one general Council, which all
Protestants hold to be rank popish; that I mean which was kept at Trent: you
will find that they testify almost in every Session, and profes to make all
their determinations according to that which had been delivered, according to
that they had received, according to that which had been conserved by continual
succession to that which was conformable to Apostolical tradition, to that
which had been perpetually and uninterruptedly retained, to that which
ancestors professed, to that which the Church of God ever taught, ever
understood, ever believed, that which has been received down by hands, that
which was the ancient judgment, and custom, that which has been approved since
the apostles days, etc. These are all the very words of the Council in several
of their Sessions. And shall a Doctor Tailor com now after all this, and tell
the world, that Popery is neither Catholic, Apostolik, nor Primitive, and that
Papists pretend to make new faith, etc. after a general Synod, which all
Protestants look upon, as the most popish Council that ever was, and that too
the last and nearest to us, has so manifestly, so pathetically, so generally
professed the contrary. What should we say to such a Doctor? And other general
Councels in like manner, never determined any thing for the quieting of
dissentions, for which end they met together, but what was latent at least in
the seed of Christ's word, and so no new article in this Doctors sense: as did
that Council for example, which determined two wills in Christ, which was no
new article, because the former old faith, which had made known two perfect
natures in our Lord, the one divine, the other humane, apparently dictated that
truth against all those, who would acknowledge but one will in him. And this
being defined by the Council, received a new strength against a novel heresy,
but not a new birth. For this cause Councels do not determine the varieties that
are in Schoolmen; because these are superstructures, and none of them more
latent in ancient tradition, than is the opinion that is opposite to it.

But Turrecremata, Triumphus, Ancoran, and Panormitan teach that the Church can
make new articles. If they should say any such thing, I have already made it
enough evident, that it cannot be thence inferred to be popery, or any part of
popery. But what if they speak no such thing? What shall we think then of this
your Dr. Tailor? Turrecremata in the place cited by him, never so much as
dreamed, as any man may there see, that the Pope is the rule of faith, as the
Doctor would have him speak: but in that whole chapter labors only to show,
that it belongs to him principally to regulate disputes in faith, as being the
chief Prelate. In the like manner does he most unworthily abuse the other
three, brought by him as witnesses, that the Pope can make new Creeds, and new
faith: whereas Panormitan teaches expressly, that he cannot make, but only
declare faith; Ancorano says the like, adding that what he so declares, may be
new to us, though not in it self: and Triumphus no less manifestly speaks in
the very place cited by him, that there is one and the same faith in the
ancients and moderns, and that in our holy Creed are inserted all those things,
which universally pertain to Catholic faith: although he say withal, which is
also very true, that to add, explicate, or declare a truth, which is contained
in holy Scripture, has always been lawful for the Church. But is this to make
new faith which is not Apostolik, and primitive, as this your Doctor would
have them to assert? Do you Sir, your self judge. And him that thus abuses the
world, God Almighty judge. So that when we come to the close of all, there is not
any one Catholic Doctor, that ever said that the Church can make new articles
of faith in Doctor Tailors sense.

Why then did Pope Leo the 10. condemn Luther for denying the Pope to have this
power? Neither did Luther, or Pope Leo ever dream of any such thing. For Luther
wholly busied himself about his old Catholic Religion, from which he had
revolted, which he called an Egyptian darkness that had overspread the earth
even from the Apostles days, and never thought of this school question, which
in his days was not heard of. And he denied the then present Pope who was Leo
the tenth, to be any judge in those Controversies of Religion, or to have any
power statuendi, of deciding or determining in such affairs. Nor is there any
the least mention, either in Luther's resistance, or Leo his censure, about
constituting new articles, but only deciding the old, which Luther would have
thought to be erroneous, however strengthened by antiquity, and from which old
errors he would make himself a reformation and innovation by the right, which
was in himself not subjected to any man, no not to the Pope himself in those
affairs. Is this a mistake think you in your Disswader or something wors? Truly
I cannot think he was so ignorant.

The like insincerity does this your Disswader exhibit in all that his talk of
the Catholics dealing with the Fathers works, and the indexes or tables
adjoined to them, jumbling his words so confusedly together, that his reader
might beleev that to be don to the Fathers writings themselves, which the
Churches care provided to be done to the false glosses, tables and indexes
annexed to those writings; and that to be taken out of those writings, which
ever was, and still is in them; and Printers and Correctours complaining of
that fault of making alterations in the Fathers Editions, which they did not so
much as think of. Which is a most stupendous insincerity. And thus, says he,
are the Fathers maimed and curtailed by Papists; insomuch that Sixtus Senensis
praises Pope Pius 5. for this his car ein purging the Fathers works. I say this
whole talk of his is most prodigiously unjust. For that Index Expurgatorius
extended not to any writings or works of the Fathers, but only to the marginal
notes and false glosses and indexes or tables put to them by the heretics; and
therefore are Tertullian, Origin, and some others still printed entire, though
there be not a few things in them contrary to Catholic faith. And this the very
words of Junius a Correctour of a Press cited by the Doctor clearly intimates.
What, says he, Papists dare not do with the Fathers, they practice upon us, he
means Protestant printers and writers: and with their little forks thrust out
our annotations in the margent, and our sayings in the indices, although they
be consonant to the Fathers minds. But, says he, this care was so great in
Pius 5. that Sixtus Senensis commends the Pope for his industry in purging the
Fathers works. He did so indeed: but if the Doctor had spoken out the
sentence, he had betrayed his own false heart, which he would not willingly do.
Expurgari, says Senensis, and emaculari curasti omnium Catholicorum
Scriptorum, ac praecipue veterum Patrum scripta, haereticorum aetatis nostrae
faecibus contaminata and venenis infecta. Your Doctor our Disswader makes
Senensis praise the Pope, for his purging the Fathers, as though he had scowred
and scraped off the substance: whereas he commended him only for his care in
cleansing them from the infectious notes and glosses superadded to them by the
heretics of our times.

But Sir, that I may tell you once for all. The falsifications of Authors
perverted by this your Disswader, are so many, so notorious and gross ones,
that in the very relating them I shall tire both my self and you. My design is
only to let you know, that this whole work of his Disswasive from Popery, if
the proofs and citations he brings for his talk were true, as they are all
false, signifies nothing at all. Two worthy Catholic Gentlemen have discovered
by the help of the Libraries in London and Oxford so many most gross
falsifications, one of them a hundred and fifty, the other yet more and
greater, that it cannot but amaze an honest minded reader to behold them. Pray
read them Sir, and ponder seriously; and so rid of that trouble, I shall make
the more haste in my own design. It was their endeavor it seems to show him to
be dishonest, mine is only to prove him impertinent. God reward them for their
pains, and help me in mine. For my hand denies me now his office, not able to
write with that facility it was wont. But because I saw no abler pen to appear,
as I thought they would in the confutation of this slanderous book: I judged it
my part, Sir, to give you some general hints of light concerning it, till there
might issue some more plenary confutation by a better hand. And here, Sir, you
must know too, that I had no sooner finished this my Epistle, but that I
understood of another book against this Doctor Tailors Disswasive, a very
solid book written by Ja. Ser. in order to his own book called Sure-Footing
lately set forth, which made me doubt for a while, whether I should let this of
mine appear; especially when I considered the industry, care, and solidity of
those three men; the last whereof had so taken up what the other two had left
for me to say, and so utterly confounded this Disswasive, that I might well be
silent. But I remembered a story which I had sometime read in holy writ, of Joas
the King of Israel; who coming to visit Elizeus the Prophet when he lay sick on
his deathbed, was bid by him for his encouragement against his enemies, to
strike the ground with the javelin he had in his hand. Joas at his word struck
the floor three times. But the holy man of God was angry with him and said; If
thou had struck five or six or seven times, thou had smote Syria even to an
utter consummation; but now thou shall smite it but thrice. So very faulty is
this Disswasive, that it cannot be smote too often, even to an utter
consummation.

. 2 Which is about a leash of new Articles.

Says, that in the Church of Rome faith and Christianity encreas like the
moon: and that there be now two new articles of faith a coining, namely the
immaculate Conception, and the Popes being above the Council: and one other
lately produced in the Council of Trent, sess. 21. which is, That although the
ancient Fathers did give the Communion to Infants, yet they did not beleev it
necessary to salvation: Which decree is, says he beyond all bounds of modesty
and evident truth.

Here your Doctor tells news of one Article lately made, and two more a
coining, which will shortly be out of the mint: both which news he knows, but
we know not. Indeed Sir, this section belongs more to a writer of Diurnals or
weakly Intelligencer, than to a Doctor of Divinity. And therefore at the reading
of it, I turned suddenly to the frontispiece of the book, to see whose
Imprimatur it had to it. And I found it licensed, not by Mr. l' Estrange, but
Geo. Stradling. First then he tells us news to come, and then news past.

A pair of faith articles are now, he says, in the mint, and will shortly come
forth. The Virgins immaculate Conception, and the Popes being above a Council.
But how can your Disswader say, that these two are shortly to com forth, whereas
in this very section he tells us a little afterward, that the Council of Basil
decreed the second Article against the Pope. And I am sure, the same Council of
Basil decreed the first article of the immaculate Conception, sess. 36. Surely
the year of our Lord 1431. when that Council was kept, is not now to come.
Where and when, and how can they be more then they are already? I suppose he
prophesies this by reason of some vehement disputes about those points. If this
be it, he may add yet five hundred more, which are more vehemently disputed
than these be. One of them it is much he could miss. For the superiority
betwixt the King of France and Spain has been often agitated not only by their
Ambassadors in Kingdoms where they reside, but even in Councels also, and that
with too much of vehemence there.

As concerning the Conception, I know the two schools of divine S. Thomas and
subtle Scotus have much altercation about an instant of time, an Aristotelical
Instant, so swift and short an instant, that no thought of man, though never so
nimble, can ever catch it. And the general Pastor has silenced that
School-dispute, because it sounded ill, and signified nothing. What is it to
action, or any esteem toward that Blessed Virgin, that she was pure in her
Conception by Gods preventing grace, as one school speaks, or by his
sanctifying grace, as the other school declares it; that she was ever
Immaculate, Gods mercy providing that in no instant imaginable she should be
liable to original sin, as Scotus teaches; or Gods grace so working, that
immediately after that instant she should be made pure and holy, as Saint Thomas
speaks. For this is the school dispute, which your Disswader, if he understands
himself, here talks of. And those very Doctors who dispute this, and all pious
Christians have ever unanimously believed, that the Blessed Virgin was not only
most pure and unspotted in her whole life, but even from her first animation in
the womb. So that if we speak of a real and complete Conception, she is already
believed to be Immaculate. And from this universal Tradition, wherein Catholics
agree, and are already resolved, the first reforming Protestants departed, as
well as from many others. Nor in any probability will ever that Aristotelical
School instant, which signifies just nothing, as to any Christian action, be
ever thought of: unless some greater disorder then I have yet heard of, exact a
further decision about a thing, which it is not the weight of a hair, whether
it be expressed according to the school of S. Thomas or of Scotus.

The like I say to that other article, which your Disswader prophesies will
shortly come forth, concerning the Popes being above a Council. For that there
is, and ought to be, one visible Pastor over all Christ's flock upon earth,
whether essential or representative, is a Christian Tradition; which Catholics
still embrace, but Protestants have left. And this tradition, together with the
former of the immaculate Conception, if your Disswader had endeavored to show,
either not to have been, or likely not to be perpetual, his endeavor however
insufficient, had not been at least impertinent. But instead of that, he tells
us, that this and that will shortly com forth new articles, not heeding that
himself and such as he have departed from the old.

And this his prophecy in this, is as vain as in the other. For that the Pope,
who is and ever was believed the head and Prince of the whole Council, should
be also above it, and his authority there greater then all the rest beside, is
a speculative querk, that ambition may think, but sober reason will never deem
of moment. For whether he be above the Council, that is to say, of greater
authority then all the other Prelates put together; or not above, but their
authority joined together as great, or greater then his: neither they without
him, nor he without them, can positively declare any thing with authentic
authority, for the silencing of differences which arise in faith. In The interim
the chief Prelate is for certain above the Council in this sense: that he is
their Prince and Superior: as also he has in himself a negative voice, both
with the Council, and without it. For this is a right ingrafted naturally in
the condition of all whatever superiority, spiritual or civil: without which
they could not rule or manage their charge. By it they silence disquiets, and
end debates, according to the tenor of laws already made, which in such cases,
they are by their place and office to interpret; so far at least, that one
party shall not carry it against the other, which he shall judge in such and
such circumstances to com nearer to law and right, than he. This power I say
every superior must have over his subjects, whether his authority be greater
then all theirs put together in the making of laws, or not. Nor is it of any
concernment at all, since one without the other can enact no laws, that may
have their full and perpetual force, which of them is the greater. The statutes
and acts that are made in any Kingdom by the King and Parliament of the place,
have the same force, whether the Kings Majesty, who is superior prince, and
head of the Parliament, be above the whole Parliament, that is, of more
authority than all the rest there put together, and weighed in a balance
against him yea or no. Nor would he gain or lose any one jot of his dignity,
authority, or reverence, whatever should be concluded in a pair of subtle
speculatours scales, concerning that point. Although for my part, I hold it
little better than busy sedition, to raise such fantastic doubts. And the
danger of it we experienced here in this Kingdom but the other day. And I may
be bold to fay, by what I know and heard my self, that the hint was given them
by Ministers talking upon this point of the Popes not being above his Council.
Catholics know how to obey their Pope and Pastor, whether he be above or not
above a Council, which silly querk concerns not them to think of. But others
are apt to catch fire at any thing, which may any ways dissolve the bands of
their due obedience. Thus much concerning the two points of school-speculation,
which your Disswader prophesies will shortly be determined. But he does but
dream, and so let him sleep on.

The third new article, is that which was lately produced, says he, in the
Council of Trent, sess. 21. which is, That although the ancient Fathers did
give the Communion to Infants, yet they did not beleev it necessary to
salvation.

Your Disswader seems here tacitly to grant, that all the other Canons and
Decrees of the Council of Trent are old and primitive doctrine. He would not
otherwis have culled out from thence this one only article for new.

I looked into the Council of Trent, and found there no such article of faith
as this your Disswader speaks. The Canon or Article of faith concerning this
point runs thus. Si quis dixerit parvulis, antequam ad annos discretionis
pervenerint, necessariam esse Eucharistiae communionem, anathema sit. And this
is all the articles of faith determined in that Council upon this affair:
wherein the faithful are forbid to hold that the Communion of Infants is
necessary to salvation. If any one, says the Council, shall say, that
communion of the Fucharist is necessary to babes before they come to years of
discretion, let him be Anathema. And this doctrine I am persuaded your Disswader
himself holds for good. But this would not make him sport enough. And therefore
he lets pass the Canon or Article of faith, and speaks of the doctrine or
Declaration of it, which is not propounded for faith at all to any believer,
although all Catholics that know it, adhere to it as good and solid. And this
is his first legerdemain, to propound that for an Article of faith, which is
only a doctrine or declaration of faith. His next trick is, to make it run short
like a Canon of faith, whereas it is a large and serious explication, wherein
those words he catches at are so connexed with others, that their rationality
there appears, which here is hid. Third is, that he makes it the Councels
business to determine only a matter of fact of the ancient Fathers not believing
infants communion necessary, though themselves used it: which was none of the
Councels intention; but insinuated only by way of anticipation to cut off the
arguments of heretics, who strengthened their error about the necessity of
infants communion, by example of the ancient Fathers who practiced it. Denique
eadem sancta Synodus docet parvulos usu rationis carentes nulla obligari
necessitate ad Sacramentalem Eucharistiae Communionem: Siquidem per Baptisms
lavacrum regenerati, and Christo incorporati, adeptam jam filiorum Dei gratiam
in illa aetate amittere non possunt. Neque ideo tamen damnanda est antiquitas,
si eum morem in quibusdam locis aliquando servavit. Vt enim sanctissimi illi
Patres sui facti probabilem causam pro illius temporis ratione habuerunt, ita
certe eos nulla salutis necessitate id fecisse sine controversia credendum est.
Thus speaks the Council in their doctrine or declaration of that Article of
faith. Siquis dixerit. But enough of this business. And although your Disswaders
talk deserv it not, yet your own satisfaction concerning these three novelties
here specified, because I thought it might happily require what I have said
thereof, pray take it in good part. And be assured that faith and Christianity
in the Roman Church increases not like the moon; although out of that Church it
decreas indeed like the moon in her wain, daily and in all Reformations to the
wors.

. 3. Which is about Indulgences.

Says that the doctrine of Indulgences is wholly new and unknown to antiquity,
as Antonius, Prierias, Bishop Fisher, Agrippa, and Durandus, Popish doctors do
acknowledge. And hence it is, that Gratian and Magister sententiarum, both of
them eminent doctors among the Papists, have not a word of them. Indeed in
primitive times, when the Bishop imposed several pennances, and that they were
almost quite performed, and a great cause of pity intervened or danger of
death, or an excellent repentance, or that the martyrs interceded, the Bishop
did sometimes indulge to the penitent, and relax some remaining parts of his
penance. But the Roman doctrine of Indulgence is another thing. They talk of
Jubilees and treasure of the Church, and pilgrimages, which ancient Fathers
either speak against, or never heard of. In fine, theirs is become a doctrine of
solution not absolution, that is, the sinner is to go free without any
punishment: which is destructive to true repentance, and right hope, to Christ's
merits, and free pardon, nourishes pride and brings in money, condemned by holy
Scriptures and ancient Fathers, who teach repentance reducing to a good life,
faith in Christ's merits, and hope in his promises. Neither can any Papists tell
what they are the better for their Indulgences; or whether they be absolutions
or compensations; whether they take off actual pennances, or potential; such as
be due in the court of man, or of God; whether they avail, if the receiver do
nothing for them, or not; whether they depend only of Christ's satisfaction, or
the Saints likewis. And therefore the Council of Trent durst determine nothing
about all these things, but contented themselves only to declare this, That
there is in the Church a power of granting Indulgences; advising Catholics to
set other superfluous and curious questions aside.

Sir, if I had had the opportunity to print the four paragraffs, which to
lessen the book I left out of my Fiat Lux, because one of them was about
Indulgence, I should need to say the less to this section; wherein I must
notwithstanding be brief, that I may speak somewhat also to those that follow.

Three things are in this his third section confusedly jumbled together by your
Disswader concerning this business of Indulgence; Faith, School-philosophy, and
Abuses. Catholic faith and Tradition he sets down himself p. 17. and
acknowledges it for good. Now lest the Roman Emissaries, says he, should
deceiv any of the good sons of the Church, we think it fit to acquaint them
that in the primitive Church when the Bishop imposed severe pennances, and that
they were almost quite performed, and a great cause of pity intervened or
danger of death, or an excellent repentance; or that the Martyrs interceded,
the Bishop did sometimes indulge to the Penitent, and relax some of the parts of
his penance, and according to the example of S. Paul in the case of the
incestuous Corinthian, gave them ease, lest they should be swallowed up with
too much sorrow. These are his words. And in them he has set down exactly, not
only the faith, but all the faith of Roman Catholics in this point, to stop the
mouths of Roman Emissaries: which faith and practice he acknowledges also
expressly to be ancient and primitive. And thus much he would have us beleev
that Protestants hold and allow; although not their books and writings only
which manifestly gainsay it, but their very practice, which has long ago
abandoned, and is now utterly ignorant either of confession or penance, or
relaxation or indulgence; and the very Articles of the English Protestant
Church refute him. But he that writes against Popery, need not heed what he
says. If another say the contrary, so that he speak against Popery too, they
will both pass for good.

But the Papists, says your Disswader, they are quite gone from this primitive
way: their doctrine of Indulgence is another thing, quite another thing. And
then jumbles together heaps of their school-disputes, about solutions,
absolutions, compensations, relaxations, and such like stuff; which together
with some abuses that time has brought forch, as well in that as other affairs,
and which Councels and Pastors have in all ages endeavored to rectify, must
make up a Miscellan, which he would have to be thought the Popery of this
business. Good Lord! Is this ignorance in your dissuading Doctor, or illud quod
dicere nolo. He acknowledges manifestly, that the Council of Trent decided no
more than that very Tradition, which the Church has kept in all ages,
acknowledged here by the Disswader himself to be primitive. Nor can he bring
any Catholic Council that has decided any more, or any Gospel or Tradition for
more. If school-divines questions, that are raised beyond faith in this point
as well as hundreds of others, may suffice to infer that Roman Catholics are
departed from the ancient primitive way, although they keep it ^e may as well
say they are departed from the old faith of the Trinity, Creation, Incarnation,
Sacraments, Resurrection, Justice, Grace, and the whole contents of the old and
new Testament. For though they keep the ancient faith concerning all these
things, yet have their schoolmen raised many hundreds, nay thousands of
questions and conclusions beyond that faith, that be variously agitated in the
schools amongst them. Your Disswaders craft lies in this, that whilst he brings
in here these school-disputes for popish faith and popery; and points out
eminent Doctors amongst Papists, who witness these fancies to be new and
unknown to antiquity, as Antonius, Prierias, Fisher, Durandus, Maironis,
Cajetan; and the Council of Trent, either not able, or not willing to determine
them: he hopes his reader will easily beleev, without much labor of his, that
Popery is not only a new foppery, but a confusion inextricable. This is his
drift not only in this section, but all his whole book. But he is entangled in
his own snare. For if neither the Council of Trent determined those things, nor
yet any other Council in the Catholic world, nor any ancient Tradition
delivered, nor her Doctors acknowledge them, then is there not any popery
therein: nor is popery any such thing.

Wherefore your Dissawader is very angry with the Council of Trent, for that they
would not there, either justify the abuses, or determine the school-disputes in
that point; but rather condemned the one, and exploded the other. I will set
down the Councels decree word for word, that you may see without any further
discourse of mine, how much your Doctor has abused, his reader. It runs thus.
Cum potestas conferendi indulgentias a Christo Ecclesiae concessa sit, atque
hujusmodi potestate divinitus sibi tradita antiquissimis etiam temporibus illa
usa fuerit; sacrosancta Synodus Indulgentiarum usum Christiano populo maxim
salutarem, and sacrorum Conciliorum autoritate probatum, in Ecclesia retinendum
esse docet and praecipit, eosque anathemate damnat, qui aut inutiles esse
asserunt, vel eas concedendi in Ecclesia potestatem esse negant. In his tamen
concedendis moderationem juxta veterem and probatam in Ecclesia consuetudinem
adhiberi cupit, ne nimia facititate Ecclesiae disciplina enervetur. Abusus vero
qui in his irrepserunt, and quorum occasion insigne hoc Indulgentiarum nomen
ab haereticis blasphematur, emendatos and correctos cupiens, praesenti decreto
generaliter statuit pravos quaestus omnes pro his consequendis, unde plurima in
Christiano populo abusuum causa fluxit, omnino abolendos esse. Caeteros vero
qui ex superstitione, ignorantia, irreverentia, aut aliunde quomodocunque
provenerunt, cum ob multiplices locorum and provinciarum apud quas hi
committuntur corruptelas, commode nequeant specialiter probiberi, mandat
omnibus Episcopis, ut diligenter quisque bujusmodi abusus Ecclesiae suae
colligat, eosque in prima Synodo Provinciali referat, etc. Thus the holy
Council condemns, and labors with all fatherly and pastourly care possible, to
prevent and amend the abuses, which your Disswader here sets down as one part
of Popery in this point; and the school-philosophy, which he makes the other
part thereof, the self same Council explodes in their decree of Purgatory, which
your Disswader calls the mother of Indulgences. Praecipit sancta Synodus
Episcopis, says the Council, ut sanam doctrinam a sanctis Patribus and sacris
Conciliis traditam a Christi fidelibus credi, teneri, doceri, and ubique
praedicari diligenter studeant. Apud rudem vero plebem difficiliores ac
subtiliores quaestiones, quaeque ad aedificationem non faciunt, and ex quibus
plerumque nulla fit pietatis accessio, a popularibus concionibus secludantur.
Incerta item and quae specie falsi laborant, evulgari, ac tractari non
permittant. Ea vero quae ad curiositatem quandam aut superstitionem spectant,
vel turpe lucrum sapiant, tanquam scandala and fidelium offendicula prohibeant.
I would we could see our English Bishops meet together in a Council, and make
such pious and fatherly provisions against scandalous books, seditious sermons,
and vicious customs, as this Popish Council has don. They would then give some
help to temporal authority, and not lay all the burden upon their shoulders,
whilst themselves sit like drones in their fat benefices, and do nothing. But
here you may see Sir, that all that which your Disswader makes here to be
Popery; abusive customs, and school-philosophy, is by a general Popish Council
expressly excluded from it. What strange kind of audacity is this, to call that
Popery or Catholic faith, which Catholic Doctors deny, Catholic Councels
exclude, and Catholic Professors never think of. But what your Disswader knows
to be new, he first puts that upon Papists for their faith; and then tells them
that their faith is new.

And your Disswader, as I told you before, is much troubled, and murmurs
bitterly against the Council of Trent: for that they would not determine those
philosophical subtilties, whether Indulgences be solutions or absolutions,
whether donations or compensations, whether for potential or actual pennances,
whether in the Court of God or man, whether out of the treasure of Christ or
Saints, whether upon condition of doing something or nothing. The Council, quoth
he, slubbereth all the whole matter both in the question of Indulgences and
Purgatory, in general and recommendatory terms; affirming that the power of
giving Indulgence is in the Church, and that the use is wholesome; and that all
hard and subtle questions concerning Purgatory, (which although if it be at
all, it is a fire, yet is it the fuel of Indulgences, and maintain them wholly)
and all that is suspected to be false, and all that is uncertain, and
whatsoever is curious and superstitious, scandalous, or for filthy lucre, be
laid aside. And in the mean time they tell us not what is and what is not
superstitious, nor what is scandalous, nor what they mean by the general term
of Indulgence. And they establish no doctrine, neither curious nor incurious.
Nor durst they decree the very foundation of this whole matter the Churches
treasure, neither durst they meddle with it, but left it as they found it, and
continued in the abuses, and proceed in the practice, and set their Doctors as
well as they can to defend all the new curious and scandalous questions, and to
uphold the gainful trade. Thus heavily poor man does your Disswader complain
of the Councels silence in those philosophical points, neither resolving the
doubts, nor so much as explicating the terms thereof, that he might understand,
what is superstitious, and what is scandalous, and what they mean by
Indulgence, and what by curious, and the like hard words. In The interim while
the Council sends him to school to learn the meaning of those hard words, and
the result of those disputes, which belonging not to faith, make little to
edification, and from whence no accession to piety can be made, nor indeed any
useful knowledge, all your Disswaders sport is spoiled. And he has some reason
indeed to complain and weep. But I pray you Sir consider; If I have a
releasement granted me from some temporal penalties due to my misdoings, what
does it concern me to know, whether that releasement be a substance or an
accident, whether it be in the predicament of quantity or quality, whether it
be a solution or absolution, whether it be from power or bounty, whether it
issue as out of a treasure, or from a tribunal, or the like. The Schoolmen
whence your Doctor picked those curious questions, would I am sure have
acquainted him with their opinions concerning all such things, if he had staid
to read their answers. But he was in haste; and indeed it concerned him not to
know their resolution. He had enough, to pick out their philosophical prattle
in the general heads of it, which because it is found in the school-books of
such as are Catholic believers, he makes no doubt, but the very naming of it
will suffice to persuade the Land, that it is all popish doctrine and Popery;
and that Papists cannot agree in it; and that it is new. Indeed Sir, he has
great need to go to school to those Doctors, not only to hear their
resolutions, but to understand the very terms of the question. For had he
known, what those very words of solution and absolution mean, he had never
added that absurd interpretation of his own, which he give p. 20. It is a very
strange thing, says he, a solution not an absolution, that is the sinner is
let go free without punishment in this world, or world to come: a wise
interpretation of a pitiful Divine.

But I cannot stand here to give notice of his special mistakes, simple
inferences, vain insultings, and particular falsifications, all which are gross
and various. I do only assure you Sir, that if he mean by Popery the Religion
and faith of Roman Catholics concerning this business of Indulgences, in one
period above named, he approves, establishes, and ratifies it all. And in all
the rest he says nothing against it, and indeed nothing at all to it. For the
subtle curious theories that are made by wits upon this subject, over and
above what their faith extends unto, as well as in all other things even from
the worlds first creation to its final consummation, all whatever is contained
in the whole Bible, about which they have raised many thousands of disputes,
over and above that which is there plainly delivered by their faith, these for
such as are at leisure and love them, may serve for Academick exercise and
discourse. The disorders and abuses that have been in this, as well as other
affairs, all good men and sacred Councels have labored to their power to
suppress and rectify. And are there not abuses of all kinds in the Protestant
world, notwithstanding any endeavors to the contrary? But the faith that is in
this point and all the whole practice of it, Catholics still hold, and
Protestants have forsaken it: For these have neither confession of sins, nor
penance for those sins confessed, nor indulgence of any such pennances enjoined,
as Catholics have. Indeed the Prelat Protestant keeps still one ancient custom
of commuting, as they call it, which is but a new word for Indulgence, when the
penance of standing in a white sheet for one kind of sin imposed, is upon some
considerations released. For although the Reformation have taught, that
Matrimony is no Sacrament, but a mere secular contract, yet Ministers I know
not how keep still that Spiritual Court (as they call it) unto themselves; as
being it seems the only men that are able to judge in those affairs. But there
be other sins that require penance and satisfaction, besides that one: and
other penance besides a white sheet to be commuted.

. 4. Which is about Purgatory.

Says that Purgatory is another ill novelty: both because the Greek Fathers
never make any mention of Purgatory, and also because the doctrins on which it
is built are either falls or at least dubious; as that there is distinction
betwixt mortal sins and venial; that sin may be taken away, the obligation to
punishment remaining; that God requires of us a full exchange of pennances for
the pleasure of sin, notwithstanding Christ suffering for us. But Papists are
deceived in this point upon two mistakes; the first whereof is, that ancient
Fathers used to pray for the dead: but they prayed not in relation to
Purgatory: and so the Church of England allows to pray for the departed, namely
as the Fathers did. The second is, that the Fathers speak of a fire of
purgation after this life, which was but an opinion of such a thing after the
day of judgment. And this is also refuted by those other Fathers, who hold the
souls to be kept in secret receptacles until doomsday, which opinion cannot
stand with Purgatory. Beside St. Austin in his time, doubted whether Purgatory
was, or no. And though ancient Fathers speak much of intermedial states and
purgations, and fires, and common receptacles and delivery of souls, yet they
never agreed throughout with the Church of Rome. But Papists have been brought
into this belief by frightful relations of apparitions, which the wiser sort
beleev not. And Tertullian denies that the souls of the dead do ever appear.
How the Greek Church denies this purgatory doctrine, appears in the Council of
Florence. Moreover S. Cyprian and others teach against it, that after death is
no place for penance, no purgation: and no less holy scripture, who says,
Blessed are those who dye in the Lord.

What a rapsody of stuff is here? Papists gathered this doctrine of Purgatory
out of falls grounds: Papists have been frighted into this doctrine of Purgatory
by apparitions. The Fathers speak of a fire of purgation after this life, but
they meant not as Papists do. The Fathers held secret receptacles for souls
until doomsday; but that cannot stand with Papists Purgatory: though they
speak much of intermedial states, yet that does not agree throughout with the
Roman doctrine of Purgatory. And blessed are the dead; for they ^est from their
labors. Blessed surely had your Disswader been, if he had rested from his
labors too.

Sir, if your Disswader had meant to say any thing to the purpos in this
affair, he should have clearly set down in this his section, before he had
discoursed further, what is the Papists belief and practice in this business.
But this he utterly omits and neglects to do, lest he should spoil his own
sport; and thinks it enough, in a rambling talk to say, that the Fathers prayed
for the dead, the Fathers spoke much of intermedial states, but no Greek
Fathers, no Latin Fathers agree with the Roman doctrine of Purgatory, S. Cyprian
denied it, S. Austin doubted it, the Scripture is against it, the grounds for
it are dubious, apparitions for it are frivolous. And he never speaks one word
what that Roman doctrine of Purgatory is: nor can I imagine what he fancies it to
be. If he do but speak against it, be it what it will, he has said enough. So
he thinks. But Sir, had he declared it as he ought to have don, it had then
clearly appeared, that those Fathers who prayed for a joyful Resurrection to
their friends departed, who speak of a fire of purgation after this life, of an
intermedial state and purgations and delivery of souls thence, were directly
and perfectly of the now present Papists belief: and that St. Austins doubting,
whatever it was, and the Greeks disagreeing in Florence, and S. Cyprians
affirming that there is no place of repentance after this life, so far as they
are truly cited, stand all very well, perfect, and completely with the Roman
Catholic belief and practice.

But what think you, Sir, of our English Protestant Church? Does she pray, or
so much as leave it indifferent to pray for the dead, as this Disswader speaks,
if it be not don in relation to Purgatory? the name Purgatory I mean. For if
they pray for the refreshment, ease, and comfort of souls departed as ancient
holy Fathers did, there is nothing else but the bare name remaining, if those
prayers bear any sense. Has the Protestant Church any altar, or priesthood, or
sacrifice for the dead, which all ancient Fathers both Greek and Latin speak
of, as the usage and custom of the Christian Church in their times? Does any
amongst them, when he dies, give alms either to priests or poor people, or
other friends to pray for his soul when he is departed hence? Is not he looked
upon, that shall be heard to say for his deceased friend, God give him rest, or
God grant him a joyful Resurrection, as either some professed, or at least a tacit
and concealed Papist? What is it this Doctor then tells us, of the English
Churches allowing prayer for the dead, which our very Protestant articles
condemn, and all their writers have hitherto opposed. Nor have they any Priests
amongst them to perform any such rite in that way the Fathers speak of, and
used themselves on their altars, which are all razed here to the ground. And as
for the people, they neither do, nor dare, under the danger of being thought
Papists, if they had the mind, either practice or commend any such custom.

But Greek Fathers never mention Purgatory, as Polydor and Roffensis witness.
Where does Polydor and Roffensis witness that? How would your Disswader have
them mention it? Purgatorium is a latin word, and not to be found in greek
writings. Did not S. Basil pray to God, for rest and pardon for the soul of thy
servant N. N. Does not S. Chrysostom speak of his offering sacrifice for all
those who slept before us, etc. and for the rest and pardon of thy servant N
etc. Does not S. Cyril frequently say, We offer this sacrifice for our deceased
Fathers and Bishops, and all those who have departed this life, etc. And S.
Epiphanius, We make mention both of just and sinners, etc. And what is the
Papists Purgatory for Gods sake, but only such a condition of souls deceased,
as requires help from the prayers of the faithful living. This I take to be the
Roman doctrine, or Catholic belief, both of the Eastern and Western part of the
Church, both Greeks and Latins, wherein all ancient Christians unanimously
agreed. And your Disswader, that he may leave it free for every man's thoughts
to imagine what he lists, never speaks himself what it should be.

But the Fathers prayed for those who perhaps never were in Purgatory, as
Apostles, etc. And they prayed too for those who perhaps were there, or in that
condition that required their prayers. Truth is, they prayed far differently
for the just ones and other men: as any one may see in those very Fathers,
insinuated in those your Disswaders words. And if some just ones commemorated by
the Fathers wanted not our prayers, does this infer that no condition of souls
deceased wants them, or that those Fathers who prayed also for others then
deceased, as wanting those helps, although in another manner than for the just,
should think so? I trow not, however your Doctor throws his ink about
confusedly to blind our eyes.

But S. Austin doubted whether there were any Purgatory or no. And is it likely
Sir, that he who in his Enchiridion. Cura pro mortuis, Civitate Dei, and
several other of his works speaks so expressly of souls expiation after death,
and of the sacrifices which himself made being a Priest for souls deceased, in
particular for his mother Monica, and her husband, for that end so expressly I
say and clearly, that no Roman Catholic now, either does or could possibly say
more, should doubt whether there were after this life any expiatory place or
condition?

I will but set down two or three places of many in that holy Fathers works,
which may suffice to show his mind. Temporarias poenas alii in hac vita tantum,
alii post mortem, alii and nune and tunc patiuntur. l. 21. de Civitate Dei.
Again, Orationibus vero sanctae Ecclesiae and sacrificio salutari, and
eleemosynis quae eorum spiritibus erogantur, non est dubitandum mortuos
adjuvati, ut cum eis misericordius agatur a Domino, quam eorum peccata
meruerunt: hoc enim a patribus traditum universa observat Ecclesia. De verb.
apost. sermon. 34. Again, Neque negandum est defunctorum animas pietate suorum
viventium relevari, cum pro illis sacrificium mediatoris offertur, Ench. c. 10.
The Disswader cannot but have read several such like passages in that eminent
Doctor. And the jest is, that the place he cites for S. Austins doubting of
Purgatory, is one of those wherein he expressly teaches it. So expert a Doctor
is this of yours. What is it then St. Austin doubted? For he must needs doubt
something. Otherwise there had been nothing for your Disswader to catch hold of.
Speaking therefore of those sufferings after this life, before eternal bliss can
be obtained, in which condition such as upon a good foundation have built some
light matter, which the Apostle calls wood, hay, and straw, may be saved, yet
so as by fire, S. Austin doubts whether those very affections men bear to
things in this life, which are lawfully had, but lost with some grief, may not
burn, and afflict them in that place of expiation, as well as other venial
offenses, and be some part of the wood, hay, and straw the Apostle mentions. And
truly the doubt is very rational, and remains still a doubt. But when your
Disswader takes hereupon occasion to say, that St. Austin doubted Purgatory, I
cannot doubt but that he wanted either sincerity in his heart, or eyes in his
head.

But in the time of Otho, in the twelfth age of the Church, the doctrine of
Purgatory was got no further than a Quidam asserunt, Some say so. Sir, Otho
here cited to say quidam asserunt, speaks not at all of any expiation after
death, as your Disswader would have us think, but after judgment, which some
divines in those days held over and above that which their faith had
delivered: which opinion had then but a some say so for it, as it has also
now: and it was then, and is now but a philosophical opinion. Can you beleev
your Disswader did not see this? It was truly, if he did see it, a gross and
inexcusable insincerity, to make Otho say it was only the opinion of some, that
there was a purgation after death, who expressly treats of that particular
opinion concerning a purgation after judgment, which their faith and religion
did not reach unto. But as I told you before, I must not insist upon your
Disswaders falsifications, however they be various and very gross, because that
work is well don already, and my design looks another way. As he is to blame,
for making some Fathers think and speak what they did not; so is he, while he
makes all the Fathers in general to acknowledge and practice as much in this
point, as any Roman Catholic believes, and yet adds withal, that those Fathers
notwithstanding agreed not with the Roman doctrine, which himself never declares
what it is, most palpably ridiculous.

But the doctrine of Purgatory is grounded, says your Disswader, upon false
principles, as upon a supposed distinction betwixt venial sins and mortal,
between sin and its obligation to punishment, etc. Sir, if we would speak
properly, neither is this belief of future expiations, nor any other point of
Catholic Religion to be called a doctrine, or opinion, or judgment, of some
divines or all divines, or any such like thing. For it is the faith as well of
divines, as other Christians; unto which they as well as these submit all
equally with the same resignation, and no doctrine of any man's. Upon the pin of
this one mistake, if it be a mistake, and not rather a malicious wilfulness,
hangs all this your Doctors Disswasive, which being removed, all his whole book
falls to the ground. And therefore it were worth the labor to discourse more
copiously upon this subject; which all Anticatholiks either understand not, or
dissemble, that they may have the more ample field of scholastical Divines, and
some rotten Casuists to ride a hunting in, when they chase Popery; which the
world must beleev to be a doctrine of divines. And this doctrine must not be the
doctrine of any one of their schools, much less of all their schools, but of
this or that obscure man, who followed no school at all: nor any good thing
that he delivered, but some uncouth odd speech unheedfully dropped from his pen:
nor this heartily delivered neither, as he spoke it, but wrested and perverted
against his meaning. And this is the mode of chasing that wild beast of Popery,
with seven heads and ten horns, made by the slight of ministers both terrible,
and yet at the self-same time ridiculous to people: not to all: for God be
thanked there be very many grave and wise men in the land, but only to the
inferior and more numerous sort of people, such as will stand to hear Jack
Pudding talk in Bartholomew Fair. But I have not now time to enlarge my self
upon this subject, as it may deserv. I say then that no Catholic faith, which
ministers express by the odious name of Popery, is properly speaking, any man's
doctrine; much less is it a doctrine grounded upon this or that principle, as
indeed all school-doctrin is; but it is a Catholic faith and belief, grounded
immediately upon the veracity and truth of the Revealer our Lord and his
Apostles. But your Disswader speaks still of doctrine, and Roman doctrine, and
grounds of doctrine, as if he were utterly unacquainted with faith, Christian
faith, and of all he is to speak; imagining Religion to be some school
conclusion of Philosophers; wherein he is either notoriously mistaken, or would
in his heart have others most notoriously to mistake. Wherefore, although I could
easily defend those scholastical grounds, whereon he says the doctrine of
Purgatory is built; yet I must first tell him that which is of more concern
both for himself and others to know; namely that those are not, be they true or
falls, any grounds of Purgatory at all: nor is Purgatory a doctrine built upon
those grounds. what then are those assertions, that some sins are mortal, some
not, that the pardon of sin may stand with an obligation to temporal
punishment, etc. They are, Sir, rational congruities invented by Catholic
Divines, the more fully to clear unto weak believers the rationality and truth
of that old Christian Tradition concerning our expiatory sufferings after this
life, before entrance into glory. But if we will look for more ancient and
Christian-like grounds for this expiation, so far as one business of faith may
be said to be grounded on another, (even as Gods attributes are said by
school-divines one to flow from the other, namely in order to our
understanding, which cannot otherwise think or speak of that most simple and
infinite being) the great depositum fides affords other grounds, far better,
more intelligible, simple and easy grounds of Purgatory, than those your
Disswader catches at, although even they be solid and good ones too. As for
example these; Christians are culled and called out of darkness by the mercy of
their gracious Redeemer unto purity, light and holiness, which they are to
practice and act all their whole life after: and if they do otherwise, they
shall suffer accordingly, so much of pain as they have had of unlawful
pleasures, to the despite of that precious blood, that redeemed and brought
them out of sin and darkness, and of that holy Spirit of his, wherewith they have
been anointed; every one as he has acted in his body, whether good or evil,
being to receiv accordingly after this life. So that he who shall at all times,
cooperating faithfully with Gods holy grace, keep his hands pure, and heart
clean from such enormities, as may violate friendship with his Redeemer, shall
be in another condition at his departure, then he who has in his life time
polluted himself and don injury to the sanctifying blood of Christ by his many
filthy adulteries, drunkennesses, cheats, slanders, murders, or the like,
although by Gods grace, he should find mercy at his last hour. These, if I
could stand to enlarge my self upon them, being themselves Christian Traditions
and Apostolical doctrine, might in some sense be said to be the grounds of
expiatory penalties after this life, commonly called Purgatory. But those
others which your Disswader mentions, are but some congruities latelier put
together by Doctors to clear unto unstable Christians, as far as they may be
able, the rationality of their Christian Tradition concerning expiations after
this life: which Preachers in their sermons, and Doctors in their chairs
usually invent and utter as well in this affair as other businesses of faith,
some with more firmitude and some with less, according to their learning and
capacity: I say they are congruities for it, and good ones too: but no grounds
of it. For faith is not deduced by reasons, or drawn from premises, or
concluded from grounds. And although this faith be manifold and about sundry
matters, as the Creation, Redemption, Justification, Resurrection, and the
like, yet all these particular faiths, depend immediately like several rays on
one sun, upon the one only authority and truth of the first Revealer, which is
the foundation and ground of all. And if those abovenamed assertions be no
grounds of this faith concerning future expiations, much less is that true and
firm tradition, Blessed are those that dye in our Lord, any ground against it.
For they are happy, and happy that ever they were born who dye in our Lord:
that is to say, in his faith and fear, in his love and grace. But there are as
many degrees of dying in our Lord, as there be varieties of the lives and
actions of those that dye in him. And they all rest from the labors of this
life, and some also are freed from the pains of the other, who depart hence in a
more complete reconciliation with him.

5. Which is about Transubstantiation.

Says that Transubstantiation is another novelty in the Roman Church, so much
a novelty, that we know the very time of its birth, and how it was introduced.
For Scotus, Occam, Biel, Fisher, Bassolis, Cajetan, Melchior Caen acknowledge,
that it is not expressed in Scripture; and in Peter Lombards time they knew not
whether it was true or no. Durandus a good Catholic after the Lateran Council
where it was first declared, said it was not faith, as Scotus says it was no
faith before it: Nor did the Lateran Council determine that which now the Roman
Church holds: which doctrine of theirs is a stranger to antiquity, as Alphonsus
a Castro acknowledges: and the same is made good by the testimonies of
Tertullian, Justin Martyr, Eusebius, Macarius, Ephrem, Gregory Nazianzen,
Chrysostom, Austin, the Canon law it self, Theodoret, and Pope Gelasius, who
all witness that the bread is our Lords body spiritually. And your Disswader
therefore advises his charge, to take heed they be not led away by rhetorical
words, to beleev the Roman doctrine, which is an innovation and dangerous
practice: about which they make many foolish questions: as whether a mouse may
run away with her maker, whether a Priest is the Creator of God, etc. In fine,
Transubstantiation is absolutely impossible. For Christ's glorious body cannot
be broken, nor yet the mere accidents, nor one body multiplied, as be many
wafers; and it is against the demonstration of our senses.

Sir, I know well enough, that Tertullian, Justin Martyr, Eusebius, Macarius,
Ephrem, Gregory Nazianzen, Theodoret, Chrysostom, and S. Austin, were all of
them not only Roman Catholics, but Catholic priests too, and could easily prove
it. But if your Disswader should have the confidence to deny that: I hope yet
he will grant me, that Scotus, Occham, Biel, Bassolis, Cajetan, Melchior Caen,
Durand, and Alphonsus a Castro Papish Schoolmen and Doctors of the Church,
and Friars, were all such: and as for Bishop Fisher, Peter Lombard, and Pope
Gelasius, these I may almost presume he will let pass for Papists. What is then
this Roman doctrine, which so many Roman Doctors, whereof each one had such a
multitude of disciples and followers in the Catholic world, do not so much as
acknowledge? Where shall we find it? For your Disswader names heaps of Popish
Doctors, that deny it, and not any one that owns it; nor ever so much as tells
us what it is. What strange kind of proceeding is this? Nay in the beginning of
the section, he tells us that this Popery of Transubstantiation is so new, that
it is well enough known to have begun in the Council of Lateran: and yet in the
middle of the very same section says expressly, that the opinion was not
determined in the Lateran Council, as it is now held at Rome. The Popery or
popish doctrine of Transubstantiation now held at Rome, it is very well known to
all, says he, that it had its first beginning in the Lateran Council; and yet
adds, that the opinion was not determined in the Lateran Council, as it is now
held at Rome. What opinion, Sir, was determined in the Lateran Council, and
what is that which is now held at Rome? Does not your Disswader speak of the
doctrine now held at Rome, when beginning his section, he speaks thus? The
doctrine of Transubstantiation is so far from being Primitive and Apostolic,
that we know the very time it began to be owned publicly for an opinion, and
the very Council in which it passed for a public doctrine: which Council two or
three lines afterward he says was the Council of Lateran under Pope Innocent
the third, twelve hundred years after Christ. And against that new doctrine
which began, he says, twelve hundred years after Christ, and thereby convicted
of novelty, he writes this his whole section. What means he then in the name of
God, but only two pages after, namely p. 39. to say, that the opinion was not
determined in the Lateran as it is now held at Rome. Is that opinion now held
at Rome, younger or older than the Council Lateran; and when began that opinion
held at Rome, or was it from the beginning? And against which of the opinions
does he speak in this section? For against both of them together he cannot. The
very head and principal, and as it were the sum of all his discourse in this
section, The doctrine of Transubstantiation is so far from being Primitive and
Apostolic, that we know the very time it began, and the Council it passed for
a doctrine, etc. It was but a disputable question till the Council of Lateran in
the time of Pope Innocent 1200. and more after Christ, etc. This I say cannot
agree with the doctrine now held at Rome, which he says afterward is another
thing from that which was determined in the Council of Lateran. If then this
parcel of Popery, which he says in one place, is not that which was determined
in the Council of Lateran, and in another place is that which was determined in
the Council of Lateran, be the matter and subject of his discourse in this
section, ought he not in plain terms to have told us, what this piece of popery
is, that we may know what he speaks of. Surely he ought. If it neither be owned
by so many popish doctors which here he names, and names not any one popish
doctor that owns it: if it neither be determined in the Council of Lateran,
nor he himself can name any other Council wherein it was lately or otherwise
determined, how is it Popery? What doctors own it? What Council has declared
it? What people profes it? And what is that thing they should profes, declare,
or own? What is it I say? This he ought to have spoken openly, sincerely, and
plainly. And yet he endeavors not at all, which he should one would think have
principally heeded, either to set down what doctors own it, or what it is they
own: but spends his whole time in telling us only of a great company of popish
doctors that like not of that Roman doctrine, which he never declares himself
what it is. And then exhorts all his charge and all good people to take heed of
that Roman doctrine, that scandalous doctrine, that blasphemous novelty, which
was determined in the Council of Lateran, and yet is another thing from that
which was determined in the Council of Lateran; not any part of Catholic belief
until that Council, nor yet esteemed to belong to faith after that Council, by
the greatest of popish doctors, about which they make many foolish questions,
as whether a mouse may run away with her maker, etc.

Sir, your Doctor, who pretending a Disswasive from Popery, by which he doubts
not but his reader will understand the Roman Catholic faith, never meant to
touch at all their real Religion, which is universally in their hearts and
hands, and no power of man is able to confute, but either some obscure parcels
of philosophy, or abuses of men, which he is better able to make sport withal,
was fallen here it seems upon the Catholic faith, before he was aware. And
therefore he suddenly drew back; and so blundered up and down in the
affrightment, that he seems neither to know what to speak, nor against what he
is to speak of. The Roman doctrine of Transubstantiation was first determined in
the Lateran Council: The opinion was not determined in the Lateran Council, as
it is now held in Rome. What would this man have? What does he speak of? What
opinion is that which is now held in Rome, differing from that of the Lateran
Council? What is that doctrine of the Lateran Council, differing from that is
now held in Rome? What is that Rome? the Church of Rome or Court of Rome, the
City of Rome or schools in Rome? And is it in all Rome or some particular
streets, or parishes, or schools, or shops? And how do they hold it? with their
hands or teeth, or pens or hearts? as a matter of faith, or business of dispute,
as delivered to them, or invented by them, in their confession of Religion, or
profession of Philosophy? These things ought all of them to have been expressed,
that we might rightly understand who in Rome hold it, and how they hold it, and
what is that same It they hold. But your Disswader hopes, that upon those
general words of his, The opinion was not determined in the Lateran Council, as
it is now held in Rome, his unwary reader will be bold to think more, than he
dares himself utter. And perhaps he is not deceived. For few readers are wiser
than their book.

But the Romans make many foolish and blasphemous questions about it. The more
blasphemous and foolish they, who urge them to it; if any one amongst them have
resolved such doubts, as infidelity in derision of holy things has raised.
They who aforetime denied Gods Incarnation, gave occasion of as foolish and
blasphemous disputes as any these be. And if any then studied to give an answer
to such sordid, unmanly, and scurrillous opposition, although they might fail
in discretion, yet their heart was innocent, and intention good.

The business which I suppose your Doctor would be at here, is the real
presence of our Lords blessed and glorious body under the species of
corruptible elements, which is one of the paragraffs I left out of my Fiat. And
I am sorry now with all my heart it was left out: because here is no time or
place to treat of it, as that great and weighty subject would require. Neither
is it my intention here to declare the old Christian Tradition: but only to
give you, Sir, to understand, that this Disswader, though he may hurt his
unwary reader, yet he nothing at all indammages the old Catholic faith, by any
words of his, which speak it to be new. Large volumes have been written upon
this subject, enough to satisfy any moderate well disposed mind: qui legit
intelligat.

Let me only give you notice Sir, that this parcel of Christian faith now
abolisht here in England, was so ancient, that the very old Pagans and Jews
derided the primitive Christians above a thousand years ago, for their
worshipping a breaden God, as they pleased then, and the infidels of our times
are not ashamed now, to misname that sacred mystery: It was so universally
believed, that their adversaries by that one only mark expressed as it were in
short the very substance of their Religion; Since the Christians adore that
which they eat, said one of the Infidel writers, well enough acquainted with
the course of Christian Religion, let my soul be with Philosophers: It was so
sure and undoubted in their hearts, that some ancient holy Fathers have
elucidated the mystery of the Incarnation, by this of the real presence in the
Eucharist, as the more manifest: It was so grave and solemn, that all the
Churches or Temples in the Christian world, were built principally for it: and
the devotion of those times studied to erect them with a strength and
magnificence answerable, as far as they could, to the majesty of that divine
mystery: It was such a princely leading point of faith, that it drew all other
pieties after it, frequent prayers and meditations, alms-deeds, contrition for
sins, singing of psalms, hymns and canticles in the Quire before that presence
in the Altar, Confessions, Sermons, Catechize, Processions, Fasts, Festivals,
and all that real fear and love of God, that has been ever found in Christian
hearts: Finally, it is the very legacy of Jesus Christ the holy One, to his
Spouse the Church, whereby he proved himself both to be a poor and most loving
and also omnipotent Espouse. Another man might leave wealth and possessions;
but though he be never so kind and loving, he cannot leave his body to his
wife, to remain ever with her for exercise of her love, for comfort of her
heart, and glorifying of her soul, by virtue whereof she should be raised up to
follow and join with him in the eternal glory of another world. This was a
Testament only fit for Jesus Prince of Angels and men to make. And this I
suppose is that piece of Popery, your Disswader here so fumbles at, that he
knows not what to call it, or how to express it in his words.

O, but it is Transubstantiation which the Disswader dislikes. And what is
Transubstantiation? what does it mean? What is that long winded hard word of
Transubstantiation, what is the meaning of it? For Catholic Religion, which
your Disswader calls Popery, is not words: nor are words Catholic Religion; but
the sense, and life, and meaning delivered us by help of words for faith, hope,
and charity to feed upon. Neither Consubstantiality, nor Trinity, nor
Incarnation, nor Transubstantiation, and such other like phrases, are any thing
at all of any Religion. Your Disswader abuses the world, when he tells you, he
knows when Transubstantiation first came up. The meaning of it was in the
Christian world, all those many ages before that Lateran Council he speaks of:
or else it had not been in the world then. Pray let him tell me, whether the
consubstantiality of the Son of God with his eternal Father who made all
things, be a novelty or new article, yea or no. He knows the very time, as
himself here speaks, when it began to be owned publicly for an opinion, and
that very Council in which it was said to be passed into a public doctrine, and
by what arts it was promoted, and by what persons it was introduced. And if he
do not know all this, I can tell him. Does this prove that same
Consubstantiation to be a novelty yea or no? Let him answer me directly. I am a
plain man, and love plain dealing. Was Jesus the Son of God and Savior of
mankind believed any otherwise to be true and really God after that Council
had declared him to be consubstantial to Almighty God his heavenly Father, than
he was before Christians ever heard of that word Constsubstantiality or
Consubstantiation? If Christians notwithstanding that new word still believed
and adhered to one and the same old faith they did before, then say I the same
of Transubstantiation. And if that new word made no new article, no more does
this: Nor does the one word any more belong to Christian Religion than the
other: and both indeed only so far, as they conveigh the old faith, by this new
invented word, guarded against the subtilties of the heretics then living, who
by their circumventing sophistry deluded all other expressions concerning the
real presence of the Godhead in our Lords humanity, and of his humanity in the
Eucharist, save only that other of Consubstantatiion, and this of
Transubstantiation, both words in those days equally new. And when those
heresies and heretics are once vanished, there is no further use of the words
amongst Christians, who beleev and worship by virtue of their Christian
Tradition, the very thing it self, Gods divinity in his humanity, and Christ's
humanity in his sacred Eucharist, without troubling their heads with those hard
words, which were invented against subtle heretics, unless happily the same
heresies should rise again. And the Catholic flock acts and believes after both
those Councels, just as their Christian predecessors did before. They
acknowledge Christ our Lord really God, and fear, and love, and hope in him,
whether they ever hear of his consubstantiality or consubstantiation with God,
or no. Nor do they ever trouble their heads to know, what is the meaning of
con. or what is substance; or what be accidents, or what substantiation, or
consubstantiation, no more after that Council of Nice than before it. Such
terms and phrases are besides the simplicity of their holy and innocent belief,
which holds notwithstanding all that is really meant by those words, taught
them in a more natural and plainer way. So likewise do Catholic believers after
the Council of Lateran worship their crucified Redeemer in the Eucharist, in
the same manner others did before it, being the very same Christians with those
that lived the age before, and think no more of Transubstantiation many
thousands of these now, then those others did: that word making no more
difference before and after this Council of Lateran, then had Consubstantiation
made amongst the Catholic Christians, which were before and after that other
Council of Nice. By those words some cunning wolves had been by their Pastors
discovered and separated from the sheep; and after that the whole flock fed
quietly in the same hills, and by the same fountains they did before. And in
this sense Catholic Divines might say, and truly say, that Transubstantiation
is not of faith either before the Council or after, if any one of them did
indeed ever say so. For Christian faith is not words, as I said before, nor
words any Religion.

And if those Catholic Divines, who ever they were, meant any thing else; as
namely, that the Christians before that Council of Lateran, who indeed
worshipped their Redeemer in the Eucharist as true and fully as any that lived
after that Council ever did or can, were not given generally to understand
explicitly, that Christ our Lord is so present in the Eucharist, that there is
there no other substance but himself: in this sense they spoke true, that so
much had not been spoken expressly by a Council, but yet that the faith and
practice of Christians both before and after that Council was the same. And so
consequently there was no more of faith after that Council than was before it;
whether we consider the learned or the common flock of Christians. For these
worship Christ in the Eucharist after that Council, as others did before it;
though neither of them think of Transubstantiation: and those learned ones
spoke and wrote of our Lords presence in the Eucharist before that Council, as
others do after it: and both do equally beleev the thing that is meant by
Transubstantiation, which in a diverse sense, according as men speak either of
the word or meaning of the word, may be either said to be or not to be of
faith, either before the Lateran Council or after it. Those words of Tertullian
in his 2. book ad uxorem, where he speaks of the marriage of a Gentile with a
Christian woman, Non sciet maritus, quid secreto ante omnem cibum gustet, and
si sciverit, panem non illum credat esse qui dicitur, etc. Those also of S.
Cyprian in his Coena Domini. Panis iste communis in carnem and sanguinem
mutatus, etc. And again; Panis iste non in specie sed natura mutatur, etc.
Those likewise of St. Chrysostom, de poenitent sermon. 5. Non quod panis sit
respicias, neque quod vinum sit reputes, etc. And again; Mysteria hic consumi
Christi corporis substantia, etc. Those too of S. Greg. Nyssen in his magna
Catechista. Recte ergo nunc quoque Dei verbo sanctificatum panem, (...): and
again; Haec autem dat virtute benedictionis, in illud transelementata eorum
quae apparent natura. Lastly, (that I may not forget my own design, which is
not here to prove Catholic faith, but only to take a little view of this
Disswasive from it) those words of S. Cyril in his Mystagogica quarta; Hoc
sciens and pro certissimo habens panem hunc qui videtur a nobis non esse panem,
etiamsi gustus panem esse sentiat, sed corpus Christi; and vinum quod a nobis
conspicitur, tametsi and sensu gustus vinum esse videatur, non tamen vinum, sed
sanguinem esse Christi,. I say these and such like words of ancient Christian
Divines, many hundreds of years before the Council of Lateran, speak as much
the thing meant by Transubstantiation, as any Doctor can express it now;
though these may know more of the word than they. And indeed the definition of
the Catholic Council makes no alteration at all in the practice of Catholic
faith, which so considers their Lords presence in the Eucharist, that it never
heeds the Quomodo or concomitances; the adoration, love, and devotion being
still and ever in all things the very same.

If Christ our Lord should appear to two Christians now, as he did once to S.
Paul in a splendor of light; and a voice out of that shining brightness should
issue so efficacious, that they should both of them be fully persuaded in their
hearts to worship him whom they believed both of them there present. I suppose
these two would equally do well, and equally do the same thing, although one of
them should happily think there was no other thing there, but his Lord in an
appearance of light, and the other should not think at all of the light,
whether it were a substance or only an appearance of it. But if a third man
should deny the real presence of our Lord in that light, he would for certain
be of another faith. So it is here, Protestants who deny the real presence, are
of another belief from Catholics who acknowledge it; but Catholics who equally
adore it, are all of one belief, though perhaps not one of a million ever
thinks of Transubstantiation. O but Christ might be present in the Eucharist,
although Transubstantiation were not. He might so: and Christ likewise may be
owned for God, though Consubstantiation were never thought of. Both there and
here something is explicately spoken, which was latitant in the former practice
and belief, and he that can may understand it. But the millions that never
heard of it, so long as they beleev and worship their Crucified Redeemer, as
they ought, in the Eucharist, are never the worse. Had it not been for
heretics, neither Consubstantiation, nor Transubstantiation had been ever
heard of: and yet the practice and faith of Catholic Christians the same it is.

The holy Fathers which your Disswader cites against this particle of Catholic
belief, some say nothing at all there concerning that thing, some speak what he
cites in another manner, some teach quite contrary. But this I intend not now to
insist upon. Only thus much in general, and I pray you, Sir, mark it well.
Those ancient Fathers, who say sometimes, that the words of our Lord are to be
understood spiritually not carnally; and that those symbols are a figure of his
body, agree with all Catholics that are now in the world no less in the meaning
of those their words, than others wherein they manifestly assert the real
presence in this Sacrament. For all Catholics say, that our Lord is not to be
so understood, that his holy body in the Eucharist is to be fed upon in a
carnal way, as though it should be divided into gobbets, and so digested by the
stomach into flesh and blood, as other meats are: but that as that holy body
now glorified is become a spiritual body, as good S. Paul speaks, totally
spiritual and divine, and not now subject to any condition or laws of material
corruptible bodies here on earth, so is it spiritually to be taken, as the food
not of a mortal body, but the immortal spirit. So likewise do all Catholics
acknowledge and beleev that the symbols after the powerful blessing of Christ's
consecration, do so become his sacred body, by conversion, mutation, or
transelementation, as the same Fathers speak; that the outward appearance which
remains of them is not now any more a figure of bread and wine as it was
before, but of our Lords precious body and blood which have succeeded in their
place. So that those very words of the ancient Fathers, wherein they say, that
the elements are now become a figure of Christ's body and blood, do prove not
only a real presence, but a transelementation too, or Transubstantiation, which
your Disswader judges to sound somewhat more. For every material body (I pray
you Sir mark this well) I say every material body here on earth, as a tree, a
man, or beast, or other thing exhibits to the eye, ear, taste, or other senses
an outward species of that which it is And the substance ever goes along in
nature with that appearance it exhibits, unless the power of God should
interpose, and make it otherwise. Thus when I have bread before me, or milk for
example, that I see taken from the cow, I see it, and feel it, and taste it, to
be such as it shows it self; and such it is as it shows it self to be. Thus it
is in all nature. But we are not, say those good holy Fathers, to think so
here. For though here be the color and touch and taste of bread; yet after this
strange and powerful conversion made by Gods omnipotent words, it is no more
bread you see, it is not natural bread you touch, it is not material bread you
taste, but the blessed body of your Redeemer which is touched, seen, and tasted
under those remaining appearances, which are no more now the figure of bread,
which they were before, but the figure of our Lords body under the species,
appearance or representation of bread now wonderfully concealed. And thus much
is manifestly and clearly expressed by all those holy Fathers. Hoc sciens, says
great St. Cyril of Jerusalem, and pro certissimo habens panem hunc qui videtur
a nobis, non esse panem, etiamsi gustus panem esse sentiat, sed est Corpus
Christi: and vinum quod a nobis conspicitur, tametsi and sensu gustus vinum
esse videatur, non tamen vinum, sed sanguinem esse Christi. And this speak all
holy Fathers, both Greek and Latin. It would be endless to bring their
testimonies. By these few words, if, Sir, you have heeded them well, you will
presently conceiv the meaning of that speech of Tertullian in his third book
against Marcion. Acceptum panem and distributum discipulis Corpus suum illum
fecit, Hoc est corpus meum dicendo, id est, figura corporis mei. Figura autem
non fuisset, nisi veritatis esset Corpus. Caeterum vacua res quod est phantasma
figuram capere non posset, etc. And Ministers are grossly deceived to think the
Fathers speak of a figure or trope in Rhetoric, it is manifestly apparent they
speak of a figure in nature; that figure or shape, which accompanies natural
things, which in this mysterious Sacrament is made by the power of God to
accompany another substance. So that here the appearance of natural bread is no
more the figure of bread, as naturally it is, but the figure now of our Lords
blessed body, couched by the power of God under that appearance, which is
naturally the figure of wine and bread. And a figure of the body it could not
be, unless the substance of that body were really and truly there under that
figure or appearance; Figura non fuisset, nisi veritatis esset corpus.

But in Peter Lumbards time, Transubstantiation was so far from being an
article of Catholic faith, that they did not know whether it were true or no,
as appears by the same author in his 4. book and eleventh distinction: so that
it made haste to pass in the Lateran Council for faith, which about fifty years
before, in Lumbards time, was but a new disputable opinion. Your Disswader had
done wisely, if he had produced for himself, as frequently he does, only some
obscure authors, which seldom fall into men's hands. But Peter Lumbard the
master of sentences, is an author so known by all, and in every man's hand,
that your Disswader, had he not utterly abandoned both honesty and reason too,
had never mentioned him. For this great master from his eight to the fourteen
distinction of his fourth book, does with all solidity and art, so declare and
confirm the real presence in this Sacrament of the Altar, and the conversion of
the elements by Gods powerful word into the very substance of our Lords body,
as a great article of ancient Christian faith, that nothing can be said either
more solidly, or with more earnest resolution. But, Quem Deus vult perdere,
dementat. After your Disswader had wilfully thrown away his honesty, God in his
just judgment so darkened his reason, that he could not so much as heed what he
said. There I say that learned Catholic Doctor does industriously and in a
copious manner in thirty whole pages together according to the edition I have
by me, printed at Colen, both declare and establish that Catholic Christianity
of the real presence, and transmutation of the elements into Christ's sacred
body, answering and clearing many things which heretics and pagan philosophers
might object against it. And your Disswader takes hold of one of the
philosophical objections, which the great master presently solves, for an
argument of the masters own doubting; although he could not but see him assert,
declare and establish the contrary, the real presence I mean, and miraculous
mutation of the elements into the substance of our Lords flesh and blood, in
all that his copious and learned discourse, both before and after that
objection. O unhappy Kingdom of ours, by these lying falls teachers so woefully
misled. This one only passage, which any one that has but a mediocrity of
learning may see with his own eyes, may suffice to show what a man your
Disswader is, and how little to be credited. But whom God will overthrow for
his grand misdemeanors, him he in his justice blinds. I could find in my
heart to give here an abridgment of all that great masters discourse concerning
this Sacrament of the altar, as he there calls it. But it is somewhat besides my
way, and I have already been too long. Qui legit intelligat.

The great weight and importance of this business has made me speak something
more of it, than I shall of other things. That I may therefore here recapitulate
in brief, what I have hitherto said to manifest your Disswaders insignificancy,
and to speak plainly, his impertinency in this point: First he is faulty, in
that he never declares this business of Transubstantiation, what it is, or what
it means in the belief and judgment of that Roman Church he opposes: Secondly,
that he makes all the Popish Doctors which he mentions concerning it, to speak
against it, and to disown it, whatever he meant by it, and not any one of them
to speak for it, or profes it. And how then is it Popish or Popery. Thirdly,
that he says in the beginning of his section, that the piece of Popery he here
writes against was first determined in the Council of Lateran, and yet but two
pages after, forgetting himself, he says, that the opinion was not determined
in the Lateran, as it is now held in Rome: and yet never expresses how it is
now held in Rome, or what that is which is now held in Rome contrary to the
Council, or by whom, or in what manner. Fourthly, because the business of the
real Presence, which Protestants love to call Transubstantiation, that they may
play with that fine long gingling word, as children with a rattle, is not
touched at all by him.
And yet that is all the substance of Popery in this point: which, that
Berengarius the heretic, together with his associates might fully acknowledge
without any slight of the manifold evasions used by him, this word was invented
by the Prelates of the Council, as was Consubstantiation by those of Nice, for
a firmer establishment of Catholic Tradition, and ancient truth. So that your
Disswader here touches but the lid and rind, not the heart and substance of
Popery, which he is afraid indeed to deal with. And being weak in sense, he
plays with words.

. 6. Which is against Popish Communion.

Says, that the half-communion is another Innovation in Popery, swerving from
the Apostles practice, and Chirsts Institution: as appears in the Popish
Council of Constance, where it is decreed, though Christ instituted, and
primitive Christians received in both kinds, yet that no Priest under pain of
Excommunication should communicate the people under both kinds, which is a bold
affront to Christ himself: although even their own Cassander and Aquinas teach,
that to be the ancient custom of the Church, and Paschasius resolves it
dogmatically, that the one is not to be communicated without the other.

This business, Sir, is more amply discussed and cleared in my Fiat Lux, which
you have by you. If you do but read that, I shall have here less to say. But
know Sir, that this business touches not any unalterable dogme of faith, but an
alterable use and practice, as shall be declared by and by: and therefore is it
not to be called Popery, upon that account. And a change in such things is so
far from blame, that it is oftentimes necessary; so long as the substance of
Religion is preserved entire, as here it is. Christians are to fast after the
departure of the Espouse: and set times therefore to be appointed, that such a
good work be not in the Church of God utterly neglected: yet the days and
times are some of them for urgent reasons altered. They did fast on Wednesdayes
and not Saturdayes in many places; now on Saturdayes not Wednesdayes.
Christians did stand at their Liturgy all Paschall time; now they kneel. Little
children were in old time communicated after Baptism in many places of the
Catholic world; now no where. Absolution is now given upon an humble confession
and a promis either expressed or tacit of performing the due penance; but it
could not be in ancient times obtained, till the penance was fulfilled.
Priests may be consecrated now at twenty five years old, in former times not
till thirty. Many holy days were then kept, which now cannot: Many now, which
could not then. Communion was oftener in some ages, than it is now. There is a
reason for all these changes of discipline and custom. But the substance of
Religion remains ever the same, about Fasts, Liturgy, Baptism, Penance,
Confession, Priesthood, Feasts, Communion, and such like things, though some
circumstance may change. So concerning this point of the Eucharist the
substance of Religion is, that in memory of our blessed Lords Passion, a
benediction or consecration of bread and wine be made in the Church of God by
his Priests for ever, until our Lords second coming: to the end that the Church
his spouse may ever have his body with her to feed upon. This I say is the
substance of religion in this point. But some circumstances, such as may, will
change. For example, Priests rarely celebrated in some times of the Church, but
yet when any Mass or Messach was kept by any one of them, all the other Priests
and Clergymen that were near would assuredly be present at it, and hear and
pray, and meditate with other people in most humble and fervent manner, as
became all good Christians to do: but now in this last age they go generally
every one to the Altar daily. Which custom is the better, I will not here
determine. But I am sure, that great S. Francis commanded all his children to
hear Mass once a day both Priests and others; but forbad those that were
Priests every day to celebrate; and I think he had the Spirit of God in him. In
old times all Christian Priests had their head covered at the Altar with an
Amictus or amice of pure linen, now they generally let it fall into their
neck, and their heads are utterly bare. And time will come, that they will put
it upon their heads again. So likewise for good and just reasons, were catholic
people in some times and places communicated in the one kind, and some time in
the other, and some time and place in both. But they were never debard
Communion; nor was ever the Sacrifice of the Altar stopped. Nor is it so
indifferent a circumstance to consecrate or celebrate in one kind, as it is in
one kind to communicate. For Communion respects the thing contained, the body
and blood of Christ, which was ever believed to be equally present in either
kind. But the sacrifice or consecration in one kind would not figure our Lords
death and passion, and the effusion of his blood, as it ought to do. But this
great Christian work of sacrificing, which is essential Religion, and the very
characteristical badg of Christianity, because our Protestant Reformers cast it
off, they talk ever since, only of Communion of lay people, as though the
sacred benediction, or consecration and oblation, which indeed is the Christian
sacrifice according to the rite and figure of Melchisedek, recounted, admired,
and worshipped by all primitive Christians, were instituted only for that end.
Whereas indeed Christ our Lords institution touches immediately the figuration
only of his death and passion, which is completly don in the sacrifice
consummated by the Priest; although the peoples communion, unto whose comfort
and benefit all that work of consecration is exercised in the Church, ought to
follow by sequel, when it is necessary or expedient.

Now the ancient primitive Church so firmly believed, that the blessed body and
blood, and whole humanity and divinity of Christ, were so present to those
sacred symbols after the benediction or consecration of them by their Priests
in Christ's name and virtue, tho it be unconceivable and wholly ineffable unto
us: that if a man with an indifferent and unprejudiced eye will but look back
upon antiquity, he may plainly see, that in all ages it was indifferent to
Christians, though not to consecrate, yet to communicate either in one kind or
both. For the younger people, and such as were sick, were generally
communicated only in the liquid kind; and others, though some also received in
both when solemn Communion was made, yet that in the very primitive times, they
thought it all one to receiv either in both or one, S. Cyprian, S. Basil, and
Tertullian, very ancient Priests and Fathers do abundantly witness. For
Tertullian in his book de oratione, describing the Christian ways of old,
Vsque adeo accepto corpore, says he, stationem liceret solvere: that is, when
they had communicated the body of their Lord, no mention made of the chalice,
they brake up their station, and had their Ite missa est, to be gone; as it is
now even at this day among Catholics. And as for S. Basil, he in his epistle to
Caesarea Patricia, tells at large how Christians in those days communicated
four times a week and oftener, if a Martyrs feast chanced to fall in the week:
and how, that if persecution happened so violent, that a Priest could not be
had to give the people Communion, they were forced with their own hands to
touch that sacred body, which was consecrated and kept in ciborium's, boxes or
pixis for them. And this the peoples irreverence of touching the sacred body,
good S. Basil labors to excuse, both by the urgency of their devotion and
need; and also by the example of the Hermits, who leading a monastical life,
for want of Priests at that time among them, kept the sacred Communion in their
cells, and received it with their own hands, touching it, contrary to the
general custom, when devotion and piety required: as also by that of the
Christians in Alexandria, and Egypt, who in such times of persecution and
danger, would have the sacred Communion at home in their own houses, lest upon
any necessity they should chance to dye without it: and lastly by the very
custom of Priests in the Church, who then so delivered the host to
communicants, that when it was put by the Priests into their mouths, they
touched some part of it, who received it, with their own hands. All this S.
Basil there discourses more at large: which agree well to the consecrated
bread, thus touched by the people in time of necessity, thus put into their
mouths by the help of the Priests and their own hands, thus kept at home in
times of persecution, thus reserved in pixes or little arks, but not at all to
the chalice And all those devout Christians, thought themselves sufficiently
communicated in one kind, who understood Christianity as well surely, as we do
now abov a thousand years after them. St. Cyprian likewise in his book de
lapsis, has much to the same purpos, giving us also to understand by his
testimony, that those ancient Christians for fear of death, and the grievances
of persecution, had usually the Sacrament kept by them in a Repository or Ark
in their houses, which with all devout reverence when they were necessitated to
it, they put with their own hands into their mouths, and participated on such
like occasion, although by general custom it used to be put into their mouths
by the hands of Priests. And he relates amongst other things a frightful story
of a certain woman, who for fear or other weakness had complied to the idol
sacrifices: and when she came home, to repent and humble her self in her
Oratory, and by holy communion both to expiate that her transgression, and
strengthen her against the like temptation, as soon as she had opened her
Ciborium or Pixis, wherein the body of her Lord and Redeemer was kept, a
terrible flash of fire issuing thence upon her, did so affright her, that she
durst not touch it. Quandam, says he, mulierem sacrificiis idolorum
contaminatam, cum Repositorium seu Arcam suam, in qua sanctum Domini posuerat,
manibus pollutis tentasset aperire, ignis efflans eam terruit, nec tangere erat
ausa. This and much more might be brought to witness, that primitive Christians
thought themselves completly communicated in one kind, and this very kind that
is now in use amongst Catholics. But I must come to your Doctor.

Half-Communion, says he, is another Popish novelty, whereby they deprive the
people of Christ's blood, Sir, if they eat in memory that Christ died for them,
which they do, and which in all Protestancy makes a perfect communion, how are
they deprived of his blood Can they beleev his death and passion without faith
of his blood shed for them? But they ought to have wine as well as bread. So
they have: as much as the Disswader and his Church allows their people, whereby
they may feed upon Christ, who shed his blood for us, in their heart by faith
with thanksgiving; and which as your Disswader here speaks, may make Christ's
body and blood present to them by sacramental consequence. And how is it then a
half-communion? O but the wine is not the blood of Christ. Not carnally as your
Disswader speaks of his Sacrament, but it is so by sacramental conseqence. It
is as much then as yours the blood of Christ. And how is it then a
half-communion, and yours a whole one? O but their bread is believed to be the
body of Christ. So it is: but yours is not. And therefore if theirs be but a
half-communion, yours is none at all. But how good Doctor Disswasive is
half-communion either new Popery, or old Popery, or any Popery at all? Roman
Catholics or Papists use no such word: nor do they own any such thing as
Half-Communion. They beleev and call it a whole Communion. Is it lawful for you
to forge a Popery of your own, and then put it upon them, who neither in
thought, word, or any of their writings profess any such thing. But is not
Communion in one kind all one with Half-Communion? No, Sir, it is not all one.
It differs as much as half and whole. And that I think is something. It is a
whole Communion Sir, both in the tenor of their belief, and according to that
of yours. And why then should you call it a half-communion? According to
theirs, whole Christ is equally present under either of those figures or
appearances: and therefore according to their faith it is a whole Communion. And
according to yours it is no less. When you your selves give the bread to your
people, and say, Take this in remembrance that Christ died for thee, and feed
upon him in thy heart by faith with thanksgiving, you do not intend I suppose,
nor do the people mean to feed only upon one half of him. Why then would your
Disswader injuriously misname that a half-communion, which in all opinions is a
whole one. Neither Catholics nor Protestants feed upon the signs but thing
signified. This difference too there is, that Catholics have all the mystery of
the passion represented to them in their sacrifice, and the presence of the
whole Lord in their Communion. But Protestants have no such thing: although the
mystery be preached to them. And therefore is the Catholic not a half but whole
Communion; and that of the Protestants may well be doubted, whether it be any
Communion at all, though it be a whole Sermon. For how can any one discern the
Lords body there, where in reality it is not? If your Disswader had a candor
becoming a gentleman, he would neither falsify the ways, nor misname the
practice of any Religion. But be it as it is. Since Papists, as he will have
them called, have equally used the Communion in the liquid kind alone, as this
in only the other, why should he call one of them more than the other by the
name of Popery. And why is not Communion in both kinds, which he acknowledges
to have been more in use amongst them, and proves it by the testimony of their
own popish doctors, be rather Popery than either of the other. O but this
half-communion began but in the Council of Constance. I have sufficiently shown
you, Sir, that the custom was in the world, before the City of Constance knew
what Christianity were.

And even this Council of Constance is perverted by the Disswader too: as if he
had sworn to act nothing sincerely. That business in the Council was thus.
Petrus Dresdensis, and other associates of Huz, had taught publicly, and with
much scandal, that the Eucharist is necessarily to be given to lay people after
supper, and in both kinds. This doctrine and practice of theirs was censured by
the Council, which at one and the same time declared those two circumstances of
communicating in both kinds and after supper, not to be of necessary
obligation, because the Canons and approved ancient custom of the Church, had
never looked upon those two circumstances, as of necessity to be observed. But
what does your Disswader here? First he sets down the Councels resolution in
direct opposition to Christ. Whereas Christ instituted, etc. yet we command
contrary, etc. as though the Council had absolutely annulled Christ's
institution: which notwithstanding they acknowledge and allow for good: and only
declare the two said circumstances in that institution of our Lord, not to be
of that necessity as the substance of the institution it self, giving for their
reason for it, which your Disswader thinks not good to take notice of, that the
Canons and ancient custom of the Church had sufficiently made manifest, that
those two circumstances of communicating at night and in both kinds were not
necessary, by allowing the contrary practice in primitive times. Secondly,
whereas the Council joined both the circumstances together, namely of
communicacating in both kinds and after supper, he quite leaves out that of
receiving after supper: because it would as much have inferred the Protestant
practice to be against Christ's institution as the Popish is: and so his talk
would either have been of no value, or against himself. Thirdly, whereas the
Council declared only against the opinion which those Heretics had of the
necessity of those two circumstances, and corresponding practice, he makes them
to condemn not their necessity, but the circumstances themselves, which the
Council never thought of. Fourthly, he delivers that Councels declaration
against those circumstances, as if it had been a dogme of faith, and
consequently Popery or Catholic Religion, whereas it was delivered in order to
the circumstances themselves but as a temporal law and decree, though in order
to the necessity of those circumstances it be a constant Catholic truth. And
therefore the Council of Basil, which a little after determined the same doctrine,
namely that Priests are not bound to communicate the people in both kinds,
whereof they also give their reason, quia certa fide tenendum est, quod sub
specie panis non tantum caro, and sub specie vini non sanguis tantum, sed sub
qualibet specie Christus totus continetur, sess. 30; yet they allowed the
Bohemians and Moravians, who desiring to submit to the Catholic Church, and yet
in their weakness could not comply with that custom, to be communicated in both
kinds. These four are shifts of much insincerity, but I must bear with him. His
other authorities against this Catholic custom now generally in use, may be
easily understood by what I have hitherto spoken what they mean. But that of
Paschasius I cannot but give you notice of it. For Paschasius speaking of one
certain ceremony in the Priests celebration of Mass, wherein he drops a piece of
the host into the consecrated chalice. Very rightly, says he, is the flesh
sociated with the blood, because neither the flesh without the blood, etc. And a
little after, Therefore, says he, they are well put together in the chalice,
because from one cup of Christ's Passion, etc. From those words, which speak only
the Priest's action in the sacrifice of Mass, your Protestant Disswader would
prove his communion of people in both kinds, of which Paschasius neither spoke
nor thought. Is he not hard put to it think you? or is he ignorant rather of
what he speaks. But he is gone to his next section, and I must follow him.

. 7. Which is against Service in an unknown Tongue.

Says, that the Roman Church offends no less in another of their Novelties, of
using an unknown tongue in their Service; which use can no more be reconciled
with Saint Paul's fourteenth chapter to the Corinthians, than adultery with the
seventh Commandment: and Origin, Ambrose, Basil, Chrysostom, Austin, Aquinas
also and Lyra speak all against it: no less also the Civil and Canon Law.
Indeed what profit can he receiv, who hears a sound and understands it not: a
dumb Priest would serve as well: for God understands his thoughts. The popish
people that pray in their churches they know not what, can have no affection,
because they have no understanding of their own prayers. Therefore let every
tongue prais the Lord.

Here the Disswader, that he may the better express the confusion and darkness
that is in this popish custom, which he means here to speak against, uses a
confused and dark speech of his own, and confutes it rather by emblem than
reason. His reader no doubt will imagine, or else the Disswader fails of his end,
that Roman Catholics do not understand their own prayers in the Church; that
God is not praised by them in every tongue; that they are not at all edified by
their Liturgy or Mass; that they join not their desires, nor understand what
they say or ask of God; that their heart says nothing nor asks for nothing,
and therefore receivs nothing; that they understand not in particular, what they
should desire or beg of God; that their own souls have not any benefit by their
prayers; and that the Church will not suffer them to be brought out of their
intolerable ignorance. All these things are jumblingly said and asserted in
this his section against the Roman liturgy, and must as he hopes be believed by
his reader. But there is not a Roman catholic in the world, however ignorant and
simple he be, but will be ready to tell your Disswader to his face, that there
is not of all this, any one word of it true. But he imagines that Roman
Catholics come to Church like Protestants, there standing or sitting, and
looking upon one another, till a black-coat comes to read some prayers in their
ears. But in this he is grossly mistaken, as all Catholics know, though others
do not. They have their obsecrations, their meditations, their postulations,
their psalms, their ejaculations, which humbly upon their knees they pour forth
to their Redeemer, both while their priest is with them at the altar; and
before, and after too. Nor is there a blesseder sight to be seen on earth, than
devout Catholics in a Church; whereas others stand or sit, gazing about, till
the Parson comes to make use of their ears, neither heart, nor lip, nor hand,
nor knee, nor breast being to them of any use. And this every one would
understand as well as I, if he understood Catholic customs and religion as I
do. Nor does the Priest come to the altar to teach the people what they should
say, but to pray and make an atonement for them. And in his confession,
entrance, hymn of glory to God on high, prayer, epistle and gospel, and his
whole work of consecration and offering, they go along with him in their
meditations, humiliations and requests, understanding all the whole matter and
business of that heavenly devotion, though they hear not his particular words,
which it would be all one to them, whether they were in latin or in the mother
tongue. I know alas, I speak but in vain, to such as are brought up in another
way, and by fallacious slights of ministers are lead into a misconceit of the
ancient religion of this Land; which till they see it again, they can hardly
ever rightly understand. Prejudice is a lettance almost unremovable. And it
concerns ministers, that such a prejudice should be continually rivetted into
peoples minds, who must either be deceived, or ministers undone. But he that
sees Catholic people at their devotions, and Protestants at theirs, would, if
he be any ways disinterested, conclude with himself, that Catholic people serve
God in earnest, Protestants but in jest.

Truth is, the Catholic Liturgy is only a representation of Christ's death and
passion, which our Lord appointed should be exhibited to the eyes of his
believers, so long as the world shall last: that coming still together, they
may worship there their crucified Lord, and pour forth in him all their
requests, every one according to their several necessities. So that the priest
and peoples great work is soon ended; the consecration, lifting up the host and
chalice, and adoration, being all accomplished in half a quarter of an hour:
and in some Churches, that especially of Ethiopia, in yet lesser time. And all
the prayers and meditations, and what other things the Priest either speaks
with his lips or heart besides, are only to dispose himself, before and after
that great work. And in all times have Christian people ever made it their
special care, to furnish themselves with such meditations and affections, as
that their solemn work of adoration requires. I find in my heart here to set
down the way I have been taught to hear Mass, and which I practice my self.
Such an ocular pattern would I am sure give more satisfaction to my countrymen,
than any general words I can speak concerning it. But I shall have some better
place for that hereafter.

The testimony of authorities which your Disswader brings against this Roman
custom of one and the same language all over the world, which he calls an
unknown tongue, either speak nothing at all to that business, or say nothing but
what Papists say themselves; and many of them by his usual trick either of
total falsity, or partial depravation, are made by your Disswader to speak
against a custom, which they never so much as dreamed to impugn. If Origin say,
that the Grecians in their prayers use Greek, and the Romans the Roman
language, etc. so say all Papists too. The Maronites with some others use the
Hebrew Liturgy, Grecians the Greek, and Western Christians the Roman; and so
every one in his own tongue, that is proper to that part of the Church whereof
he is a member, prays and praises God. And yet it was never thought
necessary that any people in the Christian world should have their Liturgy in
their mother tongue. Again, if St. Ambrose say, when people meet for
edification in the Church, things ought to be spoken which hearers understand:
so say, and so do Papists also. For all their Sermons, which are made for
edification, are ever in the mother tongue, or vulgar language of the Country;
and in so plain a manner they either are or should be uttered, that hearers may
understand and edify thereby. But the Christian sacrifice is offered up to
God, not for the peoples edification or instruction, but for their
reconciliation and peace. Likewise if S. Jerome and Ulphilas translated the
Bible: so has it been translated by several other Priests since their time, I
beleev into all languages of the world, and is continually read and expounded
in Catholic Countries, now one mystery of it, then another, unto peoples
constant edification. But this infers not that it ever was or ought to be read
in the Churches, one chapter after another, instead of their Liturgy. No such
thing did antiquity ever hear of. If the civil law of Justinian ordain all
bishops and Priests to celebrate the sacred oblation not in a low voice, but
with a loud clear voice, which may be heard by people: so do Roman Priests at
this day act all according to that Canon. But how came the first reforming
Protestants to leave off the name of Priests, but only because they had no such
sacred oblation, which was abolished by them, any longer now to make. Again, if
there issued from Pope Innocent the third, a precept or decree in the Council
of Lateran, that in the same city, as your Disswader here speaks, thinking it I
beleev to be some City called Lateran, where people had then met together from
several parts of the world, service should be celebrated according to the
diversity of ceremonies and languages; no doubt but that precept or decree was
then observed throughout all the City of Rome, where that Council was kept. And
the Maronites with their adherents, had the sacred Liturgy in Chaldee or
Hebrew, the Grecians in Greek, others in Latin, with such variety of ceremonies
therein, as was used in these several nations, though they acted the same thing
in substance. So that such as came from Syria, Egypt, or Greece, were not bound
to be present at the Latin Liturgy, although they were then in Rome; nor yet
the Romans to the Hebrew or Greek Mass. And if any were met there from our
English Sarum Church, they might use their Sarum Missal, and not that of the
Roman Dioces, although it might have shorter, or perhaps longer graduals, more
or fewer meditations, or differing evangiles, or a longer solemnity of
consecration. This difference is still in the world amongst Roman Catholics at
this day, and ever was and will be, althoug the whole substance of their
Messach or Liturgy be every where the same. And for this reason a Dominican
Friar, now deceased, coming over some years ago into England, because he began
his Mass with Confitemini Domino, after the manner of the Dominicans, and not
with the usual psalm, Judica me Deus, although they had patience with him till
he had ended, yet the women that were present at it, got together afterward,
and in their indiscreet zeal fell upon him, and beat him for a counterfeit. And
if the Council be of any force here, (otherwise why is it brought) then are
Catholics according to that Council to celebrate in the very same city here
with Protestants without control, though they use diversity of ceremonies and
languages. All these authorities then, make nothing against this piece of
Popery, but rather confirm it. And the glosses which your Disswader makes upon
them, and all his insulting invectives, are but the froth of his own evil will.

When your Disswader tells us further, that Basil, Chrysostom, Ambrose,
Austin, Aquinas and Lyra speak against Service in an unknown tongue, as unapt
to edify; the aforenamed Catholic Gentlemen, who have endeavored with all
care to search the Libraries for a trial of your Disswaders honesty, have found
in some of those Fathers no such book as your Disswader cites, and in none of
them any such words. Which I am apt to beleev, not only by reason of the
industrious sincerity of the said Gentlemen, and palpable insincerity of this
Disswader, but for other special reasons drawn from the authors themselves. For
St. Basil and St. Chrysostom, St. Austin and St. Ambrose, the two first were
Greek Priests that used a Greek Liturgy of their own, one of them an Archbishop
or Patriarch, the other a monk; the two last, S. Ambrose a Priest and Bishop of
Millain in Italy, S. Austin the like in Africa, and founder of the Augustine
Canons regulars, and Hermits, used a Latin one: both which differed even in
their times from the vulgar language of their respective places. And Aquinas
and Lyra are manifestly known to be later popish Priests and Friars, using one
and the same Latin Liturgy, differing from the languages of England and Spain.
As also because it is unlikely, they would use this Disswaders reason, because
such unknown tongues in the liturgy would not edify. For though edification in
a large sense may well agree with the Mass or Liturgy; in that, it excites holy
and heavenly affections; yet in its proper sense it is the effect of sermons
and good preachers, edifying the people by their holy lives and wholesome
doctrine, unto an emulation and care of observing what those people see and hear
so frequently taught and practiced by their pious preachers.

Those words of S. Chrysostom, If one speak in an unknown tongue, he is a
barbarian to himself and others, are absolutely true. For so, if an
Ambassador, or any other here in England, should chatter words which neither
himself nor others understand, he would be a barbarian both to others and to
himself too. But when your Disswader says, that S. Chrysostom spoke so, in
order to a form of prayer, and urging the Apostles precept for it, he wrongs
him wretchedly. For he does it not; nor can such a saying have any place in
such a business. For the priest speaks not in his liturgy to the people, as your
Disswader simply imagines, but to God, where both speaker and hearer
understand. But the testimony of Lyra who is made to say, that in the primitive
Church all things were done in a vulgar language, is falsified in the very
substance. For he says not omnia all things, but communia common things, some
parts in Baptism, where the godfather or godmother makes a profession of faith;
something in churchings of women, benedictions, marriages, and such like, as is
yet in use amongst Papists at this day, were so done. So that all the contents
of this section, the testimonies your Disswader brings against this Catholic
custom, and your Disswaders own insultings, which I set down in the beginning,
together with his glosses upon those testimonies, are either absolutely falls or
totally impertinent, and in one word unconscionably slanderous.

But it is as possibly, says he, to reconcile adultery with the seventh
Commandment, as Church service in a language not understood, to the fourteenth
chapter of the first epistle to the Corinthians. And is it so? Let us look then
into that strange fourteenth Chapter; and see what it says.

1. Follow after charity, and desire spiritual gists, but rather that you may
prophecy. 2. For he that speaks in an unknown tongue, speaks not unto men,
but unto God, for no man understands him: however in the spirit he speaks
mysteries. 3. But he that prophesies, speaks unto men to edification,
exhortation, and comfort. 4. He that speaks in an unknown tongue edifieth
himself: but he that prophesies edifieth the Church. 5. I would that you all
spoke with tongues, but rather that ye prophesied: for greater is he that
prophesies than he that speaks with tongues, except he interpret that the
Church may receive edifying. 6. Now brethren if I come unto you speaking with
tongues, what shall I profit you except I shall speak to you either by
revelation or by knowledge, or by prophesying or by doctrine. 7. And even things
without life giving sound, whether pipe or harp, except they give a distinction
of the sound, how shall it be known what is piped or harped. 8. For if the
trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself for battle? 9. So
likewise you, except you utter by the tongue words easy to be understood, how
shall it be known what is spoken? for he shall speak unto the air. 10. There are
it may be so many kinds of voices in the world, and none of them are without
signification. 11. Therefore if I know not the meaning of the voice, I shall be
unto him that speaks a barbarian, and he that speaks shall be a barbarian
to me. 12. Even so ye forasmuch as ye are zealous of spiritual gifts, seek that
ye may excel to the edifying of the Church. 13. Wherefor let him that speaks
in an unknown tongue, pray that he may interpret. 14. For if I pray in an
unknown tongue, my spirit prays, but my understanding is unfruitful. 15. What
is it then? I will pray with the spirit, I will pray with the understanding
also. 16. Else when thou shall bless with the spirit, how shall he that
occupies the room of the unlearned, say Amen to thy giving of thanks, seeing
he understands not what thou say? 17. For thou verily give thanks well,
but the other is not edified. 18. I thank my God I speak with tongues more than
you all. 19. Yet in the Church I had rather speak five words with my
understanding, that by my voice I might teach others also, than ten thousand
words in an unknown tongue. 20. Brethren, be not children in understanding,
howbeit in malice be ye children, but in understanding men. 21. In the law it
is written, with men of other tongues and other lips will I speak unto this
people: and yet for all that, will they not hear me says the Lord. 22.
Wherefore tougues are for a sign not to them that beleev, but to them that
beleev not: but prophesying serves not to them that beleev not, but to them
who beleev. 23. If therefore the whole Church be come together in some place, and
all speak with tongues, and there come in those that are unlearned or
unbeleevers, will they not say that ye are mad? 24. But if all prophecy, and
there come in one that believes not, or one unlearned, he is convinced of all,
he is judged of all. 25. And thus are the secrets of his heart made manifest,
and so falling down on his face, he will worship God, and report that God is in
you of a truth. 26. How is it then brethren, when ye come together, every one
of you has a psalm, has a doctrine, has a tongue, has a revelation, has an
interpretation: let all things be done to edifying. 27. If any man speak in an
unknown tongue, let it be by two, or at the most by three, and that by course,
and let one interpret. 28. But if there be no interpreter, let him keep silence
in the Church, and let him speak to himself and to God. 29. Let the prophets
speak two or three, and let the other judge. 30. And if any thing be revealed to
another that sits by, let the first hold his peace. 31. For ye may all
prophecy one by one, that all may learn, and all may be comforted. 32. And the
spirit of the prophets are subject to the prophets. 33. For God is not the
author of confusion, but of peace, as in all Churches of the Saints I teach.
34. Let your women keep silence in the Churches, for it is not permitted to
them to speak, but they are to be under obedience, as also says the law. 35.
And if they will learn any thing, let them ask their husbands at home: for it
is a shame for a woman to speak in the Church. 36. What, came the word of God
out from you, or came it unto you only? 37. If any think himself a prophet or
spiritual, let him acknowledge that the things I write unto you are the
commandments of God the Lord. 38. But if any be ignorant, let him be ignorant.
39. Wherefore brethren covet to prophecy, and forbid not to speak with tongues.
40. Let all things be done decently and in order.
Thus runs this fourteenth Chapter in your own translation. And if it do
nothing at all concern Church Service, why should the Roman Liturgy be
reconciled to it, any more than adultery to the third commandment? Or what
disparagement is it to this service, that it cannot be reconciled to that law
which no way concerns it: If it do concern Church Service, then must all the
Common prayer and Service of our Protestant Church of England be abolished;
being as irreconcilable to this rule, as you say adultery is to the seventh
Commandment. Say which you please. If it concern not any Church Service, you
justify as to this account the custom of the Roman Church: if you say it do,
you condemn your own.

Truth is, the Spirit of our Lord magnified his primitive Church, when it began
to spread and appear in the world, with many particular graces; that the Jew
and Pagan might discern in it something extraordinary, and by that exterior
sign be induced to beleev that the founder of that Religion was no ordinary
person: as gift of miracles, tongues, and prophesies. The new converts of
Corinth seemed to be more pleased with the gift of tongues, than any other; and
when they met together, fell a gabling all at once, not two or three only, but
more, and perhaps the greatest part of them, all at one and the same time, as
the Apostle here intimates, v. 23. one for example in the Congo language; the
other that of Mexico, one Ethiopian, the other Arabian, one the Indian, another
the Slavonian: and none understood another, nor could well hear one another for
the confused noise, as we may gather by v. 2. and v. 11. and so became
barbarians to one another. This gift then and special grace of Gods Spirit,
though it might astonish a Pagan, that should look upon them, which was all
that holy Spirit intended by it; yet it could not edify him any further, or
move him, if he should be left to himself, to think otherwise of them, than
that they were a company of mad gabling distracted people; especially when he
considered that some of them seemed to exhort, some to sing, some to pray, and
all in a cluster at one and the same time, no man heeding the other, or
understanding a word he said, if he should. And this disdorder the Apostle here
labors to rectify in this whole fourteenth chapter. And it is manifest, that
the apostle here neither spoke nor thought of any Church Service either in one
language or other; but only of that temporal gift which is now past away long
ago with the people that had it. Nor can it prudently be applied to any
Church Service that I know in the world. For there is no such doing any where.
Much less can it relate to any custom of the Roman Church, where all the people
are devoutly praying to one and the same God, in quiet and silence, both in
spirit and understanding, heart and mind too; the priest knowing what himself
speaks or prays; and the people understanding both what he acts and does in
their behalf and his own, and what also they beg of God themselves, either with
words or without them. So that here is no kind of parity at all.

Nay, if neither the Priest did understand himself what he speaks, nor the
people what they pray, both which are absolutely falls, yet would the Apostle
allow even that, as a good custom, though not so perfect; so long as the words
contained piety, and the heart stood piously affected in pronouncing them. He
that speaks in an unknown tongue, says he v. 2. speaks not to men but to
God, and though man understand not, yet in spirit he speaks mysteries. And
again v. 4. he says, that such an one edifieth himself: and v. 14. he teaches,
that such a ones spirit prays, though his mind or understanding does not: and
v. 17. that he gives thanks well. With these of our learned Apostle your
Disswaders words throughout this his section, are I am sure absolutely
irreconcilable. For he says, such an one prays only with his lips, and not
in spirit; that there is neither affection nor edification in any such prayer;
and that the heart and spirit says nothing and asks for nothing, and so
receives nothing, which Solomon calls the sacrifice of foools; thus speaks your
Disswader quite contrary to Apostolical sobriety. And not that custom, I should
think, but your Disswaders invectives against it are irreconcilable with this
fourteenth chapter. Saint Paul says, that such a one prays in spirit; the
Disswader, that he prays only in his lips. Saint Paul, that he edifies
himself; the Disswader, that his soul has no benefit, and that there is neither
edification, nor affection, or any good by such prayers. Saint Paul, that he
prays well, and gives thanks well; the Disswader, that he does ill. But I need
not stand upon this now. There is no such thing in the use of the Roman
Liturgy, where priests and people pray both in spirit and mind too, both with
heart and understanding also.

Only let me tell you thus much, that St. Paul in one verse of this chapter
checks your Disswader and all his whole discourse in this section: Linguis loqui
nolite prohibere, says he v. 39. Do not forbid to speak with tongues. But your
Disswader forbids, and labors here might and main against it. Does the Apostle
speak here of Church Service, or not? If he do, then Church Service in an
unknown tongue is allowed: if he do not, then one of this chapter is against
Church Service in an unknown tongue. Surely your Disswader did never ponder
these things, as he ought. Nay, if this discourse of the Apostle concern
Church Service, so that your Disswader hence may rightly gather, that the
popish Mass in an unknown tongue is irreconcilable with it, I may upon the
same ground prove more strongly, that S. Paul would have the popish Mass in an
unknown tongue to be practiced; Volo omnes vos linguis loqui, says he v. 5. I
will that ye all speak with tongues; or I would that you all spoke with
tongues: which is according to your Disswaders meaning, I will have you all
turn Papists, or I would ye were all turned Papists.

But lastly, if this 14. chapter to the Corinthians be to be understood of
Church Service and Church-preaching and Church-praying, as this dissuading
Doctor would have it, then Sir must our Protestant pulpits and service-pews
all down; and the Quakers way must come up infallibly. For what says the text
here. Sive lingua quis loquitur, secundum duos aut ad multum tres, and per
parts; and unus inter pretetur: si autwm non fuerit interpres, taceat in
ecclesia, sibi autem loquatur and Deo. Prophetae autem duo and tres dicant, and
caeteri dijudicent. Quod si alii revelatum fuerit sedenti, prior taceat.
Potestis enim omnes per singulos prophet ari, ut omnes discant and omnes
exhortentur. Et spiritus prophet arum prophetis subjecti sunt. This is the
great result of this whole chapter: and the very utmost that the Quakers would
have; and what they practice daily in their meetings. If any speak in a tongue,
says the Apostle, let it be by two, or at most by three, and that by course;
and let one interpret. But if there be no interpreter, let him keep silence in
the Church, and speak to himself and God. Let the Prophets speak two or three,
and let the other judge; and if any thing be revealed to another that sits
by, let the first hold his peace; for ye may all prophecy one by one; that all
may learn, and all be exhorted or comforted. And the spirit of the prophets are
subject to Prophets. Let your Disswader now speak what he thinks; but speak it
openly, that the good Quaker may as well hear him as the Papist: and speak it
so effectually, that as far as in him lies, all the whole three Kingdoms may be
persuaded, that this chapter concerns the public Service of the Church. If
this were once done, I beleev there would not be ere long so much as one by
shop or minister left in the Land. And it were a less damage to your
Disswader, that adultery were reconciled to the seventh Commandment, than
Church Service to his fourteenth Chapter of Corinthians.

Why there is a language used in the Catholic liturgy, which though it be not
the tongue of any one Country, yet it is the most universally known language
of the whole Catholic family upon earth, is sufficiently discoursed in Fiat
Lux. I need not stand here to repeat it. I must go on.

. 8. Which is about Images.

Says, that Image Worship, wherein Papists give the same worship to the
pictures as is due to the thing represented, is another novelty, and that a
heathenish one too, brought in first by Simon Magus, and then the Gnostics,
against which writes Clemens Alexandrinus, and others: insomuch that S. Cyril
in the time of Emperor Julian, denies that Christians did worship the Cross,
and Epiphanius is said to have cut in pieces a cloth picture, wherein was the
image of Christ or some Saint. And therefore the decrees of the second Nicen
Synod which had approved images, was abrogated by another general Council at
Frankford; a little after which Council, the Emperor sent Claudius a godly
preacher to preach against Images in Italy. And well he might, for the Council
of Eliberis had long before that time declared against them. And all the
devices of Roman writers to palliate this crime are frivolous; for the pure
primitive times would not allow the making of Images, as witness Alexandrinus,
Tertullian, and Origin.

Here is much ado about a shadow. Whatsoever your Disswader could pick up, that
might sound but like his purpos, is here in a general mass heaped up together,
whether it do touch his purpos, or not at all concern it, or be happily against
himself. Theodoret, forsooth, S. Austin and Irenaeus, these must all testify,
that Simon Magus first brought images into the Church, whereof they have not any
one such word. The same fathers with Epiphanius must accuse the Gnostics and
Carpocratians for the same thing; whereas they only blame them for placing the
pictur of Jesus and S. Paul with Homer, Pythagoras, Plato, Aristotle, and other
Heathens. Clemens and Origin disown and write against heathens Idolatry. So
that all this concerns not our purpos. The two Councels of Eliberis and
Frankford are against him, and so is likewise S. Cyril who in the very place
cited object extreme ignorance to Julian the Apostate, who had cast the
Christians in the teeth with their worshipping a wooden Cross, which they would
not do to great Jupiter, and their painting the ima(...) foreheads, and before
their houses. And Saint Cyril tells Julian, that the Cross put Christians in
mind of the virtue and good which Christ their Lord had done and suffered for
them, which the good Doctor calls the precious and health-giving wood. And we
may see not only by S. Cyrils answer, but by the objections of the Apostate
Julian, what manner of Christians there were in those days, fourteen hundred
years ago.

The Council of Eliberis was kept in Spain, in the time of Emperor Galerius,
when many Christians by reason of the bitterness of perfecution, sacrificed
through fear unto the heathen gods, and much contumely was done all over the
world, and especially in Spain, both to Christians themselves, and the holy
Gospel, and all sacred things. Wherefore the Council laid heavy pennances on all
such Christians as should so apostatize either into heathensme, herefie, or the
notorious sin of adultery; and amongst other things, c. 36. ordained that no
sacred pictures should be painied upon the walls, because namely there they
stood fixed, and were liable to the contumely of pagans, whereas such as were in
frames and tables, might easily be removed and put into a safe place. That
Council of Eliberis, because they adjoyn not a reason unto their decree, may
easily be mistaken; although the one may be discerned in the other, by a
judicious and serious reader, Ne quod colitur adoratur, says the Council, in
pariotibus depingatur. For the picture properly speaking, terminates neither
respect nor contumely, but the thing represented by it, which if it be divine,
must not receiv contumely, if it can be helped, from wicked men.

But the Council of Frankford I cannot but wonder, why your Disswader should
cite it as an enemy to Images. Did not that Council consist of Catholic or
popish Prelates, 300. of them gathered together under the Legates of Pope
Adrian the first; in which also the Emperor Charles the Great, as stout a
Champion of the Roman Church as any ever was in the world, was actually
present. O but Eginard, Hincmar, Amonius, Blondus, and others testify that the
said Council of Frankford condemned the second Nicen Synod, wherein images were
established, calling it an Antichristian assembly. But how can this be thought
probable, nay I may say possible, of those two Councels? being so near one
another, that there were not above eight or nine years space between them, and
both of them under one and the same Pope Adrian the first. Can any beleev this,
though twenty Eginards should say it? But he is not found indeed to speak ought
of it. Hincmar says, that they of Frankford condemned the Synod assembled at
Nice without the Popes authority. But that Nicen Synod was both assembled and
confirmed by the authority of that very same Pope who called and ratified this
of Frankford. Blondus says, that they abrogated the seventh Synod, and the
Faelician heresy de tollendis imaginibus. And none of them say, that they of
Frankford called that Nicen Synod an Antichristian assembly, or that they
published any book to that purpos. What strange confidence then is this of your
Disswader, to talk thus at random, without book, and besides all rule, and
against truth.

The occasion of assembling this Council of Frankford were the misdemeanors of
Elipandus Bishop of Tolledo in Spain. For Faelix Urgelitanus his Countreyman
having consulted Elipandus concerning that scholastic difficulty, Whether
Christ as man ought to be called the natural, or only the adoptive Son of God,
by means of his discourse, and a book written by him upon that subject, believed
and said against the ancient language of the Church, that Christ was to be held
an adoptive child of God, and not his natural son. And these two, together with
Claudius Taurinensis, who came to them from Italy, filled all Spain with the
clamor. This act of theirs was fond as well as wicked. For though in the
schools it might happily be held, that Christ as man is not the natural but only
the adoptive Son of God, if that particle as, be taken for a note of
reduplication; yet they could not be igrant, that believers have nothing to do
with such nice logical points. These conceiv Christ altogether specifically, as
he is in himself. And so they had ever believed him to be the only begotten
natural Son of God, and we ^l so many as are made partakers of his gra^e ^opted
in him. And he that shall ^rea(...)st to be as man, only his adoptive Son,
whither that as of his be taken reduplica(...)ficatively, he make, but an ass
(...) and a knave to boot. But these three, though often admonished, yet would
they not desist. And therefore in a Council at Ratisbone, Faelix by name was
condemned, respect being then had to the person and dignity of the Archbishop
of Toledo, and the other Bishop. Faelix therefore was brought to the Emperor
Charles his Court, who then wintered at Rheginum; where after a while, he
humbly submitted to the Council, there then met together; and from thence sent
to the presence of Pope Adrian, in the Cathedral of S. Peter he publicly
acknowledged his error, and returned home to his own City. Elipand when he
heard of all this, grew more violent than before; and labored not only with
his whole endeavor to reclaim Faelix to his former error, but by letters
patent and large dated to all the Bishops of France and Germany, to draw those
two Kingdoms to his opinion. Whereupon Faelix returned again to his vomit. And
least the infection should spread any further, by the agreement of the Pope and
Charles the Emperor, a Council was called at Frankford. This was the very
business and occasion of that Council: whereby every one may discern himself not
only the improbability, that the said Council of Frankford, which purposely met
together to maintain the honor of Christ, should deface his figures; but the
falsity also of this your Disswader, who tells us, that a while after this
Council of Frankford, Ludovicus son to Charles the great, sent Claudius a
famous Orator to preach against images in Italy, p. 60. Whereas Claudius had
troubled Italy and Spain too, three or four years before that Council, nay
before the Council of Ratisbone, which was two years before, and his way was
condemned with himself both at Ratisbone and Frankford too.

These things being so, how in the name of God comes your Disswader here
against so much reason to aver, that the Council of Frankford declared against
images, that they condemned the second Nicen Synod, wherein the use of Images
had been maintained, that they published a book wherein that Synod was declared
Antichristian, and that Ludovicus Charlemains son sent down Claudius after that
Council to preach against Images in Italy. I know that other Protestants have
been guilty too of some part of this his story; so far at least as to say in
particular, that the Frankford Council was against images. But they never set
down any of that Councels declaration against them, nor is there any extant.
Binius, who set forth all the Councels at large, both shows and copiously
proves, that the acts of the second Nicen Council were all confirmed in the
Council of Frankford; which is also averred by Alanus, Surius, Vasquez, and
several other learned men. And since it is likely enough, that something was
done in this Council about Images, whereof there is so much talk in the world,
there can nothing be thought more rational, than that Pope Adrian, whose legates
presided in both the Councels, should according to the Churches custom send
those decrees of Nice about the same time lately finished, unto the Council now
at Frankford; that the definition of the Nicen Council might be made known to
all the West, by their acceptance and promulgation at Frankford. Which also
that it was absolutely done, and no other thing done but it, may sufficiently
be gathered by the authority of the Council of Senon, which in the 14. of their
decrees speaks thus: Carolus magnus Francorum rex Christianissimus in
Francofordiensi conventu, ejusdem error is Iconomachorum suppressit insaniam
quam infaelicissimus quidam Faelix in Gallias and Germani as invexerat. And the
same is ratified by Platina, who in the life of Pope Adrian, Biennio post,
says he, Theophylactus and Stephanus Episcopi insignes Adriani nomine
Francorum and Germanorum Synodum habuerunt, in qua and Synodus quam septimam
Graeci appellabant and haerests Faeliciana de tollendis imaginibus abrogata
est: as also by Paulus Emilius, who in his second book de gestis Francorum,
speaking of that Council of Frankford, Et imaginibus, says he, suus honor
restitutus est. The like may be proved out of Blondus in his Decads, Sabellicus
his Aeneads, Gablisards Chronology, Alanus his Dialogues, Nauclerus, etc. All
which various testimonies joined in one; together with the motives of that
Frankford Council; the great procurer and protector of that Council, Charles
the great, an eminent Champion of the Roman Church; the Presidents of that
Council, Theophylact and Stephen, legates of the same Pope Adrian, who had
lately finished and confirmed the second Council of Nice, may suffice, I should
think, to refute the trifling humor of this Disswader. But his confidence is
greater in his readers light belief, then either the weight or truth of his own
words.

But all the devices of Roman writers to palliate this their crime, he says,
are frivolous. What are these devices, and what is their crimes? Sir, where
there is no crime, there needs not any palliating devices. Is it a crime to
keep an image of Christ crucified for us, that we may be often put in mind of
the good and virtue of his holy passion, and our fancy assisted and kept in at
our prayers, within the compass of their object? This is the business Sir, speak
directly unto this, before you go any further. You will make all sorts of
profane Images, either to some civil use or indifferent, or perhaps a naughty
end. This is no crime with you. If it be, how comes it to pass, that never any
bishop or other minister in England, who scribble with such a stiff
impertinency against Popish Images, have never labored at all against these
Protestant pictures. O but Protestants do not worship these pictures. Do they
not? I would to God, that all good Catholics could so heartily love, imitate,
and worship those blessed persons represented in their portraictures, as
Protestants do theirs, who by such amorous faces in their curious dresses are
brought, I fear, too often on their knees. Motives to filthy iniquity, they may
stand; but representation of austerity, of contemplation, of martyrdom, of
divine ecstasies, of charity, of our Lord Jesus, and his Saints, these are
popish, these are antichristian, these are abominable. If the God of holiness
will not have any sacred figures to be made, surely he cannot allow lascivious,
profane, and light ones. But though he do not, our Ministers will. O but the
Papists give the same worship to the representation, and the thing represented.
This your Disswader may gather happily by his own experience. For the figure of a
King, a father, and a wife, if they do raise any affections or thoughts, these
must needs be so much differing, as the persons represented are. For the
shadow, figure, or representation if we would speak according to right
philosophy, neither does not can terminate any such respect, though it may its
own. For example, (that I may declare this my speech) put case I have three or
four Crucifixes before me, of a several make or form, and of a much differing
art. All these four figures have but one and the same representation, because
they represent but one and the same thing Christ Jesus our Lord crucified for
our reconciliation and redemption: and whatever good affection may arise in my
heart upon the sight and thought of it, must needs be the same to that
representation and thing represented: because it is terminated upon the thing
represented by means of the representation of it. And that is but one and the
same respect, though the figures be many. For the representation or figure can
terminate no such thought, although it be a means of directing it. But yet all
those four figures have respects of their own, which they bound and terminate
themselves; by reason, for example, of the excellency of their colors, the
material on which they are wrought, the exactness of art in limning every part
to the life, and the proportions of the whole in its due and full measure.
These and such like considerations are ended fully in the picture, without any
consideration had to its object represented. And they may be of such concerment
in the business, that a man may be moved to prefer one of those four pictures
before all the other three. This is that I mean Sir, when I say that a shadow,
figure or representation neither does nor can terminate any such respect as
results naturally upon the samplar or prototype, though it may its own. And
this is no sophistry of Aristotle, but mere natural and vulgar reason, common
to all mankind.

O but the Papists make their pictures their gods. I, this is the talk of black
ministers in the dark, to fools and children; while they sit warm in the Roman
Catholic Benefices which they have invaded, it behooves them to say, what ever
they can think against Popery, be it right, be it wrong, be it sense or
nonsense. All goes down by a people once inveigled. And if they be not still
kept warm in their mistake, the minister is lost. Good God, in what a world do
we live! I did my self beleev all this once. And I wondered, when I first saw
Roman Catholics to tear their pictures somtime^, and put them into the fire. It
is no such marvel, if Epiphanius should tear a Saints picture, which your
Disswader here tells us, although that story be not found in that epistle of
Epiphanius translated by St. Jerome, Roman Catholics do it ordinarily. For they
use picturs but as they do their prayer-books, and when they are so sullied and
worn they can use them no more, they are turned both into ashes, which is the
last end of picturs, books, and men. And the respect they give to pictures, is
but the very same kind, with what they give to the holy Gospels; save only that
the Gospel is looked on as the inside, and a Crucifix the outside of their
Redeemer; but both are still but shadows of him.

I could say more concerning this business, and make it appear both that
Christians have ever in all ages had images of their Lord and his Saints in
their houses and Churches, and how profitable and useful they are, and that
they are neither against the will of God, nor any right reason. And this I
could clearly prove out of S. Basil, Eusebius Caesariensis, S. Gregory
Nazianzen and Nyssen, S. Austin, Bid, Jo. Damascen, Athanasius, Ambrose,
Chrysostom. But I have here said enough, if I have enough demonstrated, as I
think I have, that your Disswader has said nothing.

. 9. Which is an appendage to the former.

Reprovs the picturing of God the Father and holy Trinity, which many of the
holy Fathers speak against, much to the blame of the Roman Church, which in
their Mass-books and Breviaries, Portuises and Manuals picture the holy Trinity
with three noses, and four eyes, and three faces in a knot.

Though the Catholic Christian Church has ever used and approved of the use of
Images, as well as spiritual books, yet they allow not of any abuse in either.
And Ordinaries, Bishops, Visitors, and Superiors in all places are to look to
that. So that in this his appendage, as he calls it, your Disswader acts but
the part of a good Visitour, to blame and mend that which is amiss; which must
continually be done, and continually is done all over the Catholic world, as
well in this, as other affairs. And if any Ordinary be negligent herein, he is
worthy of blame. But Sir, this is nothing of Popery or Catholic Religion; which
allows only in general the use of pious figures, to forward our thoughts and
desires to that eternal felicity above, which so many holy Virgins,
Confessors, Martyrs, Apostles, Monks, Hermits, and pious Princes, portrayed
all before our eyes, arrived unto, by their austerities, alms-deeds, purity,
fastings, disciplines, meditations, watchings, and patient sufferings, in love
and conformity to their holy Redeemer, who is the prince, and leader, and crown
of all those his glorious Saints, redeemed and sanctified by the virtue of his
precious blood and passion, out of the thraldom of Satan and this wicked world.
Nor has Catholic Religion ever descended unto the particular cirumstances of
these figures. This belongs to the care of Bishops and Ordinaries. Catholics
have generally no figures, but of such only, as once have lived amongst them in
their Church, either as head or members of it. Nor of many ages would bishops
permit the holy Trinity, especially God the Father to be pourtrayed at all. And
if now they suffer it, they have for it I make no doubt a sufficient reason;
especially since they heed not at all, however your Disswader imagines, any
natural similitude in any of their pictures. If they be so made, as to raise
the fancy to thoughts above, and the love and virtues that may bring us
thither, they care not whether, for example, Saint Bennet were a man just of
that complexion, or Christ their Redeemer of those direct features the limner
has given him. They come not into their Churches, nor do they cast their eyes
upon their pictures for any such end. And if God the Father be represented to
their eyes, as he is to their ears, when he is called Father, I see no harm in
it. If we may use such a form of words, when we speak to God, as this world we
live in may afford our ears, why may not the eyes have such an answerable form
too. But this is a business, which your Disswader, if he were a Catholic, might
well propound in the next general Council, and do otherwise in the mean time,
if so he please in his own Diocese. For neither books nor picturs can be used
in any Diocese, but what the Ordinary of the place allows. And the Bishop still
guides himself by the general doctrine and discipline, the faith and custom, the
tradition and laws of the Church in the whole mannagement of his care. And when
these do not clearly descend to any particular which he is to deal with, he
uses therein his own discretion, going that way, if he do well, that he finds
comes nearest to the rule, as temporal superiors also do in their affairs.

O but the Roman Church with much scandal, and against nature and the reason of
mankind in their mass-books and breviaries, portuises and manuels picture the
holy Trinity with three noses, and four eyes, and three faces in a knot. And do
they so? I have seen I think as many Catholic countries, and mass-books, and
breviaries, portuises, and manuels, as your Disswader ever did; and yet I never
saw any such picture therein all my life. He has been it seems an earnest pryer
into the front and faces of books. But did he not mistake, tro^ you? and take
some fortune-book, written in old letters, for a mass book? and thence
conclude, that all breviaries and mass-books, portuises and manuels were stored
with such ^gures. However it were, the picture was to blame. For three noses
and three faces ought to have more than four eyes. And if there were but four
eyes, I cannot see how there should be three whole faces, although there were
there three noses in it. But this is as good stuff, and as true, and as
pertinent too, as any other part of this his book, which he calls a Disswasive
from Popery.

. 10. Which is against Papal authority.

Says, that the Popes universal byshoprick is another novelty, though not so
ridiculous, yet as dangerous as any other. And a novelty it is; for Christ left
his Church in the hands of the Apostles, without any superiority of one above
another. And in the Council of Jerusalem, James and not Peter gave the decisive
sentence. Christ sent all his Apostles with the same whole power, as his Father
sent him. Therefore. S. Paul bid the bishops of Miletum feed the whole flock. And
well said S. Cyprian, that the Apostles were all the same that S. Peter was.
And this equality of power must descend to all bishops, who succeed the
Apostles in their ordinary power, as ambassadors for Christ. So then by the
law of Christ one bishop is not superior to another. Christ made no head of
bishops. Beyond the bishop is no step, till you rest in the great shepherd and
bishop of souls. Under him every bishop is supreme in spirituals, and in all
power which to any bishop is given by Christ. And that this was ever believed
in ancient times, is proved by Pope Eleutherius his epistle to the bishops of
France, by S. Ambrose, S. Cyprian, Pope Symmachus, S. Denyse, Ignace, Gelasius,
Jerome, Fulgentius, and even Pope Gregory the great. Wherefore S. Paul expressy
says, that Christ appointed in his Church first Apostles, but not S. Peter
first. Nor did Peter ever rule but by common council, as S. Chrysostom
witnesses. And it is even confessed by some of the Romish party, that the
succession is not tied to Rome, as Cusanus, Soto, Driedo, Canus and Segovius.
Nor was any thing known thereof in the primitive times, when the bishops of Asia
and Africa opposed Pope Victor and Pope Stephen; and all bishops treated with
the Roman bishop as with a brother not superior, and a whole general Council
gave to the bishop of C. P. equal right and pre-eminence with the bishop of
Rome. Finally, Christ gave no commandment to obey the bishop of Rome, and
probably never intended any such thing.

A man would surely think Sir, that this nail is knocked in to the head. What
could be said more? But to be brief with you. If all the other sections of this
your Disswasive have said nothing, this I may say speaks something wors than
nothing. For his reasons are senceles; his testimonies either impertinent or
manifestly against himself; and his whole discourse contrary to the laws and
constitutions of our English Protestant Church.

To begin with the last: whether you look upon the statutes and acts of
Parliament, whereby our English Church and government were first settled in
England upon the reformation in the days of Edward the sixth, and afterward
ratified: or the articles, canons, and constitutions that were agreed upon by
the bishops and clergy, and confirmed both by King Edward, Queen Elizabeth,
King James, and our good King Charles, we shall clearly see, that our English
Protestant Church and government is Monarchical; and that bishops are as much
subjected to their Arch bishops, as Ministers to Bishops; and Arch-byshops in
like manner to the King, in whom the Episcopal power is radical and inherent,
and in whom is the fullness of ecclesiastical authority, and from whom bishops
do receiv their place, authority, power, and jurisdiction. And that Parson,
Vicar, or other Doctor, who shall write or speak contrary to this; by the
constitutions and canons ecclesiastical made in the time of our late good King
Charles, he is to be suspended; and by the Canons and constitutions
ecclesiastical made and confirmed in the Reign of King James, he is
excommunicated ipso facto; and by the laws of Queen Elizabeth and King Edward
to be further punished. How comes it then that this your dissuading Doctor
utterly dissolves all this frame of government, under pretense of talking
against papal power, as contrary to the mind and will of Christ; which will and
mind is notwithstanding most resolutely asserted by the constitutions and laws
of this our very English Church and Kingdom, which rejected indeed the Roman
seat and person, but retained still the power and ordination of
Church Government; which finally rested, now no longer in any Roman bishop, but
in our own princely monarch. If any will but take the pains to look upon our
constitutions and statutes he will soon find all this to be most true. This
your Disswader in despite of all our laws to the contrary, will have the
government of Christ's Church not to be monarchical; but a pure aristocracy,
ruled by a company of bishops, standing like a company of trees, all in a row,
one by another, but no one between the other and heaven. An order he admits or
precedence, according as. I suppose as one begins to count or number them, but
no jurisdiction, no power, no authority, no superiority of any one over the
rest. One bishop, says he, is not superior to another, Christ made no head of
bishops. Beyond the bishop is no step, till you rest in the great shepherd and
bishop of souls. Under him every bishop is supreme in spirituals, and in all
power which to any bishop is given by Christ. But the laws of the land and
constitutions of our English Protestant Church, teach us on the contrary, that
one bishop is superior to another, and he therefore called an Arch-byshop; and
that according to Christ there is a head both of Bishops and and Arch-byshops:
so that there is one other step yet, before you rest in the great shepherd and
bishop of souls, even he who is under Christ supreme head and governor of his
Church in these his Majesty's realms of England, Scotland, and Ireland; and
that, under Chirst every bishop is not supreme in spirituals, or in all power;
mark, I say he is not supreme in all power, which to any bishop is given by
Christ.

The statutes and acts of parliament are in every man's hands to look into. But
the canons and ecclesiastical constitutions, because they are not so obvious, I
shall name one or two of them, to justify this my speech. In our canonical law
made in Kings Edwards days, there is an act tit. 189. De officio and
jurisdictione omnium judicum, which speaks thus. Si episcopus suerit negligens
in administranda justitia, pertinet ad ejus Archiepiscopum, ipsum compellere ad
jus dicendum; illique terminum praescribet, quem si non observaverit absque
legitimo impedimento, non modo censuris ecclesiasticis puniet, verum and in
astimationem justam litis damnabit. It is manifest by this canon, that every
bishop is not supreme; but that one is superior and head over the other; so
far, as to compel and punish him: which cannot justly be done, without authority
and power. There is another canon or law yet more full than this, tit. 92. De
ecclesia and ministris ejus, which speaks thus. Omnia quae de Episcopis
constituta sunt, ad se pertinere Archiepiscopi quoque agnoscant. Et praeter
illa, munus illorum est, in sua provincia episcopos collocare, cum a nobis,
says the King, electi fuerint. Vtque totius provinciae suae statum melius
intelligat Archiepiscopus, semel provinciam suam universam si possit ambibit
and visitabit. Et quoties contigerit aliquas vacare seeds episcopales,
episcoporum locos, non modo in visitatione, sed etiam in beneficiorum
collocatione, and omnibus aliis functionibus ecclesiasticis implebit. Quin and
ubi episcopi sunt, si eos animadvertat in suis muneribus curandis and
praesertim in corrigendis vitiis tardiores and negligentiores esse, quam in
gregis Domini praefectis ferri possit, primum illos pattern monebit. Quod si
monitione non profuerit, illi jus esto alios in eorum loco collocare.
Appellantium etiam ad se querelas causasque judicabit. Episcopi suae provinciae
si qua de re inter se contenderint aut litigarint, judex and finitor inter eos
esto Archiepiscopus. Ad haec audiet and judicabit accusationes contra episcopos
suae provinciae. Ac denique, si ullae contentiones aut lites inter episcopum
and archiepiscopum ortae fucrint, nostro judicio, says the King, who ratifies
these ecclesiastical canons, and puts them forth in his own name, cognoscentur
and definientur. Archiepiscopi quoque munus esto synodos provinciales nostro
jussu convocare. By this constitution or canon, one of those canons on which
our very English Protestant Church is founded, it manifestly appears, that an
Archbishop, or in plain English a prime bishop or chief bishop is not a name
only of order or decent precedence, as your Disswader here speaks, but of
dignity, authority, power, superiority, and jurisdiction over bishops. And he is
as much above them, as other ordinary bishops are above a Presbyter or
parochial minister. For in administering Sacraments, and preaching Gods word,
every minister is empowered as fully as any bishop: but the government of
ministers or presbyters within the Diocese, is proper only to one, who therefore
has the name and title of bishop, which signifies an Overseer of the rest. This
bishop admits of presbyters into a parish, and when any parish is vacant, he
sees that one be put in: if any be careless and negligent in the duty of his
parish, he first advises him like a father, and if he will not amend his
manners, he puts him out, and furnishes the place with a better pastor: he
judges the complaints between parishioners and parsons, or between parsons or
presbyters among themselves, and decides them: he visits and keeps chapter, or
should do at least, and finds and speaks, and punishes their faults. All these
things are contained in the office of a bishop; which therefore argue him to have
an authority, power, or jurisdiction over other Presbyters or pastors within
his Dioces: although he be a presbyter or pastor himself; and a chief one too,
that is to say, with a more ample and large authority, then any one of those who
be under him has given them, and therefore called a bishop or overseer by way of
eminence. And if all these things do, as needs they must, argue not only an
order or bare precedence, but a jurisdiction and power of a bishop over other
presbyters; then must they needs conclude the same power to be in one bishop
over another, in him namely, who by way of eminency is called the bishop or
archbishop, or prime bishop amongst the rest; who is as truly the bishop of
bishops, as these are overseers of presbyters. For this prime bishop is
declared by the abovesaid canon, to be enabled by virtue of his office, to have
all the power and charge that other bishops have; and then over and above that,
first to place the bishops elect, and seat them each one in their provinces;
then to go over and visit the whole province authoritatively, which none of the
bishops under him can do: thirdly to see vacant seats supplied: fourthly, if
such bishops as he shall find slow and negligent in their duty, after a
fatherly admonishment, mend not, to put others in their place: fifthly, to judge
the complaints and causes of such as appeal unto him from their own bishops:
sixthly, to decide the controversies that may happen between one bishop and
another: seventhly, to judge the accusations that are against any bishop:
lastly, to call synods, and there conclude and decide what may seem best for
the welfare and spiritual government of his province. Are these the works of
authority, power, and jurisdiction, yea or no? If they be not, how can any
authority or power be proved? For all power is proved by its act; or how in
particular may it appear, that bishops have any authority over their presbyters
or ministers? But if they be; then is there more than a precedence or order
amongst bishops: then did not Christ leav his Church in the hands of the
Apostles without any superiority of one above another, as this Disswader talks:
For the laws and consticutions of this our Church and Kingdom, do publikly
attest that this our English Church is settled according to the will of Christ,
by archbyshops and bishops, which is absolutely true; then also did not Christ
send all his apostles with the same whole power; then were not all the apostles
the same that Peter was; then did not an equality of power descend from the
apostles to all bishops; then is there a step beyond the ordinary bishop, nay
two steps, before you come to rest in the great shepherd and bishop of souls;
then, under Christ is not every bishop supreme in spirituals, nor yet in all
the power which to any bishop is given by Christ; all this I say is true,
whatsoever your Disswader talks against not only the Catholic Church and
government, which was here for above a thousand years together in England, but
against the very frame and constitution of his own Protestant Church, whereof he
is himself an unworthy member. But ministers when they begin to talk against
popery, they are so heedlesly earnest, that they knock out their own brains;
and either to get a benefice or honor in it, they destroy their own Church
that gives it them. I can no more wonder now, that such an one as Whitby, in
his book written against worthy Cressy, should say so peremptorily, that an
archbishop has no power or authority, and that his grace of Canterbury has no
jurisdiction, as he there talks, impar congressus Achilli; since a man of such
renown, as Doctor Tailor, should speak the same here, and give the
Presbyterians and other Sectaries in the Land, such a fair occasion and
president to undermine and overthrow that Church, which is but lately lift out
of the ruins of their hands. The same argument, that proves the bishop, an
ordinary bishop to be under none but immediately under Christ, will prove as
much for a single Presbyter or Presbyterian. And it is already done by the
subtle pen of John Bastwick, in his Apologeticus as praesules Anglicanos, which
book is so strongly written both against Popish and Protestant Prelacy too,
that upon the grounds on which all Protestants go, it can never be answered;
and upon the grounds Doctor Tailor here lays, it is all of it in a manner
confirmed and made good. What a strange madness is it for any one, that he may
seem to weaken another Church, to overthrow his own. Truth is, here is no tie
in England, that any one will be held with. The scriptur is in every man's bosom
to make what he will of it. Ancient canons, customs and councels they slight as
erroneous. Their own constitutions and statutes they do not so much as heed.
What can be expected from hence but eternal dissension and wars.

Nay the minister to get his orders and benefice, the bishop to enter into his
See, make a solemn protestation of obedience and subjection. When they have got
their ends, they wipe their mouths, and so far forget what they have done, that
they write and act presently, as if they had never thought any such thing. See
here the form of consecration of bishops prescribed and used by our English
Protestant Church. In the name of God. Amen. I N. chosen bishop of the Church
or See of N. do profess and promise all due reverence and obedience to the
archbishop and to the Metropolit an Church of N. and to their successors. So
help me God through Jesus Christ. Where reverence, subjection and obedience is
due on one side, there must needs be authority, power and jurisdiction on the
other. And that man, who has One set over him with such an authority under
Christ, cannot be immediately under Christ himself; and if he affirm he is so,
then ipso facto does he reject and rebel against that authority which in words
he acknowledged. This is Dr. Tailors case, who teaches here, that bishops are
successors of the Apostles; and that there was no superiority amongst the
Apostles; that by the law of Christ one bishop is not superior to another;
that Christ made no head of bishops; that beyond the bishop is no step, till
you rest in the great shepherd and bishop of souls, etc. What is this, but to
reject all obedience and loyalty, solemnly vowed and promised? and to rebel
against all the laws and constitutions of his own Church; and finally, which is
wors than all the rest, to give an example to disaffected ministers of doing
the like?

But how does he prove all this? very copiously both by reasons of his own, and
autorities of other men. Only the mishap is, those signify nothing at all for
him; these, very much against him. But what are his reasons? Bishops are the
Apostles successors, and there was no superior amongst the Apostles. Mr.
Bastwick and such as he will tell you, Sir, that priest, minister, and bishop
were but several synonomous words for one and the same thing upon diverse
respects: so that it is to be feared your Disswader has proved too much here,
and has spoken against himself; but if he has not proved too much, he has
proved nothing. I am sure there was a superiority amongst the Apostles, and
shall demonstrate it by and by, as well as I can. In the mean time, how prove
you there was none? Christ sent all his apostles with the same whole power, his
father sent him. Good Sir, our Lord says indeed, as my father sent me, so do I
send you; giving them a legal commission from him, as himself had from God his
eternal Father. But that he sent them every one with the same whole power, that
is, so to teach and govern, that they should be subject to no one amongst them,
these are your Disswaders words, cast in by fraud and fallacy, and no authority
evangelical; and therefore prove nothing. Nay if Christ had so sent his Apostles,
every one with the whole power of governing in himself, then had he changed his
fathers commission. For he was sent himself to be one head and governor; and
yet he had then constituted many. But how can you dream, good Doctor, that
Christ sent his apostles, each one with all his whole power he had received
from God, since the very chiefest of his power, which is to confer grace upon
the ministerial acts of his words and sacraments, can not be given to man. You
see how fondly as well as falsely you have foisted in these words, with all his
whole power. What follows next. S. Paul bid the bishops of Miletum feed the
whole flock. Pray Sir how many bishops were there, do you think, in that one, no
huge town of Miletum. Bastwick brings this for a proof, that bishops and
priests were all one thing in those days. And if it be otherwise, the times
are much changed. Then many bishops served one town; now many towns will hardly
serve one bishop. But you cut off the sentence Sir, that it may sound better
for your purpos, and, which is wors, change it too. The Apostle charges them to
attend to themselves and all the flock, wherein the holy Ghost has constituted
them overseers. Which last words because they limit both their care and your own
argument, you thought it prudence to leav them out. Pray Sir, would you have
any bishop to enter upon another Diocese? What then would you have here, when
you make S. Paul bid the pastors all of them to feed all the whole flock,
without any restriction? In all your heats remember still your self. Go on. The
equality of power must descend to all bishops, who are their successors. I can
easily grant you, that they have all of them equal power of administering
Sacraments, and looking to their flock, every one within his own precincts. And
this is all your discourse infers. But an equality of power over one another,
was neither amongst the Apostles; nor yet here in our English bishops, nor ever
in the Church of God. How do you prove that? By the law of Christone bishop is
not superior to another; Christ made no head of bishops: beyond the bishop is
no step till you rest in the great shepherd and bishop of souls. Under him
every bishop is supreme. This argument is in a mood and figure called Ita dico.
You say so: and the statutes and canons of the Church of England say no. Whom
shall we beleev? I always prefer a Church before any one Churchman, though he
be in her, when he is against her. But S. Paul says expressly, that Christ
appointed in his Church first apostles, but not S. Peter first. I marry Sir!
now we are come to an argument indeed. And it runs thus, According to S. Paul,
the apostles were the first rank or dignity in the Church: but S. Peter was
none of that rank or dignity; therefore he could not be first. Was not S. Peter
then one of the apostles? or will you make it run thus? The apostles were the
first rank or dignity in the Church, but S. Peter was not that rank or dignity,
therefore he was not first. This is indeed the surer way. Because no one man can
be reckoned for a rank or dignity, or so many persons in the plural number.
This is an argument never yet thought of in Oxford or Cambridg, to prove they
have no superior either over all, or over any one College. Not over all: For
there be first Colleges, then Halls, then Inns, etc. therefore the
Vice Chancellor is not first. Not over one College: For there are first
Fellows, then Scholars, then Pensioners, etc. and therefore Mr. such a one who
is neither fellows, scholars, nor pensioners is not first. So here, Christ,
says S. Paul, set in his Church first of all apostles, therefore says our
learned Doctor, not first S. Peter, and secondarily apostles, but all the
apostles were first. The apostles were the first rank of dignity, good Sir, but
that rank had order in it too. And so there might be place for a first man, even
in the first rank. But Peter did never rule but by common council, as S.
Chrysostom witnesses. He ruled then good Sir, it seems he ruled then. Will you
bring this for an argument of his not ruling? You are shrewdly put to it in the
mean time. And if he ruled and governed and managed all by common council, he
was the better superior for that; but not therefore no superior. Will you admit
no rulers but tyrants, who do all by their own will. But even some of their own
popish writers do grant, that the succession is not tied to Rome, as Cusanus,
Soto, Canus, Driedo, Segovius. What does that opinion of theirs, if they did
say so, prove against the sovereignty of one bishop over the rest, which is the
only thing now in hand, wherever he reside? I cannot in reason be thought to
speak against our English monarchy, although I should happily say, that the King
is not bound to reside still at Westminster. The papal pastor has ever since
S. Peter's time, ever resided yet in that Roman Diocese, which Catholics do
indeed consider as a thing somewhat strange; since all other apostolical Sees
besides that, are failed and gone; but no man knows the disposition of divine
providence here on earth for future times. Perhaps that Roman See, I mean the
particular Roman Diocese shall so remain to the worlds end; and perhaps again
it may not. And if it should not, or if that whole City should be destroyed, or
Christian Religion in it; or if the City and all the whole Kingdom of Italy
should lie under the ocean, quite overwhelmed and drowned, yet so long as the
world lasts, there shall be a Church of Christ on earth; and so long as there is
a Church, there will be one supreme pastor of it, where ever he reside. And
this is that which some Catholic doctors mean, when they say that the
succession is not tied to Rome. What does this make to your purpos Mr.
Disswader? Go on then. No papal sovereignty was thought of in primitive times,
when the bishops of Asia and Africa opposed Pope Victor and Pope Stephen. Does
an opposition infer a nullity of power? Then Sir there would be no power upon
earth either ecclesiastical or civil; which are all resisted one time or other.
Was there no royalty or bishops in England so much as thought of thirty years
ago, when they were both of them more than opposed by the rabble? What
miserable shifts are these! You may find, and I am confident you do find and
know well enough, that even in those times you speak of, and before and after
them, the papal power was acknowledged and reverenced by the whole world: and
yet you will take advantage of a dispute, that happens more or less in all
ages, to say against your conscience, and from thence infer, that the papal
power was not so much as thought of in those primitive times. God keep you Sir
from contesting with any of your servants. For if you do, this argument of
yours will prove, that your authority in your own house was not so much as
thought of in those days, either by you, or them, or any else. Have you any
thing else to say? A general Council of Chalcedon gave to the bishop of C. P.
equal rights and pre-eminence with the bishop of Rome. What general Council was
that? and who is that C. P. and what were those equal rights universal over
all, or by way of similitude over some? A Constable may have given him equal
rights and pre-eminence in his lesser charge unto some purposes, as a King has
in his whole Kingdom: what then? If this prove any thing, it is, that there is
a sovereign power over all, in proportion to which, in measured out the right
and authority of another in order to one particular. But all bishops ever
treated with the Roman Bishop as with a brother, not as a superior. As brother
and superior too, he both treated with them and they with him, as I could
easily show at large. But to a bare falls affirmation one single negation will
suffice. Christ gave no command to obey the bishop of Rome, and probably never
intended any such thing. He commanded and probably intended, that all should
obey those that were set over them. Is not that enough? I pray you Sir tell me,
did he give any command to obey the bishop of Canterbury here in England, or
the bishop of Armagh in Ireland, or probably ever intend any such thing? Speak
out. If he did, the Roman Prelate will challenge obeisance upon the same title:
if he did not, then is your promise and vow in episcopal ordination
infignificant and fond. But James and not Peter gave the decisive sentence in
the Council at Jerusalem. And why say you so? How prove you that his words and
not the other were decisive, when one of them did but second the other.

Now since your Disswader has proved after his manner, that there is not any
one sovereign bishop over all, pray give me leav Sir to let you know, why I
think on the contrary, that one such there is and ought to be. And to omit
test^monies, which are in this point innumerable, I shall for brevities sake
only use two reasons. The first is: That Christ our Lord would have the whole
company of Christians upon earth ever to be and remain one flock. This I
conceiv can never be, except they be all under one visible pastor. Nor can it
suffice to say here, that they are all under one Christ and one God: For this
can never make them all, either really to be, or truly to be called one flock
on earth. All the Kingdoms and people in the world, however they be governed,
are under one God the supreme King, as the whole Church is said to be under one
Christ: but this makes them not to be one Kingdom. Nay, those that have not a
visible King, are not any Kingdom at all; but an aristocracy only, or
commonwealth, or wild straglers. But if you will have no visible flock of
Christians upon earth, you teach the Quakers doctrine, and abolish all
government. It is certain then, that if the ecclesiastical government of each
place, do end in the bishop of that respective Diocese, as the Disswader talks,
that there must be then as many flocks of Christians, as there be bishops upon
earth; which being not subordinate all of them to one general pastor, can
never bring their flocks into one.

Second is, That such a polity and government must ever be preserved in Christ's
Church, which himself set up and practiced. This is most certain. For if that
polity or body be changed, it is no more Christ's polity or Christ's body, but
that other, whatever it be which is introduced in his place, and the body of
that man or men that introduced it: from whence also it receivs its name; as
from Luther, his followers are called Lutherans, and Calvinists from Calvin:
and consequently all the laws, which do ever follow the condition of the
government, must alter with it. Thus it was with us here in England the other
day. When our government was changed, we were no more the body of William the
Conqueror, or any polity instituted by him; but another polity or body, set up
by the Rump-Parliament; and all our laws became then liable to their arbitrary
interpretation, to be wrested as themselves pleased. And they had been, if we
had continued a while longer in that sad condition, by degrees utterly
abolished. All this not our reason only, but heavy experience will acknowledge
for a certain truth. But Christ our Lord did assuredly both set up and practice
himself a visible sovereignty over all the whole flock of Christians, which he
gathered together from other visible companies of Jews and Pagans. And therefore
must there still and ever be, some one visible pastor over this one flock unto
the worlds end. For if that polity or body change, then is it no more Christ's
body, but another thing. And his laws and religion will be then interpreted
according to the pleasure of those who first rejected the government, and of
their followers afterward, unto infinite and endless misery.

And that this polity or government is ever to remain in Christ's Church on
earth, may be gathered, first by this; That every wise legislatour knows well
enough, that all his people under him look upon his example, as their rule to
steer by ever after, so long as they mean to preserv his way, and be of his
body. Thus, when any state is once founded either in aristocracy, democracy or
monarchy, the founder of such a state has no need to tell the people, what he
would have them to do afterward; or whether they should choos themselves one
governor or many; where they have his clear example to walk by. They will
naturally follow his steps therein, so long as they mean to preserv the state he
has established. Now the Apostles and all his disciples and believers knew and
saw, that the Church of Christ, which is his state spiritual, was founded by
him in monarchy, or the superintendency of one over all. And therefore as soon as
our Lord spoke to them of his own departure, they began all of them naturally
to think of one, who should succeed in his general care, and who that one
should be. Nor did they doubt whether one should be over all the flock, but who
should be that one, that should preside and oversee it. And to prevent the
faction, our Lord, as Catholic tradition teaches, and the letter of the Gospel
not obscurely insinuates, pointed out one; giving him withal a good rule of
humility and charity to remain for after ages, That he that is greatest among
them should be as the least, most humble, most serv^ceable, most full of
observance and charity: which rule if that chief pastor observe not, he is the
more to blame. And all ages have ever looked upon the successor of that chief
apostle, as Vicegerent of our Lord and master; under whom they are united in
one flock, and so keep their laws and religion still one, and entirely the the
same, from age to age; however they lie divided in place and time under several
bishops up and down the world. Whereas all others besides this one Catholic
flock, run into several bodies; and by their various interpretations, dissolv
by little and little, according as themselves increas, all the whole frame of
ancient religion. Secondly, it may be gathered by this, that Christ our Lord
instituted a monarchical government of his Church, ruled so long as he lived by
one; and therefore must that government ever remain. He set it up to remain. For
surely he did not set it up to be pulled down again. Thirdly, because there is
no power on earth to change it. What God has constituted, man cannot undo,
lawfully I mean he cannot.

Now we have no such body of Christians in England, that remain under one who
is general pastor over all the Christian flock in the world, or do so much as
pretend it, save only the few Roman Catholics, that are yet here left alive, by
the strange providence of that God, unto whose universal Church they have still
adhered, notwithstanding the greatest trials that ever poor Christians were put
to. Neither Quaker, Anabaptist, or Independent, Presbyterian or
Prelate-Protestant do so much as pretend to any such thing; but they all oppose
it. And as they do not pretend to belong to any general body, that has a
visible head overseeing the whole flock of Christ throughout the world; so
neither is any of their Church-governments monarchical in their respective
place, if we may beleev themselves. I know our English Protestant Church was
first appointed in the days of King Edward and Queen Elizabeth to be
respectively monarchical, that is to say, within the precincts of this Kingdom,
the hierarchy ending in the Kings majesty, who is doubtless the supreme head and
governor both of the Protestant Church and the temporal or civil state, in all
these his three Kingdoms. But indeed and truth none of them acknowledge it. For
they do not, any of them, expect, as they ought all of them to do, a full
decisive sentence from the Kings Majesty's lips in all their controversies or
doubts of faith; nor will they acquiesce in his judgment: which is a strange
mad refractorines in our nation, and contrary to our own principles. The
Independents last tribunal is in the light of his own breast. The Presbyterian
will not look beyond his Presbyteral Consistory. And the Prelate-Protestant
writer, which I most marvel at, ends all in the bishops, allowing no authority,
power or jurisdiction to their Archbyshops, but only an order and decent
precedence for manners sake, which in effect is wholly to dissolve the
constituted frame of Church Government in this land. They speak not indeed of
the Kings majesty, for fear I suppose of the rod God has put into his hands.
But it is not hard to gather both by their words and actions, what they think.
Whitby of late wrote a book against Dean Cressy; and there he says expesly,
that an Arch-byshop has a decent precedence, but no authority; and that his
Grace of Canterbury has no jurisdiction; and that the Kings Majesty is not the
root of Episcopal jurisdiction here in England: And yet he was approved and
praised even by our Protestant bishops. Do they not see, that a pari, nay a
fortiori the same be affirmed of our bishops? that they have no authority, and
that they have but a decent precedeney over Presbyters, and that they are not
the root of ecclesiastical jurisdiction. With what a strange blindness are our
eyes possessed! Nay, this great Disswader an eminent man among
Prelate-Protestants, here teaches publicly, that bishops are all supreme under
Christ. So that this our Church Government by bishops, can be no other but
Aristocracy: the Presbyterians a Democracy; and the rest a plain Anarchy, every
man thinking and acting what is good in his own eyes. And none of these, who
are all fallen from the general flock and general pastor, heed unto effect,
any one thing that may restrain them, either statutes canons laws,
constitutions, or ought else. But God blesses his true Church with a true
obedience. Thus I have given you Sir my reason, why I think there is and must be
one general pastor over all the whole flock of Christians. Pray ponder it
well. Brief I am in it, because it is beyond my general design, which is only to
show, that Doctor Tailors Disswasive from Popery is insignificant.

I am now come to the testimonies your Disswader cites for himself; which I
told you before, are above half of them impertinent, and the rest, if he had
not fraudulently maimed them, flatly against himself. As for the first sort,
your Disswader imagining in his head, that the Apostles had no superior, which
is the grand falsity on which all his whole discourse runs, brings all those
authors who either say, that bishops are the successors of the Apostles; or
that they had received the keys of heaven; or that they are not to be
contemned, and the like, for witnesses of his opinion, as Irenaeus, Cyprian,
Ambrose, Anacletus, Clemens, Hieronimus, Gregorius, and various others. All
this is impertinent. But the other autorities, had they not been curtaild and
perverted by him, had openly and plainly spoken that Catholic truth, which he
here opposes; namely that the Apostles had a superior; and that all the whole
Christian flock have and ought to have one general pastor, and that he ever
hitherto has sat since S. Peter's death in the Roman See. I know it would be
worth my labor to set down all those testimonies by him here cited, at large
as they lie in those Catholic Fathers and Divines: as apt at one and the same
time to convince this his whole section of falsity, and the Catholic doctrine to
be no novelty, as he says it is. But because this is already done by the
abovenamed Catholic Gentlemen, who with a greater patience than I am master
of, turned over those many ancient authors, I will content my self with only
the first of them.

In the whole new testament, says your Disswader, there is no act or sign of
superiority; or that one apostle exercised power over another: but to them whom
Christ sent, he in common entrusted the Church of God, according to that
excellent saying of S. Cyprian, the other apostles are the same that S. Peter
was, endowed with an equal fellowship of honor and power, etc.

This then is the excellent saying of S. Cyprian, The other apostles are the
same that St. Peter was, endowed with an equal fellowship of honor and power.
And he cites it out of his epistle de unit. Ecclesiae ad Novatian. But did S.
Cyprian either say or mean by that saying, so much of it as is S. Cyprians,
that there was no superiority among the apostles, or that the Church of God was
entrusted to them in common? Nay, does not S Cyprian use those words in a
discourse wherein he endeavors industriously to declare, that there was a
superiority among the Apostles; in which as in a cone of unity they were all
united, although they were all alike in power and commission of administering
Sacraments. If it be so, what shall we think of this Disswader, and of his
excellent saying of S. Cyprian, to prove that the Church was entrusted to the
apostles in common; and that no one apostle exercised a power over another. The
text of S. Cyprian runs thus. Our Lord said to Peter, Upon this rock will I
build my Church, and again feed thou my sheep. Upon the one Him Christ builds
his Church, and unto Him he commends his sheep to be fed. And although after
his resurrection he gave to all his apostles equal power, and said, as my
father sent me, so I send you; yet that he might manifest unity, he constituted
one chair, and by his authority disposed the origin of unity beginning from
one. The other apostles are the same that Peter was, etc. But the beginning
comes from unity, the primacy is given to Peter, that one Church of Christ and
one flock of Christ may be monstrated. Thus St. Cyprian testifies of the
apostles, that although they were all equal in their spiritual commission of
Gods word and Sacraments, yet were they brought to an unity by the government
of one superior, and one chair which oversaw them all. And is this a fit place
to prove, that the Apostles had no superior over them, which expressly
testifies that they had one? In the same manner does our Disswader deal with
the other testimonies. But I have been too long upon this point. Here is enough
Sir to let you see, what I said in the beginning of this discourse, that your
Disswaders reasons are senceles; his testimonies either impertinent or
manifestly against himself; and his whole talk and doctrine contrary to the laws
and constitutions of our own Protestant English Church.

. 11. Which concludes the novelties.

Gives notice of nine other popish novelties, Saints invocation,
Scripture-insufficiency, absolution before penance, Priests confirmation,
nine-penny-masses, circum gestation of Eucharist, intention in Sacraments,
mass-sacrifice, and communionless mass.

After your Disswader has mentioned these to show the fertility of his brain,
he says nothing of them at all, but only that they be also innovations; and
thence concluds, that the Roman Religion is neither old nor primitive nor
catholic, and that it is easier for Protestants to tell where their religion
was before Luther, then for Papists to tell where their religion was before
Trent. And that when the enemy had sowed these tares, and honest men in the
Church durst not complain, then England and other nations by the glass of
Scriptur reformed to pure antiquity, preferring a new cure before an old sore.
In the beginning of the section it was a new sore, in the end it is an old
sore, so long time was he a writing this one no-section. And he has so ordered
the business, that it will be hard now for Papists to show their Religion before
Trent, although he has neither deduced the original of these nine or his other
ten novelties from Trent, nor can ever show that these or they are the Papists
religion. For as he has handled them, there is not one of them any part of their
Religion; much less does their religion consist in them. His first business of
the power of making articles (sect 1.) is so far from religion, that it is not
so much as the philosophy of any one school in the Catholic world. His leash of
new articles, (sect. 2.) is partly a fond dream, and partly an erroneous vision
of his own. His discourse of Indulgences (sect. 3.) is utterly besides the
purpos; and what there is of Catholic faith in it, he allows himself as ancient.
4. His talk of Purgatory is so ridiculously absurd, that granting all that
Roman faith teaches, to be both ancient and universal; he yet says at random,
that Roman faith is not that, and yet never speaks himself what that Roman
faith is. 5. In Transubstantiation he wholly plays with the word, which he
knows when it came in, wholly neglecting the thing it self; and brings a
multitude of Popish Doctors that own it not for their faith, and not any one
popish man or woman that own it: he says it was defined in the Lateran Council
first; and yet is not that which was defined in the Lateran Council, and never
speaks what this thing is, which notwithstanding he will have called Popery. 6.
The business of half-communion, as he calls it, is no Popery at all, that is to
say, no Catholic faith, but a custom only in the exercise of their religion,
and that neither universal for time or place. And although Catholics beleev,
that it is not necessary to communicate in both kinds, yet do they not beleev,
that it is necessary to communicate only in one kind, either this kind or that;
but have used all the three ways. 7. His discourse about service in an unknown
tongue is a like mistake, taking custom for religion, and discipline for
doctrine; and he perverts and falsifies the custom too, saying that Papists
understand not their own prayers, nor know what they ask of God. 8. His talk of
images passes by all the use of them that religion requires, and is wholly
taken up in some school disputes and his own lies. 9. His exceptions against
the pictures of the Trinity with so many eyes and noses and faces in a knot, is
as much popery as Euclids book de Triangulis. 10. His section about the
sovereignty of one bishop over all Christians had been about popery and
catholic religion indeed, if he had handled it right; but as his reasons are
fond, and autorities falls; so he mistakes the very thing it self, imagining
that papists beleev that spiritual supremacy to be tied to the walls of Rome,
which is no faith of theirs, and consequently none of their popery. And so none
of his sections, nor any part of his discourse touches either all or any part of
Papists religion. And is not this a doughty piece of work to prove popery, by
which all his readers understand the Roman Catholic religion, to be neither
old, nor primitive, nor apostolical? How he would have handled the other nine
points, because he says nothing of them, I will not trouble my self to read. But
I am sure that seven of the nine have not any relation to Catholic religion;
all of them I mean besides Saints invocation and the Sacrifice of the Mass.
What Council has determined, or what Catholic believes, that the sacred
scripture is insufficient; or that absolution ought to be given before
penance; or that single priests are to confirm; or that masses are to be sold
for nine pence; or circum gestation; or any such intention in sacraments as to
damn folks, which the Disswader here speaks; or that mass is to be without
communion. And I may now think, if he had spoke of the other two, Saints
invocation and Sacrifice, he would even there also have mistaken and strayed.
For he has so behaved himself hitherto, as though he were resolved not to speak
any one word true or to the purpos. And yet he would seem to do it, perhaps on
the same motive, that Sir Toby Matthews flitted from the richer byshoprick of
Durham, to that of York, because, as he himself gave the reason, he wanted
Grace. But Doctor Tailor must remember his own doctrine, that an Archbishop,
although he have Grace, yet he has no jurisdiction with it: and it is a
question whether is better, to have power without grace, or grace without
power. He is well enough as he is, if he could be content. But ambition and
covetousnes will know no bounds.

And as your Doctor in this his Disswasive prattles about a Popery which is no
part of Catholic religion; so does he wholly pass by their chief religion,
which is in a manner their whole popery; and all their religious customs
attending it; not that, only which the first reformers allowed of; as their
faith of one God, all powerful, most wise and good, who made all things
visible and invisible, and by his providence conserves them in their being, who
in the fulness of time sent his beloved son to reconcile the world to himself,
etc. but that also which they rejected and principally inveighed against: as
first internal sanctification and renovation of our spirits; which was the end
of Christ's appearing in the world, the efficacy of his grace in our hearts, and
the intention of his counsels and laws: secondly, the comfort, merit and
necessity of good works, unto which holy gospel by all sweet promises invites
us, Gods holy spirit moves, the very excellency of man's nature and condition
suggests, the name and profession of Christian calls for, and future happiness
requires. These by the first Protestants were all cried down as mortal sins,
and of no value at all in the eyes of God; by which doctrins they debauched
mankind, and made men so dissolute, careless and licentious, that if good
nature, right reason, and the gracious working of God in our hearts had not
more force upon some, than the principles of the first Protestancy, earth had
become a mere hell by this. Thirdly, he passes by the priesthood, altar and
sacrifice, which Christ our Lord instituted for our daily atonement in the
figuration of his holy passion; at which old Christians with all fear and
reverence offered up their daily praises, requests, and supplications to God,
for themselves and allies and whole Church of Christ; for all distressed
persons, for kings and princes, and for all men, that we may lead a quiet and
godly life in this world. Fourthly, the seven sacraments of Christ's; which are
so many conduits of sanctification for our several necessities, and for all
conditions of men, and for all degrees of spiritual comforts. Fifthly, the
obligations of vows, which any shall freely make for Gods glory and his own
advancement, in piety, in continency, in charity; and the blessed condition of
singing and praising God in monastical retirement. Sixthly, the communion and
union of the whole body of Christians under one visible pastor; by whom they
are aptly knit and compaginated together into one flock and body of Christ;
however they may differ otherwis in country, language, laws, civil government,
and other affections. Sevently, the marks of the true Church, and the authority
she has to keep her people in unity of faith and observance of their Christian
duties. Eighthly, the danger of original sin and actual transgressions; which,
however we may have heard of Christian faith, and beleev it to be true, may
notwithstanding exclude us eternally from the bliss of heaven now opened to
believers, such, as by mortifying ungodly lusts shall render themselves
conformable to their Lord and head, who is ascended into heaven, and gone
before to prepare there a place for them in bliss with himself. Ninthly, the
necessary concurrence of Gods grace and man's will unto his justification, and
sanctity and future glory in him; Qui creavit te sine te, non salvabit te sine
te, as good S. Austin speaks. Tenthly, the necessity and great benefit of
prayer, alms-deeds and fasting, which is practiced in the Catholic Church, and
commended to all as worthy fruits of that religion, which labors to root out,
pride of life, concupiscence of eyes and concupiscence of flesh thereby: and
our obligation to exact justice in all our contracts and dealings with our
neighbor. Eleventhly, the danger of living and dying in sin to such as profess
Christianity, and uselesnes of faith without the good works of grace attending
it. Twelftly, the possibility of keeping Gods commandments with the assistance
of his grace. Lastly, not to mention more, the great duty incumbent upon all
Christians, when, led away by the deceit of Satan, flesh and this wicked world
they shall chance to have strayed from their holy rule, to set all straight
again by humble confession, restitution and other penal satisfactions for their
fault. These and such like principles of ancient Christianity, our first
reforming Protestants, Luther and Calvin with other their companions, all
apostate priests from the mother Church, so stiffly cried down as notorious
popery, that they have thereby corrupted the whole world. But your Doctor in
this your Disswasive from Popery, for reasons best known to himself, takes no
notice of them at all. Protestant writers, however loath to practice them, yet
ashamed they are now to speak against good works, as their forefathers did.
Indeed every one of them that upon the hope of a richer benefice writes against
Catholic Religion, makes both a new Popery, and a new Protestancy too; and
while they speak in general against that, they may say in particular of this,
what they pleas. For Protestants had never any Council to make them all agree,
how much of Popery they should reject, or what they should positively
establish: nor ever will nor can have; nor do they care, so they keep but their
livings and places that they have extorted from Catholic hands, which they know
they cannot keep, except by libelling against Popery they get the power of the
land, honester and better men then themselves to back and support them in their
ways, whether any thing be ever settled or no.

I should also here set down the substantial customs of Catholic Christians, in
their chapels and churches, oratories, and private houses, wholly neglected by
the Disswader, though they be in the hearts and hands of them all throughout
the whole earth. If he had declared either their substantial faith or customs,
he had lost his credit with some, but he had saved his own soul, which now is
become as black as hell with slanders, lies, and uncharitable depravations both
of their customs and immaculate Religion. What he can pervert and make sport
with, that he puts upon them for popery; and what he cannot, that must be
thought no popery at all. But this I cannot now insist upon. My letter is
already grown too long.

ANd yet I cannot but give you notice Sir, that even these things specified
here by your Disswader for popish novelties, as they are rightly understood in
the catholic sense and meaning; Indulgences; the real presence, under the
apperances or species of material symbols; Communion in one kind, Liturgy in
hebrew, greek or latin tongus, unknown generally to vulgar people; Use and
respect of images and sacred figures; Spiritual Supremcay in one bishop over
the rest; Saints invocation, and sacrifice of mass, are all acknowledged by
former Protestant Reformers, for old errors, errors, indeed but old, very old
ones, a thousand years older than your Disswader makes them, who would here
make us beleev they are but fresh novelties.

As for the antiquity of Indulgences, so far as they belong to Catholic belief,
I need not trouble my self with further testimonies, then the only one of your
Disswader himself, who is instar omnium. For p. 17. he acknowledges their use
to be ancient and primitive.

As for the real presence, Humpred in his Jesuitism says, that Gregory the
great, who lived a thousand years ago, taught Transubstantiation. The Century
writers Cent. 5. teach, that Chrysostom, who was two hundred years before
Gregory, is thought to confirm transubstantiation: and Cent. 4. they place
under the title of hurtful opinions and errors of the fathers, that saying of
S. Greg. Nyssen in his catechist sermon de divino sacramento, Not because it is
eaten does the bread become the body of the word, but forthwith by the word it
is changed into the body, as it is said by the word, This is my body. And they
say in the same century c. 10. That Eusebius, Emissenus did speak unprofitably
of Transubstantiation. Antony de Adamo in his anotomy of the mass says, That
the book of Sacraments ascribed to Ambrose affirms the opinion of Christ's
bodily presence in the sacrament. Peter Martyr in his defense, wholly dislikes
the judgment of St. Cyril in this point. Mr. Whitgift in his defense against
Cartwright, testifies of St. Ignatius disciple to St. John the Evangelist, that
he should say of some heretics in his time, That they do not admit Eucharists
and oblations, because they confess not the Eucharist to be the flesh of our
Savior Jesus Christ, which flesh suffered for our sins, Adamus Francisci in
his margarita theologica, says, Commentum papistarum de transubstantiatione
mature in ecclesiam irrepsit. And Antony de Adamo in his anatomy of the Mass,
says, I have not yet hitherto been able to know, when this opinion of the real
and bodily being of Christ in the Sacrament did begin. This then according to
the acknowledgment of Protestants and those very learned men, is no novelty.

The indifferency of communion either in one kind or both is manifestly
affirmed by Luther in his epistle ad Bohemos, by Melanchton in his century of
theological epistles, and several other Protestants, convinced thereof by the
current of primitive antiquity.

That the Christian Liturgy was in ancient times ever celebrated in Greek,
Chaldee, Latin or other language unknown to vulgar Christians, and in a part of
the Church where lay people might not approach, and great part of it secretly,
and out of the hearing of any body, and with much pomp of vestments, gold and
silver chalices, etc. is amply testified by Theodore Beza, in his eight epistle
theological. And therefore Queen Elizabeth did not think she acted against
antiquity, when she caused the Service to be read in English all over Wales,
where the people understand it not. For which very same reason the great
Cardinal Richlieu deservedly taxed heretical ministers (who except at least in
outward show, against this ancient custom) for their practicing the very same
thing, (as convinced in their own consciences that it was the ancient practice)
both in Bearn, Narbo, Province, and other places, where the ministers of those
places read Service in the French Tongue, which was not the language of those
Provinces, nor by any of those people any more understood, than is Latin by the
vulgar of mankind. And yet the case is far otherwise in this affair affair
amongst Catholics than other people. For these do but only come together to
hear and attend to the Minister what he says. But the Priests in the Catholic
Church comes to make atonement for the people: which may well be done, so long
as the said people are in a general disposition of heart fitly disposed to
present themselves before the face of their Lord for that end, whether they hear
and know the sighs and requests of their petitioner in particular for them or
no, so long as they are assured they are of that true Church, by whom their
priests are directed in their duty. For thus it was in the law of Moses
dictated by God himself. There shall be no man, says the sacred text, Lev. 16.
in the tabernacle of the congregation, when the priest goes in to make an
atonment in the holy place, until he come out and have made an atonement for
himself and for his household, and for all the congregation of Israel. If God
allowed of this custom four thousand years ago, it can neither be a novelty nor
ill.

As for images and their due respect, the Magdeburgian Centuriators in their 4.
Century testify, That Lactantius affirms many superstitious things concerning
the efficacy of Christ's image. And in their 8. century, That S. Bid erred in
the worshipping of images. So Bale in his pageant of Popes says, That Gregory
by his indulgences established pilgrimages to images, and defended worshipping
of images. As also, That S. Leo allowed the worshipping of Images. Functius
another Protestant in his chronology at 494. adds, That Xenaias who lived
thirteen hundred years ago, was specially noted and condemned for being the
first that stirred up wars against images. This is then no novelty neither.

As for Purgatory and prayer for the dead, Fulk in his Retentive affirms, That
it prevailed within three hundred years after Christ. And in his confutation of
Purgatory, That Ambrose allowed prayer for the dead, and that it was the common
error of his time. And again in the same book, That Chrysostom and Jerome
allowed prayer for the dead: and in another place of the same book, That Austin
blindly defended it: and again there, That Tertullian, Cyprian, Austin, Jerome,
and many others affirm, that sacrifice for the dead is the tradition of the
Apostles. As also he had acknowledged about ten pages before, in the same book,
That prayers for the dead is taught in the writings now extant under the name
of Dionysius Areopagita, mentioned in the acts of the Apostles, which book,
though he doubt whether it be his or no, yet himself writing against the
Rhemish upon the 2. Thessalonians, allows it to have been written above
thirteen hundred years ago. Chemnitius in his Examen says, That it was taught
by Austin, Epiphanius, and Chrysostom: as nine pages before that, he had said,
It was taught by Origin, Ambrose, Prudentius and Jerome. Mr. George Gifford in
his Demonstration says, That it was generally in the Church long before
Austin, as may be seen in Cyprian and Tertullian. And Bucer in his Enarrations
upon the Gospels speaks, That prayer and alms were made for the dead almost
from the very beginning of the Church. This is not a novelty then.

As for Papal Superiority, the Protestant Centuriators acknowledge, That in the
fifth age of the Church, above a thousand years ago, the Roman Bishops applied
themselves to establish dominion over other Churches; and, That they usurped to
themselves right of granting privileges and ornaments to other Archbyshops:
and, That they confirmed Archbyshops in their Sees: and, That they deposed and
excommunicated some, and absolved others: That they arrogated power to
themselves of citing other Archbyshops to declare their cause before them: That
against a bishop appealing to the Apostolic See, nothing should be determined,
but what the bishop of Rome censured; That they appointed their legates in
remote Provinces, challenging authority to hear and determine all uprising
controversies; especially, in questions of faith: That they took upon them
power of appointing general councels, and to preside therein, either by
themselves or their deputies, rejecting for unlawful those Synods that were
called without their authority. They also add in the same century, That Roman
Bishops had flatterers in those times, who affirmed, that without permission of
the Roman bishop none might undertake the person of a judge. Nay, forgetting
themselves they aver in the same century, Collat. 775. That antiquity had
attributed the principality of Priesthood to the Roman bishop above all. I
could alledg also the like confession of Beza, Mr. Whitgift, and Cartwright:
but those eminent Protestant Centuriators may serve for all, who testify
further in that fifth century, That Victor called the Roman Church the head of
all Churches: That Turbius Asturiensis flattered Pope Leo, and acknowledged his
superiority: That sometimes bishops condemned in Synods appealed to the Sea of
Rome, as did, say they, Flavianus Patriarch of Constantinople in the Council of
Ephesus; and that Councels also requested to have their acts confirmed by the
bishop of Rome. And so indeed did not only Flavianus appeal to Pope Leo, but
Talida Patriarch of Alexandria deposed by the Emperor Zeno, appealed also to
Pope Simplicius; S. Athanasius to Pope Julius; etc. So did the Council of
Chalcedon request to be confirmed by Pope Leo, the Council of Carthage by Pope
Innocent, the Council of Ephesus by Pope Celestin, etc.

The like superiority of the Roman bishop, not only over the neighbor Churches
and Bishops of Italy, but over remote provinces, and the greatest Archbyshops
and Patriarks of the world is acknowledged by Protestants to have been
practiced also before that, in the fourth age, when the Church first lift up
her head by favor of Constantine the great, and appeared openly in the world.
In this age say the Centuriators, the mystery of iniquity was not idle. And
they say also, that then the bishop of Rome challenged by ecclesiastical canon,
the disallowing of those Synods whereat they were absent; That Theodoret a
greek father, who lived about the latter end of this age, deposed by the
Council of Ephesus, was restored to his byshoprick by Pope Leo, unto whom he
had made his appeal; and that S. Chrysostom appealed likewise to Pope
Innocentius, who thereupon decreed his adversary Theophilus to be
excommunicated and deposed: That the famous and ancient Council of Sardis,
consisting of above 300. bishops assembled from Spain, France, Italy, Sardinia,
Greece, Egypt, Thebais, Lybia, Palestin, Arabia, and sundry other places of the
world, and whereat sundry fathers of the Nicen Council were present, decreed
appeals to the bishop of Rome: for which fact the Centuriators blame the said
council; as do also Osiander, Calvin, Peter Martyr and others. And lastly, that
whereas the Arrians had expelled Athanasius bishop of Alexandria, Paulus bishop
of Constantinople, and other Catholic bishops of the East, and brought their
accusation to Julius then bishop of Rome, that he might ratify what they had
done, he, the said bishop summoned Athanasius according to the canons, and when
he had heard all sides speak, he restored Athanasius and his fellow bishops to
their own place; fretus ecclesiae Romanae praerogativa, as the Centurists there
speak.

In the age before this, when raging persecution obscured both the government
and most of the written monuments of that time, yet want there not monuments of
the Popes power in confirming, deposing, restoring bishops. Then it was, that
S. Cyprian, as himself testifies, moved Pope Stephen, by his letters to depose
Martianus from his byshoprick, and appoint another in his place; and he tells
us likewise in his fourth epistle, how Basilides went to Rome, hoping to
beguile Pope Stephen then ignorant of the whole matter, so to procure himself
to be restored to his byshoprick, from which he had been justly, says S.
Cyprian, deposed. In this age the foresaid learned Centuriators reprove Pope
Stephen for his undertaking to threaten excommunication to Helenus and
Firmiltanus, and all others throughout Cilicia, Cappadocia, and Asia for
rebaptizing heretics; they reprove also, as became Protestants to do, both S.
Cyprian and Tertullian in this point; Tertullian for saying, that the keys
were committed to S. Peter, and the Church built on him; S. Cyprian, for
affirming the Church to be built upon S. Peter, and one chair founded by our
Lords voice upon the rock; for calling Peter's chair the principal Church, from
whence Priestly unity arises: and for saying, that there ought to be one
bishop in the Catholic Church; and that the Roman Church ought to be
acknowledged of all other for the mother and root of the Catholic Church.

In the second age, the next after the apostles, whereof fewer monuments remain,
yet be there some testimonies of this superiority acknowledged even by
Protestants. Pope Victor is owned even by our Mr. Whitgift in his defense, to
be a godly bishop and martyr, and the Church in his time in great purity, not
being long after the apostles times; and yet Amandus Polonus a Protestant
Professor at Basil says in his theological thesis of the same Pope Victor,
That he showed a Papal mind and arrogance: and Mr. Spark in his answer against
John Albines, thinks him, somewhat Pope-like to have exceeded his bounds, when
he took upon him to excommunicate the bishops of the East: and Whitaker charges
him with exercising jurisdiction upon other Churches. So that these three
Protestants discerned a papal power even in this second pure age of the Church,
although they liked it not. But the Protestant Centuriators do much except
against a saying of S. Irenaeus, who lived in this age next after the apostles,
and might well remember the apostles own lively preachings, (as Hamelmannus a
Protestant writer in his book of traditions, speaks both of Irenaeus and
Polycarp) recorded in the third chapter of his third book, Ad hanc enim
ecclesiam Romanam, propter potentiorem principalit atem necesse est omnem
convenire ecclesiam; It is necessary, that every other Church, says Irenaeus,
comply with the Roman, by reason of her greater principality. First, because he
says it is necessary; secondly, that every Church; thirdly, for the Roman
Church's more potent principality, to comply with her, the Centurists are much
displeased at it, and censure it for a very corrupt speech. And indeed the
papal power and jurisdiction was so eminent in all ages, that Philip Nicolai in
his comment de regno Christi, resers the beginning of it to the infirmity of
the Apostles, and bishops succeeding them. For there speaking of the origin and
increas of papal power, Primatus affectatio, says he, communis fuit infirmitas
apostolorum, ac etiam primorum urbis episcoporum.

Finally, in the first age, that St. Peter had a primacy above the other
apostles, is acknowledged by Calvin; The twelve apostles had one among them to
govern the rest; by Musculus, The celestial spirits are not equal, the apostles
themselves were not equal, Peter is found in many places to have been chief
amongst the rest, which we deny not; by Mr. Whitgift, Amongst the Apostles
themselves there was one chief; and by Dr. Covel, who in his examinations,
teaches at large against the Puritans, both that there was one appointed over
the rest amongst the apostles to keep them in unity; and that that government
was not to ceas with the apostles, but ever to continue in the Church; and that
it is the only way to prevent dissension, and suppress heresies; and that
otherwise the Church would be in a far wors case, than the meanest
Commonwealth, nay almost than a den of thieves. But the Centurists like not
this, and therefore do they in their 4. Cent. reprehend many of the Fathers, for
entituling Peter the head of the apostles, and the bishop of bishops. So indeed
Optatus calls him apostolorum caput, and therefore Cephas; Origin apostolorum
principem; Cyril of Jerusalem, principem and caput caeterorum; Cyril of
Alexandria, Pastorem and caput ecclesiae; Arnobius Episcoporum episcopum; the
Council of Chalcedon, Petram and verticem ecclesiae Catholicae. Thus much for
that point; which by all this is proved to be far from any novelty.

As for Saints invocation, and the antiquity of that belief and custom, it is
acknowledged by the Centurists, Chemnitius, our Dr. Whitgift, and Fulk. Dr.
Whitgift in his defense has these words, Almost all the bishops and writers of
the Greek Church and Latin also, for the most part were spotted with doctrins
of Free Will, of merit, of invocation of Saints, and such like. Fulk in his
rejoinder to Bristow, I confess, says he, that Ambrose, Austin, and Jerome held
invocation of Saints to be lawful: and in his book against the Rhemish
Testament, In Nazianzen, Basil, and Chrysostom I confess, says he, is mention
of invocation of Saints: and again, that Theodoret also speaks of prayers to
martyrs: and again in the same book, that Leo ascribes much to the prayers of
S. Peter for him: and again, that many ancient fathers held, that Saints
departed pray for us. Chemnitius in his examen, acknowledges as much of S.
Basil, Nazianzen, Gregory Nyssen, Theodoret, S. Jerome, and even S. Austin
himself. The Centurists charge the same upon S. Cyprian, who is ancienter than
S. Austin; and again upon Origin, who was ancienter than Cyprian: adding, that
there are manifest steps of Saints invocation in the doctors of that ancient
age. So, this is no novelty then.

Lastly, as for the Sacrifice of Mass, and Altars, (which as Dr. Reynolds says
well in his conference with Heart, are linked together) Peter Martyr in his
common places, reproves Peter of Alexandria for attributing more, as he
speaks, to the outward altar, than to the living temples of Christ: and he
checks Optatus also for saying, what is the altar? even the seat of the body
and blood of Christ; such sayings as these, says Peter Martyr, edified not the
people; and lastly, all the fathers in general he finds fault with, for their
abusing so frequently the name Altar; which indeed is spoken of even by S
Ignatius, the Apostles undoubted scholar, who is therefore carped at by
Cartwright. Calvin, Fulk, and Field acknowledge, that most ancient fathers, S.
Athanasius, Ambrose, Austin, Arnobius, talked much of the Christian Sacrifice
and Altar, and Priests, who offer and pour out daily on the holy table; adding,
that the fathers without doubt received that their doctrine from the Jews and
Gentiles whom therein they imitated. The Centuriators in 3. Cent. blame Cyprian
as superstitious in that point; and in their 2 Cent. say, that S. Irenaeus and
Ignatius though disciples of the apostles, were dangerously erroneous in that
account. Sebastianus Francus in his epistle de abrogandis in universum omnibus
statutis ecclesiasticis affirms, that presently after the apostles times, the
supper of our Lord was turned into a sacrifice, Andreas Chrastovius in his book
de opificio missae, charges the most ancient fathers with using a propitiatory
sacrifice. And our own Ascham in his Apologet. pro coena Domini, is found to
acknowledge, that sacrifice for the dead and living is so ancient in the
Christian Church, that no beginning of it can be found: although he thinks also
with Calvin, that it was derived, whenever it first began, from the custom
either of the Jews or Gentiles, or both; thus bespattering with his rash pen
the very first sproutings of Christianity in the world. However it is in the
mean time no novelty at least.

And let any one in any age of Christianity look all over the Christian world,
on any of those who profess that name, whether they kept communion with the
Roman Church, or brake by schism from it, or perhaps never heard of it, as
they say the Church in Ethiopia did not, and he shall find that they all had
this Christian sacrifice amongst them, as the great capital work of their
Religion. The Grecians under their Patriarch of Constantinople even still after
their schism have their Priests celebrating in all their ancient robes this
their sacred liturgy to this day in the learned greek tongue all over the world
where they live, and may serve God, not only in Greece, Epirus, Macedon and
islands of the Egoean sea, but in many parts of Natolia, Circassia, Russia,
Thrace, Bulgaria, Rascia, Servia, Bosnia, Walachia, Moldavia, Dalmatia,
Croatia, Thracia, and up as far North as Trebisond. The Assyrians or Melchites,
who are under the Archbishop of Damascus, whom they entitle Patriarch of
Antioch: The Georgians that dwell between the Euxin and Caspian seas, under
their Metropolitan who resides in the monastery of S. Catherin in Mount Sinai.
The Circassians that live between them and the river Tanais: The Muscovites or
Russians, under the primate of Mosco: The Nestorians dispersed up and down in
Assyria, Mesopotamia, Parthia, Media even to Cataia and India, under their
Patriarch residing either in Muzal, or the monastery of S. Ermes fast by it.
The Indians or Christians of S. Thomas, about the cities of Coulan and
Maliapar, Angamal and Cochin under their own archbishop, who is subject to the
patriark of Muzal, or patriark of Babylon, as they call him: The Jacobites in
Cyprus, Syria, Mesopotamia, and Palestin, under their patriark resident in
Caramit metropolis of Mesopotamia, or else in the monastery of S. Saphran near
the city Merdin: The Cophti, or Christians of Egypt, subject to the patriark of
Alexandria: The Habassms or midland Ethiopians under their own patriark or
Abuna, who is ever a monk of S. Antonies order, consecrated for them by the
patriark of Alexandria: The Armenians, on this side and beyond Euphrates, under
their two patriarks, resident, one of them in Mitilene, or else in the city of
Sis, not far from Tarsus in Cilicia, the other in Sebastia, or else in the
monastery of Ecmeazin: The Maronites resident in mount Libanus, under their
patriark, who is ever a monk, and resides either in Tripoli, or in the great
monastery of S. Antony: All these, although many of them fell away long since
from ecclesiastic unity upon their dislike of the Council of Ephesus and
Chalcedon, where one person and two natures in Christ was declared, and others
of them upon other such like occasion, yet do they still keep up all of them,
their monasteries, altars, priesthood, sacred ordination, messach, and ancient
Christian Liturgy. Nor do they know any other way of serving or appeasing the
Almighty in order to heavenly bliss, than this propiatory sacrifice, which
received from their forefathers they practice and exercise to this day. And
this was ever the great devotion of all Christians, and still is, excepting
only some few here in the North who have gone out of that primitive
Christianity, the last age, by following the unhappy steps of Luther and
Calvin; and not all of them neither. For Luther, although he fouled, yet did he
not throw down the altar: and the pure Lutherans that be yet in Germany,
Denmark and Sweathland, keep it up still.

Thus Sir have other Protestants admitted all that to be ancient, which this
your Disswader calls a novelty unheard of in ancient times. Nay Luther and
Calvin esteemed all Popery an old Egyptian darkness spread over the face of the
Church all ages since the Apostles days, and dissipated at length by that new
light which they revealed. It is a strange thing that Popery which in Luther
and Calvin's days was old, should now after a hundred years be grown young
again. But when Protestancy was new, then Popery was old; and now Popery must
be thought new, when Protestancy is grown old and rotten. Truth is, it was the
Ministers advantage, to acknowledge Popery to be old, when (...) where Catholic
Religion spread all over ^e earth, had all her monuments entire by her, to show
her antiquity to all people then living; who had also heard of the Catholic
faith of their ancestors; although they made it by slight of fallacious
oratory erroneous. But here and now in England, where all those monuments are
destroyed, it is a double convenience to say, that Popery is erroneous and new
too. When the first Reformers endeavored to supplant the Catholic professors
of their means and livings, it was best to accuse them of old errors. But now
to keep their livings they have invaded, it is a wiser part it seems, to
inveigh against Popery as a novelty. There novelty could no way be proved; and
here in England antiquity cannot easily be shown. Then matter of fact would
have disproved novelty; now matter of fact will not prove antiquity here in
this Kingdom, where the ancient religion is abrogated about a hundred years
ago; and people now alive that behold Protestancy, never saw Catholic
Religion, and are almost persuaded by their ministers there was never any such
thing here. Nor will people read Catholic authors, nor beleev them if they do;
nor have they power to consider who built all their Churches, or made their
laws, or any other good thing done for them by Catholic believers, but take all
Papists to be in a manner Atheists, because they com not to hear their ministers
talk in those Churches from whence poor Catholics were first solemnly banished;
and then within a while after were punished for not coming there; at such a
time, when their altar, sacrifice and priesthood were now abolished, and their
priests put to death, and others made liable to it afterward, when ever they
should come into those Churches again to do their functions; and ministers had
got into their places to rail against them and that holy ancient Religion,
which had built those Churches to their hands.

There is I think no better way imaginable to discover the nature of the ancient
Christian Church, than by considering what was said to be her belief and
practice then, when first she dared to show her face openly in the world,
appearing at length as it were from under ground and her former lurking
condition, wherein she had remained three hundred years under the cruel
persecution of Pagan Emperors. As soon as Constantin the Great, Gods heavenly
grace so moving him, had first taken this holy Church by the hand, and clothed
her with her ornaments of peace, then surely she would appear her self. And
what she was then, may be easily gathered by such ancient writers, who either
purposely spoke of the life of Constantin, or incidentally of the things which
were done in those days, as Eusebius, Zozomen, S. Jerome, Bid, and others; who
deliver us the form and features of the Christian Church in those times, so
like unto the Popery that is now adays, after thirteen or fourteen hundred
years, both in the particulars Dr. Tailor speaks of, and several others now
cancelled by our Protestant Reformation; that a man may safely swear, that the
now present Popery and old Christianity are one and the same thing.

Eusebius tells us, how Constantin the Emperor after the fashion of those good
times, chastised his own body with fasting and disciplines; how he used to
bless himself, and sign his face with the sign of the Cross; how highly he
honored and set up that triumphal ensign, having confidence of victory in
virtue thereof; how he erected illustrious temples in memory of the Christian
martyrs; how he refused to sit down in the general Council of Nice, till the
Prelates there had given their consent; how he dedicated a sumptuous Church in
memory of the apostles, and provided there a sepulcher for himself, to the end
that after his death he might be partaker of the prayers there offered; how he
assembled the priests to the dedication of his temple, whereof some preached,
others offered sacrifice for the common peace, for the Church of God, and for
the Emperor; and lastly how in his sickness he confessed his sins in a chapel
of the martyrs, and prayer and sacrifice made for his soul after his deceas.

Zozomen in his history tells us also of him, that because those primitive
Christians used consecrated places, and only them for their public Liturgy,
Constantin had ever carried with him in the camp a portable altar and
tabernacle, and priests and deacons attending it, for celebration of divine
mysteries; how much also he honored the holy monk S. Anthony for the great
austerities of his life; how he would have all conciliar decisions to be
regarded as most firm and unalterable; and that he would not undertake the
judgment of ecclesiastical causes; and that he had great veneration for the
sign of the Cross. These and such like things speaks Zozomen.

So likewis, that Churches and Altars were consecrated in the time of
Constantin the Great, with the sign of the Cross and sprinkling of holy water
amongst other Catholic rites and ceremonies, is witnessed by S. Austin and S.
Bid. That Constatin the Emperor translated to Constantinople the holy
relics of S. Andrew, S. Luke, and S. Timothy, at which the devils even
audibly yelled and roared out, is asserted by S. Jerome. That the Emperor in
all his glory went to kiss the Martyrs Sepulchers, humbly praying those Saints,
that they would be intercessours to God for him, is told us by S. Chrysostom.
And lastly, that in Constantins days the Popes authority was acknowledged and
reverenced, is apparent by the great Synod of Arles then celebrated, who
decreeing that Easter should be uniformly kept, entreated Pope Sylvester, to
direct his letters according to the Churches custom all the world over for that
end.

Nay, the Century writers of Magdeburg, enemies of the Catholic Church, and so
renowned Protestants, that they have been styled by their followers, Men worthy
of eternal memory, even these do write of Constantin, (though with a design to
diminish his honor) that he appointed a great holiday for the temples
dedication, which we in English call a Wake: that he favored consecrations and
superstitious exornations of Churches; that he with other Christians in those
times met for Gods service only in consecrated places: that he would have
candles to burn in Churches in the day time; that superstitiously he sent to
Constantinople some relics of the Cross found by his mother Helena, for the
preservation of the City; that in Constantins time pilgrimages were much in
use, and that his mother Helena went to the holy land to worship: that Priests
were forbid to marry by the Synod of Arles, in the time of Emperor Constantin
and Pope Sylvester: that both under Constantin and long before his time were
both Monks and Nuns spread all over Asia, Syria, Palestin, Egypt, Bithynia,
etc. that Constantin did so reverence Bishops, that he would not sit amongst
them in the Nicen Council, but in a lower seat: That the said Emperor checked
Akesius for denying Priests to have power of forgiving sins, bidding him set up
a ladder for himself, and go up to heaven his own way all alone: and lastly,
that after his death they poured out tears and prays every where for the
Emperors soul.

And other Protestant writers many of them since, as Napper for example in an
English treatise upon the Revelations, and Frigivillaeus in a latin one called
Palma Christiana, dedicated to Queen Elizabeth, convinced by so palpable
testimonies every where obvious, acknowledge the Christian Church in Constantins
time to have been wholly Papistical. After the year of God three hundred, says
Napper, the Emperor Constantin subjugated all Christian Churches to Pope
Sylvester, from which time till these our days the Pope and his Clergy have
possessed the outward visible Church. And Frigivillaeus in his wrath calls
thereupon the noble Emperor Constantin, the great Dragon who gave power to the
Beast. Take it all in their own words.

Thus Eusebius; Ab omni licentia and vitae luxu diffluente sese vocavit, inedia
and corporis afflictione seipsum coercuit imperator, l. 2. de vita Constantini,
c. 14. Atque interdum vultum salutari illa signavit nota, l. 3. c. 2. Imperator
triumphale signum honoravit: and again, In qua part istud crucis vexillum
visum fuit, hosts sugam capere, victores persequi. Qua re intellecta imperator
sicubi partem aliquam sui exercitus languentem cernebat, ibi salutare illud
vexillum tanquam quoddam subsidium ad victoriam obtinendam locari mandavit,
cujus adjumentis extemplo parta est victoria: quippe dimicantium vires divina
quadam potentia fuere admodum confirmatae, l. 2. c. 7. Civitatem multis templis
in honorem martyrum illustrissimisque aedibus sacris adornavit, l. 3. c. 47.
Cum parva quaedam sella ex auro fabrificata illi esset loco posita, non prius
consedit quam episcopi ad id annuissent, l. 3. c. 10. Apostolorum templum ad
perpetuam illorum memoriam conservandam aedificare caepit, l. 4. c. 58. In
oportunum ventura mortis diem hic locum sibi provida dispensatione designavit,
ut defunctus quoque precationum, quae ibidem essent ad apostolorum gloriam
offerendae, particeps efficeretur, l. 4. c. 60. Sacerdotes alii qui horum nihil
poterant efficere, incruentis consecrationibus divinum numen placabant, and
supplices Deo preces offerebant pro communi pace, pro ecclesia Dei, ipsoque
imperatore, l. 4. c. 45. Humi procumbens genibus in ipsa martyrum aede errata
sua confessus est, etc. Adhuc quidem licet contemplari ter beatae animae
tumulum divinis ceremoniis and mystico sacrificio sanctarumque precationum
societate perfrui, l. 4. c. 61.71.

Thus Zozomen; Tabernaculum ecclesiae figuram exprimens, cum contra hosts
praelio contenderet, secum circumferre consuevit imperator Constantinus ad eum
finem, uti neque sibi in solitudine agenti neque exercitui deesset aedes sacra,
etc. Sacerdotes and diaconi tabernaculum assidue secuti sunt, l. 1. c. 8.
Antonium magum illum monachum in solitudinibus Aegypti magna cum nominis and
famae celebritate vitam degentem Constantinus imperator propter ejus virtutis
splendorem sibi amicum fecit, literas honorifice scriptas ad eum misit, l. 1.
c. 13. Jussit Constantinus, ut Conciliorum decisiones firmae and immutabiles
existerent, l. 1. c. 9. Mihi vero non est fas, cum homo sim, ejusmodi causarum
cognitionem arrogare, l. 1. c. 16. Sanctae cruci plurimum tribuit honoris, tum
propter subsidia in bello contra hosts gerendo ex ejus virtute sibi allata,
tum propter divinam sibi de ea oblatam visionem, l. 1. c. 8.

Thus the other Fathers; Crucis charactere basilicae dedicantur, altaria
consecrantur, Aug. sermon. 19. de sanctis. Bed. l. 1. c. 30. l. 5. c. 4.
Constantinus imperator sanctas reliquias Andreae, Lucae, and Timothei
transtulit Constantinopolin, ad quas daemones rugiunt, Hieron. contra Vig. Nam
and ipse qui purpuram indutus est, accedit illa amplexus sepulchra, and fastu
deposito stat sanctis supplicaturus, ut pro se ad Deum intercedat, Chryshom.
26. in ep. 2. Cor. De observatione Paschae Domini constitutum est in hac
Synodo, ut uno die and tempore per omnem orbem observetur: and juxta
consuetudinem, literas ad omnes Papa Sylvester tu dirigas, Conc. 1. Arelatense,
can. 1.

Thus the Century writers, Constantinus diem festum admodum solennem ad
celebrandam dedicationem templi indixit, Cent. 4. coll. 452. Templorum recens
extructorum consecrationes, exornationes superbas aliaque superstitiosa, quorum
maximam partem Constantinus excogitavit, and in multas ecclesias propagavit,
coll. 497. Christianos in templis nondum consecratis non convenisse clare
indicat Athanasius, coll. 408. Accensiones candelarum interdiu in templis
Constantinus instituit, coll. 497. Plane simili superstitione Constantinus
reliquias quasdam de cruce ab Helena reperta Constantinopolinin dicitur
transtulisse, ut esset ejus urbis conservatrix, coll. 1529. Caeperunt hoc
saeculo primum sub Constantino loca terrae sanctae, etc. in pretio haberi, etc.
Helena matter imperatoris mulier superstitiosa illuc profecta est adorandi
causa, coll. 457. Secunda Synodus celebrata est Constantini imperatoris and
Sybvestri tempore, etc. ubi can. 2. dicitur. Assumi aliquem ad sacerdotium, in
vinculo conjugii constitutum, nisi fuerit promissa conversio, non oportet,
coll. 704. Fuisse etiam ante Constantinum virgins seu mulieres continentes and
castitatem perpetuam professas ex libro quarto Fusebii de vita Constantini
apparet; ubi magnopere approbasse disciplinam ejusmodi imperatorem Constantinum
affirmat; adeo ut frequenter eorum contubernium adierit. Helenam vero
Constantini matrem Hierosolymis virgins Deo sacras reperisse Socrates
testatur, quarum professionem usque adeo probarit, ut ministram illis sese
praebuerit, coll. 467. Monachi per Syriam, Palestinam, Bythiniam, and reliqua
Asiae loca sub Constantino magno, coll. 1294. Notum est quam reverentiam and
observantiam episcopis habuerit Constantinus in Synodo Nicaena; ubi nec
consedere prius quam episcopi annuissent, voluit, coll. 460. Ad poenitentiam
admoneri homines, spem vero remissionis non a sacerdotibus sed (...) ipso Deo
expecta^e, etc. Cu haec dixisset Acesius, subjunxit imperator, Pone scalam o
Acesi, and solus ascend in coelum, coll. 653. Turba frequens preces cum fletu
pro anima imperatoris fudit, coll. 454.

Thus Frigivillaeus Gauvius, Constantinus tribuit Romano episcopo primatum ante
omnes. And again, Ex eo apparet satale fuisse, ut Constantinus daret potestatem
bestiae, quam statim Julius exercuit. Nam etiam Constantinus magnus ferebat
arma draconis in insignis suis, etc. ita ut ipse sit draco, qui dedit
potestatem bestiae, and typus draconis serpentis antiqui, Apoc. 13. qui bestiae
potestatem dedit. These words are in his Palma, p. 34.

And the same Centurists, learned and industrious Protestants, do manifesty
acknowledge, although they also dislike it, even in that fourth age above
thirteen hundred years ago, when the Christian Church first lift up her head in
the world, all in a manner practices, belief and rites yet held in the Roman
Church, and utterly now abolisht by the Protestant reformation, as then in
vogue amongst the prelates and people of those times: for example, the Primacy
of the bishop of Rome deduced by divine right from that of S. Peter, coll.
515.551.556.458. the single life of. Priests, 616.486. the sumptuousnes of
consecrating Churches and celebrating Masses in hallowed places, 497. the rites
used in ordination of deacons, subdeacons, acolytes, exorcists, readers,
door-keepers, and in the unction and consecration of Priests, 873 and 874.435.
ecclesiastical vestments, the alb, the stole, Dalmatick, cope, mytre,
504.876.835. saying of prayers upon little stones or beads, coll. 1329.
worshipping and estimation of the Cross, 302. praying toward the East, 432.
canonical hours, 433. mattins in the night, 459. solemn funeral rites and
prayer for the souls of the deceased, 453, 454, 455. Priests blessing of the
bride and bridegroom after marriage, 453. prohibition of marriage as well as
eating of flesh in Lent, 453.441. consecration of monks and monasteries, 466.
vowed chastity, poverty and abstinence, anchorets, hermits, their cells and
austerity of life, 470.488.300, 301.471.474. Images in the Church, and candles
there burning in the day time, 409, 410. solemn translation of Saints relics,
and placing them under the altar, with pilgrimages to them, whereat sick persons
were miraculously cured, 456, 457.602. consecration of baptismal water, and
confirmation by a bishop with chrysme, 415.420.865. sign of the cross in
baptism and exorcismes, 421.417. Free Will, interior justification and merit
of good works, 291, 292, 293. confession of sins to a priest, penance and
absolution with imposition of hands, 425.834. unwritten traditions, 299.
invocation of Saints, 295. Purgatory, 304. altars consecrated with the sign of
the cross and chrisme, called the s^at of Christ's body and blood, 409. real
presence and transubstantiation, 209.985. the reservation of that sacrament,
and offering it up a sacrifice to God propitiatory both for the living and
dead, 427.430.985. challice, coverings and holy vessels which lay people might
not touch, 490.835. mixtur of water with wine in the chalice, in time of
consecration, 480. In a word; all things which the Roman Catholic Church now
believes and practices contrary to themselves are acknowledged by those learned
Protestants in that fourth age to be so spread over the face of Christianity,
that many others of the same belief with them have not feared to say, that the
Church in those days, when she first lift up her head in the world, was
Antichristian and Papistical. Popery then is no such novelty, as Dr. Tailor
imagines, or would have us at least imagine it to be.

The Disswasives second Chapter.
That the Church of Rome uses doctrins and practices that are directly or by
consequent impious, and give warranty to a wicked life.

IS declared in 12. Sections. For the Roman doctrine teaches, says he, that a
sinner is not bound presently to repent, and that contrition is of it self of
no value, Sect. 1. Teaches also, a confession that is frivolous, and either of
ill or no consequence, sect. 2. Teaches a penance that is ineffective, sect.
3. Teaches Indulgences of no use, sect. 4. Teaches other assertions attending
hereon both falls and wicked; as that a habit of sin is no sin, and that one sin
is venial, another mortal, sect. 5. Teaches, that a probable opinion may safely
be followed, sect. 6. Teaches fond battologies and prayers without attention,
sect. 7. Teaches prayer to dead men, sect. 8. Teaches fond and wicked
exorisations and incantations, sect. 9. Teaches new Sacraments without warrant,
sect. 10. Teaches image worship against good life and virtue, sect. 11. Lastly,
teaches the abuse of faith, hope, and charity.

And so is demonstrated your Disswaders second plea against Papists. But to
answer all this in a word, The Roman Church or Catholic faith teaches none of
this.

His third Chapter.
That the Roman Church teaches doctrins destructive of Christian society, and
monarchy.

IS shown in three sections. First, she teaches it is lawful to lie and speak
falsities. Secondly, she does intolerable prejudice to government by exemption
of Clergy. Thirdly, subjects Princes to the Pope, and separateth wives from
husbands, and children from parents. And thus he concludes his third plea
against Popery, ending his book with a prayer, That the Lord would give his
reader understanding.

He prays to his own ruin. For if the reader of his book have understanding,
the writer of it will utterly lose his credit. And is it possible, that Dr.
Tailor should have so low opinion of us all, as to expose such talk as this to
the view of three nations? He wrote indeed first and principally for those
Irish people that belong to his charge; and he has it may be some such opinion
of them, as I remember I had, when being a boy I first heard talk of the wild
Irish. But we are now men, and should put away such childsh things. Neither
they nor we, are so wild or simple, as Dr. Tailor -- takes us to be.

How he has behaved himself in his first chapter, wherein he would prove Popery,
that is to say, Catholic Religion neither apostolik nor primitive. I have told
you Sir more at large. Now I tell you briefly, concerning these two chapters,
that there is not so much as any the least parcel of popery proposed to be
confuted therein. But he either depraves and slanders their religion; or
imposes, what no way belongs to it; which is injustice on both hands. But their
discredit will promote his applaus; and he cares not how it be effected. He is
secure, if they be misunderstood, and himself believed to be their enemy. For
then, the better part of the land will hold him up, and the other not go about
to pull him down. And therefore that all may join with him in the derision of
this same Ecce homo, he first like a Jew puts a reed into the Papists hand, and
then laughs at the featous scepter.

All this whole book of Dr. Tailors, and three parts of all the other books
that have ever been written since the Reformation against Popery, might be
sufficiently answered, without descending to particulars, and totally annulled
by one general discourse of the nature and poperties of school divinity, whence
the adversaries of Catholic faith cull out all their little drolleries, when
they make their rhetorical discourses against Popery, to blind the Land, and
abuse good people. And I had it in my heart, when I first set pen to paper, to
do it fully; so much in my heart, that I made but little account in comparison
of all the other things I had to speak. But I have already exceeded the length
of a letter, and shall take some other time for that discourse. Only take notice
Sir, that Dr. Tailor, and such like Protestant writers do as fond and unjustly
herein, as that Catholic would do, who undertaking to write against
protestancy, should never take notice either of the principles of reformation,
or of the articles, canons, or constitutions, for example, of our English
Church, but only pick out here and there some few words of this or that obscure
ministers book, found up and down in the Stationers shops in Oxford, Cambridg,
or London, and call a heap of such stuff, swerving perhaps from the Protestancy
he opposes, by the name of Protestant-doctrin. Thus do all Protestants deal
with popery. Not a word do we hear when any one of them writes against it, of
their substantial Religion, which is in the hearts and hands of all Catholics,
established by gospel, tradition, and councels, and justified by the universal
practice and judgments of all men in the world who profess that faith, which
only is popery and Catholic profession; but only some deviations either in the
words or manners of some one or other that have lived amongst them: and this is
that they call Popery.

This Disswasive of Dr. Tailors is wholly nothing else: only with this
difference, that the subject and heads of his first chapter is something that
pertains to Catholic faith and profession, though in speaking of them he
utterly swerves from the purpos: but in his other two chapters, both what he
speaks and what he speaks of, is utterly impertinent. But thus is malice and
misapprehension against Catholics and their Religion most holy and innocent,
diffused up and down in men's hearts, to the ruin of charity, and a right
understanding in this Land.

But my Protestant Countrymen, those I beseech not to be too credulous. And my
Catholic Countrymen I most fervently beg of them, still more and more to
beleev and hope and trust in God, who in his good time will justify his own
religion, and all his poor servants that profess it. We must still remember in
what a world we live, and be willing for our beloved Lord to suffer contumelies
here, in all resignation and peace. He that can do this is a conqueror of
himself, and lord of the world, a friend of Christ, and heir of heaven.

This is all, Sir, I either mean or need to speak at this time, concerning this
Disswasive. Try all things, and hold what is right. Truth like the sun will
soon appear to an open, unveiled and clear eye: but prejudice leads us
blindfold unto ruin. Nor must you stay, Sir, till our good ministers tell you,
that you and they are in an error. Though an Angel from heaven should convince
them of it; yet can he not by any argument persuade them to leave a wife and
five hundred pound a year for a poor humble and naked truth. It were in the
mean time a thing I should think of much wisdom in them, not to write any books
against Papists. For they do but lose by that public slander, which comes to
Catholic eyes, all that varnish of vain glory, which they procure themselves by
private calumnies cast upon them in the pulpit, which Catholics never hear of.
Some one or other amongst those papists may happily think it expedient and no
ways against the rules of patience, to refute their folly. And then the
minister is lost. That most honorable authority, which forbids Catholics to
write any books, forbids others by a tacit consequence, to slander them. For
the law of God and nature ever permits, and sometimes commands, the innocent to
justify themselves, and clear their injured reputation. Farewell.

Dated this 8. of the Calends of July, 1665. J. V. C.


