TO KATHOLIKO STILLINGFLEETON. OR, An account given to a Catholic Friend, of
Dr. Stillingfleets late book against the Roman Church. Together with a short
Postil upon his Text, In three Letters,

By I. V. C.

All things are not, which seem to be:
Nor do all things seem to be, which are.
Bruges, Printed by Luke Kerchove, 1672.

TO KATHOLIKO THE PREFACE.
SIR,
MAny learned Treatises have been composed and set forth, by the Reverend J. V.
C. the worthy Author of FIAT LUX, for persuading a right Understanding and
Moderation in matters of Religion; and for the convincing this our distracted
Nation, of the Innocence of our Catholic Religion and Practices, in order to
Church and State; which have been received with much benefit and applause. But
that good esteem wherewith You and Others entertained the First Part of his TO
KATHOLIKO, did especially engage Him, to endeavor the publishing the remaining
Pieces thereof then fitted for your view, in obedience to your command, as well
as to undeceive Dr. Stil^^'s seduced Readers both concerning his Errors, and
our Vnblamableness; as also to discover the grand Imposture, contrived by his
Malice or Folly for the subversion of his Catholic Neighbors.

The whole Work had long since been made public, had it not (as the cause it
justifies) suffered much Persecution, almost to its utter suppression. The
malignity of our Adversaeries, conscious of the weakness of the Doctor's charge
against Us; and fearing, least the perverseness of their hearts, in imposing and
divulging so evident calumnies, should become Visible; has constrained this
your harmless Postill to a longer Voyage, then the timely Vindication of our
Churches impeached Honor, would have otherwise reasonably allowed; Having now
escaped many storms it walks alone, and ventures to look forth upon you; yet
had its worthy Author been longer spared with Us, you would have seen it in a
fuller and more fashionable dress; though even thus, it is not beneath your
Expectations, offering unto your Consideration, such sober Reflections, as well
become the dignity of the Holy and Apostolical Religion of Catholics, and do
clearly Vindicate that our Way from the foulest aspersions, carnal wisdom could
utter, against plain Truth and Honesty.

Were that freedom, which the Doctor's provocations imply, allowed Us, for a
legal defense of our holy Church, which the Law of Nations, and our Venerable
Courts of Justice afford the most wretched assailed Innocents, in Case of fraud
and Calumny, against the Prevaricators of common peace; It would be easy to
manifest, that as our Catholic Doctrine and Devotions need no other Champion,
then that Churches perfection and Majesty: So her many Doctors, neither want
skill or will, to put by those weak thrusts, the Doctor makes at her reputation
hitherto preserved without blemish by God's assured providence, over her
watchful Pastors.

The Doctor in this his Account of the Idolatry, Impiety, Fanaticism,
Divisions, (and what not of Iniquity?) of the Roman Church, has summed up high
Criminations against Us; and then, having laid the Foundations of his own
Belief, concludes, the Church of Rome, neither to be the Catholic Church, nor
any sound part, or member thereof; but whether he designed this his so
peremptory a Charge, as an Obelisk, with GRATITUDO POSUIT, to his thereby
deluded Benefactours; or to be a new Dioclesian Column, with NOMINE CHRISTIANO
DELETO, for this Age too; he knows best, who framed it; sure it is his
fundamentals are such, that they subvert all Christian Monarchy and Obedience,
without which, not only Christianity, but neither any Church, consisting of
more then one member, can long preserve its self from mouldring into Divisions
and Desolation.

The truth is, if ever any Opposer of our Catholic Faith, has betrayed his own
Cause, this Doctor is notably guilty of it: for his Imputations upon Us are so
evidently slanderous, and the Principles of his own Religion so leakie that
they have rendered the whole Reformation suspected of a Notorious Cheat, in its
growth and progress, to all unprejudiced Judgments; who by the sober ways of
our Religious Worship, our many great encouragements to piety, our zeal in
obse^ving Evangelical Counsels, and our wonderful Unity in the groundsills of
our Christianity, are clearly convinced of the holiness of our Catholic
Truths, and Maxims of Morality; and (notwithstanding, our Adversaries loud
declaimings against Us, even from the Infancy of Christian Religion, to this
Age when the Reformation was Vshered in by unclean licentiousness, much
different from the subtle Errors of Primitive Dissenters,) that neither Wit
nor Malice of Man can overthrow the Faith and Moral Precepts of the Roman
Church, conveyed unto Us in her sacred Canons; whereas her Impugners still,
like Jonas Gourd, wither in their blossom; for the counsels of Men shall fail,
according to the good Gamaliels Rule, but God and Truth have their Date
everlasting.

Had the Doctor as carefully perused the large Records of our Church Histories,
which treasure up, and continue to Us, the Body of our Christian Belief and
Rules of manners, unchanged through all its Ages, by the Vigilance of her
Apostolical Governors, by whom Primitive Truths have been unanimously
conserved, and conveyed unto Us in their Original Purity; as he has been in
Rakeing over the foul ashes of ambitious Schismatics. Scepticks, and
Libertines, (the Cockle, that still grows up with Christ's best corn); and in
frameing his Creed by the Square of his Truth discerning Reason, that which
Holy Scripture forbids to our utter peril; he had discovered, our Catholic
Doctrine to be the very Image of her Divine Architype, who IS, and changes not;
and who has accordingly laid the Foundation of, and built up, this our
Impregnable City of the Pilgrim Saints; still guarding It with his own sacred
Spirit, and assisting her Visible Pastors, in the Government of that his
Catholic Body, that as he has promised, Hell may not prevail against it; Nor
may the Doctor's severe Account hope other success herein, than the more
powerful Swords of Pagan Cesars, the Edicts of Senats. and the wrath of Flamins
of the Old Heathen Rome; upon whose Ruins, our glorious Lord has by S. Peter,
built up this his everlasting Church; in Communion wherewith only, we can
pretend to the Title of Christianity, or to the promises which Jesus Christ has
thereunto annexed; if either Christ's promise, or gift to, or prayers for S.
Peter, may be allowed, to have either power with God, or any credit with
Mankind.

Hence Sir, the Doctor's Book, as it has bred admiration at his confidence, and
contempt of his Malice, amongst all Catholics, who are better acquainted with
their own Faith and practices, then to be instructed in them, or misled from
them, by any prevaricatours sounding brass or tinkling Cymbal: so has it
raised up an amazement, in some of the more learned Clergy, of Protestants, at
that his boldness; and caused them to suspect too, their own cause; which,
after so often plaistring over their breach from Us, with manifold Untruths at
length needs buttressing up with so palpably incredible calumnies, therein
inserted. His Account indeed seems chiefly designed for Vulgar Capacities and
therefore he mainly endeavors to captivate their attention and belief, with
much sophistry, and many smooth stories, of some Doctors amongst Catholics,
whose different Opinions about the Moods of Christian Doctrine (which they
believe simply, as it is delivered them plainly, though they Vary in their
Explications of Divine Mysteries) he makes pass for disagreeing in Articles of
Faith; of others some, who schismatically affected speak the style of their
predominant passions, not according to the Religion they received from their
Catholic Teachers, and are therefore censured by the great Overseers of
Christiant^y; whom nevertheless the Doctor makes to speak the pure sense of the
Roman Churches Faith and Piety; And of some too, whose Judgments guided by the
compass of their ambitious and unclean affections, driving at great Names and
Places, cause division in the outward Hierarchy and Government of the Church,
for which neither the Canons of our Faith and Manners gives them any authority;
nor may it be hoped, that either the care or power of our chief Pastors, may
wholly avoid such Wolves, since according to Christ's prophesy, scandals will
still arise, though our Catholic Bishops still oppose themselves against them;
and yet the Doctor will have these either to be our Church Governors, or their
actions to be destructive of our Catholic Unity. But all these slights of his
are to so little purpose, that many sober Protestants has been startled at
th^se his Cantings, and Imputations upon so an^i^nt and grave a Body of
Christians, whom their former Teachers ever allowed to be members of Christ's
Mystical Body and capable of salvation, in their own way of Christian
observance Whence as the Cruelty of the old Roman Emperors and Presidents,
against the Primitive Christians moved many Unbelievers of those times, to
embrace the Roman Faith; so has the severe Accusations of the Doctor against
Catholics, moved many of their Adversaries, to a more steady enquiry into our
Catholic Truths, to confer more reverently with the Dispensers of the Doctrine
of that defamed Religion; and often to conclude, somewhat more than ordinary of
truth and honesty to be found in that Way, which being long since banished this
Nation, by very severe Laws, is still so eagerly arraigned, so clamorously
cried down, in Press and Pulpit; and at any Rate exposed to the severity of
those, whose Interest, passion or dullness, has ever since engaged them in its
suppression.

The Doctors whole Account amounts to a pulling down, and a setting up; first
he pulls down the Church of Rome, then He sets up his Own; he makes Use of four
formidable Engines to overturn that our Catholic Church, which your TO
KATHOLICO amply examines; But surely, if the Church of Rome falls, all
Churches, which either received their belief from her or now communicate in
faith with her, must fall too; and thus the Catholic Church, and the Communion
of Saints, an entire Article of the Apostles Creed* is on a sudden cancelled.
Indeed it is so proper to all Church Reformers, to pull down Churches, and such
like Monuments of our forefathers Christian piety, sucked in with that faith
they originally received from their Roman Apostles, that our Nati^n has cause
enough to bewail the power of th^^ Sword of Gospellers, in whose sense we may
confess, The Roman Church, in some measure, to be no sound Church; even no
Church at all, were their Swords as keen as their Pens and Tongues, and as
close-laid, as Nero once wished His* to an Imaginary Neck; for we are ever
bound to believe, each one speaks and writes his own thoughts and hearty wishes.

The Doctor having endeavored to level our Roman Church, and not finding One
principled according to his own Acephalick passion, wherewith to close, lays
the foundation of his Own, properly His, Stillingfleet Church; Not Roman, nor
Protestant nor indeed any Church at all; for where he leaves neither any
constant Rule, whereby to square our faith or observance, in necessaries not
clearly revealed in holy Wri^t; nor any power to oblige to a conformity in
Belief and Practices; nor any One Visible Head, for our Direction and
Communion, there can be no Church of Christ, but a Babel and Confusion; that
which evidently follows from the Doctors Own Principles; whereunto he pretends,
the faith of Protestants must be reduced, as to the only true Test, of its
being Christian and Catholic. And thus, after our long reproaching, that
Church as Vnprincipled, the Doctor in a full Council of his own thoughts,
assembled in Virtue of his all-truth discerning Spirit, synodically pronounces
his Anathema's against Us, and publishes Canons of faith to all the Churches of
England, and will prove it to be One, Holy, Apostolical and Catholic, by such
Rules, as neither Scripture, nor Councels, nor Fathers, nor any Church ever
men^^on'd before, nor will ever be solemnly canonized by any Synod of our
English P^^lates, however he pretends them to be Protestant, (wherein we may
admire at their silence); even by those Rules, by which, a^^ ^elief built on
them (not borrowed from the Roman Church) may be contradictory, and will be
clearly resolved not to have One Mark of the true Christian Church, even to be
no Church at all, but a pure Stillingfleet an phantosm.

His design in forging these his Principles was, thence to show, the Protestant
Church, as Protestant, or as it is by Schism separated from the great Catholic
Body of Christians, to be Positive, Uniform and Principled; whereas by them, it
is clearly Negative, Confusive, and Begs the question in the root of all.
Briefly thus: As for the first, the Dr aims directly, at the subversion of all
traditional Revelation, and of an external visible and infallible proponent of
divine credibles, and of all power obligeing to acceptance of them as such and
consequently, at the overthrow of all Articles, by the Church of Rome allowed
and Canonized as truths revealed upon those grounds. As for the next his Canons
for the interpreting Gods written Revelations, are of that Latitude, that
whoever admits them, if he please, may disagree with the Doctor and all others,
and with himself too, at different times, by virtue of a pretended Personal
infallible-all-truth discerning-faculty which he allows all, in all
fundamentals and superstructures depending on the controverted sense of Gods
written Word, after a sober enquiry and sincere endeavors; however necessary
those credibles be to salvation, or the framing one Church of many
truth-discerning members; whether this their enquiry be performed by the
working of reason only, which in supernatural Truths, revives Pelagianism; or
by a pretended personal divine assistance, in regard of each Believer; to which
every one may as legally pretend, and appropriate it to himself, by pretense of
having used his best means to understand Scripture, as the Dr. himself, or any
other Teacher, which is to erect an Acephalick Enthusiasm or Fanaticism. And as
for the last, if it be a legal proof, that there is no traditional Revelation*
or that God has used fraud, or that his scribes have been unsincere with us,
because there are some divine Revelations written; or again, that there is no
external infallible proponent or obliging Authority, as to matter of faith and
manners, necessary, because every one is an infallible proponent to himself,
and can use his best endeavors to discern the true sense of Scripture in
necessaries to Salvation* or also that the Church of Rome is not the Catholic
Church, nor any sound part thereof because the true believer must since^ely
endeavor to discover the true meaning of written Revelations, according to the
intention of Gods holy Spirit; if I say, these of such like discourses of the
Dr be first principles, we need not fear begging the question, in any discourse
whatsoever.

But I purpose not here Sir to give you a special report either of the Drs.
account of our Calick Religion, or of his Principles of his own, intending not
to exceed the limits of a preliminary Epistle, or to forestall your TO
KATHOLIKO, or the labors of others, who have already entered the field, or
perhaps will hereafter appear there, to help on the Doctors Itch of writing
against the Roman Church, or for his own (as he makes it his Profession) though
to as little purpose as if he had forbid his beard to grow, or the Sun to walk
his usual rounds, for God will preserve the work of his own hands should the
Dr. scribble or babble till his doomsday. However it will be worth the while,
if he thinks his cause deserves it, to consider his own contradictions; his own
Fanaticism; his misrepresentations of our Catholic Devotions and of our
doctrine of repentance and Indulgences, his Principles considered, and this
your Friends KATHOLIKO TO wherein he may find diversion enough for the
ex^^cising his truth discerning faculty and sober enquiry. And since he now has
so notoriously injured the, Catholic Church, by Infamations and Novelties, and
has confidently provoked the Doctors thereof, to appear in the Field; We may in
all justice expect, he will not, as hitherto set guards upon all approaches;
nor shall be then want wherewith to employ his admirable talents, in those his
dear Fields, which lay so open for himself to ramble in.

Now Sir, as for any Answer to these our Reply's, you must be sure to arm your
self, with a large store of Resignation; either to be told by the Doctor, of
his many more important employments abroad, and necessary Occupations at home
for propagating the Gospel; or to hear of some new disperate Piece against
Popery, which some considerable Person expects from him; or that he is sick of
some disease, much like Demosthenes his Quinsie; for it is usual with Persons of
his opportunities, in this case, still to answer besides the purpose; nor to
heed whatever has been often said unto them; but ever to crow and caper, as if
each of them were a Conqueror, so true is it, That although thou should bray
a Fool in a Mortar, amongst Wheat with a Pestell, yet will not his foolishness
depart from Him. So unwilling to detain You any longer, from the perusal of
this your KATHOLIKON, I remain

SIR, Your devoted Servant, J. C.
June 25. 1672.
TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
FOr preventing mistakes, thou art desired to take Notice, that some few Copies
of J. V. C. his Third Letter, speaking to the pretended Fanaticism and
Divisions of the Church of Rome, stole abroad without, either the review or
allowance of the publisher, and therefore they are not owned as the true and
genuine Work of that Author; that which is here presented unto Thee; together
with his first Epistle, which refutes Image Idolatry imputed to that Church,
formerly Printed, now reprinted with addition; and likewise his Second Letter
replying to Dr. Stilling fleets Host Idolatry and Saint Idolatry; and also to
his Hindrances of good Life and Devotion. Which make the whole Posthume Work of
that Worthy Author, answering to that Doctors Account.

Most considerable Errata Corrected.
[Image Idolatry.] Page 20. Line 13. Beads.

[Host Idolatry and^.] Page 30. lin. 8. do take, page 37. l. 5. for all.

[Hindrances, etc.] Page 14. l. 22. he may not. Page 18. l. 8 how the
Sacra^ents. p. 19. l. 23. often, no ways.

[Fanaticism.] Page 11. lin. 11. propagation. page 12. l. 9. peace and. p. 23.
Acab. p. 16. l. 18. Feast of the.

TO KATHOLIKO Stillingfleeton.
THe Book, Sir, which taken up with better affairs, you sent unto me, that I
might, after I had read it over, draw an Abridgment of it for you, with my own
thoughts super-added in the close, by way of a short Comment thereon, is the
second production as it seems, of Doctor Stillingfleet against Popery. Less
displeasing it is I think to a Reader, and nothing so tiresome, as some other
Books which have issued forth on that Side against the ways of Catholic
Religion. For there is some Truth in his Citations, a seasoning of Salt and
comical Wittiness sprinkled all over; and no such thick gross venom of
maliciousness, wherewith other Books of that kind are overcharged, appearing,
though much of it lie hid, throughout his Book. Indeed he perverts all things
by his various subtilty: But that is no more, but what his own fame and
interest, here principally aimed at, would require. And we must give him leave
to deride also, and play and sport himself in his Book, as a Leviathan in his
own waters. It is his pasti^ue and pleasure, and a sweetness esteemed perhaps
necessary to his life. And who would be so ill-natured as to envy it him?
Besides, it is a pretty piece of Rhetoric, both fit and very efficacious to
create in his Protestant Readers an opinion of his unerring confidence, which
is the one great end of his Labors. And if we be thus kind, he will, in
recompense of that our civility, give leave I suppose to Catholics, who see
him so jocund and supinely careless in his errors, thence to conclude the
strange inconsiderate security of the merry man.

But we must know, Sir, that this his elaborate Book against the Church of
Rome, as he speaks, although it be his second, yet is it not intended to be his
last: For, If Catholics have any thing to say, quoth he, either against our
Church, or in defense of their own, let them come into the open Field, from
whence they have of late so wisely withdrawn themselves, finding so little
success in it. Thus he speaks in his Preface, threatening (if I understand him
right) another Knocker, as stout a one as this can be, if any one dare to
appear against him, or say so much as Boh to a Goose. And these words of his,
import I think a Challenge, called commonly a Defiance; which Catholics as
soon as they had read, thought it as much their duty, as it sounded to be the
Doctors desire, to fit their Slings unto their Arms, and meet him. But the
thing proved alas to be but a Copy of the Doctors Countenance, quite differing
from his heart. For the Presses, guarded enough before against Catholics, was
presently within a month after his Book came forth, so stoutly beset, so
frequently invaded, so violently searched night and day, especially by the
industry of one of them, who entering into the Printing-houses, cried out aloud,
And what! have ye here any thing against the Doctor Stilling fleet? hah! that
what before was difficil, and extremely dangerous, was now become impossible.
So that I believe no Catholic in England can do him the favor which the
Doctor thirsts after so earnestly in his Lips. He challenged the Pap^sts for
his Credit, and stopped up their way for his Security: He would first make the
world believe they cannot answer him, and then provides that they shall not.
This seems to be his mind.

And yet I think, Sir, there be few Protestant Gentlemen in England who desire
not as earnestly as any Catholic, to see some Reply to his Book: So little do
they think themselves concerned in a Scroll which neither defends their
Religion, nor hurts or touches ours; wherein nothing is said, but what might as
well be spoken by a Mahomet an, Jew, or Pagan; and the most part of that which
is put to disable Catholic Religion, diminishes Christianity it self. Some of
them offered themselves to print a Reply for us: But they offered but words.
For they found that the Bishop durst not give a License to any of our Catholic
Books, only so far as to secure the Printer from danger; although the Doctor
be a Foe to their Rank and Order, and Catholic Religion a Friend. This is,
truly Sir, a very sad case, that they can freely give one a License to defame
men, and yet dare not give others a License to clear themselves. Doctor Cousins
when he was in Paris, spoke up and down so freely against Catholic Religion
that their Clergy hearing of it came to him, and told him plainly, That if he
had ought to say against their Religion they would both get him a License from
the Bishop to print his Book, and themselves pay the whole charges, and then
answer him when they had done, for his satisfaction. But we poor Creatures can
obtain no favor in our own Country, no leave to speak or justify our selves,
no License to print a Book for our defense, when we are both scurrilously
libelled, and falsely slandered, and imperiously challenged to answer: Nor is
there any open field for our poor Men to come forth into, that I know of, but
Tybourn; and that is perhaps the Doctor's meaning. It does mightily amaze our
Catholics all over the Land, to have their Ears thus beaten with slanders,
which are both of a high nature, and still notoriously false, year by year,
without any end; thereby to make us odious to our Neighbors, and them to God.
Our blessed Lord have pity on us; and either open, if it may be thy will, our
Magistrates hearts toward us, or stop the Ministers mouths against us; that
our good Name and Peace may return unto thy great Glory. We are, if we be
si^ent, proclaimed guilty: and if we speak, insolent. What can we do, Sir,
here, but still commend our selves unto our heavenly Lord, who miraculously
preserves us. We do either subsist after this life, or not. Our Protestant
Country men must needs believe one of these two things: Either some Religion
is true, or it is all a fiction. If it be all a^fiction, and there is no life
to come, then are they as guilty as we; nay, something more; for they have
taken away our Churches from us, for themselves to dissemble in. If there be a
life to come, and this everlasting, then can there certainly be nothing of
greater importance in this world, than to know, when many ways are pretended to
it, which of them is the most authentic and truest, wherein we may be both
happy and safe for ever. Why then are we, who are the first not permitted to
speak, while all others are permitted to blaspheme us? If we prove to go amiss,
the danger is our own: and if we be in the right, it cannot be any danger unto
them to know it. All the positive things of Religion which any of them do keep,
they have them all from us, we borrow nothing from them. And the negative
points which separate them from us, seem to us as false and impious, as they
can possibly appear true to them. They have as many Articles to believe as we,
only some of them which made the separation are affirmative to us, and negative
to them: And one Affirmers word is to be taken in Judgment before ten Deniers.
And yet will they neither read our Books, nor suffer us to print any, when we
are falsified, and mis-interpreted, and challenged and obliged to do it, for
fear I think our Religion should prove true. All rejoice when a Book is written
against Popery: but no man seeks to be informed. They will have it by all means
to be esteemed false, be it in it self what it will or can be. And in that
strange prejudice men venture to die, only for the pleasure of a Minister and
his Wife and Children, who must needs have it so.

The occasion of this his present book, entitled, A Discourse concerning the
Idolatry, etc. was, it seems, a question or two propounded unto Mr. Stilling
fleet, by I know not what Gentlewoman, who having heard the Doctor say, That
Protestants if they turned Roman Catholics, would lose their Salvation; told
him, That if Protestants say so, then are they full as uncharitable as Papists
themselves, who aver the like of Protestants: She therefore consults some
Catholic Gentleman in the business; I do not know whom neither. But he, it
seems put into her hand two questions, to show to Doctor Still, in her next
encounter. First was, Whether the same motives which secured one born and bred
in the Catholic Church to continue in it, might not also serve to secure a
Protestant, who convinced by those motives should embrace it. The second was,
Whether it suffice to be a Christian in genere, or it be also necessary to
adjoyn to some Church of Christians in particular? These be the two questions.

The second of these two questions the Doctor re^^lves affi^matively; I affirm
says he, that a Christian by virtue of his being ^o^ is ^ound to join ^e the
Communion of some Church or Congregation in particular. Thus he resolves it,
and speaks not a word more of that business. Yet here we may take notice that
the said Resolution of his, is quite contrary both to a book of his called
Irenicon, written in the times of our late Anarchy, and also to his first work
written more lately against Popery. For all the whole scope of both these
books, is to show that a Christian by virtue of his being so, is not bound to
join in the Communion of any one Church in particular, or any Organical Body,
as he calls it. And that because every such body, either that is or has been in
the World, is liable to error, falsehood, and corruptions. And what necessity
in ^eed can there be in me to join in any Communion, which may go astray and
mislead me, since I cannot do worse if I remain free and all alone, and may
perhaps do better? But these contradictions are small matters. So long as the
Doctor opposes the Catholic Church, out of which they are all fallen, he is a
Protestant good enough, whatever he hold in particular, either contrary to
himself or any others.

The first question, which is the occasion and subject of this his present book
he resolves negatively; averring, that the same motives which might secure one
born and bred in the Catholic Church to continue in it, cannot secure a
Protestant, convinced by them to embrace it. And this his Assertion he
discourses at large, and confirms by various Syllogismes; because invincible
hinderance may perhaps excuse the one, but not the other: because the
Protestant is safe in his own Church, and therefore has no necessity to leave
it: because there is imminent danger in the Roman Church; where there is so
much Idolatry, so many hindrances of good life and devotion, so much
divisions, so much uncertainty of faith in it. Unto these resolutions and
argumentations of his, the Catholic Proposer adjoined present^y his own reply,
a very rational me thinks and good one. Hereupon the Doctor wrote and set forth
this his present book, called A Discourse against the Idolatry, etc. both to
enlarge his own arguments, and to disable the Catholic Gentleman's Reply. And
this was the occasion, purpose, and subject of the book you put in my hand to
peruse, and write to you the substance of it, with some few brief thoughts of
my own upon it.

Indeed the whole book is a kind of Academick Act or Commencement: such a one
as we have once a year in our famous Oxford and Cambridge, written and printed
for peoples deligh: and pastime; and if so it please the Stars, for his own
honor and preferment by our Doctor. And it came forth very seasonably about a
fortnight before the Oxford Act. to save the wits living here abouts, the great
charges and some kind of pains of a Journey thither, being now furnished well
enough aforehand with as subtle and good an Act, as that may happily be, at our
own doors, and which may please the Women somewhat better, in our Mother tongue.

The conclusions defended in this Holborn Act* are these three. 1. Popery is
idolatrous. And this is accomplished in two of his positions which he calls
Chapters. 2. Popery is a hinderance to a good life and devotion. And this is
dispatched at one other breathing, named his third Chapter. 3. Popery is
divided and disunited in it self.
And this puffed out in his fifth Chapter, which concludes his Book; And in midst
of this great Act, rises up a prevaricating Tripos, to refresh our
wearisomness, and make a litt^e sport. And he takes up the whole Scene of his
fourth Chapter. And his Theme is, Fanaticisme: the Church of Romes Fanaticisme;
or the Fanaticism of the Roman Church. And upon my word, it has made many
people merry, not the softer S^x only, but the rougher and more serious
mankind. And all do so c^ap and commend the man, that one may well bel^eve he
has received his reward, Idolatry, ill life and div^sions of the Roman Church,
which are h^s three less wild conclusions, we have in part already heard of;
even as we have heard talk of Europe, Asia and Africa. But Fanaticisme, his
merriment is, I think, the proper and peculiar discovery of Dr. Stillingfleet
himself: And he may deserve either to give or take a surname from it; as Scipio
Africanus took from Africa, and Vesputius Americus gave to America his new
found Land. What is it, that wit and industry cannot bring to light, if they be
jointly bent both of them upon the search? And a new discovery especially of a
rich pleasant Country full of curiosities is so pleasant to the Discoverer
himself, so naturally pleasant that I cannot but think that D^ctor
Stillingfleet, at his invention of Fanaticisme, wherewith he hoped to make many
others merry, laughed heartily himself.

He begins his Book with the Roman Idolatry: and he does wisely in it. For
Idolatry is such a terrible thundering charge; that in all Readers judgments
that Church is half condemned already, which has that crime so much as laid
upon it. Men therefore choose rather to be accounted Atheists than Idolaters.
For the first argues wit, with other stupidity. Nor will one man of a hundred
trouble himself to read over a Book written on any purpose of clearing from
that enormous crime either himself or religion professed by the Author of it.
Be the imputation never so false, yet is it still ablasting imputation; which
kills and overthrows, not so much by proving as by naming it. He must needs be
impious who is an Idolater; and he must be an Idolater who is called so. Be it
never so unjust, it is still a witty trick to cry out against him as an
Idolater, whose honor and livelihood we would here in England undermine. Sad
experience has proved this to be true too too often. And the Great God of
Heavens anger lies I fear heavily upon us for it. This thus far. Now forward.

IMAGE IDOLATRY.
The Church of Rome worships God by Images, and is therefore guilty of Idolatry
by giving to the Creature the worship due only to the Creator. For God having
forbidden any such sort of worshipping him by his own law and commandments given
by Moses, wherein he forbids his people to make day kind of image, pesel
themunah eikon glyp^on, sculptile, any thing represented either by carving tool
or pensil, cannot own that worship, nor can any such worship terminate upon
God. And the reason of that law of Moses is unchangeable, which is that God's
infinite and incomprehensible Deity cannot be represent^d For which reason the
wisest of Heathen both particular Men and Nations judged all such
representations of the invisible Godhead to be incongruous and unbecoming his
glory; And if this were inconsistent with Gods nature and will in the old Law
much more in the new, where we are taught to worship God in spirit and truth,
and to have no low unworthy thought of God. It might therefore seem more
rational to worship God in the Sun, and Moon, which have more of God in them,
and to say our prayers to the Sun and Moon them to any image or shadow; the
same argument which excuses the one will justify the other much more. For this
reason St. Paul teaches that the Godhead is not like to gold or silver or
stone, and blames those who change the glory of the incorruptible God into the
image of corruptible man. And the Heathens in doing this did ill: although the
wiser sort among them testify that they did not hold their statues to be Gods,
but that they worshipped God in them. And yet some ancient Fathers disputed
notwithstanding against that heathen practice, and counted it idolatry.
Wherefore Germanus Patriark of Constantinople says expressly that Christians
make no representation of the invisible Deity; and Damascene that it is madness
to go about it. Wherefore the Synod of Constantinople and that of Frankford
pleaded hard against the making of any images amongst Christians however the
second Council of Nice vainly went about to defend them as innocent and useful
helps. Finally, Moses himself explicates by his deeds the meaning of his own
Law when he was so highly displeased with Aaron for the golden Calf he had made
the people in his absence. And yet Aaron did not make it to bring the people
into heathen idolatry, but to give them only a Symbol of the Angel who was to
go before the people: As also the two Calves set up by Jeroboam in Dan and
Bethel were set up only to keep the people from going up to Jerusalem, and not
to bring them to the idolatry of heathens. And therefore Primitive Christians
never used any images, as the learned of the Church of Rome acknowledge.

1. This is the sum of the Doctors discourse in this his first Chapter. And he
cannot but expect his Reader should have a mighty conceit of either his most
high or most deep Divinity, who has converst so much with the learned sort of
the Church of Rome, the graver sort of Philosophers, and wiser sort of
Heathens. Nothing does he here deliver, that was so much as thought of by the
common sort, the vulgar sort, the ordinary sort of Mankind. And O what pleasure
and content of heart will it be unto him, if he could meet with an adversary of
his learned sort too, who viewing his airy subtilties should oppose him
seriously, as if he were serious himself; and then distinguish as if he were
dealing with some solid Divine; and then ply him with proofs and testimonies,
refell him by shorter enthymems and longer syllogismes; subtly search in what
Mood and Figure he speaks; and then tell him how his consequence flaggs, or
antecedent is ambiguous, till he have learnedly consumed a hundred pages in
refutation of a trifle. Then surely will the Doctor be judged by all parties
to be as he would be thought to be, an able man.

2. The Catholic Church uses indeed both in their public and private
oratories, some pious representations of our holy Lord, either in his passion,
or birth, resurrection, or ascension, or miraculous working of some divine
miracle: And these holy figures of his are accompanied commonly with some
others of his blessed Virgin Mother, the renowned Apostles, valorous Martyrs,
holy Confessors, chaste Virgins, or other happy followers of our Lord, who
through many tribulations and a constant exercise of Christian virtues have
passed hence to a blessed life. All which do mightily avail, unto our
retiredness and recollection; when we enter into the house of prayer, a holy
place separated and sanctified for Gods service, from our own houses or the
streets. And the respect or esteem we have for such figures, is nothing but
what we bear either unto the sacred histories recorded of the same Persons, or
to those good rules of life and promises of Gospel, which those Worthies have
embraced, for the encouragement and imitation of us, who are now struggling in
that wicked world, which they overcame before us. For example, as we reverence
the history of Christ's incarnation, sounding in our ear; so do we look upon the
figure of it r^^^esented to our eye: As we love the story of St. Mary Magdalens
conversion; so do we like her Picture. As we honor St. Paul's life and
Martyrdom; so do we respect his Image. And St. Lawrences most cruel passion
upon the hot burning Gridiron, when it is represented to us in a Pict^re, we
are in the self same manner affected toward it, as we are to the invincible
virtue and patience there shown for the Love and honor of Jesus our Lord,
whose steps he followed. So that, what authentic history records to us in
words, of the virtue and valor of any of our Christian Ancestors; or what holy
Gospel tells us, of the glory and crown to be rendered unto the good works of
sobriety, charity, chastity, purity, patience, and the like: the same is
without words painted unto us by these compendious hieroglyphics, serving more
speedily than words can do, to fasten us unto a strict recollection in our
Prayers by one short glance about us; and to a fear and awfulness of Gods
presence in that place where we are met together for his Service, accompanied
with the sigures of so many of our pious Ancestors who are gone to Heaven
before us; and also to a dissipation of any worldly thoughts, that may, as they
are apt enough to do, at that time come along with us there unto our
hinderance. All this benefit we have by our Pictures, when we have happily no
book to look upon, or know not by our ignorance to read, or cannot by darkness
or other lettance attend unto that labor. And this is all the whole business
of Images, as to Religion. In the Road of Philosophy trodden by School-Divines,
where thousands of conclusions over and above faith are advanced and opposed by
one another unto the sharpning of their wits, many things are said about every
thing, as the creation, resurrection, and the like, which faith in the same
things is silent of; Nor are we in our defense of faith concerned at all in
them. And it may be easily discerned by our Catholic practice what use we make
of our Images, when of a hundred people entering into a Church, nor one of them
ever casts his eye wistly upon them, but contented with a general glance,
compose themselves presently unto their prayers and meditations they keep
silently in spirit toward God. And when our Pictures are so sullied and
spoiled, that they will no more serve our use, we put them into the fire, as we
would do also a page of sacred Scriptures uttterly obliterated and fouled.

3. Indeed all the whole business of the use of Images at all, is but a matter
of discipline and government, for the help of people in the great work of
recollection and prayer; as is the use of Churches, and the music used in
them, with the Harp, Viol, and other Instruments, the Use of Beads and
Prayer-books. All which our Religion could spare, and yet be not at all
impaired, as to any its essential or substantial parts. Nay there be
inconveniences in any one of these things. Nor do I know any good thing in this
world without some inconvenience or other. It is enough for us, that the
conveniences and benefits of any good we have or use, are more and greater than
the inconveniences be. Many worthy Prelates in Christianity have at times
excepted very strongly against Organs, as some hindrance of the great work of
sp^ritual contemplation which Christian people meet to practice together in
their holy Assemblies, the great paramount work of Christianity, especially at
Mass. But these men, although moved unto that their exception by a Zeal not
evil, yet were they fain to yield at last unto the prevaling reasons of other
Prelates which over bore their lesser ones. Some other of our Catholic Doctors
and Prelates would have had us to have used no Pictures; that Jews and Pagans
might not catch at that pretense to cavil against our Christianity as they did.
But all these submitted at last, unto the prevailing part; by whom they were
made to understand that the inconveniences they urged were but imaginary and
small, the conveniences great and real. There have been not a few who have
excepted against much vocal Prayer; because it took up too much of the time
which would be better employed in the more principal work of prayer in spirit.
But yet could they not carry it, although their reasons were very plausible and
good; because that high and Angelical prayer in spirit, agreed not equally to
all men, or to any one consisting of flesh and blood equally at all times and
places, as vocal prayer does. Some have disliked even our material Temples,
built up so sumptuously as they are; because God immense and incomprehensible,
dwells not in buildings made by man's hands; Heaven is his Seat, and Earth his
Footstool; Yet could they not obtain* that our Churches should be therefore
pulled down, or not built up. Prayerbooks were nothing at all in use amongst
Christians in primitive times; when they prayed almost altogether in spirit,
and used no other vocal prayer but that our Lord taught us. And yet this
hinders us not, either to make such books, or use them in following times.
Instead of our beads in wood or metal, they used in ancient times a bag of
little stones, by the emptying whereof they knew that they had said over our
Lords prayer a hundred or perhaps three hundred times, according as any one in
his devotion had prefixed to himself every day of his life to do for Gods glory
and service. And there might be inconveniences pretended against our present
heads, especially those of gold and pearl. But they will not be thrown away for
that. Our Church-musick has been more than once opposed, and that by Prelates
most holy and renowned men, who deemed it an unsufferable lettance to the
spiritual recollection which Christians ought above all things to a tend unto,
that they may have our Lords good Spirit, and his holy operations in them,
especially when they meet together at their holy Synaxis. But Church-musick is
kept up to this day, notwithstanding their reason against it, which is very
good, for other reasons no less good and great than it; specified and urged by
the far greater number of pious Prelates for it. And yet if all or the greater
part of Catholic Prelates meeting together should take away all these outward
helps from us, beads and books, singing and Church-musick, pictures, and
Churches, and all, finding the inconveniences to be now greater than they have
been, and weightier than any convenience we have by them: though the thing
would seem very strange to us, yet ought we I think to obey them resignedly,
and attend wholly unto our spiritual meditations, either alone, or in our
Eucharistian meetings, and to the other good works commanded orcounselled us in
Gospel, in expectation of our future bliss and eternal happiness in God, which
can never be taken from us: though all things of discipline or helps in
government be alterable.

4. And now it is time to turn back and view the subject of this Chapter; that
we may see if any one period in it be true and pertinent. He tells us first,
that Papists worship God by Images, which logically is not true; Then that a
representation of the invisible Deity cannot be made; which is impertinent;
Then that the worship given to God by an Image does not terminate upon God:
which is neither pertinent nor true. And so he proceeds on to the very end of
his Chapter, with sounds either empty or false, or both; neither heeding or
caring what he says, so he do but mention learned Papists, and wiser Heathens,
which may help to butterress up his reputation. I cannot but remember here, the
shadow or Ghost in Virgil which Juno made of Aeneas, to draw her beloved Turnus
out of the field; It seemed to fight and threaten, and press on, and give back.
But nothing at all was done really.

Tum dea nube cave tenuem sine viribus umbram.
In faciem Aeneae, visu mirabile monstrum,
Dardaniis ornat telis, clypeumque jubasque
Divini assimilat capitis, dat inania verba,
Dat sine mente sonum gressusque effingit eunti^
Morte obita quales fama est volit are figuras
Aut quae sopitos deludunt somnia sensus.
Ac primas laeta ante acres exultat imago
Irritatque virum telis ac voce lacessit.
And such a shadow of controversy is all this present Chapter, and his whole
book also: a foming face and feeble force: big, but empty words: rumbling, and
yet insignificant sounds: qu^ck profers, and no progress: a daring shadow or
armed Ghost, without either body or bones. And yet such a thing as defies the
whole Catholic Church; steps out from the rest of his Camp, and defies them
all alone; defies them both in letters syllables and words. And this is all.
For he touches no body. Because Cathol^cks by the advice and allowance of their
Prelates do keep amongst them the representation of the divine Founder of their
Religion, who appeared amongst us by his unspeakable Love in form of a Man; and
of some of his holy followers in the way he chalked out for us; therefore he
talks of Moloch and Milcom, Osiris and Isis, Chemosh and Astaroth, Baal Peor
and Rimmon, golden Bulls and Remphan, the Calves of Dan and Bethel. And what is
all this for? Wy to overrun Papists, and beat us down; How can it do that?
These Idols were set up by Heathens, in opposition to the true God, and in the
very place of God, as darkness in the night time is in the place of light. This
is true, What then? and therefore I must not forsooth keep the figure of Jesus
Christ, or of S. Paul, or other domestic of my own religion for my own
encouragement therein. What likness, what consequence is there in all this?
Which is Remphan, and where is Moloch? Which is the Calf, and where is the
Bull? Nay, and here it is worth our observing too, that Protestant Gentlement
and Ladies of England, Ministers and Bishops too, have all pictures in their
Chambers as well as Catholics; even those of our holy Apost^es and Martyrs, as
well as others. And there they are good and lawful figures, but in our Chambers
they are Bulls of Basan, and Calves of Bethel among us. Catholic Pictures are
against Moses his Law; but theirs are not so; Although they be representations
both in Heaven above and Earth below, and Waters under earth, expressly by the
same Law forbidden; for example, Moon and Stars Dogs and Cats, Whales and
Dolphins. The Picture of Martin Luther in their Chamber is the lawful effigies
of a man. But Saint Stephen in our Closet is a Calf. Can any man who talks at
this rate, be thought to be one that has conversed either with the learned sort
of Papists or the wiser sort of Heathens: or one rather that had never any
conversation at all either with reason or men, O but Catholics worship God by
their Images, which Protestants do not. I marry, this is a huge fault indeed,
that Catholics take thereby occasion to think of God and his manifold mercies,
and bless his name, and trust in him. For they no other way worship God by
Images: This is the mortal sin which Catholics commit. And if that illogical
speech of the Doctor, Catholics worship God by Images, be drawn into any kind
of sense, it can be no other than this, that Catholics take occasion by the
pious faces of their Martyrs to think of Gods manifold graces and mercies
toward them, and thereupon trust in him afresh and bless his name: which great
error the Doctor, it seems, does carefully avoid. The ancient devout
Christians thought of God and worshipped him by any thing any good thing they
enjoyed; the verdant fields and sweet flowers, comfortable air, and pleasing
light, mountains, valleys and liquid streams; Plumbs, Pears, Apples, and
cheerful Grapes; by the virtue, charity and devotion of men, the ministry of
Angels, etc. But now we must take heed of that. We may taste a Plumb or a
Cherry, we may eat a Venison Pasty and drink good Wine if we can get it; nay we
may have fine Pictures in our Chambers, even the Picture of Jesus Christ
crucified, or any of his followers: we may have all this, if we be such good
Protestants as Mr. Stillingfleet, and never think of God, or worship God by it.
But if we worship God by it, if we think of God by it, then it is all poison to
us. All is suddenly turned to Moloch, to Remphan, to B^al Peor, to Ashtaroth,
to Aarons golden Steer and the Calves of Bethel. If we do but eat a custard
thinking of God, or worshipping God by it, presently it becomes a Ramphan or
Chiun, the Idol of the Arabians. Walking upon Hamstead hill, as people use
innocently enough to do, if casting our eyes about the prospect we think of God
by it, as Catholics are wont, the hill before innocent is now become a Baal
Peor the Idol of the Moabites. A Citiz^n walking to the Tower, may look
harmlesly enough upon the Crown and royal Robes there. But he must take heed
then, that he fall not into a meditation of Heaven, or the glory of its great
King, to worship him in his heart by it, For then it becomes to him an
Adramelech, the idol of Sepharva^m. And he must beware of the like abuse when
he sees the Chamber and Table where his Majesty sits in Council with his Peers,
lest it become a Moloch to him, the idol of the Moabites. The very Flags and
Banners often seen in London-streets, make some simple soul to think of
Jerusalem above, the peace and happy company there, and the God of all: but
then O how suddenly is the Streamer metamorphosed and t^rned into Nesroch, the
idol of Senacherib. Some are so bold, when they either see or hear of any
corrupted by the French Pox and lec^e^y, to thank God who has preserved them,
and worship God by it. And thereby sin no less grievously than Maacham the
Mother of Asa King of Judah in worshipping her idol Priap or Nimphleseth A
Gentleman called upon God not in words only but very hea^t^ly when a
troublesome Fly got into his Eve, and much affl^cted him: but he little thought
that by that piety of his he had sinned as deeply as they that worship
Baalzebub the idol of Acaron. Nothing is more ordinary with Country Gentlemen,
when walking abroad they behold a goodly fair Flock of Sheep in pasture of
their own, than to thank God and worship God by it; but little do they think
good men, they are guilty of idolatry thereby, as much guilty as they that
worshipped Ashtaroth, the idol of the Philistines. Nay a very Cow or Calf in the
Meadows, if we take occasion by it to thank God for his benefits, or to worship
God by it, is the same thing then, as Aarons Moulten heifer, or Jeroboams
Calves set up in Dan and Bethel. And as it is for substance, so for the figures
of things. St. Paul's picture so long as we do not think of God by it, is a
lawful picture. But if we come once to think of God, to worship God by it, O
then that is a Calf too, Aarons Calf, one of Jeroboams Calves, etc. This
thinking of God, this worshipping of God by any thing, this is the pestilential
blast, that spoils all. It turns sweet into bitter, lawful into unlawful,
things innocent into sin, and good things to death. The representation of our
blessed Lord crucified for us, so long as we think not of him may pass for a
good innocent or at least indifferent thing; but if we once think seriously of
him, if we worship God by it, then, O Mr. Stillingfleet, what is it then? And
yet answer me not. For I will not have those blasphemous words here repeated.
Speak them to a Jew in order to Jesus Christ and he will embrace and love you.
But a Christian cannot endu^e to hear them.

5. Papists says he worship God by images, and so are guilty of idolatry,
Catholics may hear this, but can never understand what he means. They are
never taught in any of their Catechisms to worship God by Images. None of their
spiritual books wherein all religious Duties are importunately urged and
pressed upon them ever mention it: and their practice does not infer it. For if
it did, they would easiliest understand it who best know what themselves do.
They are taught, and do in their practice endeavor to worship God in their
heart and soul, and ardent affections streaming forth thence toward him. They
worship him with bended knees, lips and voice, hearts and eyes lifted up unto
him. They worship him with the assistance of Gods good Spirit, the Priests
Sacrifice, and help of mutual Prayers. They worship him by mortifying their
sensuality and carnal appetites, by giving alms and relieving the poor and
needy for his Love, by observing his Laws and Counsels, by resigning to his
good will and plea^ure in all things, especially in time of afflicting
persecutions, when they suffer all manner of reproach, lies and calumnies, loss
of goods and sometimes life it sell for his name sake patiently. They worship
him in Closets, in Church Assemblies, in the fields, as they are walking, on
Land or Sea, where they have oppportunity to do it. Thus does their religion
teach them to worship God, as with the right causes and instruments; as by the
true effects and operations; as in the times and places seasonable for worship
and devotion. But how they should worship God by images, or (as he speaks
oftener in the context of his discourse) in images; this they do not easily
understand. When he lays any thing to Catholics charge, he ought to speak I
should think as Catholics do, and then he will be understood by them. It is
not to be conceived how any one can worship God by images, and in images, but
either for the real presence there; or ideal imitation; or some sort of
occasion of worship arising thence. And so God must be worshipped by them and
in them, either presentially, ideally, or occasionally. And it cannot be
presentially. For so God is no otherwise present in a picture than in the wall
it hangs upon: nor yet ideally; for the picture for example of St. Mary
Magdalen or St. Paul, is no idea of that invisible and glorious Godhead; nor
yet is any other, as the Crucifix for example or Christ our Lord in his Birth
or Resurrection; for all these figures are representations of his humanity, and
no idea's of his Deity at all. And Mr. Stillingfleet must needs mean one of
these two ways. For otherwise he could not charge them with idolatry for it.
And therefore I say that his charge is false and slanderous. But if he mean
that they worship God by images and in their images, occasionally; which is a
moral interpretation, and the only true one: Then is such a work so far from
Idolatry, that it is a sublime piety. For what can they better do, then to give
God thanks for so great graces, mercies, helps, and comforts bestowed in Jesus
our Lord upon his Apostles. Martyrs, Confessors, and Virgins, when they look
upon their Figures and Pictures either in their contemplations, or patience of
Martyrdom, or conversion of the world, subduing and bringing flesh, Satan and
the World under their seet: especially if Catholics conceive thereby some
pious resolution, as well they may, of doing something the more and patiently
suffering for God, in imitation of those pious Heroes our Predecessors in
Religion, and yet naturally but flesh and blood as we our selves are. I say all
this is signal piety, and our Christian duty. And according to this moral
meaning Catholics if they do worship God by their Images, and in their Images;
do well, and like good Christians. But the Doctor will not charge them I
suppose with a matter of so much truth and great piety as this is, although his
words cannot make out any other sense that is true, but only this moral one.
And the more logical sense of worshipping God by images, and in images; ideally
or presentially is false. Let him even take which sense he pleases, either what
justifies Catholics or what falsifies his own assertion; It is all one to me,
whether we stand, or he fall.

6. He adds, That the worship of God by Images does not terminate upon God;
because God has forbid it, and so gives Gods honor to the Creature. This is
strange gibberish. An act that tends to nothing is no act. If it be some act,
it tends and has already tended to something; and it terminates upon that thing
unto which it tends, and whose act it is denominated. This is clear enough even
to a young sophomore, or one who indeed never yet came into the Air of
Philosophy, if he do but understand the terms and words here used. For example,
I cannot see a man in the street, except my vision terminate upon him; nor can
my vision terminate upon him, but I must see him. And it is all one whether I
see him close by me, or by my Window, or in a Looking-glass at home. For I
cannot see him any way, but my sight must terminate upon him, and if it do not,
I see him not. And this course of nature is not hindered, nor yet altered at
all, because that Person may happily have forbidden me to look upon him, either
this way or that. For our acts or actions are accomplished within our selves,
independently of any acceptance or disacceptance of them. Acceptance or
d^sacceptance, commanding or forbidding is another thing, extrinsecal and quite
differing from the substance of the act or action. For they specify only,
either the motive or event which may make the act either good or evil, either
grateful or displeasing, but not make it an act or no act, or not to tend where
it has tended. And so must my act of worshipping God by images, terminate upon
God, or else it is no act of worshipping God by them; however God may have
either commanded or forbid it. God has forbidden blasphemy; and yet the act
terminates upon him, otherwise it could not be a sin against him. And if Gods
worship by Images do not terminate on God, whither on Gods name does it tend;
and how is God worshipped by them? This he does not tell us here, unless he
insinuate it in those following words o^ his, but gives the honor due to God
unto the Creature. But how can that be? If God should have forbid us by his law
to see a star through a tube; should we not therefore see it but the tube only,
or should not our sight then be terminated upon the Star. So it seems by this
Doctors philosophy, who has conversed with the learneder sort of Papists, and
the wiser sort of heathens, but very little with himself. Holy Fathers and
Doctors have often said, that the honor of an Image redounds to the Prototype:
but never thought or said, that the honor of the Prototype redounds to the
Image, as it is here affirmed against both art and experience. But let us hear
him proceed in his discourse. He will surely let fall some sense or truth ere
long.

7. Gods infinite and incomprehensible Deity, says he, cannot be represented.
O here it is. This is very true. What a comfortable thing it is to meet with a
draught of truth sometimes, when a man is dry and thirsts after it. But to what
purpose is this spoken here? Catholics have no representations of that
invisible Deity, nor none they look after. Figures they have of our Lord
Christ, born as man amongst us and made flesh, and crucified, and ascending
into Heaven. Figures also of his holy Followers and Martyrs: but
representations of the invisible Deify they never yet saw nor heard nor thought
of. On then. The wisest of Heathens judged any such representations of the
Divine nature incongruous and unbecoming his glory, Indeed they were wise
heathens, and their judgment very right and good. Nor did I ever hear of any
Christian wise or unwise any otherwise minded: O how would this Doctor prevail,
if this wise Discourse of his, were as pertinent as it is true. But he trusts
and hopes well, that his good fate will so accompany his Reader, that he shall
not doubt at all that every word that is true in his book is also to some
purpose. And to some purpose indeed it is: namely to have it thought, that he
is victorious in his main design: although indeed and truth it belong nothing
at all to it. But let me not stop his carreere. If any such figure of the Deity
were inconsistent in the old Law much more in the new where we are commanded to
worship God in spirit and truth. O uncontrollable consequence, arising from
premises most true. No man can or dare deny all this. Methinks I love him here
for his reason, and cannot but grieve it should be all spilt in vain; so pure
it is and precious. A little more of this, while he is in a good mood. It seems
more rational to worship God in the Sun and Moon which have more of God in them
than a Picture has, and to say our prayers to the Sun and Moon than to any
Image. Seems so Sir? It is certainly more rational: what should we doubt of?
And what a pity is it, there should be none to be found, who worship God in a
Picture either ideally or presentially; none who say their prayers to a picture
that this great blow of his might not beat the Air to the indangering of his
elbows. Saint Paul testifies that the Godhead is not like either to gold or
silver or stone. Good St. Paul always said well; and his testimony is good at
all times; and especially now, when it hits so pat with the wiser Heathens.
There be many Churches now in England which have since our reformation, the
Tetragram name of God written upon the walls within side in golden letters.
Unto those men who did this, it would not seem altogether impertinent, to tell
them, that the Godhead is not like to gold, silver or stone. But to such as use
only the effigies of our Lord according to his humanity, and his holy Apostles
and Martyrs, what a pity it is it should be impertinent and wholly lost. Let
him speak on some more of his truths. Germanus Patriark of Constantinople says
expressly that Christians make no representation of the invisible Deity: and St.
Damascene affirms it madness to go about it. Marry, God have mercy o'their
souls for this their express saying, Catholics would desire no better a
testimony for themselves if they wanted any, then this of those two great
Catholic Doctors; that no such repre^entation entation they have, and none
they go about to have. O but he hopes, that all this being true will make
strongly against the Church of Rome. And will it so? I have heard say, there be
a thousand Churches in Rome, which are all Churches of Rome equally. Which of
them all are concerned in this talk, that their walls may confute him? But he
means Catholic people perhaps, oh, O, then all is well, they are safe enough
and unhurt by all this, which is but their own doctrine, and faith. At least he
has by these fair shreds of truth farced up a dozen pages in his book; And he
hopes that his protestant reader will believe it all to be most pertinent and
apposite discourse against papishes, though it be nothing less. And if they do
so think, he has his end, a happy Man no doubt.

8. Moses forbad says he, the making of any graven thing, and the word which
Moses uses in that his law for a graven thing is general and signifies not an
idol only as Papists say, but any picture, likeness, image or representation,
as Moses himself speaks, either in heaven above or in earth below or waters
under the earth, pesel, themurah, eikon glypton, sculptile, any kind of thing
that may be expressed either with the pencil or graving tool. Believe me Sir if
this be true it will undo all our Painters, who come flocking hither into
England as the only thriving place for them out of Holland, Germany, France and
Italy too; and here fill the Land with pesels, themunahs, eikons, g^yptons,
sculptile's, and any things they can express with their pencils for our
delight; Dolphins, whales and other fish of the Sea; bi^ds of the Air, Beasts,
Flowers, Woods, gallant men and fair women, all that ever Moses forbad to be
expressed. Nay, I have seen my self in a Protestant Church Moses himself painted
on the walls with glittering horns on his head, and a pair of law tables in
his hand. But it may be Lawmakers do exemp themselves: at least some
Protestants may interpret as they seem to do, that Moses forbad to make the
figure of Jesus Christ but not his own. No man in England scruples to have any
of these eikons, no not the Doctor himself, notwithstanding this law of Moses
so expressly contrary to them all; no man doubts to set any painter or graver on
work. And yet must still this Law be cast in the teeth of Catholics as
transgressors of it. For Gods sake why is St. Mary Magdalen in her penitential
weeds upon her knees, with beads in her hand, and eyes all blubbered and swollen
with tears, more against the law of Moses; than one of our delicate Paragons of
beauty, in her shining dress, lips of coral and sparkling eyes, O but
Catholics worship them. S^r this word in the sense and meaning of protestants
is as great a falsehood as was ever uttered by man. For Catholics neither have
nor can have any other relative esteem of any Picture, than what they have to
the penitential works they represent, or to the worth and piety of the Persons.
And an absolute esteem of the Picture, this is measured out only by the
Materials, and artifice of the Painter; according to which one Picture shall be
worth five hundred pounds, and another representing the same thing, not worth
five shillings. And can we believe that our Protestant young Gentlemen have no
veneration at all to our beauties set thus in their Majesty, nor no kind of
affections rising in their hearts toward them? Yea ten to one more of ill
affections, and god wot greater, then any good ones we can have to our
crucisied Jesus in our way of piety. And the difference indeed is only this,
that our reverence and affection is toward holy persons, and unto an imitation
of their piety, hope, patience, constancy, and charity: Their's to a
concupiscence of flesh and eyes. This and nothing but this if truth may be
spoken, makes them so wrathful and furious against our Catholic pictures.
Satan hates Jesus Christ, and therefore inflames them to tear down his memories
and representations: but he loves pride of life; and those portractures must
stand that advance this. He is pleased with that which feeds concupiscence of
eyes: and concupiscence of flesh brings him in the disciples which Jesus Christ
loses.

Moses did forbid Jews who were traveling with him toward Palestine and
idolatrous Nation, to make to themselves, that is to say on their own heads,
without warrant of the Synagogue, or in imitation of the Pagan rites, any of
the idolatrous images there and elsewhere to be met withal, or any similitude
at all, least seduced thereby, they leave their own God and religion to cleave
unto false gods and idolatry. This law of Moses and purpose of the law is so
clear, that he must be obstinately blind who sees it not. And what does this
concern our holy Catholic figures of St. Paul for example or Christ crucified,
more than Protestant sigures of young Lords and fine Ladies; save that the one
moves us to the love of moritification, prayer, patience, chastity, the other
allures us from it; the one confirms Religion, the other weakens it. Besides
our holy Pictures are allowed by the Church, the others forbidden And this
indeed is the only aim of Moses, when he forbids the people to make to
themselves any graven images whatsoever; to themselves, that is on their own
fancies, and upon their own authority: For such only were unlawful, and not
those they were commanded by just authority and allowed to make. See, says God
by Moses, I have called and named Besaleel, and I have filled him with the
spirit of wisdom and understanding, and all knowledge of all amnner of
workmanship, to devise cunning works to work in gold and silver and brass, and
in cutting of stones and in graving of wood, to work all manner of workmanship.
And I have appointed Aholiab with him; and in the hearts of all the wise I have
put wisdom, that they make all that I have commanded. And by virtue whereof the
said men and others after them move and graved pomgranets and lilies, and
placed Cherubs upon the Propitiatory, between which graven Cherubims God
himself gave out his Oracles to Moses: as he did also heal the people by the
figure of a Serpent which Moses commanded to be set up. So that here is a vast
difference betwixt figures graven and set up by authority, and those which
People make to themselves. The one is commanded, the other forbidden. Aaron's
Calf of gold destroyed the people, but Moses his Serpent of brass healed them.
These things are not now said afresh. They have been told to Ministers over and
again, but they are never the better for it. Indeed they love not to hear of
it, because it spoils their sport.

I add yet withal, over and above what is yet said, that neither that law of
Moses, nor any of his Ten Commandments, nor any other of his Precepts, either
ceremonial, judicial or moral, does any way oblige Christians at all, as it
comes from Moses, who is not our Lawmaker or master, but ruler and leader of
the Jews. Nor do we Christians believe that theft, adultery, homicide or
blasphemy, is a sin, because Moses for bad it, but because we have received
from Jesus our own Leg slator who justified Moses law and ratified it in all
the said particulars, that so it is. And it is here to be observed that one of
the most solemn laws contained in those two tables, that I mean, which ordains
the seventh day to be kept holy day, unto which Moses adjoyns an irrefragable
and unchangeable reason, namely because God rested that day when he made this
visible world, beginning his work says Moses on the Sunday wherein he created
light, and the Friday following finishing the whole; even this law of his most
solemn and importunely urged by Moses, is annulled and abroga^ed amongst all
Christians even from the beginning of Christianity, for want of ratification of
it from our Lord and Master Jesus who is our Lawmakers and Prince. And the same
thing do I say of this his present Law about figures, images and
representations of things by sculpture or pencil, which was only of temporal
concernment to the then present Jews, against the danger of idols, which then
filled the earth, and as mere a ceremonial law as the other, and equally
concerning a ceremony of worship. If our own Prelates whom Christ our Lord
instituted to oversee his flock should for reasons best known to themselves
take from us those little small helps we have by the Images of some of our
Ancestors, Martyrs, Apostles, Virgins, Confessors, then would we be without
them, and yet not think our selves to lose one jot of our Religion for that.
But we will not forfeit them for any Law made by Moses, except it be
established and ratified by our own Lawmakers or his Prelates watching over us
under our Lord unto our good, if Moses should have made any law against them,
which indeed he did not, but only against Heathen-Idols. And if any one should
endeavor to have or Christian representations to be abolished, because he
thinks and believes that Moses forbad them, then is that Man say I, bound to
observe all the whole law of Moses, as it is literally express^d by him, even
to the least apex or iota thereon. For the authority of a Legislator being the
same in all his whole law, must oblige equally in all its parts: and the
distinction then between jadicial, moral, and ceremonial law, signifies
nothing; seeing that Moses his commands are equally peremp^ory, and press as
strongly in the one as in the other. This is no imaginary Opinion of mine own,
but what reason and the Spirit of God moved St. Paul to aver as stoutly in the
case of circumcision, which is another of Moses Laws, as I do here. I testify
to every Man, says he, who is circumcised, that he is bound to keep the whole
Law. And this must needs be true, most certainly true for by observing
circumcision, because it was commanded by Moses he subjects himself to the Law
and Authority of Moses as his Prince and Legislator; and consequently is bound
to observe him equally in all things which he commands with the same authority
and will to be obeyed, which is no less then all his whole law. And cursed is
every one, says the same Apostle, who is under the law, and continues not in
all things which are written in the Book of the Law to fulfill them. Although
then it should be granted that Moses by his law prohibited all kind of figures
and representations, even those used by Christians, which he did not, yet if
our Lord ratified it not, it does not touch us at all. And that he did not
renew or ratify it, is sufficiently clear to Protestants, because no such law
of his is found among the Evangelists: and unto Catholics no less, because
there is neither Gospel nor Tradition for it. And if all men would separate
themselves from prejudice, which blinds and hardens them in their conceits,
they might easily believe that neither Christ's immediate Disciples nor any
Christians that succeeded them after our Lords departure, would have either
feared or hated the figure of our Lords countenance, if by chance they would
have met with it. But if any one notwithstanding, fully persuaded that Moses
made a law against all sort of Images and representations, should upon that
authority of his abolish ours, he is bound also upon the same authority to
sacrifice an Ox, and observe all the whole law in all and every particular,
under the penalty of sin.

Since therefore by the order of God and Moses many graven things were made;
representations and similitudes both in Heaven and Earth, notwithstanding the
said law; as the Serpent of brass (which must either be made by melting or
graving) pomegranates, lilies, and various suchlike things both graven in
stone and interwoven in silks. Cherubins or Angels in the Propitiatory, even in
Moses time, and afterward more fully and plentifully in Solomon's Temple; it
is not rationally to be doubted, but that this law of his was intended only to
keep those People close and constant to their own God and to their own
Religion, which was inconsistent with the idols of the Nations; and not for any
purpose of keeping Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, either out of their chamber
hangings or ours. I know the Jews do urge this Precept of Moses very eagerly
against Christians ever since Jesus Christ our Lord was rejected by them, whose
image and figure they cannot abide to see. But we must have patience with all
men.

9. Moses says he, grounded this law of his upon a reason unchangable, namely
that Gods infinite and incomprehensible. Deity cannot be represented. O
profound invention! This is such a law and ground of a law, as was never before
thought of. The ground and reason of making a law must be this, an
impossibility of breaking it. They must not make any representations of God,
because God cannot be represented. And the same motive or reason will be
equally proper for all the rest of the Commandments: They must keep the seventh
day of the week a holy day. The reason and motive; because there is not an
eighth day to keep holy and sanctify. They must honor their Parents. The
ground and reason of this; because none of the whole Camp had any Fathers or
Mothers alive to dishonor. They must not kill. The motive and reason is:
because they were all shot-free, and so firmly enchanted that none could hurt
them. They must not commit adultery. The ground and reason is; because there
was never a Woman in the Camp, which any man though provoked with the highest
lust could possibly come near or touch with a pair of tongues. They must not
steal. The great cause thereof is, that there is nothing at all in the Camp for
any man to take away. Thus the Doctor imagines Moses to forbid any
representations of God because God cannot be represented. And such another
discreet Mounsieur was he who solemnly commanded his Bowyer not to make him any
shafts at all of a Piggs tail: and he gravely gave him the reason for it,
because quoth he of a piggs tail no shaft can be made. Truth is, Moses never
thought of any such Law, nor any such reason of it much less; but provided for
the security of the Hebrews Religion, that it might remain unchangable and firm
in the mids of those many Nations round about them who worshipped false Gods and
idols: as Moses very frequently interprets himself and all the Prophets after
him. Therefore says God by Moses, thou shall have no other Gods but me, thou
shall not make to thy self any figures, as the Gentiles do, nor worship them.
For I am a jealous God, and will have no intermingling of devilish idolatry
with my service; And all the reason given by Moses is gods jealousy not
enduring any divine worship but his own. This is the very truth and all the
truth of this business, which this Doctor would turn another way, thereby to
make Moses seem as simple a man as himself. And those idols forbidden by Moses
did so involve an opposition to the true God and his divine worship, that
People could not possibly betake themselves to one, but they must leave the
other. Therefore did Moses forbid both other Gods besides their own one God,
and all idols together: which was by ancient Christians very rationally and
wisely reckoned all one and the same Commandment: whereof no less a Man, then
St. Austin himself is witness. But the memories of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob
could bring no such danger with them. And that is our care, for we are not in
danger of loosing the faith of Jesus Christ by keeping the Image of him our
crucified Lord among us; or forsaking the communion of Saints by retaining
their portraictures before our eyes. We should ipso facto renounce our Lord and
all his whole Religion, should we set up Moses his forbidden Idols, and make it
our religion to worship them as heathens did. But we are heartened, encouraged
and confirmed in our Christian Religion by looking on the faces of so many our
glorious Martyrs, holy Anchorets, and Hermits, pious Virgins and Confessors,
who professed this our Religion before us, bravely triumphing by the power of
Christ's love and divine faith, over sins allurements, and deaths ugliest
terrors; though encompassed themselves with the like passions and infirmities
we are our selves environed round about. And when we are entered into a Church
amongst so many of our worthy Predecessors, we compose our selves more heartily
to our devotion then otherwise we should do, in imitation of them; remembering
now that we are come up to Mount Sion, to the City of our living God, to
celestial Jerusalem, and society of Angels, to the Church of Primitive
Christians conscript in the Heavens, to God the Judge of all, to the Spirits of
just men perfected, to Jesus the Mediator of a new Testament, and to the
aspersion of blood speaking better things than Abel.

10. The Heathens, says he, did ill in their idol worship, and yet the wiser
sort among them testify that they did not hold them to be Gods but worshipped
God in them. Our acute divine having now by his fine wit so clarified Moses
law, that it might not so much concern Idolaters as our vulgar Painters; he now
begins so to purify idolaters practice too, that they may seem but in the same
condition with our Catholic and best Christians. And who would not give his
penny to hear him act and speak. The heathens all in general are so excused in
their idolatry. Aaron in his act of apostasy, and Jeroboam in his great sin;
that they are all and each of them no otherwise faulty then the Church of Rome
in his books. Thus does Mr. Stillingfleet convert idolatrous Nations, while he
sits dreaming in his Closet. Here he diminishes and there he exaggerates, here
he blacks with his Pen, and there he whitens; and then he cries out all is one,
all of the same measure, all of the same color. And truly I believe the great
Giant Goliath and little David might thus be made equal, if the Giant were
beheaded and cut off by the knees, on one side; and David on the other side,
set upon a high pair of stilts. While Catho^icks are made to do what they do
not, and Heathens not to do what they do, on a supposal that all this is true,
there can be no great difference. Let us then hear him what he tells us of
Heathens in general. The wiser sort among them testify quoth he, that they
worshipped not the idols as gods, but worshipped God in them. O very good? Thus
the wiser sort among the Heathens say. But first who are these wiser sort? It
behooved him to let us know this. But yet for his own procket-reasons he does
not. But 2ly what says he himself to it? O that is needless: for his Reader
will understand well enough what he ought to think, when such a Doctor as
Stillingfleet tells him what the wiser sort have thought. No body would think
with fools, but with the wiser sort always. And his whole discourse proceeds on
this supposed knowledge of the wiser sort, and according to it concludes. we
cannot therefore doubt of his mind. But have we no wise sort of ancient
believers who lived among the Heathens, to testify unto us what the heathens
did? Have we no Apostles and Prophets to hearken to, no renowned and infallible
persons to inform us? Surely we have, and those so many, that we need not have
recourse either unto persons unknown amongst the heathens for their testimony,
or to Mr. Stillingfleet the ingenious trifler. He tells us, that the Heathens
did not worship their Idols as Gods, but worshipped God in them. But our
Apostles and Prophets tell us contrary things. Hear Moses speak, who lived
among the thickest of the Heathens; To whom did they sacrifice, O Moses, whom
did the Heathens worship? Immolaverunt Demoniis and non Deo, Deuteronomy. 32. They
worshipped not God but devils, they sacrificed to devils says he, and not to
God. The Nations change their gods, and indeed they are no Gods, says Jeremy
ch 2. but my people have changed their glory unto an Idol. Baruch another
Prophet brings in his testimony, chap. 4. You have provoked him who made you,
says he, even the eternal God, sacrificing to Devils and not to God. The holy
Psalmist he tells us no less peremptorily. That they immolated their Sons and
Daughters to Devils, and sacrificed to the idols of Canaan, Ps. 105. and that
all the gods of the Heathens are Devils, Ps. 95. Saint Paul our own Christian
Doctor is bold, and expressly, testifies both against Stillingfleet and his
wiser heathens; That the things which Gentiles immolated, they sacrificed to
Devils and not to God, 1 Cor. 10. And yet after all this our Doctor is not
ashamed to justify those his clyents the heathens. They did not worship their
Idols, says he, for Gods, but worshipped God in them. And whom shall we here
believe? Moses, Jeremy, Baruch, david, St. Paul and all our Christian Doctors,
or Stillingfleet rather and his wiser Heathens unknown to himself? They
sacrificed to Devils and not to God: they changed their glory into an Idol:
they irritated the eternal God, immolating to devils and not to God; they
sacrificed their sons and daughters to devils not to God. Thus speak our
Prophets and Apostles. But Mr. Stillingfleet affirms, they sacrificed to God,
they imolated to God, they worshipped God and not devils, they worshipped not the
Idols but God in them. But I discern well enough the cause of his mistake.
Because they abstracted the general notion of God, and applied it, each one to
his own idols; therefore he thinks he may say they worshipped God in them. But
this is a gross mistake. For to worship God in a thing, and to worship a thing
for God who is no God, are two very differing cases Christians worship God in
Christ, and they do well; Heathens who worshipped their Idols for God did ill.
Cromwell our late Usurper after he had murdered our good King, and set the
Crown upon his own head, would have taken it well, if his Army had told him
they honored him for their King, but not, if they had said they worshipped the
King in him. The first word had sounded in his ears as a grateful flattery, the
other as treason to himself. To abstract the Deity and apply it to another
subject unto whom it does not belong, is as far as we are able to behead the
true God and set his Crown upon the shoulders of usurping devils. And because
the true real Deity cannot be removed, either by the pleasure of the Usurper or
worshiper, therefore are these idols devils and false Gods. God cannot be
worshipped in them, because he is not in them; and if they be worshipped as Gods
it is Idolatry; or else there is no such thing as idolatry upon Earth.

Aaron, says he, made the golden Calf, not to reduce the People unto heathen
idolatry, but for an emblem of the good Angel who was to go before them. Here
is another excuse of Aaron his small fault; which drove Moses his brother and
Prince into as great a passion of wrath as perhaps he ever felt; even so
prevalent a grief and anger, that it dashed in pieces the very tables of the
Law he had in his hands; though he was by the testimony of holy writ the
mildest of men: and all this it seems for an emblem: And why that emblem?
since they had such an emblem before in the pillar of cloud by day and sire by
night; which was a more significant emblem of the angel who went before them,
then any Calf of gold could be. The holy Prophets testify of those People and
Aaron, that in Moses absence this figure was melted and founded by them to be
set up in place of the God, who had hitherto conducted them with Moses now as
they thought vanished, out of Egypt into Arabia; and to lead them on the rest
of their way, as their supreme conduct after the manner of Egyptian Deities.
They made a calf in Horeb and adored the figure, they changed their glory into
the likeness of a Calf eating hay and forgot their God, Psalm. 125. Now if they
forgot their own God, and slighted him, and cast him from them, and changed his
glory into a Calf, and worshipped the very figure: then must that sculptil or
statue be now accepted for their God. The like testimony gives St. Stephen,
Act. 7. They made says he, a Calf in those days, and offered sacrifice unto
the Idol, and made themselves merry in the works of their own hands. What can
this import, but that they had now altered their religion, renounced their
former God, and made to themselves a new one after the manner of Egypt. It is
pity Mr. Stillingfleet had not been with Aaron; his confidence would have
pleaded for him a little more handsomely then he did for himself. But the excuse
perhaps being hypocritical and false would have more offended Moses, than his
former fault. Aaron knew well enough what he had done. And although he somewhat
minced his fault, yet would he not tell a lie. I cast a little metal into the
fire, says he to Moses, and there came out this Calf. The Doctor adds two
pretty reasons, why neither he nor the people, could ever think of declining
then to any heathen idolatry, First because they had no pretense of doing so.
As though the very absence of Moses, whom they had long expected and now
thought lost, were not pretense enough, unto some leading men in the Camp to
raise a sedition and thereby force Aaron to make them such idols, as they were
acquainted with in Egypt. It is well enough known, that by the contagion of
those leading men, the Camp was ever and anon in such like tumult and ready
disposition to apostasy. His second reason is, because no intimation is made
that they fell into heathen idolatry. What intimation is given thereof by the
Prophet and St. Stephen he takes it seems for no intimation at all. When they
fell, says he, into heathen idolatry, mention is made of their Gods, as Baal
Peor, Moloch, Remphan; but here Aaron is said to make a feast to the Lord: As
though there were not Egyptian idols as well as Syrian; and Osiris and Isis, as
well as Moloch and Remphan. And a feast made in honor of this their new God
and Religion, might well be said a feast to the Lord. It was a policy in Aaron,
thus to speak, that the common people might not suddenly discern the
alteration. And we may easily believe that the leading men, who brought him by
persuasion and force unto this apostasy, suggested the said stratagem; first to
get the people more universally on their side without commotion: and then to
put something into their mouths for to say to Moses, if he should chance to
come upon them suddenly and take them beyond expectation in the fact. For that
it was a mere pretense of policy is evident by this; that they gave to Moses no
such account of any feast made unto their ancient true God; and secondly
because their principal Leaders had no purpose to make any, for they had now
forgot and put away their own true God and cast him out of their mind, as holy
text speaks, obliti sunt Dei sui.

The Calves set up by Jeroboam in Dan and Bethel, were only to keep the People
from going up to Jerusalem, and not to bring them to any idolatry of the
hearthens. Here is another excuse for Jeroboam and his peccadillo. Who would
not take Mr. Stillingfleet to be a very charitable man, who can cover such a
multitude of sins? and yet is it all no other but a secret prodigious malice
against Catholics, who must bear the more and hear the worse for it. Jeroboam
says he did not alter the divine worship, or give any occasion of idolatry;
No, no. He only kept the People, says he from going up to Jerusalem, whither
they used once a year to resort. And this could be no such great matter; since
they had the same service, the same sacrifice and adoration at home. But why
then is Jeroboam charged with idolatry in holy Scripture, as one that had done
evil above all that went before him, and made him other gods and molten images
to provoke God to anger, and to cast his own God behind his back, 1 Reg. 14. O,
ho, thence we conclude says our Doctor that an image set up for Gods honor is
idolatry; as it is among Papists. And is not this a pretty nimble leigerdemaine
of a slight man. First who taught him that Papists set up images for Gods
honor? I have learned amongst them that they are set up for our encouragement
and imitation, and for an honorable memory of their holy Martyrs and Apostles.
But what honor can one of those images be to God? none at all I think, except
indirectly, because God is the blessed author of all good, whence the said
Apostles and Martyrs received their strength and grace. Secondly where does
this confident man find, that Jeroboam set up his images for Gods honor? Even
no where at all. His own boldness is so strong in him, that he says what he
l^st; without any ground or occasion at all any where, either among sacred
writers or profane. Thirdly whence does he gather his negative word, that
Jeroboam acted none of the heathen idolatry, nor brought the People to it? Even
from his own confident brain whence he has the other, expressly contrary to the
testimony of holy Writ which speaks, as it were passionatly and very
emphatically of his notorious idolatry, wherein he did evil above all that were
before him, wherein he made him other gods and molten Images, to provoke God to
anger, and cast his own God behind his back. Can he be justly charged with all
this, only because he kept the Israelites from going up to Jerusalem, and made
them do those devotions at home which they were wont to do in that mother
City. Can only change of place suffice for the criminous imputation of
idolatry, where is the same adoration, same rites, same sacrifice, same
Priests, and same God. Is it possible that the same service and
Common Prayer Book read by Ministers of the same kind of London and Highgate,
be Gods service in one place, and idolatry in the other, all other things
agreing but only the circumstance of place? No indeed, it is not possible it
should be so. But it is very possible it should be said so. Mr. Stillingfleet
here speaks it, and speaks it stoutly, on his own head, even against all Divine
authority and upright reason. People may sin against ecclesiastical obedience
indeed, by not coming up to their parochial Church when they are commanded. But
they cannot, only upon that ground, be charged with idolatry, or making strange
gods, or casting their own God b^hind their back. He must be a very passiona^e
Prelate, and extremely unjust and sinfully injurious, who lays that imputation
upon people, upon no other ground or motive then that one circumstantial
neglect of place. And yet holy Scripture several times thus charges Jeroboam;
and puts such a blot upon his scutcheon both for his own idolatry, and that
into which he induced all the people, that he is seldom or never mentioned
without his black surname; Jeroboam who made Israel to sin. If it were true at
least, as Mr. Stillingfleet here speaks, that Jeroboam and Isreal's sin were
only a circumstance of place, and that they and he did in their own tribes but
what was done in Jerusalem, then must it needs follow, that there were in the
Temple of Jerusalem such like representations, as those Calves set up by
Jeroboam in Dan and Bethel, and indeed the very same with them. And thence we
may gather for our learning, if this be all true, an axiom of great truth and
concernment; namely, that one and the same piece of worship which pleases God
in the Catholic Church, is an abomination to him in the ways of heresy and
schism. The very same thing which in Jerusalem and the tribe of Judah were
called Cherubims; in Samaria and all the rest of Israel apostatiled from them,
was but a Calf.

11. Charles the Great a noble Emperor caused Books to be set forth against the
Council of Nice where images had been established, called Carolin Books, and
assembled also a Council at Frankford, wherein both the said Nicen Council was
condemned, and all their reasons for images confuted, etc. That there were both
in the Council of Frankford and Nice too, some Catholic Prelates who
propounded difficulties against images cannot be denied. For when ever any
Council meets together about any affair, they dispute pro and con, both for and
against it; that the Prelates having all things set before their Eyes that can
be said on both sides, might be the better enabled to determine. So doubtless
it was done by the Apostles themselves in their great Council held in Jerusalem
about Circumcision, where inquisitio magna facta est, great inquisition,
disputation, and examination was made about it. All this is certain enough. But
yet, that either in Frankford or any where else, were made after this their
dispute any final or conclusive declaration against the ^se of images amongst
Christians; or that Charles the Emperor should either write Books or cause any
to be written, either against images or the Council of Nice wherein they had
been then established; or summon that Council of Frankford to withstand that
other of Nice unanimously concluded by the Prelates, and confirmed by the
general Pastor; this is a thing so apparently false and fictitious, that there
needs no more but the knowledge of those very Persons and times to prove it so.
Charles the Great was one that adored the Roman Church whereof he was himself a
member, above all Emperors that ever was before or since his time. The Council
of Frankford, wherein were little less then three hundred Catholic Prelates,
was peaceably concluded, and no commotion followed upon it; which must needs
have risen, if they had condemned another Council lately celebrated and
confirmed by all pastoral authority. Nor was that Frankford Council ever
annulled or any way censured either by P. Adrian or any after him. Add to this,
that the said Council was both begun and finished under the same Pope Adrian,
and his Legates Theophilact and Stephanus, who had presided lately in the said
Nicen Council, where the lawful use of images was established. It cannot
possibly be imagined that the same Pope and Presidents should conclude in
Frankford quite contrary to what they ordered in Nice but seven or eight years
before. It is also certain, that the said Council of Frankford, was summoned
and assembled, not about images only as the Doctor imagines, but about the
question of our Lord Christ his filiation, as all ancient histories testify,
against Foelix and Elipand two Spanish Bishops, and Claudius Taurinensis, who
teaching that our Lord is rather to be called an adoptive than natural Son of
God raised much commotion in Spain and France: and this novelty of theirs was
first condemned at Ratisbone, and afterward at Frankford. For Foelix after his
first condemnation, repaired to the Emperor Charles his Court who then
wintered at Rheginum; and there submitting to the Prelates, was sent thence to
the presence of Pope Adrian, where in the Cathedral of St. Peter, he revoked
his Error. Elipand hearing of his submission grew more violent, and by his
books both regained Foelix again, and disturbed all Germany, as he had France
and Spain before. And now to prevent the infection, the Pope and Charles the
Emperor agreed to bring together a conciliar Assembly of Prelates in
Frankford, wherein presided Theophylact and Stephanus, who had lately concluded
the second Council of Nice. Whence it clearly appears that Doctor Stillingfleet
quite mistakes the business. Now if the same Pope and his very self-same
Legates presided first in the Nicen Council, and then in Frankford, as the
Doctor acknowledges, we may rationally enough conclude, that the Nicen decrees
about images, lately finished in the East, were made known to the West by their
acceptance and promulgation at Frankford, where the business of filiation was
decided: For this is indeed very true. But no way can we think that the same
Presidents would now undo, what they had done a little before. And that this is
indeed the whole truth in this business, may be yet confirmed by the authority
of the Council of Senon kept not long after, which in their 14. decree thus
speaks, Carolus magnus Francorum Rex Christianissimus in Francorum furdensi
conventu ejusdem erroris iconomachorum suppressit insaniam quam infelicissimus
quidam Faelix in Gallias and Germanias invexerit. By this testimony it appears,
that Felix over and above his capital error about Christ our Lords adoption,
was an iconomachus too or adversary of images, and suffered at Frankford for
both his errors: which is not unlikely by the testimony of Platina and Paulus
Emilius: For Platina in the life of Pope Adrian, Bienni^ post, says he,
Theophylactus and Stephanus Episcopi insignes Adriani nomine, Francorum and
German^rum Syn^dum habuerunt, in qua and Synodus quam septimam Graeci
appellabant, and haeresis Feliciana de tollendis imaginibus abrogata est. And
P. Emilius in his second book de gestis Francorum speaking of that Council of
Frankford, Et imaginibus, says he, suus honor restitutus est. The like may be
proved out of Blondus, Sabellicus and other historians. So that all these
things rightly considered and put together, will sufficiently convince his
relation of the Frankford Council to be fictitious and groundless. If the
Council were assembled by the agreement of the Pope and Emperor, then not of
the Emperor against the Pope. If to suppress Elipand, Claudius, and Felix;
then not the Nicen Prelates. If under the same Pope and Presidents which
presided lately in Nice, then not against any thing determined and concluded in
Nice. If upon the motive of Elipands error against our Lord's filiation; then
was not an image the principal occasion of it. If Felix were there condemned
for his opposition to images, then were not images condemned. If Charles the
Great, one of the devourest to the Roman Church that ever reigned, so much
swayed in that Council, then would he not suffer the Roman Church to be there
affronted and censured. If an upright Catholic, he would not in spiritual
affairs gainsay the Prince of Prelates, who had so lately set his hand and seal
to Nicen definitions. In a word, if Charles the Great called that Council at
Frankford, as the Doctor affirms, then without all doubt was that ratified
there, which was established at Nice a little before. For Charles was as much a
Roman Catholic as either Stephen and Theophilact, or the Pope himself, and
knew as well as any man, what obedience is due to the definitions of a Council
rightly consummated and confirmed, as that of Nice was, Binius the great
Collector of the Councils proves at large, that all this story of the Carolin
books and Frankford Synod assembled against that of Nice, is a groundless
fiction. And so do Alanus, Surius, Vasquez, and several other Doctors. And they
are all amazed, whence the rumor should arise, and by whom, and in what age or
time. But I cannot wonder much at it, since I heard lately of a French
Gentleman, who affirms and shows in a Book of his, that the English never
conquered France, nor ever gave them any one overthrow in battle. And when he
was told by a neighbor, of this his notorious falsehood; O, quoth he, my book
two hundred years hence may pass for an authority as good as any that speak
otherwise. And so I think there may possibly be such impious men, who out of
their present malice may furnish out a lie to insect posterity, in after times.
But he must be an unconscionable wicked man who can do such a deed.

12. Primitive Christians never used any Images, as the learned of the Church
of Rome acknowledge. He had done well to let us know who are these learned of
the Church of Rome. But he will not do us that favor. And we must still take
his word for the judgment of the learned sort always. Nay, we must believe too,
that he is ever on the learned sorts side. It is indeed unlikely that figures
of those holy Persons, who first spread our Christianity in the World, and made
it good both by their lives and death, should be frequent in primitive times.
First, because those same figures, although they be honorable memories both of
their persons and pieties, unto whose zeal and goodness we are so much
indebted; yet are they not so necessarily requisite unto any such purpose, but
that the Church can be without them.Secondly, because primitive Christians had
not amongst them any such plenty of Artists, as we have now a days to make
them.Thirdly, because Pagans would have mis-interpreted the end and meaning of
such figures, as this our Doctor does in the midst of day light. But that in
those primitive times there was never any Christian so ill affected toward
those pious representations as is Mr. Still. appears sufficiently by the
testimony of those ancient Doctors, who mention incidentally the customs of
those primitive times; especially about the figure of the Cross, which they
made continually on their forehead and breasts, as a preservative against
evil, and kept it all over their houses, particularly in their Bed chambers and
closets, either framed in wood or stone, or painted in colors. There be,
notwithstanding the deluge of time which swallows up all things, some monuments
yet left among us of the respect which those Christians then bore both to the
relics and figures of their Saints. The very Chair of St. James the Apostle
and first Bishop of Jerusalem, Eusebius in the seventh book of his history
attests, that it was had in great esteem and veneration in all times, even to
his own days. Accordingly S. Clement in his sixth book of apostolical
constitutions gives this general testimony of that kind of piety in those
primitive Christians, (...) The very relics, says he, of Saints now living
with God are not without their veneration. Some remainds there be also of an
apostolical Council at Antioch, gathered out of S. Pamphilus and Origin,
wherein caution is given both against the Jews malice and Gentile idols, by
opposing the Images of Jesus and his holy Followers against them both: (...).
Ignatius also that worthy apostolical Prelate, the third from St. Peter the
Apostle in the Chair at Antioch, thus signally speaks of the sign of the Cross
in his Epistle to Philadelphia, (...) etc. The Prince of this World, says he,
rejoices when any one denies the Cross: for he knows the confession of the
Cross to be his own ruin: this is the Standard against his power, which so
often as he either sees or hears it spoken of, he shakes and trembles: thus
speaks that glorious Prelate. The abovenamed Eusebius testifies also in the
same book of his history, that he saw even in his time the brazen Statue of our
Lord Jesus, which was set up in Paneada in Palestin, unto his honor by the
woman cured by him of the bloody flix; so notable for miracles, that they were
spoke of all the World over. This Statue of our Lord when Julian the apostate
caused it to be thrown down, and his own to be set up in place thereof, a
strange sudden fire from Heaven consumed the Statue of Julian, as Zozomenus in
his fist book witnesses. And of the same brazen Statue of Christ our Lord write
also Theophilact, Damascenus and several others. And here we may take notice by
the way, that charity and devotion set up statues to our Lord, but apostasy and
malice pulls them down. And whether Doctor Stillingfleet, who busies himself so
much to cast down the Images of Jesus our Lord and his holy followers, would
refuse to have his own set up for his great pains, either in Guildhall or
Cheapside, he knows best himself. Truly if that were done, I do not believe
that any of his neighbors or Countrymen would take him then for a Calf of
Bethel. Of the Images of the Virgin Mary made by St. Luke, there is much fame
amongst the ancient writers, in particular Theodorus, Simeon Metaphrastes and
Nicephorus: The last of which does also attest in his second book, that the
said precious Relick was carried up and down the whole habitable World of
Christians, who looked upon it with a most greedy and unsatisfied devotion. The
same Nicephorus adds moreover, how Constantius the Son of Constantine
translated the Relics of St. Luke from Thebes, of St. Andrew from Achaia, and
of St. Timothy from Ephesus, unto Constantinople, with a vast concourse and joy
of Christian People: and there with all honor and reverential respect
inshrined them in a Cathedral Church dedicated to the Apostles. Of the Image
also of Christ our Lord imprinted by himself in a Handkercher applied to his
own face, and sent to King Abagarus who requested his Picture, write Evagrius,
Metaphrastes and ot^ers. Of another Image of Jesus Christ made by Nicodemus,
which being ignominiously crucified by the Jews wrought many wondrous
miracles, we have a solemn testimony of Athanasius cited in the fourth action
of the seventh great Synod. And all this testifies that Christians in primitive
times were affected toward holy Pictures and Relics as Catholics are at this
day: at least not such haters and vilifiers of them as is Dr. Stillingfleet.
Nor can I conceive how any of the learned in the Church of Rome should be
ignorant of these things. Nay, the very Church of England, which this Doctor
pretends to defend, has lately put the Images of the Apostles and Primitive
Saints into their Common Prayer Book and Primers printed by authority. So that
if the Doctor had opened his eyes he might have seen clear enough, that all
this talk of his is now unseasonable, however it might have passed well enough
in the beginning of the furio^s reformation: when they pulled down all sacred
figures, and suffered none to be set up either sacred or common. When Husbands
broke their Wives pictures, and Wives their Husbands, least they should give
ill example to St. Peter and Paul, or encourage any of the twelve Apostles to
creep up again upon their Walls. When children in obedience and duty to their
parents, spitting upon their effigies, said as they were taught to say, I
renounce the Devil and all his works. When all the People flocked together in
all places to tear down Churches and Chapels, and private Oratories in Houses,
with a Now boys, we are free men, let us eat, drink and play, for to morrow we
shall dye. No more duty of any our daily Prayers, no more fasting, no more
vows, no more troublesome adoration upon our Knees, no more pining meditations,
no more penance, no more restitution, no more Priest, no more Altar, no more
Cross or holy Rood, no more Peter and Paul to be seen, no more languishing
memories of Saints, no more obedience to the erring Church, no more
self-examination, no more conscience scruples, etc. Those times indeed were mad
enough. But now People, as newly awaked from Wine, begin to be wiser and look
more soberly about them. Even Denmark and Holland consider now in cold blood
the many sad mischiefs they acted in hot: nor is our own Country wholly
ignorant of the irreparable ruins of those mad times. However, our Doctor will
not have his sport spoiled, nor yet his game stopped. Punchienella, though
Bartholmew fair be ended, may be acted still either in Lincolns-Inn-fields or
Chairing cross or any where else, both now and then and seven Years hence. It
will be still new to some body. But Sir, you are to take notice, that nothing
being so opposite to Jesus our Lord, or his holy law; or even to common reason,
then Idolatry; the Doctor has craftily placed it, in the very front of his
forlorn hope, thereby surely to affright silly Catholics from their old
station, and to deter all others from Communion with them, as Persons
grievously guilty of abominable, Pagan, even worse than Pagan Idolatry; verily
Sir Mandevils Giant in the enchanted Valley of Python, cannot be more
terrifying to a Night-Walker; nor Sir Hudibras his Squire, mounted on the
outside of his soft-footed steed, to the diffiding Fiddler; then this Sir
Doctors Monstrous Idol, to one who claims part with Christ in God. True it is,
some of the prime Reformers, and others who since have thrived in the World
thereby, through a bitterness of spirit, against the zealous Prelates of the
Catholic Church, who opposed their Ambition, or Lust, or both, did cast this
scandalous Assertion of Idolatry upon Us, for our Veneration of Images;
heedless, as the old Pagans they imitate were, what Accusations they charge
against us, or by what sleevless arguments they prove them; so they may thereby
make their Apostasy from our holy Church, somewhat colorable amongst Vulgar
Spirits; who still, like the men of Athens, are intent upon Novelties, ignorant
of the Nature, motive and design of divine Worship, a mistaking wherein only,
can beget a just imputation of Idolatry on the Worshipper; surely his
Doctorship may not be ignorant hereof, and therefore, his charging us therewith
upon those his soft grounds of a Termination of our Worship on Pictures,
obscurely and fraudulently worded argues an unexcusable Malice, passion or
dullness. Did he ever read, a Divine Worship ultimately terminated upon figures,
to be allowed by any Canon of the Roman Church? Did any of our Catholic
Doctors or Schoolmen, whom he seems to have swallowed by shoals, ever assert
that termination? Did he learn that Doctrine from any professor of the Catholic
faith? I am sure he did not. But we must give the Doctor leave to walk in his
own Maze, and to think, and speak, and write too, what he pleases; Worship of
its self, is of a great latitude, therefore to speak to the purpose, he should
set down what he means by Divine Worship, as distinct from other inferior
Worships, Religious and Civil, whereby it becomes proper to God; then, he should
appoint the formal End to which that Worship tends, according to the nature of
the act, and the duty of him that gives it; but thus concealing, what alone
would have cleared Us from his grand calumny, he endeavors to puzzle and
delude his greedy Readers, into a belief of our Idolatry, and to a great
Veneration of his Reverend and Worshipful Doctorhood; knowing them to be
weathercock-like, easily whirled about with every grave blast of his, if it
blows but in the teeth of Popery. He again discovers his own real or wilful
Ignorance, of what Relative Worship is, and whether it tends; every termination
of a Latreutical affection or action, wherewith we honor God, as the Author of
life and death, signified by the sacrifices of the Old Law, makes not that
Worship relative, otherwise the Worship of God immediately in spirit, would be
Relative too Relative Worship imports a reference of one object to another in
our Worship, which therefore looks not upon the former, either as the motive,
nor yet as the ultimate term of its tendency, but only as it does occasionally
awaken our spirits confined to sensible obj^cts in their first motion, and often
distracted about them, to think on God, by reason of some connatural, or
arbitrary connection they have, according to the common esteem of mankind, with
Him; and consequently terminates not our Worship, without an indispensable
reference to God, the latter object, whence our Divine worship takes its first
Rise, and whereupon it finally rests; And thus, not only Divine Relative
Worship, but other Religious, and civil too, are, and ought to be allowed in
any Church or State, which has any thing Worshipful in it. Thus the good Saint
Paul, will have us bow at the Holy Name of JESUS, and why not at the Name of
GOD or JEHOVAH; and that, whether it be imagined, spoken, printed or painted?
since God is equally ineffable by any of them; and what One represents to the
Mind, the other to the Ear, the latter does to the Eye. Their Rubricks too
requires a Worship of their figurative Bread, and their graver Clergy will still
bow to, and be uncovered before, their Communion Board; and who not, when the
Parson prays? I have seen Images of the Saints, even of Christ at the right
hand of his Father, bound up in their Common-prayer-Books, and Used by
Protestants, without fear of Idolatry; and K. James a wise and learned Prince,
in the Year 1617. ordered pictures of our Saints to be set up in his Chapel of
Haly-Rudd House in Edinburgh, as Spoteswood tells us. Thus good Subjects, for
the love they bear their gracious Prince, will ever be uncovered before his
Throne; and had the High and Mighties paid their Relative Homage to his
Majesty's Ships, by sticking their Flag, and lowering their Topsails, they had
not deserved to be canceled the Roll of Free-States; nor, though they hate
Papists and their Images, did they ever plead that Recognizance, to be
Idolatry; had they, I believe, it had made them yet more Ridiculous than they
are, even in our own courts. All this Dr. Still, might have considered, But his
tongue is hot, and he must speak although it be against himself, and the very
Church he justifies, as much as it is against the Church he arraigns. Indeed
his whole Discourse is so frivolously subtle and subtilely frivolous, that no
Church needs much to heed what he says. This I know and am certain of, that
although he should be confuted at large, and confounded for ever by any
Catholic Writer, yet shall we be never the nearer to any quietness and peace.
For the next Man that wants a rich Benefice, will if he have but this Man's
Confidence, Collect another Book of Popish Idolatry out of this Book of Doctor
Stillingfleet, as he ga^er'd this of his out of Henry More, Jeremy Tailor, and
sundry others his Predecessors; not heeding at all any answer that has been
given by former Catholics to the talk, any more than Dr. Stillingfleet does
here. They will ever written one out of another, and never regard what has been
said to any one of them in defense of that which they oppose, abecedarian
Scriblers. Nor can there be any end, so ^ong as there is a bishopric or fat
benefice to hope for: and Catholic hands so tied up, that they can print
nothing unto their own justification without insuperable difficulties and
hazard.

I have read in London the Defiances of one Fencer to another, both of them in
Print. Who accordingly do meet in Bear-Garden without any control there to
baste one another lustily for the Peoples pleasure And it would be a pastime I
think equally delightful, not less profitable, and somewhat more civil, to see
two Men reason down one another. We poor men should esteem it a great favor to
us, if our adversary might read his charge and we our defense, even in
Bear-garden. Since neither in Churches. Halls, Universities, or Schools are we
permitted to speak; or Print any thing to speak for us. And Doctor
Stillingfleet who has made his Defiance already, may, which he has not yet
done, appoint the Day. Not men and fencers only, but bulls and bears, cocks
and dogs, all are permitted to defend themselves when they are invaded, but
only we poor old Christians, whose Religion has blessed our Land
Fifteen-hundred Years. As if it were agreed on all hands that we should never
be rightly understood.

Mr. H. Thorndike a grave Divine and learned Doctor in our present English
Church both affirms and strongly proves in his Book called Just Weights and
Measures, that Roman Catholics are Idolaters no way: Adding also, That they
who separate from the Church of Rome as Idolaters, are thereby Schismatics
before God. Thus speaks that learned Man, the Phaenix of divines, who only
dares to be honest. And the mere authority of this eminent Protestant may
suffice to evacuate all the sophistry of this whole Chapter of this Doctors
book: as also of that which follows in the next place about our holy Host and
Saints.

Now Sir, I must bid you farewell. And that you may not think me either idle or
neglective of my duty and respects to you, pray give me leave to tell you, that
what you see here printed but now, was written and ready for the Press in
August last. And before October ended I had finished all my work upon Dr.
Stilling fleet's Book, suchlike familiar Commentaries, as these upon his first
chapter be. But in all these Six Months I could get no more Printed for You
either at home or abroad, than this poor Fifth Part of the whole, after my many
travels, vexations, expenses and dangers. Such obstructions are made about the
Presses, and so many violences offered here continually, far above any used
since we were born, that I can see no possibility for any whole Book of ours to
shoot that gulf, be our cause never so innocent and good. Nay, they will here
Print our Catholic Books themselves, as if they were their own, as Thomas a
Kempis, Granada, Parsons Resolutions, Drexelsius, and the like. But if we be
taken Printing them, the PRESS is broken, PRINTER punished, and we, if we be
found, in danger of our Lives. And therefore I beseech you, Sir, be content
with thus much, or rather this little. The rest you shall have in written hand.
In the mean time let Dr. Still. triumph and crow as he pleases. He is made and
has made himself sure enough. Although he has defied the whole Catholic
world, and all that know of it, having something to say, are both willing and
ready, yet will no Man come forth into the open field against him, because they
cannot. He thinks himself wise no doubt; wiser than millions of men: and may do
so still. For my part, Sir, I find him as wise as one man; and no more. Farewell.

TO KATHOLICO.
SIR,
I Am glad you have received my first Packet, lately and indeed too late
transmitted to you: and yet more, that you rest contented with my brief Postill
upon so small a parcel of Dr. Stilling fleets Book, after so long an
expectation. Sooner than I did I could send you nothing: and although I could
have said more upon the first Chapter which I sent you, yet since you are
satisfied with it, I am now content that I said no more. Sir, by that his
beginning you may well suspect, that the Doctor means to deal insincerely with
us. And this you shall see so plainly in each parcel of his Book, that you will
grieve at his wilful and studied insincerity. For as to the abovesaid business
of Images, first he knows well enough, that to set up the Statues and Images of
renowned persons after their decease, of magnificent Kings, just Judges,
learned Philosophers, valiant Captains, illustrious Historians, powerful
Orators, flourishing Poets, great Inventers of Arts and Sciences for a Nations
good, has been, and is still, and ever will be the custom of all Nations upon
earth; not wholly excepting the very Jews themselves, who keeping so honorable
memories of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob by Tradition of words, long before they
traveled from Egypt into Palestine, where they were by the way forbidden to
make to themselves, or worship any Idols of the Nations amongst whom they might
converse, cannot be thought to have had any aversion from the figures or faces
of t^o^e their Ancestors, if any they had, or could have had amongst them.
Secondly, the Doctor knows or ought to know, that three very great and good
effects are apt to be wrought in posterity, by means of such figures of their
worthy predecessors. For those Images do both prolong their memories upon
earth, which is some honor to them; and create a thankfulness in posterity for
their virtue and worthy deeds; and also inkindle in them an earnest emulation
of doing the like noble actions in succeeding ages. And thirdly, as little can
he deny, that all these three both innocent and commendable effects are as apt
to follow upon the sight of our Lord and his holy Saints, Apostles, Martyrs,
Confessors, Virgins, whose Images only are regarded by the Church. Catholics
not only believe, but experimentally perceive, that such representations do
quicken in them from age to age the beloved memory of our crucified Lord and
all his blessed followers; that they incite in their hearts a thankfulness for
so many their good deeds still redounding to our good; and that they kindle a
desire of imitating them so often as they behold those virtuous faces, once
Pilgrims as we now are, and Believers with us; even as they imitated our Lord,
by a strange force and courage trampling Sin and Satan under their feet. And
thus by Images we do reverence and honor Christ our Lord, and his holy Saints,
with a respect and veneration due unto them, each one in his place and dignity.
Nay one yet further good use do we, guided by our Faith and Religion, still
make of those pious representations: For being assured that our Saints in
heaven do offer up their incense of prayers in behalf of their Brethren on
earth, we seldom cast our eyes upon their figures, but desire in heart at
least, to reap some benefit thereby, partakers of their heavenly intercession:
Thus we do. But does Dr. Stilling fleet speak of these things, or unto these
things, or against any of these things? no not one word. Nor would any custom
of ours, or belief or doctrine of the Church, have brought in any of the
contents which make up his first Chapter, wherein our Image-idolatry is
declared and confuted by him. Wherefore laying out his charge against us in a
phrase of ambiguous words industriously con^r^ved, he brings in thereby all
that talk of his, which nothing at all concerns us, a^^ yet sounds a^ if it
did. This, Sir, is his in^^nce^^cy. Papists, says he, worship God by Images,
the Church of Rome worships God in Images, and therefore are they Idolaters.
This is his charge, very ambiguous, as all men may see, and of an uncertain
interpretation. It sounds in a direct sense, as if Catholics had some
representations of the eternal Deity either made by themselves, or some other
way con^^^ghed unto them, by which and in which they worship God. Thus chief
Magicians p^^cking their finger, let the blood drop in a pan of ^urning coals,
and when the sinoak ^rises, down they fall and worship their w^ck^d Familiar,
whose face then appears before them in a Looking-glass set aforehand for that
pu^pose on their Altar. And some such way ^^ay the Reader conceive, that we
worship God in Images, as they do their Familiar Demon. And again, when it is
said that we worship God by Images, he may as well imagine, that se^ting our
Images a fire, we offer them to God as a Burnt-offering, or some other such
like way worship God thereby: For this is the direct and connatural meaning of
the words. And in this direct ^ence the Doctor proceeds, and brings in thereby
all the contents of that his first Chapter. Papists, says he, worship God by
Images and in Images, which is idolatry and a fond idolatry too. For such a
worship cannot terminate upon God, because he has forbid it. For can any
representation of the invi^^ble De^y be made, as even the wiser Heathens have
ack^^wledged. An Image of God must needs be below God, and unbeseeming his
glory. For which cause Moses forbids it, S. Paul disowns it, learned Christian
Doctors abhor it. This was the fault of Aaron, the fault of Jeroboam, the
fault of all the Heathens who worshipped God in their Images or Idols. Thus our
Doctor speaks: and this is all he speaks, quite besides his business and our
Catholic custom. For our Images are the representations of our Lord Christ
born and crucified for us; and of his holy Apostles and Martyrs, and other his
renowned followers. And although we believe Christ our Lord to be God, yet the
Image of Christ and the Image of God are two different things, as all men know.
This then is the reason, why he words his charge against us in that manner he
does, with much insincerity. For if he had only charged us with that which we
only do; namely, that we make Images of Christ and his blessed Saints; or that
we worship and honor them thereby; this would not have brought in those many
materials of his long discourse, nor would he have had any thing thereof to
have said against us. And surely we can only honor them by Images, whose
Images we set up for our use; as (...) men know well enough. And if he will
inf^^^ upon another reflected act, because (...) think we do well thereby in
order to God, th^^ (...) therefore worship God by them (...) them; this is
merely to trifle. For thus w^ ^ay be said, and that more properly (...) ^^ly
too, that we worship God by the K^^^ (...) in the King, or other Magistra^^
(...) us by God Almighty for our go^ (...) which in that sense is most
certainly true. Nay we may as well be charged to worship God by and in our
Bread and Butter, Beef and Mutton, which we eat giving God thanks thereby. This
I say is the Doctors inun^^^ity; totally blameable in Treatises of
Cont^oversies that concern Religion, which exact a proper, direct and plain
expression. And it is in vain for him to reply, that we use also the
representations of Father, Son and Holy Ghost: For we have none of these as
they are in themselves, but as they have appeared unto us; the Holy Ghost in
the form of a Dove, the Son in the form of man, and Father as he founds to us
under that notion in our ear: which are still no representations of the
invisible Deity, of which the Doctor speaks. And he may remember too, that the
present Church of England, which he pretends to defend, allows and uses all
these Images also; even that of God the Father, which many of our Catholic
Prelates have excepted against and endeavored to suppress, however some others
amongst them have thought withal, that such a figure might well enough be
permitted: because what may be represented to the ear, may in the same manner
be represented to the eye also. Thus much Sir of the Doctors insincerity
hitherto. And what pretty Sophistical tricks he uses afterward, you may see in
due time and place. You may note only for the present, that after his imagined
overthrow of our Christian Images, he now in his second Chapter invades our
ancient Sacrifice typified by Melchisedek his bread and wine, which he calls
the Host: just according to the first method of the furious Reformation, which
first battered our Church-windows, and then slurred down the Altar-table.

Host-Idolatry and Saint-Idolatry.
The adoration of the Host is a grand piece of Idolatry in the Roman Church:
Nor will it suffice them here to plead, that they believe Christ to be in the
Eucharist on the same divine motives they believe Christ to be God, and that
they may therefore worship him there: for if there were a revelation of his
presence there, yet is there not the same command of worshipping him there, as
is of his person. Let all the Angels of God adore, and again, all must honor
the Son as they do the Father, but no news of worshipping the Host. But
secondly, there are not the same grounds to believe Christ's presence here, as
that Christ is God; and if that presence be not, then is it idolatry without
excuse. It is here granted, that the person of Christ visibly appearing to us
in any place, may be worshipped: but there is not the same reason of believing
and seeing. And if any reply, blessed is he who has not seen and believed, he
may know, that that word is here impertinent, relating not to this matter, but
to the Resurrection. It is also granted, that in the celebration of the
Eucharist, we are to give a spiritual worship to Christ, as well as to the
Father; performing that Religious Act with a due veneration of his majesty and
power; with a thankfulness for his goodness, a trust in his promises, and a
subjection to his supreme authority. We grant also, that external reverence may
be shown in the time of receiving the Eucharist, in signification of our humble
and thankful acknowledgement of his benefits. But we deny, first, that Divine
worship is to be given to the Elements on the account of a real presence, or
that the same adoration is to be given out of Communion as in it: And this is
the only Controversy. For how can one be sure, that the object is such in it
self as deserves worship, sine it seems Bread still? The Scripture that says
This is my Body, may be otherwise interpreted; and then the words will not
make it out: and the sense of them given by Fathers is hard to seek, and harder
to find, the world being full of disputes about it. The sense of the present
Church can stand in no stead; For is it enough that the Pope say so? No. If he
define it? No. If a General Council concur with him? No; unless they proceed
in a right way: and who knows that? Besides, how can we tell that he who
consecrates is a Priest, or has any intention to do it? And as we cannot be
sure of the object of worship there; so neither that we have yet sufficient
reason to worship. For Divines are not resolved, whether the humanity of
Christ, taken abstractively from the Divinity, be capable of Divine worship: so
that if the humanity be present with the Divinity, it is uncertain whether I
may worship it; and as distinct from the Divinity, it is certain I cannot: And
though out of the Sacrament we may worship Christ safely enough, yet not so in
the Sacrament, where his corporal presence is the cause of our adoration, and
perhaps without the Divinity at all which is unto no purpose of Christ's
institution. But suppose Christ's Divinity be present, yet this gives not ground
enough of worshipping the thing wherein he is present: For how and why should
it be? Here are their Doctors puzzled mightily, to show how their worship is
terminated in this case, and how God is united to the Sacrament more then to
the Sun and Moon; and whether there be any hypostatical union in one place more
then another: What can they urge for any sufficient authority of this their
worship? The authority of the Roman Church? That is nothing worth. Catholic
Tradition? Let them show it. Scripture? That cannot do it alone, without
Council and Fathers, as some of their own learned men acknowledge. For the
words, This is my Body, may stand with a Metaphorical, as well as a real sense.
But if they chance to be mistaken in the belief of this Doctrine, then can they
not certainly be excused from Idolatry, as their own men, Bishop Fisher, and
others do acknowledge; no more then the Manichees and some others, who said
Christ was the Sun, and therefore worshipped it. Veneration and Invocation of
Saints is another piece of Idolatry, etc.

. 1. The Author having prosecuted in one long Chapter the first piece of our
Catholic Idolatry, he bestows upon us another here as long as it, about two
other our Idolatrous parcels, the Eucharistian Host, and Saints. For Idolatry
is such a rumbling sound, that he thinks not fit to confine it to one Chapter,
as the other three subjects, Indevotion, Fanaticisme and Division; but we must
hear of it on both sides our head, unto our double confusion. But it is here to
be noted, that he changes now the mode of his Sophistry in to a new kind, I
suppose for his Readers refreshment; Before he cast beams, now he throws motes
into our Eyes. Our Images he confounds by the Loggs of Heathen Idols; but our
Eucharist by the dust of Philosophical curiosities; which he so spreads abroad
that he loses his own eyesight.

. 2. And as he changes his Logic, so does he alter his phrase also. And he has
a reason for that too. In his first Chapter he charged us with worshipping God
by Images, and in Images: now he does not say in the like phrase, that we
worship God in the Host, or by the Host. And of this his sudden change of
phrase, I believe every Reader does not take notice, or perceive a reason,
though the Author have one, and that a good one for it, and I think a couple.
For first a waggish wit must so provide, that he impose upon his adversary, not
that which is true, or sounds true, but what is, or sounds false. To worship
God in Images sounds false: but to worship God in the Host sounds true: and
therefore he imposes that upon Catholics, but not this. Secondly, This his
diversity of phrase brings him in all the materials of that his first and this
present Chapter, which he could never by any force have haled into his paper,
unless he had carefully so placed his words, as here he does. The charge of
worshipping God in Images, gave him occasion to talk how such a worship cannot
terminate upon God; how that the invisible Deity cannot be represented; how the
Heathens worshipped God in their Idols; how that Aaron and Jeroboams sin was no
other, etc. which materials till up his first Chapter; and had all failed him,
had he spoke singly of the respect which Catholics bear to their holy Apostles
and Martyrs, represented either to their ear or eye: which is all they do. On
the other side, his charge of worshipping the Host, and not God in the Host,
opens him a passage for all the talk of this his second Chapter: how that we
have no command in Scripture of worshipping the Host, though we be commanded to
worship Christ: how that we have no ground to worship the Elements; how that we
cannot be sure that the Host is an object of worship: how Schoolmen are puzzled
to declare the union with the Elements and Symbols; etc. which are his
materials against this second parcel of our Idolatry: and had all failed him
too; had he fairly imposed upon Catholics a worship of God in the Host, as
before he did a worship of God in Images. For these two great reasons he warily
imposes upon them in choice phrases of his own; that people may hear and read
in both places, not what Catholics do, but what they do not: and yet so
confidently charged upon them, as if it were their right. And thus he makes
sport for himself but marrs none; very careful, not to obstruct, but set open a
way for his prattle; which is a pretty piece of wit, if it had a little honesty
to make it relish.

. 3. I do not perceive the Author to be so jolly in this his second Chapter, as
in his first. Nor does he argue so positively against this great work of
Christian Religion, no less solid and certain then Christianity it self; as he
did before against the ceremonious use of an Image; which Catholics heed no
otherways then ornaments of their Religion, fruitful in so many sweet fragrant
Roses and Lillies of their Martyrs and other blessed Saints. And therefore Dr.
St. winks himself, that his reader may think here is no truth to be seen. Full
of doubts he is, that Catholics may be thought doubtful. What can they show,
what can they urge for this their worship? The authority of the Roman Church?
that is little worth. A speedy, quick and dextrous dispatch. Catholic
tradition? where is it? why do they not show it? who ever heard of it? Poor
man, he cannot see wood for trees, nor London perhaps in the midst of
Cheapside, except some body point at it. The numerous volumns that have set
forth this Catholic tradition, as eminent, as clear, as universal as
Christianity it self, he now remembers them not; no not any one of them can he
now call to mind, to lead him out of the maze he is in. Will they pretend
Scripture? all that is disputed, that is otherwise interpreted. If he continue
in this his perplexity, he will turn Atheist by and by. For there is no one
Article of Christian faith, or Scripture that speaks it, but has been disputed,
denied and otherwise interpreted. What can Scripture, says he, do without
Councils? and what are Councils but fallible mistaking businesses? A sad plight
the man is in: but it is on his own accord and free will; that his reader may
imagine Catholics who are all the world over in a peaceable possession of this
their faith, to be in the same pickle too. He simply conceits Catholics to
have their faith to pick up some where; and he cannot possibly tell where they
should glean it, with any assurance or quiet: at least he would have it thought
they cannot. Bellarmin, says he, declares by convincing arguments, that Christ
is God and to be worshipped: but what Church, what tradition, what Counsel,
what Fathers tell us any such thing of the Host? Alas poor dark man! we must
not then ever think to pick our Religion out of Bellarmin it seems. And so must
needs be in the same case with those Christians who lived before Bellarmins
time; that is to say, either to have our Religion already without Bellarmins
help, or to seek it. But where had Bellarmin yet a Child, where had he his
Faith before he wrote any thing? surely not out of Bellarmins books. It is a
wonder the Dr. thinks not of this, to help him a little to his sound senses.
But he is in his ecstasy, and will be in it still; And he tells us in this his
rapture, that Bellarmin proved by convincing arguments, that Christ is God, and
to be worshipped; but who ever said the like of the Host? We know, and remember
well enough that the same Bellarmin, who proves so laboriously that Christ is
God, declares also no less effectually in a whole treatise of the same volume
of controversies, both our Lords Divine presence in the Eucharist, and our
supreme veneration, love and honor there due unto him. This we know; and this
the Dr. did himself know also, before he drove himself into these his fained
Apoplexies; wherein he has indeed some imperfect glimpses of it, even now, that
we may give him his due; but the whole treatise in Bellarmin seems to him now
at this his distance, but as a small black mote, such as an Eagle may happly
appear to us flying in the Clouds five miles high above our heads; an atome, a
little on this side nothing; and therefore not worth speaking of. And by this
means he goes on glibly in his extacies, and exclamations unto the end. What
ground have Papists, what ground have they for this their worship? Scripture?
Tradition? Councels? Fathers? Church? Reason? where are they? what are they
worth? who ever saw them? why are they not shown? Thus the good man raves.
Although all people before this last and worst age, who ever in any place bore
the name of Christians, both Latin and Greek Bishoprics, who filled up Europe;
and all the rest every where; Armenians, Habassins, Maronites, Jacobites,
Muscovites, Melthites, had all of them this one solemn adoration of God in the
Eucharist, as the great work of Christianity; although ancient Fathers,
especially the Grecians have left more record of it, than any other parcel of
Christian belief and practice; although many great, laborious, and learned
volumnes have been set forth in this last age, both in France, Germany, and
England, whereby that Catholic piety is so demonstrated, that none who
considers things in earnest, can refrain to acknowledge it; yet does Dr. St. in
his deep ecstasy forget all this, and cries out, who ever said it? who ever
proved it? who ever professed it? And he hopes his Reader, who is seldom wiser
than his book, will answer to his question, and say, No body, No body Sir, you
are in the right; and Papists are mere Fools and Blockheads.

4. The drift of this Chapter is to show that we can neither believe our Lords
presence in the Eucharist, nor do any homage to God in him, there figured
according to his own solemn Institution, as Crucified among us unto our
reconciliation and peace. And truly his discourse here tending thereunto, is
all of it so extraordinary slight, that one cannot tell whether himself be
serious, or that he do indeed take us all for Mushromes, so soft and foolish,
that we will be carried away at his pleasure by any thing, or indeed by
nothing. Suppose, says he, we have the same Divine Revelation of Christ's
presence in the Eucharist as of the Divinity of his Person; yet can we not
possibly worship here as there; because there it is said, let all the Angels
adore him, but we have no command to worship the Host. As though one and the
same command, Let all the Angels adore him, would not serve indifferently both
in Heaven and Earth, both for Angels and men, where ever he is present. The
Divine revelation of his presence needs no further command to engage our
worship; nor is that said command, Let all men honor the Son, as the Father,
and let all the Angels worship him, determined to any one place, or to any one
mode of his presence. St. Paul worshipped our Lord in the fields of Damascus,
where he met him after his Resurrection. And yet he had never any command to
worship him in those plains, either of Damascus or Libanus. The particular
Revelation of his presence there, was a Monitor sufficient of his duty. The
person of Christ, says he, visibly appearing to us in any place, may be
worshipped; but there is not the same reason of believing and seeing. All other
good Christians before Dr. Stillingfleet, judged revelation and believing to be
a surer testimony in matters of Faith and Religion, than our seeing is. Let us
hear one of our Christian Doctors speak, whose testimony will serve for all the
rest. We have not declared unto you, says St. Peter, the virtue and coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ, in any fabulous mythology; but as we have seen with our
eyes his own Majesty. For he received from God the Father, honor and glory, by
a v^yce conveyed unto him from that glorious magnificence, saying thus, This
is my well beloved Son, in whom is my sole content. And this voice we our
selves heard derived from Heaven, when we were together with him in the holy
Mount. And yet have we more firm Prophetical words, unto which while you attend
as to a light shining in an obscure place, ye shall do well, until the d^y
dawn, and the morning Star arise in your hearts. Thus speaks St. Peter, our
Lords great Apostle, who, though he beheld our Lords Glory in the Mount, and
heard there a voice from Heaven unto his honor, yet he prefers before both
these private testimonies, the one general Authority of Divine Revelation, as
firmer and more authentical than either, or yet both of them put together, as
the sole standing unextinguishable general light, set up in the obscurity of
this our dark life, for the assured guidance of all men. As if he had plainly
told us, that our private senses may be deceived, especially in matters of
Apparitions and transitory Visions, imparted unto some one or other apart. But
prophetic speech and revelation, this is general and the same to all; this is
unerring and firm; this stands for ever. Here have we plainly good St. Peter's
mind in this affair. But our Doctor resolves otherwise. Divine revelation,
although we have it, will not serve his turn. But if he could see Christ
appearing to him any where, he could worship him then, and would perhaps do it.
There is not the same reason with him, in believing and seeing, and that is
indeed true, St. Peter says so like wise. But St. Peter says, that believing
is firmer than seeing: Dr. Stillingfleet avers, that seeing is firmer than
believing. He would be afraid to act that upon mere Divine Revelation, which he
will not fear to do upon sight. Could he see Christ appear to him, he would
worship him; but he cannot by any means worship him, where Gospel testifies his
presence, and he sees it not. Nay, he avers a little afterward, that he can
kneel down and worship Christ any where, excepting only in the Eucharist, where
his corporeal presence is the cause of adoration. He can do it where no cause
obliges him to it, no peculiar cause exacting it. But in no wise will he be
brought to it, where his presence known by Revelation stands to claim it.
Gospel and the custom of Christianity quite spoils his Devotion, and keeps
him from doing that homage to our Lord in the Church, which he could freely
give him in a Marketplace. And if any should reply, quoth he, that blessed is
he who has not seen, and yet believed; he may know that this saying of his is
impertinent to this present purpose, because it relates only unto the
Resurrection. This he speaks, not considering that the said assertion of our
Lord, Blessed is he who sees not, and yet believes, is indefinite and
consequently general, equally appliable unto all things our Lord ever acted or
taught us either to believe or hope for. And as our Lord used it to his
Disciples in the business of the Resurrection, so must it hold good equally in
that of his Incarnation, Ascension, or any thing else he either spoke or acted
for us. And though it be applied unto one thing, it does not therefore follow
that it relates to nothing else, nor is pertinent to any other mystery but
that. We may well and properly say, according to Dr. Stillingfleet, Blessed is
he who has not seen, and yet believed the Resurrection. But we must not say,
Blessed is he that has not seen, and yet believed the Incarnation, Ascension,
Christ's miracles in curing the Deaf, Dumb, Lame, and Blind; in raising the
dead, and preaching eternal happiness to his followers. Unto all this, that
saying is impertinent with him, it relates to nothing at all but the
Resurrection. And have we not here a solemn and peculiar wit, and one that may
well challenge the whole world to come forth into the open field against him?
But we must note here, that the Doctor does not grant any such Divine
Revelation, which may either clearly speak our Lords presence in the Eucharist,
or justify our worship in it, only he permits it to pass for disputation sake;
and avers, that if there were any such Revelation, yet would it not suffice to
free us from Idolatry: and this he does to give us an experiment of his wit.
And that experiment we have had, and must be content with it till more come.

5. It is here granted, says he, that in the celebration of the Eucha^ist, we
are to give a spiritual worship unto Christ, as well as to the Father;
performing that religious Act with a due veneration of his Majesty and power,
with a thankfulness for his goodness, a trust in his promises, and a subjection
to his supreme Authority. We grant also, that external reverence may be shown
in the time of receiving the Eucharist, in signification of our humble and
thankful acknowledgment for his benefits. Here be a great many good things
granted us here, and I take them thankfully. In his first Chapter he was so
Zealously hot, that he would grant us nothing, no not so much as to hang up
such pictures in our Chambers as he has himself looking upon him in his own;
but can we get this grant of his ratified and sealed by all the Protestants in
England? If it were, the Church of England would look the better for it. Nay,
will not be himself, what he has granted us to day, revoke again to morrow? The
Doctor should do well to read over now and then his own grants and denyals. For
he is not so fixed in them, that one dare take his word, as I could easily
specify both in this and other particulars; But I refrain from that work now,
as needless Sir to you; at least we have as much here granted, as adoration
requires. But I cannot perceive he will have any of it relate to ought
subsisting in the Eucharist; but only to the Author of it, who is in Heaven,
upon a consideration of his benefits, which is some part of Catholic truth,
though not entire.

6. But we deny, says he, that Divine worship is to be given to the Elements,
upon the account of a ^^^l presence. This denial also, as the words ^and, is
good enough. For none that I know worship Elements. Secondly, We deny that the
same adoration is to be given out of Communion as in it; and this is the only
Controversy. I had thought he said before, that he could worship Christ any
where but only in the Eucharist, where the corporeal presence determins a
worship. Now he seems to say, that he can worship him in Communion, and not out
of it, and this the only controversy. But we must take his grants and danyals
singly, and not stand to tie them one to another, lest we anger our Benefactor.
What he gives, we must take thankfully, and not look a gift horse in the month;
and what he denies in one page, he may grant us in another, if we can but have
patience.

7. They cannot be sure, says he, that the object deserves worship, appearing
still bread; Scripture, that says, This is my Body, may be otherwise
interpreted, the sense of the Fathers is hard to find; the present Church
stands in no stead. For is it enough, the Pope says it? No. If he define it?
No. If a General Council concur? No. Unless they proceed in a right way; and
who can be sure of that? Now he throws about his Philosophy-dust, to persuade
us we can be sure of nothing: It still appears bread. So it does. Even Christ
our Lord appeared a mere man, but the eye of Faith apprehended him the Son of
the Living God; a Child newly baptized appears, but the same it was, and yet is
believed to be now regenerate and born again; all that is in man, appears
mortal, but is not believed so. Mul^a videntur quae non sunt. This divine
Majesty has words of life and power, and call, the things which are not, as
those that are; and by his naming them, makes them to be what he says they are.
And in those words of life do Ca^holicks believe and trust; when taking bread
he solemnly and seriously said, at his last hour, (instituting then an Oblation
and Sacrament, most sovereign and venerable to remain in his Church for ever)
This is my Body: and all Christians hitherto have lived and dyed in this Faith.
Scripture, that says, This is my Body, may be otherwise interpreted.
Considering they were the last words of our Loving Lord departing from us, and
his final Legacy bequeathed his believers, they cannot be rightly interpreted,
but as they sound. And any other interpretation, that has been yet given by any
against our Catholic Faith, amounts only unto thus much, This is not my Body,
which is a strange mad interpretation. The sense of the Fathers is hard to
seek, says he. But who seeks after it? writers of controversies may take pains
to cull it out, and demonstrate it to unbelievers for their Conversion. But
Catholics have their Faith already, wherein they are educated and bred up from
their youth, united to their immediate Pastors, as these are to the rest of the
Catholic Body. The present Church stands in no stead, why so? that is all in
all, as the body is to the finger, hands, and other members, in which they all
move: Is it enough, the Pope says it? No, etc. This man here imagins, first,
that Catholics have their Faith to seek, which is his feeble imagination.
Secondly, That Scripture cannot help them for his reason above specified, as
feeble as it: And Thirdly, That the present Church can avail as little,
because the Popes word is not assured, as though the Popes word were the
present Church. And is not all this a strange raving talk? All men know, I
think Sir all men, excepting only this spiritual H^ctor, that as Catholics
have their Faith and Religion by Tradition, from one Generation to another; so
in it they have ever lived unanimously under their immediate Priests and
Pastors united altogether in the great Catholic Body, the present Church, and
never look further. Nor is there any need at all, either of the Popes word or
Councels, unless some great sedition or scandalous Apostasy arise in some one
or other particular Diocese. For then the Bishop of the place calls for help of
his fellow Bishops, and the supreme Pastor in particular, and conciliar
Assemblies, as Governors extraordinary in a tempest which may endanger the
ship. And Catholics thus keeping close together in one body, united with their
Pastors whom the Holy Ghost has set over them for their safety and peace,
cannot but remain steady and immovable, by the assistance and blessing of that
Lord who has promised ever to be with them, even to the worlds consummation.
Nor do they ever seek for their Faith any where; for they have it sufficiently
already; and all their ^are is to conform their lives to it as they ought, that
they may get Gods good Spirit, and his holy operations in themselves, which is
the end of their Religion, and all they do in it. And what a pretty piece of
ignorance is it in Dr. Stillingfleet, to persuade us that they cannot be
certain of their Faith, who are certain, and know themselves certain, and
declare so much before the face of the Sun, and all the eyes of Heaven, by
their stability, fixedness, and immovability in Faith, even this particular
Faith of our Lords presence in the Eucharist, so many ages together, and such
vast distant places, not only against the dictamen of their own senses, but
even against all the violence and subtilty of mankind, conspiring to shake all
the very nerves and bones of their holy Faith out of joint. Dr. Stilling fleet
has more need to consider in Gods fear, how Catholics do arrive to this
strange assurance, rather than emptily to tell us they cannot be sure.

8. Their own Schoolmen puzle, and are unresolved how the whole Humanity can
be present, how united, how terminate a worship, etc. Here is another handful
of his dust, his curiosity-dust, to lessen our assurance. If our Schoolmen
puzle, and are puzzled, we must needs be thought unresolved. But what do these
Schoolmen puzle, what are they unresolved in? Not in their Faith, which says
that our Lord is present with us in his holy Eucharist; but in the
Philosophical Quomodo, or how this thing, or that thing is. And as they cannot
disagree in Faith, which they received all alike one and the very same; so can
they not agree in Philosophy, which they invent and contrive very diverse, every
one to himself, according to his genious and capacity. And what is all this
unto us believers, or to one and another among themselves as they are all
Christians? even just nothing. I say just nothing can the assurance of our
Faith be prejudiced, by any supervening curiosities of men disputing afterward
in their maturer age about the Quomodo of it, or the possibility of the
contrary to it, or the ways of Gods working in it or conclusions deduced from
it, or a hundred such like things introduced by learned and subtle Schoolmen,
for the sharpning of wits, and advancement of learning. The Doctor dreams I
think, that what ever Catholic writers speak, is Catholic Faith: and
consequently, that they puzle, and are unresolved in Faith, where ever they are
unresolved: which although it be a pitiful piece of Childishness to think, yet
is not he the only man that rides upon this Hobbyhorse. Tailor, Poole, Moore,
Hammond, Pierse, Whitby, Owen, all of them mount upon the same Steed, and one
cannot tell which of them is the wisest. Faith is before and antecedent: Faith
is the Revelation of Jesus Christ conveyed unto us by his Church,
uninterruptedly succeeding from generation to generation: Faith is plain and
single, and equally common to all. But School-learning is ambiguous, doubtful,
various, intricate, invented by men, diverse and contradictory, and a mere
stranger in our Christianity, which is a thousand years older than it, and may
in all probability subsist yet a thousand years more, after that
School-learning is quite vanished out of the world. Are all our Anti-catholick
adversaries so blind, that they cannot see this? It is strange to me, that they
should not consider, that all the said Popish Doctors and their Disciples
remain peaceably together, in the same profession of Faith all the world over,
notwithstanding these their clashing Philosophies. For how could they otherwise
call them all Popish Doctors. Faith is one thing, and the declarations of it
may be many. One single truth revealed to us by our Lord and his Church from
him, may give Philosophical wits occasion to raise up a hundred questions about
the modes, circumstances, and inferences of it. And these various conclusions
of men, both those which declare Faith, and those which superadd other new
things over and beyond it, are Philosophies commonly called theology, exposed
in the Schools unto the trial of wits; where they are so sure to suffer
opposition, that not one conclusion in a hundred escapes it. So that their
puzling about curiosities of their own, does nothing at all concern either
faith or faithful men. Those that love it, let them take their pastime in that
puzling work: but they do not think to be saved by it. And they who never know
or hear of it, may happily be the better Christians for that, but never the
worse? I believe Jesus our Lord to be present in the Eucharist, and worship him
there, and offer up unto Almighty God all my necessities with Jesus my Lord,
there figured by his own institution, as crucified before us; all this my Faith
teaches me; and all this I do, and can do well enough, though I never either
conceive or consider, how his humanity is united, how it is present, how it
terminates our worship; all which concerns me nothing. Let the curious
speculate such like things, and be never the wiser, but only in a few uncouth
words. I am satisfied, if I do my duty in simplicity and innocence; that duty
that is before all these speculations one and the same, and remains the same
after them. By a vulgar and familiar example, I may happily be better understood.
The Doctor both sees, and walks, and sleeps; and so do I my self. And yet our
Schoolmen are puzzled, and mightily unresolved about all these things, how they
are done, and cannot possibly agree. They cannot conclude, whether our seeing
be wrought by introreception or extramission of rays; some say the one way,
some the other, some both. They cannot tell assuredly, whether vision be
effected in the crystaline humor or nerves; they agree not what thing this
sight or vision is, nor how it is conveyed or lodged within for future
dreams, etc. They are unresolved how we think or how the world without us gets
so strangely within us, or how it lies there couched, or how it circles so
wonderfully in our spirits, or what physical thing our thinking is, whether
appearances or only motion, and what, and where those appearances, and what the
moover: They cannot with any uniformity declare how we walk, how the various
strings lie for this motion; where they are knit together; what command,
impulse, or impression sets the members to move; and how that impulse is
conve^ghed, and whence it comes; and where sits the director paramount, whose
beck is so uncontrollable, that each member does suddenly his duty according
to command. They could never yet agree in the ways of sleep, whence it comes,
and where it resides; what is that thing which so strangely silences all the
senses? where those spirits retire, who keep daily Centinal in those
Cinque Ports; and which are their Bed-Chambers? what do they when they thus
retire; and how they rest; how they issue next morning each to his own place,
without any director, etc. Here Schoolmen puzle, here they are unresolved,
here they dispute and differ. But what then? Cannot I therefore see, nor walk,
nor think, nor sleep? No, it seems, till the Schoolmen resolve: say you so?
Let them never resolve them, and I will try whether I can sleep at my time, and
walk, and think, and look about me. Even just so it is here, for the dictates
and axioms of Faith were before School-mens doubts and resolutions, and will be
ever the same, what ever they resolve or doubt of.

9. The sense of those words, This is my Body, is doubted of, and interpreted
now another way, and several disputes arise. What have Papists to rely upon,
since the Fathers are themselves as fallible as other men; neither are they
assured that they have any Priests amongst them for to consecrate, etc. If we
can now but save our eyes, we are well. For we have but two or three motes more
to trouble us. All is doubtful he says; doubtful, whether we have any Priests
or no; doubtful, whether we have any certain sense to our words; doubtful
whether we have any men to make sense of them: doubtful whether we have any
trust and assurance upon those men. And what shall we do now? Surely he would
have us either do, or not do something or other, but I know not what. We cannot
heed holy Fathers, for they are fallible and doubted men. We cannot believe
Protestants, for they are doubtful men, and divided, and unsettled in their
opinions of this point. We cannot regard Dr. Still. for he is a doubt-making
man, and blunders and settles upon nothing, and not certain himself, according
to what he speaks here of Priests out of Chillingworth, whether he be a
Minister or no, or a Clark, or a Christian, or so much as a Stillingfleet. I
think we had best keep our selves where we are, who doubt nothing at all, and
leave the Doctor to play at his Blindman-buff all alone. If Infidelities and
Cavils of men, disputes and difficulties, surmised doubts, and vain sophismes
must annul our Faith; then can we not possibly in this world either keep or
receive any Faith in God at all. And Christ our Lord must needs then have
appeared among us on this our Earth in vain. For both himself, and all the
whole truth he delivered us, was in his time, and all following ages
contradicted round about, and opposed, and rendered thereby doubtful by Jews and
Pagans; and no less by those people, who Apostatized from that Catholic
Society, than any other their outward and foreign Adversaries. And I suppose
the Giantly wits of former ages amongst the Rabbis and Philosophers, did with
somewhat a more stronger shot from since and reason, invade our Christian
assurance, than any is here discharged out of his Elder potgun by our
doubt-making Doctor. This is uncertain, Church is slighted, Fathers are
otherwise interpreted, there are now who deny it, etc. What news in all this
can trouble me, who could not but foresee, if I did but use my common reason,
that all these things would happen. It is not to be expected, that all men
should believe at once. And he that believes not, will both conceive doubt^,
and urge them* both hare a believer and persecute him too, perhaps to death,
without any doubt at all. These doubts and oppositions, and (...) raised
against Faith, can have no other effect in a true believer, but to strengthen,
and spread the roots of it more wide and deeper in his heart. There was a
notable Prophe^ie of our Lord uttered by St. Si^^^on, a worthy great Personage
at his birth, (...) This Jesus is set both for the fall and rising of many in
Israel, and for a sign to be contradicted. Both Christ and his whole Faith
delivered by him is (...) a Sign and eminent Trophy, set up in the eyes of the
whole world, by all grumbling unbelievers to be enviously glanced at,
maliciously traduced, and all possible ways opposed and persecuted. O but what
if this Faith of Papists should prove to be false, says he, then cannot
Papists be excused from Idolatry, as their own learned men acknowledge. This is
even wondrous true, whether our own learned men, who are still brought in by
him for the imbellishment of his own Clarkship, do acknowledge it, or no. And
so, if Jesus Christ himself should prove not to be what he is believed by
Catholics, then would the Doctor also, who is ready to worship him upon the
account of that our Faith, declared and maintained by the Catholic Council of
Nice, be an Idolator too. A false consequence may easily flow from a false and
impossible supposition. But wise men, are more apt to consider their own
danger, than other men's. And the Doctor, if he were indeed in earnest, and
heeded rather his own Salvation then vain glory, should rather ask his own
soul, I should think, what if this Catholic Faith should be true? Catholics
have for it clear Gospel, universal tradition, all Christian Churches in the
world believing it; and that in all ages the Doctor has nothing but his own
sense, and John Calvin who fell from that Church, to plead for him. Were not
the Manichees censured as Idolaters, for worshipping the Sun in the Firmament,
believing it to be God. They well deserved to be censured. For that was a fancy
of their own, grounded upon that word, he has set his Tabernacle in the Sun,
drawn unto a fond sense by their private interpretation, contrary to the
Authority of the Church and Pastors, whom they would not obey, when they
checked and reproved them for it. Even as now our present Protestants do put
their various fanciful interpretations of sign and figure upon the words of
Gospel, This is my Body, which the whole Church of God, out of which they fell,
ever loved and reverenced, as the most clear evidence of a Heavenly Legacy, the
truest and reallest that was ever made to man, and of highest concernment to
him. Only the Ma^^chees judged by their erring, surmise that our Lords Body was
really there, where the Church taught them it was not. Protestants think it not
really there, where the same Church teaches them it is. And thus have we passed
through those handful of doubts which the Dr. casts before our eyes to persuade
us we are not sure, where he knows we are immovable. And we may worship our
Lord in the Eucharist still, as we did before, for Stillingfleet.

10. The residue of this Chapter bewraies our third Catholic Idol. Saints
namely, and their invocation. There be but three or four words in it of
substance (if a falsehood may be said indeed to subsist at all) dilated so by
his pretty rhetoric, as if he had a mind to teach young Lawyers how to plead
in a false cause. The Heathens, says he, were not blamed by Christian Doctors,
for their ill choice of worship, Venus for example, or Vulcan, who were
wretches; but for giving divine honor to any but the true God, as Papists do.
Here are two untruths, and both notorious ones. For neither do Catholics give
divine honor to Saints, their fellow Servants and Domestics of Faith; neither
is it true, that ancient Christian Doctors did not blame the Heathens for their
ill choice of worship; as monuments yet extant, various and weighty monuments
do witness, both in St. Austins Civitate Dei, and elsewhere. Wise Heathens
worshipped one God supreme, heeding the rest as inferior powers under him, as
Papists do their Saints. These be two more falsehoods, as is already declared in
part. For neither are Saints, any inferior powers to help us from themselves,
as the Sun, Moon, or Mercury; but friends of God in Heaven, and welwishers to
their Brethren on Earth, ready as Onias, Job, Abraham, and Daniel, and all the
good Angels, both to desire and rejoice at their conversion and peace. Neither
did the wise Heathens worship one God supreme, as St. Paul expressly testifies
in his Epistle to the Christians at Rome; where he tells them, that even the
Pagan Philosophers whom Dr. Stilling fleet calls the wiser Heathens, held the
truth in injustice, that they did not glorify nor worship the supreme God;
that they became as vain in their thoughts and deeds, as any, even the unwiser
sort of them, that pretending to be wise, or wiser Heathens, they became stark
Noddies; that they transformed Gods truth, discerned even by his works of
Creation into a lie; and that they worshipped and served the Creature (...) and
not the Creator. I know well enough that Varro, with some others of the
Heathens about Rome, where all sorts of Idols were brought together for the
renown and pomp of that conquering City, began to plead thus, and excuse their
Idolatry, as the Doctor has learned by him here to do. But did St. Austin admit
that plea? or was there ever any Christian, who opposed it not, together with
all our holy Prophets and Apostles? What subordination was there amongst the
Egyptian, Cyrian, and Chaldean Idols; or what Country ever was there among the
Heathens, who looked not upon their own Idol-God as Supreme? Papists build
Churches to Saints, offer Sacrifice to Saints, as Heathens to those dieties.
Two more falsities. Papists do neither of these. And the Doctor might be
ashamed to talk thus. Have not Protestants, St. Paul's Church, St Peter's Church,
St. Dunstan, St. Steven, St. John's Church, and the like, even as Catholics
have? And did ever any Catholic in the world, say, or write, or profess to
offer Sacrifice to Saints? They use a formal invocation of them. One more:
Formal invocation, is only an invocation of the cause, who is to give the
blessing, grace, or favor petitioned, and from whom all good things do flow,
and not of him who requests it. Popish Hymns and Anthems in honor of Saints,
are not only Rhetorical Apostrophees, used by some of the Greek Fathers, or
poetical flourishes, as those of Damascus, Prudentius, Paulinus, Ambrosius, or
only general wishes, that Saints would pray for us, of which are some instances
in good Authors, or any devout Assemblies, at the Monuments of Martyrs, which
were usual in ancient times. They are indeed not only this, because they are
also and principally formal invocations of the most glorious God, as any one
may perceive, who will please to read over our Catholic Hymns, for Apostles,
Martyrs, Confessors, Virgins, in the Breviary, as the Doctor (more shame for
him thus to talk) has done himself. St. Austins example when he says, Blessed
St. Cyprian help us in our Prayers, availes not Papists at all; for that of St.
Austin was but a p^ous Apostrophee. It availes as much as we need; call it
Apostrophe, or what you please: Nor does it avail Papists, that Faustus, the
Manichean Calumniates Catholics living in St. Austins time, with their
honoring the memories and shrines of Martyrs, and turning the old Idols into
Martyrs, which those Catholics worshipped with like Vows; for St. Austin's
excuse of that fact does not agree with the Papists that are now adays. It so
well agrees with them, and justifies so punctually all that ever they do in
this affair, that they need not either to change or add one word to it. I will
only se^ down that excuse of St. Austin, as Mr. Still. has been pleased here in
his book to give it us, without addition, or change of any word. All the
worship, says St. Austin, which we give to Saints, is that of love and
society; which is the same kind with that we give to holy men of this life, who
are ready to suffer for truth of Gospel. Sacrifice is not only refused to
Saints and Angels, but any other Religious honor which is due to God; as the
Angel forbad St. John to fall down and worship him; The Heathens indeed built
Temples, erected Altars, appointed Priests, and offered Sacrifice to their
Idols. But we erect no Temples to Martyrs, as to Gods, but memories as to dead
men, whose Spirits live with God. We raise no Altars, on which to Sacrifice to
our Martyrs; but unto our one God only, the God of Martyrs as well as ours; at
which, They as men of God, who have overcome the world by confessing him, are
named in their place and order, but are not invocated by the P^iest who
Sacrifices. Whatever Christians do at the memories of Martyrs, is for Ornament
to those memories, and not as any sacred rites and sacrifices belonging to the
dead as Gods: Nor do we worship our Martyrs with divine honors, nor with the
faults of men, as the Gentiles did their Gods. Thus speaks St. Austin to
Faustus for the Catholics then living, as Dr. Still. himself reports. And the
Catholics now alive need no more to be said for them. And thus his Idolatry.
Romance, which fill up two of his Chapters, is now happily ended. And methinks
Sir, that he has behaved himself herein somewhat like our Country Gypsies, who
meeting with people in the way, under pretense of telling them their Fortunes,
ask them many odd uncouth Questions about things past, not easily to be
remembered, and speak unintelligable ambiguous words, which put them into so
deep a muse, that the Gypsies get thereby a fair opportunity to pick their
pockets.

TO KATHOLIKO.
THe Doctor pretends, Sir, in his third Chapter to descend unto some parcels of
our morality: persuading us that five pieces of our belief and practice are
main hindrances of a good life and devotion: namely, our Doctrine (as he calls
it) of penance, of purgatory, of prayers in an unknown tongue, of the efficacy
of sacraments, and of our prohibition of scripture. His reasons for all this,
or his cunning leiger ways of perverting all these things, his insincerity
therein, and notable dissimulation, you shall hear by and by. For perceiving
now, that after I have set down the sum of his text in gross, I am forced to
repeat it all again by retail, spending thereby both time and paper needlessly,
I must content my self to give you his text only in parts, with my short
comment adjoined to each parcel as I go. But give me leave to tell you, Sir,
thus much in general aforehand, that all this his whole Chapter is so palpably
uncharitable and unjust, that no honest understanding Reader, what pleasure
soever he took himself in writing it, can read it over without disdain and
grief. What is this world come to? and where are we? and what strange things do
we see and hear daily? This one book of Dr. Still. is to me such a world of
wonders, that I shall not hereafter ever marvel any more at any lie or slander,
that I shall know imposed by any whatever wicked man, upon his neighbor. Has
the fool said in his heart, there is no God, no providence at all, no care or
respect to be used toward men? Are all things lawful that any one shall lust
to do or say against his neighbor? no compassion, no truth any more? God help
our innocent Catholics. And sure I am God will help them, and justify their
cause in his own good time, and preserve them always.

Hindrances of a good Life and Devotion.
. 1. Their Sacrament of Penance with contrition, says he, is sufficient in the
Church of Rome for Salvation, without any more ado: No mortyfying of passions,
no forsaking of sin is requisite; who would not be of this fine easy way,
where all the precepts of holiness are insignificant? But what one Catholic
man upon the face of the earth, ever thought or said this, which he imposes
here upon them all, as their religion and faith? Holy Gospel, and all our
spiritual books, wherein our substantial religion is contained, both those of
ancient times, and of our later writers, as Granada, Thomas a Kempis, S.
Bonaventure, Parsons Resolutions, Bishop Sales, Drexellius, Stella, and others,
do all of them press and urge this Catholic duty of interior renovation,
sanctification, and conformity to our Lord Jesus as the main end of his
appearance amongst men. And Catholics themselves know, that it is their only
care and fear, their desire and study so to do; such men to live, and such to
die, as our Lord would have us. For this end we say our daily prayers, with our
hymns and canticles, for this end we meditate; for this end we fast and
chastise our bodies, for this we do penance, make restitution, give alms,
frequent sacraments, and all that we endeavor according to our poor abilities,
Gods good counsels and holy grace assisting us. He who shall please only to
peruse the writings of Dr. Eckius, and his fellow Catholics, who opposed
Martin Luther and his Protestant-reformation, when it first rose up; may there
clearly see that this interior sanctity and renovation and holiness of life,
is the one great Catholic point, stoutly maintained against those wild and
dissolute Reformers, who began now to corrupt the world with that cursed
opinion of theirs, that faith alone is sufficient to salvation. And what a
strange man is this Dr. Stillingfleet! If any one indeed of our men, had
objected to Protestants; that in their reformation-way, neither penance, nor
contrition, nor satisfaction, nor renovation of life is needful, according to
the first Masters of the Reformation, who taught and maintained openly, and in
the eyes of this very Sun, that nothing is necessary to salvation, but only to
believe, and by that naked faith to apply Christ's merits to themselves, all
interior sanctification being both impossible and needless; he had said no
more than truth, and what he might easily have proved out of the first
Reformers principles; however I hope not maintained now by many of our wiser
Protestants in England, who notwithstanding remain still in that reformation
which was chalked out for them by such wicked Leaders. But now to lay upon
Catholics that wicked doctrine of Reformers, opposed now a whole hundred years
by our Catholic Divines, is a desperate confidence, befitting none but men
wholly unconscionable. Let them keep their own dirt to themselves, and not
throw it into our faces, however they begin now to be weary and ashamed of it.
The precepts of holiness, sobriety, and justice, are insignificant to them, who
have hitherto even from the very cradles of this unlucky reformation publicly
defended them to be insignificant; and not to us, who have still maintained,
that they are the very all in all of Christianity. I have troubled my self some
while to think, what should move Dr. Still* to invent this slander. Some word
or other he must pervert; but I cannot conclude what it should be. Perhaps he
may take occasion from hence: that whereas there be several things concurring
to our purification after sin, as Gods grace, and our dislike of our own ill
deeds, fear of Gods wrath and punishment, grief for his love and favor
forfeited, an humble confession, purpose of amendment, and renovation of life;
some Schoolmen have amongst their other curiosities, considered into which of
these many things may our justification be principally attributed, as the
principal virtue and cause of it under God. For God who created us without our
selves, will not redeem us without our selves. And if any one in his philosophy
have said, that confession and sorrow have the chiefest influence on our fide,
that may be enough for Dr. Still to say as here he does, that we make
confession and contrition all in all, and renovation of life nothing. Or
perhaps because Catholic Doctors have taught, that confession, together with
contrition, may sometimes be so great and cordial at the last hour, that evil
men may thereby find mercy with God, as the good thief did, although they have
no further leisure to mend and renew their lives; therefore does this man
conclude, that with us confession with contrition is sufficient, without any
more ado. Whence soever he concludes or gathers it, he knows best himself. But
this I know, that it is an abominable slander. And if all his readers were as
skilful in our Catholic religion as we our selves who profess it, he would not
have dared to speak these things, despairing then of finding any credit either
with man, woman, or child.

. 2. They of the Church of Rome need little to heed a good life, who can have
their sins expiated in Purgatory by the prayers of the living, which is a
doctrine very pleasing to rich men, but uncomfortable to the poor. Pretty
stuff! And need not then any man heed either to have patience in afflictions,
or do his duty, because another prays to God either that he may do so, or find
mercy if he have done otherwise? Or must he needs be negligent of himself to
day, because he hopes good people will pray for him to morrow, when he cannot
help himself? Souls departed are by our Christianity believed to be now out of
the place and way of merit: for there is neither art, nor industry, nor any
good work to be done in the grave, whether we all hasten. And if friends on
earth, where Gods favor may by our dutiful compliance be obtained, do commend
their dead to Gods mercy and goodness; this surely cannot make those friends
careless of themselves while they remain here living. All men know that it is
not enough for our entrance into heaven to cry, Lord, Lord; which is the voice
of those who think that only faith saves; but the will of God who is in heaven
is to be fulfilled by every one that shall enter there. And yet it is good and
pleasing, and profitable notwithstanding to cry and supplicate unto our Lord
God, with all earnestness of heart, both for our selves and friends. But the
poor are then in a sad condition, and the rich man may easilier enter into the
kingdom of heaven, than a camel through a needles eye, by procuring Masses for
their Souls. Who told this man, that the Souls of the poor are not prayed for
in the Catholic Church? He only thinks so. And he thinks amiss therein, as he
loves to do. Whence does he gather that the rich go to heaven so easily in our
esteem by Masses? This he thinks too: Perhaps he does: For I am much deceived,
if he do not utter many a falsehood which he knows to be such, before he utters
it. At least none of ours ever told him the one nor the other: and what we
believe or do our selves he may easily mistake, and we have had already
sufficient experience of his ignorance therein, or some worser misdemeanor.
Prayer or whatever good work of Christianity, although it may do some good; ye^
does it not therefore do all: and what does not all good, must not therefore be
denied to do some. Poor Lazarus's may by their cold, hunger, and nakedness,
here on earth patiently endured, satisfy for their humane frailties so far
with God here, that after this life, having no utmost farthing to account for,
they may chance not to need any farther help. But the rich men of the world
will not easily be brought unto those many voluntary penances and
mortifications, which their sensualities exact, unto their expiation and peace
with God. It were a happy thing, if they would be persuaded in their lifetime,
to distribute part of their goods unto the poor of God, the orphans and widows,
their lame, old, decayed, feeble neighbors, as they used to do formerly in
Catholic times. But if infected by the contagion of sin and sinners, they will
not be moved to this: yet a charitable distribution at their death, though it
be a late offering, it is better than none at all. And several prayers poured
forth to God for them after they are departed hence, though they may not
perhaps equal their condition to the Soul of a poor believing Lazarus, yet will
alms-deeds plead their cause before God, and prayers will not be in vain. Make
your selves friends, says our Lord, of the mammon of iniquity, that when you
fail, they may receive you into eternal tabernacles. And although it be surer,
and a more certain way to make those friends betimes, and continually, all our
whole life time; yet are not they excluded from some benefit thereof, who make
them late, and at their last hour. For they who receive temporal good things
out of charity in God, are obliged now in the same charity to repay spiritual;
and all other spiritual recompense is now out of season, save only prayer and
hearty good wishes, which are never in vain before God. And it were much to be
wished that Mr. Still. would cease at length to make jests of sacred Gospel,
and apply it seriously to his own heart and soul, as it is intended by our holy
Lord. Perhaps he would not then endeavor any more to enrich himself, or court
promotion by this wicked trade of defaming his innocent neighbors, Gods
ancient and renowned servants: It is neither impossible to God that a camel or
cable rope should pass through a needles eye, nor yet that a rich man should be
saved, if he will bend himself to his duty.

. 3. Prayers in an unknown tongue hinder all sincerity of devotion among
Papists. Here the Author wriggles and winds himself, like a snake in a bush;
speaking sometimes as if people knew not what their Priest says; and sometimes
again, as if they knew not what themselves pray, confounding all things that he
may more freely sport himself. It is better, faith he, to know what we pray,
than not. Christian prayers are not to be used like charms. God understands
more than one language. The more people understand, the better they pray. Why
some pray and not others, if some understand and not others? Why should any
pray, but he that understands? All this is very true, but what and whom does it
concern? People may as well pray at the chiming of Bells, as at the jargon of
Priests words. What does he mean by praying at the jargon of words, and how at
them? Is not this a merry conceited man? And what harm is it if a Christian do
pray at the chiming of Bells? Hundreds of good Catholics pray at the striking
of the clock daily: and what then? what harm is this? But his chiming jargon
put together makes the merriment. If a Catholic priest appearing among the
Christian flock met together to pray and meditate, and offer themselves and all
their friends to God, join himself with them, and place himself between them
and God, to offer to him his own and their necessities, to sacrifice for their
peace, as our Lord in his last supper appointed, to meditate and pray with them
for himself, and all the people, placed in their humble and silent posture in
the Church, what chimes or jargon is there here? But when a man speaks against
he knows not what, he must needs say he knows not what against it. For
Catholics, whose devotion he here derides, pray and meditate both privately
all alone in their own closets or oratories, and publicly in their Synaxis or
assembly at Liturgy. Their private devotions take them up an hour or two every
day in the week, wherein they keep peculiar prayers and meditations, about the
creation, and Gods providence, the incarnation, passion, mysteries of grace,
the duties of life, vice and virtues, Gods mercies and judgments, man's misery
and weakness, punishments and rewards eternal: And all these prayers made
either in their own tongue or no words at all, cannot be concerned in any of
this our doctors talk. And their conventual converse with God in their Synaxis
or Mass, is no otherwise. For there met all together, they do but meditate and
pray as they did before, but now in a community, either without any words, as
was most familiar in ancient times, or with words, as now is more usual;
understanding well enough, both the thoughts and aspirations of their own
hearts, and the words of their lips, if they utter any. Only there is required
here, a little more instruction; that they may conceive both what the Priest
does with them and for them: and also how to comply and join their hearts with
his; that they may all unanimously endeavor in this their silent, and yet
busy and earnest commerce with God, to offer up themselves with the div^ne
sacrifice, unto their own reconciliation and peace. For the Priests great work
there, is rather visible actions than audible words: and whether he speak
english or latin, it is all one to them who can seldom hear him, and attend not
so much to his words, as deeds, whenever they cast their eyes that way. And
that this is the capital devotion of all ancient Christians in their Synaxis,
and not any few prayers read in our ears by a Minister in a Pew, has been amply
demonstrated by Catholic Doctors, in all the languages of Europe at this day.
Their Synaxis was never any hearing or fitting business; but such a posture of
humiliation, where every heart submits, every tongue confesses, and every knee
bows to God in Jesus our only hope and refuge. And if the doctor is ignorant
of all this, let him turn Catholic that he may understand it better.

. 4. The efficacy of sacraments in the Church of Rome, depending upon bare
administration without any preparation of mind, is another great enemy to
Piety. For their Sacraments confer grace ex opere operato, as the Council of
Trent has defined. This being so, what need is there of any preparation of
mind, by the exercise of faith, prayer, repentance, any strict examination, or
endeavor of raising our selves unto any worthy use of Sacraments. Devotion
will never be more easily banished out of the world, than by a persuasion that
grace and its comfortable effects may be had without it, without prayer,
without endeavor of a holy life, without mortification, and watchfulness after
the benefits which Christ's life and death obtained for us. This is a goodly and
very plausible harrangue, if it had any foundation or truth in it. D^d ever any
Council, or Doctor, or Catholic man, either say or believe that our Lords
Sacraments do confer grace unto the receiver, without any of their preparation,
or disposition of heart toward them? Never any one. But all the whole world of
Catholics prepare themselves for them, with all their whole utmost care and
endeavor, believing all they can possibly do, is yet too little; unless Gods
mercy and goodness interposing accept freely their poor pitiful endeavors. And
of the multitude of their Priests in the Catholic world, there is hardly one
of a thousand so desperate, but he spends one hour in prayer, recollection, and
examination of himself, before he dare approach the Altar. And that one, if any
such there be, who shall neglect this his due preparation, so that he
communicate unworthily, if by timely and serious repentance he do not recover
himself, will harden by degrees, and be lost irrevocably. Thus some do fall
away, either openly or occultly; and these occult apostates are easily known by
this, that they are wholly taken up in worldly affairs and sensual pleasures,
not rellishing now any spiritual employments in their closet. Thus affairs
stand with Catholics in this business. And what can we then think of this
Doctor, who tells the world such a notorious untruth against them. But is it
not defined that the Sacraments of the new law confer grace ex opere operato?
This is very true, indeed it is so defined. But what is the english of these
latin words, ex opere operato: not surely this, without disposition, without
any preparation, or examination, or devotion. This is not the english of that
latin: but this, By the very work done; which gives us quite another since and
meaning. That thing avails by the very work done, which carries with it self a
power and virtue, if the work be done, to avail and profit us. Our corporeal
meat sustains our bodies ex opere operato, or by the very work of eating, done,
and completed in all its operations: we all know this. And yet none of us
think, that we need not therefore have any appetite or disposition in our
bodies, when we eat; or that we need not keep our bodies clean, or sound, or
healthful, that our food may be unto us the savor of life unto life, and good
nouriture and strength. And the Doctor if he had not studied rather to
misconstrue all things, than interpret any thing right, might easily have
discerned the true and connatural meaning of the words, by their very place and
posture in the canon cited by himself out of the Tridentine Council. For there
it is defined and openly declared against the Protestant Reformers, who exalted
faith, only and solitary faith, unto the exclusion of all other good works and
use of sacraments; that our Lords sacraments instituted for our sanctification
and comfort, are both profitable and necessary unto that end of conveighing
grace and sanctity into us, and that by a virtue conferred upon them by the
divine Author and Institutor of them. This the Council there defines; opposing
the virtue of sacraments, showing it self, and streaming into the heart of the
worthy receiver, in the very thing done, unto the bare and naked faith of those
lewd reformers: even as the sad Council still up and down in all their Sessions
did maintain the necessity of prayer, almsdeeds, mortification, penance,
justice, truth, satisfaction, sobriety, continence, purity of life, meekness,
and all Christian virtues, against that wicked Solifidian heresy, which they
with all their force endeavored utterly to root out Siquis dixerit, says the
Council there, per ipsa novae legis sacramenta ex opere operato non conferri
gratiam, sed fidem solam divinae promissionis ad gratiam consequendam
sufficere, anathema sit. Who can be so blind as not to see here plainly
declared, that our Lords sacraments have a sanctifying power either in them or
with them, and therefore not to be contemned or neglected, under any pretense
of faith, which although it be good and lively with the concurrence of other
good works and graces, yet is it without them unprofitable and dead: And
amongst those good helps and quickners of our faith, are the sacraments by our
Lord himself instituted, none of the least or meanest; and therefore to be
received with all love and reverence, as the very conduits of divine grace ex
opere operato derived into our souls from thence. Here then we cannot prudently
imagine, that our Catholic Prelates in the Council exclude our devotion,
disposition of mind exercise of faith, prayer and repentance, strict
examination, endeavor of a holy life, mortification and watchfulness, all
which they had elsewhere established; but to suppose rather and include them
all: because all these are opposed unto faith alone, as necessary preparatives
for the receiving of that virtue which sacraments confer. And the Council
rather chose to express themselves, when they would speak of the powerful
operation of sacraments, rather in this general way, ex opere operato, than any
other more particular manner, that they might declare themselves in words
acknowledged and indifferent unto both the great schools in the Catholic
world, whereof though both of them agree that grace is conferred by the thing
done, yet one teaches that the said grace or virtue is inherent and
intrinsecal, the other that it is extrinsecal only and assistant to the
sacraments: And therefore would not the Council say, that sacraments contain
grace, but that they cause it ex opere operato, by their sacramental
application unto the faithful and worthy receiver.

It is a long received opinion among schoolmen, says the doctor, that
sacraments of the old law in conferring grace, depend upon opus operantis, the
faith and devotion of the receiver; but those of the new confer grace ex opere
operato, without any disposition, internal motion, or preparation of mind. O
shameless ignorance! very fain would this man be thought a deep schoolman, who
never penetrated any one schoolman in his life, as it appears sufficiently by
his simple talk, nor yet understands them, either what they say, or who they
are. Insomuch that I am half persuaded that he takes Lillies Grammar for one of
the schoolmen. Is that an opinion, a long received opinion among schoolmen? How
long for Gods sake? and among how many of them? All of them for certain. Nay
name ten: for there are many hundreds of schoomen, and all masters, although
not all institutors or sounders of the chair; and as simply as I sit here, I
have been a piece of one my self: which I now speak, Sir, that this doctor, if
he come by any chance to hear of this my little postil, might not fear that he
has got some petty abecedarian Commentator, who largely explaining his easier
texts, should pass by his more grave and harder ones, untouched. Nay let him
name only one, and it shall suffice. The margent of his book over against this
his school-assertion, was bare, and able to hold one man's name at least: and
yet he leaves it quite empty. He does not quote so much as any one schooman,
for the justification of this his assertion most unconscionably false. And
although it nothing concerns us in our defense of faith, what opinion is
amongst schoolmen, who have raised an art of their own, an art of talking,
defending and proving things never revealed unto us, or any ways edifying to
our salvation; yet if there had been any such opinion among schoolmen, then had
not Dr. Still. been unconscionable, however he had been impertinent. Schoolmen
do indeed agree unanimously, that the sacraments of the law of Moses conferred
no grace at all. So the whole four schools of S. Thomas, and Scotus. Aureolus
and Darandus: and all the many Doctors of them teach; however some of them
speak otherwise of circumcision, which was from the fathers. But this simple
talk, that sacraments of the old law conferred grace by the disposition of the
receiver, the new without it: as I never heard it before, so does not he know
where to find it, except it be in some writings of Mr. Farnaby a late
Schoolmaster in London.

Schoolmen are much puzzled, and cannot agree how sacraments confer grace,
whether as a moral or physical cause, whether as inherent or assistant, whether
as an instrument or a sign, etc. I care not if I help the Doctor a little, not
in the schoolmens puzling, but his own. The schools of St. Thomas, and all the
Doctors of it, in declaring the efficacy of Sacraments (which all Christians
equally believe) teach, that they work grace as a physical cause, and as
inherent, and as an instrument of it under God. The whole school of Scotus
teaches, that they work it as a sign only, as assistant, and moral cause. And
if the Doctor please either to dispute for St. Thomas his way in Scotus his
school, or for Scotus his way in the school of St. Thomas; he will find that
they do not fumble, or puzle, or stand unresolved what to say; but that they
struggle stoutly, and maintain incessantly, and defend invinceably, both of
them their own proper ways and opinions, without ever yielding one inch of
ground to the opposer. And though the matter be of small importance, yet the
glory or shame of overcoming or being overcome, is thought by them all to be no
small matter. Never did Aeneas and Turnus rush with a more violent shock and
and resolution, than sometimes they do; Rumpuntur nescia vinci Pectora; and all
for an opinion amongst themselves, affirmed by one, and gainsaid as resolutely
by the other. Dr. Still. utterly unacquainted in these affairs, may say as he
pleases, that they fumble, and puzzle, and are wholly unresolved. But all this
signifies no more, but that he is wholly ignorant of what he speaks. Cassander
and Arnoldus, both Catholics, do hold it to be a Catholic doctrine, that
Sacraments do no good without the devotion of the receiver, and condemn the
other opinion of some amongst them, as wicked. Here the man names us two of our
Doctors who hold it to be a Catholic doctrine, that Sacraments do no good
without the devotion ^f the receiver; which we all believe. But he names us not
any one, who ever said it was a Catholic doctrine, that they do all their good
without any disposition or devotion of the receiver; which is the opinion he
has put upon us all this while, without any fear or wit. Did Cassander and
Arnoldus hold right or wrong? Were they with us or against us? If against us in
faith, then were they not Catholics themselves: if with us, then is all Dr.
Still's discourse against us here, both impertinent and false. But I perceive
well enough he neither knows what faith means, nor what it is to be a
Catholic. A most certain truth it is, that Sacraments do no good to the
receiver without a congruous disposition and devotion in him. And all food,
whether spiritual or corporal, if it do no good, must needs do some harm. And
this is something more than he tells to be said by Arnoldus and Cassander.

. 5. Another enemy to piety is their prohibition of Scripture, and keeping from
people Gods holy word, which might direct and comfort them. This charge bears
something more of color and appearance, than any or all the other four. And
yet, things rightly understood, it is nothing else but a mere color and
appearance. For all the whole fourteen hundred years before PRINTING was found
out, in all which time those sacred writings were so rare, that not one of a
thousand could get them, it was the labor and obligation of a Priest still
night and day to read and study those books, and not for himself one^y, and his
own edification, but to gather out thence such holy words as might direct,
encourage, and comfort people in the many occurrences of life. For which reason
the Bible was then called Liber Sacerd^tis, the Priests book: but especially
and above all, to collect from thence what he thought might best conduce unto
devotion and piety toward God. And this was not hard for them to do, after
they had once by their united industry gathered out of the said Bible a
complete Breviary for themselves. For this lying now by them, easily could they
turn unto any thing they should have need of on any occasion. Thus they did
before PRINTING was found out. But no such thing is ever done by Ministers, who
leave their people both to buy themselves a book, and use it when they have it
as they please. And now since the Invention of PRINTING, peoples hands are so
filled with holy gospels, psalms, hymns, canticles, holy histories, prayers
meditations, manuels and the like contents of holy scripture, drawn out more
amply for them in spiritual books; that nothing at all is there in faith or
good manners, wherewith they are not as fully acquainted as their Clergy. And
all this, as it is nothing else but Gods word, so is Gods word nothing else but
this. Therefore is not Gods word prohibited or kept from people in the Church
of Rome, as the doctor affirms. Indeed the whole letter of scripture as it
lies, is permitted to none, but such as have abilities to use it. But what
then? Even our ordinary people have more now, than they had in the best ages of
Christianity, who digesting well, what they had, saved their souls by it, and
that is enough. And the little they had, was all that is to be had for that
purpose. I have, Sir, often had occasion to speak of this subject: and must be
fain now in this my speedy haste, to borrow some help from my words elsewhere
delivered, whose sense, though it be perfect enough in my mind, yet if I do not
help my self thence, I shall spend time which I cannot now spare, in thinking
how to word and express it to you. Thus then it is written of this business in
one place Catholics have the sum of scripture both for history and dogm,
delivered them in their own language, so much as may make for their salvation,
disintangled from the tropes and schemes. and ambiguous phrases, wherein it was
first written, good orders being set and instituted for their proficiency
therein; the sum of all divine truths belonging to Christianity, and the whole
counsel of God for their direction and comfort; this have Catholics full and
clearly delivered them out of holy writ, and all their whole duty both toward
God and their neighbor, in their own language. Nor are they ignorant of any
thing that may appertain either to sobriety, justice or piety. The whole sacred
story of our Lords incarnation, passion and ascension, all his sacraments, all
the whole counsels and precepts of God, which may concern salvation, all his
promises and threats, they have them all made known unto them, clear and
disintangled from the various tropes and schemes of rhetoric or logic, so
interwoven in the sacred authors writings, that it puzzles the greatest clerk
with all his literature and science to understand the connexions, transitions
of discourse, objections, amb^guous phrases, hebraisms, and grecisms, and
suchlike obscurities that occur; or to find out the drift and purpose and
meaning of places: which things do and have too too often caused mistakes and
heresies in the world. And all the sacred truths which it concerns them to
practice, the people have still been put in mind of by their priests both in
private and public, to their daily edification. Nor was it ever the fashion in
Christianity to throw the bible among people, and so leave them to themselves,
as the Reformers have done. Most certain it is, that the word and will and
counsel of God, consists not in letters and syllables, much less in the tropes
and modes of rhetoric and logic, which do variously obscure the sacred writ
above all books that have ever been penned by man; but in the sense and
meaning, which, is easily and securely conveyed. It is no hard matter, for
example, to understand, that all men, both Jews and Gentiles, who have ever
come to the knowledge of Christ, were beholding to Gods mercy, merely to Gods
mercy for that their conversion and the life of grace they had by it; which is
the scope of S. Paul's epistle to the Romans: although to give an account how S.
Paul deduces and proves this truth in that his epistle, what arguments he does
either establish or refute, what modes and figures he uses, what tropes and
rhetorical schemes be in his expressions, how he passes from one thing to
another in his discourse, and by what art of ratiocination the context of his
whole letter is knit together, this is neither easy to understand, nor
necessary to any man's salvation to discern. And yet the epistle without all
this knowledge cannot be understood, or rightly apprehended. And if it be
conceived falsely, mistakes and heresies will rise. The will and mind and word
of God, this all people are to know, what he has commanded, what counseled,
what threatened, what promised, what our Lord did and suffered for us, and what
we are to suffer and do for him, that we may be partakers of his glory. But the
humanity and philosophy that lies couched in holy writ, vulgar people neither
can nor have need to dive into it. Nor was the holy scripture ever penned or
intended for the people immediately, but for the bishops and priests of God,
who are to watch over them for their good; and from their lips they are to
receive knowledge. Christians were ever fed like pigeons, by the mouth, until
they were so fledg, that they could now fly and feed themselves. Once come to
maturity, they may read what they please on Gods name, and the more they attend
to lection of holy scriptures, the better it is, so they apply all unto action
and sanctification of their lives. And again, in an epistle of mine its written
thus: I have heard many great protestant divines ingeniously acknowledge that
divine comfort and sanctity of life requisite to salvation, which religion
only aims at, may with more perfection and less inconvenience be attained by
the customs of the Roman Church, which gives the sense life and meaning of Gods
word unto people, without the husk of the formal letter; than by the way of
Protestants, which exhibits it to people hidden under the hard shell, able to
break peoples teeth Religion consists not in reading but doing; to be had by
heart, and not in the lips: that way is tedious and barren, this fruitful and
easy Christ our Lord drew a compendium of all divine duties into two words,
the great apostle into one: and both of them made all to consist in practice.
If the several gospels for every day in the year which are or may be in the
hands of all Catholics, the chief particles of divine epistles, those I mean
which are of general concernment, books of sacred instructions and meditations
upon the mysteries of salvation, and spiritual treatises for all occasions and
uses which be numberless, adjoined to the rites of examination of conscience;
continual and daily use of prayer and fasting, and an orderly commemoration of
the things our Lord has wrought for us throughout the year, which all men by
law are tied to observe, may not give sufficient acquaintance of what concerns
salvation, and enough to promote people toward it, I am to seek what it is
that can. Sure I am that the world was first converted without any books at
all, and many millions of good Christians both lived piously and died happily,
who never saw the Bible. What further good may it do to read the letter of S.
Paul's epistle to the Romans for example, or Corinthians, wherein are treated
questions and cases that are now quite vanished out of the world, and other
theological discourses, which vulgar people can neither understand, nor are at
all concerned to know. What more of good can accrue to any by the translated
letter of a book, whereof nine parts in ten concern not my particular either to
practice, or so much as heat of, than by the mere substance of Gods will and my
own duty once well understood, and daily applied unto action and answerable
good deeds? What is there now in England when the said scripture letter is set
open unto every eye, any more of peace or charity, piety or justice, than in
former Catholic times when the substance of Gods word and will was given
people in short, and the observance of their duty prolixly pressed upon them?
What did they do in those ancient Catholic times? They flocked every day to
their Churches, there to pay, meditate, and renew their good purposes: they
sung psalms, hymns, and canticles day and night all over the land; they built
all our churches which we have remaining at this day amongst us, and as many
more now razed and pulled down; they founded and endowed our Universities,
established our laws, set out tithes and glebe land for the clergy, built
hospitals, erected corporations; and in a word did all the good things which we
find done by our forefathers for our good in this our native kingdom. But what
do we now? what have we still been doing since the reformation? quid agitur in
Anglia? consulitur de religione. Continually are we making and unmaking our
religious rites, still building and pulling down our opinions. Former Catholic
Christians practiced, and we dispute. They had a religion fixed, we are still
seeking one. They exercised themselves in good works by the guidance of their
holy faith, which led them toward them, and pressed their duty; all these
works we by our new way evacuate. They had the substance of religion in their
hearts, we the text in our lips. They had nothing to do but conform their lives
to Gods will; all our endeavor is to apply Gods word to our own faction. Let
there be no longer a mistake: the question is not, whether people are to have
Gods word or no; but whether that word consist in the letter left to the
peoples disposal, or in the substance and meaning of it, urgently imposed upon
people for their practice. And we must still and ever remember, that it is not
Gods will or word, but the letter of scripture only, which makes here-ticks:
this may be depraved by men unto their own destruction, that cannot.

So that when we come to a conclusion of these things; there is no such
Catholic doctrine, faith, or religion amongst us, which prescribes any of
these thing put here in his third chapter upon the Roman Church. For first, our
Catholic way is so far from keeping Gods word from the people, that it has
been the only great endeavor of our Church and pastors in all times and
places, to derive Gods word and will in such a manner unto people, that they
may observe and keep it: however they will not permit the letter promiscuously
unto all hands without a knowledge of their ability and stayedness; even as
they do not suffer all sorts of men to come to holy communion without a license
and assurance of their lives and persons. Secondly, that our efficacy of
sacraments depends upon mere administration without any preparation of mind, is
so false, that every Catholic boy and girl, arrived to years of discretion,
will hiss at it. Thirdly, that we pray in an unknown tongue, and know not what
we say, is a calumny only proper for the wise men of Gotam. Fourthly, that
prayers for one another after this life ended, do hinder our own holiness and
devotion in this present life, is a paradox fit only for discourse in a tavern
or coffee-house over cups. Fifthly, that our sacrament of penance with
interior contrition suffices us without any amendment of life, or purpose
toward it, is a slander which the doctor could not have vented with applause
on any other ground but Billingsgate. He took it seems more pleasure to show an
evil wit, than a good candid nature, which is a perfection more becoming him,
and if I be not mistaken by too much charity, more apparent in his courteous
conversation with his neighbors, than in his written Romances, or books made
against the Church of Rome; which are so false and injurious, that they cannot
but hurt as well our Protestant neighbors who read and believe them, as poor
innocent Catholics, who dislike and suffer them. And now, dear Sir, I bid you
farwell the second time.

FINIS.
TO KATHOLIKO.
FANATICISM.
I Am now, Sir, arrived to the Doctors merriment, a merriment peculiarly
profane, which has gained him much applause. He endeavors in his 4. Chapter
to declare and prove, that the Church of Rome is fanatical; founded and
supported on fanaticism. A merry theme and fit for a terrae filius. And I
suppose here, that he means by the Church of Rome, not any material building of
stone and mortar, either the floar or walls, windows, pillars, steeple or
weathercock; nor yet any men or women, boys or girls in England, Ireland,
France, or other countries; but the Catholic faith and religion protest all
over the world, by such as we now in England call Papists. For his readers both
Catholic and Protestant, do understand him so to mean. And this religion and
faith, he proves by such arguments to be fanatical; as might infer fanaticism
indifferently upon all Kingdoms of the earth, and all mankind; thus he speaks.
There were two men and as many more women in distant times and places, who
pretended revelations about the unspotted purity of the blessed Virgin Mary:
Therefore is the Catholic Church and faith fanatical. Secondly, one St.
Catherin of Sena is said to have had shining wounds in her body, and to smell
the stench of lecherous men: therefore is their faith and Church fanatical.
Thirdly, St. Gregory and Saint Bede write of some apparitions: therefore is their
religion and faith fanatical. Fourthly, one Bishop appointed a day to be
holiday, another built a Church; and both were done by revelation: therefore is
their faith and religion fanatical. Fifthly, St. Bennet, St. Francis, St.
Dominick, St. Romewal, and St. Bruno founders of chief religious orders among
them, had many symptoms of madmen, as to prophecy, to see angels, to neglect
their bodies, to be beaten and scoft at by men: therefore is their religion and
Church fanatical. Sixthly, about four hundred years ago, there rose a
pernicious heresy, which spread far, and caused much disturbance, before they
could silence and suppress it (...) therefore is their Church and religion
fanatical. Seventhly, St. Ignatius founder of the Society of Jesuits was such
another fool as St. Francis, and labored and suffered much, before he could
get his order and rule approved by the Bishop: therefore is the Roman Church
fanatical. Eighthly, one man among them of late printed a spiritual book wherein
were some words and phrases unusual and hardly intelligible: therefore is the
religion and Church of Rome fanatical. Ninthly, three men amongst them in this
last age, uttered blasphemous words against the honor and prerogative of
Kings, who are Gods Vicegerents upon earth: therefore is Catholic religion
fanatical. All these hollow voices are to be heard and seen in this his
Bartholmew Booth, for the recreation of such as love it, issuing unto our great
wonderment only from the belly of one man, breaking wind in the midst of it.

. 1. Let us see then how all this put together does prove the Church of Rome,
whose emblem it is intended, to be fanatical. It is an easy thing to act upon
a stage the gravest and soberest man alive, in a drunken posture. Wit without
honesty, and confidence without conscience, can pervert and turn things upside
down at pleasure. But a little reflection will set all straight again. The
Catholic Church and religion here represented as fanatical, first, it has
subsisted by the confession of our first reforming Protestants even from the
Apostles days, or very little after, spread all over Europ, Asia and Africa.
Secondly, it has been embraced and owned by Kings and Princes, honorable
Lawyers, learned Physicians, stout Captains. subtle Philosophers, people
innumerable, as the very sands on the sea shore. Thirdly, it made and framed
the Laws both of our own Country, and every Christian Kingdom. Fourthly, it
built the many goodly Churches all over the world, even those here, wherein now
Protestants, the right owners excluded by violence, do preach. Fifthly, it set
out the glebe land and tyths whereon they live. Sixthly, it founded our
Corporations, raised our famous Universities, and furnished their Libraries
with books. Seventhly, it has preicribed and delivered us the forms, not of the
Sacraments only, but of any sort either of ecclesiastical or civil
instalments. Eighthly, it has triumphed over Jews and Pagans, notwithstanding
their power and furious opposition, by Gods blessing and her own innocence,
prudence and constancy; and laid asleep the very heresies that have risen up
against her in all ages out of her own bowels. All these things, that I may
speak no more, are not the works of fanaticism, they are not the properties,
power or gestures of fanatics. Fanaticism rises up suddenly, and dies like a
mushrom; utters a fond defiance, and so vanishes; destroys, but builds nothing,
chatters a little like a moon calf, and is seen no more.

. 2. That our Doctor may proceed somewhat doctor-like, he tells us in the
beginning of this his Chapter, what he means by fan^ticism. By it, says he, I
understand an enthusiastic way of religion, or resisting authority under
pretense of religion. This is his desiartion of it. But whether it be one
definition or two, it is not easy to say. Indeed and truth, it is no
definition at all; but only an obscure dark wording of things, so purposely
ordered, that he may put what he pleases in the circle of fanaticism, besides
himself. It is, says he, an enthusiastic way of religion. But what is
enthusiastic? what does way mean in these our affairs? and what is a way of
religion? A definition ought to be plain and familiar, without either
amphibology or trope; and more intelligible than the thing defined. This is not
so. Enthusiasm in Greek is but the same thing as Inspiration: Were then the
Apostles and Prophets, who were inspited, and taught that their inspired way of
religion, the fanatics here spoken of, or no? Secondly, what is meant by way?
Is it a way chalked out for a man, by his just and legal guids; or a way
invented by himself? This is a main business, and perhaps the very essence of
fanaticism; and yet it is not here expressed. Thirdly, what is a way of religion?
Is it religion it self, or some certain fanciful gestures in the exercise of
it, or some odd mode in defending it, or some peculiar manner of applying it
unto the conduct of our lives? A clergy man may either in a pulpit or at an
altar have many simple wild gestures, and yet be a sound Christian for all
that. But is such a one to be understood here to have an enthusiastic way of
religion? He who makes it a part of his religion to defame his innocent
neighbors wrongfully, persuading people that he does God good service therein;
is this man a fanatic? and yet he practices a very mad way of religion. To
side first with our English prelacie, and when it is overborn by unlawful
violence, to turn unto them who overthrew it; and as soon as it is
reestablished, to come back again to it; is this fanaticism? I am sure it is a
mad way of religion. He that disables his own Protestant Bishops in one book,
being a Protestant himself, and in another inveighs heavily against some
Jesuists for resisting their Papist Bishops, whom himself also does not
approve; is this man a fanatic yea or no? And yet he follows and treads a very
strange mad way of religion. So that obscure general and tropical words are so
far from keeping him out, that they include rather, and hem in Dr. Still,
himself, and wholly enclose him in his own circle of fa^aticism. Again, his
other part, or other whole definition of fanaticism, A resisting authority
under a pretense of religion, is obscure enough too. For there be many sorts of
resisting, and many sorts of authority, and many sorts of pretenses, and many
religions pretended: and yet not all of them fanatic. All Protestants in their
first reformation resisted all authority of the whole Catholic world, both
ecclesiastical and civil, and that under pretense of religion, a new way of
religion invented by themselves, opposite to the Catholic way, wherein they
had all been born and bred: Are all these and their successors unto this very
day fanatics or no? He will say no perhaps, because they had good reason to do
it. But do not Quakers, whom Dr Still. speaks openly to be fanatics, say also
that they have good reason to withstand and desert our Protestant English
Church. O but no body says so but themselves: Neither did any but those first
Protest^nts say they had any reason at all: but the whole Catholic world rose
up and condemned them. So that we have got but little light by this definition
of his; left wholly in as much obscurity as ever he was himself, after he had
been puzling among the Schoolmen. Truth is, we are neither to seek into logic
or into dictionaties, for the mea^ing and signification of fanatics, or
fanaticism. For the word, as it relates to religion here in England, is of
voluntary imposition; never before applied unto any Sects of Christianity, till
my Lord General Monk used it in Parliament some few years ago, to express those
men who under pretense of their new invented doctrines contemned and rose up
against all authority, and waged war and overthrew both Church and State before
them, unto the utter impoverishing and desolation of the Land. These our great
General, never to be mentioned in England without honor, called Fanatics,
that is to say, mad foolish blasted men, who preferring their own instable
conceits (for they had now fallen and shivered into many Sects) before solid
obedience unto Church and State, rooted up what ever was fixed for the general
good of all men, and contenting themselves with the pillage of the Land, could
settle nothing at all themselves, either of religion or government in the end.
These he called Fanatics. And in his great prudence he made choice of that new
word, upon hopes that every one of these several sects would lay the epither
upon his neighbor: as indeed they did. And amongst these men, yea the very
chief and ringleaders of them, did Mr. Still. our Doctor join himself. And yet
does he here in his own little subtilty lay the whole ignominy now upon the
Quakers, as a burden for the younger brothers to carry. And yet were they
hardly born, when the work of fanaticism in England was accomplished. By all
this we may easily discern what fanaticism means. But yet we must
notwithstanding content our selves with the definition he has given us; so far
as it can bear any fixed or certain sense; and so proceed.

. 3. The Church of Rome, says he, is both ways fanatical, both in an
enthusiastic way of religion and resisting authority. A man would wonder how
this charge should be made good, of a Catholic Church whose religion is ever
settled, and delivered by tradition from generation to generation, still one
and the same; and has no other superior Church on earth, either to resist or
observe. But yet does this man go nimbly about his work, without either fear or
scruple. For, first, revelations have been countenanced in that Church. One of
an Abbat in a storm, another of St. Norbert. of St. Gertrude, of St Briget, St.
Joan, St. Catherin of Sena, about the Conception, and these revelations were
contradictory to one another, one affirming the immaculate conception, the
other denying it. Oho is this the first proof of fanaticism in the Church! A
very pretty one surely. He has already forgotten his own definition of
fanaticism. For here is no mention made either of any new way of religion
invented, or of resisting authority under pretense of it. But all that he
esteems whimsical or fanciful stuff, must it seems be called fanatical. But can
any vain fancies, dreams or visions of two or three, who profess a religion,
prove that religion to be fanatical? Yes, will he say, if they be countenanced.
But, first, they might be countenanced, and yet not as any part of their
religion. Secondly, how does he prove they were countenanced? because some
Doctors maintained one of those contradictory revelations, and some the other;
till the whole business was silenced. Thus he tells his story. But is this to
countenance any thing? I think not, nor yet can any one in reason think it. It
is moreover certainly believed by all Catholics in the world, that the blessed
Virgin Mother of our Lord Jesus, was ever most pleasing to God, and immaculate
in all her ways, even from her first Being; and this is not questioned by any.
The dispute in Schools yet undecided, is only about the Mood and Tense of it;
whether that her Sanctity were in her from the beginning, by way of
preservation from the blemish of sin, for every conceivable Instant of her
being, in her passive Conception, as Scotus teaches in his School? or whether
it were by way of Sanctification, after the first real instant of her Being,
wherein, as other Children of Adam, by natural progation, she was liable to
Original sin, as the followers of St. Thomas affirm? And this was the matter of
those their Revelations or Dreams, according to the pious opinion They
conceived of our Lady's purity, These of their Angelical Doctors
contemplations. But how does this prove, that our general Faith, wherein they
all lived and dyed, is Enthusiastic? There be Dreamers in England, good store;
and those that dream waking too; and yet may not the Church of England be
called Fanatic for that. Fond contradictory fancies of some, make not the
general Religion, unto whose guidance they are to submit, when they come to be
questioned, any ways in fault. Indeed, the Doctors of these Schools, as they
have been too earnest in the maintaining their School. Curiosities, to the
admiration of innocent Believers, not at all concerned in their subtilities: So
were some of them strongly persuaded about the said Revelations or dreams, for
the honor, each of their Schools, and the positions they teach; but our
Catholic Bishops, who heed Religion only, concern not themselves in School
Niceties, but in plain and solid Faith. It is the property of such as are mere
Schoolmen, to reverence their School- dictates often to the prejudice of grace
and charity. That these women should pretend Revelations about a School point,
was either the strength of their own fancy, working on the way they had heard,
or the weakness of their guides; It matters not whether, for Saints are not
Saints in every point of their lives; flesh and blood will sprout Imbecilities,
until their perfection comes; And how hard it is to discern the Original of
Visions, which of them is divine, which humane, and perhaps an evil Motion, we
have examples enough in holy Writ, amongst the Prophets and Sons of Prophets.
When Josaphat and Achal, Kings of Judah and Israel, were to make War on Ramoth
Gilead all the chief Prophets were called together, even four hundred of them,
to give their Counsel; All of these pretended revelations from God, and yet
speak contrary things, especially Micheas, and Zedechias were at open defiance
one with another, about the truth of their Visions. And yet all this made not
any proof that the Religion of the Hebrews was Fanatic. But he that will read
more of these theological subtilties, may see it, if he please, in the works of
that learned Divine Franciscus a Sancta Clara a Catholic Doctor; especially in
his book De Schismate, his other called Paralipomena philosophica, and a third
called Religio Philosophi, in a more ample and solid manner there discust. I
have now said enough of this business; and something more may chance to add by
and by, when occasion offers.

. 4. Saint Catherin had her five shining wounds in her bands, feet and side:
insensible of all pains in her ecstasies, and could smell stinking vicious
souls, as St. Philip Nerius did afterward; which is one degree above the
enthusiasm of a Quaker. I know not, how many degrees it is above the enthusiasm
of a Quaker; sure I am it is far below the fanaticism of Doctor Stillingfleet,
who talks at this wild rate. What is all this, if it were true, to the
definition of fanaticism? and where does the fanaticism lie? is not this man
strangely frantic himself, who cannot distinguish between peoples religion,
and the acciden^^ that do befall them. Were these wounds and Noses any part of
their Creed? Although the Doctor have no such nose, yet may he have such a
stink; and though he want the wounds, he may have fairy nips, that are as bad.
If St. Catherin were so estranged from sensual things, and so absorpt in God,
as is here related, God be thanked for it: if she was not, I can believe in God
nevertheless; and my religion is still the same. I did once read a story of a
young man in Hungary, who flying for fear, at the coming in of the Turks, into
the adjoining woods, lived there so long estranged from all human diet, that
all his friends and neighbors after the Turks departure could not take him;
till he chanced to slip into a deep pitfall set on purpose to catch him: The
reason was, as he afterward related, because his smell became so refined and
pure by his living in the woods on the wild and thin provision there, that he
smelt men a mile or two off, before they could come near him. And this story I
judge to be true, as well as that of St Catherin, who had heavenly helps beside.
And if Dostor Still. unacquainted with such things, esteem them whimsical, let
him think so. What them? I do not. It is but the various judgment of two petty
Doctors. My religion however is still the same solid faith it was: unless the
pain I have now actually in my side, must give the Church of God a pleurisy.

. 5. Visions and apparitions have been made use of by them; to prove Doctrines
that were before; as those related by S. Gregory and S. Bid to prove
purgatory; appearances of a child to prove transubstantiation; of a black man
blotting sins out of a book, when a thief did penance, to prove confession.
Very good. Then were not those parcels of faith brought in by those visions.
And a whimsical proof by any Minister, to declare and justify his text, does
not infer that divine text to be therefore Enthusiasm. He told us before, like
a Doctor, that fanaticism was some new enthusiastic way of Religion, or
resisting authority under pretense of it. Where is all this here? Is fanaticism
now some other thing? nothing but a weak proof? whether Dr. Still. himself has
ever used in his Sermons any such proof as this is, when he has discoursed of
the souls superviving after this life ended, I cannot tell. But I am confident
that if he has, he did not therefore think himself a fanatic; nor yet any
others who heard him speak it. I should, if he had either reason or apparition
for any thing he utters in this Book of his, think the better both of him and
it. The best is, that all these apparitions here related, were first written by
venerable and grave men, whose words are of greater authority than
Stillingfleet-derisions.

6. They not only prove Doctrines, bus even define things merely by private
revelations. Do they so? What are these things so defined? What is the reason
he changes his phrase, and says not, as we might have expected he should, that
they not only prove doctrines that were before, but define doctrines also,
upon private revelations. He is wary in this, and calls them things, not
doctrines. But yet hopes still that his Reader will so understand, as if they
defined doctrines as well as proved them upon private revelations. He has a
multitude of these little tricks; which I must let pass. But what things do
they define? Let us hear them. Pope Urban the fourth determined the festival of
corpus Christi day, upon a revelation made to some Nuns in Leeds. Pope Boniface
the feast of the archangel Michael upon another made to the Bishop of Siponto.
And why, says he, should we be told of fanaticism so often? Do we found our
religion upon any such visions? Here we have now the things defined upon
private revelations; only a couple of holy days; or rather one holy day; and
one Church built upon a hill; and neither of them upon private revelations. The
appearance of an Angel, which caused the building of the Church, was solemn and
public. But corpus Christi day was instituted apart, or rather transferred
from Maunday thursday in holy week, until the Paschal festival were ended;
because in the holy week, other affairs of piety toward the passion of our
Lord, unknown to Dr. Stillingfleet, do so take up all that time, that people
cannot then sufficiently celebrate the institution of the Eucharist, as they
would and ought to do. This is the known reason why corpus Christi day was
instituted to be kept apart, the thursday after Trinity. And if some Nuns had
any vision that so it ought to be, what then? It only follows hence, that the
vision they had proved true: and not that any part of Catholic religion was
built upon such visions. For all the religion or faith that is in this
business, was before that institution of the holy day. A circumstance of time
or place for the exercise of religion, though it be defined, is not to define
religion it self. The real presence or corpus Christi was believed and loved
and reverenced long before Pope Urban; and the Angels of God honored before
Pope Boniface was born. Why, says Mr. Still. should we hear so often of
fanaticism? Do we found our religion upon any such visions. And who, gentle
Doctor, does found any relgion upon them? Do you call the building of a Church
or institution of a holy day, a founding of religion. And who tells you so
often of fanaticism? You cast it indeed upon one another here in England,
Presbyterians, Anabaptists, and other such like: I know no body else who tell
you of it. But if you will have me speak what I now think; all the whole
protestant reformation is fanaticism to me, even in the most rigorous and
strictest sense.

7. Their religious orders, even the chief among them, Benedictins,
Carthusians, Dominians, Franciscans and Jesuits were all instituted by
enthusiastic persons, upon the credit of their visions and revelations: so
much has fanaticism contributed to their support. Now this man blows upon us a
little more nearly than hitherto: and yet he blasts but his own soul thereby.
For first the Catholic Church is truly and properly supported by Jesus Christ,
her founder and divine Master. Then, by the innocence, purity and powerfulness
of her faith. Next to this, by the care and vigilance of Apostles, venerable
Bishops, and holy Priests, who made unblameable thereby in themselves, are
industrious to teach and exhort, and see this holy religion observed and put in
practice by others committed to their charge. And then also, by religious
people and all those good Christians, who do earnestly heed those heavenly
dictates of our Lord, to fulfill them; so distributing the time of this their
short life, that now they practice one good thing, and then another, as
occasion offers, till all justice be fulfilled; keeping themselves unspotted of
the world. So that religious people do no otherways support the Church, but by
their studious observance of her holy laws and counsels: unless the venerable
Bishops do call forth some virtuous choice men amongst them for their help.
This is most certain.Secondly, no less certain it is, that the founders of
religious orders were both pious and wise persons, and several ways proved to
be so, by their miraculous and innocent lives, before their rule was allowed
of. Nor were any of them accepted, as this man speaks of, by the credit of
their own visions.Thirdly, although the Benedictins and others here mentioned,
were very eminently religious in the West part of the Church: Yet it is not so
certain that they are the chief of all religious that either are or have been
in Church in any place or age. Very eminent were the orders founded by St.
Austin, that venerable Doctor and Bishop in Africa; the Monks of St. Martin a
Bishop in France; those of St. Malachy in Ireland; the religious of St. Basil,
of St. Pacomius, of Cassianus, St. Jerome, and several others in the East and
South part of the Church. Very eminent without all doubt, were those many
religious Societies, whom St. Jerome and others testify to have spread
themselves all over Syria, Armenia, Persia, Ethiopia, Asia, and all the
northern parts, even amongst the Goths and Dacians, before the fourth age of
the Christian Church. Very eminent were the religious institutes which were all
over the country we now inhabit, in the Britons time, long before our
forefathers the Saxons came in upon them, under the rule of St. Columba, the
rule of St. Brendan, the rule of St. Columbanus, the rule of St. David, the
rule of St. Martin, the rule of St. Austin, the rule of St. Patrick, the rule
of Lyrinum, the rule of St. Regulus, the rule of St. Ninian, the rule of
Floriacum, the rule of St. Joseph. Very eminent were the episcopal Monasteries,
all over the Christian world in primitive times; especially for the first six
hundred years of Christianity, wherein Bishops themselves led a monastical life
with their clergy, in a community together. And out of this clergy were
selected still the choicest men for virtue and learning, to oversee the
parishes; amongst whom they still lived by the said rule, as far as it could be
accommodated to their occasions, unto the edification and comfort of the
people. And although our clergy is not ordinarily educated now adays in so
str^ct a course, yet is it no ways handsome for all that, in my judgment, that
these men of God, Priests of our Lord Jesus, and venerable dispensers of his
mysteries, should any of them be called Seculars: especially since their state
and condition requires, that they live in chastity, under an obedience to their
Bishops, and perhaps without an absolute dominion of their own goods: and all
of them prescribe to themselves some good rule or other for the government of
their lives. Very eminent were the rel^gious of 'St Mark in Alexandria, where
thousands of them lived more like Angels of God than men. Very eminent were the
religious orders instituted by the Apostles; amongst whom all things were
common, and none had any thing which he could call his own. For they all made a
voluntary abdication of their goods, that they might serve God uniformly in a
community together. Amongst whom Ananias pretending to enter, as dispropriated
of all his goods like the rest, which indeed he was not; suffered a corporal
death for his dissimulation. So that teligious institutes are as ancient as
Christianity it self. For it is not to be thought that St. Peter and the other
Apostles, would exhort any to a greater perfection of life, than they professed
themselves, by their education under Jesus the great Master, whose words and
counsels must still be professed by some in his Church: while others, whose
condition of life cannot reach so high, conform themselves to the rules and
precepts of sobriety, justice and piety, that are common to all, loving the
rest of their Catholic body, which may serve God better than they can do in
their worldly entanglements. And I am very clearly persuaded, that the true
real Church of God, wherein Christ's good Spirit dwells, as it never has been,
so never can it be without religious orders. And it is hard to say which of
them all from the beginning of the Church to this day is the chiefest; or what
founder of them was most enthusiastical.

. 8. It is a fair way toward the proof of St. Bennets fanaticism, as also of
St. Romwall, St. Bruno, St. Francis and St. Dominick, that Bellarmine confesses
those orders to be instituted by the inspir ation of the holy Ghost. Here the
author shows himself a Typhaeus or terrae filius indeed. If this be a fair way,
I know not what is a foul one. Is the inspiration of the Holy Ghost the
fanaticism here spoken of? or is one of them a fair way to infer and conclude
the other? What a kind of desperate talk is this? is the inspiration of the
Holy Ghost and fanaticism all one with Bellarmin? or is it all one and the same
thing with Mr. Stillingfleet? He does not express himself here, any further in
this business: but leaves us in our amazement, to think what we please. But
could good St. Bennet ever expect to hear such words spoken of him in our
island of England, so much illustrated by his children, for so many ages
together; in which time have resorted to his Monasteries millions of pious
souls, leaving father and mother and all pleasures, honors, dignities and
pride of this weak and short and sinful life, unto their more sincere and
endless bliss. Must St. Romwal and St. Bruno those retired Baptists, and
fathers of the renowned Camaldulensians and Chartreux Monks; must St. Dominick
that patriarch of piety and zeal toward all men's salvation; must St. Francis
full of God, Francis the meek, the poor beadsman and intercessor for all
mankind, in whom Jesus himself our blessed Lord seemed again to live and breath
and bleed afresh; must these and such like men, whom former protestants
themselves have so much honored, that in their very heat of controversy
against the Church, they have upon consideration of so many shining stars, as
it were stopped their career to give them their due respects, be boldly and
without fear now surnamed fanatics, in these our last and worse days? what
will become of Gospel? if such words as these be not permitted only, but
applauded, farewell all Christianity. But how does this man prove in general,
that both themselves, and their orders were fanatical? because Bellarmin
confesses that they were instituted by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost.
Abominable stuff! who can hear it? Let us see then how he fastens fanaticism to
each of them in particular. And we may expect here to find some mention of
their extreme mortification and penitential life, their chastity and warching,
their patience and abnegation of their wills, their prayer and incessant
praises of God, their retiredness and silence, their humility and punctual
obedience, their sweet and edifying conversation, their profound meditation,
ecstasies and love of God, and p^ous consummation of their lives at their last
hour; and other such like graces which tradition and writings have left unto
after ages for our encouragement and pattern.

9. St. Gregory, says he, writes of St. Bennet, that he was a hater of all
human learning: that he lived in a cave; that he conquered lust by rolling
himself among thorns and nettles, that he drove away by the sign of the Cross a
black devil that disturbed a Monk at his prayers; that when any Monk did eat
out of his sight he perceived it, that he discovered Riggo in a Kings habit to
be no King; that he knew the secrets of the Divinity; and beheld his sister
Scholasticas soul going to heaven. This is all he says of St. Bennet, and he
tells it us out of the writings of St. Gregory, one of the best and learnedest
prelates that have ever sat in St. Peter's Chair. But what St. Gregory delivers
in a sober grave discourse, he speaks in a mock phrase, and brings no more of
his life unto light, than what himself can laugh at. But first, this is not the
hundredth part of St. Bennets life. Secondly, all this put together infers not
fanaticism, which is the business we look after. For here is no resisting
authority under a pretense of a new way of religion. The Religion of St. Bennet
was our Catholic religion, the precepts and counsels, hopes and promises of
Gods holy Gospel, wherein he lived himself and bred up all his followers,
inviolably. I think Dr. Still. notwithstanding his own definition, which he
does not himself heed, calls all those fanatics, who do not, as he does; or do
practice that, which he cannot; or have had those gifts from God, which he has
not. Otherwise, how should living in a cave, subduing lust by nettles, a power
over devils, the spirit of discerning at a distance, knowledge of Gods divine
mysteries, and the like, seem to him any properties of a fanatic. All this if
it be true, makes for St. Bennets glory; and no part of it to his
disparagement. His retirement into rocks and caves, his mortification of lust,
and all the rest are good and glorious. And he has no less a man than St. Paul
the great Apostle, a companion with him also in his dislike of human learning;
who both vilifies it, and gives us as great a caution against it, as ever St.
Bennet did: the same blessed Apostle, as dusty and dirty in his travels, and
careless of his outward man, as ever St Bennet could be; however taken, as Dr.
Still. here tells us, by country people for a beast. But let the beast be
where it will. God sees not as man sees. And what is comely in our eyes, is an
abomination to that holy one who regards the heart. Saint Bennet is content
with his own company of Apostles and Prophets, who did the same things with
him, and had the like gifts; and heeds little any derision of Stillingfleets
long finger.

. 10. Petrus Damianus reports of St. Romwal, that he was hard to learn in his
youth, that he took ugly birds to be devils and chaced them away; that he was
converted by a vision of St. Apollinaris, that he had devils lying upon his
legs, and sometimes bruising him in his prayers, that he wept bitterly, when he
said Mass; saw Monks going up to Heaven on a Ladder of light: And that St.
Bruno and Hugo built the grand Chartreus upon a vision. This is all he can pick
out against St. Romwall and St. Bruno, to prove them fanatics; that is to say
mad men: for I cannot tell what else he should mean. Nor can any one perceive
by his phrase of speech, whether he relates these few things of them (or those
of St. Bennet) as things he believes to be true, or which he thinks to be
false. If false, then Peter Damian Writer of their Lives is the fanatic, and
not St. Bruno or Romwall: If true, then Dr. Still. is the fanatic, and not
Peter Damian. For what blame is it in any, either to be hard to learn in youth,
or to see devils if he did see them, or to be converted by a vision, or to weep
at Mass, or the like: where lies the fanaticism of this business? Here is no
news of any new religion invented, or any resisting Authority under pretense
thereof. He that walks all his whole life in the ways of Christian piety, may
have such things as these happen to him, partly in his youth, and partly in his
maturer age. None of these things are unusual or impossible, where Christianity
odious to evil Angels is practiced, and professed in earnest. The Religion of
these men is the same one Catholic Faith, that is common to all; though all do
not keep so strict rules to observe it, as they did; nor are all block heads,
or hard to learn in their youth; nor have all men devils lying upon their legs,
or bruising them in their prayers; nor do all weep at Mass, or see Ladders of
light, or the like. And whether these oppressions and apparitions in any one
Catholic young or old, be true or false, imaginary or real, this cannot make
his religion either better or worse; however the man may be otherwise affected,
then others of the same religion, who are free. If Dr. Still. could but see the
daily lives of the Camaldulensian Monks or Carthusians, from their first
Founders time, in profound silence, austerity and prayers, he would find there
is some other thing there to do, then to scare Crows.

11. St. Francis and St. Dominick were the persons, whom Pope Innocent the
third saw in a vision, to support the Lateran Church; hence therefore called
the two Lamps, etc. Surely these two men will prove no fanatics, but grave
solid Orthodox Christians. For fanatics pull down Churches but support none.
And yet our Doctor will not have it so. They must by all means be fanatics
too; nay, the chiefest of fanatic and enthusiastic men. For Cardinal
Vitriaco, says he, calls St. Francis an illiterate man; and St. Bonaventure
describes him no otherwise. His first conversion to that strict course of life
was by visions, wherein he was swallowed up in God: as St. Bonaventure will
have it, and his soul melted at the sight of the Crucifix. So tender hearted
was he to the poor, that sometimes be rent off his clothes, to give them, and
sometimes unript and divided them amongst them: in all this having no teacher
but Christ, whose voice when he heard from a Crucifix he was besides himself,
so that people flockt about him as a mad man, and cast dirt at him; and his own
father renounced him before the Bishop; upon which St. Francis rejoiced now,
that he could better say Our Father which art in Heaven. In this height of
fanaticisme he made crucifixes in mortar, and preaching to the people pierced
their hearts. Then opening the Gospel thrice, he took the first three Sentences
for the rule of his Order. He had many ecstasies and raptures; and in one of
them had a full assurance of his sins remitted. His rule confirmed afterward
by the Pope, he called the book of life and marrow of Gospel. St. Dominick
comes not much behind him. For he had a vision also that God had chose him and
St. Francis, to reform the world and the evil manners of men. This is what he
can cull out of St. Francis and St. Dominicks life, to prove them both
fanatics and enthusiastic men. And he interlards his narration with much
jesting girds of his own, to make it have the more fanatic relish: but all in
vain. For though he omit here in a manner all the whole life of those holy and
blessed men, as he did before in others; and picks out thence only such few
passages, as he thought he could lash, as he went, with the Scorpions of his
bold derision: yet will not this serve his turn. For all that is here reported
of St. Francis (the scurrillous manner of his relation excepted) is only his
voluntary poverty, his neglect of humane learning and worldly wealth, his
divine visions and entertainments with God, his charity to the poor, his
efficacious preaching unto the reformation of evil manners, his rule of life
drawn out of Gospel, and confirmed by the chief Christian Prelate: All which
things are so far from fanaticism, that they are quite opposite to it. Here is
no news of any new invented enthusiastic way of Religion, but on the contrary,
a tenor and rule of life drawn out of Gospel, and confirmed by his own Prelate
and Ecclesiastical Superior. The ways of fanatics and fanaticism are quite
contrary to this. Much less have we here any resistance of Authority, but a
submission to Authority and an humble expectation of their approbation and
license. He must surely think our Kingdom of England to be much alienated from
the Kingdom of God, if he hope to persuade them, that love of poverty, neglect
of worldly wealth and humane literature, charity to the poor, divine
revelations, powerful preaching against sin, melting affections toward God,
and a rule of life drawn out of Gospel is fanaticisme. He will be a very dull
reader, who will not hence conclude, that our twelve Apostles were the first
and chiefest fanatics in the world. And this our wits too much prone to
looseness and atheism will greedily enough, and nimbly infer: and perhaps
rejoice that they have an Atheist in Print, to propagate their infidelity.
Atheism loves not lonelines; but is then most secure when the company is
greatest.

But it will be here objected, why then did St. Bennet, St. Francis, and St.
Dominick make themselves new rules? Is not this a new religion? Sir, although a
Catholic cannot easily be so ignorant, as to ask any such question as this is;
yet because it may be the straw, at which Dr. Still. stumbles, who as in this
his whole book he speaks like a Child, so, for ought I know, he may understand
like a Child; I say therefore, that a new rule is so far from a new religion,
that the Gospel can do little good without it: For the counsels and precepts of
Gospel, whereby our souls are to be sanctified, and ordered to our final end,
are all general and abstracted from any circumstance of time, or place, or
measure, or manner; to the end, they may be indifferent to the many conditions,
professions, and employments of mankind, in their several states and ages.
Watching, fasting, works of charity, mortification of sensuality, continence,
repentance* administration of Sacraments, and the various like good things,
commended to us in our holy Gospel, are so prescribed and counseled us, that
the manner* the when, the where, how often, how long, and other such like
circumstances, without which those rules and counsels cannot be brought down to
execution and pract^ce, are not specified. Therefore has the Cathol^ck Church
brought down some of these things unto individual circumstances, when she
appointed rites and times for Sacraments, set holy days for people to meet
together in their meditations and prayers, set times for fasts, others for
confession, others for Communion, some for rejoicing in our Lord, some for
mourning and doing penance, so much and in such a manner, as might well
consist with the generality of the Catholic world. But because neither is this
sufficient for our daily progress, unless people, considering their own
particular occasions, and the lettanees which may occur more in one hour of the
day then another, either set themselves a further rule, for their daily piety
and particular ordering of their houses, or follow the direction herein of some
wiser and better man: Hence it is that so many rules have issued forth in the
Christian world; by which some people have governed their own private houses,
accommodating them in the best wise they could unto their affairs; and others
have quite retired out of the world, to serve God more perfectly all their
life, according to this or that approved rule, in a more full observance of it
under Monastical obedience. This is the motive nature and end, of so many rules
in the Church of God; whereof some suit best with one complexion, and some with
another. And all of them tend unto the bringing down of Gospel unto a constant
practice. And what Christian soever sets himself no such rule, nor follows any,
must needs live a loose and careless if not a wicked life, although he should
have the whole Gospel by heart, and be able to speak it all without book.

If the exact lives and pious rules of St. Bennet, St. Francis, St. Dominick,
St. Basil, St. Brun^. St. Romwall, and such like men, were printed together in
our English tongue, with the pictures of their Religious men, met together
either in their Refectory, Schools or Quire; this one sight would I am
confident more move my good Protestant Countrymen, who are daily abused with
Ministerial lies against us, then any one book of controversy can do. I will
only set down here the one rule of St. Francis, according to which his
religious disciples are regulated all their life time throughout the world;
whereby either your self, Sir, or any other may judge whether he be worthily
called either fool or fanatic.

St. Francis his Rule.
Chap. 1. THe rule and life of Friar minours is this; To observe the holy
Gospel of Jesus Christ our Lord; living in obedience, without property of
goods, and in chastity. Brother Francis does promise obedience and reverence
unto Bishop Honorius his Lord, and to his Successors Canonically installed, and
to the Roman Church. And be other Friars bound to obey Brother Francis and his
Successors.

Chapter 2. If any shall be willing to take this life, and shall therefore present
themselves to our Brothers, let them be sent to the Provincial Ministers, who
may only, and none besides them, have power to admit them. The Ministers must
be diligent to examine them about Catholic Religion and Church Sacraments. And
if they believe these things, and will faithfully confess them, and firmly
observe them to the end, and either have no Wives, or those Wives if any they
have, are entered into Monasteries, or by the authority of the Bishop of the
Diocese are dismissed, a vow of continence now solemnly made, and their said
Wives be of that age, that there can arise no suspicion of them: let the
Ministers then speak unto them the word of holy Gospel, that they go and sell
all their goods, and bestow them upon the Poor. Which thing if they cannot be
able to do, their good will in this part may suffice: And let the Brothers
beware, and their Ministers too; that they be not solicitous about the temporal
goods of these men: that they may freely dispose those things of their own as
our Lord shall inspire them. And if Counsel be required the Ministers have
leave to send them unto some men fearing God, by whose advice they may bestow
their goods upon the Poor. After this they may grant them their vest of
probation; namely two tunicks without a capuce, and a girdle and drawers, and a
caparoon down to the girdle; unless the Ministers shall otherwise think fit
according to God. After the year of probation is ended, let them be received
unto obedience, promising ever to observe this life and rule. And in no wise
shall it be lawful for them to go out of this religion, according to the
command of my Lord our chief Bishop: because according to Gospel, no man
putting his hand unto the Plough, if he look back is fit for the Kingdom of
God. And those who now have promised obedience, let them have one tunick with a
capuce, and another without a capuce, such as will have it. And those who are
urged by necessity may wear shoes. But let all our Friars be clothed with
course Garments, and they may mend them with Sackcloth, or other pieces on
Gods blessing. All whom I do exhort and admonish, that they neither despise nor
judge men, whom they shall see clothed in soft and colored raiments, to use
finer meats and drinks, but let every one of them judge and despise himself.

Chapter 3. The Clarks must say the divine Office according to the course of Roman
Church, the Psalter only excepted, out of which they may have Breviaries. But
Laimen are to say four and twenty times, Our Father, etc. for their Matins, for
Lauds five; for prime, tierce, sext and none, for each of those hours seven;
for Vespers twelve: for Compline seven: and pray for the dead. And all are to
fast from the Feast of all Saints unto Christmas day. But as for the holy Lent,
which begins from Epiphany unto forty days after it, which our Lord by his own
holy fast has consecrated, those who voluntarily will fast it, Gods blessing
be upon them: and they who will not, let them not be tied to it. But the other
Lent, from Ashwednesday unto Easter day, let them all fast that. Other times,
excepting Friday, they need not fast. And in times of manifest necessity, let
no brother be tied to corporal fast^ng. And I counsel admonish and exhort my
brothers in our Lord Jesus Christ, that when they chance to walk through the
world, they do not wrangle nor contend with words, nor censure other men; but
be meek, peaceable, modest, gentle and humble, civilly speaking unto all men,
as becomes them. And they ought not to ride, but in a manifest necessity and
urgent weakness. In what ever house they enter, let them first say, Peace to
this house: and let them according to holy Gospel eat what is set before them.

Chapter 4. I do firmly command all my brothers, that in no wise they receive Money
or Coin, either by themselves immediately, or by another person interposed. And
for the necessities of the sick, or the clothing of brothers, the Ministers
only and the Controlers may by their Spiritual friends take special care,
according to places and times and coldness of countries, as they shall find
expedient for their need: this still provided, that as it is already said, they
receive no money nor coin.

Chapter 5. Those brothers whom our Lord has given the gift and strength to work,
let them labor faithfully and devoutly; yet so, that idleness our souls enemy
being kept out, they extinguish not the spirit of holy prayer and devotion,
unto which all other temporal things ought to be still subservient. And for
reward of their work, they may take the necessaries of body, both for
themselves and brothers, besides coin or money, and that humbly, as becomes the
servants of God, and followers of most holy poverty.

Chapter 6. Our brothers may appropriate nothing to themselves, not house, not
place, not any thing, but as strangers and pilgrims in this world, in poverty
and humility serving our Lord; let them confidently go for Alms. Nor must they
be ashamed, for our Lord for us has made himself poor in this world. This,
this is the high towering spire of our sublime poverty; which has installed you
my dearest brothers, heirs and Kings of that Kingdom of the Heavens. It has
made you poor in pelf; but in virtues it has raised you up on high. Let this
be your portion, even this poverty which will conduct you unto the land of the
living, unto which my dearest brothers remaining close and wholly fixed, no
other thing for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ may you wish to have under
Heaven for ever. And where ever my brothers are, or meet with one another, let
them show themselves toward one another as domestics: and let each one open
to the other his necessity freely. For if a mother nourishes and caresses her
carnal child: how much more carefully ought each one to support and love his
spiritual brother. And if any of them fall into sickness, other brothers ought
to serve him, as they would be served themselves.

Chapter 7. If any of our brothers by the instigation of Satan shall sin unto
death, for such sins as it has been appointed among our brothers that recourse
should be had only to our Provintial Ministers, let the said brother be bound
to have recourse unto them, as soon as possibly he may, without delay. And the
said Ministers if they be Priests must enjoin him a penance with mercy: if
they be not Priests, let them cause it to be enjoined by other Priests of the
Order, as they shall according to God think fittest; and they must take heed
they fall not into wrath, and trouble for the sin of another; for anger and
disturbance in ones self and others hinder charity.

Chapter 8. All our Friars universally must still have one of the brothers of this
religion for the Minister general, and servant of the whole brotherhood: and
him they must constantly obey; and when he goes out of office, an election of a
successor must be made by the Provincial Ministers and Controllors, in the
Pentecost Chapter; wherein the Provincial ministers are bound to meet, where
ever it is by the minister general appointed: and this once in three years, or
in some other term of time either greater or lesser, as by the said Minister it
shall be ordained. And if at any time it should appear to the universality of
the ministers Provincial and Controllers, that the said general elect is
insufficient to the service and common good of the brothers, the said brothers,
unto whom the election does belong, may in the name of our Lord choose
themselves another for a custos; and after the Pentecost Chapter, the Minister
and Controllors may all, if they please, and it seem good unto them, in the
same year convocate their brothers unto a Chapter in their custodies.

Chapter 9. Let not our brothers preach in the Diocese of any Bishop, where it is
forbidden them by him. And let no brother presume at all to preach unto people
unless he be first examined and approved by the Minister general of this
Fraternity, and have by him that office of preaching deputed to him. I do also
admonish and exhort all our brothers, that in any preachings they make, their
expressions be well examined and chaste, unto the profit and edification of
people, denouncing to them vice and virtue, punishment and glory, with brevity
of speech, for an abbreviated word has our Lord made upon earth.

Chapter 10. Those brothers, who are Ministers and servants of their other
brothers, must visit and admonish their other brothers, and charitably reprove
them; not commanding them any thing, that may be contrary to their own soul and
our rule; and the brothers who are subjects, must remember that for God they
have denied their own wills; and therefore do I strongly command them that they
do obey their Ministers in all things, which they have promised our Lord to
observe, and are not contrary to their own soul and our rule. And where ever
our brothers be, who shall perceive and know, that they are not able to observe
the rule punctually; unto their Ministers ought they and may they have
recourse, and the Ministers must charitably and cheerfully receive them, and
show so great familiarity toward them, that they may speak to them, and act as
Masters to their servants; for so it ought to be, that ministers be the
servants of all the brothers. And now I admonish and exhort in our Lord Jesus
Christ, that our brothers beware of all pride, vain glory, envy, covetousness,
care and solicitude of this world, and of detraction also and murmuring. And
let not the illiterate care to learn letters, but let them heed, what they
ought to desire above all things, to have the spirit of our Lord and his holy
operation in them, to pray always unto God with a pure heart, and to have
humility and patience in persecutions and sickness, and to love those who
persecute us, for our Lord says, Love your enemies, pray for such as persecute
and slander you; blessed are they who suffer persecution for justice: for
theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven, and he who persevers to the end shall be safe.

Chapter 11. I do strongly command all our brothers, that they keep no suspicious
company or talk with women: and that they enter not into the Monasteries of
Nuns, excepting only such unto whom a special license is allowed by the Sea
Apostolic: nor that they be Godfathers to men or women, least by this occasion
any scandal arise, either of the brothers or amongst them.

Chapter 12. What brother soever by Gods inspiration shall have a will to go
amongst the Sarazens and other infidels, let him demand license of his Minister
Provincial. And let not the Ministers give license to any, but such as they
shall see fit to be sent. Moreover I do enjoin the Ministers by obedience, that
they ask of my Lord our Pape, a Cardinal of the Roman Church who may be
governor, protector and correctour of the Brotherhood: that always subject to
the feet of the same holy Roman Church, we may stable in Catholic faith,
observe poverty, humility, and the holy Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
we have firmly promised.

This is the rule of St. Francis, and his gray Friars, wherein are apparently
all the perfect lineaments of a good sound Catholic Christian; but of
fanaticisme nothing at all. Nor can I possibly tell, why he should ascribe
fanaticisme to persons wholly Evangelical, resigned, humble, meek, spiritual
men; unless perhaps because some one vision or other is written, to have
happened to one or other of them in their life. And this may seem strange and
incredible indeed to carnal men, who do never really and heartily converse with
God: but to others who are as much spiritual as they are carnal, it is no such
great a novelty; witness our holy Apostles and Prophets, who had them
frequently. I cannot tell whether our English fanatics, such I mean as are
called so, do ever pretend any of these visions; if they do, they are not
fanatics because of their visions, but because they are pretended only and
false, and Dr. Still. does neither say nor go about to prove that these visions
were false, or so much as that they were frequent and familiar in their life.
And if one or other such peculiar visit from God, either by vision or
revelation may conclude a man to be fanatical, farewell all religion, both
Hebrew and Christian; for the sounders and teachers of both were familiarly
absort in God, which Dr. Still. derides here in St. Francis, and visited by him
in apparitions, revelations, and visions continually.

. 12. Let me, Sir, in this paragraf acquaint you; that when I first at your
request undertook this work, not much pleasing to my hand, which uses a pen
with much d^fficulty, my m^nd and thoughts were in a manner wholly then taken
up, with this one Chapter of the Doctors book, wherein I intended to be most
copious; not thinking to meet with such a multitude of impertinences and
falsehoods, as have now stopped me at every turn, I must therefore be shorter
then I intended; and do like Whittingtons cat, which set down in a house
swarming with mice and rats, could do no more then crush the heads now of one,
and then of another, all day long, for want of leisure to eat up any. Some
things I thought to say of these religious founders; and some of the orders
founded by them. Concerning the founders, I meant first to set down the
miraculous lives of these Saints, their profound humility, patience,
continence, and poverty, their contempt of this vain transitory world,
consisting notwithstanding with a most cordial affection, respect and love,
which they bore to all mankind, their continual converse with the God of
spirits; their strange joy in contumelies and other injuries, which is a
perfection very few can arrive unto in this life; their carnest aspirations
after the fight of Jesus and his Heavenly Kingdom; with their glorious
triumph^ng death. Of all which we have as clear and certain tradition, as if
they had lived but yesterday. And Dr. Still. has been picking, as it seems,
amongst those fragrant relics, not with any spirit of a Christian, either to
love or imitate them; but to fill up, like an adder, the venom of his own
breast, and then to disgorge himself into a book.

2. I had it then in my heart, to discover at large the various growth of
Saints; neither uniformly answerable to one another, nor yet to themselves in
the several ages of their life: and yet all of them friends of God, and
acceptable to him in the course and consummation of their lives. Nor is to be
expected, that men encompassed with the like infirmities we be our selves,
should in all the parts either of their whole life, or any one year or month
therein be still alike, either devout, or joyous, or indisturbed. What is born
of flesh is flesh, inclining to sensual things, and unwilling to be restrained,
subject to cold, hunger, and several infirmities; and therefore averst from
kneeling, fasting, contemplation, especially if it be long and frequent, and
still leaning toward its own delight and satisfaction. On the other side, what
is born of spirit, is spirit; still flying upwards toward the God of spirits,
in whom is most permanent and solid bliss. And these two must be allowed
sometimes in us, to struggle and get the mastery, at least to come to such
equitable conditions, that the balance may hang straight. No man is suddenly
made naught: neither is holiness the work of a day; there appears in Corn first
a slender green sprig like grass, then a stronger blade, then an ear promising
grain, which comes up at length, if it be helped and not hurt, cherished by
sweet showers and the the Suns vital warmth, and not blasted with mildew, nor
lodged by winds, nor trod down by beasts. And what is good Corn in the fields,
the same thing are Saints in the Church: though not one of a thousand of them
is put in the Calender. When any one of them is a child, he speaks like a
child, and thinks like a child, and does like a child; and his main perfection
then, is obedience, fear and observance of his parents, who if they be careful
of their children after baptism, as ancient Christians were, might set them in
the right way of a blessed life without much trouble. In their youth, they have
various properties; some blameable, and others innocent, some imitable, and
some to be corrected. St. Austin was perverse in his ways, St. Francis gallant
in his conversation, St. Lawrence charitable, St. Bennet pious, St. Romwall
fearful, St. Bruno pensative, St. Do. minick rigorous, St. Martin devout, St.
Gregory studious, St. Nicholas addicted to abstinence, St. Hilary bent against
heresies, St. Anthony inclined to deserts, St. Thomas to reading, St. Vincent
to preaching and the like, with infinite variety. And all of them by light of
Gospel, and rule of life drawn out thence, and accommodated to their occasions,
went on still mending, pruning and perfecting themselves, for Gods favor and
further presence, even in their mortal bodies as a Temple upon earth,
proceeding still from virtue to virtue, till they all met united at length, in
one contemplation, one spirit, one peace and joy in God for eyer. And he who
thus persevers unto the end is safe; and no saint, till his voyage be wholly
ended. Nor is any imperfection in their life, to be attributed unto other
original, then their earthly tabernacles, as all ours are. Some of them also,
which I must not here omit to speak are fanciful, fearful and scrupulous; as
probably was St. Romwall in his youth, and very many good women, amongst whom I
may well reckon St. Bridget, Gertrude, Joan of the Cross, and Catherine of
Sena, not as if their whole life were so, but because they were once in their
life taken notice of, for a notable working of their imagination, about the
conception. Those religious women that were governed by Franciscans, fancied
Scotus his way truest, the other a D^minican Nan, saw St. Thomas his school was
in the right. Whereas indeed they saw perhaps nothing at all in it, nor
understood where the difference lay. And all of them were equally then lest to
themselves in punishment of their business about affairs, that did nothing at
all concern them; it was not perhaps their own fault so much, as those men's,
who put these impertinent things into their heads, though not perhaps unto any
offense to God, yet unto some disturbance, neither useful to themselves nor
others. And if those Divines and Doctors, who went about to have the visions
and revelations of the said good women approved, had been truly wise, they
might have easily understood, that Gods good Spirit, which inspires, inlightens
and strengthens us in the ways and will of Christ our great Lord, never
interposes in subtle curiosities of men. I will send you my Spirit, says our
Lord; and when he comes he will put you in mind of all things which I have told
you. We are then of that good spirit to learn, not what Scotus, Aureolus,
Aquinas, or Durandus have imagined, but what our souls Lord and master the
eternal Wisdom has revealed, and no more; but men are not usually so earnest
and zealous for God, as they are for their own fancies: they talk and think and
contend more now adays, about the thin imperceptible curiosities which they
learned in schools, then Gods saving wisdom; however, be those schoolmen and
school-women who they will, even the best that any one can make of them; sure I
am that all actions of saints are not saintly action. Those men and women were
not dropped out of the Stars, but flesh and blood as we are, and ^^able to our
infirmities; yet are we to admire* and love our saints tenderly, because they
struggled so bravely through all the many encounters and oppositions of this
mortal life, till they came to enjoy the God of Gods in Sion. And what was good
or perfect in them, is recorded for our imitation: what was imperfect, they
washed away by penance, Divine contemplation and austerities; and some also by
their precious blood, freely and plentifully shed, for the sake of Jesus, whom
they loved unto the end, Gods grace still assisting them in all their ways of
holiness and truth.

3. It was then in my thoughts to show in an ample manner, how all the men
renowned for sanctity in the world, Elias, Elisha, saint John Baptist, and all
the Prophets, our own twelve Apostles and the first preachers of Christ upon
earth, were no others then such men as St. Bennet, Romwall, Bruno, Francis,
Dominick, even in those very things, whence Still. concludes them all to be
fanatics and fools. Saint Paul saw in a vision the secrets of God, which he
could never express by humane words; which thing is derided here in St. Bennet,
who is said to have known the secrets of the Divinity. St. Peter had a vision
of a sheet let down from Heaven by the four corners of it: and such a vision
was that of St. Francis and Dominick supporting the Lateran Church. St. Paul
was buffeted by an Angel of Satan, which is mocked at as fanatical in saint
Romwall bruised by evil angels. Saint Peter discovered Ananias, that he was not
what he pretended, dispropriated of his goods: which is marked as fanatical in
St. Bennet, discovering the dissimulation of Riggo, who appeared before him as
a King, and was not. Saint Paul melted so much with the love of Jesus, that he
no more lived now, but Jesus lived in him; which is laughed at here in saint
Francis, said to melt away at the fight of the Crucifix. The same Apostle was
abused all manner of ways, nay even scourged and whipped by the Jews his own
countrymen; which is noted here as a sign of fanaticism in saint Francis, when
the people derided, and threw dirt at him. Jacob saw a Ladder let down from
Heaven: flouted here in saint Romwall; who saw Monks ascending upon such a
thing. Eliseus discerned the secrets contrived in the King of Syria's chamber:
which is here vilified in saint Bennet, said to perceive his Monks when they
drunk or eat out of his sight. Abraham and Daniel, saint John Evangelist and
others, had frequent revelations and visions of good and bad Angels; the least
part whereof is here esteemed ridiculous in saint Romwall and saint Bennet; nay
our holy Lord and Savior tells us many of his own visions, of Nathanael for
example seen under his figtree; of Dives and Laz^rus perceived in distant
places and conditions; of the Angels falling from Heaven like lightning. And we
are here to observe, that whatever grace or virtue our Lord had himself, should
be dispersed among those who follow him, with a true and upright heart, for of
his fullness we all receive, even grace for grace. Whence we may well conclude
that saint Francis, Bennet, Romwall, Bruno, and Dominick, were Jesus Christ's
true servants, by the graces and visions they had like himself; and not that
they were fools and fanatics: except we intend that others, more forward men
should by the same topic conclude the like of Jesus Christ himself: and what I
pray you Sir, would a profane Rhetoric what sport would it make upon several
words of the Gospel concerning our Lord; for example, Marc. 3. where it is said
of him (...), that he was beside himself. Is not this in our Doctors english to
be a fanatic? saint Francis with the rest slighted the world left their
patrimonies, went poorly attired, beaten, reviled, scoft at by the world. Were
not all the Apostles such men? in a mind piously disposed these things would
seem glorious, and transcending the power of flesh and blood, either to do or
suffer constantly, through our whole life, without some special assistance from
Heaven. But where God once inhabits, he raises above earthly things those holy
tabernacles of his, now wholly conversant in Heaven. And so much indeed as any
man has of God, so much is he he like to saint Francis and Bennet, to the
Prophets and Aposties of our Lord, however these may appear to carnal eyes
contemptuous and vile. Flesh and blood left alone seeks ease, wealth, fullness,
honor, and whatsoever is gustful to our outward senses or more interior
imagination, reduced into concupiscence of flesh, concupiscence of eyes and
pride of life. And he that laughs at the lives of St. Bennet or St. Francis,
and the rest like unto them, can have but little of Gods Spirit in him, if any
thing at all. The style of the holy Ghost concerning such men is Diametrically
opposite unto the jeering phrase of Dr. Stilling fleet. By faith, says holy
Writ, Abraham as soon as he was called obeyed, to march forth into a place he
should inhabit, not knowing whither he went. By faith he removed toward a
land promised him, into a strange country, and dwelt in tabernacles, and so did
Isaac and Jacob heirs with him of the same promise. For he looked for a City
having a foundation, whose builder and maker is God. Thus speaks the holy
Scripture, and is not this St. Bennets case as well as Abraham's. Did not he
thus march forth out of his father house, thus dwell in the tabernacles of
rocks and caves, looking after a City built above in Heaven: and both St.
Bennet and Abraham did both of them dye in that their faith, and never returned
again from whence they came. Again, by faith, says holy Scripture Moses, when
he was great, refused to be called the son of Pharaos daughter, choosing rather
to suffer adversity with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin
for a season; preferring rebukes and taunts, before the treasures of Egypt.
Thus did Moses, and is it not the same thing which St. Francis did? St. Francis
preferred rebukes and taunts for Christ's sake whom he loved, before the
pleasure of his fathers house; nay to suffer adversity with Gods peculiar
people for that name, he rejoiced to be disinherited by his own father. Moses
then and St. Francis were both of them either wise and holy men, or a couple of
fools. Holy Scripture goes on thus; others were tortured and racked: others
mocked and scourged, bound and imprisoned; stoned and murdered; cast out from
amongst men and banished; walking up and down in Sheeps skins and Goats skins,
in need and want, in tribulation and affliction, wandering in wildernesses, in
mountains, dens and caves of the earth: of whom the world was not worthy, and
all these men through faith obtained a good report. Thus speaks holy Writ; but
Dr. Stilling fleet has no good report for them; they are all in his phrase and
judgment, madmen and fanatics, and unworthy of the world, whom the holy Ghost,
judges beloved and divine Heroes, of whom, the world is not worthy. And our
great Lord at the sight of these exulted in Spirit and said. I confess to thee
O Father, Lord of Heaven and earth; for that thou have hid these things from
the wise and prudent, and revealed them to babes. So O Father, because it so
seemed good before thee.

4. Another thing also did then much run in my thoughts, and it is this, that
all the whole History of our Lords incarnation passion, ascension, is liable to
the same kind of derision here used by this Doctor. Nay the whole Gospel, and
all the precepts and counsels of Christianity, together with all its threats
and promises, are as mere a folly unto a carnal man, that will presume ^o sport
himself with them, as any thing here derided. Few of those who live in this
present age are ignorant of this. Our ears are beaten with such talk familiarly
in all places. And the bearer does generally but laugh, and applaud the wit of
this profane orator. For this reason St. Paul to prevent the cavil,
acknowledges himself a fool aforehand. Ye do willingly bear with fools, says
he to the inhabitants of Corinth, and take me, if you please, for such another.
We are all fools in Christ. And if any one does seem to be wise among you, let
him become a fool too, that he may be wise indeed. I know, says he again, that
the word of the cross is but folly unto desperate forlorn men. But Gods folly
is wiser than man's wit. The foolish things of the world these has God chosen,
that he may confound the wise: and so has that holy one ordered his ways and
counsels, that by folly he might save the world, which carnal wisdom had
undone. These and other things to this purpose speaks that holy man. And what,
I pray you, Sir, is greater folly with carnal men, than to pass by injuries
insensibly, and suffer our selves to be abused in patience; to divide our goods
among poor people, neither of kin to us, nor perhaps known; to disdain this
present life; to fly with all caution the delights and pleasures of it; to pant
and breath after our last hour; so to manage all our affairs, as if our Soul
were but a pilgrim in our mortal body, to meditate daily on our latter end;
still to abstract our mind from visible and corporeal things ready to fly hence
out of this prison unto our God invisible, our bodies either slenderly regarded
or wholly neglected, or perhaps chastised and curbed; that liveing here we may
express our Lords death, and dying obtain part of his resurrection and glory,
which yet our eye never saw, nor ear heard, nor can our heart conceive what it
is. All this which is but evangelical rules and counsels, acted by good
Catholics unto each ones ability, and preached and talked of sometimes by
Protestants themselves, are derided now by wits of this age as folly and
madness. And if Dr. Still. do well, they must do well too

Fifthly my purpose then was to prove, that St. Bennet, St. Francis, and the
rest here derided for fools, were all of them profound judicious men, as any
perhaps ever was: and this too, whether they be weighed in the balance of the
Sanctuary, wherein for certain they will carry it; or whether they be compared
to the great heroes of the world, who wrought so many great things both at home
and abroad, in war and peace, without reading any books of pedan^ick men,
looked upon on by those worthies as things far below them. All the books of the
world will never make a fool wise, nor will a wise man want any thing by the
loss of them, besides a little pastime. Substantial wisdom is implanted in the
spirit of man by his first Creator; and this alone in its great latitude of
degrees discerns men's excellences. And what comes by reading of books is but
like the outward coloring of a wall, which will never make it sound, if it be
rotten before. The holy Gospel indeed is needful to the world; because it
turns the faces of poor misled mankind from false unto true and permanent
felicity. But this also, if it be used only as other books are, to quote places
in latin, greek or hebrew, or repeat sentences without book, or maintain
dispute and talk, makes no man truly either wiser or better any one jot, then
he was before. Gospel so far polishes, so far sanctifies, so far makes us
wise, so far happy, as we put it in practice and no farther. Human learning,
that is philosophy and languages, which is all that can be understood by it,
this might these Saints both neglect themselves and dissuade it also with all
their endeavor unto Christians, who looking after a world to come, ought no
more in true wisdom to entangle themselves in this, then any other vanities of
this transitory life. And St. Paul himself who understood true wisdom well
enough, inveighes as strongly against it, as any of these above named Saints,
calling it a windy puffing business, (...), the first ruin of mankind, who was
therefore carefully forbidden the insipid tree of knowledge, whose fruit fills us
up only with wind and sin. And this old mystical precept, St. Paul renews in
plain words, when he counsels us, to beware of vain, philosophy, that we be not
led away and deceived by it, according to the constitutions of men and elements
of this world; such as is the philosophy of Aristo^le for example, of Plato,
Democritu^, Pithagoras and such like men, now crept god wot into our Christian
Schools, and there dominereing unto our much loss of time, hinderance of
devotion, and prejudice of mutual charity. I know they do some good unto the
sharpening of our wits, if men could be content with that. But many will not
rest here but even wear out their lives in those empty shadows, that have
nothing at all in them either of solidity or substance, nor tend to any thing
but discourse. There is other learning for Christians, more solid and edifying,
more comfortable and useful, more illuminating our hearts, then all this vain
literature, which puffs us up, as if we were some great ones, and yet God knows
has neither savor in it nor sustinence. And that other was the learning and
wisdom of these holy men, who knew how to act and speak like Angels of God. And
truly so much judgment had St. Francis the veriest simplician of all the five,
that men of those times would rather acquiesce to his opinion in any weighty
affair or matter of conscience, then any now either to subtle Scotus, or any
other of our Schoolmen. His very rule though it seem austere, is nothing but
the very sublimity of Christian prudence. And some other monuments which he
left behind him, kept yet amongst his children, although brief and few, are so
solid and judicious as well as sweet and pious, that if he were a fool, I know
not where to find a wise man upon earth amongst Christians. But it must needs
add, I think, to his heavenly glory, what made him so much exult as yet a
mortal on this earth, to be contemned, reviled and contumeliously treated here
by Dr. Stillingfleet. And so let him live with joy in God for ever.

St. Paul distinguishes a double sort of wisdom; one carnal, which is an enemy
to God; another spiritual, which is at variance with the world. And both of
these have a vast latitude of degrees in several men. Some are so carnal, that
they have nothing of Gods spirit in them: and some again so spiritual as if
they had no body to look after. These are rare, and those frequent in this
world. Others again have some part of both the one and the other: and this in a
vast unspeakable variety. But he that has nothing of Gods spirit here, shall
never see God hereafter. Who sowes by flesh, of flesh shall reap corruption:
and he who sowes in spirit, of the spirit shall reap eternal life. Carnal
wisdom is conversant in carnal things, and spiritual wisdom in things
spiritual. And according as one walks in spirit, so he neglects the things of
the flesh; on the other side, as he walks in fleshly desires, so he contemns
and vilifies the spiritual. For flesh covets against the spirit, and spirit
against the flesh: and these two are adversaries one to the other. The works of
the flesh are adultery, fornication, uncleanness, wanton dalliance, idolatry,
witchcraft, enmities, scolding, emulations, wrath, sedition, sects, envy,
murder, drunkenness, bankettings, and the like. The works of the spirit,
Charity, joy, peace gentleness, bounty, goodness, faith, meeknes, temperance, and
such like. And accordingly we see men carnally wise, to be crafty, covetous,
injurious, leacherous, malicious, envious, contentious, detractours,
supplanters of their innocent neighbors, proud, contumelious, unheedful of
their pacts and promises, uncharitable, unmerciful, bold, impious, contemners
of Gods Law, and fearless of him. But the spiritually wise are silent,
peaceable, patient, no contrivers of ill to any, ever thinking of God and their
last end, charitable toward all men, suspicious of worldly prosperity, zealous
and fervent in prayer, making friends daily of their outward mammon, still
breathing after God and his heavenly Kingdom, neglecters of their own bodies,
nor making provision for the lusts of it, haters of worldly excess^s, still
examining and reflecting on their ways, that they be not unjust or evil, ever
pruning their passions, and rectifying what they find amiss, humble minded and
dying by little and little unto all sensuality, that they may live with God for
ever. This is the wisdom of Saints, whom crafty worldly men looking upon as
fanatics and fools make their prey of them, and eat them up as sheep prepared
for their table. So that as this true and spiritual wisdom conforming us to our
Lord Jesus Christ receives sometimes peculiar visits and privileges from God;
so is it likly to meet with contempt, hunger, nakedness, scourges, and
persecutions in this world. And these are the things which Dr. Stillingfleet
h^re derides in these five Catholic Saints: which be either the genuin works
of spiritual wisdom: or secondly some peculiar privileges conferred from
heaven upon it; or thirdly some afflictions that do annoy it, either from evil
Angels or men. That they fled from their Fathers house, mortified their flesh
and carnal concupiscence, retired to rocks and caves, wept at their devotions,
neglected human literature; that they were swallowed up in God, melted at the
sight of the crucifix, tender hearted toward the poor, covering them sometimes
with their own clothes, those texts of holy Gospel for the rule of their life;
these and such like things are but the connatural operations of divine wisdom
and Gods good spirit in them. Secondly, that they perceived angels or drove
them away by the sign of the cross; that they seemed to be besides themselves
after they had conversed with God in prayer, and unlike unto other men; that
they pierced their hearers hearts when they preached and exhorted them; that
they discerned the dissimulation and fraud of people who appeared before them,
and sometimes the evil deeds and counsels of men out of their sight; that divine
visions were made either to themselves, or to other men concerning them and
their peculiar friendship with God; all such things as these are but peculiar
privileges of heaven granted unto some special friends and lovers who are
wise to God. Thirdly, that they were taken for beasts, derided, scoft, pelted
with dirt or stones, whipped, renounced by their parents, buffeted and bruised by
angels of Satan, walking in extreme hunger and dirty attire, reviled and
contumeliously treated; these are but afflictions falling upon them by evil
angels and men: and all of them either voluntarily undertaken or voluntarily
accepted and entertained, when they fell upon them, for his love and respect,
who so suffered and so entered into glory. And the doctor if he were honest
and truly wife, would never dare to lay fanaticisme unto Saints, because some
men here in England, who are according to his own definition fanatics indeed,
pretend some of those things, for which ancient Saints were much renowned. He
might and ought to remember that these good things bear no part at all in the
definition of fanaticisme, but are the very lineaments of evangelical
perfection; nor is all evil, which such men do. It is neither wisdom nor
honesty, nor so much as a manly behavior, to deride good or innocent things
even in those men, we may by custom and education dislike, Papists, Quaker, or
how ever they be called. By these proceedings atheism spreads its roots in the
hearts of those who read such flouts and contumelies, perhaps further than the
gibeing author of the libell himself intended. If the doctor, who by his
little parcels of story endeavors to render these five great persons
contemptible, do believe those relations of them to be true; then must he needs
believe also, that the Patriarchs and Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and all the
Saints of God so esteemed hitherto, were all mad men and fanatics. If he
believe them not, but judge them false relations, then is he a mad man himself,
to conclude them fanatics by that which never was. So that be the stories true
or false, the doctor will be thought either unwise or impious, which he
pleases,

These worthy Sir are the five thoughts, wherewith my mind was then wholly
taken up, before I put my Pen to paper: which now, too much tired already with
his many impertinencies and falsehoods, I can but only mention. And I wish with
all my heart, that the doctor had so moderated and guided his words, that
neither his own Prelates, nor other grave People of the Land, who cannot but
foresee the dismal event of such wild talk as his is, might not take offense
or be scandalized thereat. All our Bishops mouths are now stopped against
fanatics, if the said enthusiasts do derive their pedigree from renowned
Saints who by the Bishops authority are put every Year into the Calendar.

13. The things I had to say concerning the Orders and families of these
Saints, were yet more and greater, than any I could speak of the men
themselves, who lived but a short time in this world. And all this I must also
now omit. Only I wish with all my heart, that my countrymen would first think
in their mind, what a comely and blessed Land this was, when it was inamelled
up and down with so many beauteous tabernacles of religious men, in their
several rites and habits chanting the praises of God night and day, with Hymns,
Psalms and Canticles perpetually, living in common, chastely and obediently all
their days; After this, if they please to consider, the hourly employments of
all these families throughout the day, while they now worked, now prayed, now
subdued their bodies with hard disciplines, now wrote out books for the use of
posterity, now chanted out Gods praises, met all together seven hours a day in
the Quire, and thus ended their lives in the arms of one another, they cannot
but applaud that happy society of men thus dedicated to God, and think the
Country wherein they live the happier for them. All the many books both greek,
latin and hebrew, historians, orators, and works of ancient Fathers, had never
possibly been deduced unto our times, had they not been renewed age by age
still in several kingdoms by the labor of these religious men, before Printing
was invented. Nor had England seen any of these goodly Churches that remain in
it to this day, nor yet enjoied those wise and equitable laws, by which this
land is still governed, contrived all of them by Catholic Princes, Monks and
Bishops. Nor is Catholic religion against the law, as some now think, but with
the law and the law with it and for it, and by it, however some superadditional
statutes have been contrived of late against that holy ancient faith, since the
reformation. Thirdly they may consider if ^^ey pleas the wondrous convenience
of these general granaries in a land, religious foundations I mean, not only in
spiritual things, wherein we have good helps and examples all the land over at
our own doors; but even in our temporals also. For no sooner was a child born
to any man, but he had choice of occasions to provide for him, without any
further cost or charges both for his soul and body: which is a benefit so
wanted now, that neither high nor low know well now adays how to dispose of
their children. Fourthly, they may call to mind and admire the great love and
respect the Christian world ever had for those holy orders and their founders,
unto whose company they flocked continually with exulting hearts. And happy he
who could be thought worthy to be admited into their society, even of all ages,
states and conditions of men, wherein they profitted some of them unto
admirable sanctity and glory: and even the worst and veriest truant among them
was yet better, than the wide world would have made him. The one order of St.
Bennet received into it twenty Emperors and ten Empresses, forty seven Kings
and above fifty Queens, twenty Sons of Emperors, and forty eight Sons of
Kings, about a hundred young Ladies daughters to Kings and Emperors, a hundred
other Princes and Princesses, Dukes and Dutchesses; Marquesses Earls and
Countesses well near two hundred, fifteen Bishops who left their Miters to live
in that happy retired life; and others of the inferior Gentry innumerable. And
thus has this holy order continued, thus lived and flourished now a thousand
Years in the Christian world, the resting place of the rich and refuge of the
poor. So that all people who lived in those good days and beheld religious
orders, had a contrary judgment of them unto Dr. Stillingfleet who was born but
yesterday, and never saw any. Fifthly, the eminence of learning in all these
orders, and the books of all sorts and kinds, that have issued from them, who
is able to recount them? No sort of knowledge, no kind of literature has escaped
them. The one order of St. Bennet has brought forth fifteen thousand seven
hundred. Monks, eminent writers and compilers of books. The Academies were all
anciently in their Monasteries. At one Abbey in France called Fleury were
brought up at once four thousand Students. Their Rabanus set up the School of
Germany. Their Alcuinus founded the University of Paris. Their Bid advanced
our Oxford University, first renewed by Theodore and Adrian benedictin Monks
also. Their Dionysius Exiguus perfected the Ecclesiastical computation. Their
Guido made the scale of Music. Their Silverster invented the Organ. Theirs
were Anselmus, Ildephonsus, Bernardus and Rupertus, the four Marian Doctors:
and what not? Sixthly, if we please to consider the multitudes of glorious men
in these five orders, who had received a double portion of their Fathers
spirit, as Elizeus is said to have got of Elias above other Sons of the
Prophets; who will then be able to recount the eminent Saints, Confessors,
Martyrs, Aposties and Converters of Countries, that have issued out of these
divine Sanctuaries. The one order of St. Bennet has brought forth forty
thousand blessed Confessors, above three thousand Martyrs; Missioners and
Apostles, so many and powerful, that they have converted no less than thirty
Provinces unto Christian faith. St. Bennet himself converted Campania, which
had remained Pagan even to his days; St. Leander part of Spain; St. Boniface
and his companions much of Germany and Hassia; St. Amand, Willebrord, Wilfred,
Switbert, with their fellow Monks, Belgium, Holland, Friseland and South
Saxony: St. Willehade, Dacia, Gothland and Groonland: St. Kilian and Lambert,
the Taxandrians and other Germans: St Lugdurus, Adalbertus and other Monks out
of the Monastery of Corbey, Pannonia, Sarmatia, Poland and Muscovy. St. Steven
Suec^a, St. Bruno Lituania, St. Albo Gascony, another St. Boniface Sclavonia,
St. Otho Pomerania, St. Winkelin Wandalia, and St. Austin with his good Monks
sent hither by St. Gregory made all our England Christian, wherein we now l^ve.
For though our learned and reverend Antiquary Mr. Broughton does think that St.
Austin and his holy Monks brought hither with them the rule of St. Gregory,
distinct from that of St. Bennet, yet that is of small concernment to my
purpose now in hand; especially since that rule and all the former rules in our
Britany, did unite at last in St. Bennets rule, as lesser lights in the body of
the Sun. And should I mention the holy Confessors, learned Writers, valiant
Martyrs, and vigorous Apostles, all those glorious men in the orders of St.
Francis, St. Dominick, St. Bruno, and other such like founders, bright stars
now out of our sight, yet shining in a higher heaven the day would fall me. My
voyage is now bent another way. And therefore great Servants of God, spirits
inkindled from heaven, brave virtuous hearts raised up even in your mortal
pilgrimage above mortality it self, let it suffice I love you. Time will bring
forth a better Pen to recount your names in a character more worthy of you than
mine is. I must go hence.

By this little Sir we may discern, if the God of this world has not utterly
blinded our eyes, that these holy orders were founded in the wisdom of God and
power of God, and not in Stillingfleetisme. For counsels of men come to naught;
but what is of God is lasting: as wise Gamaliel discoursed in a council of the
Jews The order of St. Dominick, St. Bruno, Romwall and St. Francis have been
six hundred years in the Christian world; St. Bennet almost twice as long; and
yet live. What is of God is powerful of it self, without any worldly helps of
force or subtilty. What is of God is servent and vigorous. What is of God,
however it may seem distastful at the first, becomes daily more delectable,
attractive, and pleasing. What is of God is zealous of God, loves and bends
toward God, thinks nothing hard, nothing tedious, nothing heavy, that is
undertaken for Gods cause. All time is well spent in his service, all
difficulties easy, all labor pleasant, all mortification comfortable, all our
members too few for his employment, all the blood in our vains too little to
shed for his love. And all this fervor and constancy, love of God and
amiableness to men, zeal and vigor, purity and perseverance were looked upon
and approved and imitated to their power by such as lived here in England in
the days of holy Catholic religion with all heavenly comfort: however now out
of sight it be all out of mind too; so much out of mind, that Dr. Stillingfleet
calling it fanaticisme expects an applause for his labor. The grand Turk a
great enemy of Christians, when he looked upon poor humble St. Francis (who
having come a long journey unto his conversion, made his way unto him by the
very majesty of his countenance and power of GOD that went along with him,
through all his Guard and Nobility about him) the grand Seigneur had so great a
reverence for the man, that dismissing all that were about him, he took him
into his closet and there converst with him many hours in private several
times. And thence at last he dismissed him with so much peace and honor, as if
he had been not a man but an Angel of God rather, appearing upon earth. And
this thing was never done to any in that Court, either before that time or
since. But the doctor never saw either St. Francis, or St. Dominick, St.
Bruno, or St. Bennet, or any of their orders: and therefore speaks of things
utterly unknown to him according to the malice of his own heart, be the truth
what it will. It was once a Christian lesson in England, that we should speak
of the dead nothing but good; and of the living nothing but truth. But he does
neither.

14. From hence the author proceeds to a new argument fit as he thinks to prove
the Church of Romes fanaticisme, which indeed so exalts her honor, that it
proves her the only powerful Judge that does suppress it. He tells us then a
long and punctual story of some disturbances and heresies that rose about three
hundred Years ago in the Christian world, who were the chief authors, when and
where they first appeared, how far they spread, what tumults they caused, what
Catholic Doctors opposed them, and what Pope at last censured and silenced
them. And this was the heresy of the Fratricelli, Begwini, and such like
others. And he is so exact in his narration, that he spends almost forty pages
in it, thereby to daz'e the Reader, and lead him on so far that he may not
reflect upon the impertinence of it. For heresies will rise, and the first
uprise of them must needs be amongst some who lived thitherto in the Catholic
Church. And if they will not hear and be quiet as the rest are, they will be
censured in the end; And this was all the business here. But the Doctor twits
at the Pope, for that he delayed his censure so long, still favoring the
Friars, amongst whom there were some great sticklers in that madness. Surely
Sir it is a part not of prudence only but justice too in any judge, to hear all
parties speak, and to defer an extreme sentence, till he see where it is most
due. And sometimes the commotion is so disorderly, wild or amb^guous that true
prudence will doubt, whither punishment be to be infl^cted on this or that
side, or perhaps on either; until a^ least it appear so seasonable, that it may
do good. But thus I say; If the^e men ^ere named, Almarious, Parma, Oliva,
Peter John, Geraldus, Sagarellus, Dulcinus, Hermanus, and other Fratricelli
were fanatics, or their opinions fanaticisme; then did the Church justly and
prudently so to silence them, that they are now no more extant in the world. If
they were not fanatics; then all the Doctors narration is but a tale of Tom
Thumb. I can tell the Doctor of another fanaticisme far greater and of more
dismal consequence than this, which rose up in the Catholic Church, but one
hundred Years ago, begun, promoted and spread over half Europe, by Martin
Luther an Augustine Friar, John Calvin a Priest, and as I think a Cannon too,
Swing ins who I am sure was both, Carolstade an archdeacon in Wittenburg,
Bucer a Dominican Friar, Lismanin a franciscan, Richerius a Carmelite. Alciat
and David George from Transylvania, Valentin Gentile from Italy, Castalio from
France; Peter Martyr and Ochyn from Florence, Alasco from Po^and, B^za from
Burgundy, Servetus from Spain, Melanchton from Germany as if the whole earth
had conspired to cast forth her dead, unto the infection and ruin of mankind.
These had been all Catholic hitherto, and Catholic Priests too; And what d^d
they now hold forth, and what did they pretend and teach? a perfect
fanaticisme, here described by the Doctor; and both the ways of it: both a
new enthusiastic way of Religion; and a resisting of authority under pretense
of it. They would have now no more obedience to their Prelates; which is the
very essence of fanaticisme; no obligation to the religious duties, wherein
they had hicherto been trained, no respect to Church laws, or rules of
discipline, fasts, or other observances. The best works were sins. Restitution
superfluous. Monasteries and religious retirement superstitious. Gods law
impossible to be kept. No oblation, no altar, no priesthood any more: And such
negatives innumerable. This was their new religion; the maddest that ever was
broched upon earth, and far short even of Pagan honesty. And how did they go
on? Even with point of pen and force of arms; defying and defaming all
Superiority upon earth. They razed and threw to the ground hundreds of fair
Monasteries and Churches, filled all Germany, where the fanaticisme began, with
ruins, perverted England, Ireland, Denmark, Swethland, and all the Islands here
abouts; and pillaged the whole Kingdoms. This fanatic heresy was opposed by
all the learned Catholics in Christendom, and censured, not by the Pope only,
but by a general council of Bishops gathered together round about, to apply
their helping hands; and stop the ruin. And yet has this one dangerous
infection been yet too strong for all endeavor. Other lesser fanaticismes have
yielded to the incessant care and vigilance of Catholic Prelates. But this of
Prot^stants holds out as yet, and so will still, till the temptation be removed
by the hand of heaven, which turns all men's hearts, when the Hour is fittest
for it.

15. After this, the Doctor gives us the story of St. Ignace Founder of the
Society. So contumeliously related; that his conversion to a stricter life, by
reading the lives of former Saints; his backwardness to human literature, his
patient sufferings, and travels to and fro, as his pious purposes led him, his
fasting and meditations, the examinations made of his rigorous course of life,
and various oppositions, his gathering Disciples and endeavor to have his rule
confirmed by the Supreme Bishop, are all made to sound conformably either to
Don Quixots Romance, or the esteemed madnesses of Quakers, who are, says he,
at least Grandchildren to the founder of the Jesuits. Truly these Quakers
either are, or must it seems be thought, an odd kind of people. They are
Benedictins, Franciscans, Dominicans, Jesuits; and all within the compass of
one Chapter. And yet they profess none of all this, nor know nothing of it. But
here Sir, you may perceive at least, how easy it is to make a pious and serious
matter to sound ridiculous or wild by the mere manner of relating it; which is
a great and necessary caution against the poison of slanderous tongues. What
M^ffeius, Ribbadanira, and Orlandius learned Jesuits write seriously of that
holy man, if not all to his honor, yet no part of it to his disparagement,
this by profane irony is travested into mockery. Thus do Jews tell the story
of our Christianity and its ^oly founder unto their Ch^ldren, in such a
Stilling fleetian way, that they are made to hate and scorn it all their life
after. But Jesuits have too much gravity and wisdom in them, to be la^^ght out
of countenance by a trifl^ng prevaricator. Let St. Ignace be as great a fool as
St. Francis, or yet as great as t^is Author can speak him, yet can he not deny
but he has wise and grave and learned children, whose books have helped him
many a t^me to make up his Sermon. When King Saul began to p^ophesy, the people
wondered at it, and asked one another, Is Saul also among the Prophets? unto
whom another replied, How came he there, Quis est pater cjus, who is his
father? giving the rest thereby to understand, that his prophesy was not genuin,
nor likely to be fixed and constant, because he was not a Prophet of prophets nor
had his spirit from them. So may we contrariwise think of this worthy society
of Jesuits, that such a stable gravity and fixed wisdom, as is in them all,
must needs be derived unto them from the spirit and statutes of their founder.
That is I think a true moral physiognomy which is given us by the Lyrick poet,
especially in a continual succession of men. Fortes creantur fortibus and
bonis. Est in juvencis, est in equis patrum Virtus, nec imbelles ferocem
Progenerant aquilam columbae. But let St. Ignace be never so simple, yet did he
ever submit unto his Superiors and Pastors, walking all his days in
Catholic religion, and had his rule of life confirmed by his Prelate; and
therefore could be no fanatic, according to the Doctors definition of it. He
neither invented any new way of religion, nor yet resisted authority under
pretense of it. But I think the doctor gave us that definition of fanaticisme,
in the beginning of this his Chapter, only to keep his discourse far enough off,
and never to touch it.

16. The Doctor proceeds now to declare how the very Catholic way of devotion
does promote enthusiasme. And what think you Sir, does he speak of here? not
one word of our daily psalms, hymns, canticles, anthems, sacred lessons,
doxologies, our Lords prayer or any other devotion prescribed by the Church,
and almost hourly in the hands and eyes of Catholic people: not a word of our
examination of our selves upon our knees, penitential petitions, or other our
obsecrations, thanksgivings deprecations or interpellations for our selves and
all other good Christian people, for Kings and prelates and all constituted in
authority over us, that we may live a peaceable and quiet life with all piety
and decent behavior. No mention of all this, which he knows as I perceive by
his talking of our Manuels and Breviaries, to be our Catholic devotion; no not
one word. What is it then he calls the Catholic way of devotion? Only one
spiritual book set forth by Mr. Cressy about twenty Years ago out of Father
Baxers works, wherein the Doctor finds some uncouth hard words which he cannot
understand: this is that which he calls Catholic devotion: and this is all the
way he shows that Catholic devotion promotes enthusiasme. Have not I reason
Sir to be weary in following after such a butterfly?

17. He tells us at last, That Papists are guilty of resisting authority under
pretense of religion, which he proves first by the principles of the Jesuitical
party which are destructive to government, and Secondly by this that the said
party are most countenanced in the Court of Rome. But he never tells us what
are these principles of the Jesuitical party, nor what this Jesuitical party
is. He only names Mariana and one or two others who should say that a Prince
excommunicated loses his Sovereignty; For which boldness they suffered worthily
both by their own body and others. Now how this discourse of our Doctor agrees
with his purpose all this while pretended here I cannot see. For it has not so
much as the color which appeared in some sort hitherto. His book is entitled A
Discourse of the idolatrous fanaticisme of the Church of Rome: but now he tells
us of a Jesuitical party and the Court of Rome. The Society of Jesuits, a
religious grave prudent family in the Catholic Church of God, this I have
heard of: and the Church of Rome, or Catholic Church I know. But what is this
Jesuitical party, and what this Court of Rome I understand not at all. The
Doctor pretended to speak of the Church and her religion, though indeed he
has never come near it yet. But now he speaks that which has not so much as
the sound of it. A Jesuitical party and a Court, what are these to our purpose
now in hand? There be parties and as many designs, signs, as there be men in
this world, although they should be all of one religion; and not all of them,
nay not perhaps one in a thousand directed according to Gospel or right reason
at all times, but for avarice rather, solicitude of this world, or sensuality.
Who can mend this? Or whose part is it to justify such things? No man that
defends a religion, can conceive how they may concern him; and he that opposes
a religion, if he were wise or honest, would never object them. And as for the
Court of Rome, I know no more of it then I do of the Court of France, Spain or
Constantinople. I have long since been told, that the designs of Courts and
Courtiers, are politic, high, ambitious, and close. And I have heard again
that they are of one and the same opinion all over the face of the earth, a
high elevated secret mysterious way, unknown to us peasants who are born in
sin, although it go under the name still of that rural religion which is
countenanced in their respective Kingdoms. How true these things be, and what
this way of theirs is I know not, nor do I love to speak of them at all. One
part of our duty I think and respect toward our Superiors is silence, and not
to speak at all of them. For we may conclude that God subjected all other
Creatures un^o man, because he created them dumb. And certainly enough may we
imagine that the opinions of Courts and Courtiers are very high, since one can
hardly meet any ordinary man, who would not have the whole earth under his
command and power, if he could get it: It is not long since we had here
threescore thousand of our own Protestant Countrymen armed in the field who
held all of them an opinion that the Kings Crown was at their disposal. So they
wrote, so they talked, and so they acted. And it is hard to say in what head
are the most presumptuous, ambitious, and lofty opinions. And our Doctor
himself who so contemptuously treats King Pepin, Charlemaign, and other
renowned Kings of the earth, nay all the Catholics in the world at once,
cannot be one of the humblest and modestest of men. Court of Rome, and
Jesuitical party, sounds in my ears like a thorough Bass, and treble Violyn
playing together; the one strikeing three long humming Notes about the double
Gamut; the other descanting thereon in short and quicker graces. The Court of
Rome I something perceive methinks what it should be, but not what it is: But
the Jesuitical party with all its graces, I neither know what it is, nor what
it should be. That worthy Society of Jesuits may be considered either according
to their religion, or Schools, or personal designs. According to their religion
they are as other Catholics be, in the same worship, same Sacraments, same
Altar, same Priesthood, same faith, same hope to come. As to their Schools,
although they have I believe five hundred Readers of the Chair, and perhaps as
many public defensions in every three years space: yet did I never hear of any
such thing either taught or defended in their Schools, which is here put upon
the Jesuitical party: And yet it is nothing to our purpose if it were. But as
to the personal designs of them or any others we can no more dive into them,
then into the several wandering thoughts and purposes of men, museing daily in
London-streets about their affairs. And one man or other thus museing amiss
amongst the Jesuits, can no more be called the Jesuitical party, then such a
one here in England be termed the English party. Mariana I am sure has been
soundly checked amongst them and other Catholics for his fault here spoken of.
And if the Court or Courtiers of Rome have any fancy, that they are higher than
Kings, and by their excommunication can render them Kings no more, as this
Doctor here speaks, this may argue indeed that they are a high minded people.
But Courtiers do not walk so exactly according to our Christian religion, that
this can prove that vanity of theirs, to be any part of it. Catholic Kings who
have been here in England well nigh twenty since the Conquest, more among the
Saxons, and others not a few amongst our ancient Britains; and the present
Catholic Kings of France, Spain, the Emperor, German Princes and others have
and do all know well enough, that such a fancy is no part of our Catholic
religion. Nor did our King Henry the Eighth who first left it off, express any
such cause or reason for it: The times would be very good and happy if all the
words and actions of every particular man were answerable to his holy faith.
But this is not to be expected in this evil world. And to call that religion
which is done or spoken contrary unto it, is a very great injury and injustice.
Our holy religion teaches us to observe and obey our Kings and Superiors, as
Gods Vicegerents upon earth, though they be Infidels and Pagans, and rather to
lay down our lives for them, then suffer them to be hurt. And this is nothing
but the very law of Nature antecedent to any religion whatsoever; and holds
good although there were neither heaven nor hell, nor any reward or punishment
to come. And what power can any man upon earth have to take that away which he
never gave, nor ever had. He that creates can only annihilate. So long as kings
are Catholics, the Pope prays for them. And if they cease to be so, he is
nothing to them any more. And yet are they the same they were, in all their
royalty and power uncontroulably. If the King of France should receive the
Garter from our King of England, he is thought to be so long his friend, as he
is pleased to wear it. But if he throw it off, he is King of France still, as
much as ever he was. I know not what the Court or Courtiers of Rome may think
or say in this business: For what the Doctor here tells us about the Irish
remonstrance, is a personal business, and not so circumstanced that one can
draw any general conclusion or position from it. But if they be only so much as
said either to have conceived or countenanced any such opinion looked upon by
all Catholics and good Christians upon earth, as ungrounded, falls and impious,
it behooves them I should think, both for the public good, honor of Catholic
religion and their own credit to see it censured with all speed, that the
progress of Christianity be not stopped by it. For no Pagan King will venture
at a promise of everlasting felicity with the hazard of his Crown at the
pleasure of one man whom he never saw nor knows. Sure I am if any such opinion
had been heard of when Christianity was first planted in Kingdoms it had never
found footing in this world. And if it be now countenanced, the progress of
Christianity is at an end.

I doubt not, but that a Cotholick writer may in his controversy about
religion, if so he pleas, defend an opinion also of any one or other who has
professed the Catholic religion which he maintains. But this is more then any
one needs to do. For religion is quite another thing, derived from another,
author and original, established in another manner, no less differing from an
opinion, then a fixed star in the firmament from the mist or fog ariseing from
the earth. Faith is one known thing, but opinions are innumerable and endless.
If the various opinions, entertained in men's minds but one only day in any City
of England were all faithfully recorded at night, they would exhibit to a
Reader a most prodigious spectacle. Opinions are infinitely various, infinitely
changable, infinitely contradictory and absurd in the world. Nor may we doubt
but that thousands of them are contrary both to religion and law. Angry rageing
men and wanton women, unfaithful servants, and di obedient children, thieves and
murderers, cheats and liars, can we think when they act according to their own
disordered passions, that they hold not then an opinion, that in such
circumstances it is expedient for them so to do? Wicked sinners hold wicked
opinions, be the religion what it will. Gainsay and blame them in their heat;
and it will soon appear, that they are stiff and resolved in that their opinion
by the very fury of their wrath. And what will not sycophants and flatterers
either say or write, to pleas the mind of those on whom they depend, even
against their own. Rules of law and religion are fixed and stable and ever the
same. But opinions are moveable as water: and never right but when conformable
to a right rule of some good law: and how far they are conformable, so far are
they right and no more. And therefore it is a madness in any one who undertakes
to write against the standard of a religion, to object instead of that,
opinions of men. For first one man may have an opinion to day and write it also
in a book; and yet few years after, nay perhaps very few days, change his mind.
Secondly the opinion of one man may be gainsaid by a thousand as wise as he,
who live under the same law and religion. Thirdly an opinion in a book is
indeed nothing at all in the world, but a mere p^atonick idea, till it be
reduced to some real existence by circumstances which actuate it and make the
action really to be: and some opinions are worse then nothing. For which reason
all the multitude of opinions which sill up the books of learned Casuists may
be exercises of wit indeed; but no guids can they be unto action. The direction
of a liveing Oracle and Counselor who can penetrate all present
circumstances, and prescribe by his wisdom on which side is then most of good
and least of evil; which is the only rule that directs a wise counselor what
to determine, this only is our guide in doubts. Wherefore the great Princes of
the earth recurre not to books in their difficulties, but use the wisdom of
their counsel, wise and grave men who must hear all things that can be said on
both sides, hic and nunc, and ponder them deeply before a judgment can result.
And it often happens amongst them, that they will determine in one year that
action to be rejected, which was in another time expedient and good, only upon
change of circumstances. It is in my mind a vain labor to write long
discourses about probable opinions as some do. For if we speak of an opinion in
a strict sense, an opinion tending to action, and yet separated or abstracted
from all circumstances of person, time, place, means, motives, events, and
connexions with ill or welfare, which no writer of a book can see; such an
opinion is nothing at all in the world but a mere fantosme, more apt to mislead
then secure any action of life. And he that goes to a book to learn there, how
he is to act in any business he is about, goes like one blind man to another
blind guide to lead him. For this reason all ancient good Christians ever had
their consciences g^ided by living Oracles of men; who laying the general rule
of religion before them, still gave that for safest counsel, which all
circumstances considered came nearest to the intent and scope of Gospel. Truly
I cannot but grieve to see men talk so much as they do now adays, about
opinions. For we are to hold nothing but Gospel and our holy Christian
tradition, and no opinions at all in religious affairs. And if opinions do
rise therein, as needs they must sometimes, by variation of circumstances, that
is still to be rejected, which most swarves from the intent of holy Gospel, or,
(which is all one) has least in it of good and most of ill. Let not only three
men but three millions of men hold any thing to the breach of this rule, it is
not to be heeded. They who write books of moral actions and conscience, can
know nothing either of the person actually concerned, or of the various
circumstances which must bring this action into a just existence (let them in
their abstracted aerie problems say what they please) nor innumerable events
thereof; although there be some opinions that no circumstance can justify. Nor
do Catholic Kings and Princes ever heed at all, what people talk in their
Schools and Academies, unless it proceed to action. If any do act well, he has
peace: and if any do ill, death is at his door, however opinions go. But of
this enough. Doctor Still. threatens us here with a more accurate examination
of these things from the author who wrote against the Apology for Catholics.
I know not who that Author is. But I can tell him thus much, that the right
honorable Author of that charitable Apology stands now actually ready with
his Pen in hand to entertain him as he has once already done. And that
Protestant writer will find him still a main strong Castle not to be blown
down, or so much as shaken by his impertinent waves. All after ages shall make
honorable mention of that noble man, when his adversary shall be swallowed up
in the deep of oblivion Not only Catholics but many worthy Gentlemen even
amongst our Protestant countrymen have grieved in their hearts to see us lie
open to so many grievous defama^ions of men. But this noble Person ventured to
speak and write an Apology for us. And if no man should be valorous, truth ^ow
kept under lock and key for a whole hundred years, would never appear, as it
is, and in its own shape.

18. Sir one mistake of mine committed in my first packet, wherein I told you
that this piece of Fanaticisme was Doctor Stillingfleet's own proper
invention, I must here revoke. For it is not so. I wondered indeed, that in his
arguments against the Church of Rome, set down in the beginning of his book,
wherein is mention made of that Churches Idolatry, hindrances of a good life,
and divisions, there was not there any one word of Fanaticisme which here fills
up a whole chapter in his book, compiled as himself speaks in defense of those
arguments. But I was inlighten'd in this my doubt by a mere chance. For meeting
with a Protestant Stationer, I asked him if he ever heard of an Author called
Foolis or Foulis, who is quoted once or twice by Doctor Stillingfleet. O quoth
he presently, Foolis is an ass; he printed last year an ecclesiastical
history, wherein he says that Papish Saints were fanatics. I had the book, but
threw it out of my shop: It is sold now up and down the streets for wast paper.
I considered then with my self, that the Doctour's arguments were made as
himself speaks, two Years ago: this his book in defense of them is but now
printed, and Foolis his book a Year ago came forth. My riddle is now out. The
Doctor never dreamed of fanaticisme, till he learned it of Foolis. And yet
does he not quote this Foulis in all his Chapter of Fanaticisme, though he does
in another; ambitious it seems to have the honor of the invention ascribed to
himself alone. Nor is it hard, since Foolis his book is become wast paper, to
find out, not the Master only from whom our Doctor learned his lesson of
fanaticisme, but the very chair also whereon he sat, when first he learned it;
fith bookish men are very apt to peruse the wast paper they are then to use.
But it was a lucky chance for Doctor Stillingfleet. He applied therefore his
wast paper; and saying in his heart, Here is a gallant matter for a whole new
Chapter in my book, he rose and tied up his breeches.

TO KATHOLIKO.
DIVISIONS.
UNto this fifth Chapter I shall speak Sir very little: because it is wholly
parergicall, and besides his or what ought to be his purpose. A Reader who
looks upon his book conceives him to speak of divisions which are contrary to
their unity of faith. And yet the Doctor by a multitude of stories, which make
up this chapter, exemplifies only and declares divisions that have been in
several times and places, contrary to the unity of affections; in matter of
honor, wealth, and power; some in Italy, some in France, some in England, some
in America, some about their School conceptions, some about power and
jurisdiction, liberty and freedom, and the like. So that all that has happened
in the Catholic world the space of a thousand years, contrary to that peace,
humility, love, tenderness, justice, mercy, patience, prudence, which religion
requires, so much of it as he found related in Catholic authors to his hand,
is the miscellan hodg podg of this his fifth chapter, called Divisions, not
ever intended by any of those Catholics authors unto Dr. Still. purpose, unto
which the said stories are wholly improper.

1. The story of the wars and differences in Italy nine hundred years ago about
Church Lands, managed on one side by Charles Martell, King Pepin, Charlemaign,
Ludovicus Pius, Lotharius and others, for the Popes right against Emperors and
their Lieftennants on the other. And here by the way we may note that
Charlemaign or Charles the great, was a notable champion not for the faith only
but for the temporals also of the Roman Bishop* even to his death; which I gave
the Doctor notice of, when I spoke of the Council of Frankford, and himself
now here acknowledges it.

2. The story of the quarrels between Henry fourth Emperor, and Pope Gregory
Hildebrand, about an age afterward, and the various troubles inferred upon the
said Emperor thereby.

3. The story of P. Urban and Paschall and others then sitting in the Sea
apostolic; and Emperor Rodulphus, Lotharius, Conradus; and the great wars and
feuds between them unto the great affliction and misery of mankind.

4. The story of the Schisms that happened in the ninth age about the election
of Popes, wherein successively they deposed, contradicted, judged and censured
one another, unto the unexpressable scandal and grief of the whole world. And
all these above named histories are gathered out of Alphonsus Ciaconus,
Baronius, Luitprandus, Morinus, Papirius Massonus, Onuphrius, Sigonius,
Nauclerus, Sigebertus, Otto Frisingensis, Conradus, Rubeus, Valesius,
Sirmondus, Sabellicus, Blondus, Nithardus, Hincmar Guicciardin, Platina all
Catholic historians, not one, that I know, excepted.

5. The story of Friars and Monks exemption from Episcopal jurisdiction, and
the troubles caused thereby amongst the Clergy, and the instability of Roman
Prelates, sometimes confirming and then again recalling those their
privileges. This happened in the thirteenth age about four hundred years ago:
some Doctors defending the said Religious exemptions and privileges, as St.
Bonaventure, St. Thomas, Jacobus, Abbas, Cluniacensis; and some opposing them,
as Dr. Saint Amor and the University of Paris, Armacanus, Durandus,
Mimatensis, Petrus de Vineis and Aegidius Romanus.

6. The story of two or three Priests here in England about threescore years
ago, who having boarded together at Wisbich with some of the Society very
peaceably for a time, at last fell out and parted with much scandal and heats
one against another.

7. The story of Richard Smith Bishop of Calcedon opposed here in England about
forty years ago by some religions.

8. The story of a bitter contest between some regulars and their bishop in the
Philippin Islands, and again in Angelopolis in America about twenty years ago.

9. The story of the many differences amongst the Schoolmen, not to be ended
either by Pope or Councels, although one of the contradictories must needs be
false.

These are his stories, some of them dismal enough, and yet all of them I think
as true, as I am certain they are impertinent. And ever and anon the Doctor
cries out where is their unity here, where is now their infallibility so much
talked of! whereas indeed the stability of religion and Gods infallible
protection of his Church never appeared in greater splendor, then it did in
those dismal dark times, when such as should have been Pastors, proved wild
beasts rather and wolves to destroy the flock. For even in those worst times,
did the Catholic Church most flourish in unity and Christian piety all over
the world. And through all these tempests, and many more yet greater, has this
ship of the Church passed on now almost seventeen hundred years; and yet
continues. To keep it safe and whole, not only from outward opposition of
Infidels, but even from the many inward and domestic scandals, strong enough
to crack asunder the very sides of it, and dissipate it into dust, is a power
and virtue truly divine, which can proceed from nothing but Gods great favor
and love and blessing upon it. We had never heard so much of the power of our
Lord Jesus nor known it so well, if a tempest had not rose and endangered the
ship. And all that I think can be judiciously gathered from these many dismal
stories and miserable scandals, is only this, that in all such distresses and
ever we are still to trust in God, and in the virtue of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who has promised to be with us even to the worlds consummation. And if he be
with us, we shall be well, be what will against us, whether it rise within the
Church or fall upon it from without. The Catholic Church must taste all the
trials and temptations which may render her conformable to her Lord and head,
both from friends and foes. And it is enough that he watches over us who never
sleeps, and suffers no more to befall us then will redound to his own glory in
the end.

But I wonder much, how the Doctor amongst the many differences and broils
here recorded, could omit to relate the differences betwixt the Kings of France
and Spain now daily sounding in our ears, unto the sad and woeful ruin of so
many thousand people. But he is subtle, and thinks perhaps, if he should speak
of such public things now in present action, that every one would be able to
tell him presently, that the said discourse is nothing to the purpose, for that
the said Kings and their whole Kingdoms are all in a perfect unity of their
Catholic faith for all that. And therefore he judges it a wiser part, to hunt
farther from home, as foxes do; where ordinary Readers cannot so easily discern
his impertinency. If he do speak any thing near our own times, it must be the
wranglings of some obscure men unknown to us; if he relate the differences of
greater men, they must be such as are far removed off, four, five, nine hundred
years ago; and then he hopes that his Reader may not so easily discover his
fraud. For the same reason he omits also to speak of the great wars and
differences between the house of York and Lancaster here in England, which
brought with them as dismal effects, as any here recorded by him; as also the
Wars of England with France unto the utter depopulation in a manner of that
whole Kingdom. And yet did their unity of faith stand all the while inyiolable.
And this truth, because it is known to every Reader, therefore will not the
subtle Doctor make any mention of these things. But I cannot so well tell, why
he should omit the story of the Arrian heresy, which disturbed not one Kingdom
only, but all the whole Christian world, Europe, Asia and Africa, so far as the
very Sun in the Firmament looked upon it. And those differences were indeed
about a point of faith (which nothing is here in all the differences related by
the Doctor) Secondly, they brought with them unspeakable molestations and
damages all the world over, far further then these his related differences ever
reached: Thirdly, they lasted four hundred Years, whereas most of these his
differences were little and light, and personal or national, and none of them
so lasting as the troubles of Arrianism. So peevish, obstinate and self-willed
are men, even against all rules of Christian piety and moderation, when
concupiscence and passion are once engaged. And yet was that Arrian dispute so
quaint and subtle, that the world hardly discerns, where the difference lay,
which so much incensed all the Catholic Prelates in the world, and set in such
a deadly fewd so many great and holy men on both sides, who had guided their
Flocks before in all tranquillity and peace. But what reason soever the Doctor
had for his omission of this Arrian heresy, which is more pertinent than any of
all his stories put together; yet might he not methinks have utterly forgot
the famous and renowned story of Robin Hood, who was a noble person and well
beloved of his Country: and yet outlawed by his King who professed the same
Catholic religion with him, was forced to confine himself to woods and
deserts, in much hunger and distress, and daily dangers of his life. If he had
bethought himself well, he might have printed here the whole History of England
and France, Spain and Italy, Germany, Poland and Greece. And it would have made
him a fine long chapter. Especially if he had inserted all the wranglings and
lawsuits, that have happened amongst Christians in all the said Kingdoms from
their first conversion, for above a thousand years, unto this last age, when
Protestancy first showed its head. But in all that time, there is not an
Author upon earth, who mentions any wars, any wranglings, any division of
Protestants. For neither Caesar nor Pompey, however mischievous made any
troubles, before they were born: nor did any writer take notice of those
turbulent warriors from the time of Picus first King of the Latins unto their
days; which was little less than the same space of time that Protestants were
in a deep silence and peace, all over the whole Christian world, fifteen
hundred years. I have no more now to say but dear Sir farewell, and continue
still to love and pray for

Your friendly Postillator, J. V. C.

FINIS.

