AN EPISTLE TO The Author Of the ANIMADVERSIONS UPON FIAT LVX. In excuse and
justification of Fiat Lux against the said Animadversions.

Psalm. 120. Quid detur tibi aut quid apponatur tibi ad linguam dolosam?
Sagittae potentis acutae, cum carbonibus desolatoriis.
Cum his qui oderunt pacem eram pacificus: cum loquebar illis impugnabant me
gratis.
1663.

An Epistle to the Author of the Animadversions upon Fiat Lux.
SIR,
I Was in my Journey in the North, far enough from London, when your
Animadversions upon Fiat Lux came forth. Nor did I ever set eye upon them, till
my return in February, about half a year after: which I tell you Sir, to excuse
my silence. And now in brief: For your labor I thank you; for your endeavor I
pity you; for your purpose I pardon you: that being as I beleev, intended for
Gentlemen's satisfaction, the other for Fiat Lux his confutation, this for the
Authors confusion.

I may not go about to reply unto you; because this would be against the very
end and principles of Fiat Lux it self, which speaks forth nothing more then
this, That Controversies about Religion are vain and fruitles. And lest this
should not be able to detain me from any such reply, you add your own threats,
That if I shall dare to write again, you will make me know what manner of man
you are. However Sir, let me crave leave to thank you for the pastime your
Animadversions have given me since my return.

But Sir, you mistake the very drift and design of Fiat Lux, which makes you to
err ever and anon, and almost continually throughout your whole Book, whiles
you take that as spoken absolutely which is only said upon an hypothesis of our
present condition here in England, which is distraction, disputes, and wars, in
order to a contrary end of unity, love, and concord, designed by Fiat Lux. By
virtue of this capital mistake, what by me is said of the obscurity of God,
Nature, and Providence, is with you impertinent; that of Light and Spirit,
impious; that of Plea of Parties, frivolous; that of Reason, dissonant and to
no purpos; that of Scripture blasphemous; that of the History of Religion, no
less inconsequent than untrue. In a word, this thing, that thing, every thing,
a wild, dishonest illiterate discourse.

Some would wonder, that he who writes in consutation of a Book, should be
himself the only man that understands it not? But the reason is apparent: It is
your only advantage to mistake. The whole discourse of Fiat Lux chained
together, one part with another, from that which is supposed to that which is
designed, would breath so much of charity and sobernes, that my Commentatour
could not have told how to make any mad versions upon it.

It is not yet too late. Now that you have finished your Animadversions, or
Comment, or Notes upon it, you may do well to take my Book again into your
hands, read it calmly, and understand it.

That which you speak so frequently of Fiat Lux his ignorance, is not
altogether amiss: for he pretends not much to learning, although he knows what
he says. But yet Sir, if you had defied and villified him with less violence,
and more seldom, and not so universally in every point of History, Language,
and Philosophy, nor just then when you had least cause, it had been more for
your honor.

And in my mind you too much forget your self, when you recount so often with
regret and anger, that some Gentlemen of the Land should it seems, through their
own inconsideration, have any liking of a Book which you judge so slight, aerie,
vain, fallacious, and simple: As if they had none, and you all the judgment of
discerning. Gentlemen, Sir, must be allowed a sens of Religion as well as
Ministers; and their portion of reason must not therefore be less, because their
Blood is more noble, the company they keep more accomplished, and their
education better. They have the body, although they wear not the Cloak of
Religion; and masters they are of their own reason, though not of yours. This
is one difference between Catholic Countries and ours, that there the Clergy
man is only regarded for his virtue, and the power he has received, or is at
least believed to have received from God in the great ministry of our
Reconciliation. And if he have any addition of learning besides, it is looked
upon as a good accidental Ornament, but not as any essential complement of his
Profession: so that it often happens without any wonderment at all, that the
Gentleman Patron is the learned man, and the Priest his Chaplain of little or
no science in comparison; but here in England our Gentlemen are disparaged by
their own Black Coats, and not suffered to use their judgments in any kind of
learning, without a gibe from them. The Gentleman is reasonles, and the
scribbling Cassock is the only Scholar: he alone must speak all, know all, and
only understand.

I cannot but smile to see you turn so dexterously every thing that is said in
Fiat Lux, to your own use. His discourse of innocence and moderation, gives you
occasion to speak and amply dilate of wars, murders, adulteries, lies,
hypocrisies, villainies: And when he cries, Peace, Peace, it is motive enough
for you to cry, Guns and Daggers. You rave and rage against him and the whole
earth, you load your pen and pages with the tyrannies, desolations, disorders
have been aforetime in the world, not heeding that you had not so much as heard
at this day of any such abuses, if their holy and renowned Clergymen, who
still declaimed against the vices of their times, had not left them upon
record, or so much as considering, that even now in these best times of
Reformation are as grand disorders in all kinds as ever were in the worst
times of Popish corruption: nay there was never any crow or magpy so pecked and
cawed upon the back of a sheep, as you do upon Fiat Lux, and if he do but stir
or wag, you threaten, if I understand you right, to peck out his eyes. And all
this, because Fiat Lux endeavors to show, that animosities about matters of
Religion are groundless, prejudicial to peace and neighborhood, ruinous,
desolatory, endless, and consequently vain, fruitles, and sinful, (there may
indeed be some advantage on the Defendants side, which is not in the Plaintiff
or Actour, but this at present I am not to take notice of) nay finally, that
they have ever don much harm in Kingdoms, but never good. In all this Sir, you
do like your self, you love nois and whirlwinds, and when you hear of Peace,
prepare your self to Battle: so ill do you understand the sound of a retreat,
or, because it suits not with your ends and inclinations, will not.

But all this discourse of Fiat Lux, tends, say you, to Popery. A fearful thing,
and ungrateful news to Ministers; for whose foolish, endless, and ungrounded
quarrels, we have lately engaged our honor, peace, livelihood, lives, and all
that is dear unto us; and yet we are still, but where we were before we began:
nay, ten times farther off from any reconcilement, unity, or satisfaction then
before? And such success have all wars ever had, where the alarm was given in
the Pulpit. But why must it tend to Popery? Because Fiat Lux is bold to say,
that Popery in its own likeness is not so ugly as we imagine it. Lord! what a
strange thing is this, that either Fiat Lux or any else should presume to say,
that we in England, or other Nations may be carried by the reports of some
interested men, to think wors of a thing then it may deserv; especially
considering that we com all to Church to hear Gods Word, and there meet with a
man, who in the first opening of his lips, cries, Hearken my Beloved to the
word of the Lord; and so having with that airy honeycomb sweetened the edges of
our ears, pours into them afterward what poison of his own conceived interests
he pleases; all which we his dearly beloved let down greedily into our hearts,
as that precious word of the Lord, which he at first proclaimed. By which
fallacies, we have been in the time of these our late wars, so far inveigled (I
speak to men now alive, who all know I speak true) that it became then a most
dangerous thing, yea, treason it self, to say, God save the King, who was by
this our Pulpit rhetoric made as odious then throughout the Land, as Popery,
what ever it be, ever was or can be? And are not neighbors thus abused daily
almost in every thing? where is that man who has not by such like means been
one time or other induced, to think amiss, even of his most innocent and
dearest friends, till himself by trial found the contrary. O but God forbid,
you will say, that ever we should com by trial to know what Popery is. Sir, may
it be far from us, so long as heaven pleases: But in the interim, what harm can
it be to us to mitigate our passions! which if there be no mistake, are
prejudicial notwithstanding to our own peace; and if a mistake there should be,
are double injurious, and desperately sinful before God and man. Oh but mistake
there can be none! Sir, let me tell you roundly. By your own Book of
Animadversions I do as clearly see, as ever I beheld Sun in the Firmament, that
you do not your self understand what Popery is; even no more, then the poorest
meanest peasant in the Parish. But who is able to make this good and clear unto
you? no body Sir, so long as you are in passion; in a calm of indifferency,
your very self. Nor could I without that serenity, have been ever able to
discern it. But yet, there is one thing more, which will hinder your
acknowledgment, although you should com to know it. It is their interest to
justify themselves, and yours to condemn them.

Had not you with your threats so much frighted me from any thought of writing
any more, I could I think my self (who am in your judgment one of the greatest
ingrams in the Land) make it yet appear that the present Popish Religion, if to
pleas you they will give me leav to call it so, is not only less ugly then we
conceive it, but far more innocent and amiable then I have made it. And, if
there were not so much as one Catholic, or Romanist, or Papist upon earth, yet
so far am I from any interest herin, that in that judgment I would
notwithstanding die alone. Nor had I set before my eyes any other end in that my
Fiat of moderation, against which you write your hot Animadversions, then the
peace and welfar of my Country, which under the pretended shadow of Popery,
inflamed by the alarms of Vicars and their Wives, for whom we fight as it were
pro aris and focis, hates and mischiefs, strikes and destroys one another
without end. And yet (which is a strange thing) whilst every one conceits
himself to fight for Purity of Gospel against Popery, they fight all for Popery
against Purity of Gospel. And this you cannot deny, if you will but aver what
in your Book of Animadversions you do your self so frequently assert, that what
good soever the Papists or Roman Catholics either do or have amongst them, they
have and do the same as Christians and not as Papists; and that Popery is it
self nothing else, but pride, interest, ambition, tyranny, worldly respects,
thirst of blood, affectation of Dominion, etc. As on the other side, grace
charity and peace is, I am sure, the pure quintessence of Gospel, and the very
extract of true Religion. Either then I had reason to tell you, that you
understand not what Popery is; or if you do, you must needs acknowledge, that
those who here in England betwixt the years of 1640. and 1660. with guns and
daggers, as you often phrase it, with field rhetoric and pulpit cannon,
subverted all before them, even Church and State too, let them call themselves
Puritans, Independents, Presbyterians, or what they pleas, were all of them by
this your own rule, as arch Papists as ever trod upon the earth. Nor is it of
concernment, so they have the reality of the thing, whence they may borrow
their name; whether some man upon earth be their Pope, or whether the Devil be
himself their ghostly father.

And I fear Sir (give me leave to express my fears) I do very deeply fear, that
you were your self some part of that dismal tempest, which in the last years of
our woeful Anarchy overbore all before it, not only Church and State, but
reason, right, honesty, all true Religion, and even good nature too. The very
flashings of your pen move me to this thought. The whole physiognomy of your
Book speaks the hot and fiery spirit of the Author. First, you cannot abide to
hear of moderation, it is with you most wicked, hypocritical, and devilish,
especially as it coms from me. And for this one thing Fiat Lux suffers more
from you, then for all the contents of the Book put together. My reason is your
passion; my moderation inflames your wrath; and you are therefore stark wild,
because I utter so much of sobriety. Secondly, your so frequent talking of sword
and blood, fire and faggot, guns and daggers do more then show, you have not
yet let go those hot and furious imaginations. And in a phrensy you upbraid
your adversary with that, which succeeded not as you would have had it in your
self. Thirdly, your prophetic assurance so often inculcated, that if you could
but once com to whisper me in the ear, I would plainly acknowledge, either that
I understand not myself what I say, or if I do, beleev it not, givs a fair
character of those fanatic times, wherein ignorance and hypocrisy prevailed
over worth and truth; whereof if your self were any part, it is no wonder you
should think that I or any man else, should either speak he knows not what, or
beleev not what himself speaks. It was the proper badg of those times; when
after the alarm sounded in the Pulpit, that our people thereupon went forth in
troops to battle, neither did the peasant understand nor the man in black
beleev, although the sound rung generally in their ears, that it was the sword
of the Lord and of Gideon, which they brandisht against the loyal band, their
foes. Fourthly, your pert assertion so often occurring in your Book, that there
is neither reason, truth, nor honesty in my words, is but the overflowing of
that former intemperat zeal: and the more frequent it occurs, the less
approbation it will find. Fifthly, your sharp and frequent menaces, that if I
write or speak again, I shall hear more, find more, feel more, more to my
smart, more then I imagine, more then I would, rellishes too much of that
insulting humor our poor bleeding Land then groaned under, the many years of
our anarchical confusion. Sixthly, the absence of your name in the frontispiece
of your book, which I have never before observed in all my life of any
Protestant writer, that has ever in my time set forth a book here in England
against Popery, givs no small suspicion that the Author of our Animadversions
is no such Protestant as he would be thought to be. Lastly, that I may omit
other special reasons, your other general trick of charging me then most of all
with fraud, ignorance, and wickedness, when in your own heart you find me most
clear from any such blemish, thereby to put a vail upon your own cause, which
would otherways be disparaged, makes me smell a fox, a notorious one; sic notus
Ulysses. This has been too often acted here in England to be soon forgotten.
The better the cause, the louder still was the cry against those who stood for
it, that the blustering nois of calumnies might drown all report of their
innocence. And by all this I cannot Sir but suspect, that if the description of
Popery your Animadversions gives us, be right, you are a Papist your self, a
great one, and no true Protestant. But as it is, so let it be.

Thus much I only tell you, that you may see I am neither neglective of your
book, nor idle; but have perused and read it over. And although what for the
threats of your Animadversions, and what for the reasons of my own Fiat Lux, I
may not enter into controversies: yet I hope I may let you know that I have
seen your work. And that you may the better credit me, I will give you a short
account of it, first in general, then in particular.

All the whole design of Fiat Lux you do utterly mistake, throughout all your
book of Animadversions; so that you conceiv that to be a Controversy, which is
none; that to be absolutely asserted, which is but hypothetically discoursed;
that to be only for one side, which is indifferently for all; although I speak
most for them that are most spoken against, and am in very deed absolutely
against all speaking, quarrelling, disputing about Religion. If you will but
have patience to hear my purpose and design, which to all men not interested
and blinded with a prejudice, is clear enough relucent in the whole context of
Fiat Lux, what I say will easily appear to your self. Fiat Lux says one thing,
and supposes it, another thing he desires and aims at: that he dislikes, this
commends. We are at this day at variance about Religion, this Fiat Lux
supposes? but it were better to have peace, this he aims at and desires. And
both these things are intermingled up and down in my Book, according to that
small faculty that God has given me, though not according to the usual method
of Books now adays. Here Sir in few words you have the whole sum of Fiat
Lux. And I hope you will grant that that to be the scope of my book, which I
made it for. That we are now at varience is most clear and certain, by me
supposed, and not to be denied. And that it were better to have peace, is as
absolutely expedient, as the other is evidently true. These then being things
both of them which no man can resist; either by denying the one, or disliking
the other; I thought them better intermingled than set apart, and with more
reason to be supposed then industriously proved. Yet to superinduce a
disposition unto peace, my only work was to demonstrate an uselesnes, an
endlesnes, an unprofitablenes of quarrels, which I labored quite through my
book, beginning it with an intimation of our quarrels, which S. Paul calls the
fruits and works of the flesh; and ending it with a commendation of charity,
which is the great fruit and blessing of Gods holy Spirit. Now the easier to
persuade my Countrymen to a belief both of the one and the other; first, is
insinuated in Fiat Lux both the ill grounds and worst effects of feuds; then is
the plea of parties specified; their probabilities acknowledged; and lastly an
impossibility of ever bringing our debates to a conclusion, either by light, or
spirit, reason or scriptur texts, so long as we stand separated from any
superior judicative power unto which all parties will submit, is I think with
a strong probability, if not demonstrative evidence concluded. And therefore is
it thought by Fiat Lux to be more rational and Christian like, to leav these
endless, groundles, and ruinous contentions; and resign our selves to humility
and peace. This is the design and whole sum of my book. And although I speak
up and down here for Papists, there for Protestants, elsewhere for Presbyterians
or Independents, commonly out of the very discourses they make for themselves,
yet do I not defend either their ways or their arguments. Nor do I teach any
doctrine at all, or hold there any opinion; but only giv to understand in that
one little book, what is largely discoursed in a hundred; That all parties do
make out to themselves such a probability, which as it stands joined with the
actours resolution, and separated from any superior visible power to which
they will submit, can never be subdued. And has not long experience proved
this as true as any thing else? What is there in Fiat Lux that can be denied? Is
it not evident that we are now at variance? and too long indeed have been. Is
it not also clear, that peace, charity, and neighborhood is better than
variance, dissension, and wars? do not parties strongly plead for themselves, so
far persuaded each one that he is in the right, that he will not yield that
truth is with any but himself. Is not all this evident? I am sure it is; and
all England will witness it. And if any one should be able to evince, that any
reasonings made in Fiat Lux either for Papists, Protestants, or others, be not
certain, or perhaps not probable, yet he does nothing, except he be able to
prove likewise, that they are not probable to Fiat Lux, or to those that use
them, whether Protestants or Papists; which he can no more do, than he can pull
a star out of the firmament. I say Sir again, and mark I pray you what I say:
If you should chance to evince, that the reasons brought by Fiat Lux either for
the doctrine or practices of Papists or others, be either not probable or
untrue, yet is your labor all in vain, except you be able to demonstrate
likewise, that they are not probable to Fiat Lux, or to Papists and others who
use those reasons: which you can no more do, then any thing that is absolutely
impossible. By this time Sir, you may discern how hard it is to deal with Fiat
Lux, and impossible to confute him: since he speaks nothing, but what is as
clearly true and evident, as what we see at midday. Nor do I in this any way
exalt the ability of the Author, whom you are pleased so much and frequently
to disable. A Tomfool may say that, which all the wise men in the world cannot
gainsay: as he did, who said the Sun was above half an hour high at noon. It
was Fiat Lux his fortune rather then chois, to utter words which will no sooner
be read than acknowledged. And it was your misfortune Sir, to employ your
greater talents in refuding evident truths, perhaps for no other reason, but
because they issued from the pen of a man, who is not so great a friend to
faction as you could wish. And although you proceed very harsh and furiously;
yet am I verily persuaded, you now discern, though too late for your credit,
that you had all this while, according to our English proverb, good Mr. Doctor,
a wrong sow by the ear. Thus far in general. Now briefly to give you some
account in particular.

You spend four Chapters and a hundred and eighteen pages, which is the fourth
part of your Book, before you com to the first line and paragraff of mine, The
applaus and honor of this world, etc, And it is not unwittily done. For being
to be led, as you heavily complain, out of your ordinary road of controversies,
by the wild chase of Fiat Lux, it behoved you to draw some general common
places of your own, for your self to walk in, and exercise your rhetoric and
anger, before you pursue a bird that flies not, you say, in any usual tract.

Preface from page 1, to page 19
Your preface, wherein you speak of my subtilty and your own pretense, affords
me nothing but the beginning of your mistake, which will run quite through your
book.

1 Chap. from page 19. to 29.
Your first Chapter beats me about the pate, for saying that I conceal my
method, with a terrible syllogistical dilemma, He that uses no method, say
you, cannot conceal it, and if he has concealed it, he has used one. But I
must pass by store of such doughty stuff, being only fit for the young Oxford
Scholar, who being com home to take air, would prove before his father and
mother, that two eggs were three. Then going on you deny, that Protestants ever
opposed the merit of good works; which at first I wondered at, seeing the sound
of it has rung so often in mine own ears, and so many hundred books written in
this last age, so apparently witness it in all places, till I found afterward
in my through perusal of your book, that you neither heed what you say, or how
much you deny. At last giving a distinction of the intrinsic acceptability of
our works, the easlier to silence me, you say as I say.

2 Chap. from page 29. to 110.
Your second chapter collects out of Fiat Lux, as you say, ten general
conclusions, spread all over like veins and arteries, in the body of that my
book. And this you do that you may make your self a campus Martius to sport in,
without confinement to my method. But you name not any page of my book where
those principles may all or any of them be found; and you do wisely; for in the
sens those words do either naturally make out, or in which you understand them,
of all the whole ten I can hardly own any one. The first of my principles must
be this, That we received the Gospel first from Rome. We, that is, we English
first received it thence. But against this you reply, That we received it not
first from Rome, but by Joseph of Arimathea from Palestin, as Fiat Lux himself
acknowledges. Sir, if Fiat Lux say both these things, he cannot mean in your
contradictory falls sens, but in his own true one: We, that is, we Englishmen,
the now actual inhabitants of this Land, and progeny of the Saxons, received
first our Gospel and Christendom from Rome, though the Brittans that inhabited
this Land before, differing as much from us as Antipodes, had some of them been
Christened long before us. And yet the Christendom that prevailed and lasted
among the Brittans, even they also as well as we, had it from Rome too, mark
this likewise. But you reply, Though persons from Rome did first plant
Christianity among the Saxons, was it the Popes Religion they taught? did the
Pope first find it out? or did they Baptize in the name of the Pope? Good Sir,
it was the Popes Religion, not invented, but professed by him, and from him
derived unto us by his missioners. You add, Did not the Gospel come to Rome as
well as to us? for it was not first preached there. Sir, properly speaking, it
came not so to Rome as it came to us. For one of the twelve fountains, nay two
of the thirteen, and those the largest and greatest was transferred to Rome,
which they watered with their blood: we had never any such standing fountain of
our Christian Religion here, but only a stream derived to us from thence.

My second assertion must be, From whom we first received our Religion, with
them we must still abide. This principle as it is never delivered by Fiat Lux,
though you put it upon me, so is it in the latitude it carries, and wherein you
understand it, absolutely falls, never thought of by me, and indeed impossible;
for how can we abide with them in any truth, who may perhaps not abide in it
themselves. Great part of Flanders was first converted by Englishmen, and yet
are they not obliged, either by Fiat Lux or any lux whatsoever, to accompany
the English in our now present ways.

My third is, The Roman Religion is still the same? This indeed: though I do no
where formally express it, yet I suppose it, because I know it has been
demonstratively proved a hundred times over. You deny it has been proved, why
do you not then disprove it? because, you decline, say you, all common places:
very good, so do I; let us com then to proper ones. You fall then upon my
Queries in the end of my book. The Roman was once a true flourishing Church,
and if she ever fell, she must fall either by apostasy, heresy, or schism, etc.
So I speak there. And to this you reply, that the Church that then was in the
Apostles time, was indeed true, not that Roman Church that now is. So, so; then
say I, that former true Church must fall then, some time or other; when did she
fall? and how did she fall? by apostasy, heresy, or schism? Perhaps, say you,
neither way: for she might fall by an earthquake. Sir we speak not here of any
causal or natural downfall or death of mortals by plague, famine or earthquake,
but a moral and voluntary laps in faith. What do you speak to me of
earthquakes! you add therefore the second time, that she might fall by idolatry;
and so neither by apostasy, heresy, or schism. Good Sir, idolatry is a mixed
misdemeanour both in faith and manners, I speak of the single one of faith. And
he that falls by idolatry, if he keep still some parts of Christianity entire,
he falls by heresy; by apostasy, if he keep none. At last finding your self
pusled, in the third place you lay on load; She fell, say you, by apostasy,
idolatry, heresy, schism, licentiousnes, and prophanenes of life. And in this
you do, not much unlike the drunken youth, who being bid to hit his masters
finger with his, when he perceived he could not do it, he ran his whole fist
against it. But did she fall by apostasy? By a partial one, say you, not a
total one. Good sir, in this division, apostasy is set to expres a total
relaps; in opposition to heresy, which is the partial. Did she then fall by
heresy, in adhering to any error in faith, contrary to the approved doctrine of
the Church? Here you smile seriously, and tell me, that since I take the Roman
and catholic Church to be one, she could not indeed adhere to any thing but
what she did adhere unto. Sir, I take them indeed to be one, but here I speak
ad bominem, to one that does not take them so. And then, if indeed the Roman
Church had ever swerved in faith, as you say she has, and be her self but as an
other ordinary particular Church, as you say she is; then might you find some
one or other more general Church, if any there were, to judge her, some
Ecumenical council to condemn her, some fathers either greek or latin, expressly
to write against her, as Protestants now do, some or other grave solemn authority
to censur her; or at least some company of believers out of whose body she went,
and from whose faith she fell: none of which since you are not able to assign,
my Query remains unanswered, and the Roman still as flourishing a Church, as
ever she was.

The fourth assertion, frequently, say you, pleaded by our Author is; that all
things as to religion were ever quiet and in peace, before the Protestants
relinquishment of the Roman Sea. This principle you pretend is drawn out of
Fiat Lux, not because it is there; but only to open a door for your self, to
expatiate into some wide general discourse, about the many wars, distractions,
and factious altercations, that have been aforetime up and down the world, in
some several ages of Christianity: And you therefore say it is frequently pleaded
by me, because indeed I never speak one word of it. And it is in truth a falls
and fond assertion. Though neither you nor I can deny, that such as keep unity
of faith with that Church, can never so long as they hold it, fall out upon
that account.

Fifth is, that the first reformers were most of them contemptible persons,
their means indirect, and ends sinister. Where is it sir, where is it, that I
meddle with any men's persons, or say they are contemptible. What and how many
are these persons, and where did they live? But this you add of your own, in a
vast universal notion, to the end you may bring in the apostles and prophets,
and some kings, into the list of persons by me surnamed contemptible, and liken
my speech, who never speak any such thing, to the sarcasms of Celsus, Lucian,
Porphiry, Julian, and other Pagans. So likewise in the very beginning of this
your second chapter you spend four leaves in a parallel betwixt me and the Pagan
Celsus, whereof there is not any one member of it true. Does Fiat Lux, say you,
lay the cause of all the troubles, disorders, tumults, wars within the Nations
of Europ upon the Protestants? Does he charg the Protestants that by their
schisms and seditions they make a way for other revolts? does he gather a
rapsody of insignificant words? does he insist upon their divisions; does he
manage the arguments of the Jews against Christ, etc. so does Celsus, who is
confuted by learned Origin, etc. Where does Fiat Lux, where does, does he, does
he any such thing. Are you not ashamed to talk at this rate. I give a hint
indeed of the divisions that be amongst us, and the frequent argumentations
that are made to imbroil and pusle one another, with our much evil and little
appearance of any good, in order to unity and peace, which is the end of my
discourse. But must I therefore be Celsus? Did Celsus do any such thing to such an
end? It is the end that moralizes and specifies the action. To diminish
Christianity by upbraiding our frailties is paganish: to exhort to unity by
representing the inconvenience of faction is a Christian and pious work. When
honest Protestants in the Pulpit speak ten times more full and vehemently
against the divisions, wars and contentions that be amongst us, than ever came
into my thoughts; must they therefore be, every one of them a Celsus, a pagan
Celsus? what stuff is this! But it is not only my defamation you aim at, your
own glory coms in the rear. If I be Celsus, the pagan Celsus, then must you
forsooth be Origin that wrote against him, honest Origin. That is the thing.
Pray sir, it is but a word, let me advice you by the way, that you do not
forget your self in your heat, and give your wife occasion to fall out with
you. However you may, yet will not she like it perhaps so well, that her
husband should be Origin.

My sixth principle must be, that our departure from Rome has been the cause of
all our evils. This is but the same with the fourth, in other words, but added
for one to make up the number, and it is, you say, every where spread over the
face of Fiat Lux. Sir you may say what you pleas to be in his face, but I know
best what is in the heart and bowels both of Fiat Lux, and his author. And
sure I am this never came into my thoughts. Our dissentions in faith may well
multiply, as we see with our eyes they do, by our further departur from unity;
and this may cause much evil. But the branches of our too too manifold evils
found among the sons of men, spread all, as Fiat Lux also speaks, from that
fertile root of our innate concupiscence, which by evil customs rises up into a
thick bole of vicious inclinations, while we study not to impair but rather to
augment and nourish it. However I must give you leav to number this among my
silly principles, to the end you may talk more copiously of the disputes, and
wars and broils that are and have been in several parts of Christendom, and
fall again into your much affected and often iterated rhetorical strain, So the
Pagans judged the Primitive Christians, etc.

Seventh is, There is no remedy of our evils, but by a returnal to the Roman
Sea. This and the principle foregoing, had not you warily cloven a hair, had
been all one; and both are equally mine. But sir, that may remedy our
difference in faith, which neither can nor will prevent varieties in philosophy
or other worldly judgments: nor considering the infinite diversity of men's
humors, is there any one thing equally prevalent with all men, and at all
times, to the like good effect, and if it do certainly help one evil, it is not
therefore a remedy for all. But it seems you have yet a little more mirth and
choler to vent, and therefore I must permit you to add this principle for mine,
that you may smilingly consider, how the Romans should cure our evils, that
cannot prevent disorders differences and sins amongst themselves.

The eight follows, That Scriptur on sundry accounts is insufficient to settle
us in the truth. And in this you flourish and triumph most copiously for
fifteen pages together, as the champion of the word of God. But sir, you speak
not one word to the purpos, or against me at all, if I had delivered any such
principle. Gods word is both the sufficient and only necessary means both of
our conversion and settlement as well in truth as virtue. But sir, the thing
you heed not, and unto which I only speak, is this: If the scripture be in two
hands, for example of the Protestant Church in England, and of the Puritan who
with that scriptur rose up and rebelled against her, can the scriptur alone of
it sels decide the business, how shall it do it, has it ever don it? or can that
written word now solitary and in private hands so settle any in a way that
neither himself, nor present adherents, nor future generations shall question
it, or with as much probability dissent from it either totally or in part, as
himself first set it. This sir is the case, unto which you do neither here nor
in all your whole book speak one word. And what you speak otherwis of the
scripturs excellency, I allow it for good. What is not against me, is with me.

Ninth, The Pope is a good man and seeks nothing but our good. This also I no
where aver. For I never saw him, nor have any such acquaintance with him, as to
know whether he be a good man or no, though in charity I do not use to judge
hardly of any body. Much less could I say, that he whom I know to have a
general solicitude for all Churches, seeks nothing but our good. Sir, if I had
pondred my words in Fiat lux, no better than you heed yours in your
Animadversions upon it, they might even go together both of them to lap pepper
and spices, or some other yet more vile emploiment.

Tenth, that the devotion of Catholics far transcends that of Protestants. But
sir I never made in Fiat lux any comparison between their devotions; nor can I
say how much the one is, or how little the other. But you are the maddest
Commentatour I have ever seen, you first make the Text, and then Animadversions
upon it. Here at length you conclude your chapter, and would, say you, your
book also; if you had none to deal with but ingenious and judicious readers. It
seems what follows, is for readers neither judicious nor ingenious. And because
I knew you took me for one of those, I went on in my view. Indeed, had I not
undertaken to give you an account of your whole book, I could have been well
content to stop here with ingenious and judicious readers, and look no further.
Doubtless in this affair good wits will jump. You would write no more had you
none but judicious readers, and these will read no more because they are
judicious. But I poor ass must jogge on.

3 chapter from page 110 to 119.
Your third chapter concerns my preface, which in part you allow, and partly
dislike. And I am equally content with both.

4. or 5 chapter from page 119 to 148.
Your fourth chapter by mistake of press is named Fifth, and so I must here call
it. It begins my book, and takes up five of my paragraffs at once, You have
loitered long about the gate like a trifling idlesbee, and mean now it seems,
when you com to my own words, to go nimbly over them, as of lesser concernment
then your own forestalled conceits, which you have hitherto made sport with.
You first set up a maypole and then danced about it, and now at length half
tired and almost out of breath, you come home to me.

My first paragraff about Diversity of feuds you do not much except against.
But I see you do not affect the schoolmen, happily for the same reason the French
love not Talbot, having been used in their infancy to be frighted with that
name. However you think I have good reason to make honorable mention of them,
because they were, say you, the hammerers and forgers of Popery. Alas sir, I see
that anger spoils your memory; for in the twelfth and thirteenth chapter of
that very book of your Animadversions, you make Popery to be hammered and
forged not a few hundreds of years, before any schoolmen were extant. You check
me also for saying, that reformation of religion is pretended by emulous
Plebeians, as though say you, Hezekiah, Josiah, and other good Kings and
Princes also of our own were emulous plebeians. But sir, when I say in Fiat lux
p. 20. what glory the emulous plebeian sees given to higher spirits, etc. I
only speak of the times of vulgar insurrection against authority; as all men see
except your self, who will not.

My second paragraff of the Ground of quarrels you like well, and explicate it
with a text to help me out. I could not happily tell, how to cite James, the
fourth chapter, the first and second verse of that chapter, without your help.
However, it is kindness though it be but course, as sir Thomas Moor told his
maid, when she kissed him as he was going to execution; and so I take it.

My third paragraff about nullity of title would, you think, every period of it
confute my self. But that saying of S. Paul, An a vobis verbum Dei processit an
ad vos solos pervenit, which I make use of to stop the mouth of all
vitilitigatours in religion, was cited by me, you think in an unhappy hour,
because, say you, there is is not any one single text of scriptur more fatal to
papal pretensions. And why so Sir? because the Gospel you say, came to Rome as
well as it came to us here in England. To this Sir I have already told you,
that it came not to us as it came to Rome: and now I tell you again, that it
came to us from Rome, and not to Rome from us. And therefore is that text fatal
to us, not to them: It may open their mouths, but I am sure it stops ours.

Heats and resolutions, the subject of my fourth paragraff, which your self
will not countenance, you will not permit me to dislike. You may talk against
them, but I may not. But I may be excused; for I knew not then, such a man of
art as your self, would speak of that he understood better then I do.

The motives of moderation in my sixth paragraff you laugh at; and I will not
stop your merriment. But in all this say you Fiat lux has a secret design,
which your eagle-sighted eye has discovered. And in vain is the net spread
before the eyes of a thing that has a wing. And I must know, that the author
of Animadversions, is that thing that has a wing.

6 chapter from page 1 48 to 177.
Your sixth chapter, which meets just with my sixth paragraff of the obscurity of
God, in the beginning, where you declare the sufficient knowledge we have of God
by divine revelation, whereunto by our humble belief we have subscribed our
consent, is right and good; but not at all against me, who there treat a case
of metaphysical concernment, which you apprehend not. It is no wonder then, you
should so much dislike all that my plea of uncertainty, not only before any
teacher appear, but after too; whiles you take the teacher and his words as
they walk hand in hand actually linkt together with our belief in him; which
actual belief my supposition suspends and separates, to the end I may consider
whether any such teacher can appear so accomplished as to move us, who live in
this present age, and coin religion anew, to a belief invariable: so that
through your too much haste you utterly mistake all my whole discourse, and
speak nothing at all to the case I treat of. I speak wholly there, as in other
parts of Fiat lux, upon a supposition of the condition, the generality of
people are now actually in, here in England, where every one lets himself loose
at pleasure to frame opinions and religions of themselves. And so cannot be
thought to speak of a settled belief, but only of settling one, or one to be
settled; which there and elsewhere in that book, I endeavor to show impossible
to be so fixedly stated by any private man, but that himself and others may
rationally doubt it. And that therefore our only way is to beleev and not
dispute, to submit to the old way we have formerly received, and not to surmise
a new. This is the very substance scope and purpos not only of that paragraff,
but of my whole book, which you do as utterly swerv from, as ever any blinded
man, put to thrash a cock, misplaced his blow. Perhaps it is hard for you to
conceiv your self in a state you are not actually in at present: and if you
cannot do this, you will be absolutely unfit to deal with such hypothetick
discourses, as I see indeed you are. Bellarmins little catechize had been a
fitter book for you to write Animadversions upon, than my Fiat lux. There is
good positive doctrine, signed hic and nunc, and specified to your inclination
and capacity, I meddle not with any: I deliver no positive doctrine at all; I
never descend to any particular conclusion or thesis of faith; I defend no
opinion but only this, That every opinion is defensible, and yet none
impregnable. Do you not blush sir, to see your own gross mistake. God is my
witness, when I find you, misled by your own error, so furiously to tax me
with ignorance, fraud, blasphemy, atheism, I cannot but pity you. And
generally you talk at random, as well in this chapter as others. Let me give
some little hint of it in particular.

Where I in my foresaid paragraff say that differences of faith in its branches
are apt to infer a suspicion in its very root, and consequently atheism. To
this you reply, that That discourse of mine is all rotten: that Christian
religion it self might thus be questioned: that it is the argument of the pagan
Celsus: that such contests have ever been; that Protestants are resolved: that
Catholics turn atheists as well as others: that our religion is the same
yesterday and to day: that our evils are from our selves, etc. Does this talk
concern or plead to my assertion? I know all this, as well as you; but that it
is nothing to the purpos, that I know, and it seems you do not. Though all this
you say be true, yet still it remains notwithstanding as true and certain as it
was before, and that is certain enough, That difference of faith in its
branches are apt to infer a suspicion in its very root, and consequently
atheism. You have but beaten the air.

So likewise unto all that discourse of mine, If the Papist or Roman Catholic,
who first brought us the news of our Christianity, be now become so odious, then
may likewise the whole story of our Christianity be at length thought a
Romance, You speak with the like extravagancy, and mind not my hypothetick at
all, to speak directly to my inference, as it became a man of art to do. But
neglecting my consequence, which in that discourse is principally and solely
intended, you seem to deny my supposition, which, if my discourse had been drawn
into a syllogism, would have been the minor part of it; And it consists of two
categories; first that the Papist is now become odious: second, that the Papist
delivered us the first news of Christianity. The first of these you little
heed, the second you deny, That the Papist say you, or Roman catholic sirst
brought Christ and his Christianity into this land is most untrue, I wonder,
etc. And your reason is, because if any Romans came hither, they were not
Papists, and indeed our Christianity came from the East, namely by Joseph of
Arimathea, etc. And this is all you say to my hypothetick or conditional
ratiocination; as if I had said nothing at all but that one absolute category,
which being delivered before, I now only suppose. You use to call me a civil
logician, but I fear a natural one as you are, will hardly be able to justify
this motion of yours as artificial. A conditional has a verity of its own, so
far differing from the supposed category, that this being falls that may yet be
true. For example, if I should say thus: A man who has wings as an eagle, or
if a man had wings as an eagle, he might fly in the air, as well as another
bird. And such an assertion is not to be confuted by proving that a man has
not the wings of an eagle. Yet so you deal with me here, a great master of arts
with a civil logician. But, that I may go along with you, we had not sir our
Christianity immediately from the East, nor from Joseph of Arimathea, as I have
already told you, we Englishmen had not. For as he delivered his Christianity
to some Brittons, when our land was not called England but Albion or Brittany,
and the inhabitants were not Englishmen but Brittons or Kimbrians, so likewise
did that Christianity and the whole news of it quite vanish, being suddenly
overwhelmed by the ancient deluge of paganism: nor did it ever come from them
to us. Nay the Brittons themselves had so forgot and lost it, that even they
also needed a second conversion, which they received from Pope Eleutherius. And
that was the only news of Christianity which prevailed and lasted even amongst
the very Brittons: which seems to me a great secret of divine providence in
planting and governing his Church; as if he would have nothing to stand firm
and lasting but what was immediately fixed by and seated upon that rock. For
all other conversions have vanished, and the very seats of the other Apostles
failed, that all might the better cement in an unity of one head. Nay the
tables which God wrote with his own hand were broken, but the other written by
Moses remained, that we might learn to give a due respect to him whom God has
set over us as our head and ruler under him, and none exalt himself against
him. I know you will laugh at this my observation, but I cannot but tell you
what I think. To return then to my former discourse; when I speak good sir, of
the news of Christianity first brought to this land, I mean not that which was
first brought upon the earth or soil of this land, and spoken to any body then
dwelling here, but which was delivered to the forefathers of the now present
inhabitants, who be Saxes or Englishmen. And I say that we, the now present
inhabitants of England, offspring of the English or Saxons, had the first news
of our Christianity immediately from Rome, and from Pope Gregorius the Roman
Patriarch, by the hands of his missioner Saint Austin. And this all men know to
be as true, as they know, that Papists are now become odious. Since then the
categorick assertions are both clear; namely that the Papist first brought us
the news of Christianity, and secondly, that the Papist is now become odious
amongst us; what say you to my consequence? that the whole story of
Christianity may as well be deemed a Romance, as any part of that Christianity
we at first received, is now judged to be part of a Romance. This consequence
of mine it behoved a man of those great parts you would be thought to have, to
heed attentively, and yet you never mind it.

You add in the close of your discourse, that many things delivered us at first
with the first news of Christianity may be afterward rejected for the love of
Christ and by the commission of Christ? But sir, what love of Christ dictates,
what commission of Christ allows you, to choos and reject at your own pleasure?
what heretic was ever so much a fool, as not to pretend the love of Christ and
commission of Christ for what he did? How shall any one know you do it, out of
any such either love or commission? since those who delivered the articles of
faith now rejected, pretended equal love of Christ and commission of Christ,
for the delivery of them, as of any other. And why may we not at length reject
all the rest, for love of something else? when this love of Christ, which is now
crept out into the very outside of our lips, is slipped off thence. Do you think
men cannot find a cavil against him, as well as his law delivered unto us with
the first news of him? and as easily dig up the root, as cut up the branches.
Is not the thing already don, and many become atheists upon that account. Pray
speak to me something of reason. Did not the Jews by pretens of their love to
that immortal God, whom their forefathers served, reject the whole gospel at
once? and why may not we possibly as well do it by piece meals! Let us leav
cavils: Grant my supposition which you know you cannot deny: then speak to my
consequence which I deem most strong and good, to infer a conclusion which
neither you nor I can grant. I tell you plainly and without tergiversation,
before God and all his holy angels, what I should think if I descended unto any
conclusion in this affair. And it is this: either the Papist, who holds at this
day all those articles of faith which were delivered at the first conversion of
this land by S. Austin, is unjustly become odious amongst us; or else my honest
Parsons throw off your cassocks, and resign your benefices and glebe-lands into
the hands of your neighbors, whose they were aforetime: my consequence is
irrefragable.

If any part, much more if many parts, great substantial parts of religion
brought into the land with the first news of Christianity, be once rejected (as
they are now amongst us) as Romish or Romancical, and that rejection or
reformation be permitted, then may other parts and all parts, if the gap be not
stopped, be looked upon at length as points of no better a condition. Nay it must
needs be so: for the same way and means that lopt off some branches will do the
like to others, and root too; A villification of that Church, wherein they find
themselves who have a mind to prevaricate, upon pretens of Scriptur and power
of interpreting it, light, spirit, or reason, adjoined with a personal
obstinacy that will not submit, will do it roundly and to effect. This first
brought off the Protestants from the Roman catholic Church, this lately
separated the Presbyterian from the English Protestant Church, the Independent
from the Presbyterian, the Quaker from the other Independents. And this last
good man heeds nothing of Christian religion but only the moral part, which in
deed and truth is but honest paganism. This speech is worthy of all serious
consideration. And I could wish you would ponder it seriously. See if the
Quaker deny not as resolutely the regenerating power of baptism, as you the
efficacy of absolution. See if the Presbyterian do not with as much reason
evacuate the prelacy of Protestants, as they the Papacy. See if the Socinian
arguments against the Trinity, be not as strong as yours against the Eucharist.
See if the Jew do not with as much plausibility deride Christ, as you his
Church. See if Porphiry, Julian, and other ancient pagans do not as strongly
confute all Christianity, as we any part of it. He is a fool that having a will
and power enough, cannot find out as plausible a pretense for the pulling down
of churches, as we had any for the destroying of monasteries. There be books
lately set forth, and by more then one author, which do as powerfully dissipate
the conceit we once had of hell, as any ever did elude Purgatory. Did we not
lately find out texts and reasonings against our King and monarchy, as many as
we found out long ago against Pope and popery? Gods providence and our souls
immortality if any list to deny, he may have more abundant argumentations every
where occurring, than any other piece of popery now rejected ever felt. If one
text of scriptur be by a trope of rhetoric made to speak a sens, contrary to
what was believed in catholic times in any one point, cannot another text by
some such slight be forced to frustrate another. And thus when all articles are
at last by such tricks of wit cashiered, can there be wanting several appearing
incongruities, contradictions, tautologies, improbabilities, to disable all
holy writ at once. And cannot the Jew afford us at last arguments enough, to
dissipate at length the very name of Christ out of the world, which after the
whole extirpation of his law will but float on men's lips like an empty shadow,
till it quite vanish. These things fir, are not only true, but clear and
evident. And nothing is wanting to justify them, but a serious consideration.

These few words sir, which I have bestowed upon you by way of supererogation,
above what I needed, will somewhat enlighten you to discern the goodness and
necessity of my consequence. If the Papist who first brought us th^^ news of
Christianity be now become odious, the^ may all Christianity at length be
thought a Romance, etc. Religion like a house, if a breach he once made and not
repaired to former unity will by degrees all moulder away, till no one room be
left entire.

7 chapter from page 177. to 188.
Your seventh chapter finished in five leafs runs, of flies over, no less than
four of my paragraffs at once, which make up above fifty pages, concerning the
obscurity of Nature and Providence. All which discourse of mine is, you say,
nothing to my purpose, but foisted in for a blind to entertain my readers. But
sir, those judicious readers you lately left behind you, that discern my purpos
better than I see you do, will tell you, that it is so much to my purpos, that
nothing could be more. At least you let all pass without either censure or
commendation, till you meet happily at length with a word or too of mine (let
fall in my ninth paragraff called Help) about scripture. This makes your heart
leap; it is a common place you know how to sport in, and you never meet with
that sound, but it makes you dance. Your chapter then, which is written against
all my philosophical discourse of nature and providence, is called scripture
vindicated, as though I had industriously wrote against scripture. And therein
you sweetly dilate upon the excellency and goodness of the word of God, as if I
had any way diminished it, or positively wrote against it; just according to
the tone of our late dismal times. Lord, I am for thy cause Lord, I am left
alone to plead thy cause Lord against thine enemies. But sir, the few words I
there speak, only incidentally, in the end of that my paxagraff called Help,
concerning the surmises that men may have about scripture, as they be but a
small part of the many, which I know to be now vented up and down the land in
this our present state of separation one from another; so if I had not given
some touch of them in that metaphysick abstracted discourse of Fiat lux, which
proceeds, as I have said, upon a supposition of our choosing and making
religions here in England at pleasur, unto endless differences and divisions, it
had been a maimed and imperfect work, and no ways satisfactory unto those
judicious readers unto whom I write, though you do not. And I cannot but tell
you, whatsoever you think of your self, you are in truth but a weak man, except
you dissemble and mistake on purpos, to take that as spoken absolutely by me,
and by way of positive doctrine, which I only deliver upon an hypothesis
apparent to all the world besides your self. I speak upon a supposition of
doubting, which these times have brought upon us, of interpreting, accepting,
rejecting, framing, forging religions and opinions to our selves; and you reply
against me words and discourses that presuppose an assent of believing. If a
man beleev, he cannot doubt. And if he doubt not of the scriptures truth, he
cannot make exceptions against any of its properties. But if any begin to
questions this, or that, or other part of doctrine contained in scriptur, and
delivered by those who first brought it, as every one does who swerves from the
Church he found himself in, then I suppose such a one doubts. And being now
thereby separated from that body of believers to which he before by faith
adhered, he cannot now left to himself, but proceed, if he give attendance to
the conduct of his own surmising thoughts, to more suspicions than I was
willing to express.

But sir, what you say here, and so often up and down your book, of Papists
contempt of scriptur, I beseech you will please to abstain from it for the time
to com: I have conversed with the Roman catholics of France, Flanders, and
Germany; I have read more of their books, both histories, contemplatives, and
scholastic divines, than I beleev you have ever seen or heard of. I have seen
the devotion both of common people, colleges of sacred priests, and religious
houses, I have communed with all sorts of people, and perused their councels.
And after all this, I tell you, and out of my love I tell you, that their
respect to scripture is real, absolute and cordial even to admiration. Others
may talk of it, but they act it, and would be ready to stone that man that
should diminish holy writ. Let us not wrong the innocent. The scriptur is
theirs, and Jesus Christ is theirs, who also will plead their cause when he sees
time.

8 chapter from page 188 to 198.
In your eight chapter, which falls upon my paragraff of Reason, you are
absolutely in a wood, and wonder more then ordinary, how that discourse of mine,
concerning reason to be excluded from the imploiment of framing articles of
religion, can any ways concern Protestants, or be a confutation of
Protestants. As though Fiat lux were written to any such concernment against
Protestants. Your head is so full, it seems of that controverting faculty for
Protestants against Papists, that if Popery be but mentioned in a book without
an epithet of detestation, you conclude presently, that the book is written
against Protestants. And if every thing therein contained, answer not the idea
of your brain, then it is impertinent with you, it is silly, it is besides the
purpos. And this censur you have given, still as you have gone along all my
whole book hitherto, of every part and parcel of it, even from my preface to
this present paragraff of Reason. You cannot see how all that vain flourishing
discourse of mine, concerning diversity of feuds, ground of quarrels, nullity of
title, heats and resolution, motives to moderation, obscurity of God, nature and
providence, or the like, should confute Protestancy, or any way concern
Protestants. And therefore it is wholly impertinent. Thus the famous Knight, when
he had once conceived an idea of his own errantry, every flock of sheep must be
an army, and every windmill a giant, or else it is impertinent to Don Quixot.

9 chapter from page 198 to 213.
Your ninth chapter upon my paragraff of Light and Spirit; is wholly spent,
neglecting all my other discourse, in solving the Jewish objection, which I
answer my self. And if you have added any thing better than mine, I shall be
thankful for it as soon as I see it. But I fear your vaunting flourishes about
scriptur which you love to talk on, will not without the help of your credo and
humble resignation, solve the argument; which that you may the easlier be quit
of, you never examine; but only run on in your usual flourishes about the use
and excellency of Gods word. I told you in Fiat lux, what the Jew will reply to
all such reasonings, but you have the pregnant wit not to heed any thing that
may hinder your flourishes. But sir, if you were kept up in a chamber with a
learned Jew, without bread water and fire, till you had satisfied him in that
objection; I am still well enough assured, for all your aerie vaunts, that if
you do not make use of your Credo, which here you contemn, you might there stay
till hunger and cold had made an end of you. But I beleev you love not such dry
blows; however you may be delighted with pen encounters at a distance, where
after your suppositum has been well inspired with the warm spirits blown hither
out of the fortunate islands, you may cavil revile and threaten at your
pleasure, and knock down the shadow of your adversary which your own spirits
have raised up, and presented to you in your chamber.

10 chapter from page 213 to 228.
Your tenth chapter runs over two of my paragraffs, which speak the plea of
Independents, Presbyterians, and Protestants. That you esteem idle, the other
sensles, the last insufficient. And to make this last good, you endeavor to
disable both what I have set down to make against the prelate Protestant, and
also what I have said for him. I said in Fiat lux, that it made not a little
against our Protestants, that after the prelate Protestancy was settled in
England, they were forced for their own preservation against Puritans, to take
up some of those principles again, which former Protestants had cast down for
Popish, as is the authority of a visible Church, efficacy of ordination,
difference between clergy and laiety, etc. Here first you deny that those
principles are popish. But sir, there be some Jews even at this day, who will
deny any such man as Pontius Pilate, to have ever been in Jury. I have other
things to do, than to fill volums with useles texts, which here I might easily
do, out of the books both of the first reformers, and catholic divines and
councels. Then secondly you challenge me to prove, that those principles were
ever denied by our prelate Protestants. And this you do wittily and like your
self. You therefore bid me prove that those principles were ever denied by our
prelate Protestants, because I say, that our prelate Protestants here in
England, as soon as they became such, took up again those forenamed principles,
which Protestants their forefathers both here in England and beyond the seas,
before our prelacy was set up, had still rejected. When I say then, that our
prelate Protestant affirmed and asserted those principles which former
Protestants denied; you bid me prove that our prelate Protestant ever denied
them.

Thus you contradict what I say is pleaded against our prelate Protestant. And
again you do as stiffly gainsay what I plead for him my self. You laugh at me
even with head and shoulders, and tell me, that the prelate-Protestant has far
better arguments for themselves, than either mine is, or any I can bring; nor do
they need the help of such a weak logician as my self, in this their cause. Sir
give me leav to tell you here once for all, that I thought it sufficient for my
design, to set down either for Papist or Protestant, when occasion required,
such reasons as appeared plausible to my self; and to say all for them that can
be said, was neither the work of my small ability, nor any purpose of my
design. And it is enough to me, that I know no better. But let us see what my
argument is, and how you crush it.

The Church, say I, must have a bishop, or otherwise she will not have such a
visible head, as she had at first, etc. This that you may evacuate, you tell
me, that the Church has still the same head she had, which is Christ, who is
present with his Church by his Spirit and laws, and is man God still as much as
ever he was, and ever the same will be: and if I would have any other visible
bishop to be that head, then it seems I would not have the same head, and so
would have the same and yet not the same. Thus you speak.

But sir, I cannot in any reason be thought to speak otherwise, if we would use
true Logic, of the identity of the head, than I do of the identity of the body
of the Church. This body is not numerically the same: for the men of the first
age are long ago gone out of the world, and another generation com, who yet are
a body of Christians of the same kind; because they adhere to the same
principles of faith. And as the body is of the same kind, though not
numerically the same; so do I require, that since Jesus Christ as man, the head
immediate of other believing men, is departed hence to the glory of his Father,
that the Church should still have a head of the same kind, as visibly now
present, as she had in the beginning; or else say I, she cannot be completely
the same body, or a body of the same kind, completely visible as she was. But
this she has not, this she is not, except she have a visible bishop, as she
had in the beginning, present with her, guiding and ruling under God. Christ
our Lord is indeed still man-God, but his manhood is now separate; nor is he
visibly now present as man, which immediately headed his believers under God,
on whose influence that nature depended. His Godhead is still the same in all
things, not only in it self, but in order also to his Church, as it was before,
equally invisible, and in the like manner believed; but the nature delegate
under God, and once ruling visibly amongst us by words and examples, is now
utterly withdrawn. And if a nature of the same kind, be not now delegate with a
power of exterior government, as at the first there was, then has not the
Church the same head now, which she had then. Qui habet aures audiendi audiat.

And here by the way we may take notice what a sincere English Protestant you
are, who labor so stoutly to evacuate my argument for episcopacy, and leav none
of your own behind you, nor acquaint the world with any, although you know far
better; but would make us beleev notwithstanding those far better reasons for
prelacy, that Christ himself, as he is the immediate and only head of invisible
influence, so is he likewise the only and immediate head of visible direction
and government among us, without the interposition of any person delegate in
his stead, to oversee and rule under him in his Church on earth: which is
against the tenor both of sacred gospel, and S. Paul's epistles, and all
antiquity, and the present ecclesiastic polity of England; and is the doctrine
not of any English Protestant, but of the Presbyterian, Independent and Quaker.

Christ then in your way is immediate head not only of subministration and
influence, but of exterior derivation also and government to his Church. Pray
tell me, is he such an immediate head to all believers, or no? if he be to all,
then is no man to be governed in affairs of religion by any other man: on the
other side, if he be not immediate head to all, but ministers head the people,
and Christ heads the ministers, this in effect is nothing else, but to make
every minister a bishop. Why do you not plainly say, what it is more than
manifest you would have. All this while you heed no more the laws of the land,
than constitutions of gospel.

As for gospel; That Lord, who had been visible governor and pastor of his
flock on earth, when he was now to depart hence, as all the apostles expected
one to be chosen to succeed him in his care, so did he, notwithstanding his own
invisible presence and providence over his flock, publikly appoint one. And
when he taught them, that he who were greatest among them should be as the
least, he did not deny but suppose one greater, and taught in one and the same
breath, both that he was over them and for what he was over them, namely to
feed not to tyrannise, not to domineer abuse and hurt, but to direct comfort
and conduct his flock, in all humility and tenderness, as the servant of all
their spiritual necessities. And if a bishop be otherwise affected, it is the
fault of his person, not his place.

As for the laws of the land, it is there most strongly decreed by the consent
and authority of the whole kingdom, not only that bishops are over ministers,
but that the kings majesty is head of bishops also in the line of hierarchy,
from whose hand they receiv both their place and jurisdiction. This was
established not only by one, but several Parliament acts, both in the reign of
King Edward and Queen Elizabeth. So that by the laws of the land there be two
greeces between ministers and Christ, which you cut off, to the end you may
secretly usurp the authority and place of both, to the overthrow at once both of
gospel and our law too.

By the laws of our land our series of ecclesiastical government stands thus,
God Christ King Bishop Ministers People
the Presbyterian predicament is this, God Christ Minister People.
So that the ministers head in the Presbyterian predicament, touches Christ's
feet immediately, and nothing intervenes. You pretend indeed, that hereby you
do exalt Christ; but this is a mere cheat, as all men may see with their eyes;
for Christ is but where he was; but the minister indeed is exalted, being now
set in the Kings place, one degree higher then the bishops, who by law is under
both king and bishops too

You will here say to me, What is the Papists line of Church government. There
the Pope must sit next Christ, and Kings under his feet. Sir, I have not time
in this short letter to discourse this subject, as it deserves. Nor does it now
concern me, who have no more here to say than only this; that my argument for
prelacy, howsoever in your words you may disable it, is not weakened by you in
deeds at all, and as far as I can perceiv, not understood. Yet two things I
shall tell you over and above what I need in this affair also.

First is, that Roman catholics do more truly and cordially acknowledge the
respective Christian king of any kingdom to be supreme head of his catholic
subjects even in affairs of religion, than any other, whether Independents,
Presbyterians, or even prelate Protestants have, if we speak of truth and
reality, ever done. And this I could easily make good both by the laws and
practices of all catholic kingdoms upon earth in any age on one side, and the
opposite practices of all Protestants on the other. Second is, that for what
reason Roman catholics deny a prince to be head of the Church, for the same
ought all others as they deny it in deeds, so, if they would speak sincerely as
they think and act, to deny it in words also, as well as they. For catholics do
beleev him to be head of the Church, from whom the channel of religion and all
direction in it is derived and flows; for which reason a spring is said to be
head of a river. But neither does any King upon earth, except he be priest and
prophet too, ever trouble himself to derive religion, as the Pope has ever don:
neither does either Protestant, Presbyterian or Independent, either in England
or elsewhere, ever seek for religion from the hands of the King, or supplicate
unto him when any doubt arises in those affairs, as they ought in conscience
and honesty to do, for a final decision, any more than the Roman catholic does.
So that whatever any of them may say, all Protestants do as much deny the thing
in their behavior as catholics do in words; and catholics do in their
behavior observe as much, as Protestants either practice or pretend. What is
the reason that Roman catholics in all occurring difficulties of faith, both
have their recours unto their papal Pastor (unto whom kings themselves for
their own ease remit them) and acquiesce also to his decision and judgment, but
only because they beleev him to be head of the Church. And if Protestants have
no such recours, nor will not acquiesce to his majesty's authority in affairs
of religion, but proceed to wars and quarrels without end, the prince neglected
as wholly unconcerned in those resolvs, they do as manifestly deny his
headship, as if they professed none. Nay to acknowledge a headship in words and
deny it in deeds is but mockery. By these two words Sir, it may appear, that
the kings majesty is as much head of the Church to Roman catholics as to any
Protestants; and these no more than they either derive religion or decision of
their doubts from the kings chair.

Ith interim it is a shame and general scandal to the whole world, that we in
England should neither supplicate nor acquiesce in affairs of religion to his
judgment, whom in words we acknowledge head of the Church, but fight and quarrel
without end; and yet have the confidence to upbraid Roman catholics with a
contrary belief, who although they ever looked upon their papal patriarch as
spiritual head and pastor and deriver of their faith, unto whom they so
submit, that he who after his decision remains contumacious forfeits his
Christianity, yet have they notwithstanding in all ages and kingdoms resigned
with a most ready cordial reverence unto all decisions orders and acts of their
temporal princes, even in spiritual and ecclesiastical affairs, as well as
civil, so far as their laws reached, as supreme head and governors of their
respective kingdoms. And all kings and princes find in a very short space,
however others may utter hypocritical words of flattery, that indeed none but
catholic subjects do heed and fear and observe them universally, in all whatever
their commands, being taught by their religion, of which they alone give
account at times appointed for penance, to hearken and obey for conscience sake
all higher powers, constituted over them for good.

That catholics do universally observe their king in all affairs as well
ecclesiastic as civil, I need not, to make it good, send you Sir either to the
testimonies of civil law and Codex of Justinian, or to the other various
constitutions of so many several provinces and kingdoms, as are and have been
in Christendom; our own home will suffice to justify it. Were not the spiritual
courts, both court Christian, Prerogative court and Chancery, all set up in
catholic times, about matters of religion and affairs of conscience, and all
managed by clerks or clergy men under the king? In brief, where ever any civil
coaction or coactive power intervenes, be it in what affair it will, all such
power and action who ever uses it, has it autoritatively only from the king.
For neither Pope, nor Bishop, nor any Priest ought to be a striker, as S. Paul
teaches: nor have they any lands, or livings, or court, or power to compel or
punish either in goods or body, but what is lent or given by princes and
princely men, out of their love and respect to Jesus Christ and his holy
gospel, whose news they first conveyed about the world; although a just
donation is, I should think, as good a title, as either emption, inheritance,
or conquest, if it be irrevocable. The king is the only striker in the land ex
jure, and the sword of the almighty is only in his hand; and none can compel or
punish either in body or goods, but only himself, or others by his commission,
in any whatever affair. He can either by his authority and laws blunt the sword
of those who have one in their hand, whether by pact or nature, as have masters
over servants and parents over children; or put a civil power into the hands of
those who otherwise have none, as prelates, priests and bishops. So that
although the Pope derive religion, and chiefly direct in it, yet is the king
the only head of all civil coercition, as well in Church affairs as any other,
which his commands and laws do reach unto.

So that the line of Church government amongst Catholics, since the conversion
of kings, runs in two streams; the one is of direction, the other of
coercition, That of direrection is from Christ to the chief pastor, from him
to patriarchs, then to metropolitans, arch-byshops, bishops, priests and
people: and in this line is no corporal coaction at all, except it be borrowed;
nor any other power to punish, but only by debarring men from sacraments. In
the other line of corporal power and authority the King is immediately under God
the Almighty, from whom he receivs the sword to keep and defend the dictates of
truth and justice, as supreme governor, tho himself for direction and faith be
subject to the Church from whose hands he received it, as well as other people
his subjects; after the king succeed his princes and governors in order, with
that portion of power all of them which they have from him their liege
sovereign received. This in brief of papal Church government, which we in
England by our canting talk of the Lord Christ, to the end we may be all lords
and all Christ's, have utterly subverted.

Indeed in primitive times the channel of religion for three hundred years ran
apart, and separate from civil government which in those days persecuted it.
And then the line of Christian government was unmixt. None but priests guided,
defended, governed the Church and Christian flock; which they did by the power
of their faith, virtue, secret strength, and courage in Jesus their Lord
invisible. Afterward it pleased the God of mercies, to move the hearts of
emperors and kings of the earth, to submit unto a participation of grace; unto
which they were more easily inclined by the innocence and sanctity of Christian
faith, especially in that particular of peaceful obedience unto kings and
rulers, though aliens, and pagans, and persecutors of religion. And now kings
being made Christian were looked upon by their subjects with a double
reverence, more loved, more feared, more honored than before. Nor could
Christian people now tell, how to expres that ineffable respect they bore their
kings, now coheirs of heaven with them, whom before in their very paganism
they were taught by their priests to observe as gods upon earth, not for wrath
only or fear of punishment, but for conscience also and danger of hazarding not
only their temporal contents, but their eternal salvation also, for their
resisting authority though resident in pagans. And kings on the other side, who
aforetime by the counsel of worldly senators enacted laws, such as they thought
fit for present policy, and defended them by the sword of justice, wielded
under God to the terror of evil doers and defense of the innocent, began now,
as was incumbent on their duty, to use that sword for the protection of
Christianity, and faith, and the better way now chalked out unto them by
Christian priests, from Jesus the wisdom and Son of God. And by the direction
of the same holy prelates, abbots and other priests, who were now admitted with
other senators into counsel, did they in all places enact special and
particular laws answerable to the general rule of faith, which they found to be
more excellent and perfect, than any judgment they had by natural reason
hitherto discovered.

Thus poor Christians, who had hitherto but only a head of derivation, of
counsel and direction, which could but only bid them have patience for Christ's
sake, and conform themselves to his meek passion, when they suffered from
aliens, and when they suffered injury from one another, could only debar the
evil doer, if he gave not satisfaction, from further use of sacraments; those
Christians I say, who could hitherto have no other comfort or assistance in
this world under their spiritual pastor, than what words of piety could
afford, had now by the grace of heaven princely protectours, royal defenders,
and head champions under God, to vindicate and make good all Christian rights,
discipline, and truths now accepted and established from faith, as well as
other civil rites and customs dictated aforetime from mere reason, equally
revengers upon all evil doers indifferently, that were found criminal in
affairs, as well purely Christian as civil, still using the advice and
direction of their prelates and Christian peers in the framing and establishing
of all those laws they were now resolved to maintain. So it was don in England;
so in all places of the Christian world. And then the line of Christian
government ran mixed, which before was single. And Christians now had a Joshua
to their Aaron, who were only led by Moses before. And although Aaron was head
of the Church, yet Joshua was head and leader, prince and captain of all those
people who were of that Church. The chief bishop is an Aaron, and every
Christian king a Joshua. And as it is a content and support to Aaron to have a
Joshua with him, to fight Gods battles and keep the people in awe; so is it not
a little comfort to Joshua to have an Aaron by him, with whom he may consult.
And indeed no kingdom can have a perfect accomplishment without the presence of
these two swords, civil and spiritual. Ecce duo gladij hic! satis est.

And although Christians even at this day, when any heresy or novelty arises,
have still recours unto the same head of their religion for a decision of the
doubt, whom they consulted before (for as the channel of Christianity is and
must be still the same, so must the springhead be the same also) yet when the
thing is once decided, they have none but kings and governors under him, to
see the direction executed, as the only overseers with coactive power to do it.

And thus you see in brief how the Pope is head of the Church, and the King
head likewise, and both immediately under God; but with this difference, that
the king only governs Christianity established in his own royalty by law; the
Pope without further law rules and guides all the streams and rivulets of
religion, where ever it flows. He is head of primary direction; the king of
sovereign execution: he of guidance and spiritual authority only; the king of
civil and natural power invested in his place and dignity from God above, to
maintain any laws as well purely Christian as civil, which himself shall accept
establish and promulgate. The Pope persuades; but the King commands: and
although the Pope should formally command, yet vertually and in effect such a
command amounts only to a persuasion; and he that obeyes not, feels no smart
for it, except the king be pleased to espous his cause, and punish the
contumacious; which if he justly do, then have kings a just authority in those
affairs; if otherwise, then has the Pope no means of help or defense in this
world, any more after the conversion of kings than before it; and help himself
he cannot any other way, than only by putting people out of his communion, who
care not of it. The Pope is obeyed for conscience and love only to his
religion; the King for wrath and conscience too: the Pope delivers the rule but
in general only, and blunt on one side; the king particularises and gives it an
edg: the Popes headship is exercised in Ought and Should be; the Kings is Will
and shall be: the Pope secludes the contumacious from heaven, which he that
believes not feels not; the King over and above that, cuts off malefactors from
the face of the earth too, and they shall be made by feeling to beleev it.

And these two defend and secure one another, and keep both Christians and
their faith inviolate. And while Christians themselves do both tenderly love
their Pape and chief pastor, and springhead of their religion, which is
believed beyond him to flow invisibly from God the great ocean of truth; and
withal do honor fear, and observe their King and princely governor, who only
bears the sword of justice and not in vain, to take revenge upon all those,
whom the love of religion and spiritual sword of their pastor will not keep in
awe, they do their duty as they ought, and shall find happiness therein. I must
make haste, and can say no more at present to this business, which as I have
told you is somewhat besides my purpos.

Only one thing I must needs tell you before I pass on. Although a king is in a
good and proper sense styled head as well of Church as State within his own
dominions: yet head of the Church absolutely, is so proper to the Roman
Patriarch, that no man upon earth besides himself has ever so much as
pretended to it: and that for six reasons. First because head of the Church
absolutely, intimates an universal right over the guidance of religion, not in
one kingdom only but all, where ever that religion is. And the king of France,
for example, neither did nor can pretend to be head of the Church of England,
much less of Hungary, Spain, Africa, Italy, Greece, Asia, etc. Yet such a head
there must needs be, to the end the Church may be one mystic and spiritual
body, at unity in it self. And that head must be unlimited to time and place,
as the Church it self is ever permanent, and universally spread; nor must the
government alter, as governments of particular kingdoms do. Secondly, head of
the Church absolutely, involves a primacy both of conveighing and interpreting
faith: and all princes in Europ received their faith at first from priests, who
sent for that end from their spiritual superior converted their kingdoms, but
they never gave faith either to them or their pastor. Thirdly he that is head
of the Church absolutely, must be of the same connatural condition with the
whole hierarchy, to confirm, baptize, ordain, preach, atone the almighty by
sacrifice, impose hands, segregate men from their worldly state unto his own
spiritual one, and in a special manner to exercise those priestly functions,
unto which he segregates them. Fourthly, head of the Church absolutely is to be
indifferent unto kingdoms and all sorts of government, as the religion also is,
and keep it like it self in all places unaltered in its nature, however in its
general dictates it may concur to the direction and good of all people and
governments. And therefore he cannot be confined to one place or government, but
must be as it were separate and in a condition indifferent to all; as a general
bishop, whose sole care is to heed those eradiations of faith spread up and
down the world, may be and is; when princes heed but their own particular
kingdoms, and care not how religion goes in another, any more then their wealth
or polility. Thus the sunbeams though they fall upon several soils diversely
affected, yet they keep their own nature unaltered, by virtue of one general
fountainhead of light which is indifferent to every kingdom, and dispenses,
distributes and keeps the rays unaltered. Fifthly, the ends and ways of
religion are quite of another nature from all worldly businesses, and therefore
require a particular superintendent set apart for them; as indeed they ever
have had since the time of religions first master, who ^s he did educate his in
order to a life eternal in a government apart, being himself a man distinct
from Caesar, so used he to speak of religious duties as separate and differing
from others; Reddite says he, quae Caesaris sunt, Caesari, and quae Dei, Deo.
In very truth, the Church and Christianity, as it is a thing accidental to all
worldly states, so is it superinduced upon them as an influence of another rank
and order, unto a particular end of future bliss; whereas all states do of
themselves aim no further than the peace and happiness of this life. And so for
the particular end and means answerable thereunto, which religion uses, it will
require a particular and special overseer. Thus Aristotle, though he conceited
the celestial orbs to be contiguous, and so all rapt together in a motion from
East to West, yet because they had special motions of their own, he therefore
allowed them particular Intelligences to guide those motions. So we see in
ordinary affairs, a man that has several ways and ends is guided by several
directours, in this by a lawyer, in that by a physician, by a gardener, by a
tradesman, etc. Sixthly, because head of the Church absolutely, must be one that
succeds in his chair, whom Jesus the master left and appointed personally to
feed his flock. No king upon earth ever pretended to sit in that Fishermans
chair, or to succeed him in it, which the Pope to my knowledge for sixteen
hundred years has both challenged as his right, and actually possessed. And
Catholics are all so fixed in this judgment, that they can no more disbeleev it,
than they can ceas to beleev in Jesus Christ.

11 ch from page 228. to 246.
Your eleventh chapter falls directly upon my fifteenth paragraff of Scriptur.
And therefore I may here expect, you should insult over me to the purpos. But Sir
I told you before, and now tell you again, that I know no other rule to
Christians either for faith or manners, no other hope, no other comfort, but
what scriptur and holy gospel affords. But this is not any part of the debate
now in hand, however you would persuade the world to think so. When four or
five men of several judgments collected from the very scriptur you and I talk
of, rise up one against another, with one and the same scriptur in their hands,
with such equal pretense of light power and reason, that no one will either
yield to another, or remain himself in the same faith, but run endless divisions
without contronl: does scriptur prevent this evil? does it, has it, can it
remedy it? can any one man make a religion by the authority of scriptur alone,
which neither himself nor any other, upon the same grounds he framed it, shall
rationally doubt of. This is our case and only this; which you do not so much
as take notice of, to the end you may with a more plausible rhetoric, insult
over me as a contemner of Gods word. Nor do you heed any particle of my
discourse in this paragraff, but according to your manner collect principles to
the number of seven, out of it, you say, which I do not know to be so much as
hinted in it, that as you did before, so you may now again play with your own
bauble, and refute your self. And they are in a manner the very same you
sported with before in your second chapter. 1 from the Romans we received the
gospel.2 what is spoken in scriptur of the Church belongs to the Roman.3 the
Roman every way the same it was, etc. of all which I do not remember that I
have in that my paragraff so much as any word. Sir either speak to my discourse
as you find it, or else hold your peace.

As if then you had overheard me aforehand, to give you this deserved check, at
the close of your chapter, you bring in some few words of mine, with a short
answer of your own, annexed to the skirts of it; which I here set down as you
place them your self. No man can say, speaks Fiat lux, what ill popery ever did
in the world, till Henry the eights days, when it was first rejected. Strange,
say you in your Animadversions, when it did all the evils that ever were in the
Christian world. With the Roman catholics unity ever dwelt. Never Protestants
know their neighbor catholics, not their religion. They know both. Protestants
are beholding to Catholics, for their benefices, books, pulpits, gospel. For
some, not all. The Pope was once believed general pastor over all. Prove it.
The scriptur and gospel we had from the Pope. Not at all. You cannot beleev the
scriptur, but upon the authority of the Church. We can and do. You count them
who brought the scriptur as liars. No otherwis. The gospel separated from the
Church can prove nothing. Yes it self. This short work you make with me. And to
all that serious discourse of mine concerning scriptur, which takes up sixteen
pages in Fiat lux, we have got now in reply thereunto, this your Laconick
confutation. Strange. Never. Know both. Some not all. Prove it. Not at all. Can
and do. No otherwis. Yes it self.

12 chapter from page 246 to 262.
Your twelfth chapter meets with my history of Religion, as a flint with steel,
only to strike fire. For not heeding my story which is serious temperate and
sober, you tell another of your own, fraught with defamations and wrath,
against all ages and people: and yet speak as confidently, as calm truth could
do. First you say that Joseph of Arimathea was in England, but he taught the
same religion that is in England now. But what religion is that Sir? Then; you
tell us that the story of Fugatius and Damian missioners of Pope Eleutherius
you do suspect for many reasons. But because you assign none, I am therefore moved
to think they may be all reduced to one, which is, that you will not
acknowledge any good thing, ever to have come from Rome: Then, say you,
succeeded times af luxury, sloth, pride, ambition, scandalous riots and
corruption both of faith and manners, over all the Christian world, both
princes, priests, prelates and people. Not a grain of virtue or any goodness we
must think, in so many christian kingdoms and ages. Then did Goths and Vandals
and other pagans overflow the Christian world. Either to punish we may beleev,
or teach them how to mend their manners. These pagans took at last to
christianity. Happily, because it was a more loose and wicked life, then their own
pagan profession. These men now christened advanced the Popes authority, when
Christian religion was now grown degenerate. And now we come to know, how the
Roman bishop became a patriarch above the rest, by means namely of new
converted pagans. It was an odd chance, they should think of advancing him to
what they never knew, either himself or any other advanced before amongst
Christians, whose rotten and corrupt faith they had lately embraced. And yet
more odd and strange it was, that all Christendom should calmly submit to a
power, set up anew by young converted pagans; no prince or bishop either there
or of any other Christian kingdom, either then or ever after to this day
excepting against it. Had not all the bishops and priests of Africa, Egypt,
Syria, Thrace, Greece, and all the Christian world acknowledged by a hundred
experiments the supreme spiritual authority of the Roman patriarch in all times,
before this deluge of Goths and Vandals? But why do I expostulate with you, who
write these things not to judicious readers, but fools and children, who are
not more apt to tell a truth, than to believe a lie. But what follows next.
Toward the beginning of this lurry, say you, were the Brittons extirpated by
the Saxes, who in aftertimes received Austin from Rome, a man very little
acquainted with the gospel. Here Is the thanks good S. Austin has, who out of
his love and tenderness to our nations welfar, after so long and tedious
journeyes, entered upon the wild forest of our paganism, with great hazards
and inexpressable sufferings of hunger cold and other corporal inconveniences,
to communicate Christ Jesus and his life and grace unto our nation. After this,
say you, religion daily more and more declined till the Reformation rose. This
is the sum of your story; which if I like not, I may thank my self, say you,
for putting you in mind of it. Indeed Sir, it is so falls and defamatory, and
laden with foul language, not only against all nations, ages and people of all
conditions, but against the honor of sacred gospel it self, which must utterly
die and have no life or power in the world for so many ages together, that I
think neither I, or any else can like it, that bears any respect either to
modesty religion or truth. You say in this your chapter that I am better at
telling a tale then mannaging an argument: but I shall now beleev, that you are
equally good at both.

13 chapter from page 262 to 278.
Your thirteenth chapter takes up my three following paragraffs about the
history of religion; wherein, after that according to your wonted manner you
tell me, that I do not my self understand what this thing, that thing, the
other thing means, although it be part of my own discourse, you say at length, that
there is no such matter, as I speak; make another story of your own of the same
mettle with your former, imposing afresh upon popery (by which: I do not indeed
know what you mean) a wain-load of adulteries, drunkenness, atheism, poisonings,
avarice, pride, cruelties, tumults, blasphemy, rebellions, wars, crimes, and
yet threatening to say if you should chance to be provoked, far harder things
then these. Sir, may no man provoke a wasp.

But if this be the right character of popery, which here and elswher up and
down your book you give us, I tell you first, it will be a difficult matter to
know in what age or place popery most raigns; secondly, that it is a thing I am
so far from excusing, that I wish it back to the pit of hell from whence it
issued; thirdly, that Roman catholics, if you be indeed against this popery,
are all on your side; for to my knowledge their religion is as opposite to it,
as light to darkness, or God to Belial; lastly, that you need not be so tenderly
fearful for the spreading of popery; for honest men will be ready to stone him
that teaches it; and knaves, hypocrites, adulterers, traitors, thieves,
drunkards, atheists; rebels, if you have given a right description of popery,
are all Papists already; these need no conversion, the other will by no
rhetoric be moved to it. Indeed you fright us all from papistry. For though
some love iniquity as it is gainful or pleasursom, and must needs suffer for it
when they are condemned at the sessions, and cannot avoid it; yet is no man
willing to suffer either loss of goods or imprisonment, death or banishment,
for the bare name of popery, that has neither gain nor pleasur in it. In a
word, wicked men will act your popery, but not own it. And they which own a
popery, which I see you are not acquainted withal, will not only dislike
others, but hate themselves, if through any frailty or passion they should ever
fall into any article of your popery here described. Good Sir, take heed of
blaspheming that innocent Catholic flock, which the angels of God watch over to
protect them. Be afraid to curs them, whom God has blessed, or impose that
upon their religion which it detests.

14 chapter from page 278 to 286.
In your fourteenth chapter which is upon my title of Discovery, you labor to
show that the contradictions, which I mentioned in Fiat lux to be put upon
popery, are no contradictions at all. Well Sir, although slanders put upon them
be never so contradictory and opposite, yet must they have patience: all is
true enough, if it be but bad enough. While our Kings reign in peace, then the
Papists religion is persecuted, as contrary to monarchy: when we have destroyed
that government, then is the papist harassed, spoiled, pillaged, murdered,
because their religion is wholly addicted to monarchy, and Papists are all for
Kings. Have not these things been done over and over, within the space of
twenty years here lately in England? All men now alive have been eyewitnesses
of it: These things as put upon Papists ceas to be contradictions: And if they
should be contradictions, both parts are therefore true in our country logic,
because they are put upon Papists. Is there not something of the power of darkness
in this?

One latin word of mine which shuts up that my Paragraff of Discovery, Ejice
ancillam cum puero suo, because I english it not, you translate it for me, or
rather interpret it, Bannish all men out of England but Papists: this according
to your gloss must be my meaning. And you seem to exult, that Fiat lux, who in
outward show pretends so much moderation, should let fall a word that betrays
no little mischief in his heart. Good Lord whither does passion hurry man's
spirit! All that period of mine in the end of the foresaid is but merely
coppied out of one of Saint Paul's letters, which he wrote to the Galatians, the
fourth chapter of that Epistle, wherein those very words, alluding to a passage
in Moses his Pentateuch, are expressed. Do you either read in your English bible,
Bannish all men out of England? or understand any such meaning of Ejice
ancillam cum puero suo, Gal. 4.30. Pray peruse the ten last verses of that
chapter attentively; and see if I have not in my discourse so coppied out their
meaning and very words too, so far as it behooved; that I have done nothing
else. Abraham had two sons, says S. Paul, one of a handmaid, the other of a
free woman, etc. These things are an allegory, etc. But as then, he that was
born after the flesh persecuted him that was born after the spirit, even so it
is now. But what says the scriptur? cast out the bondwoman with her son: for
the son of the bondwoman shall not be heir with the son of the freewoman, etc.
Pray tell me soberly; Did the apostle mean by those words, Cast out the
bondwoman with her son, that the sons of Ishmael should be put to the sword or
banished out of their kingdom? Now pray hear my discourse which I coppied out of
that original; If my reader here be cautious, he may easily discern a reason,
why all these sects are so boisterous one against another, and every one of
them against the Roman catholic. Ismael disturbed the whole house, and was ever
quarrelling and bustling against Isaac. The reason is the same both here and
there. Ismael was a natural son, and Isaac the legitimate heir. And natural
sons be generally seditious, violent and clamorous. As Ismael therefore was Isaac
his natural brother; so is a protestant minister but the by-blow of a catholic
Priest; the Presbyterian likewise to him: and so forward, till you com to the
Quaker, who was begot by a delusion, and brought into the world by a fright:
his hand is against every man, and every man's hand against him. The remedy and
only means of peace is, Ejice ancillam cum puero suo. These be my words out of
S. Paul; and what is his meaning, the same is mine. But you will have me in
spite of my teeth, because I speak nothing but good, still to mean some evil. I
thought S. Paul had meant by those words, if I must needs discover my
understanding to you, that the peaceable Isaacs were the only sons of Gods
promised love and favor, the inheritance of which blessing boisterous Ishmaels
can never work out to themselves, by all their persecutions and bustling
contentions. And according to this meaning I concluded, that to consider and
think seriously of this, were the only remedy and means of peace amongst us
here in England. Eijce ancillam cum puero suo is an antidote against all
contentious emulations, which are a suspicious mark not of an elect but of a
reprobate. But I must neither think nor speak, nor mean, but what you will have
me to do; and that shall still be something that is odious. An emblem hereof was
the rod of Moses, which taken in the right end was a walking staff; in the
wrong, a serpent.

15 chapter from page 286. to 304.
In your fifteench chapter, upon my paragraff of Messach, you are in a mighty
plunge what this Messach should be, and what the etimology of that word. Latin
it is not, greek it is not, and you are sure it is not hebrew; surely it is,
say you, some uncouth word, like that of the Gnostics Paldabaoth. Alas good
Sir, it is English, a pure English word; used here in England all the Saxons
times, and some hundred years after the conquest, till the French monosyllable
had by little and little worn out the last syllable of the word. And you may
find it yet in the old Saxon laws which I have read my self, those especially
of King Ina, if I rightly remember the name, which be yet extant, wherein strict
care and provision is made that a due reverence be kept by all people in the
Church all the time of their Messach, which now we call Mess or Mass.

Then having laughed at my admiration of catholic service, you carp at me for
saying that the first Christians were never called together to hear a sermon;
and to convince me, you bring some places out of S. Paul's Epistles, and the
Acts, which commend the ministry of the word: This indeed is your usual way of
refuting my speeches; you flourish copiously in that which is not at all
against me, and never apply it to my words, lest it should appear, as it is,
impertinent. I deny not that converts were further instructed, or that the
preaching of Gods word is good and useful: but that which I say is, that
primitive Christians were never called together for that end, as the great work
of their Christianity. This I have so clearly proved, both in the second
dialogue of the Reclaimed Papist, and also in the foresaid paragraff of
Messach, that you divert from that, to declaim of the necessity and excellency
of preaching, and bring neither text nor reason that may reach to my words at
all.

You go on, and wonder much, that we should hear nothing in scriptur of this
Christian sacrifice, if any such were. Sir, you will neither hear nor see. But,
say you, the passion of our Lord is our Christian sacrifice. Do not I say so
too? But that this incruent sacrifice was instituted by the same Lord before
his death, to figur out daily before our eyes that passion of his, which was
then approaching, in commemoration of his death, so long as the world should
last; this, though I plainly speak it, you take no notice of it. But the
Judaical sacrifice, say you, is said by the apostle in his epistle to the
Hebrews, in this to differ from the sacrifice of Christians, that ours was don
but once, theirs often. It is true the sacrifice of our Lords passion, of which
the apostle in that whole discourse intends only to treat, in opposition to that
of bulls and goats, was so don but once, that it could not be don twice. But as
the sacrifices of the old law, were instituted by almighty God, to be often
iterated before the passion of the Messiah for a continual exercise of
religion; so did the same Lord for the very same purpos institute another to be
iterated after his death, unto which it were to have reference, when it should
be past, as the former had to the same death, when it was to com. And it has a
reference so much the more excellent, as that it does by the almighty power of
the same Messiah, exhibit to the eye of his believers, that very true real body
as crucified amongst us, whereof the former Mosaical sacrifices gave merely a
shadow. Did not our Lord do this? were not the apostles according to this rite
(...) sacrificing to our great Lord God, when S. Paul was by imposition of
hands segregated from the laity for his divine service, as I clearly in that my
paragraff evince out of the history of the Acts of the apostles. No, say you,
the apostles were not then about any sacrifice, but only preaching Gods word,
or some such thing to the people, in the name and behalf of God. But Sir, is
this to be in earnest or to jest? The sacred text says, they were sacrificing
to our Lord, liturgying, and ministering to him. You say they were not
sacrificing to God, but only preaching to the people. And now the question is,
whether you or I more rightly understand that apostolical book. For my sense
and meaning I have all antiquity, as well as the plain words of sacred text,
you have neither.

16 chapter from page 304 to 313.
Your sixteenth chapter upon my paragraff of the Virgin Mary, which is, you
say, the most disingenuous of all my book, is spent in an invective against
calumnies, which brings you upon your often iterated common place of Pagans
reproaches to Christians. And whatever my paragraff may be, this your chapter
seems to me as ingenious as the very best of your book, and absolutely
frivolous. And must you inveigh against calumnies, whose whole book is nothing
else? it is a bundle of slanders, and a mere quiver of sharp arrows of
desolation.

17 chapter from page 313 to 325.
Your seventeenth chapter upon my paragraff of Images or Figures, nibbles at
more of my discourse made in that one paragraff, then you have taken notice of
in ten of my others. And therefore I mean to com up close to you. A man, say you,
may indeed have such thoughts of devotion, as Fiat lux speaks of, upon the
sight of images which he sees hanging in Churches, if he be a man distraught of
his wits, not if he be himself and sober. So then, mad men it seems can tell
what figures represent, sober and wise men cannot. Again, The violation of an
image, say you, redounds to the prototype, if it be rightly and duly
represented, not else. And when then is Christ crucified, for example, rightly
and duly represented? Are you one of those can tell what figures represent, or
not. The hanging up of traitors in effigy is don say you, only to make a
declaration of the fact, and not to cast a dishonor upon the person. So you
say: Because you know it don long after the fact has rung all the whole kingdom
over; and don not in places of concours, but ignominy; not in the Exchange, but
Tiburn; not with any characters declaring the fact, but with a halter about his
neck, to denote the death and ignominy inflicted, as far as is possible, upon
him. You go on.

Where the Psalmist complains of Gods enemies breaking down his sculptures, he
means not thereby any images or figures, but only wainscot or carved ceiling.
Surely the Prophet wanted a word then to express himself, or translatours to
express the Prophet. If we must guess at his meaning without heeding his words,
one might think it as probable, that the house of God was ordained with
sculptures of Cherubims, and other angels, to represent his true house that is
above, as with the circles, quadrats, triangls, rhombos, and rhomboides of
wainscot. The eye, say you again, may not have her species as well as the ear,
because God has commanded the one and not the other. This Sir you only say. Fiat
lux makes it appear, that God commands and commends both, and the nature of man
requires both: nor can you give any reason, why I may not look upon him who was
crucified, as well as hear of him. You add. Nor is the sole end of preaching
as Fiat lux would have it, only to move the mind of the hearers unto
corresponding affections. Why do not you say then, what else it is for? you deny
my words, but declare your self no other end, but what I have in those short
words expressed. You may happily conceal in your heart some other end of your
preaching, which you are loath to speak; as to procure applaus, to vent your
rhetoric, to get good benefices, to show your fine cloth and silks, your pure
neat white starched bands and cuffs, buttoned handkerchiefs, and ladies gloves,
to inflame factions, get wives, or the like; but I could not think of all
things at once; nor needed I to express any more, than that one end of
preaching which is connatural, apostolical, and legal. You go on.

God indeed commanded the Cherubims to be set upon the ark, but those cherubims
were images of nothing; of what should they be images. Nor were they set up to
be adored. Besides God who commanded them to be set up, did no more gainsay
his own prohibition of images to be made, than he contradicted his own rule
which forbids to steal, when he commanded his people to spoil the Egyptians.
But Sir, since the real Cherubims are not made of our beaten gold; those set up
by Moses must be only figures. And of what else should they be figures but of
those real ones. Nor is it either to my purpos or yours, that they are set up
to be adored. For images in catholic Churches, are not set up for any such
purpos; nor do I any where say it. No man alive has any such thought, no
tradition, no council has delivered it, no practis infers it. Christian
Philosophers or Schooolmen have indeed raised a philosophical question; Whether
any respect may be terminated upon the Figur, purely as it is such an absolute
entity in it self, besides that relative one that falls only upon the
prototype: But what they question, or what they talk, or what they resolve,
does no more belong, because they say it, unto catholic faith, then if they had
been asleep and said nothing. All catholic councels and practis declares such
sacred figurs, to be expedient assistants to our thoughts in our divine
meditation and prayers: and that is all that I know of it. And the relative
respect that is given to any figur as it is such a figur, whether in a glass,
or in any more fixed postur to supply the defects of a mirror, that it
terminates naturally upon the sampler or prototype is evident to right reason
and philosophy. And it cannot be otherwise.

That which you speak of the Israelites spoiling the Egyptians by Gods command,
has some species of an argument in it. But Sir, we must know, you as well as I,
that God who forbids men to steal, did not then command to steal, as you say he
did, when he bad his people spoil the Egyptians under the species of a loan.
Many things legitimate that their act of spoil, and clear it from any notion of
theft or robbery or stealing. First, they might have of themselves a right to
those few goods, in satisfaction of the long oppression they had unjustly
undergon: and it may be that in that their great have, their own allowance was
not then paid them. But secondly, because it is a thing of danger, that any
servant should be allowed to right himself, by putting his hand to his masters
goods, though his case of wrong be never so clear, therefore did the command of
God intervene to justify their action. And the absolute dominion of the whole
earth and all that is in it, being inseperably in the hands of God, made that
by Gods express command to be truly now and justly the Hebrews right, which by
an inferior and subordinate title, such as is in the hand of creatures,
belonged to the Egyptians before. So that the Hebrews in taking those goods
with them, did not steal: nor did God command them to steal, when he bad them
carry those goods of the Egyptians with them; for that upon that very command
of God they now ceased to be the Egyptians any more. But this can no ways be
applied to the business of Images: nor could God command the Hebrews to make any
images, if he had absolutely forbidden to have any at all made. For this
concerns not any affair between neighbor and neighbor, whereof the supreme
Lord has absolute dominion, but the service only and adoration due from man to
his maker, which God being essentially good and immutably true cannot alter or
dispens with. Nor does it stand with his nature and deity to chang, dispens, or
vary the first table of his law concerning himself, as he may the second which
concerns neighbors; for want of that dominion over himself, which he has over
any creature, to give or take away its right, to preserv or destroy it, as
himself pleases. God may disable my neighbors right, and enable me to take to
my self that which before was his, but he cannot command me to commit idolatry
or dishonor himself. If he should deny himself, he would not be God. From
hence it must needs follow, that if it be the sens and mind of the almighty,
that to set up any images in Churches be derogatory to his glory, then could
not God possibly command any to be there set up. For these two precepts, Thou
shall set up images, and Thou shall set up none, are not only contradictory in
terms of the law proposed, enounced and promulgated, but infer also in God
himself that contradiction, opposition and self-denial, which is inconsisting
with such an unchangeable veracity. God may possibly allow me either to curs or
spoil my neighbor, or in a case expressed not to help him; but he should deny
himself (which the deity cannot do) if either he should command me to blaspheme
himself, or the honor due to him either to refuse it him, or give it to
another. When therefore one and the same God so often forbids his people to make
to themselves any images; and yet in the same divine law commands them to set up
Cherubims in his own temple; it cannot, being a concernment of his worship, be
otherwise meant, than that they should make no sculptures or figurs, but what
himself commands, and which may assuredly represent persons dear to himself, as
Fiat lux interprets it. And if an image in it self be opposite to Gods glory,
as Anticatholiks think, then could not God possibly command the making or
setting up of any, in his holy temple or place of divine worship. But you go on.

Fiat lux says, God forbad foreign images, such as Moloch, Dagon, and
Astaroth, but he commanded his own. But Fiat lux is deceived in this as well as
other things, for God forbad any likenesses of himself; and he gives the
reason, because, says he, in Horeb ye saw no similitude of me. Sir, you may
know and consider, that the statues and graven images of the heathens, toward
whose land Israel then in the wilderness was journeying, to enter and take
possession, were ever made by the pagans to represent God, and not any devils,
although they were deluded in it. And therefore were they called the gods of the
mountains, the gods of the valleys, the gods of Accaron, Moab, etc. There was
therefore good reason; that the Hebrews, who should be cautioned from such
snares, should be forbidden to make to themselves any similitude or likeness of
God. What figur or similitude the true God had allowed his people, that let
them hold and use, until the fulness of time should com, when the figur of his
substance, the splendor of his glory, and only image of his nature should
appear. And now good Sir, since God has been pleased to show us his face, pray
give Christians leav to use, and keep, and honor it. If you be otherwise
minded, and take pleasur in defacing his figurs, I think they have good reason
on their sides, who honor them. You proceed.

It is a pretty fansy in Fiat lux, to say we have as well a precept, Thou shall
make graven images, as we have, Thou shall not. I wonder where Fiat lux finds
that precept, since all ancients have it, and all translations read it, Thou
shall not. What is that It they have, what is that It they read. Do you think
that Fiat lux reads one and the same text, both Thou shall and Thou shall not.
Moses his making and the command given him to make Cherubims, is a rule good
enough to Fiat lux, that some images may be made and set up in Churches: as also
is that precept. Thou shall not make to thy self any images, another rule to
show him, that some images we are not to make to our selves on our own heads, in
imitation of pagans.

No less whimsical is that relation Fiat lux says an image has to some one
prototype, for example, to S. Peter rather then to Simon Magus: for there can be
no relation, but what the imagination either of the framer of spectatour makes.
Sir, speaking as I do of a formal representation or relation, and not of the
efficient cause of it, I cannot but wonder at this your illogical assertion. Is
the pictur made by the spectators imagination to represent this or that thing?
or the imagination rather guided to it by the pictur? By this rule of yours the
image of Caesar, did not my imagination help it, would no more represent a man
than a mous. I know the imagination can, for want of real picturs, make
fantastical ones to it self; in the clouds, walls, air, or fire, etc. But when
she has real ones, made her either by art or nature, she cannot make them to be
otherways then they are; nor think or say, except she will abuse her self to
derision, that a cat is a dog, or an ox a hare. Nor does it help you at all,
that there may be mistakes; for we treat not here of the errors but natures of
things. And you will not, I hope, maintain, that there is no real heat any
where, but what the imaginanation makes, because the good poor man of Norway
sent out of his own country upon an errand, stood warming his fingers there,
at a hedge of red roses.

18 chapter from page 325 to 365.
Your eighteenth chapter, which is upon my paragraff of Tongues or Latin
service, has some color of plausibility. But because you neither do, nor will
understand the customs of that Church, which you are eager to oppose; all your
words are but wind. I have heard many grave protestant divines, ingeniously
acknowledge, that divine comfort and sanctity of life requisite to salvation
which religion aims at, may with more perfection and less inconvenience be
attained by the customs of the Roman Church, than that of ours. For religion is
not to sit pierching upon the lips, but to be got by heart, it consists not in
reading but doing; and in this not in that lives the substance of it, which is
soon and easily conveyed. Christ our Lord drew a compendium of all divine
truths into two words, which his great apostle again abridged into one. And if
the several gospels for every day in the year, which are or may be in the hands
of all catholics, the chiefest particles of divine epistles, books of sacred
history and meditation upon all the mysteries of salvation, and spiritual
treatises for all occasions and uses, which be numberles amongst catholics,
adjoined to the many several rites of examination of conscience, daily and
continual practis of prayer and fasting, and an orderly commemoration of the
things God has wrought for us throughout the year, which all by law are tied
to observe, and do observe them, may not give a sufficient acquaintance of what
concerns our salvation, and promote them enough toward it, I am to seek what
it is that can; or what further good it may do, to read the letter of Saint
Paul's epistles, to the Romans for example, or Corinthians, wherein questions,
and cases and theological discourses are treated, that vulgar people can
neither understand, nor are at all concerned to know. And I pray you tell me
ingenuously, and without heat, what more of good could accrue to any by the
translated letter of a book, whereof I will be bold to say that nine parts in
ten concern not my particular, either to know or practis; than by the conceived
substance of Gods will to me, and my own duty toward him? or what is there now
here in England when the letter of scriptur is set open to every man's eye, any
more either of peace or charity, piety or justice, than in former catholic
times, when the substance of Gods word and will was given people in short, and
the observance of their duty prolixly pressed upon them. What did they do in
those ancient catholic times? they flockt every day in the week to their
Churches, which stood continually open, there to pray and meditate and renew
their good purposes; they sung psalms, hymns, and canticles all over the land
both day and night; they built all our churches, that we have at this day
remaining amongst us, and as many more, which we have razed and pulled down;
they founded our universities, established our laws, set out tithes and
glebe-land for their clergy, built hospitals, erected corporations; in a word,
did all the good things we found don for our good in this our native kingdom.
But now, Quid agitur in Anglia? Consulitur de religione. The former Christians
practiced, and we dispute; they had a religion, we are still seeking one: they
exercised themselves in good works by the guidance of their holy catholic faith
which leads to them; all these works we by our faith evacuate as menstruous
rags: they had the substance of true religion in their hearts; we the text in
our lips: they had nothing to do but to conform their lives to Gods will; all
our endeavor is to apply Gods word to our own factions. Sir mistake me not:
The question between us, is not, whether the people are to have Gods word or
no: but whether that word, consist in the letter left to the peoples disposal;
or in the substance urgently imposed upon people for their practis. And this
because you understand not, but mistake the whole business, all your talk in this
your eighteenth chapter vades into nothing.

Where Fiat lux says in that forenamed paragraff, that the Pentateuch or
hagiography was never by any High Priest among the Jews put into a vulgar
tongue, nor the Gospel or Liturgy out of greek in the Eastern part of the
Christian Church, or latin in the Western: You slight this discourse of mine,
because hebrew, greek and latin was, say you, vulgar tongues themselves. I know
this well enough. But when and how long ago were they so? not for some thousand
years to my knowledge. And was the Bible, Psalms, or Christian Liturgy then put
into vulgar tongues, when those they were first writ in, ceased to be vulgar?
This you should have spoke to, if you had meant to say any thing, or gainsay
me. Nor is it to purpos, to tell me that S. Jerome translated the Bible into
Dalmatian; I know well enough it has been so translated by some special persons
into Gothish, Armenian, Ethiopian, and other particular dialects. But did the
Church either of the Hebrews or Christians, either greek or latin, ever deliver
it so translated to the generality of people, or use it in their service, or
command it so to be don, as a thing of general concernment and necessity? So
far is it from that, that they would never permit it. This I said, and I first
said it, before you spoke, and your mere gainsay without further reason or
probability of proof cannot dispossess me.

Syrian you would prove not to be any known language in Palestin, because the
common people understood it not, as appears in the book of Kings, where
Rabshakeh general of the host of Sennacherib, when he defied King Hezekiah
under the walls of Jerusalem, was entreated by the Hebrew princes to speak
Syriack, and not the Jews language to fright the poor people. But Sir you are
mistaken: for that tongue the princes persuaded Rabshakeh to speak, was the
Assyrian, his own language, which was learned by the gentry of Palestin, as we
in England learn french; which although by abbreviation it be called Syriack,
yet it differed as much from the Jews language, which was spoke by Christ and
his apostles (whereof Eli, Eli, lama sabacthani is part) and was ever since that
time called syrian or syriack, as french differs from english. And if you would
read attentively, you may suspect by the very words of the text, that the Jews
language even then was not Hebrew. For it had been a shorter and plainer
expression, and more answerable to their custom so to call it, if it had been
so, than by a paraphrase to name it the Jews language; which if then it was
called Syrian, as afterward it was, then had the princes reason to call it
rather the Jews language then Syrian, because that and the Assyrian differed
more in nature then appellation; though some difference doubtless there was in the
very word and name, although translatours have not heeded to deliver it.
Shibbolet and Sibbolet may differ more in signification than sound; nor is
British and Brutish so near in nature, as they are in name. And who knows not
that Syria and Assyria were several kingdoms. As likewise were the languages.

Dr. Cousins, now bishop of Durham, lately sojourneying in Paris, when he
understood of a grecian bishops arrival there, did with some other english
gentlemen in his company give him a visit, and afterward with the same or like
company went frequently to see him. The articles of our English Church were
translated into greek, and shown him. Many questions were asked him about the
service of the grecian Church, praying for the dead, invocation of Saints, real
presence, confession; etc. Dr. Cousins can tell himself what answer he received
from that venerable grave prelate Cyrillus, archbishop of Trapesond; for that
was his name and title. In brief, he owned not those articles, as any way
consonant to the faith of the Greeks, who believed and had ever practiced the
contrary. He also told them distinctly and openly, that Mass or Liturgy was,
and had ever been the great work of their Christianity all over the greek
Church; that confession of sins to a priest, praying for the dead, invocation
of saints, and such like points wherein we in England differ from papists, were
all great parts of their religion, and their constant practis. Finally he let
them know, that all the Liturgies, both those of S. Basil, S. Chrysostom, S.
Gregory Nazianzen, were ever kept in the learned greek, differing from the
vulgar language. And withal showed his own greek book of Liturgy, which he used
himself at the altar. Dr. Cousins did himself see him officiate with his lay
brother a monk of S. Basil, belonging to S. Catherins monastery in mount Sina,
ministering to him at the altar; and found both by his words and practis, that
in all those and other essential parts and observances of Christianity the
Greeks agreed perfectly with the Roman Church. This testimony, Sir, of a
venerable arch-byshop to such a worthy person as Dr. Cousins, might I should
think suffice to justify my words, and make you beleev with me, that Christian
Liturgies have ever been used, as Fiat lux speaks, in a learned language
distinct from the vulgar. But we need not go far from home for a testimony.
When was the Bible or Service Book seen here in England for a thousand years
space in any other language but Latin, before Edward the sixth days (except
happily the Psalter, which the Saxons and almost all people, have ever had in
their own tongue, being a chief part of Christians devotion) or in British or
Welsh, before the bishop of S. Asaph his translation?

You mightily insult over me in your 336 page, for saying, that the bible was
kept by the Hebrews in an ark or tabernacle, not touched by the people, but
brought out at times to the priest, that he might instruct the people out of
it. Here, say you, the author of Fiat lux betrays his gross ignorance and
something more: for the ark was placed in sanctum sanctorum, and not entered but
by the priest only once a year, whereas the people were weekly instructed. But
Sir, do I speak there of any sanctum sanctorum, or of any ark in that place?
was there, or could there be, no more arks but one? If you had been only in these
latter days, in any synagogue or convention of Jews, you might have seen even
now, how the bible is kept still with them in an ark or tabernacle, in
imitation of their forefathers, when they have now no sanctum sanctorum amongst
them. You may also discern, how according to their custom, they cringe and
prostrate at the bringing out of the Bible, which is the only solemn adoration
left amongst them; and that there be more arks than that in sanctum sanctorum.
If I had called it a box or chest or cuphoard, you had let it pass. But I used
that word as more sacred.

19 chapter from page 365 to 386.
I discerned in your ninteenth chapter which is upon my paragraff of Communion
in one kind a somewhat more then ordinary swelling choler; which moved me to
look over that my paragraff afresh. And I found my fault: there is in it so much
of Christian reason and sobriety, that if I had since the time I first wrote
it, swerved from my former judgment, of the probability I conceived to be in
that Roman practis of communicating in one kind, I had there met with enough to
convert my self. And therefore wondered no more, that you should load me so
heavily with your wonted imputations of fraud, ignorance, blasphemy, and the
like. I ever perceiv you to be then most of all passionate, when you meet with
most convincing reasons. When the exorcist is most innocent, his patient, they
say, then frets and foams and curses most.

20 chapter from page 386 to 402.
There is in your twentieth chapter, which prosecutes my paragraff of Saints or
Hero's, one word of yours, that requires my notice. I say in that my paragraff,
that the pagans derided the ancient Christians for three of their usages.
First, for eating their own God: Secondly, for kneeling to their priests
genitals: Thirdly, for worshipping an asses head. This last you except against,
and impute my story to my own simplicity and ignorance, if not to something
wors; for that imputation, say you, was not laid upon Christians at all, but
only upon Jews, as may be seen in Josephus. But Sir, you may know, that in
odiosis the primitive Christians were ever numbered among the Jews; and what
evil report lay upon these, was charged also upon them, though sometimes upon
another ground. And although Josephus may excuse the Jews, and not the
Christians; yet a long while after his time, if not even then also, that
slander was generally all over the pagan world charged upon Christians also, as
may be read in Tertullian, and other ancient writers; yea and very probably, by
the very Jews themselves who bitterly hated them, cast off from themselves upon
the poor Christians on another account, which I specified in Fiat lux. And
through the whole Roman empire did the sound of this scandal ring up and down,
for some ages together. Insomuch that Tertullian himself conceited, that as the
Christian religion was derived from the Jews; so likewise that the imputation
of the asses head, first put upon the Jews, might from them be derived upon
Christian religion. And the same Tertullian, in his Apologetick adds these
words: The calumnies, says he, invented to cry down our religion grew to such
excess of impiety, that not long ago in this very city, a pictur of our God was
shown by a certain infamous person, with the ears of an ass and a hoof on one
of his feet, clothed with a gown, and a book in his hand; with this
inscription, This is Onochoetes the God of Christians. And he adds, that the
Christians in the city, as they were much offended with the impiety; so did
they not a little wonder at the strange uncouth name the villain had put upon
their lord and master; Onochoetes forsooth, he must be called Onochoetes. And
are not you Sir a strange man, to tell me, p. 393. that what I speak of this
business is notoriously falls, nay and that I know it is false, and that I cannot
produce one authentic testimony, no not one of any such thing. But this is but
your ordinary confidence.

21 chapter from page 402 to 416.
I must not mervail, that my following paragraff, called Dirge, is so wantonly
played upon, in your one and twentieth chapter. You think of no body after they
are dead; nor does it at all concern you, whether they be in hell, or heaven,
or some third place, or not at all. But Sir, were not all the ancient monuments
of the foundations of our churches, colleges, and chapels in England now
destroyed, you would find your self with that wretched opinion of yours,
absolutely incapable to enter upon any benefice, cure, or employment in this
land. But the times are changed, and you have nothing now to do, but to eat,
drink, and preach; for to morrow you shall dye.

22 chapter from page 416 to 435
In your two and twentieth chapter, which is of the Pope, you do but only
repeat my words, and not understand, and deny, and laugh.

23 chapter from page 435 to Finis.
Your last chapter is upon my paragraff of Popery, wherein I set down eleven
other parcels of catholic profession, all of them innocent, unblamable and
sacred. You only bite at the first of them, and having it seems enough filled
your self with that, your wearied bones go to rest.

With Mas comedido, the title of my last paragraff you meddle not at all: It is
doubtless to you who understand not the English word Messach, another Gnostick
Paldabaoth. But I would you had Mas comedido by heart.

You cannot but mervail, that I have taken so little notice all this while, of
your only one strong and potent Argument, you stout Achilles that meets me in
every paragraff and period, and beats me back into the walls of Troy. Wberever
I am, whatsoever I say, your (...) is upon me. All the discourse of my whole one
and thirty paragraffs, is by it felled to the ground, miserably bruised and
battered with that one and the same (...). But I hope you will have me excused.
I have not leisur; I am not willing; I want ability to answer it, or give you
any corresponding satisfaction. The like to our Author for flourishing empty
words and cunning sleights of subtilty has been seldom, etc. Here our Author
falls into a great misadventure, etc. Here our Author discovers not only his
gross ignorance, but something more, etc Our Author believes not a word of all
this, nor can, etc. We find our Author never to fail so palpably and grossly,
as when, etc. Our Author speaks notoriously falls, nor has he, etc. Our
Authors history, philosophy and reason all alike, etc. Our Author speaks
boldly, though he know it is not so, but. etc. Our Author, if I could com to
speak to him, would not own any of this. etc. Never any such cunning
dissembling hypocrite as our Author, etc. It is no mervail our Author should
still fail both in philosophy antiquity, etc. who has not, etc. In these and
such like arguments, which occur almost as often as the pages of your book, you
rout Our Author utterly. I am in all this not able to say bough to a goose.
Although I be not conscious of any either fraud in my breast, or fault in my
book, or lie in either; yet in all such talk you must, and will, and shall have
both the first and last word too.

Another argument of yours expressed in twenty places of your Animadversions, by
which you would dissipate at once great part of Fiat lux into the air, does as
finely cant, as this does coursly defy. The religion, say you, that is now
professed in England, is that and only that which was first in ancient times
received here, etc. This you speak, and the more confidently do you speak it,
the less significant you know your words be, and yet sounding well enough for
your design. What do you mean I pray you Sir, by that religion that is now
professed in England? Why do you not specify it? Speak it in downright language.
Is it Popery that has been peaceably professed in the land for almost a thousand
years, and did all the good things we now find in it; as yet professed by some?
No, this you will deny. Is it prelate-protestancy that for threescore years
oppressed popery here? This if you had said, you had praised that too much, which
your self approves not. Is it Presbytery that warred the last twenty years, and
utterly destroyed the foresaid Protestancy? In saying this you had to your own
danger disabled the English Protestant Church, now to the great heart-burning
of the Presbyterians established again by law. Is it Independency that for six
or seven years curbed the Presbyterian here, in -- Tectour Olivers time, and
had almost past an Act for the abolishing of the three P.P.P. Papish,
Protestant, and Presbyterian. Is it Quakery, that is now far enough spread, and
openly professed by many, and judges the Papist stark naught, the Protestant half
rotten, the Presbyterian quarter addle, and other Independents imperfect. Is it
some general abstracted religion that is common to them all? Then Popery as well
as any other may be justly styled the religion here first received. For that
common notion in whatever you shall say it consists, so it be positive as it
ought to be, will be found first and principally in the Papists faith. But this
you have not thought good your self to expres, that you may seem to expres
something, that may be thought good to your self, and ill to me. But you must
deal heartily with me: I am an old ox that has fixed his foot firmly, and am
not to be out-braved either with your canting words or passionate execrations.

I had told you Sir, of all your tricks from page to page in particular, if
nothing had been required at my hands to write, but only my own reply: but
being, if I should do so, obliged to set down your talk too, I think it not
worth either my charge or labor to reflect upon you such your voluminous
impertinencies. And I have I assure you taken notice of all in your book, that
may seem to have any appearance of reason in it (though really there be none at
all against me) and is not either manifestly untrue, or absolutely improper.
This is all.

And now good Sir, I could wish you had given me the first letter of your name;
that I might have known how to salute you. I have been told of late, that the
Author of the Animadversions upon Fiat lux is one Doctor O N, a Protestant
against Popery which you found down, a Presbyterian against Protestancy which
you threw down, an Independent against Presbyterianry which you kept down. But
whether you be Doctor O N, or, to turn your inside outward, you be N O
doctor; since I cannot be assured, it shall be all one to me. All that I
undertook at this time is to let you know, who ever you be, that I have read
over your Animadversions upon my Fiat lux. And I thank you for your book; for
it confirms my Fiat lux, and all the whole design of it, I think irrefragably.
It shows to the eye and really verrifies by your own example, what Fiat lux did
but speak in words: namely that controversies of religion are endless for want
of some one thing to fix upon, which may not be depraved; that they are fraught
with uncharitable animosities, which darken the understanding and deprave good
manners; that they are mutable as men's fancies be, which can never be fixedly
stated, since every man has a spirit, has a method, has an opinion of his
own, and says and denies with endless diversity; that they are guileful and
delusory, sometimes falls on both sides, ever on one, and yet still made out
with subtle words, so plausible to the eye and ear, that men employed in the
multitude of affairs and troubles of this world, can never be able to
disintangle those knots of pro and con; then especially at a loss, when they
consider, that such as manage those disputes are all of them interested
persons; fifthly that they are mad and irrational, while all parties pretend one
and the same rule of holy scriptur, and yet will admit of no exterior visible
judge in their visible exterior contests: lastly that they are mischievous and
fatal to all places where they rise: as they have been of late to this our
distressed kingdom of England, where disputes and controversies about religion
raised to a height, by the inferior scribes against their prelates, drew after
them pikes and guns to make them good, for twenty years together, with much
desolation and ruin; which times I think I may not unjustly call the Vicars
Wars. For the inferior Priests and Levites, envying the dignities, glory and
revenues of their prelates, when they could not otherwise get them into their
own hands, by their lamentable tones in Eloimi, raised up the people of the
land, to further their design. This trick of theirs they learned from wolves.
For these, when they spy a waifaring man whom they would devour, and yet by a
narrow search perceiv him to be too strong for them, starting aside upon some
hillock, there set upon their tails, they howl for help.

And if any will not beleev Fiat lux, that such be the fruits of disputes and
controversies, and such their nature and genius, let them beleev the Author of
Animadversions, who as he says what he pleases, and denies what he lists; so
to his frequent reproaches, villifications and slanders he adjoyns his own
menaces of terror, to make my words good, and justify Fiat lux.

You frequently threaten me, that if I write again I shall hear more, far more
than you have said in your Animadversions: but I promis you Sir, if you write
again, you shall never hear more from me. For now the flies begin to com into
my chamber, which may happily expect I should heed their flight and hearken to
their buzz, and I must not leav those greater employments to look upon your
Animadversions, or any your other books.

This Epistolae my only daughter, coms as you see to chide you Sir for abusing
her innocent Brother. But she does it so sparingly and with so many blushes, as
though the blame were hers, though yours be the misdemeanour. And I hope she may
so far work upon your good nature, if you have any left, that laying your hand
upon your heart you may now sorrowing say, Quid feci? I have wronged the
innocent. And for that end I wish you all grace and peace; and I wish it you
with all my heart, who am natural father both of that innocent boy Fiat lux,
and of this Epistola his sister; and if you will but reckon me so, your very
true friend

JVC.
Given this V. of the Ides of April in the year of our Lord MDCLXIII.
FINIS.
The places of my Paragraffs in this Epistle.
DIversity of feuds page 31 Ground of quarrels page 32 Nullity of title ibid.
Heats and resolutions page 33 Motives of moderation ibid. Obscurity of God
ibid. Darkness of nature page 44 Mystery of providence page 44 Help page 44
Reason page 47 Light and Spirit page 48 Plea of parties page 49 Scriptur page
70 History of religion page 72 Discovery page 77 Messach page 80 Virgin Mary
page 83 Images or Figurs page 84 Tongues or latin service page 93 Table or
Communion page 101 Saints or Hero's page 102 Dirge page 104 Pope page 104
Popery ibid. Mas comedido ibid.

