THE NATIONAL COVENANT AND SOLEMN LEAGUE and COVENANT; With the ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
of SINS, AND ENGAGEMENT to DUTIES: As they were Renewed at Lesmahego, March 3.
1689. with Accommodation to the Present Times.

TOGETHER WITH An Introduction touching National Covenants, by way of Analysis
on the 29th. Chapter of Deuteronomy. The Substance whereof, was delivered in a
Discourse to the People, on the Preparation-day, before they were Renewed.

Isaiah 24.5. The Earth is also defiled under the Inhabitants thereof; because
they have transgressed the Laws, changed the Ordinance, broken the Everlasting
Covenant.

Ezekiel 17.18. S^ing he despised the Oath, by breaking the Covenant, when lo,
he had given his hand, and has done all these things, he shall not escape.

Printed in the 40th. Year of Our public Breach of Covenant: the Year wherein
there was much zeal for Confederating among Men, but little for Covenanting
with GOD.

An Introduction, touching National Covenants, by way of Analysis, on the 29th
Chapter of Deuteronomy. The substance whereof, was delivered in a Discourse to
the People, on the Preparation-Day before the Renewing of the Covenants at
Lesmahego.
THE greatest Glory of Man, and the lowest, and yet the most loving and lovely
step of GODS Condescension toward Man, was, is, and shall be, that he is
admitted into a Covenant Relation with GOD, whereby the Lord becomes his GOD,
King, Master, Husband, Father; And he becomes the Lords peculiar Subject,
Servant, Friend and Son. It would have been presumption in Man to offer this to
GOD, Covenants supposing properly equality, freedom from pre-obligations, and
Independency between the Parties Covenanting; None of which were, or could be
in Covenant-Transactions between GOD and Man, but Infinite distance and
Disproportion; Absolute Subjection, Obligation and Dependence on Man's part,
under the Dominion and Law of his Creator, from under which, and without which,
it is impossible to conceive he could have a Being. But, as it was an Act of
Grace and Condescension in GOD, to make Man after His own Image, in perfection
of Holiness; So it was an Act of Condescension to illuminate this with the
luster of a perfect Law, given for his Rule: Unto this it is a great additament
of Condescension, that He should give any promises encouraging to Obedience:
And greater, to conceive these confirmed by an Oath. But that the Lord should
offer to Covenant with Man, and to give the Law. Promises and Oath
Covenant-wayes, is a greater wonder of Condescension: This being a greater
privilege, as well as security, than either Law, Promises or Oaths. This was a
wonderful act of Grace and Condescension to Man at first, or the first Man
representing all Mankind, to propose to him, and to take him under the bond of
the Covenant of Works: But after the violation of that first Covenant, that
there should be any access granted to any of the Children of Men, to the
benefit of a second Transaction of Grace, is a wonder of Condescension never
enough considered. The first was the honor and happiness of the first Man,
proposed for the benefit, and being violate, became the Shame and Curse of all
Men. The second is the honor and happiness, in and through CHRIST, common and
peculiar to all the Elect, the Objects of the Covenant of Redemption, of which
that of Grace is an exhibited Transumpt. This being the main difference between
the Eternal Covenant of Redemption between the Father and the Son, and the
Everlasting Covenant of Grace, made also with CHRIST principally as
Representative of His Heirs of Grace and Glory, that in the former, CHRIST our
Sponsor is to be considered, as the Son and second Person of the Trinity,
Coequal and Co-essential with the Father, transacting about His Mediatory
Delegation in the bussiness of Redemption; in the later He is to be considered
as the Mediator, the Fathers Servant and Delegate. In the former the Promises
are made conditionally to CHRIST, upon condition of His satisfying Justice in
the fullness of time, and absolutely to the Elect, without respect to any thing
foreseen in them; in the later they are made absolutely to Christ, now having
fulfilled his undertaking, and conditionally, or by way of Testamentary
disposition to the Elect. But as GODS making Covenant with Man is a wonder of
never enough admired Condescendency; so His admitting Men to make a Covenant
with him, is no less matter of Admiration. Yet this he has not only offered
and allowed, but persuaded unto it by Commands, Promises, Threatenings,
Arguments, Expostulations, Invitations and Entreaties in the Scriptures of the
Old and New Testament: Where we find Covenanting with GOD, both Personal and
National, has the sanction of Divine Approbation. For Personal Covenanting
with GOD, it may be proven by Scripture Precepts, Promises, and Practices of
the Saints. All these Commands and Calls given to come and buy the Covenants
Benefits (which supposes a Bargain) to come to the Marriage etc. inferring a
consent to the Terms of a conjugal Covenant, do prove it to be a necessary
Duty. All these Promises of subscribing with the hand unto the Lord, Isa. 44.5.
That they shall call the Lord their Father, and not turn from Him, Jer. 3.19.
That they shall call him Ishi, and no more Baali, Hos. 2.16. That he shall say
It is my People, and they shall say The Lord is my GOD. Zech. 13.9. do clearly
imply and infer this. There are also Precedents and Examples of the Saints
confirming this, such as Jacobs Vow, Genesis 28.20 to the end, David's, Psalm. 16.2.
Psalm. 119, 57, 106. Psalm. 132.2.5. and many others. Upon this ground they took
confidence to lay particular claim to the Lord as their own GOD, Savior and
Portion.

But our purpose at present is to speak of National Covenanting. For clearing
and vindicating which, it will not be unprofitable to consider what may be
gathered from this one place of Scripture, the 29th. Chapter of Deuteronomy,
the fullest and plainest that can be found for this purpose; whereof the
compendious Analysis may be here offered.

In this Chapter we have to consider, these six things. 1. The Inscription of
the Covenant here Renewed, containing the Divine Prescription of it, v. 1.2.
The Motives and Inducements here adduced and pressed by Moses, to invite and
incite the People to Renew the Covenant at this time, from v. 2. to v. 9.
Containing also, not obscurely, their Acknowledgement of the Breaches thereof.
3. The extent of the Obligation thereof, from v. 10. to v. 15.4. The danger of
the Breach of it, from v. 16. to v. 19.5. The Greatness and Observableness of
the Punishment of that Breach, predicted and described from v. 20. to v. 28.6.
A Conclusory Corollary inferred from all, v. last.

1. The Inscription in the first Verse, Verse. 1.
does hold out to us both the Institution of GOD, the place where, or time when
it was Transacted, and that this was not the first time it had been engaged
into, but was here Renewed, These are the words of the Covenant which the Lord
commanded Moses, to make with the Children of Israel in the Land of Moah,
beside the Covenant which he made with them in Horeb. Whence we may have ground
for moving and solving several difficulties.

If Covenanting with GOD, especially National, be a necessary or expedient
Duty, approven in the Scriptures? Ans. The Lawfulness of Oaths, Vows, and
Covenants, to, for, or before GOD, will be questioned by none but Quakers, and
other Enthusiasts, or Fanatics. In the Old Test. it is here evident the Lord
Commanded to enter into this Covenant and Oath v. 1. and 12. And it is never
Abrogate in the New Test. except in ordinary Communications, wherein it was
condemned in the Old, as well as in the New. And it is so far from being
Abrogate, that it is Confirmed by the Apostle, saying, A Man's Covenant once
confirmed cannot be disanulled, Gal. 3.15. And concerning even Promissory
Oaths, saying, That an Oath for confirmation is an end of all strife, Heb.
6.16. Nor can the expediency or the necessity of this Duty be doubted by any
who considers the Commands enforcing it, the usefulness that the Saints
experienced in it, for restraining from Sin, for Aggravating it in their
Humiliations, from this consideration, That they had Vowed and Covenanted to
the contrary, for stirting up to the Duties bound upon them by the Law, and for
encouraging themselves in the h^pe of Pardon for their Short-comings: We must
not think it is inconvenient to Vow, or that it is indifferent to Vow, or not
Vow. It is said indeed Eccles. 5.5. Better it is that thou should not Vow,
than that thou should Vow and not pay. But that does not make Vowing either
Inconvenien^, Inexpedient, nor Indifferent, or not good simply; No more than
the Apostles saying, 2 Pet. 2.21. It had been better not to have known the way
of Righteousness, than after it is known, to turn from it, will make knowing
the way of Righteousness, to be either Inconvenient, or Inexp^di^nt, or not
good simply. For Vowing, as well as Paying is expressly commanded, Psalm. 76.11.
And in some cases (especially in necessary things) Vowing, and Breaking, is
better than not Vowing, and yet B^eaking the Law; for the later is two Sins,
Omission in not Vowing, and Commission in Breaking, the former only the sin of
Breaking the Vow, as Mr Durham clears it at large, on Command. 3. Page 135.136.
etc. 2. As for National Vowing or Covenanting, it is evidently approven in
Scripture Precepts, Promises, and Practices. Here is a Scripture Precept for it
in the Old Test. never Abrogated in the New. There are also Promises and these
relating to the New Test. times, not only of Personal, but of National
Covenanting, as Churches, and Christian Societies, Isa. 19.18, 21, 23. to the
end. Jer. 50.4.5. Zech. 2.11. And as for Precedents, we have very many of
National Covenants, made and renewed again and again, for Preservation and
Reformation of Religion, Extirpation of false Worship, maintaining their Laws,
Liberties, and Government, punishing and restraining the Wicked, keeping the
common Peace and mutual Defense, against the common Enemies. As here, after
that in Horeb, Isreal's Covenant is solemnly Sworn, under the Conduct of Moses.
And Renewed by Joshua, Josh. 24. By Asa, 2 Chronicles. 15.13, 14. Jehojadah, 2 Kings
11.17. 2 Chronicles. 23.16. Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 29 10. Josiah, 2 Kings 23.2. 2 Chronicles.
34. Ezra chap. 10.3. Nehemiah, chap 9. ult. and 10.28, 29. Yea always in times
of Humiliation and intended Reformation we find they fell about this Duty, That
the Lord fierce Wrath might turn away. 2 Chronicles. 29.10. To confirm Isreal's
hope, Ezr^ 10.1. Nehem. 9. ult. As also in the New Testament somewhat like this
is hinted at, 2 Cor. 8.5. Where the Churches of Macedonia gav^ their own selves
to the Lord, and to the Apostles, which at least implie^ a Covenant.

What was the Nature of these Covenants at Horeb, and of this in Moab, and
other National Covenant^ in Scripture? Was it a Covenant of Works or of Grace,
that was severa^ times Renewed? And do we stand bound to them, as the
Israelites them Ans. These Covenants as to their Nature, were neither the
Covenan^ of Works, nor of Grace formally, though matterially partaking o^ both:
They have the same mutual contracting Parties, GOD and Man (tho here Man is to
be considered, not in his Abstract, Singular, Individual, or personal Capacity;
But as a Member of a Community undertaking Vows) The same obligations to all
the duties of these forementioned Divine Covenants (tho here they are to be
taken as Public and National Duties, in reference to Religion as a public
Interest) The same sanctions and certifications of Blessings and Curses (here
to be understood a^ Na ional) With respect to the Matter of them, in the Old
Testament Dispensation, they obliged to the observation of the whole Moral,
Judicial, and Ceremonial Law of GOD, as it was then calculate to the judaical
P^dagogie; requiring indeed perfection legal, accordding to the Tenor of the
Covenant of Works, but admitting Repentance, and through Faith, accepting
Perfection Evangelical, according to the Tenor of the Covenant of Grace. And in
the New Testament Dispensation, they oblige to the same observance of the same
Laws that are not abolished, and of these Ceremonial Institutions of CHRIST,
that are substitute in the place of the former Pedagogical and Typical
Ceremonies, calculate to the Meridian of Gospel Light, Purity and Simplicity.
With respect to the End, in both Dispensations, they had, and have the same
subserviency to the Covenant of Grace, the same with the Law to restrain Sin,
to manifest it, and to lead to CHRIST for Remission of it. And with respect to
the several sorts of People engaging under these Bonds, they were to Believers,
according to the Tenor of the Covenant of Grace; and to Unbelievers, according
to the Tenor of the Covenant of Works. But as to their Form and Formality, they
were the Ecclesiastic and National Covenants of the visible Community of the
Lords People, engaging to be His, and to keep His Ways and Testimonies. First
Transacted Exodus 19.5, 8. Exodus 24.7, 8. Renewed here, Deuteronomy. 29. and several
times afterward.

Who may tender or impose it? May it be without the Magistrate? Here the
Magistrate Moses is Authorized to make it: But may it be done without him? Or
when it is so, is the obligation of it Binding, when the Magistrate or public
Father disalowes or discharges it. The reason of the doubt is taken from Numb.
30.3, 5, 8. Where it is said, if a Woman in her Fathers house (or Husbands) vow
a Vow unto the Lord, and her Father (or Husband) disallow her, not any of her
Vows or Bonds, wherewith she has bound her Soul, shall stand, but shall be
made of none effect. Ans. Justice and Order requires, that whoever has the
greatest Influence upon, or Authority over the Community, should tender the
Oath, and it belongs indeed to Magistrates to enjoin it, but not so as to
exclude themselves from coming under the Bond of it; And in that case, they
must have some to tender it to them. we find the Officers of the Church (as
Moses also was an extraordinary one) imposing it, as Jehojadah, both to King
Joash and to the People, 2 Kings 11.17. 2 Chronicles. 23.16. a precedent justifying
Mr Robert Douglass, by Commission from the Genesis Assembly, his tendering the
Covenant to King Charles the II. at his Coronation. And Ezra made the Priests,
the Levites, and all Israel to swear it; and it was acknowledged that this
matter belonged unto him. Ezra 10.4, 5. even without the consent of the
Magistrate, or him to whom they were subject at that time, then a Heathen, the
King of Persia. And if it be so tendered and taken, without the consent of the
Magistrate; yet his after dissent or discharge, cannot loose the obligation of
it. As to that of Numb. 30. It is altogether beside the purpose: For the
Magistrate is neither the Father nor Husband of the Church, tho in some sense
to the Church, Isa. 49.23. having a power as a nursing Father, not as a
generating Father, Comulative not Privative: Nor has he such power over his
Subjects, as a Father over his Child, or Husband over his Wife. Certainly these
heads of Tribes verse. 1. were Politic Fathers, as Magistrates; yet it is not
allowed to them to Disanul, Vacate, or make void these Vows, but to the Father
or Husband of the Party making them, from whom, these heads of Tribes are
spoken to, as distinct; and the command is given to these Magistrates only to
see it observed and ratified. Again, National Covenants for Religious Ends and
Interests, are not to be supposed of that nature of these Vows, which were not
about necessary, but indifferent things, and it seems rashly and unadvisedly
engaged into; for the Father had no power to make null, or of no effect, the
Maids engagements to necessary and indispensable Duties. And as to these things
which he might disallow and disanul, it is said, The Lord shall forgive her,
intimating there was something iniquous in it. However, as the Father holding
his Peace, did ratify the Vow. verse 4, and was not to rescind it afterward,
verse 15. So this Achillean Argument of the Prelatical and Malignant Party,
against our Covenants, adduced from this place, has no Nerves; because the
Father, as they sense it, or the Magistrate held his peace at, and gave his
consent to the Renewing both the National Covenant, and Solemn League and
Covenant, tho afterward he made Inquiries, Prove. 20.25. and rescinded it, by
an audacious Heaven-dating Law. But dare these Gentlemen say, that it was in
the power of such a politic Father as Ahaz, or Joash, or Jeconiah, or
Zedekiah, who after Vows made Inquiry, to disallow or disanul the Covenant of
Israel, and yet it was without their consent, and against their will that any
such Covenant was made, being made in their Minority, or in their extremity,
when forced to it.

Question may be, If the Covenant be to be Renewed, in what form? Whether in
the first unalterably? Or may it be Renewed with Alterations? Ans. As it is
plain here is someway another Covenant, beside the Covenant which he made with
them in Horeb; So it is as evident, it is rather a Renovation of the former,
than a Substitution of another; rather a Translation of the Form, than of the
Matter, with accommodation to the Circumstances, Sins and Duties of that time,
when they were in the Land of Moab, someway altered from the case they were in
at Horeb: Which were the Motives of their Renewing it at this time, and may
conduce for our direction at other times, when to Renew National Covenants. For
then at Horeb, they were newly delivered out of Egypt, and had seen the Wonders
done there, and at the Red sea, and in conducting them to Horeb. Now after
their abuse of these, and many superadded Privileges afterward, after they
had gone through the weary Wilderness, they were arrived at the Borders of
Canaan, and put in expectation of the complement of their promised Deliverance,
when they were to receive, and did receive from the Lord right Judgments, true
Laws, good Statutes and Commandments Covenant wise, with alluring Proposalls,
that if they would obey His Voice, and keep His Covenant, then He would make
them His peculiar Treasure, and a Kingdom of Priests, and an holy Nation, Exodus
19.5. etc. Now they had forsaken, broken, and forgotten in a great measure this
Covenant. Then they were solemnly adopted into a Covenant relation with GOD, to
be His People; Now they had made Apostasy and Defection, in many respects. In
a word, they had received many more Mercies, and had committed many more Sins,
now, then at that time. Therefore it was expedient they should Renew it: And it
is easy to observe several Alterations as to the Form of it, from that in
Horeb, Exodus 19 and Exodus 24.3, 7. The former was more full and particular,
suiting all ^imes. The Book of the Covenant contained all the Judgments
promulga^ed upon Mount Sinai: This, as here Renewed, did also contain the ^ame,
but more generally proposed, with a particular Acknowledgement of the Sins
against, and Breaches of that Covenant, from verse 2. ^o 9. and with a new
Engagement to the Duties thereof, and a more express explication and
application of the universality and extent of its Obligation: As we find
likewise in all the Renovations of the Covenant of Israel formerly mentioned.
Which makes it lawful for a People that would now Renew Scotlands Covenants, to
do it with suitable explications and applications to the times.

II. The following part of the Chapter, from verse 2, to verse 9, does hold
forth to us, both their Acknowledgement of Sins introductory, and their Motives
inducing to take on new Engagements.

What may be the Motives to Renew the Covenant?

Ans. 5. The first thing here is the consideration of the Wonders of Wisdom,
Faithfulness, Power, Justice, and Goodness of the Lord, appearing in their
Deliverance out of Egypt, which they had seen done before their Eyes, v. 2. The
great Temptations wherewith He proved their Faith, Verse. 2.3.
Patience, Humility and Love, and the great Temptations wherewith they provoked
Him to Anger, the Signs of His presence, protection and power continued, many
great Miracles wrought in their behalf, notwithstand^ng of all these
Temptations, v. 3. Which consideration should exceedingly aggravate their Sins,
or their Acknowledgement, and animate their Z^al in taking on new Engagements,
This also may be a Motive to the Godly in Scotland to Renew their Covenant with
GOD, with humble acknowledgement of the Breaches thereof, aggravated from all
the wonderful appearances of GOD, in ordinances and providence, both of
Judgment and Mercy, wherewith this poor place of the world has been
signalized beyond others. We are called to remember what the Lord did, in
delivering this Land from the darkness of Paganism, Popery and Prelacy, how
early H^ planted a Church in this Land, how purely He purged it, with wha^
purity of R^formation, and unity of Profession He beautified it, wit^ what
excellent Privileges He honored it, especially in bringing it under the Bond
of Solemn Covenants; whereby its Name became Beula^ and Hephzihah, and what
excellent Testimonies for CHRIST's Prerogatives as King, and His Kingdoms
Lib^rties, He did concredit to it to contend for. Our eyes also, and our
Fathers have seen great Temptations in Providence, whence we might have
learned great experienc^ of the Lords Wisdom and our folly: Always when we
were at the lowest extremity, disspairing in our selves, then He appeared in
Mercy: A^wayes when we thought our selves stronge^t, and were most consider in
our selves, then we were confounded. The Lords Temptations t^ try us have been
manifold, and our Tentations to provoke Him, have been as multifarious. The
Signs and Miracles in the conduct of His Providenc^s, in this day of Tentation,
have been observable: As Israel in the Wilderness, so we have had our Mara's,
and our Massa's, and Meriba's Taberahs, a d K^broth Hattaavahs, at Pentland
hills, Bothwell bridge, Airdsmoss, etc. But above all, the passages of
Providence since the late Popish King mounted the Throne, rai^ed up wonderfully
for our scourge, have be^n wonderful, both for the manner of his Advancement
and subsequent Emergencies. After all ^he ^o^mer breakings, two Parties in both
Kingdoms appearing against him, very seasona^ly, when it would have been
thought all would have concurred and concerted the same Cause against Popery
and Tyranny, yet were broken: And nothing was like to withstand his d^signs of
introducing the blackest of Popery and basest of Slavery, at the op^ned Gap of
the Tolleration, had not a Foreign Prince, in Zeal for Religion, Pity to these
Lands, and in pursuit of his own Right, interposed for ^ur rescue, by a very
pr^pitious pr^vidence; which, in a way as of Signs and Miracles, has given us
this enlargement and reviving in ou^ Bondage. Shall not therefore the Godly
from these considerations, be ^t^^ted up both to Acknowledgements of Sins and
new Engagements.

2. The consideration of their Obduration, Verse. 4.
Occecation and Obstinacy, supine Stupidity, and unanswerableness to these
great M^racles and Mercies forem^ntioned, which they had neither gotten Hea^ts
to perceive, nor Eyes to observe, verse 4. is both a Motive to their
acknowledgement of Sins, and to their engagement to covenanted Du ies. As this
is a sad truth as suitably applicable to Scotland, as to Israel; so the
consideration thereof, should h^ve moved the Godly to renew their
Acknowledgements and Coven^nts, if yet they had gotten Hearts to perceive, and
Eyes to see etc. Alas! all the pains the Lord has taken on us to ^^claim and
reform us, have not profited us, Priviledg^s have not prevailed with us,
Prosperity has not allured us, Adversity has not awakene^ us to our duty, and
all the fruit and effect of the Word and Works of G^d, seems to have produced
nothing but the judicial Plague of hearing inde^d, but not understanding;
seeing indeed, but not perceiving; and making our heart fat, etc. Isa 6.9.10.
Is it not time then we w^r^ consid^ring our ways, and turning to the Lord, and
Covenanting with Him.

3. Verse. 5.6.
The consideration of the Lords gracious Conduct of them in the Wilderness
four^y Years, providing them with all necessaries for Food and Clothing, tho
in an extraordinary way, wherein they might know the care and kindness of, and
their relation to the Lord their God, verse. 5.6. is made use of as a Motive to
induce them to Acknowledgement of their Sins, and a new Engagement to the duty
of their Covenant. Since our Covenants were renewed in Scotland, wit^ a Solemn
Acknowledgement of the Sins, and Engagements to the duty thereof, the Lord
has led us full 40 Years through the wilderness o^ the Sectarian Invasions,
and the Prelatick, Erastian, and Antichristian Usurpations: Wherein, tho we did
not meet with Miracles, yet truly w^ have experienced Wonders of the Lords care
and kindness, and for al^ the Harassings and Huntings, Spoilings and
Depredations of Persecuter^ the poor Wilderness wanderers have looked as
Meat-like and Cloth like (as we use to say) as others that sat at ease in
their houses, and dran^ their Wine and their strong drink.

4. The consideration of the glorious Victory obtained i^ th^s place, in the
Land of Moab, over the King of Heshbo^^ and the King of Bashan, who withstood
their progress unto the Rest the^ were seeking, whose Lands fell unto the two
Tribes and the half for a^ Inheritance, verse. 7.8. Verse. 7.8.
is likewise adduced as an Argument to exci^^ them to this duty. So in our day,
the Trophies of Triumph, that the late revolutions of Providence have erected,
to the Honor of our God and the advantage of the Covenanted Reformation, in
removing out o^ the way, two Kings, that were withstanding its propagation, and
seekin^ its destruction; and in abolishing two wicked Establishments, set up o^
the ruins thereof, viz. Tyranny in the State, and Prelacy in the Church, man
stir up all Lovers of Reformation to the same duty of Covenanting for its
Restoration and Preservation.

5. Finally, he moves them to it verse. 9. Verse. 9.
by a promise o^ prosperity to ensue upon their keeping and doing this
Covenant, which now they were about to Renew. Which he presses as n^cessary
duty, from all these Considerations.

Questioned here. What is it to keep the words of the Covenant, and do them? Is
any Man able to keep the Covenan^ more than the Command? And if not, why is
this further burden imposed are not the Commands themselves Bonds strict
enough? An. The Covenant is kep^ and done. (1.) By a constant and suitable
Profession of the duties thereon keeping the way of the Lord. (2.) By a
tenacious Confession of the Test^monies thereof, against all opposition, never
denying or forbearing the asserting the obligation thereof, nor turning aside
therefrom, to the right hand or to the left ( Josh. 23.6) keeping it without
spot, unrebuk^able (1 Timothy 6.14.) especially when it becomes the word of His
Patience, Rev. 3.10. (3.) By a mindful and careful entertainment of it in the
mind and memory, never forgetting what we are bound to thereby. (4.) By a
strict observance thereof in the practice, in all manner of conversation. Which
is to be understood in the Gospel sense, not absolutely but respectively, with
respect to our Nature, now corrupt, weak and perverse. For though we be bound
by the Law of God to be perfectly Holy, yet our Covenants do not tie us to this
perfection; and this obligation is not from our Covenant, but from the Law; for
our Covenants do not oblige to the victory over all sin, but to wrestle for it;
not to the event, but to the means which are in our power (and therefore the
People of God plead they had not broken Covenant, Psalm. 44.17. tho they had
sins) and not to the attaining all things we Covenant for, but to the aim,
desire, design and endeavor, to live in no sin Covenanted against, never to
approve our selves in it, to omit no known duty engaged unto, and to leave no
mean unesayed for attaining the whole of it. See Mr Durham on 3 Command.
concerning the obligation of Vows, Page 133. etc.

III. In the following words from verse. 10. to verse. 15, or 17. Moses proposes
the matter more closely, showing the extant of the obligation thereof, in a
threefold respect. 1. In respect of the Universality of the Persons obliged. 2.
In respect of the sacredness and inviolable strictness of its Obligation 3. In
respect of the perpetuity of its Obligation.

First, In respect of the Persons obliged, it is of universal extent, binding
and obliging all the Members of the Church, and Commonwealth of Israel of all
sorts, qualities, ranks, vocations, ages, sexes, none excluded for these
things. 1. All of all qualities, Captains, Verse. 10.
Elders or Magistrates, Officers, both of Church and State, with all the Men of
Israel. Accordingly we find Josiah taking all engaged, all the Men of Judah,
and the Priests and the Prophets, and all the People both small and great, 2
Kings 23.2. And Ezra made the chief Priests and Levites, and all Israel to
swear the Covenant, Ezra 10.5. None are so high that they are above the
obligation of it; None so small or base that they are below it. Its very
encouraging when there are Nobles and Captains etc. to take the Covenant. Its
very necessary they should go before others in it, but it does not only belong
to them.

May the Covenant be renewed without these Captains, Elders, Officers, or
Primores and Primates Regni, when they will not concur? Ans. Certainly this
extensive obligation reaching all Persons, is to be understood positively, that
all these are obliged to enter into Covenant, but not negatively, that without
any of these, the Covenant should not be entered into. The Motives mentioned
are common to the small, as well as the great, and without them, as well as with
them, the Articles of it, and the keeping and doing them are common to both
alike: The relation that the small and meaner sort of People have to God (the
other contracting party) is the same that the Nobles and Great-ones have, verse.
12. and the Privileges of it, to be established as a People unto Himself, and
to have him for their God, verse. 13. do no more belong to the one, than to the
other; and consequently the Small may renew it as well as the Great, but not
Nationally, to bind the whole Nation formally, to which indeed the concurrence
of its Representatives is necessary. 2. Verse. 11.
All of all Ages and Sexes, even their Little-ones and their Wives, verse. 11.
are obliged to take it, if they be capable. Concerning which, If Children may
be admitted to the Covenant? Ans. It cannot be doubted but they are under the
bond of it materially, being Children of the ^ovenant Act. 3.25. to whom belong
the promises (and also the duties how soon they are capable) of the Covenant of
Grace Act. 2 29. and that they are obliged to take it if they be capable;
otherwise their Parents are to engage for them. Accordingly in Scotland it has
been in use for faithful Ministers to take Parents engaged to the covenants
when they presented their Children to Baptism. 3. All of all ranks of
relations, even Strangers and Servants, from the hewer of wood to the drawer of
water. If Strangers be obliged, or to be admitted to the Covenant? Ans. As in
Israel, Strangers being admitted to the covenant, together with their
circumcision was one bage of their being proselytes (of which Strangers only
this is to be understood so now, tho the case differ very far, such strangers
as are natu^alized and reside in the country, may be admitted to the National
Covenant of that Nation whereof they are subjects, and wherein they are Church
Members: O hers are only to be restrained from doing or saying any thing
against it. verse. 13.14. Some might have had as good reason then to Object, as
many do now foolish^y, that p^rsonally they never t^ok the Covenant, being not
present when it was ^^ken. But it is plain here, absence will not absol^e from
the obligation of it; so it is in all real Covenants, that are not merely
Personal. All the Members of the Community covenanting are under the bond o^
the common Covenant. It would be a ridiculous excepti^n f^r one to allege,
they are not obl^ged to stand to the Allegiance sworn to a King, or to a
Covenant of Peace made with an Independent Nation by the Community of that
Nation, whereof they are Members, because they were abroad when these
Transactions were made. But with reference to all these it may be a Question,
Or, May all be admitted to take it? Ans. Tho all be under the obligation of it
materially, and all are bound to take it formally, caeteris paribus, if they be
qualified; yet neither ought it to be imposed, nor should any be admitted but
with respect to their capacities Gracious and Legal. The Wicked, that are
scandalous and obstinate in Wickedness, Error, Profanity or Malignancy, hating
Instruction, and casting the Lords Word behind them, have not Gods right to it,
for unto such He says, what have thou to do to take up may Covenant in thy
mouth. Psalm. 50.16, 17. Some were legally incapacitate, as the Enemies of Truth
and Godliness, with whom they were not to associate, Exodus 23.32. Exodus 34.15.
Deuteronomy. 7.2. Judge. 2.2. Ezra 4.3. Ezra 9.14. Who is to be understood with this
exception, except they were Proselytes and Penitents such as Rahab, Josh. 2. It
is clear from the Scriptures tho all are bound to it, it is to be imposed upon
and tendered to none but those that subscribe to it with choice and resolution,
Josh. 24.15.22. N^ne but such as are reformed from the Defections and
Complyancies of the time, Neh. 10.28. None but such as have knowledge and
understanding of the Sins and Duties contained in the Covenant- ibid. None but
such as can swear and subscribe it according to these qualifications of an
Oath, Jer. 4.2. in truth in judgment and in righteousness.

Secondly. Ver: 12:
The Obligation of this Covenant is showed to be very great, not only ext
nsively but intensively, Verse. 12.13. It must be very sacred, inviolable and
strictissimi juris, since. 1. it is a Covenant and Oath mutually entered into
by Israel with the Lord their God, and by the Lord with them, ver: 12: and
consequently cannot be dissolved but by consent of both Parties.

Question, Can nothing loose the Obligation of a lawful Oath? Answ: 1. It may
be clear enough that those things will not, which false sweaters pretend; and
which they that would cast off the yoke of these Covenants do plead sometimes;
As no man's temporal loss or prejudice will make an Oath null, or loose from the
Obligation of it, (though we swear to our own hurt, we must not change: Psalm:
15:4:) nor tho the Oath do engage to something in its own nature indiffe^ nt
(for by an Oath, even in things ind^ffer^nt antecedently, our Souls are bound,
Numb: 30:2:) nor the extorion o^ it by fear or violence, if the matter be
lawful; nor the deceit and guile of others, if the deceit be circumstantial
only, as in that oath to the Gibeonites; Not sinful rashness in the manner, if
lawful in the matter, as Joshuahs oath to the Gibeonites. Nor any good meaning
or intention in reversing the oath ( Saul was punished for breaking that oath
with the Gibeonites many generations after, tho he did it out of his zeal to
the Children of Israel, 2 Samuel 21:2:) Nor tho the Oath be conceived by
Creatures (as by the Altar or Temple, Heaven, etc. Math. 23.20, 22.) Nor when
the thing becomes impossible, if that impossibility could have been foreseen or
prevented. Nor when the condition is unlawful, if already fulfilled (as Juda's
promising a Kid to Thamar) Nor another meaning afterward devised, nor
according to the Imposers mind, nor our own at first who took it (that is but a
swearing deceitfully Psalm. 24:4;) Nor any other secret meaning by Equivocation,
or mental Reservation; Nor any Dispensation from Pope or King. None of these
things can make an Oath void, but if we have bound our selves, God will require
it, for whosoever despises an Oath by breaking the Covenant when lo he has given
his hand, he shall not escape, Ezekiel 17.18, 19. God will recompense it. But (2)
Oaths have no force, when the thing sworn is sinful and unlawful in it self: Or
unlawful to him that swears: Or simply impossible: Or when the thing sworn is
not in our own power, Numb. 30.5. Or when there is deceit in it, not in
Circumstantials, but in Essentials: Or when it hinders a greater good: Or when
the case materially alters: Or when the party sworn to relaxeth us. In which
respects the third Article of the Solemn League and Covenant did not oblige us
to own the Authority of Tyrants and Usurpers when reigning over us, because in
that case the obligation was unlawful, and there was a deceit in Essentials,
putting in Tyranny for Authority, and the case materially altered (we being
bound in the Covenant to a King or Magistrate defending Religion and Liberty,
not to a Tyrant overturning these) and the party sworn to had relaxed us long
ago by rescinding the Covenants? But none of all these things can any way
enervate the sacred Obligation of Scotlands Holy Covenants with God, which
still must stand in inviolable force.

2. The Covenants Obligation must be very sacred and strong, since it is
proposed for such gracious ends, and in order to ensure such glorious
privileges, which are two or three, ver: 13: ver: 13:
respecting the mutual stipulation of the Parties contracting (1) That he might
establish them that day for a people unto Himself. To be established a people
unto the Lord not only by creation, which is common to all; or Profession,
which is common to the Church visible, but by Covenant engagement to be His and
for Him, is both the Lords end, and should be ours in public or personal
Covenanting. And it is a very glorious privilege to be His people in a
peculiar manner, of whom He will take particular notice and inspection, and who
have a nearer relation to Him than other people. As likewise, it is the great
duty of Covenanters to avouch themselves to be his people, to walk in His
ways, keep His statutes, and hearken to His voice, Deuteronomy: 26:16, 17, 18. which
is the comprehensive stipulation of all Covenants with GOD. (2.) And that He
might be unto them a GOD, not only by universal Dominion, nor only by
Redemption, first by price, and then by power, but by Covenant, is the Lords
end, our privilege (the greatest of privileges, Honors and Happinesses, in
getting hereby all His Divine Attributes, Covenant Relations,
Mediatory-Offices, and all that He has purposed or promised, or Christ has
purchased for the good of His people, to be ours;) And it is the mutual
stipulation of both parties. The Lord for his part undertakes to be a God unto
us, and avouch us to be His people; And we for our part should promise and
engage to be His people, and avouch Him to be our God, Deuteronomy. 26 16, 17, 18. Or
as it is, Zech. 13. ult. He will say, it is my people, and Covenanters will say
the Lord is my God. (3) And that He might confirm not only what He had said
unto them, but what He had sworn unto their Fathers. This is the Lords End in
all Covenants which He ownes with His People, that by two immutable things in
which it is impossible for God to lie, they may have strong Consolation, Heb.
6:18: having such ample security to repose their confidence upon: This is the
privilege of his Covenanted People, to have not only the Lords word for their
security, but his Oath, confirmed by Covenant, which not only they, but their
Fathers before them did experience, that He did constantly keep, verify and
fulfill. And as here, He undertakes to make it good; so they engage to depend
upon it, and to keep what they and their Fathers had said and sworn in point of
Obedience. Now in regard of these Ends, Privileges and Stipulations, the
Covenant must have a strict and sacred obligation as inviolable, as we would
desire these to be inamissible, or as we would not come short of being a people
unto Himself, and having Him for our God, as He has said unto us and sworn
unto our Fathers. Question be then. What the better shall we be of making and
keeping a National Covenant? Here is the Answer, Hereby shall we be established
a people unto Himself, and He shall be unto us a God, as He has said and
sworn, which comprehends all advantages imaginable.

Verse. 14, 15.
Thirdly, Here not obscurely is demonstrated the exte^ of the Obligation of
this Covenant, in respect of the perpetu^tie of it. It is a Covenant oblieging
not only the present, verse: 14: but the absent, verse. 15. And not only the
absen^ in regard of place, but in regard of time. It obliged all the Children
of Israel that were not there the day: Which comprehends not only those that
were then living, but st^ture Generations. The reasons added do cle^^ly enough
confirm thi^ 1. The probable hazard of Apostasy and Pr^sumption in breaking,
the Covenant was perpetual, verse. 16, 17, 18, 19 Not only that Generation that
day which came out of Egypt, and passed by the Nations and sa^ their
Abominations and their Idols, were in hazard of turning awa^ from the Lord,
serving the gods of the Nations, having among them Root bearing Gall and Worm
wood, who might bless themselves i^ their presumption of Impunity,
notwithstanding the threatened curse. Bu^ much more in after Generations, they
that never dwelt in the Land of Egypt (and never saw the plagues punishing that
Lands wickedness) but afterward might see the abominations and the Dungy gods
(as i^ is in the Hebrew) of other Nations, were in hazard of that defection an^
presumption, when the Covenant might be worn antiquated, out of da^ and mind,
which might encourage them (much more than at that tim^ when it was in every
Bodies mouth and memory) to say I shall have pea^ tho I walk in the imagination
of mine heart. 2. The threatened punishmen^ of the breach of this Covenant was
perpetual. The Lords anger and jealousy shall smok against Covenant-breakers,
all the Curses written shall ly^ upon them, their names shall be blotted out
from under Heaven, ver^ 20. He shall separate them unto evil. verse. 21. Not
only in that ag^ wherein the Covenant was Renewed, but the Generation to come
o^ their Children that should rise up after them, shall observe the punishment
of the Posterity, when they shall have forsaken the Covenant o^ the Lord God of
their Fathers, and the Lord shall have rooted the^ out of their Land for the
same, verse. 22. to 28. which was not accomplished till many Centuries
afterward.

If the Obligation of National Covenants, where the matter i^ lawful, he
perpetual and binding upon Posterity? Answ. If any Engagements can be supposed
binding to Posterity, certainly Nationa^ Covenants to keep the Commandments of
God, and to adhere to his institutions, must be of that nature. It cannot be
denied that several Obligations do bind Posterity. Public Promises, with
annexation of curse^ to the breakers, make the Posterity obnoxious, as well as
those who personally came under the Engagement, Neb: 5:12, 13: That promise of
the Jewish Nobles and Rulers would have brought their Posterity under the
Curse, if they had exacted usury of their Brethren, as Joshua's Adjuration did
oblige all posterity never to build Jericho, Josh. 6.26. and the breach of it
did bring the Curse upon Hiel the Bethelite in the days of Ahab. Public Vows
do bind Posterity, Jacobs Vow Genesis 28.21. did oblige all his posterity,
virtually comprehended in him, Hos. 12.4. The Rechabites found themselves
obliged to observe the Vow of their Fore-father Jonadab, Jer. 35.6.14. Public
Oaths do oblige posterity, Joseph took an Oath of the Children of Israel to
carry up his Bones to Canaan, Genesis 50.25. which did oblige the posterity some
hundreds of years after, Exodus 13.19. Josh. 24.32 National Covenants with Men
before God, do oblige posterity, as Isreal's Covenant with the Gibeonites, Josh.
9.15.19. for the breach whereof, many Ages after, the posterity was plagued, 2 Samuel 21.1. So Zedekiah's Covenant with Nebuchadnezzar, Ezekiel. 17.18, 19.
Especially National Covenants with God before Men, about things Moral,
Objectively obliging, are Perpetual, Jer. 50.5. And yet more especially (as
Grotius observes) when they are of an Hereditary nature, that is, when the
subje^t is permanent, the matter Moral, the end Good, and in the form of them
there is a Clause expressing their perpetuity. All which Ingredients of
perpetual Obligations are clear in Scotlands Covenants: Which are National
Promises, adjuring all the Members of the Scottish Church, under a Curse to
preserve and promote Reformation, according to the Word of God, and to
extirpate what is in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline or Government opposite
thereto: National Vows, devoting the then engaging and suceeding Generations
to be the Lords people, and to walk in His ways: National Oaths, solemnly
sworn by all Ranks, with hands lifted up to the Most High GOD, never to admit
of Innovations, or submit to Usurpations contradictory to the Word of God:
National Covenants wherein the King, Parliament, and People did Covenant with
each other, to perform their repective duties, in their ^everal places and
stations, inviolably to preserve Religion and Liberty: Yea National Laws,
solemnly ratified by King and Parliament, and made the foundation of the
Peoples Compact with the King at his Inauguration: And Finally, they are
National Covenants with God as party contracting, to keep and do the Words of
His Covenant. The subject or parties contracting are permanent, as long
therefore as Scotland is Scot^and, and God is Unchangeable, who has given His
revealed Will for the Rule of Man's Obedience, Scotlands Reformation in
Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government, must be endeavored to be
preserved in a conformity to it. The Matter of them is moral, containing
nothing but what is antecedently and eternally binding, albeit there had never
been a formal Covenant. The Ends of them perpetually good, to wit, For defense
of the true Religion, as it was then reformed, and is expressed in the
Confession of Faith, and which had been for many years, with a blessing from
Heaven preached and professed in this Kirk and Kingdom, as Gods undoubted
Truth, grounded only upon His written Word. And for maintaining the Kings
Majesty his Person and Estate etc. Having before our eyes the Glory of God,
and the advancement of the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, the honor and
happiness of the Kings Majesty, and his Posterity, and the true public
Liberty, Safety and Peac^ of the Kingdoms, wherein every ones private condition
is included. And in the very Form of them, there are Clauses expressing their
perpetuity: A^ in that Article of the National Covenant, subscribed anno. 1638,
there a^ these words, Being convinced in our minds, and confessing with our
mouths, the the present and succeeding Generations in this Land, are bound to
keep the foresa^ National Oath and Subscription inviolable. In the Solemn
League these, Art. (...) That we and our posterity after us may as brethren
live in Faith and Love, and t^ Lord may delight to dwell in the midst of us.
Art. 5. We shall endeavor that the may remain conjoined in a firm Peace and
Union, to all posterity.

IV. Next, from verse. 16. to 20. This faithful Watch-ma^ warns, Verse. 16.17.
that, and all Generations, of the danger of breach (...) Covenant. Showing,
First, The Inductives to this sin, exposing peop^^ to the danger of it, and
involving them in the guilt of it, before he la^ before them what shall be the
punishment of it.

What are the chief Temptation inducing to this sin of Covenant Breaking? Here
it is Answered. Dwelling among, and converse with a People of a false Religion,
(...) ye know how ye have dwelt in the Land of Egypt. -- and ye have seen their
abo^ nations etc. (as it is noted in a Parenthesis, v. 16, 17.) This induces
bo^ Persons, Families and Tribes, verse 18. (and in this order, first Person
then Families, then Tribes) to symbolize with them in perjury. Peop^^ are more
readily seduced to sin, by the perverse example of these the live among, than
they can be induced to abide in duty, by the best I^structions of those that
watch over them. No wonder that a peop^^ dwelling among Infidels, be in hazard
of seduction, when a few Infid^ tolerated to dwell among the Lords people,
will readily seduce the^ therefore is that command given, Exodus 23. ult. They
shall not dwell in thy lan^ lest they make thee sin against me. The example of
the Popish, Prelatical at Malignant faction in Britain and Ireland, the
suffering them not only to dwell, but to creep into places of Power and Trust
in Scotland, after they were once in a good measure expelled; And especially,
in process of time, the stupid submission to the Restitution of their
Government of Church and State, and to the Re-introduction of their wicked
Establishments, abjured by Covenant, and to the imposition of wicked Laws
contrary to the Covenant, did gradually induce, first particular persons among
us, then whole Families, after that Tribes, Parishes and Provinces, to this
dreadful sin of Covenant Breaking.

2. Heart defection, The heart turning away from the Lord, ver. 18. Verse. 18.
is the first step to external defection, in Profession, Practice or Principle,
from the Covenant of God, The back-slider in Heart shall be filled with his own
way. If any Man draw back the Lord will have no Pleasure in him, and then he is
Plagued with Hardness of Heart, and Blindness of mind, ^o run upon sins against
the Covenant of God, not for seeing nor fearing the curse of it. The Lords
People in Scotland, turned first away from the Lord in Heart, fell from their
first Love, Liveliness, Tenderness, Sincerity and Fervor in Heart Religion, and
then they could not but be a Prey to the tentations of the time, the wicked
Examples and Laws, drawing and driving to Covenant breaking.

3. Inclinations to Idolatry of any sort, To go and serve the gods of these
Nations. ver. 18. Idolatry is a breach of Covenant, and inclination to it does
easily ensnare in the guilt of it. Where a man begins once whorishly to look
after idols of any kind; he is readily and righteously left to follow his look.
Not only is it Idolatry to worship Wood and Stone, Silver and Gold, but to give
Gods due to any other Object (contrair to the 1st: Command;) And to worship Him
any other way then he has commanded (contrair to the 2d: Command;) There are
many heart idols, as Self, the World, etc. Covetousness being Idolatry. There
are many land-idols of jealousy, as when any wicked Interest and Course is set
up, in competition with, and opposition to, and complied with in prejudice of
Christ's Interest and Cause. Thus in this Land, the Establishment of
Erastiansime, Prelacy, Supremacy, and Absolute Power, ascribing to Kings of
Clay, what is the incommunicable Prerogative of the Prince of the Kings of the
earth, and Peoples love of the World, self peace, ease, liberty, etc.
Incomplyance with these Interests, have been the Idols of these Nations: And
their heart turning away from the Lord to these, have led them to forsake the
Covenant.

4. Hereupon follows the root that bears Gall and Wormwood, ver. 18. which
is a bribed, blinded, or seared Conscience, or an evil heart of unbelief in
departing from the Living God, Heb. 13.12. A root of bitterness springing up,
whereby many are defiled, Heb. 12.15. When the heart turns away from God, then
it inclines to Idols: when it is so bewitched, then the Conscience, that is
first Reclamant, gets a bribe from the perverted will and affections to hold
its peace at, and to excuse sin, and then its dictats are Gall and Wormwood,
being blinded with Error, it seeks arguments to justify the sinful Practice,
and at length is so seated, that it is proof against all reproof, and wholly
benumbed with the deceitfulness of sin under the energy of strong delusions,
which are bitter in the end. This has been the fourth step leading in breach
of Covenant in Scotland; when first the Tentation was presented, of bowing to
these Idols of jealousy above mentioned, and the Question stated, shall we
Comply, or Renounce the Covenant? People first consulted their own Interest and
Credit, and then when that was determined to be secured, the Conscience was
soon lulled asleep, and persuaded to applaud the fleshly conclusion, and then
the judgment was set on work, to find out plausible Arguments, and after vows
to make inquiry to get shifts, excuses and defenses for their complyances, and
to excogitate pernicious principl^ about the Magistrates power in Church
affairs, his power in loosing the obligation of Covenants, and the
indifferency of forms of Church Government, and the smalness of such points to
be heads of suffering, etc. to justify their breach of Covenant. These roots
have brought forth the bitter fruits of gall and wormwood, that have brought
this Land under the curse of the Covenant.

5 Secure self-flattering presumption, blessing himself and saying, I shall
have peace, Verse 19.
tho I walk in the imagination of my heart, etc. ver. 19 This is the highest
step of preparatives to, and the heinousest aggravation of the sin of perjury,
and the bitterest fruit that grows from the root of Apostasy from God,
including many ingredients of the unpardonable sin, trampling upon Light, the
presumer being supposed to hear the words of this curse, and to tush at all
threatenings, blessing himself in his deliberate sinning with delight, not only
securely, but self-willedly, and resolutely proceeding from evil to worse,
promising to himself peace, not only outward, purchased by resolved perjury,
but inward, in the sleep of a feared conscience. A man so far left of God,
cannot withstand the tentations to Covenant Breaking; No bonds can restrain his
running headlong down the precipice to destruction. Yet the full amount of all
this presumption, has been very frequent in this apostatizing Generation, on
the front of whose perjury and perfidy, in complying with the mischief^ framed
into Laws, by a Throne of iniquity, this motto has been legibly written, I
shall have peace, tho I walk in the imagination of my heart.

V. From verse 20, to 28, the punishment of breach of Covenant is threatened,
predicted and described, with reference to a twofold breach of Covenant,
procuring a twofold punishment: personal perjury, threatened with personal;
National, with National judgments.

First, Verse 20.
Personal perjury is in two verses ma^e obnoxious to many terrible threatenings,
every clause thundering vengeance.

What may every Covenant breaker expect? The Spirit of God Answers. 1. The Lord
will not spare him. This is a Meiosis, importing far more than is expressed, to
wit, a threatening of inexorable, ineluctable and irresistible judgment wherein
there shall be no allay of Mercy, as Ezekiel. 5.11. Ezekiel. 7.4.9. implying
nevertheless always an exception of Repentance. Otherwise, the Lord will not
spare the presumptuous Covenant breaker, be who he will, be he King or Beggar,
Magistrate or Minister, or private Person. 2. But then the anger of the Lord,
and His jealousy shall smoke against that man. O who can express or conceive
the horror of that misery, of being the object of Divine indignation, in its
full, vigor and rigor, as the smoking of it imports! Yet this is the doom of
the Apostatizing, presumptuous, self-flatering Covenant-breaker; Deuteronomy: 31:16,
17. They will break my Covenant, then my anger shall be kindled against them in
that day, and I will foresake them, and I will hide my face from them, and they
shall be devoured, and many evils and troubles shall befall them, etc. Josh. 23.
ult. When ye have transgressed the Covenant of the Lord your God, then shall
the anger of the Lord be kindled against you. Mal. 3.5. The Lord will come near
to judgment, and will be a swift witness against false swearers, etc. 3. And
all the curses that are written in this book shall lie upon him. All Covenants
have a Curse, Neh. 10 29. The Curse of this Covenant is some way greater than
the Curse of the Law, deserving and procuring the Mediators vengeance, which is
a sorer punishment than vengeance of a btoken Law, Heb. 10 28, 29.
Comprehending all Miseries, Temporal, Spiritual and Eternal. This is the flying
Roll, the length whereof is twenty Cubits, and the breadth thereof ten Cubits,
Zech. 5.2, 3, 4. We have a black and broad roll of Curses appointed unto
Covenant-breakers, Lev. 26.15. to the close, Terrors, Consumption,
Burning-agues, Enemies prevailing, Rage of Tyrants reigning, Barrenness of
Land, Wild beasts devouring, the raging Sword, Pestilence, Famine, Desolation,
Faintness, and pining away in Iniquities, etc. And another, may Cubits long and
broad, Deuteronomy. 28. from 15. to the end. We see what Curses are threatened against
the Men that transgress His Covenant, Jer. 34.18, 20. etc. He will give them
into the hand of their Enemies, and into the hand of them that seek their Life.
Ezekiel. 17.15, 18, 19. Shall he prosper? shall he escape? shall he break the
Covenant, and be delivered? seeing he despised the Oath, by breaking the
Covenant, when to, he had given his hand? he shall not escape. As I live, I
will recompense it upon his own head. 4. And the Lord shall blot out his name
from under Heaven. Men think to escape by Iniquity, and to purchase, sometimes,
not only ease and rest, but esteem and renown, by perfidious and perjurious
time-serving. And the greatest Complyers, who kept their houses, when others
for adhering to the Covenant of God, lost or left them, have thoughts that
their houses shall continue for ever, they call their Lands after their Names (
Psalm. 49.11.) But the Spirit of God says, their name shall be blotted out, and
shall stink. Job. 18.17, Their remmembrance shall perish, and they shall have
no name in the street. Job, 20.7. He shall perish for ever, like his own dung,
they which have seen him, shall say, where is he? Job, 27. ult. Men shall clap
their hands at him, and shall hiss him out of his place. Psalm. 37.35.36. Tho
for a time, he may be great in power, and spread himself, like a green bay
tree, yet he shall pass away, and shall not be found. Psalm. 52.5, 6, 7. He
shall be plucked out of his dwelling place, and rooted out of the Land of the
Living. The righteous also shall see and fear, and shall laugh at him. Lo this
is the Man that made not God his strength, but trusted in the abundance of his
riches, and strengthened himself in his wickedness. Prove. 10 7. The name of the
wicked shall rot. Prove. 13.9. The lamp of the wicked shall be put out, when the
light of the Righteous shall rejoice. 5. And the Lord shall separate him unto
evil, out of all the tribes of Israel, according to all the Curses of the
Covenant, that are written in this book of the Law. verse. 21. Verse 21.
Tho all Sinners are obnoxious, yet in a more special manner, the
Covenant-braker shall be separate, or singled out to examplifie the Lords
Indignation and Jealousy. He shall particularly be the Butt of His vengeance.
Many evils shall befall him, escape who will, Deuteronomy. 31.17. according to all the
Curses of the Covenant, Temporal, Spiritual and Eternal. He shall be a prey to
all the evils of sin, given up to all the evils of trouble, and devoted, as a
Faggot, for Hells fire, for ever.

Secondly, National covenant breaking, is threatened with astonishing National
judgments, from verse. 22. to 28. Wherein, the observableness and astonishing
greatness of them, is not only threatened, but predicted (compare Deuteronomy. 31.16,
17, etc. with the event) and described. Showing, 1. The Observers. 2. The thing
observed, or the occasion of their observations. 3. Their enquiry upon their
observations. 4. Their Answer obvious and ready.

1. The Observers of the Lords Judgments upon the Nation of Israel, breaking
Covenant with God, are, The Generation to come of their Children, and the
Stranger that shall come from a far Land, verse. 22. Verse. 22
Yea, even all Nations, verse. 24. The Justice of God, in punishing National
breach of Covenant, will be so mainifected, and magnified, that all Men may
know, and must acknowledge it. Not only the Godly will be affected with horror,
and rivers of Tears will run down their eyes, and they will wish their heads
were fountains of Tears, at the sight of the sin procuring, and the judgment
punishing: Nor only faithful Teachers, that warned the people of these things
before, will observe when they come to pass. Jer. 5.19. To whom the mouth of
the Lord has spoken, that they may declare, for what the Land perishes, who
can easily tell, that it is for forsaking the Lord, and His Covenant, Jer.
9.12, 13. Jer. 16.10, 11. Nor Covenant breakers themselves, that are left in
that day, when many evils and troubles befall them, will say, are not these
evils come upon us, because our God is not among us? Deuteronomy. 31.17. And will be
forced to acknowledge that the Lord is righteous, 2 Chronicles. 12.5, 6. But it
shall be observed and acknowledged by the Generation to come, and by Strangers,
and all Nations about, 2 Chronicles. 7.19. etc. Jer. 22.8, 9. Yea by Adversaries,
employed as the Instruments of these punishments, Lev. 26.32, I will bring the
Land to desolation, and your enemies which dwell therein, shall be astonished
at it. Jer. 40 2, Nebuzaradan, the chief Captain of the Guard, said to the
Prophet, The Lord thy God has pronounced this evil upon this place, now the
Lord has brought it, and done according as He has said, because ye have
sinned against the Lord, and have not obeyed his voice, therefore this thing is
come upon you. Jer. 50.7, All that found them have devoured them, and their
Adversaries said, we offend not, because they have sinned against the Lord the
habitation of justice, even the Lord, the hope of their fathers.

Why is the punishment of National breach of Covenant so public, that it is
observed of Posterity, and Strangers? Ans: 1. To vindicate the glory of God,
which would be very much obscured and wronged, in the sight of the Nations, if
the punishment were not as public as the sin, which was observed by them; And
to vindicate true Religion, from the imputation of allowing perjury, hateful to
all Nations. 2. To proportion the punishment with the sin, in Justice, Jer:
5:19: Ezekiel: 16:59: the despising the Oath of God, and breaking His Covenant was
publict and National, and therefore must be punished with Judgments, that are
public and National. 3. To remove the stumbling block from the Nations about,
and Posterity, that this impunity would lay before them, if such a sin might
pass without signal and stupendous strokes. And to set up a Beacon, to warn
all of the hazard of splitting upon this Rock. And as the warning of it is a
witness against them that will do the like, Deuteronomy: 31:21: So, much more the
accomplishment will be. All Nations have observed and admired Scotland,
Eminency, when owning Gods Covenant: All Nations have again despised, derided,
and hissed at our unparalleled perjury, that the very Turks blush to hear of.
It may be, if Repentance prevent it not, as we have been a hissing and a
taunting proverb, for the guilt of it, so we may be a curse and execration, for
the punishment of it.

2. The thing they shall observe, or the occasion of their observing, is (1)
When they see the plagues of the Land, and the sicknesses which the Lord has
laid upon it; ver: 22: Land plagues are here threatened, for this Land-sin of
breach of Covenant; And Land-sicknesses of all sorts, Moral and Physical, even
all mentioned Lev. 26. and Deuteronomy. 28. the plague of the Sword, of Tyrannizing
Rulers or inwading Enemies, or oppressing Robbers or Rebels, the plague of
Famine. Dearth or Poverty, the plague of Pestilence, or infecting contagious
Diseasses and Sicknesses on Peoples Carcases or Spirits, or on the managements
and Administrations of public Interests, making a Sick and Disturbed Church
and State. Whence come all these Distempers? Whence have flowed all these
Grievances, under which Scotland has groaned these 40 years? The best grounded
Answer is only this, Because we have foresaken the Covenant of the Lord God of
our fathers. We have seen many of these plagues and sicknesses already, we may
see yet more, if we live. 2. And that the whole land thereof is brimstone and
salt, and burning, and that it is not sown, nor bears, nor any grass grows
therein, like the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrhah, Admah, and Zeboim, which
the Lord overthrew in his anger, and in His wrath; ver: 23: Verse 23.
Here is threatened (tho not peremptorly predicted as the rest is) the total and
final desolation of the Land of Israel, if they should forsake the Covenant of
the Lord God of their fathers, which is compared ad terrorem, or ad
equivalentiam, to the overthrow of the Cities of the plain. The Lord does not
always ad literam fulfill this threatening; but here shows, what every Land,
avowing and persisting in breach of Covenant, may fear, and in Justice expect.
Justice requires, that and land guilty of Sodoms sins, should be liable to its
Judgments. If we compare Scotlands sins, and breaches of Covenant, with the
sins of these Cities, we shall find none of these abominations here wanting,
which brought down just vengeance on the Cities of the plain; In Gen: 19: chap:
We find their sins were chiefly the breaches of the seventh Command. And in
Ezekiel. 16.49. these were their Iniquities, Pride, fullness of Bread, abundance of
Idleness, neither did she strengthen the hand of the poor and needy, and they
were haughty, and committed abomination, therefore the Lord took them away as
He saw good. In no Nation under Heaven these sins have a louder Cry for
Vengeance, than in Scotland, which declares these sins and many more that Sodom
was never in capacity to commit, without shame or fear as Sodom, and hides them
not, Isa. 3.9. Whose Rulers, of a long time, have been Rulers of Sodom, and
whose people have been People of Gomorrah, Isa. 1.10. Yea, we are liable to the
Lords Upbraidings more than Sodom, Math. 11.23.24. For if the mighty works
which have been done in Scotland, had been done in Sodom, it would have
remained until this day, therefore it may be feared it shall be more
tolerable for the land of Sodom, in the day of judgment, then for Scotland.
And from what of this threatened curse of the Covenant we have seen accomplished
in any measure, we may have ground to fear what further shall be seen in future
fulfilments of it, if repentance do not prevent it. We have seen parts of the
Land, sometime fruitful, and well inhabited, and many Families formerly well
provided, in our day laid desolate, neither sown nor reaped: We have seen some
Cities almost burnt to ashes, we have seen great Poverty and Sterility in the
Land. What is the Cause? Even this, because we have forsaken the Covenant of
the Lord God of our fathers. Isa. 24.5, 6. The earth has been defiled under
the inhabitants thereof, because they have transgressed the Laws, changed the
Ordinance, broken the everlasting Covenant, therefore has the Curse devoured
the earth.

What may this Nation, or any other guilty of the like Perjury, fear or expect
in justice, in the day He visits us? Besides the Text, we may gather, in
cumulo, these Curses of the Covenant. [1] Terrors and tormenting panick
distracting Fears, the hag of guilty Consciences, Lev 26.16. Causing to flee
when none pursues, v. 17.36. Deuteronomy. 28.67. Felt in part already, in many
shameful yeeldings, flights, and discomfiturs [2] Mortal and contagious
distempers of body, consumptions, burning agues, Levit. 26.16. Pestilence v. 25
Inflammations, Deuteronomy. 28.21; 22. Plagues, v. 27, 35, 59, 61. The great mortality
now very ordinary in the Land, is the fruit of breach of Covenant. [3] Enemies
Depradations, Depopulations and Devastations, eating up the seed, Lev. 26.16.
Slaying and chasing, v. 17. A Sword to avenge the quarrel of the Covenant, v.
25. Deuteronomy. 28.25, 34, 49, 52. Josh. 7.12, 15. Jer. 15.2. Jer. 34.18, 20. Who can
tell but the Sword, now drawn in Britain and Ireland, may avenge the quarrel
of His broken Covenant. [4] Tyrants domination, Levit. 26.17. Deuteronomy. 28.43, 48.
Our long oppression under the two preceding Tyrants, has been the deserved
punishment of our breach of Covenant: [5] Barrenness and unfruitfulness of the
ground, Levit: 26.19, 20. Deuteronomy. 28.23, 24. Isa. 24. [6] Wild beasts devouring,
Lev. 26.22. Ier. 15.3: The Lord can send these also, or men as bad as beasts.
[7] Famine, Levit. 26:26, 29. Deuteronomy. 28.53, 57. Ier. 15.2. Many poor people have
felt somewhat of this, it is easy with the Lord to reach the rich also when he
will. [8] Desolation of Cities and Sanctuaries, Lev. 26.31, 32, 34. 2. King.
17.15.18. Isa. 24.6. We have long languished under Sanctuary desolations, the
other may follow. [9] Exile and slavery, Lev: 26:33, 38: Deuteronomy: 28:25, 36, 37,
64, 68. This has been in part literally accomplished, in the deportation of
many to America more may be coming. [10] A curse and vexation in and upon all
enjoyments and employments, Deuteronomy: 28:15, 20: 2 Chronicles: 24:20: Since ever we
forsook the Lord, nothing has prospered with us. [11] Infatuation, Deuteronomy:
28:28: Quos Deos vult perdere dementat, has been written on all our projects,
for which we are a scorn and derision to all Nations about us. [12] Desertion
from God, and hiding of His face; Deuteronomy: 31:17: Jer: 15:1: Visibly seen in
Ordinances and Providence, the fruit of our forsaking His Covenant. In a word,
many troubles, Deuteronomy: 31:17: All evils, even to utter destruction, Josh: 23:15,
16. For all which, our hearts may meditate Terror.

Verse. 24.
3. Their Enquiry or Question, upon their observation of the tremendous
punishment of this sin, is, Wherefore has the Lord done thus unto this Land?
What means the heat of this great anger? This is frequently predicted to be
the Question of spectators, that shall observe the National Punishment of
National Crying sins: As in the case of the Temples desolation for Temple
polluting sins, 1 Kings 9.8, 9. 2 Chronicles. 7.21, 22. The like also, Jer. 22.8, 9.
When this shall be the question of the Nations, it will be easy to answer it.
It is not so at the beginning of the Lords contendings, when it is only the
question of the Apostatizing Generation it self; Then only the faithful
Watchmen, instructed of God, will answer it suitably, Jer. 5.19. Jer. 16.10.
It is not easy to find the wise man that may understand this, and to whom the
mouth of the Lord has spoken, that he may declare it for what the Land
perishes, Jer. 9.12, 13. The most guilty may allege the more innocent, to be
the causes of the Lands trouble, as Ahab said to Elijah, 1 King. 18.17, 18. And
even the Prophets not discovering the Lands iniquity, may see false burdens and
causes of banishment, Lam. 2.14. However, it will be no mistake to pitch upon
several causes of wrath against Scotland, even any, or all that ever brought
down Vengeance upon any Generation of wrath recorded in the Scripturs, or in
any History; such as, Profanity of all sorts, Hypocrisy, Idolatry, Adultery,
Treachery, Pride, Blood and Oppression, Contempt of the Gospel, etc. and these
attended with the greatest aggravations. With these indeed the Land has been
troubled, polluted, and for the same is yet perishing: But chiefly, that which
has incensed the anger of the Lord to all this heat, has been, and remains to
be, Breach of Covenant. And all these abominations, not simply because Breaches
of the Law of God, but as under this special aggravation, that they have been,
and are Breaches of Covenant. As is evident from,

4. The ready Answer here given, Because they have forsaken the Covenant of the
Lord God of their fathers, which he made with them, when he brought them forth
out of the Land of Egypt, ver. 25. Verse. 25.
This Answer shall be extorted from Men, all Men, that are Men of any
consideration, Prophets, Jer. 5.19. Jer. 9.13. Jer. 16.10. Covenant-breakers
themselves, Deuteronomy. 31.17. Strangers, 2 Chronicles. 7.21, 22. Jer. 22.8, 9. Let it be
enquired then, wherefore has the Lord done thus unto Scotland? What means
the heat of all this great anger, in which it has been consuming now these 40
years, and yet not consumed? The Answer must be, We have forsaken the Covenant
etc. It appears hence, that breach of Covenant is a great sin, and cause of
wrath. And is further confirmed from many Threatenings of wrath for it, Levit.
26.25. Deuteronomy. 31.16, 17. Josh. 23.15, 16. 2 Chronicles. 7.21, 22. Jer. 22.8, 9. From
sad and stupendous executions of these Threatenings, Josh. 7.11, 15. 2 Kings
17.15: etc. Isa: 24.5, 6: And from the confessions and complaints of it, 1
King: 19, 10: Neh: 9: Dan: 9: It may be also observed from hence, that no sin
is more aggravated than breach of Covenant, as appears from these words, to
ver. last; wherein this Answer of the Nations. 1. Aggravates this sin in
general, v. 25. 2. Specifies the particular kind of it, v: 26. 3. Justifies the
punishment of it, v. 27, 28.

1 Here is aggravated the heinousness of breach of Covenant, in a contexture of
words that shows forth its hatefulness. There are several degrees of this sin,
but this is the worst.

How may a Nation be guilty of breach of Covenant? Ans: Not only (1) by
transgressing any of the Articles of it, as here, by serving other gods, ver:
26; putting forth the hand to any accursed thing, which, tho it was the
personal sin of Achan only, yet the whole Congregation was involved in it,
Josh: 7:11, 15. especially when it is discovered, and yet connived at, not
witnessed against, nor mourned over. But (2) by rashness or falsehood in making
it, Hos: 10:4: swearing falsely in making a Covenant, when it is not taken in
truth, righteousness and judgment, when only in Hypocritical flattery,
without right and steadfast hearts it is engaged into, Psalm: 78.36, 37. (3) By
forgetfulness, Deuteronomy. 4:23: Take heed unto your selves lest ^e forget the
Covenant of the Lord your God; Forgetting is a step toward forsaking. Psalm:
44:17: The perpetual Covenant should not be forgotten, Jer: 50:5. (4) By
seeking shifts to elude it, and Arguments to defend the breach of it, Prove:
20:25: (5) By despising and undervaluing the Bond of it, Ezekiel: 16:59: Ezekiel:
17:16, 19. (6) By defection to the iniquities abjured in it, Jerem: 11:10. (7)
By changing the institutions sworn to be maintained, Isaiah 24:5: Either the
State Government, without consulting Divine directions and boundaries, Hos:
8:1, 4. Or the Church Government, without respect to the Pattern of the
revealed will of Christ, 2 Chronicles. 13.9, 10, 11. (8) By disowning it, and
downright denying the obligation of it, Dan: 11:30. (9) By stating an
opposition to it, and persecuting them that adhere to it, 1 Kin: 19.10. Dan.
11.30. The two last are properly forsaking the Covenant, which is more then
breaking it, (here may be gathered the answer to this Quest. This Forsaking,
implying willing and wilful deliberation resolution, and presumption in avowing
the breach of it. This is a great length in perjury, yet short of the amount of
Scotlands unparalleled Effrontery in enacting the breach of it, making the
renunciation of it a qualification of persons capable of publict Trust, burning
it by the hand of the Hangman, and making the owning of it Criminal. Again,
here is a forsaking of the Covenant, which, as it includes a forsaking of the
Commandments of God, which has a brand of a hateful heinousness, 1 Kin: 18:18:
2 Chronicles: 12:1, 5: Ezra 9:10: Jer: 9:13. So, it imports and inferrs a greater
aggravation, to forsake a Covenant of so long standing, a perpetual Covenant,
Jer: 50:5. A Covenant so holy, Dan: 11:30. A Covenant so solemnly engaged into,
Jer: 34:18: so frequently renewed, and under such sanctions, certifications,
adjurations and curses, in this chap: Josh: 24: and Jer: 11:2, 3. Further, it
is a forsaking of the Covenant of the Lord God. Tho it were but a man's
Covenant, yet it could not be forsaken, without the basest of treachery, much
more to forsake Gods Covenant, which is to forsake Himself, a dreadful sin, so
much aggravated in Scripture, Deuteronomy. 31.16. Deuteronomy. 32.15. Josh. 24.19, 20. Judge.
10.13. 2 Chronicles. 24.20. Isa: 1:4: Jer. 2.10, 11, 13. To forsake the Covenant of
the of the Lord our Husband is Adultery. To forsake the Covenant of the Lord
our King, is unnatural Rebellion. To forsake the Covenant of the Lord our God,
is Idolatry, worse than is to be found among Heathens, who will not disown
their gods. Finally, its a forsaking of the Covenant of the Lord God of their
fathers, which He made with them when He brought them out of the Land of Egypt.
Forsaking a Redeemers Covenant, who had delivered their Fathers from Slavery,
whose mercy and faithfulness their Fathers had experienced, and from their
experience of the good of keeping Covenant with Him, had commended it to their
posterity; A Covenant, not of a late date, or a new invention, but transmitted
from their Fathers; A Covenant, which, upon that head, the Lord has respect
unto, and for which, sometimes He will not destroy, but have compassion upon
the unworthy posterity, 2 King. 13:23. This is charged as a great aggravation
of breaking Covenant, Jer. 11.10. Mal. 2.10. Because it was the Covenant of
their Fathers, or of the God of their Fathers.

2. Here is specified the particular way of their forsaking the Covenant, v:
26: For they went and served other gods, Verse. 26:
and worshipped them. Indeed this is the grossest way of breaking Covenant, to
serve and worship other Gods: But this has also its degrees, whether this
Idolatry be considered as a breach of the First, or of the Second Commandment,
as was showed before, and undeniable in the Scriptures. There is external and
internal Idolatry. There is Idolatry that has a wrong object, and Idolatry
also that may pretend the true object of worship, but consisting in a worship
not of His appointment. However, by the way it may be noted, that Service and
Worship is all one. Hence the Popish distinction of Dowleia and Latreia is
groundless and Anti-scriptural. This Serving or Worshipping of other gods, is
aggravated from two grounds. [1] They were gods whom they knew not, worshipping
an unknown god (according to the Motto of the Athenian Alter) is a peculiar
stretch of of Idolatrous superstition, Act. 17:22, 23: Ignorance then (of the
object, or of the way of worship) is not the Mother but the Murder of true
Devotion. The Introduction of any unknown or uncouth thing, whether it be in
the object, or manner of worship, or any New Invention, or Innovation in the
service or worship of God, is hence inferred to be a breach of Covenant. [2]
They were gods whom he had not given unto them. If any thing then be received,
admitted, or allowed in worship or Religious service, which God has not given,
granted, or commanded, it is a breach of His Law and Covenant. His Law is so
perfect, that not only what He has forbidden is sin, but what He has not
commanded in Religious service.

3. Here is justified the punishment of that forsaking of the Lords Covenant,
ver: 27, 28: Verse. 27, 28:
(1) In vindicating the justice of it, in that all the effect of the Anger of
the Lord kindled against the Land, v: 27: was according to the Curses that are
written in this book. The punishment of a Land breaking Covenant, is only what
it deserves, and what the Lord has threatened in the Scriptures. (2) In
indicating and acknowledging the severity of it, v. 28. How the Lord rooted
them out of their Land in anger, and in wrath, and in great indignation etc.
Hence it may be inferred, that if Covenanters will not extirpate what pollutes
the Land, according to their Engagements, the Lord will be provoked to
extirpate them out of the Land, according to His Word.

VI. In the close, verse. ult. there is a Conclusory Corollary subjoined to all.
Verse. 29.
The secret things belong unto the Liad our God: but those things which are
revealed belong unto us, and to our Children for ever, that we may do all the
words of this Law. This may be taken either abstractly, as an Apothegm by it
self, or with relation to what follows in the next chapter, or to what preceeds
in this. Sin and Duty is here clearly revealed, and that should be the matter
of our exercise: But Events are secrets belonging to the Lord. He has revealed
it is our duty to keep the words of this Covenant and do them: But, who shall
endure to the end so doing, is a secret known to Himself. He has revealed it
is our duty to enter into Covenant with the Lord our God, that He may establish
us for a people unto Himself: But who shall get this privilege made good unto
them, without reversion: Or, who shall turn away, and have a root that bears
Gall and Wormwood, etc. is a secret. In the general it is revealed that the
keepers of the Covenant shall have the blessings of it secured, and the
breakers shall have the curses ratified: But who they shall be by name and
surname, is a secret belonging unto the Lord. He has clearly revealed, that
the great procuring cause of Divine Vengeance, is, Forsaking the Covenant: But
when He will inflict and execute this Vengeance, how, and upon whom, and by
whom or what Instruments, or in what measure, or how long, These are secrets.
Again, in the following Chap. He has clearly revealed when these Threatenings
have come upon us, and we shall call them to mind, even in captivity, and shall
return unto the Lord our God, and shall obey His voice, that then the Lord our
God will turn our Captivity, and will have Compassion upon us. etc. But as for
the seasons of it, it is not for us to know them, Act. 1.7. Whither it shall be
at this time, in our day, or afterward; whether by these dispensations or
instruments now made use of, or others, are secret things belonging to the Lord
our God.

But, to put a Close to this Introduction, it is apparent from what is said
there can be very few doubts, or dark difficulties about National Covenants,
but what may be resolved from this Chapter, and seen to be, not among the
secrets not to meddled with, but among the Things Revealed, belonging to us and
our Children. Particularly these Questions here touched, which have been
strumbling stones to many, and Topics of objections against our National
Covenants, are in some measure cleared. Which may here together be presented to
the Readers view.

Quest. 1 Whether it be Lawful and expedient for Nations to enter into
Covenants with God? from verse. 1.

Q. 2. What is the Nature of this Covenanting? ibid.

Q. 3. Whether it may be done without the Magistrate? Or, when it is so, is the
obligation of it binding? ibid.

Q. 4. When the Covenant is Renewed, may it be done with Alterations and
Accomodations to the time? ibid.

Q. 5. What may be Motives to Renew the Covenant? from v. 2: to v. 9.

Q. 6. What is it to keep Covenant? from v. 9.

Q. 7. May the Covenant be renewed without the Primores, when they will not
concur? from ver: 10:

Q. 8. May Children be admited to the Covenant? from v: 11.

Q. 9. Are Strangers obliged, or may they be admitted to the Covenant? ibid.

Q. 10. Does the Covenant bind the absent, and them that did not take it? from
ver: 13.14.

Q. 11. May the Covenant be imposed upon all? or may all be admitted to take
it? ibid.

Q. 12. What may loose the obligation of it? from v: 12.

Q. 13. What the better shall we be of making and keeping a National Covenant?
ver: 13.

Q. 14. Is the obligation of National Covenants (upon the matter Lawful)
perpetual and binding upon posterity. from ver: 15.

Q 15. What are the chief tentations inducing to the sin of Covenant Breaking?
and, what are the gradual steps of it? from 16: to 20.

Q. 16. What are the Curses and Punishments threatened against Covenant-breakers
Personal, from v. 20.

Q. 17. Why is the punishment of National breach of Covenant so Public, that
it is observed of posterity and Strangers? from ver. 22: etc.

Q. 18. What is the threatened Punishment of National breach of Covenant? from
verse. 22. etc.

Q. 19. What is the procuring Cause of all the Nations Miseries? from v: 24:25.

Q. 20. How may a Nation be guilty of breach of Covenant? from v: 25:

Q. 21. What are the aggravations of that sin? ibid:

THese being premised there is the less need to enlarge in the vindication of
the Renovation of these Covenants, here subjoyned, as they were Sworn and
Subscribed at Lesmahego. March, 3. 1689. Their Motives are before touched on
Question 4. from verse. 2. to 9. They Considered what the Lord had done before
their eyes, the great tentations in their day, the signs and the great wonders
of the Wisdom, Faithfulness, Power, Justice and Goodness of the Lord, appearing
in His way with them and their Fathers. They Considered the universal
Obduration, Stupidity, and unanswerableness to these wonders in themselves and
others, how they had not gotten hearts to perceive, nor eyes to see in to that
very day. They Considered the Lords greacious Conduct of them and their
fathers, and their own experience of His care and kindness toward them, in
providing so tenderly and wonderfully all necessaries for their Wilderness Lot.
They considered, how at length the Lord helped them to overcome two Kings, that
endeavored by all means to destroy them. They considered, that, as the Lord
promises prosperity to the keeping, and doing the words of His Covenant; So, in
the days of their Fathers, when they entered into, and kept Covenant with God,
He prospered them in all that they undertook, went forth with their Armies, and
made their Enemies to fall down before them, testifying in His providence His
approbation of His peoples Covenanting. They considered also, how these
Covenants (tho of Eternal obligation, as is cleared Quest. 14. from verse. 15.)
were broken, their breaches enacted by Law, they were Burnt, the owning of them
declared Criminal by an Act of Queensberries Parliament, and the obligation of
them, was like to be totally buried in oblivion. And therefore, as they thought
this a Case of Confession, when they could do no more, to give their Testimony
for the Covenants, with profession of the Sorrow of their hearts, and
abhorrence of their souls against these indignities (as was done in the Printed
Testimony, anno. 1688.) So, upon the same motives, they thought it no less
necessary, now, in this opportunity, to revive the memory of them, and at least
to break the ice for others to renew them more Solemnly. At that Critical
season, especially, when in the universal expectation of War, upon the change
of the Government, all parties were Associating for their own defense, and
asserting the quarrel and party they would espouse: They also thought it
expedient, by the renewing of these ancient Covenants, declare what Cause they
would avouch, and appear for; what King they would own, and upon what terms
they would offer, and oblige their subjection to the present Government, then
to be established, who had before declared a revolt from the former, and for
this end, to make this the bond of their Association.

It is objected, With a great deal of clamor by many, that this was an illegal
and presumptuous Action, without all Authority, or concurrence of persons that
had Authority to tender an Oath. But as this is loosed by what is said above,
on Quest. 3, and Q. 7. from v. 1. and v. 10. So we have precedents for entering
into, and renewing Covenants, for Defense of Religion and Liberty, without the
Authority then regnant, in several instances before, and since the established
Reformation; As that Covenant at Edinburgh, anno 1557, for the maintenance and
advancement of Reformation, and defense of one another adhering to it. Another
Covenant at Perth, 1559. And at Stirling, the same year. Another at Leith, anno
1560. Another at Air, 1562. All these without the concurrence of public
Authority. And in the year 1638, the National Covenant was Renewed before they
obtained Authority for it. And anno 1666. at Lanerk, a small handful of honnest
and faithful patriots renewed the Solemn League also, without and against the
Authority that was then. But this at Lesmahego, tho it was without Authority,
yet it was not against Authority, being in the time of the Interregnum, before
the settlement of Authority, for which Cause, in stead of the usual Expressions
of the King, and his Majesty, they read as in the margent, His Highness, or the
Civil Magistrate, because the present K: was not then declared. And that party
who renewed the Covenants then did not pretend to any Authority to do it as a
National Act, to bind the whose Nation; Only to take on the vows of God upon
themselves, and to invite others to do the like. If those that tendered the
Covenant at that time, did take upon them any Authority, it was not to impose
it upon any, but rather to exclude some from it, and to hinder their admission
to it, who were grossly ignorant and scandalous, by laying out before them the
hazard of swearing falsely. And discharging them, in the name of the Lord, to
devour these holy things. This also was an Off^nce to some and occasion of
obloquie against the Action: But it is justifi^d above, by what is said on
Quest. 11. from v. 10, 11, 12, etc. And by an Act of Assembly, July 20. Sess.
19. anno 1649. Debarring gross Complyers from the Covenant, and Ordaining that
none of those who were debarred, should be admitted, but such as after exact
trial, should be found for some Competent time, before or after the offer of
their Repentance, to have in their ordinary Conversations given Testimony of
their dislike of these Complyances. And it is not to be forgotten, when the
Minister was enlarging on the sins of such as had voluntarly given in the same
to him, with their names, in Write, beforehand ( viz. some that had gone a
great length in Sinful and Scandalous excesses, with that Impostor John Gibb,
and many others who had been involved in several sad defections, in the late
defiling times, as, Hearing the Curats, paying the Cess, taking the Oath of
Abjuration, etc.) Offering, and desiring to make public Acknowledgment before
the Congregation (then in the Fields) of these their public sin; Not only
several others, who had not given up their names, rose up, and openly declared
that they were guilty of several steps of defection; but also some declared
their guilt of personal Scandals; till at length the Minister was necessitate
several times to crave forbearance, the day being so far spent, that (after the
Covenants were sworn) the subscribing of them was hereby (happily) prevented
until night, which was done in the Church. The great out cry is against the
Alterations and additions in this Renovation of the Covenants: But as this
objection is taken off by what is said above on Quest. 4. from verse 1. So,
that Renovation of the National Covenant, in the year 1638, With very large
additions accommodate to the time, is a precedent justifying any Alterations or
Additions in the Covenant Renewed at Lesmabego, which are only in these words
of the Covenants, that cannot suit the present times, as is obvious from every
Alteration, marked only in the Margent, without expunging the old words.

There are indeed many Additions in the Acknowledgment of sins and Engagement
to duties (which also were then Solemnly Renewed) because these Late unhappy
times of defection have produced many other sins, than could be Confessed in
that Acknowledgment, Anno 1649. But the whole of the former is retained in a
Large Character; And the Additions subjoyned in a Lesser Character, for
distinction; The same is done, upon the same grounds, in the Engagement to
duties annexed. In the former, the sins of the time are acknowledged
impartially, without concealing any of their own, so far as they had light, no
more than the sins of any other party. In the Latter, the duties of the
Covenant are particularly and plainly engaged into, according to their
Conscience of them, even those that are, or have been Controverted: That if
others may not hereby be excited to consider them; Yet themselves might come
to, and intertain a determined sense of them, and not halt between two
opinions. And to the end the Material and Moral obligation of the Covenants may
be considered and discovered, to wit, that the duties thereof are antecedently
Commanded, and the sins thereof antecedently forbidden, tho there had been no
superadded Covenant; Therefore, in the Acknowledgment of sins (according to the
Order of the Articles of the Covenant, which are there repeated) the Scriptures
confirming every Article and Clause thereof, are annexed.

Finally, The Objection which is most commonly insisted on, and seems to have
most weight, is, That tho it were tolerable to Renew the National Covenant;
Yet, for a party in Scotland to renew the Solemn League and Covenant with
England, is folly and presumption, without their concurrence and consent, a
League without Colleagues being absurd and ridiculous. Ans. This indeed were a
very thorny point, if it were pleaded or pretended that the Solemn League and
Covenant was, or is to be Renewed, either by a party, or the whole body of
Scotland, in the present circumstances, under the same and adequate formality,
consideration, and extent of Association and Confederation with England or
Ireland, as it was at its first framing; that is, as a League Offensive and
Defensive with the Collective body of these Kingdoms, and the Noblemen, Barons,
Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, Burgesses, Ministers of the Gospel, and Commons
of all sorts, in Scotland, England and Ireland; For that would involve in an
Association with the Prelatical and Malignant party. In regard of which, as the
case now stands, it were very hard to Renew that League for Religion, between
these Nations, albeit their concurrence and consent were obtained, for fear of
a sinful Association, so much Condemned in Scripture, except they were more
Reformed, and better disposed for Reformation, and except the things to be
Reformed in both, were more particularly expressed, with accommodation to the
several c^rruptions of these times; that were not known, and could not be
foreseen, at the first making of the Solemn League and Covenant: But it is not
absu^d, that the whole Nation, or even a party in it, renew That Holy
Engagement, as it is a Covenant with God: wherein He is respected not only as
witness, but Party Contracting, or with whom they Contract, and to whom they
vow obedienee: Wherein also, they oblige themselves to nothing, either with
reference to God or Man, or those that sometimes were Colleagues, now broken
off from the League, but what they are bound to antecedently, if there had
never been any such Covenant, or League, or Colleagues. And if it be Considered
as a League or Association; It is Renewed, not in the same extent as formerly,
but only with those that did then renew it, or with all that own it in
Scotland, England or Ireland. Upon this Consideration, these words in the
beginning of the Solemn League and Covenant, expressing the several ranks, and
the extent of the Covenanters were not read, at the Renewing of it at
Lesmabego. Because they owned themselves to be under a League with none, but
such as owned the Covenanted Reformation. Nor is it altogether unprecedented,
that a Nation Renewing the Covenant, from which their Colleagues have receded.
The Renovation of it in Scotland, anno 1649. was, after the prevailing power of
England did resile from their Engagements; tho some did then, as to this day a
few do adhere to them. All the Tribes of Israel were once in Covenant together:
The revolt of the Ten Tribes, did not hinder the Godly in Judah to renew it, in
the days of Asa, Hezekiah, Josiah, nor did it preclude a small party of Ephraim
Manasseh, etc. to take part in it, 2 Chronicles. 15.9, 12. But tho there might be
some informality or inconveniency in keeping the old Form of the Solemn League,
with such alterations only annoted on the Margent, as might make it
accommodable to the present time: And perhaps it had been more suitable, to
frame it altogether in a New Form, if the Representatives of Church and State
had concurred: Yet, that party at Lesmahego, not daring to take so much upon
them, and therefore adhering to both Matter and Form, so far as it could serve
the time, and the Engagements thereof quadrate with their capacities, are not
to be rashly condemned for their Renewing old Vows, which were (and in so far
only as they were) before, and then, and are always binding. Yea rather it
were suitable and seasonable for the Representatives (who can easily mend, what
was not within their sphere to do) in stead of despising the meanness of that
party, and carping at the imperfections of that action, to imitate their Zeal,
in Renewing these National Engagements, with solemn Acknowledgements of the
Breaches thereof, in a Form that will better please them. This would be a
notable mean of turning away the Lords fierce Wrath from the Nation, 2 Chronicles.
29.10. Hereby Reformation in Church and State might be promoted and preserved;
Order and Union in the Church, which has been long wanting, might be settled
and established; Former Defections might be honestly and honorably removed and
remedied; Future Innovations and Corruptions, Schisms and D^sorders might be
prevented and precluded; And all Malignant Enemies of Reformation might be by
this Test discovered, and excluded from all Trust in Church or State, and
capacity to do either hurt: Yet without any constraint or restraint upon any
Man's true liberty. How pleasant and acceptable, both to God and Man, would it
be, as it may be hoped it will be, when the Lords people in these Lands, now
sore and long scattered and divided, shall return going and weeping, seeking
the Lord their God, and asking the way to Zion with their Faces thitherward,
That, at least the Owners and Lovers of Reformation, were saying, Come and let
us join our selves unto the Lord, in a perpetual Covenant, that shall not be
forgotten.

THE NATIONAL COVENANT OR, The Confession of Faith of the Kirk of Scotland,
subscribed at first by the Kings Majesty and his Household, in the year 1580.
Thereafter, by Persons of all ranks, in the year 1581. By Ordinance of the
Lords of the Secret Council, and Acts of the General Assembly. Subssribed again
by all sorts of Persons in the year 1590. By a new Ordinance of Council, at the
desire of the General Assembly: With a general Band for maintenance of the
true Religion and the Kings Person. And subscribed in the year 1638. By the
Noblemen, Barons, Gentlemen, Burgesses, Ministers, and Commons, then
undersubscribing. Together, with their resolution and promises for the causes
after specified, To maintain the said true Religion, and the Kings Majesty,
according to the Confession foresaid, and Act of Parliament. And thereafter,
upon the Supplication of the General Assembly to His Majesty's high
Commissioner and the Lords of his Majesty's Honorable Privy Council,
subscribed again in the Year 1639. by Ordinance of Council, and Act of General
Assembly. And now again by Us this present Year 1689. Acknowledging the public
breaches thereof, and engaging to the Duties contained therein, with
Accommodation to our Case and Time.
WE All, and every one of Us underwritten, Protest, that, after long and due
Examination of our own Consciences, in matters of true and false Religion. We
are now thoroughly resolved of the Truth, by the Word and Spirit of God; and
therefore we believe with our hearts, confess with our mouths, subscribe with
our hands and constantly affirm bef re God, and the whole World, that this only
is the true Christian Faith an^ Religion, pleasing God, and bringing Salvation
to Man, which now is by the Mercy of God revealed to the world, by the
preaching of the Blessed Evangel, and received, believed, and defended by many
and sundry notable Kirks and Realms, but chiefly by the Kirk of Scotland, and
sometimes by
the Kings Majesty, and Three Estates of this Realm, as Gods eternal Truth,
and only ground of our Salvation: As more particularly is expressed in the
Confession of our Faith, stablished, and publicly confirmed by sundry Acts of
Parliament, and now of a long time has been openly professed by the Kings
Majesty, and whole body of this Realm, both in Burgh and Land. To the which
Confession and Form of Religion, We willingly agree in our Consciences in all
points, as unto Gods undoubted Truth an^ Verity, grounded only upon his written
Word. And therefore we abhore and detest all contrary Religion and Doctrine:
But chieflly all kind of Papistry, in general and particular heads, even as
they are now damned and confuted by the Word of God, and Kirk of Scotland: But
in special, We detest and refuse the usurped Authority of that Roman
Anti-c^rist upon the Scriptures of God, upon the Kirk, the Civil Magistrate,
and Conscience of Men, all his Tyrannous Laws made upon indifferent things
against our Christian Liberty, his erroneous Doctrine against the sufficiency
of the written Word, the perfection of the Law, the Offices of Christ, and His
blessed Evangel. His corrupted Doctrine concerning Original Sin, our natural
Inability and Rebellion to Gods Law, our Justification by Faith only, our
imperfect Sanctification and Obedience to the Law, the Nature, Number, and Use
of the Holy Sacraments. His five bastard Sacraments, with all his Ri^es,
Ceremonies, and false Doctrine added to the ministration of the true
Sacraments, without the Word of God. His cruel judgment against Infants
departing without the Sacrament: His absolute necessity of Baptism, his
blasphemous opinion of Transubstantiation, or Real presence of Christ's Body in
the Elements, and receiving of the same by the wicked, or Bodies of Men. His
Dispensations with solemn Oaths, Perjuries, and degrees of Marriage forbidden
in the Word: his cruelty against the Innocent divorced: his devilish Mass: his
blasphemous Priesthood, profane Sacrifice for the Sin of the Dead and the
Quick, his Canonization of Men, calling upon Angels or Saints departed,
worshipping of Imagery, Relics, and Crosses, dedicating of Kirks, Altars,
Days, Vows to Creatures, his Purgatory, Prayers for the Dead, praying or
speaking in a strange Language, with his Processions, and blasphemous Litany,
and multitude of Advocates or Mediators: his manifold Orders, auricular
Confession, his desperate and uncertain Repentance; his general and doubtsome
Faith, his satisfactions of Men for their sins, his Justification by Works,
opus operatum, Works of Supererogation, Merits, Pardons, Peregrinations, and
Stations: his Holy Water, baptising of Bells, conjuring of Spirits, Crossing,
Saning, Anointing, Conjuring, hallawing of Gods good Creatures, with the
superstitious opinion joined therewith: his worldly Monarchy, and wicked
Hierarchy: his three solemn Vows, with all his Shavellings of sundry sorts his
Erroneous and Bloody Decrees made at Trent, with all the Subscribers and
Approvers of that cruel and bloody Band, conjured against the Kirk of God: And
Finally, we detest all his vain Allegories, Rites, Signs and Traditions,
brought into the Kirk, without or against the Word of God, and Doctrine of this
true reformed Kirk, to the which we join our selves willingly, in Doctrine,
Faith, Religion, Discipline, and use of the Holy Sacraments, as lively Members
of the same, in Christ our Head: Promising and Swearing by the Great Name of
the Lord our God, that we shall continue in the obedience of the Doctrine and
Discipline of this Kirk, and shall defend the same according to our Vocation
and Power, all the days of our lives, under the pains contained in the Law,
and danger both of Body and Soul, in the day of Gods fearful Judgment; And
seeing that many are stirred up by Satan, and that Roman Antichrist, to promise,
swear, subscribe, and for a time use the Holy Sacraments in the Kirk
deceitfully against their own Consciences, minding thereby, first under the
external Cloak of Religion, to corrupt and subvert secretly Gods true Religion
within the Kirk, and afterward, when time may serve, to become open Enemies,
and Persecutors of the same under vain hope of the Popes Dispensation, devised
against the Word of God, to his greater confusion, and their double
condemnation in the day of the Lord Jesus.

We, therefore, willing to take away all suspicion of Hypocrisy, and of such
double dealing with God and His Kirk, Protest, and call The Searcher of all
hearts for witness, that our minds and hearts, do fully agree with this Our
Confession, Promise, Oath, and Subscription, so that We are not moved for any
worldly respect, but are persuaded only in Our Consciences, through the
knowledge and love of Gods true Religion, printed in Our Hearts by the Holy
Spirit, as we shall answer to Him in the day, when the secrets of all hearts
shall be disclosed. And because we perceive that the quietness and stability of
our Religion and Kirk, does depend upon the safety and good behavior of The
lawfully established Suprem Magistrate.
the Kings Majesty, as upon a comfortable Instrument of Gods Mercy, granted to
this Country, for the maintaining of this Kirk, and ministration of Justice
amongst us, we protest and promise with our Hearts under the same Oath,
Hand-writ, and Pains, that we shall defend his Person and Authority, with our
goods, bodies and lives* in the defense of Christ his Evangel, Liberties of our
Country, ministration of Justice, and punishment of Iniquity, against all
Enemies within this Realm, or without, as we desire our God to be a strong and
merciful Defender to us in the day of our death, and coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ: To whom with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, be all Honor and Glory
Eternally.

Like as many Acts of Parliament not only in general do abrogate, annul, and
rescind all Laws, Statutes, Acts, Constitutions, Canons, civil or municipal,
with all other Ordinances and practick Penalties whatsoever, made in prejudice
of the true Religion and Professors thereof; Or, of the true Kirk discipline,
Jurisdiction, and Freedom thereof; Or in favors of Idolatry and Superstition;
Or of the Papistical Kirk: As Act. 3. Act. 13. Parl. 1. Act. 23. Parl. 11. Act.
114. Parl. 12 of King James the sixth. That Papistry and Superstition may be
utterly suppressed according to the intention of the Acts of Parliament
repeated in the 5. Act. Parl. 20. King James 6th. And to that end they ordain
all Priests to be punished by manifold Civil and Ecclesiastical pains, as
Adversaries to Gods true Religion preached, and by Law established within this
Realm, Act 24. Parl. 11. King James 6th. As common Enemies to all Christian
Government, Act 18. Parl. 16. King James 6th. As Rebellers and Gain-standers of
our Sovereign Lords Authority, Act 47. Parl. 3. K. James 6. And as Idolaters.
Act 104. Parl. 7. King James 6. But also in particular (by and attour the
Confession of Faith) do abolish and condemn the Popes Authority and
Jurisdiction out of this Land, and orders the Maintainers thereof to be
punished, Act 2. Parl 1. Act 51. Parl. 3. Act. 106. Parl. 7. Act 114. Parl. 12.
King James 6. Do condemn the Popes erroneous Doctrine repugnant to any of the
Articles of the true and Christian Religion publicly preached, and by Law
established in this Realm: And ordains the spreaders and makers of Books or
Libels, or Letters, or Writs of that nature, to be punished, Act 46. Parl. 3.
Act 106. Parl. 7. Act 24. Parl. 11. King James 6. Do condemn all Baptism
conform to the Popes Kirk, and the Idolatry of the Mass, and ordains all
Sayers, wilful hearers, and concealers of the Mass, the mantainers and
resetters of Priests, Jesuits, traffiquing Papists, to be punished without any
exception or restriction, Act 5. Parl. 1. Act 120. Parl. 12. Act 164. Parl. 13.
Act 193. Parl. 14. Act 1. Parl. 19. Act 5. Parl. 20. K. James 6. Do condemn all
erroneous Books and Writes, containing erroneous Doctrine against the Religion
presently professed, or maintaining superstitious Rites and Ceremonies
Papistical, whereby the People are greatly abused, and ordaines the home
bringers of them to be punished, Act 25: Parl: 11: K. James 6: do condemn the
monuments and dregs of by gone Idolatry; as going to the Cr^sses, observing the
Festival days of the Saints, and such other superstitious and Papistical
Rites, to the dishonor of God, contempt of true Religion, and fostering of
great error among the People, and ordains the users of them to be punished for
the second fault, as Idolaters, Act 104: Parl: 7: K: James 6.

Like as many Acts of Parliament are conceaved for maintenance of Gods true and
Christian Religion, and the purity thereof in Doctrine and Sacraments of the
true Church of God, the liberty and freedom thereof, in her National, Synodal
Assemblies, Presbyteries, Sessions, Policy, Discipline and Jurisdiction
thereof, as that purity of Religion and liberty of the Church was used,
professed, exercised, preached and confessed according to the Reformation of
Religion in this Realm. As for instance, The 99: Act Parl: 7: Act 23: Parl 11:
Act 114: Parl: 12: Act 160: Parl. 13. of King James 6. Ratified by the 4 Act of
King Charles 1. So that the 6 Act Parl. 1. and 68 Act Parl. 6. of K. James 6.
in the year of God 1579. Declares the Ministers of the blessed Evangel, whom
God of His Mercy had raised up, or hereafter should raise, agreeing with them
that then lived in Doctrine, and Administration of the Sacraments, and the
people that professed Christ, as He was then offered in the Evangel, and does
communicate with the Holy Sacraments, (as in the reformed Kirks of this Realm
they were publicly administrat) according to the Confession of Faith, to be
the True and Holy Kirk of Christ Jesus within this Realm, and decerns and
declares all and sundry, who either gain-sayes the Word of the Evangel,
received and approved, as the heads of the Confession of Faith, professed in
Parliament, in the year of God 1560. Specified also in the first Parliament of
K. James 6. And ratified in this present Parliament, more particularly do
specify; or that refuses the administration of the Holy Sacraments, as they
were then ministrated, to be no Members of the said Kirk within this Realm, and
true Religion presently professed, so long as they keep themselves so divided
from the society of Christ's Body: And the subsequent Act 69. Parl. 6. of K.
James 6. declares, That there is none other Face of Kirk, nor other Face of
Religion, than was presently at that time, by the favor of God established
within this Realm, which therefore is ever stilled, Gods true Religion, Christ's
true Religion, the true and Christian Religion, and a perfect Religion. Which
by manifold Acts of Parliament, all within this -- Realm are bound to subscribe
the Articles thereof, the Confession of Faith, to recant all Doctrine and
Errors, repugnant to any of the said Articles, Act 4 and 9 Parl. 1. Act 45, 46,
47. Parl. 3. Act 71. Parl. 6. Act 106. Parl. 7. Act 24. Parl. 11. Act 123. Par.
12. Act 194, and 197. Parl. 14. of K. James 6. And all Magistrates, Sherifs,
etc. On the one part are ordained to search, apprehend, and punish all
Contraveeners: For instance, Act 5. Parl. 1. Act 104. Parl. 7. Act 25. Parl.
11. K. James 6. And that notwithstanding of the King's licenses on the
contrary, which are discharged and declared to be of no force, in so far as
they tend in any ways, to the prejudice and hinderance of the execution of the
Acts of Parliament against Papists and Adversaries of true Religion, Act 106.
Parl. 7. K. James 6. On the other part, in the 47. Act Parl. 3. K. James 6. It
is declared and ordained, seeing the cause of God's true Religion, and his
Highness Authority are so joined, as the hurt of the one is common to both: And
that none shall be reputed as Loyal and Faithful Subjects to our Sovereign
Lord, or his Authority, but be punishable as Rebellers and Gain-standers of the
same, who shall not give their Confession, and make their profession of the
said true Religion, and that they, who after defection, shall give the
Confession of their Faith of new, they shall promise to continue therein in
time coming, to maintain our Sovereign Lords Authority, and at the uttermost of
their power to fortify, assist, and maintain the true Preachers and Professors
of Christ's Evangel, against whatsoever Enemies and Gain-standers of the same:
And namely against all such (of whatsoever Nation, Estate, or Degree they be)
that have joined, and bound themselves, or have assisted, or assists to set
forward, and execute the cruel Decrees of Trent, contrary to the Preachers and
true Professors of the Word of God, which is repeated word by word in the
Article of Pacification at Perth the 23 of Febr: 1572. Approved by Parliament
the last of April 1573. Ratified in Parliament 1587. And related, Act 123.
Parl. 12. of K. James 6. with this addition, That they are bound to resist all
treasonable Uproars and Hostilities, raised against the true Religion, the
Kings Majesty, and the true Professors.

Likeas all Liedges are bound to maintain the Kings Majesty's Royal Person, and
Authority, the Authority of Parliaments, without the which neither any Laws or
lawful Judicatories can be established, Act 130. Act 131. Parl. 8 K. James 6.
And the Subjects Liberties, who ought only to live and be governed by the Kings
Laws, the common Laws of this Realm allanerly, Act 48. Parl. 3. K. James the
first, Act 79. Parl. 6. K. James 4. repeated in the Act 131. Parl. 8. King
James 6. Which, if they be innovated or prejudged, the Commission anent the
Union of the two Kingdoms of Scotland and England, which is the sole Act of the
17. Parl. of King James the 6. Declares such Confusion would ensue, as this
Realm could be no more a free Monarchy, because by the fundamental Laws,
ancient Privileges, Offices and Liberties of this Kingdom, not only the
Princely Authority of his Majesty's Royal descent has been these many Ages
maintained, but also the Peoples security of their Lands, Livings, Rights,
Offices, Liberties, and Dignities preserved, and therefore for the preservation
of the said true Religion, Laws, and Liberties of this Kingdom, it is statute
by the 8 Act Parl. 1. repeated in the 99 Act Parl. 7. ratified in the 23 Act
Parl. 11. and 114. Act Parl. 12. of K. James 6 and 4 Act of K. Charles 1. That
all Kings and Princes at their Coronation and Reception of their Princely
Authority, shall make their faithful Promise by their Solemn Oath in the
presence of the Eternal God, That, during the whole time of their Lives, they
shall serve the same Eternal God to the uttermost of their power, according as
He has required in His most Holy Word, contained in the Old and New Testament.
And according to the same Word, shall maintain the true Religion of Christ
Jesus, the Preaching of His Holy Word, the due and right ministration of the
Sacraments, now received and preached within this Realm (according to the
Confession of Faith immediately preceding) and shall abolish and gain-stand all
false Religion contrary to the same, and shall rule the People committed to
their charge, according to the Will and Command of God, revealed in His
foresaid Word, and according to the laudable Laws and Constitutions received in
this Realm, no ways repugnant to the said Will of the Eternal God; and shall
procure, to the uttermost of their power, to the Kirk of God, and whole
Christian People, true and perfect peace in all time coming: And that they
shall be careful to root out of their Empire all Heretics, and Enemies to the
true Worship of God, who shall be convicted by the true Kirk of God, of the
foresaid crimes, which was also observed by K. Charles the first.
his Majesty, at his Coronation in Edinburgh 1633. As may be seen in the order
of the Coronation.

In obedience to the Commandment of GOD, conform to the practice of the Godly
in former times, and according to the Laudable Example of our Worthy and
Religious Progenitors, -- which was warranted also by Act of Council,
commanding a general Band to be made and subscribed by his Majesty's Subjects,
of all Ranks, for two causes: One was, For defending the true Religion, as it
was then reformed, and is expressed in the Confession of Faith abovewritten,
and a former large Confession established by sundry Acts of lawful General
Assemblies, and of Parliaments, unto which it has relation, set down in
public Catechisms, and which had been for many years with a Blessing from
Heaven preached, and professed in this Kirk and Kingdom, as Gods undoubted
Truth, grounded only on His written Word. The other cause was, for maintaining
the Kings Majesty, his Person, and Estate: The true worship of God, and the
Kings Authority, being so straightly joined, as that they had the same Friends,
and common Enemies, and did stand and fall together. And finally, being
convinced in our minds, and confessing with our mouths, that the present and
succeeding Generations in this Land, are bound to keep the foresaid National
Oath and Subscription inviolable. We -- under-subscribing, considering diverse
times before, and especially at this time, the danger of the true reformed
Religion, His Highness's honor (by whose noble enterprise so signally
countenanced of the Lord, we have obtained this reviving in our bondage)
of the Kings honor, and of the public peace of the Kingdom: By the manifold
innovations and evils generally contained and particularly mentioned in --
Supplications, Complaints, and Protestations, Remonstrances, Declarations, and
Testimonies, of old and of late.
Do hereby profess, and before God, His Angels, and the World solemnly declare,
That, with our whole Hearts we agree and resolve, all the days of our life,
constantly to adhere unto, and to defend the foresaid true Religion, and
(forbearing the practice of all Novations Former or latter.
introduced in the matter of the Worship of God, or approbation of the
corruptions of the public Government of the Kirk, or civil places and power of
Kirk-men, Or any other Corruptions of the public Government of the Kirk
Prelatick or Erastian, either tried or to be tried.
till they be tried and allowed in free Assemblies, and in Parliaments) to
labor by all means lawful to recover the Purity and Liberty of the Gospel, as
it was established and professed before the foresaid Novations: And because,
after due examination, We plainly perceive, and undoubtedly believe, that the
Innovations and evils contained in our Supplications, Complaints, and
Protestations Remonstrances, Declarations, and Testimonies.
have no warrant of the word of God, are contrary to the Articles of the
foresaid Confessions, to the intention and meaning of the blessed Reformers of
Religion in this Land, to the above written Acts of Parliament, and do sensibly
tend to the Re-establishing of the Popish Religion and Tyranny, and to the
subversion and ruin of the true reformed Religion, and of our Liberties, Laws
and Estates, We also declare, that the foresaid Confessions are to be
interpreted, and ought to be understood of the foresaid Novations and Evils, no
less than if every one of them had been expressed in the foresaid Confessions,
and that we are obliged to detest and abhore them as well as the particular
heads of Papistry abjured therein. And therefore from the knowledge and
Conscience of our duty to God, to The Government and Country.
our King and Country, without any worldly respect or inducement, so far as
humane infirmity will suffer, wishing a further measure of the Grace of God for
this effect, We promise, and swear by the Great Name of the Lord our God, to
continue in the Profession and Obedience of the foresaid Religion: That we shall
defend the same, and resist all these contrary Errors and Corruptions,
according to our Vocation, and to the uttermost of that power that God has put
in our hands, all the days of our life; And in like manner with the same
heart, We declare before God and Men, That We have no intention nor desire to
attempt any thing that may turn to the dishonor of God, or to the diminution
of the The Civil Magistrates.
Kings Greatness and Authority: But on the contrary, we promise and swear, that
we shall, to the uttermost of our power, with our means and lives, stand to the
defense of His Highness, his Person, and Authority, when lawfully chosen and
established, as King, or Suprem Magistrate over us.
our dread Sovereign the Kings Majesty, his Person, and Authority, in the
Defense and Preservation of the foresaid true Religion, Liberties, and Laws of
the Kingdom: As also to the mutual defense and assistance, every one of us of
another, in the same cause of maintaining the true Religion, and his Majesty's
Authority, with our best counsel, our Bodies, our Means, and whole power,
against all sorts of persons whatsomever. So that whatsoever shall be done to
the least of us for that cause, shall be taken as done to us all in general,
and to every one of us in particular. And that we shall neither directly nor
indirectly suffer our selves to be divided or withdrawn by whatsoever
Suggestion, allurement, or terror from this Blessed and Loyal Conjunction, nor
shall cast in any let or impediment, that may stay or hinder any such
resolution, as by common consent shall be found to conduce for so good ends.
But on the contrary, shall by all lawful means labor to further and promote
the same, and if any such dangerous and divisive motion be made to us by word
or writ, We, and every one of Us, shall suppress it, or if need be, shall
incontinent make the same known, that it may be timeously obviated: Neither do
we fear the foul aspersions of Rebellion, Combination, or what else our
Adversaries from their craft or malice would put upon us, seeing what we do is
so well warranted, and arises from an unfeigned desire to maintain the true
Worship of God, Honor of the Government.
the Majesty of our King, and peace of the Kingdom, for the common happiness of
our selves, and the posterity. And because we cannot look for a Blessing from
God upon our preceedings, except with our Profession and Subscription we join
such a Life and Conversation, as beseems Christians, who have renewed their
Covenant with God; We therefore, faithfully promise for our selves, our
followers and all other under us, both in public, in our particular Families,
and personal carriage, to endeavor to keep our selves within the bounds of
Christian liberty, and to be good Examples to others of all Godliness,
Soberness, and Righteousness, and of every duty we owe to God and Man; And that
this our Union and Conjunction may be observed without violation, we call the
Living God, the Searcher of our Hearts to witness, who knows this to be our
sincere Desire, and unfaigned Resolution, As We shall answer to Jesus Christ,
in the Great Day, and under the pain of Gods Everlasting Wrath, and of Infamy,
and loss of all honor and respect in this World. Most humbly beseeching the
Lord to strengthen us by his holy Spirit for this end, and to bless our Desires
and Proceedings with a happy success, that Religion and Righteousness may
flourish in the Land, to the Glory of God, the honor Of our Sovereigns.
of the King, and peace and comfort of us all. In witness whereof, we have
subscribed with our hands all the Premises, etc.

This Article of the Covenant, which was at the first Subscription, Anno 1638.
referred to the determination of the General Assembly, being determined, and
thereby the 5 Articles of Perth, the Government of the Kirk by Bishops, the
Civil places and power of Kirkmen, upon the reasons and grounds contained in
the Acts of the General Assembly, declared to be unlawful within this Kirk, We
subscribe according to the determination foresaid.

A SOLEMN LEAGUE and COVENANT. For Reformation, and Defense of Religion; --
WE -- Having before our Eyes the Glory of God, and the Advancement of the
Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, The establishment and
preservation of the Government.
the Honor and Happiness of the Kings Majesty and his Posterity, and the true
public Liberty, Safety, and Peace of the Kingdoms, wherein every ones private
condition is included; And calling to mind the tracherous and bloody Plots,
Conspiracies, Attempts, and practices of the Enemies of God, against the true
Religion and Professors thereof in all places, especially in these three
Kingdoms, ever since the Reformation of Religion, and how much their rage,
power, and presumption are of late, and at this time increased and excercised;
whereof the deplorable estate of the Church and Kingdom of Ireland, the
distressed estate of the Church and Kingdom of England, and the Distressed.
dangerous estate of the Church and Kingdom of Scotland, are present and
public Testimonies: we have now at last (After all the Supplications,
Remonstrances, Protestations, and Sufferings of our Fathers, and our own
Grievous Sufferings and Contendings.)
(after other means of Supplication, Remonstrance, Protestation and Suffering)
for the preservation of our selves and our Religion from utter ruin and
destruction, according to the commendable practice of these Kingdoms in former
times, and the example of Gods People in other Nations, After all the maturity
of deliberation that our circumstances could allow.
after mature deliberation resolved and determined to enter into a mu^ual and
Solemn League and Covenant: Wherein we all subscribe, and each one of us for
himself, with our hands lifted up to the Most High God, do Swear,

1. That we shall sincerely, really and constantly through the Grace of God,
endeavor in our several places and callings, the preservation of the Reformed
Religion in the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and
Government, against our common Enemies; The Reformation in the Kingdoms of
England and Ireland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government,
according to the Word of God, and the example of the best reformed Churches;
And shall endeavor to bring the Churches of God in the three Kingdoms to the
nearest conjunction and Uniformity in Religion, Confession of Faith, Form of
Church Government, Directory for Worship and Catechizing; That we and our
posterity after us, may, as Brethren, live in Faith and Love, and the Lord may
delight to dwell in the midst of us.

2. That we shall in like manner, without respect of persons, endeavor the
extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, (that is, Church-goverment by Archbishops,
Bishops, their Chancellours Commissaries, Deans, Deans and Chapters,
Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that
Hierarchy) Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Prophanness, and whatsoever shall be
found to be contra^y to sound Doctrine, and the power of Godliness; Lest we
partake in other Men's sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of their
plagues, and that the Lord may be one, and His Name one in the three Kingdoms.

3. We shall with the same sincerity, reality and constancy, in our several
Vocations, endeavor with our Estates and Lives, mutually to preserve the
Rights and Privileges of the Parliaments, and the Liberties of the Kingdom;
And to preserve and defend The Civil Magistrates Person and Authority.
the Kings Majesty's Person and Authority, in the preservation and defense of
the true Religion, and the Liberties of the Kingdoms; That the World may bear
witness with our Consciences of our Loyalty, and that we have no thoughts or
intention to diminish his just power and greatness.

4. We shall also with all faithfulness endeavor the discovery of all such as
have been, or shall be Incendiaries, Malignants, or evil Instruments, by
hindering the Reformation of Religion, dividing Between the Magistrate and
Subjects.
the King from his People, or one of the Kingdoms from another, or making any
faction, or parties amongst the people contrary to this League and Covenant.
That they may be brought to public trial, and receive condign punishment, as
the degree of their offenses shall require or deserve, or the Supreme
Judicatories of both Kingdoms respectively, or others having power from them
for that effect, shall judge convenient.

5. And wher^as the happiness of a blessed Peace between these Kingdoms, denied
in former times to our Pregenitors, is by the good Providence of God granted
unto, and Was in the days of our Fathers concluded.
has been lately concluded, and settled by both Parliamen's, We shall each one
of us, according to our place and interest, endeavor that they may remain As
they were then.
conjoined in a firm Peace and Union to all Posterity, and that Justice may be
done upon the wilful Opposers thereof, in manner expressed in the precedent
Article.

6. We shall also according to our places and callings in this common cause of
Religion, Liberty, and Peace of the Kingdoms, assist and defend all those that
enter into this League and Covenant, in the maintaining and pursuing thereof;
And shall not suffer our selves directly or indirectly by whatsoever
Combination, Persuasion or Terror, to be divided and withdrawn from this
blessed Union and Conjunction, whether to make defection to the contrary part,
or to give our selves to a detestable indifferency or neutrality in this cause,
which so much concerns the Glory of God, the good of the Kingdoms, and honor
Of the Government.
of the King: But shall all the days of our lives zealously and constantly
continue therein, against all opposition, and promote the same according to our
power, against all Lets and Impediments whatsoever; And, what we are not able
our selves to suppress or overcome, we shall reveal and make known, that it may
be timely prevented or removed: All which we shall do as in the sight of God.

And, because these Kingdoms are guilty of many sins and provocations against
God, and his Son Jesus Christ, as is too manifest by our present distress and
dangers, the fruits thereof, We profess and declare before God, and the World,
our unfeigned desire to be humbled for our own sins, and for the sins of these
Kingdoms, especially that we have not, as we ought, valued the inestimable
benefit of the Gospel, that we have not labored for the purity and power
thereof, and that we have not endeavored to receive Christ in our hearts, nor
to walk worthy of him in our Lives, which are the causes of other sins and
transgressions so much abounding amongst us, and our true and unfeigned purpose,
desire, and endeavor for our selves, and all others under our power and
charge, both in public and in private, in all duties we ow to God and Man, to
amend our lives, and each one to go before another in the example of a real
Reformation; That the Lord may turn away his wrath, and heavy indignation, and
establish these Churches and Kingdoms in truth and Peace. And this Covenant we
make in the presence of Almighty God the Searcher of all hearts, with a true
intention to perform the same, As we shall answer at that great day, when the
secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed; Most humbly beseeching the Lord to
strengthen us by his Holy Spirit for this end, and to bless our desires, and
proceedings with such success, as may be a deliverance and safety to his
People, and encouragement to other Christian Churches, groaning under, or in
danger of the yoke of Antichristian Tyranny, or to join in the same or like
Association and Covenant, to the Glory of God, the enlargement of the Kingdom
of Jesus Christ, and the peace and tranquillity of Christian Kingdoms, and
Commonwealths.

These Covenants abovewritten, formerly Nationally Taken and Renewed, and still
Nationally Binding, We, in our private Station only, Swear and Subscribe in
their genuine sense, conform to the Explication and Application thereof, in our
present Acknowledgement of the public Sins and Breaches of the same, and
Engagement to the Duties contained therein, which do in a special way relate to
the present times, and are proper for our capacities therein.

A Solemn Acknowledgement of PUBLIC SINS, AND BREACHES OF THE COVENANT. AND A
Solemn Engagement to all the DUTIES contained therein, namely these which do in
a more special way relate unto the dangers of these times. Anno 1689.
WE all, and every one of us -- by the good hand of God upon us, taking in
serious consideration, the many sad afflictions, and deep distresses, wherewith
we have been exercised for a long time past. And remembering, that as the Land,
in the days of our Fathers, was sore wasted, with the Sword and the
Pestilence, and threatened with Famine, for their Breaches of Covenant shortly
after they first entered into it. For which, Shame and Concempt was poured out
from the Lord against many thousands of our Nation, when they did in a sinful
way make War upon the Kingdom of England, in the year 1648. contrary to the
Testimony of His Servants, and desires of His People, and the remnant of that
Army returning to this Land, spoiled and oppresed many of the Faithful, at that
time. And after our Fathers in their Solemn Acknowledgement of Sins, and
Engagement to Duties, had confessed the guilt of that Malignant Association,
and obliged themselves for the future, never any more to connive at, comply
with, or countenance Malignancy; Yet they joined themselves again with the
people of these abominations: And upon terms destructive to the Nations and
Churches Interest, dishonorable to God, and prejudicial to Posterity, accepted
their mock Repentance, and admitted Malignants to places of Power and Trust:
And by a precipitant Treaty at Breda with the head of them Charles II. brought
him over and made him King, upon his mock-subscription of the Covenant,
notwithstanding he had given manifest discoveries of his Treachery and Enmity
to Religion and Liberty, in his Commissionating James Graham, to invade this
Kingdom, in the mean time of the Treaty; Whereby GOD was mocked, his Church
cheated, and the State betrayed. And then a woeful defection and division was
caused, and carried on, by the Promoters and Abetters of the Public
Resolutions, who, notwithstanding the Malignant Party was still numerous, and
retaining their former Principles, waited for an opportunity to raise a new and
dangerous War, not only to the rending of the bowels of this Kingdom, but unto
the dividing them from England, and overturning of the Work of God in all the
three Kingdoms; did yet intertain and encourage them in their Armies. For which
breaches of Covenant, the anger of the LORD was evidently seen to smoke against
the Land; which, after the Defeat at Dunbar and at Worcester, was brought in
subjection to the English, for several years. So in process of time, calling to
mind how the Malignants, again recovering power and restored to the Government,
were suffered peaceably at their own pleasure and leisure to overturn the
Glorious Work of our Covenanted Reformation, and to cut down the carved work of
the House of our GOD, as it were with Axes and Hammers, by rescinding all the
Acts and Laws made in savours thereof, and to reintroduce the abjured yokes of
Antichristian Prelacy, Erastian Supremacy, and Absolute Tyranny; Which,
through our sinful and scandalous Compliance therewith, have been so far
advanced, that there wanted little to the re-establishment of Popery it self in
these Lands. Having it also in recent memory, what indignities have been done
to our Covenants, in not only breaking them, and declaring them void and of no
force, and enacting the breaches of them, and abjuring of them, but in burning
them, and making it a capital Crime to own them. Which horrid violations and
villainies have been generally complied with, or connived at without control.
For which, we cannot but acknowledge and adore the Righteousness of the LORD,
in giving us up unto, and suffering us long to houl under many miseries and
calamities of grassant Tyranny, Oppression, Persecution, and Murdering
violence, these Eight and Twenty years: Whereby the Land has been reduced
almost to desolation. And considering also, that a cloud of calamities do still
hang over our heads, and threaten us with sad things to come, we cannot but
look upon these things as from the Lord, who is righteous in all his ways,
feeding us with the bread of tears, and making us to drink the waters of
affliction, until we be taught to know how evil and bitter a thing it is to
depart away from him, by breaking the Oath and Covenant which we had made with
Him, and that we may be humbled before Him, by confessing of our sin, and
forsaking the evil of our way.

Therefore being pressed with so great necessities and straits, and warranted
by the word of God, and having the example of Gods People of old, who in the
time of their troubles, and when they were to seek delivery, and a right way
for themselves, that the Lord might be with them to prosper them, did humble
themselves before Him, and make a free and particular confession of the sins of
their Princes, their Rulers, their Captains, their Priests, and their People:
And did engage themselves to do no more so, but to reform their ways, and be
steadfast in His Covenant. And remembering the practice of our Predecessors, in
the year 1596. wherein the General Assembly and all the Kirk Judicatories, with
the concurrence of many of the Nobility, Gentry, and Burgesses, did with many
tears acknowledge before God, the breach of the National Covenant, and engaged
themselves into a Reformation, even as our Predecessors and theirs had before
done, in the General Assembly and Convention of States, in the year 1567. And
the more recent practice of the Godly renewing the National Covenant, and
Acknowledging the breaches of it, both befote they obtained Authority for it,
in the year 1638. And again by Authority, in the year 1639. And that noble
Precedent of that National Solemn Acknowledgement of Public Sins. and Breaches
of the Solemn League and Covenant, and Solemn Engagement to all the Duties
contained therein (which we are here enlarging) condescended upon by the
Commission of the General Assembly, approven by the Commit of Estates, and
publicly owned in all the Churches, at the renewing of the Solemn League, anno
1648. and 1649. Together with the Solemn Renovation thereof, accompanied with
such confession of Sins as did suit that time, yet fresh in our memories, by
that small Army of the LORDS People, at Lauerk, before their discomfiture at
Peniland-hills. And perceiving that this Duty, when gone about out of
Conscience, has very often been attended with a reviving out of troubles, and
with a Blessing and Success from Heaven: We do humbly and sincerely, as in His
sight who is the searcher of hearts, Acknowledge the many sins, and great
transgressions of the Land: We have done wickedly, our Kings, our Princes, our
Nobles, our Judges, our Officers, our Teachers, and our People. Albeit the Lord
has long and clearly spoken unto us, we have not hearkened unto His voice:
Albeit He has followed us with tender mercies, we have not been allured to
wait upon Him, and walk in His way: And tho He has stricken us, yet we have
not grieved: Nay, tho He has consumed us, we have refused to receive
correction. We have not remembered to render unto the Lord according to His
goodness, and according to our Vows and Promises; But have gone away backward,
by a continued course of backsliding. And have most sinfully and shamefully
broken the National Covenant, and all the Articles of the Solemn League and
Covenant, which our Fathers swore before God, Angels and Men.

Albeit there be in the Land some of all ranks, who be for a Testimony to the
Truth, and for a name of Joy and Praise unto the Lord, by living Godly,
studying to keep their Garments pure, and being steadfast in the Covenant and
Cause of God; Yet we have reason to acknowledge that most of us have not
endeavored with that reality, sincerity, and constancy, that did become us, to
preserve the work of Reformation in the Kirk of Scotland. As we are obliged by
the 1. Article of the Solemn League and Covenant, and by the National Covenant,
wherein we Promise and Swear by the Great Name of the Lord our God, that we
shall continue in the obedience of the Doctrine and Discipline of this Kirk,
and shall defend the same according to our Vocation and Power all the days of
our Lives, under the pains contained in the Law, and danger both of Body and
Soul, in the day of Gods fearful Judgment; And resist all contrary Errors and
Corruptions, according to our Vocations, and the uttermost of that power GOD
has put in our hands, all the days of our life: According to these
Scriptures, Ezra 9.10. Isa. 24.5. Jer. 9.13 Dan. 7 25. Gal. 5.1. 1 Timothy 4.16. 2 Timothy 1, 13. Rev. 3.10, 11. But we have been so far from such endeavors, that
we have stupidly submmitted to our Rulers and great Ones breaking down and
overturning the whole Work of Reformation, raz^ng the Bulwarks thereof,
rescinding the Laws in favors of the same, and not only breaking, but burning
the Covenants for preserving it, enacting the Breaches thereof, and declaring
the Obligation thereof void, and criminal to be owned; And upon the ruins
thereof settieg up abjured Diocesan, Errastian Prelacy, with its concomitant
bondage of Patronages, a Blasphemous Sacrilegious Supremacy, and Arbitrary
Power in the Magistrate, over Church and State. We made little conscience of
constant endeavors to preserve the Reformation, when we did not in season
testify against those audacious and Heaven-daring Attempts. When our Ministers
were by a wicked Edict ejected from their Charges, both they and the people too
easily complied with it. And albeit in the National Covenant we are obliged to
defend this Reformation, and to labor by all means lawful to recover the
Purity and Liberty of the Gospel, by forbearing the practices of all Novations
introduced in the Worship of GOD; or approbation of the Corruptions of the
Public Government of the Kirk; Yet we gave all the approbation required by Law
of the Novation, and corruption of Prelacy, by hearing the Prelatick Curates.
We and our Teachers in a great measure complied with, submitted unto, and
connived at the encroachments of the Supremacy and Absolute Power, both in
Accepting and Countenancing the former Indulgences, and the late Tolleration.
We have taken, and subscribed Oaths and Bonds, all which have been imposed
these Twenty Eight years, for pressing Conformity with the present
Establishments of Church and State, have been contrary unto the Reformation we
swore to preserve: Some of them restraining us from all endeavors to preserve
it, as those that renounced the Privilege of Defensive Arms: Some of them
Abjuring the Covenants expressly, and condemning the prosecution of the ends of
them, as Rebellion, viz. The Declaration and Test. We have Issachar-like,
couched under all burdens, in maintaining and defending an Arbitrary Power, and
Absolute Tyranny, wholly employed and applied for the destruction of the
Reformation, and paying such Subsidies and Supplies as were declaredly imposed
for upholding of Tyrants Usurpations, and suppressing all endeavors to
preserve the Reformation. We have not constantly endeavored to maintain the
Doctrine of this Reformed Church: Many of our Ministers have in sinful silence
succeased from bearing witness to some persecuted Truths, and from applying
their Doctrine to the sins and corruptions of the Times; Whereby many of the
People have been overcome with snares, and left to seek and maintain other
Principles to justify their practices of compliance, or extravagance on the
right and left hand, not consistent with the Doctrines and Rules of the Church
of Scotland: Others of us have been ignorant of the Doctrines, not constant in
confessing them before men, when called to suffer for and avouch them:
Hypocritical, in professing them, without a suitable practice and conversation
becoming the Gospel, Cause, and Cross of Christ; And studying more the
Controverted, than the Fundamental and Practical Truths of Christianity. We
have come short in Real, Sincere and constant endeavors to preserve the
Worship of GOD, Public and Private: Many of our Ministers have left off
Preaching, and the People hearing, in times of hazard: We have been negligent
and remiss in Family Worship; And in stead of preserving it, many of us have
done much to discourage and hinder it, in some Families: And in secret Worship
we have been Formal and careless. Many have satisfied themselves with the
Purity of the Ordinances, neglecting the Power thereof; yea, some have turned
aside to crooked ways, destructive to both. We have not been careful to
preserve the Discipline and Government, Church Censures being laid aside, and
not impartially exercised against Scandals Personal and public: Scandalous
persons heing admitted to hold up their Children to Baptism, and to the
Communion of the LORDS Table, and other privileges of the Church, without
respect to the Rules of Christ, or constitution of this Church: And many of us
have been untender in giving, in taking, and removing Offenses, without
observing the Rules and Order of Christ; And some inclining sometimes to ways
tending either to the dissolution of all Discipline, or Usurpation of an
Independent or Popular way of exercising it. And whereas, in the same first
Article of the Solemn League, we are bound to endeavor the promoting and
propagating of the Reformation, and Uniformity in Religion, Confession of
Faith, Form of Church Government (which as it was primarly understood, so still
we own to be only Presbyterial) Directory for Worship and Catechizing;
According to Scripture, Isa. 19.18. Jer. 32.39. Zech. 14.9. Act. 2.46. 1 Cor.
7.17. Phil. 3.16. Gal. 6.16. Yet, as our Fathers had reason to complain that
The profane, loose and insolent Carriage of many in their Armies who went to
the assistance of our Brethren in England, and the tamperings and unstraight
dealings of some Commissioners, and others of our Nation, in London, the Isle
of Wight, and other places of that Kingdom, had proved, great Lets to the Work
of Reformation, and settling of Kirk Government there, whereby Error and Schism
in that Land had been increased, and Sectaries hardened in their way. So much
more in our day, we are obliged to confess the Offensive Carriage and
Conversation of many, that have gone to England, who have proven very stumbling
to the Sectarians there; And also the tamperings of others, in patching up an
Union and Communion with them, without a Testimony against their way: And on
the other hand, we have had little Zeal in our endeavors after such an
Uniformity; Little praying for it; And little mourning for the obstructions of
it; Yea of late, many have embraced a Toleration, introductive of a Sectarian
multiformity of Religions, without so much as a Testimony against the
Toleration of Popery it self.

In the II. Article: We are bound, without respect of persons, to endeavor the
extirpation of Popery, conform to the National Covenant, where we are bound to
abhor and detest all kind of Papistry, in general and particular heads, even as
they are now damned and confuted by the Word of God, and Kirk of Scotland.
Likeas, many Acts of Parliament not only in general, do abrogate all Laws,
Statutes and Constitutions made in prejudice of the true Religion, and
Professors thereof, or of the true Kirk Discipline, Jurisdiction and Freedom
thereof, or in favors of the Popish Idolatry and Superstition; But in special,
do constitute, enact, ratify and aprove, many Penal Statutes against Papists:
Which are founded upon Divine Precepts and other Scriptures, Exodus 23.32, 33.
Exodus 34.12, 13. Deuteronomy. 13. throughout. Judge. 2.2. Zech. 13.2.3. 1 Timothy 4.1, 2,
3. 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.12. Rev. 17.5, 16. Rov. 18.4, 5, 6. Yet, alas! We have been so
defective in this, that, upon the contrate, the Land has been polluted again
with Idolatrous Masses; Alters, and other Monuments have been suffered to be
again erected; Penal Statutes have been so far from being executed against
Papists, that they have been by Arbitrary and Absolute Power, stopped,
suspended, and disabled by the Toleration, in its own nature tending, and in
its design intended to introduce Popery and Slavery; Yet this has been
accepted and addressed for, by many Ministers, and countenanced, complied; and
concurred with, by many People, without a Testimony; or endeavor to withstand
it. Yea the Administration of the Government, and greatest Offices of Power and
Trust, has been committed to, and permitted to abide in the hands of Papists:
And the Head of them, and great Pillar and Promoter of Popery, James the 7th.
has been owned as King contrary to the Laws of God and Man, which incapacitate
him; And Covenant obligations; without respect of persons, to extirpate
Papists. And all of us have had too little Zeal or Indignation against, or fear
of the manifest appearances of the coming in of Popery, and intended
Establishment of it in the Land; And little serious Wrestling for the ruin and
fall of Babylon, and that the Lord would divide and overturn the Builders and
Supporters thereof. Many, on the contrary, have prayed for Blessings to the
Person and Government of a Papist on the Throne, the chiefest Supporter of it
in these Lands. In like manner, We were bound " To endeavor the Extirpation of
Prelacy, that is, Church Government by Archbishops, Bishops, their
Chancellours, and Commissaries, Deans, Deans and Chapters, Arch deacons and all
other Ecclesiastical Officers, depending on that Hierarchy; As in the National
Covenant, to abhor and detest the Antichristian wicked Hierarchy, and to
forbear the practice of all Novations, and approbation of the Corruptions of
the public Government of the Kirk, as being contrary to the Article of the
forsaid Confession, to the intention and meaning of the blessed Reformers of
Religion in this Land, and to Acts of Parliament insert there, and sensibly
tending to the re-establishing of the Popish Religion and Tyranny, and to the
subversion and ruin of the true reformed Religion, and of our Liberties, Laws,
and Estates. Which Article concerning Prelacy, being referred to the General
Assembly, was determined and declared Unlawful, as being clearly condemned in
the Word of God. Math. 20.25.26. Luke 22.25, 26. Act. 20.17.28, 1 Pet. 5.3. 3 John 9. Yet we have been so far from paying these our Vows, that Prelacy has
been by wicked Law established, and in stead of Extirpation, has been
submitted unto, and complied with by us; And in evidence thereof, as it was
required by wicked and Arbitrary Laws, we heard, and received Ordinances
dispensed by the intruding Curats, and paid them Stipends and Emoluments,
exacted for upholding that which we were bound to extirpate. And not only so,
but many did bind and oblige themselves, by Subscription, Promise, or Oath, to
be ordinary Church Members of the Prelatical Church: And all of us, even tho we
did stand at a distance from, and witnessed against that Faction; yet we became
very remiss in our Zeal, and flack in our Prayers against Prelacy. Instead of
endeavors to extirpate Superstition and Heresy, as we are bound by the same
Article of the Solemn League, and by the National Covenant, to detest all
Superstitions and Heresies, without, or against the Word of God, and Doctrine
of this reformed Kirk; According to the Scriptures, Deuteronomy. 12.30, 31, 32. Act.
17.22. Gal. 4.10. Gal. 5.20. Col 2.20, 21, 23. Tit. 3.10. Yet in the darkness
of these times, many dregs of Popish Superstition have been observed, many
Omens and Freets, too much looked to; Popish Festival-dayes, as Pasch, Yule,
Fastens-even. etc. have been kept by many; And Prelatical Anniversary-dayes and
Festivities devised of their own heart, appointed for Commemorating the Kings
Birth-dayes, as May 29. and October 14. etc. who were born as a Scourge to this
Realm, have been complied with by many. Yes some have supersti^iously made use
of the Scriptures, as a Fortune-book, looking to that which was first cast up
to them, or to Impressions born in upon their minds, from such and such parts
of Scripture, as Divine Responses, with out a due search of them, as the Lord
has commanded. And, many wavering and unstable, have been seduced into
damnable and pernicious Heresies, as Quakers, and delirious delusions of such
as followed John Gibb. All which have been Breaches of Covenant, as well as
Divine Commands: Yet Heresies of all kinds have been Tolerated, yea encouraged
in our day, without a witness against them from many. Moreover, we are bound in
our Covenant, to oppose and extirpate Schism on the one hand, as well as
Defection on the other; The Scripture makes this a great sin, Romans 16.17. 1
Cor. 11.18. 1 Cor. 12.25 Heb. 12.25. Jud. v. 19. Yet, as many by defection,
both in compliance with Prelacy and Erastianism, have broken the Churches
Beauty and Bands, Order and Union, in making a Faction repugnant to her
established Order, and Censurable by all her standing Acts, in bringing in
Novations in the Government, and making a rent in the Bowels of the Church, by
causing Divisions and Offenses, contrare to the Doctrine of the Church, have
made themselves guilty of Schism: So, others on the other hand, have, upon
slender and insufficient grounds, separate, both from Meaning, such Ministers
as were most faithful and zealous, preached in the Fields, and were not
chargeable with Defection and Compliance with Enemies; From whom some separate,
as John Gibb, and others.
Ministers, from Christian Societies, and Families, because of differences in
judgment, in incident debates, not necessary nor material, nor wherein the
Testimony of Christ was much concerned, or because of personal Offenses, easily
removed; Not observing the Rules of Christ for removing them, nor having
respect to His great Commands of Charity, Forbearance, Forgiving one another,
or Condescendency. And, between divided parties. which in our day, have long
been biting and devouring one another, there has been too much, both of sinful
Union and Consederacy, in terms ptejudicial to Truth and Duty, on the one
hand; and of sinful heats, Animosities, Jealousies, Pride, Passion and
Prejudices, on the other hand; grieving the Spirit of GOD, and eating up the
Power, and much hindering the holy Practice and Spiritual Exercise of Religion.
And too much also of sowing discords among Brethren, and promoting our
contentions by too credulous and sedulous taking up, and spreading reports and
reproaches one of another. What shall we say? We have been so far from
endeavoring the extirpation of Profanness (another evil engaged against in the
Covenant and condemned in the Word of God, Deuteronomy. 29 19. Job, 21.14. Jer 23 15
Ezekiel 22 26. Hos. 4.1, 2, 3. Heb. 12.15.16) that Profanity has been much winked
at, and profane persons much countenanced, and many times employed, until
Iniquity and Ungodliness has gone over the face of the Land as a flood: Nay
sufficient care has not been had, to separate betwixt the precious and the
vile, by debarring from the Sacrament all ignorant and scandalous persons,
according to the Ordinances of this Kirk. And hence it has come to pass, that
Profanity beginning at the Court and corrupt Clergy, and descending from them
like a flood, has overspread the whole Land; So that the greatest part by far,
may rather be called Children of Sodom, then of a land solemnly in Covenant
with GOD: And so far have we been from rooting out whatsoever is contrary to
sound Doctrine and the power of Godliness, lest we partake of other men's sins,
and be in danger to receive of their plagues, that we have maintained much
unsound Doctrine in the Arguments which we used for defense of our courses of
compliance with Prelacy and Erastian^sm, and walking willingly after the
Commandments of Men: And those, among others, unsound Notions have been
entertained among us; That lesser and circumstantial Truths are not to be
suffered for; That confession of these Truths has not been called for in our
day; That People are not in hazard of the sins of others, especially
Magistrates and Ministers, if they do not directly Act the same sins
themselves; contrary to express and plain Scriptures, 2 Samuel 21.1. 2 Samuel
24.17. 2 Kings 21.11, 12. Lev. 10.6. Isai. 43.27, 28, Jer: 14.15, 16. Micah
3.11, 12. Whence both Ministers and People have been involved in the sins of
Prelacy, Indulgence and Tolleration, thinking these only the sins of Prelates,
and of Usurping Rulers, while they yielded all the Conformity with them,
submission to them, and approbation of them, that was required by wicked Laws.
On the other hand, many of us have rested too much in Non-complyance with
these, and having a form of Godliness, but neglecting the power thereof.

In the Third Article, whereas we are bound in our several Vocations. To
endeavor with our Estates and Lives, mutually to preserve the Rights and
Privileges of Parliament, and Liberties of the Kingdoms, meaning true real and
righteous Privileges and Liberties, consonant to the Word of God, Deuteronomy. 1.13.
Deuteronomy. 16.16. Isa. 1.26. Like as all Liedges are bound by the Laws of the Land,
insert in the National Covenant, to maintain the Authority of Parliaments,
without which, neither any Laws, or lawful Judicatories can be established:
Yet, as our Fathers sound reason to complain, that neither had the Privileges
of the Parliaments and Liberties of the Subject been duly tendered, but some
amongst them had labored to put into the hands of the King an Arbitrary and
Unlimited Power destructive to both, and many of them had been accessory to --
those means and ways whereby the freedom and privileges of Parliaments had
been encroached upon, and the Subjects oppressed in their Consciences, Persons
and Estates; So, in our day, since this long tract of Tyranny began, they have
had rather the name and show, than the real Power and Privileges of lawful by
constitute Parliaments, since they advanced the Regal Prerogative to such a
boundless pitch of Absoluteness; Being so corrupted, that faithful Men, and
honest and honorable Patriots have been excluded, and those admitted for
constituent Members, that by the Law of GOD and Man should have been debarred.
And so prelimited, that the Members behooved to take such Oaths, for instance
the Declaration and Test, abjuring and condemning the Covenants, as engaged
them to be perjured and conjured Enemies both to our Religion and Liberty;
Which was sinfully complied with, both by the Electors of Parliament-Members,
and by the Elected. Yet the body of the Land did not make conscience of
endeavoring the recovery of these Rights and Privileges so perverted and
polluted. Whence nothing could flow from these Fountains so poisoned, but
injustice and oppression; And in stupid submission did own these for their
Representatives who betrayed their Liberties, and made Laws to enslave the
Nation, and entail Slaverie on the Posterity. On the other hand, we that
disowned them did not mind the Duty of preserving these Rights and Privileges
of Supreme Judicatories, when inadvertently and unadvisedly we put in such
Expressions and Styles in some of our Declarations, that do not belong to
private Persons, but to such Judicatories. Again, the Subjects Liberties, Civil
and Religious, both as Men and as Christians, which the Scriptures allow we
should preserve, 1 Samuel: 14:45: Acts 22:25: Acts 25:11, 16, 27. Gal: 5 1. have
been miserably encroached on by Arbitrary Government, whereby the Subjects have
been oppressed in their Consciences, Persons, and Estates, by all the Oaths and
Bonds pressing Conformity with these Cor^uptions, Novations, and Usurpations in
the Government of Church and State; And persecutions for Recusancy, and by
impositions on the Natural freedom of secret thoughts, which no law of Man can
reach, yet in our day extorted by threatenings of Torture and Death, if they
were not discovered in Answers to our persecuters impertinent questions. In all
which impositions on our Liberties as men, we have too stupidly couched under
all burdens, and complied with them. The Churches Liberties have also been
invaded by the Ecclesiastical Supremacy, declared by a Blasphemous Law inherent
in the Crown, and by an Absolute Power, which all were required to obey without
reserve, which are horrid encroachments on the incommunicable Prerogatives of
JEHOVAH, and His CHRIST as only King and Head of His Church. And yet these have
been established and homologated by our several involvements in the sin of
Prelacy, and its attending Patronages, robbing the Church of the Liberty of
election of Pastors; Indulgence and Tolleration, to the prejudice of, and
without a Witness for the Churches Liberties. In that same Article, we are
bound also to preserve and defend the supreme Magistrates Person and Authority,
in the preservation and defense of the true Religion and Liberties of the
Kingdoms. As in the National Covenant is expressed likewise, to defend his
Person and Authority, in the defense of Christ his Evangel, Liberties of our
Country, Ministration of Justice and punishment of iniquity; and stand to his
defense, in the defense and preservation of the foresaid true Religion,
Liberties and Laws of the Kingdom; As the Duty is qualified in Scriptures, 2 Samuel: 5:3: 2 Kings 11:17: 1 Kings 12:16: 2 Chronicles: 26:16, 21: Rom: 13:3, 4: 1
Pet: 2:14. But as our Fathers in their acknowledgement had reason to say,
Neither has it been our care to avoid these things which might harden the King
in his evil way; But upon the Contrary, he has not only been permitted, but
many of us have been Instrumental to make him exercise his Power in many things
tending to the prejudice of Religion and of the Covenant, and of the Peace and
Safety of these Kingdoms; Which is so far from the right way of preserving his
Majesty's Person and Authority, that it cannot but provoke the Lord against
him, unto the hazard of both; Nay, under a pretense of relieving and doing for
the King, whilst he refuses to do what was necessary for the House of God, some
have ranversed and violated most of all the Articles of the Covenant. So, in
our unhappy days, it is our Sin, Shame and Sorrow, that we have had to do with
men mounted on a Throne of iniquity, that have been subverting Religion and
Persecuting it, designing to introduce Popery it self, and Slaverie,
Destroying our Liberties, Suppressing the Evangel, and Oppressing its
Professors, Enacting and Executing manifest Injustice, stoping the Ministration
of Justice against Idolaters, Adulterers, Murderers, and other Malifactors, and
and punishing Equity and Duty instead of Iniquity, arrogating and obtaining a
Monstrous Prerogative above all Rights and Privileges of Parliament, all Laws.
all Liberties, a power to Tyrannize as be lists without control. But, as it was
our Fathers sin to inaugurate the late King, after such discoveries of his
Hypocritical emnity to Religion and Liberty, upon his subscription of the
Covenant; So, when he burnt and buried that Covenant, and degenerate into
manifest Tyranny, and had razed the very foundation upon which both his Right
to govern, and the Peoples Allegiance were founded, and remitted the Subjects
Allegiance by annulling the Bond of it; We sinned in continuing still to own
his Authority, when opposite to and destructive of Religion and Liberty. And
many in swearing the Oath of Allegiance (including also the Supremacy with the
boundless Prerogatives) without any Restrictions or Qualifications, when all
the Authority he had was engaged and exerted in a Rebellion against GOD,
forgetting, foregoing and disowning these Limitations in the Covenant; And in
putting in his Interest (with the Application of the words of the Covenant to
him, tho stated in opposition to it) in the state of the quarrel, in our
Declarations of war at Pentland and Bothuel-Bridge, for which the LORD put us
to shame, and went not out with our Armies. Again we desire to confess and
mourn over this as the sin of the Land, and breach of Covenant, that the Duke
of York has been admitted to the exercise of the Royal Office, against the
Laws of GOD and man, being incapable of the Covenants qualifications of a
Magistrate, and, being a Papist, incapable of taking the Oath of Coronation, to
maintain the True Protestant Religion, and abolish and gainstand Popery; which,
for the preservation of the true Religion, Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom,
is statute by the 8 Act Parl: 1: K: Jam: 6: That all Kings at the Reception of
their Princely Authority, shall take and swear. Yet his Authority, tho
inconsistent with, and declaredly opposite to Religion and Liberty, has been
owned and upheld, by paying the Cess and Supplies expressly exacted for
maintaining Tyranny in the destruction of Religion and Liberty.

Our own Consciences within, and Gods Judgments upon us without, do convince
us of the manifold wilful renewed Breaches of the Fourth Article, which
concerns the discovery of Malignants; consonant to the Scriptures; 2 Samuel:
23:6: Esther 7:5, 6: Psalm: 26:5, 6: Psalm: 101:8: Prove: 25:5: For their Crimes
have not only been connived at, but dispensed with and pardoned, and themselves
received into intimate Fellowship -- and entrusted with -- Counsels, admitted
into -- Parliaments, and put in places of Power and Authority for managing the
public Affairs of the Kingdom, whereby in Gods Justice, they got at last into
their hands the whole power and Strength of the Kingdom, both in Judicatories
and Armies; and did employ the same unto the enacting and prosecuting an
unlawful Engagement in War against the Kingdom of England; Notwithstanding of
the descent of many considerable Members of Parliament, who had given constant
proof of their integrity in the Cause, from the beginning; Of many faithful
Testimonies, and free Warnings of the Servants of God; of the Supplications of
many Synods, Presbyteries and Shires; And the Declarations of the General
Assembly and their Commissioners to the Contrary; Which Engagement, as it was
the Cause of much Sin, so also of much Misery and Calamity unto this Land, and
held forth the grieveousness of our sin in Complying with Malignants, in the
greatness of our Judgment, that we may be taught never to split again upon the
same Rock, upon which the Lord has set so Remarkable a beacon. And after all
that is come to pass unto us, because of this our trespass; And after that
Grace has been showed unto our Fathers, and us. once and again, from the Lord
our God, by breaking these Men's Yoke from off their, and our necks, and
sometimes delivering our Fathers so far from their insultings, that He put them
into a Capacity to Act for the good of Religion, their own safety, and the
Peace and safety of the Kingdom, should they and we again break his Commandment
and Covenant, by joining once more with the People of these Abominations and
taking into our bosom those Serpents, which had formerly stung us almost unto
death. This, as it would argue great madness and folly upon our part; So, no
doubt, if it be not avoided, will provoke the Lord against us to Consume us,
until there be no remnant, nor escaping in the Land. Many times have we been
warned of the Sin of Compliance with Malignants, both by faithful Instructions,
and fatherly Corrections from the Lord; Yet after all these Punishments, and
after all these Mercies, in mitigating these Punishments, We have again joined
with the People of these Abominations. The Lord is Righteous, for we remain yet
escaped, as it is this day: Behold we are before Him in our Trespasses, and we
cannot stand before Him, because of this. These Incendiaries, Malignants, and
evil Instruments, made many grievous Encroachments, and prevailed much in the
days of our Fathers; But not without dissent, Testimonies, Warnings, and
Declarations to the Contrary: But, in our unhappy days, they have been
suffered, yea encouraged, without any significant joint Testimony, not only to
hinder the Reformation of Religion, but to overturn the whole Work of
Reformation, to Burn and Bury the Covenants for it, to re-establish abjured
Prelacy: erect a monstrous, Christ-exauctorating, and Church-enslaving
Supremacy, attempt the introduction of Popery and Slavery at the gate of an
Antichristian Tolleration, and to persecute and destroy the Godly, who durst
not in conscience comply with them. And not only to divide the King from his
People, or one of the Kingdoms from another, but, first to divide the bulk and
body of both Kingdoms, and make them pursue divided Interests, from the
Interest and Cause of Christ; And then to divide the remnant, of such as
adhered to it, among themselves, by Indulgences, and other bones of contention,
in order to get them more easily destroyed; And at length, to engage the King
into such a division from the People, as to make him, in stead of their
Protector, their declared Destroyer: And, not only to make parties among the
People, contrary to this League and Covenant, but to draw and divide the whole
People to party with their perjuries. And yet so far have we been from
endeavors to have them brought to trial and condign punishment, as the supreme
Judicatories of the Kingdom should judge convenient, that they have been
suffered to obtain, and manage the whole Administration of Judgment in their
own hands, and to sit and act as the sole Representatives of the Kingdom; Yea,
not only have we suffered them so to sit and act, but have owned them as our
Representatives, in complying with their Mischiefs framed into Law, in
abetting, strengthening, and encouraging the Prelatical faction, in their
avowed opposition to the Covenant. The generality have owned Allegiance to the
Head of these Incendiaries and Malignants, yea a Popish Incendiarie, because he
wore a Crown on his head; And have paid the Cess, imposed for the maintenance
and encouragement of Malignants: Many have Associated with them, in Expeditions
of War, drawing up with them in their Musters, and Rendezvouses, thereby
countenancing a Malignant cause; and listing themselves under a Malignant, yea,
Popish Banner: Many have subscribed, yea, sworn themselves of their Faction,
contrary to the Covenant, by taking Tests, Oaths and Bonds, obliging them to
su^cease from Covenanted Duties, and to keep the peace, and good behavior with
them, whom they were obliged by the Covenant, to seek to bring to punishment:
yea some, and not a few, were inveigled in the snare of the Oath of Delation,
to Delate the persecuted People of GOD to their Courts; and thereby made, in
stead of discovering Malignants, according to the Covenant, to discover their
Brethren to Malignants: And very many, almost the universality of the Land,
were involved in the snare of the Oath of Abjuration renouncing the principle
of declating War against a Malignant King, and of asserting the lawfulness of
bringing his murdering complyces and Incendiaries to condign punishment. But,
on the other hand, some of us have sometimes exceeded the bounds of Moderation
in this matter, in usurping the sword, without GODS Call, without respect to
the Rule, and against the scope of our own Declarations, to take vengeance on
them, at our own hand; yea, even to that degree of taking the Lives of such at
the Curate of Carspharn, and some others.
some of them in an extravagant manner; For which, we have been sadly rebuked
of GOD, and occasion has been given, and taken, to reproach and blaspheme the
Way of God upon that account.

In the 5th Article, we are bound according to our peace and Interest, to
endeavor that the Kingdoms may remain Conjoined in a firm Peace and Union to
all Posterity, and that Justice may be done on the willful opposers thereof;
According to Gal. 5:12. Isa. 2.2.3. Isa 19.23.24.25. Jer. 50.4, 5. Ezekiel.
37.16.17. Zech. 2.11. Zech. 8.20.22.23. But tho the Peace and Union betwixt the
Kingdoms be a great blessing of God unto both, and a Bond which we are obliged
to preserve unviolated; And to endeavor that justice may be done upon the
opposers thereof; Yet, some in this Land, who have come under the Bond of the
Covenant, have made it their great study how to dissolve this Union, and few,
or no endeavors, have been used by any of us, for Punishing of such. Yea, very
little, or not at all, have the most of us been concerned about this Article,
whether there be Peace with, or holiness and truth in the other Kingdoms, or
what sort of Peace, or on what Foundations it be settled. Both Kingdoms are
mutually guilty of dissolving this Covenanted Union, in Invading each other, at
several times, contrary to the Covenant: The English Nation, in subjecting us
to their Conquest, and forcing us to a submission and Union with their
Sectarian Usurpations, on Church and State: And this Nation, in giving such
provocations to them, by the Unlawful Engagement, in the year 1648: By treating
with setting up, and entertaining the Head of the Malignant party, their Enemy
and ours both, as our King, in the year 1650; And inwading them upon his
quarrel, in the Worcester expedition, Anno 1651. Since which time, after that
Kingdom and this both united in that unhappy course of restoring the King,
without respect to the Covenant; And re-establishing Prelacy, which broke our
Covenanted Union and Conjunction, That Nation has sometimes sent aid to our
Persecutors, for suppressing our Attempts to recover our Religion and
Liberties; And this Nation has sent Forces to help their Destroyers, and to
suppress their Endeavors for the recovery of their Privileges. And in the
mean time, we have been very little solicitons for Correspondence to settle
Union with such of them as owned the Covenant; Or, for giving to, or receiving
from them, mutual Informations of our respective cases and conditions, under
all our Calamities and Calumnies cast upon us: Nor have we studied to keep up
Sympathy, or Communion of Saints, or a mutual bearing of one another burdens,
as became Covenanted Brethren. On the other hand, in stead of Union in Truth
and Duty, according to the Bond of the Covenant, a Confederacy has been
studied, in defection from the Covenant: And an Union and Peace, which wanted
the foundation laid down in the foregoing Articles of the Covenant, to wit,
Uniformity in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government, against Popery,
Prelacy, Schism, or Sectarianism, for our Religion, Laws, and Liberties, and
the discovering, suppressing and punishing the enemies of these Interests. Such
an Union has not been studied or sought; but on the contrare, an Union against
the Reformation, and Uniformity for Prelacy, or Sectarian Multiformity, by
maintaining Tyranny, and strengthening Malignancy.

In the 6th. Article, We are bound, according to our Places and Callings in
this common Cause of Religion, Liberty, and Peace, to assist and defend all
those that enter into this League and Covenant, in the maintaining thereof. And
in the National Covenant, in like manner, we are bound to stand to the mutual
defense and assistance, every one of us of another, in the same cause, with our
best Counsel, our Bodies, Means, and whole Power, against all sorts of persons
what soever; So that whatsoever shall be done to the least of us for that
Cause, should be taken as done to us all in general, and to every one of us in
particular. A duty very clear in the Scriptures, Judge. 5.23. 1 Chronicles. 12.1, 18.
Nehem. 4.14. Prove. 24.11.12. But alas! Little Conscience has been made of this
Duty: We have suffered many of out Brethren, in several parts of the Land, to
be oppressed of the common Enemy, without compassion or relief. There has been
great murmuring and repining because of expense of means, and pains in doing of
our duty. And not only so, but many have Sworn and Subscribed Oaths and Bonds
engaging against such assistances very directly, and to condemn all such
endeavors to assist, defend, or rescue them, as Sedition and Rebellion; And
obliging them to assist their murdering Malignant Enemies by such concurrences
as they required: Yea, many instead of coming out to the help of the Lord
against the Mighty, and defending their Brethren, have come out to the help of
the Mighty against the Lord, His Cause, Covenant and oppressed People,
concurring in Arms against them at all the Appearances that have been astayed
for the cause of Christ; Appearing at Courts, held for informing against, and
Condemning their Brethren that were Present at, or concerned in such
Appearances for the Covenanted Cause; And coming in as Witnesses against them;
Sitting in Assyses for Condemning them; And guarding them to their Executions,
when Martyred for their Duty and the Interest of Truth. Many again have denied
to Reset, Harbor, and Entertain their Brethren, Persecuted for maintaining the
Covenanted Reformation; And some have raised the Hue and Cry after them,
thereby occasioning and assisting in the cruel Murder of several faithful
Brethren. The most part have owned the Great Murderer, who authorized all the
rest and enacted all these Murders; And assisted him and his Accomplices and
Executioners of his murdering Mandats, with their Purses and Estates, in paying
the Supplies professedly demanded, and declaredly imposed for enabling them to
accomplish these Mischiefs. Yea, many of our Brethren have been so far from
assisting that they have added affl^ctions to their afflicted Brethren, by
their Reproaches, and persecuting by the Tongue whom the Lord had smitten, and
talking to the grief of those whom He had wounded. And as all sorts of us have
been wanting in our Sympathy with, and endeavoring succor to our suffering
Brethren, let be to deliver them from their Enemies hands, according to
capacity, especially if they were such as differed from us in their Judgment;
So we cannot forbear with shame and sorrow to confess, that many Ministers have
all along discovered great unconcernedness with, and contempt of poor
despised and reproached Sufferers; Condemning the Heads of their Sufferings;
Forgetting, or refusing to pray for them publicly; And declining, yea,
dissuading to contribute for the relief of the Banished, of late; Which has
been very discouraging to the affl^cted, and stumbling to many. In the same
Article, we are bound not to suffer our selves directly or indirectly, by
whatsoever Combination or Terror, to be divided and withdrawn from this blessed
Union and Conjunction; Whether to make defection to the contrary part, or to
give our selves unto a detestable indifferency or neutrality in this Cause. And
in the National Covenant, That we shall neither directly nor indirectly suffer
our selves to be divided, or withdrawn, by whatsoever suggestion, allurement or
terror, from this Blessed and Loyal Conjunction; According to Scripture
warrands, Genesis 13 8. Psalm. 133. throughout. Zech. 8.19. Heb. 12 14. 1 Cor.
1.10. Ephesians. 4 3. Phil. 1.27. and 2.1, 2. Jer. 9.3. Ezekiel. 22.25. 2 Timothy 4.10.
Hag. 1.2. Phil 2.21. Rev. 3.15, 16. But alas! It is long since our Fathers had
reason to complain and confess, that many in their day by persuasion or terror
suffered themselves to be divided and withdrawn to make defection to the
contrary part: Many had turned off to a detestable indefferency and Neutrality
in this Cause which so much concerns the Glory of God, and the good of these
Kingdoms; Nay many had made it their study to walk so as they might comply with
all times, and all the revolutions thereof. It was not their care to
countenance, encourage, entrust, and employ such only, as from their hearts did
affect and mind Gods work: But the hearts of such many times had been
discouraged, and their hands weakened, their sufferings neglected, and
themselves slighted; And many who had been once open Enemies, and always
secret Underminers, countenanced and employed; Nay, even those who had been
looked upon as Incendiaries, and upon whom the Lord had set Marks of desperate
Malignancy, Falsehood and Deceit, were brought in as fit to manage public
Affairs. All which Sins and Breaches of Covenant have now encreassed to a
greater height of heinousness; For in our day, these Incendiaries, desperate
and ingrained Malignants, have only been employed in, and admitted to the
management of Affairs in Church and State, and none but they have been
accounted Habile by Law: And such divisions from this Covenanted Conjunction,
and defections to the contrary part, have been enacted and established by Law.
Yea, all the unhappy divisions that have been in our day, have been the woeful
consequents and effects of Defections to the contrary part. At the first
erection of Prelacy, many, both Ministers and Professors, partly by Terror and
partly by Persuasion. did withdraw from this Covenanted Conjunction, and make
defection unto Prelacy, with which they combined in conforming with it, and
submitting unto the Ministry of the conforming Curats: And afterward, by the
terror of the fear of Men, and the persuasions of their Counsels and Example,
many of us have been seduced into a Combination with Malignants, in taking
Oaths and Bonds contrary to the Covenants, thereby dividing our selves from the
Recusants, and making defection to the party imposing them, and opposing the
Covenants. And by Combination of those that preferred Peace to Truth, and Ease
to Duty, by the terror of threatened continuance of Persecution, and the
persuasion of a promised Relaxation and immunity from Troubles, many Ministers
have been divided from the Testimony of the Church of Scotland against the
encroaching Supremacy and Absolute Power, and one from another, and have made
defection to that part and Party that were advancing these Encroachments and
Usurpations on the prerogatives of Christ and Privileges of his Church, by
receiving Indulgences and Tolerations from them; in their own nature
destructive unto, and given, and received on terms inconsistent with the Duties
of the Covenants, which were contrived and conferred on purpose to divide them
from this cause, and from their Brethren that more tenaciously adhered to it,
and did effectuate that design in a great measure. And others gave themselves
to a detestable indifference, in complying with, conniving at, and not
witnessing against these defections, but passing them over in a secure and
submissive silence: And yet many of us have not showed our dislike of these
backsliding courses, by discountenancing, withdrawing from, and keeping our
selves free of all participation with them: And others have withdrawn, that
have not mourned for the sin of these things, to the irritation and offense,
rather than conviction of these they withdrew from. Moreover, in the same
Article we are sworn, all the days of our lives, zealously and constantly to
continue in this Cause, against all Letts and Impediments whatsoever: And, what
we are not able our selves to suppress and overcome, to reveal and make known,
that it may be timely prevented or removed. And in the National Covenant, never
to cast in any Let or Impediment that may stay or hinder any such resolution
as by common consent shall be found to conduce for so good ends; but on the
contrary, by all lawful means to labor to further and promove the same. And if
any such dangerous and divisive motion be made to us by word or writ, that we
and every one of us shall either suppress it, or if need be, incontinent make
the same known, that it may be timeously obviated; agreeing very well with
Scriptures, Number: 14:9, 10: Neh: 6:3, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, etc. Psalm: 69:9: Isa:
8:12, 14: Acts 4:19: Acts 20:24: and 21:13: Gal: 2:5: Phil: 1:28. Nevertheless,
many have been the lets and impediments that have been cast in the way to
retard and obstruct the Lords work, by Prelacy, Supremacy, Indulgences.
Tollerat^on, and absolute Tyranny, and complyances therewith, enacted by Law;
and all the mischiefs establ^shed by a Throne of iniquity these 28. years. Yet
few have ever zealously contented, and fewer have constantly continued in
contending against these obstructions, so destructive to the cause. Many have
kept Secret the first motions and appearances of these things, while they
might have been suppressed and overcome: And the generality have passed them
over in silence, and made not known, nor adverted unto the Evil of these things
when declared, by witnessing against these things, when they could not be
otherwise removed or overcome. Yet many of us have our selves cast in Lets and
Impediments obstructive to the Cause, by our Defections, Divisions, and
Disorders, against Common Consent, and precipitencies without common consent,
even of our Brethren adhering to the Testimony. Many a divisive Motion has not
been counted dangerous, as those which tended to divide us from the Covenanted
Cause; And many a good and necessary Motion, has been counted Divisive, namely
such as proposed the necessity of confessing and forsaking sin.

Besides these, and many other breaches of the Articles of the Covenant, in the
matter thereof, which concerns everyone of us to search, out and acknowledge
before the Lord, as we would wish his wrath to be turned away from us; So have
many of us failed exceedingly, in the manner of following and pursuing the
duties contained therein; not only seeking great things for our selves, and
mixing private interests and ends concerning our selves, and friends, and
followers, with these things that concern the public good; but many times
preferring such to the honor of God, and good of his Cause, and retarding Gods
work, until we might carry along with us our own Interests and Designs. It
has been our way to trust in the means, and to rely upon the arm of flesh for
success, albeit the Lord many times has made us meet with disappointment
therein, and stained the pride of all our glory, by blasting every carnal
confidence unto us: We have followed, for the most part, the counsels of flesh
and blood, and walked more by the Rules of Policy than Piety, and have hearkened
more unto men than unto God.

In the Conclusion of the Solemn League and Covenant, there is a Profession and
Declaration before GOD and the World of our unfeigned desires to be humbled Ez
k: 7:16:
for our own sins, and Ezekiel: 9:4:
for the sins of these Kingdoms, especially that we have not Matthew: 22:5:
valued as we ought the inestimable benefit of the Gospel, that we have not
labored for the Acts 2:42: 1 Timothy: 6:13, 14.
Purity and 2 Timothy: 3:5:
Power thereof, and that we have not endeavored to Ephesians: 3:17: Colloss: 2:6:
receive Christ in our hearts, nor to walk Colloss: 1:10:
worthy of Him in our lives, 2 These: 2:11, 12:
which are the causes of other sins and transgressions so much abounding among
us. All which we are under many obligations to confess and mourn over from the
Word. And of our true and unfeigned purpose and desire to endeavor for our
selves, and all others under our power and charge, both in public and in
private, in all Duties we owe to God and Man, to amend our Lives, and each one
to go before another in the example of a real Reformation, that the Lord might
turn away His Wrath and heavy Indignation, and establish these Churches and
Kingdoms in Truth and Peace; Yet we have refused to be Reformed, and have
walked proudly and obstinatly against the Lord, not valuing His Gospel, nor
submitting our selves unto the obedience thereof, nor seeking after Christ, nor
studying to honor Him in the excellency of His Person, nor employ Him in the
virtue of His Offices, not making Conscience of Public Ordinances, nor Private
nor Secret Duties, nor studying to edify one another in Love. The Ignorance of
God, and of His Son Jesus Christ prevails exceedingly in the Land. Even our
Eathers, in their purest times, confessed in their Acknowledgement of Sins,
That the greatest part of Masters of Families among Noblemen, Barons,
Gentlemen, Burgesses, and Commons, neglected to seek God in their Families, and
to endeavor the Reformation thereof. And albeit it had been much preswaded,
yet few of the Nobles and Great Ones, -- could be persuaded to perform Family
Duties themselves in their own Persons, which made so necessary and useful a
duty to be misregarded by others of inferior Rank. And we may add in our
degenerate times, not only the Great Ones generally profess the neglect and
contempt of so necessary and useful a duty, both in their own Persons, and in
the use of Chaplains, except such who are as Profane as themselves: But the
greatest part of the Commons are altogether Strangers to it, many performing no
part of Family Worship; Others, only singing a Psalm and Reading a Chapter,
without Praying; And others, making a fashion of performing all, but very
perfunctoriously, formally and indifferently, and scarce once in a day; And
making little Conscience in Catechizing, and Instructing their Children and
Servants. The Nobility, Gentry and Burrows, who should be examples of Godliness
and Sober walking unto others, are very generally Ringleaders of excess and
Rioting. Whereby it is Impossible to reckon up all the Abominations that are in
the Land: But the Blaspheming of the Name of God, swearing by the Creatures,
Profanation of the Lords day, Uncleanness, Drunkenness, Excess and Rioting,
Vanity of Apparel, Lying and Deceit, Railing and Cursing, Arbitrary and
uncontrolled Oppression, and grinding of the faces of the Poor, by Land lords
and others in Place and Power, are become ordinary and common Sins. We have
been far from amending our Lives, and promoting a personal Reformation, and
going before one another in the example of a real Reformation, when we have
been bad examples of Deformation, in our personal Practices and public
Transactions, and being too familiar, and too far unite with the Patrons and
Patterns of all the Lands Deformations. Our Fathers also acknowledged, Albeit
they were the Lords People, engaged unto Him into a Solemn way, yet they had
not made it their study that Judicatories and Armies should consist of, and
places of Power and Trust be filled with Men of blameless and Christian
Conversation, and of known Integrity, and approven fidelity affection and zeal
unto the cause of God, And not only those who were neutral and indifferent, but
disaffected and Malignant, and others who were profane and scandalous were
entrusted: By which it came to pass, that Judicatories, even then, were the
seats of Injustice and Iniquity. And many in their Armies, by their
miscarriages, became their Plague, unto the great prejudice of the Cause of
God, the great scandal of the Gospel, and the great increase of looseness and
profanity throughout all the Land. But we, their far more degenerate Children,
have seen and owned Judicatories consisting of, and filled with perjured
Traitors to God and their Country; And Armies made up of these Plagues,
Ma^shalled under a displayed Banner against the Cause of God; Not only to the
Scandal, but for the Suppression of the Gospel, and forcing people to prosanity
throughout the Land: Yet we have not sighed nor cried for these Abominations,
nor have we been concerned as we ought, with the abounding of them through the
Land; Nor has our Zeal, which in any measure we professed, ex^ended it self
far beyond the places where we sojourned, not regarding the Ignorance and
Profanity of the many dark places in the Land, both in the Borders, Highlands,
and Northern Isles, and other parts, nor being careful of propagating the
knowledge of God and Religion among them. As likewise wi^h blushing we must
confess, our Pride and presumptuous boasting of the External Privileges we
had, and others wanted, of the Gospel, and outward Reformation, and Testimony,
which we bragged off, as if that had made us better than others: while we made
not Conscience of improving these Privileges, nor of bringing forth suitable
Fruits in a personal Reformation. And in like manner, the conceitedness of some
in Suffering, and Non Compliance, and Contending for Truth, rather for keeping
up the Contention, and abetting a Party, and many times, under too lofty names
of, the Suffering Party and Remnant, and the like, than to keep and hold fast
the Word of the Lords Patience, to His Glory, as our Crown. And many other
evidences of pride, hateful to God, in boasting of the use of Armies, in an
ostentive way, and being too much taken up with them ((...) tho necessary, for
the defense of our Lives) in a revengeful resenting of affronts, in a
passionate and disdainful refusing to take reproof for excesses in the manner
of any duty, when we thought the matter was right; And in our lightness of
Carriage, forgetting our Sufferings since they began to abate. Yea, both in
time of our greatest Sufferings, and since we got this Liberty of date, we must
acknowledge with regrate, that Idleness of both kinds, has too much abounded
among us: Both that when we were in a manner driven from the World, and shut up
from all Employments, but the exercise of Godliness, many did not improve that
opportunity of the Cross to promote acquaintance and communion with God, being
slothful in Prayer, Reading, and other Duties: And some again, even since they
might have had access to go to Service; or other lawful Employments, have
continued idle and out of work, to the opening of the mouths of many against
the Cause, albeit they were not called to, or employed in any public business
for the same. And besides all these things, there be many other transgressions,
whereof the Land wherein we live are guilty, which we have not been humbled for
to this day: But in stead of mourning for them, confessing and forsaking them,
we have been rather defending or daubing, covering or coloring, excusing or
extenuating them. All which we now desire to acknowledge, and be humble for,
that the World may bear witness with us, that Righteousness belongs unto God,
and shame and confusion of face unto us, as appears this day.

BUT, because it is needful for these who find Mercy, not only to confess, but
also to forsake their sin; Therefore, that the reality and sincerity of our
Repentance may appear, WE do Resolve, and Solemnly Engage our selves, before
the Lord, carefully to avoid, for the time to come, all these Offenses whereof
we have now made solemn public acknowledgement, and all the snares and
tentations which tend thereunto: And to testify the integrity of our
Resolution herein, and that we may be the better enabled, in the power of the
Lords strength to perform the same, we do again Renew our Solemn League and
Covenant, promising hereafter to make Conscience of all the Duties whereunto we
are obliged in all the Heads and Articles thereof, particularly of these which
follow.

Because Religion is of all things the most excellent and precious, and the
knowledge of the Great Truths of the Gospel, so generally decreased in this
Land, is so absolutely necessary. Therefore, we shall endeavor to be better
acquainted with the written Word of God, the only infallible Rule of Faith and
Manners; And shall study, more than formerly, the Doctrine of this True
Reformed Church, summarly contained in our Confession of Faith, Catechisms
larger and shorter, Sum of Christian Doctrine, and practical use of Saving
Knowledge, Directory for public Worship, Propositions concerning Church
Government and Ordination of Ministers, etc. And other Writings, clearing and
confirming these Truths approven by this Church, and agreeable with the Word of
GOD. The advancing and promoving the power of this True Reformed Religion, in
our selves and others, against all Ungodliness and Profanity, And the securing
and preserving the purity thereof against all Error, Heresy and Schism, and
namely Independency, Anabaptisme, Antinomianisme, Arminianisme, Socinianisme,
Familisme, Libertinisme, Scepticisme, Quakerisme, and Erastianisme, shall be
more studied and endeavored by us. And as we declare we willingly agree in our
Consciences with this Doctrine of the Church of Scotland, in all points, as
unto Gods undoubted Truth and Verity, grounded only upon His written Word; So,
we resolve constantly to adhere unto, and maintain, and defend, and profess,
and confess, and, when called of GOD, to be willing to suffer for every point
of the said Doctrine, as we shall desire to be approven and confessed by Christ
Jesus before God and His Holy Angels. 2. We shall also study more sincerity,
uprightness, and heart integrity in the Worship of God, and not satisfy our
selves with the form of it, without the Spirituality that the Object of it
requires; And shall endeavor to Recover and Preserve the Liberty and Purity
thereof from all Corruptions, Novations, or Inventions of Men, Popish,
Prelatical, Erastian, or any other. And if we cannot get these Corruptions
Reformed and removed, we shall study to keep our selves free of Communion and
Participation with the same. 3. We shall likewise, by all Lawful means,
endeavor the Recovery and Re-establishment of Presbyterial Government, which
is the only order of Christ's House of Divine Institution, and seek to have it
Redintegrated in all its parts, Privileges, and Courts of Kirk Sessions,
Presbytries, Synods, and General Assemblies. And that the true Discipline of
the same Church may be impartially Exercised; Both which, we shall endeavor to
Preserve aginst all that seek to Subvert and Pervert the same: And when
Restored and Recovered in its freedom and integrity, shall Cordially submit
unto the same, as becomes the Flock of Christ. 4. In like manner, the carrying
on the Work of Uniformity in the three Kingdoms, shall be desired, designed,
prayed for, studied and endeavored by us, by Remonstrances, Supplications,
Admonitions, Testimonies, and all other means possible, lawful, expedient and
competent unto us in our capacities, and that before all Worldly Interests
whether concerning the Magistrate, or our selves, or any other whatsomever.

According to the Second Article, 1. We shall do our outmost endeavors to have
the Land purged of Popish Idolatry, the Monuments thereof destroyed, and so far
as lies in our power, shall never suffer the same to be reintroduced or
errected again: But shall endeavor to have the Penal Statutes against Papists,
of late stopped and suspended by the Tolleration, revived, left in full force,
and duly put in execution against those Enemies of Religion and all good
Government. 2. We shall Endeavor the extirpation of Prelacy, by all approven
means, according to our Capacities and Vocations. And in order thereto, we
shall never submit to that Prelatical Hierarchy of Archbishops, Bishops, etc.
having power of Order or Jurisdiction over preaching Presbyters, whether
Erastian, or only Diocesan, in any form or degree, howsoever Reformed,
accommodated, restricted, or limited by Cautions or provisions of Men; Since
frequent and fatal experience has taught this Church, that they cannot be kept
long within banks or bounds; And the Word of GOD has condemned that Office,
and Subordination it self, in any degree. We shall also, by all lawful and
legal means, seek the removing of their substitute Curats, depending on them;
from the Parish-Churches on which they have intruded. And shall never submit to
the Ministry of, hear, or receive Ordinances from, nor pay any Stipends unto
any Man that enters into the Cure of any Perish. at the door of the Bishops
Collation, or Patrons Presentation. 3. Because many have of late labored to
supplant the Liberties of the Kirk, and have in a great measure obtained their
design, by the late Indulgences and Toleration, We shall refuse, withstand, and
witness against all such Encroachments on the Liberties of this Church in all
times coming; And shall withdraw our selves from Communion with any such
Meetings or Congregations, that hold their freedom from, and are modified by
such Usurpations. Purposing and promising to use all endeavors to have a
settled Ministry, according to Christ's Institution, without any dependence on,
subordination unto, or homologation of an Ecclesiastic Erastian and usurped
supremacy in the Civil Magistrate. Furthermore, we shall strive to recover, and
when recovered, Maintain and Defend the Kirk of Scotland, in all her Liberties
and Privileges according to our power, against all who shall oppose or
undermine the same, or encroach thereupon, under any pretext whatsomever. 4.
And as on the one hand, we here enter into Vows to detest and abhor all
Superstition, Heresy, and Profaneness, and whatsoever shall be found contrary
to found Doctrine and the power of Godliness, and to keep our selves, so far as
we can, from all partaking in other Men's sins, by consent unto, ass^ciation,
incorporation, combination, communion, compliance with, or conniving at their
si^s; So, We resolve, in the Lords streng^h, to guard against all Schism and
sinful Separation, or unjust, rash, and disorderly withdrawing from
Congregations, Societies, or Families, or any part of the Communion of the true
Reformed Covenanted Church of Scotland, holding purely and entirely the
Doctrine, Worship, D^scipline and Government of the same in Principle and
Exercise, according to the Rules of Christ, and standing Acts and Constitutions
of this Church. And that we shall neither gather nor set up formed separate
Churches or Societies, under other Ordinances, Government or Ministry, distinct
from the Presbyterian Church of Scotland. Nor withdraw from Minister or Member
of that Body, for any offense, in any case, where either the offense may be
legally removed without our withdrawing; Or cannot be instructed to be
condemned by the Word of God, or the Constitutions of this Church; Or is in it
self an insufficient ground of withdrawing; Or a thing to be condescended upon,
forborne, or forgiven. But shall study to maintain Union and Communion, in Truth
and Duty with all the Ministers and Members of the said Church, that do, and in
so far as they do follow the Institutions of Christ.

According to the Third Article, 1. We shall endeavor with all sincerity,
reality and constancy, according to our Vocations and Capacities, by all
possible and lawful means, to seek the removal of those things that corrupt,
prelimite, or preclude the right constitution of Parliaments, and other
Judicatories; The rescinding and taking away of these wicked Acts and Oaths
that give entrance unto the Enemies of the Reformation, to sit there as
Members, and exclude those that are honest and well affected to the Covenant
and Cause of GOD. And all other Acts and Laws that have been framed since
Prelacy and Tyranny came in, that have been opposite unto the said Covenant and
work of Reformation; The reviving and ratifying of all former Righteous Laws,
made in favors thereof; And the restoring and recovering of all the due and
true Rights and Privileges of Parliaments. And as we shall earnestly pray unto
God that He would give us able men fearing God, men of Truth, and hating
covetousness, to judge and bear Charge among His people; So, we shall according
to our Places, Callings and Capacities endeavor that Judicatories and all
places of Power and Trust, both in Kirk and State, may consist of, and be
filled with such men as are of known good Affection to the Cause of God, and of
a blameless and Christian conversation, to whom we shall submit, and obey, and
defend them and their Rights, with our Estates and Lives. 2. We shall also
desire, and do design to recover, vindicate and maintain the Liberties of the
Subjects, in all these things which concern their Consciences, Persons and
Estates, 3. Now after we have been long howling under a grievous Tyranny,
making men like the fishes of the Sea that have no Ruler over them; We shall
desire and long for a good Government, and seek to have it rightly settled, upon
such a foundation of Righteousness, with such a subordination to GOD, and in
such hands as Religion and Liberty, and we in maintaining the same, may find
protection and Patrociny. And then in the terms of the Covenant, we promise
Subjection, Allegiance, and our best endeavors to preserve and defend the
Person and Authority of our Lawfully invested Kings, Princes, or other
Magistrates, in the preservation and defense of the True Religion, and
Liberties of the Kingdom, Ministration of Justice, and punishing of iniquity:
Or so far as our owning and defending them may, or can consist with the
preservation and defense of Religion, Liberty and Justice; Giving unto GOD that
which is GODS, and to Caesar the things which are Caesar's: And upon other
terms, we purpose never to own Allegiance to mortal Man.

According to the Fourth Article, 1. Bein^^ now sensible of the sin of
compliance with M^l gnants, we shall resolve through Grace to stand aloof, and
at a greater distance from every thing that may import compliance, confederacy,
or unitive transaction with them while remaining such, by Associating with them
in Arms, paying them Cesses and Contributions imposed for maintaining them in
their Cause and course of opposition to the Cause of GOD; Or by swearing,
subscribing, or taking any of their Oaths, Tests or Bonds; Or any new Oaths or
Bonds whatsoever, which may any way condemn, Limite, or Restrain us in the
Du^i^s whereunto we are obliged by the National or Solemn League and Covenant.
Yea, 2. We shall be so far from conniving at, complying with, or countenancing
of Malignancy, Injustice, Iniquity, Profanity and Impiety, that we shall not
only avoid and discountenance these things, and cherish and encourage these
persons who are zealous for the Caus^ of GOD, and walk according to the Gospel:
But also shall seek a more effectual course than heretofore, in our respective
places and Callings, for punishing and suppressing these evils, and faithfully
endeavor that the best and fittest remedies may be applied for taking away the
causes thereof, and advancing the knowledge of GOD, and Holiness and
Righteousness in the Land. And to this effect, shall endeavor to Represent our
Grievances unto competent Judicatories against those who have been open
Persecuters, that they may receive condign punishment as the degree of their
Crimes and Offenses shall require or deserve, that so the Land may be purged
from blood, and the LORD may delight to dwell among us. Ye c^nsidering what
rashness has appeared in some, in putting forth their hand to punish such
Incendiaries by death, and how people may be still in hazard of running upon
Extravagances in this matter, from the misunderstanding of this Article of the
Covenant; We shall therefore guard against all irregularities in seeking the
punishment of Malignants, Incendiaries, or evil Instruments, and endeavor the
discovery and bringing of them to Justice in a Right and Legal way.

According to the Fifth Article, We shall according to our places, power, and
Interest, endeavor to have the Union of the Kingdoms brought to its Covenanted
Basis, and avoid every thing that may weaken the same, or involve us in any
measure of accession unto the guilt of those who have invaded, or hereafter may
invade the Kingdom of England to break this Covenanted Union. And shall
endeavor more correspondence and sympathy with all our Covenanted Brethren,
both in England and Ireland.

According to the Sixth Article, Considering what Dangers, We, and all our
Brethren, under the Bond, and owning the Obligation of these Covenants, are in,
and may be exposed to, from the Popish Prelatical and Malignant Faction still
prevailing, And what defects we are sensible have been among us in the duty of
defending and assisting one another in this cause. We do here s^l^mnly en^er
under a Bond of Association with all that do n^w renew these Covenants with the
Acknowledgement of the public Breaches, and Engagement to the duties thereof,
and shall concert and assert the old Covenanted Cause and Quarrel, as our
Fathers stated and contended for it, from the year 1638. to 1650. Which cause
of the Covenanted Reformation, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government,
and all Interests and Rights Religious or Civil, contended for, during that
foresaid space of years conducing to promote the same; we faithfully promise to
prosecute, and endeavor to propagate, preserve and maintain, with the hazard
of our Lives and all that we have. Not fearing or regarding the soul Aspersions
of Rebellion, Combination, or what else our Adversaries from their Craft and
Malice would put upon us. Seeing what we do is so well warranted, and arises
from an unfeigned desire to maintain the true Religion, to obtain the
Protection, and preserve the Honor of Righteous Government, and promote the
Peace and Happiness of the Kingdom, for the present Safety and future Felicity
of our Selves and Posterity, and encouragement of others, groaning under, o^ in
danger of the Yoke of Antichristian or Erastin, Popish or Prelatical Tyranny,
to join in the same or l ke Association. In maintaing which, we shall
faithfully and steadfastly, according to our place and power, sympathize, bear
all burdens, and imbark our Interests with, and assist and defend all these who
enter into or join with this Association and Covenants. And shall reckon
whatsoever shall be done to the least of us for this Cause, as done to us all in
general, and to every one of us in particular. And shall account it a breach of
Covenant, if, seeing our Brethren pursued for this Cause, and having sufficient
means to comfort and assist them, any of us shall either make peace with the
Persecuters, bind up their hands by Oaths or Bonds from resisting them, refuse
to hide, harbor or supply the Persecuted, decline to venture in lawful and
necessary attempts for their relief, or withdraw from their dutiful support.
And being thus united and Associate in this Cause, as we resolve and oblige our
selves to abide in this firm conjunction, and neither consent nor concede to
any Combination or Counsel, suggestion, persuasion, allurement or terror that
may have any direct or indirect tendency, tentation or influence to seduce us,
either to division among our selves, or defection to our Adversaries, or a base
indifferency and neutrality between the two, but shall with all Zeal, Fidelity
and constancy communicate our best help, counsel and concurre^ce for the
promoving all resolutions, as by common consent shall be found to conduce for
the good of the cause. And endeavor to discover, oppose and suppress all
contrivances or counsels that may cast in any let or ^mpediment that may be
obstructive or prejudicial to the cause: So we shall likewise desire, design
and endeavor to get the defections, unworthy neutralities, and unhappy
divisions that have long and lamentably wounded and wr^cked this Church,
removed; Differences settled, and Breathes healed, in such a way, and upon such
terms as may be honorable and advantageous for the Cause. And if our Brethren
and we, between whom such differences have fallen in and have been sadly
fomented on all hands, will search and try our ways respectively, how far they
and we have reced^d from the good Old Way of the Church of Scotland, and in our
impartial search, shall find out our respective defections and breaches of
Covenant, on the one hand and on the other, and unite in confessing these, by
joining in this or the like acknowledgement of public sins, and keeping days
of Humiliation and Mourning for the same. And as we offer and promise to
confess our sins here acknowledged, or any other (so far as we can be
convinced) any manner of way that they shall desire or appoint; So, if they
will at least confess theirs Doctrinally, and they and we both forsake them
mutually; And forsaking, concur in procuring the condemnation of them in
Ecclesiastical Synods or Assemblies, and so return unto, and fix our ground on
the Old established Foundations, according to the Word of GOD and Constitutions
of this Church, settled before the Covenanted Reformation stopped: We will then
embrace and maintain Union and Communion with them, and offer and avouch our
concurrence with them, and submission to them in the LORD: And shall not suffer
our selves, directly or indirectly, by whatsoever combination, persuasion or
terror, to be divided and withdrawn from this blessed Union and Conjunction.

And because there be many, who heretofore have not made Conscience of the Oath
of God, but some through fear, others by persuasion, and upon base ends and
humane Interests have entered thereunto, who have afterward discovered
themselves to have dealt deceitfully with the Lord, in swearing falsely by His
Name. Therefore We who do now renew our Covenants in reference to these duties,
and all other duties contained therein, Do, in the sight of Him who is the
searcher of hearts, Solemnly Profess, that it is not upon any Politic
advantage, or Private Interest, or by-end or because of any terror or
persuasion from men, or hypocritically or deceitfully, that we do again take
upon us the oath of God, But honestly and sincerely, and from the sense of our
Duty: And that therefore denying our selves and our own things, and laying
aside all self-interests and ends, we shall above all things seek the Honor of
GOD, the good of His Cause, and the wealth of His People; And that forsaking
the counsels of flesh and blood, and not leaning upon Carnal confidence, we
shall depend upon the LORD, walk by the Ru^e of His Word, and hearken to the
voice of His Servants. In all which, professing our own weakness, we do
earnestly pray to GOD, who is the Father of Mercies, through His Son Jesus
Christ, to be merciful unto us, and to enable us by the power of His-Might,
that we may do our Duty, unto the praise of His Grace in the Churches. AMEN.

FINIS.

