A Civil CORRECTION OF A Saucy Impudent PAMPHLET, Lately Published, Entitled,
A Brief Account of the Designs which the Papists have had against the Earl of
Shaftsbury, etc.
HAving very often heard of Popish Designs against the Earl of Sh. but never
being able to get any true account of 'em in particular, it is not to be
imagined how extremely pleased I was the other day to meet with a merry
Pamphlet, entitled, A brief Account of the Designs which the Papists have had
against the Earl of Shaftsbury, occasioned by his Commitment, July 2. 1681.
Very good, thought I; now the Mountain brings forth, or never: So with Hat over
eyes, and Legs across, very gravely to reading f^ll I. The first thing I meet
withal, is indeed a very solid Position; Had Sir F. W. himself labored and
strained for a Period, (...) my Conscience he could not have squeezed out a
duller. Says the worthy Pamphleteer, Though the Apprehending of the Right
Honorable the Earl of Shaftsbury has filled the Town and Country with talk
and noise, yet it neither frightens nor discourageth any true Protestant, or
good English- man. Well said old Tautology: That Is as plain as the Nose in ones
Face: Cheer up my Countrymen; for discouragement being the effect of fear, and
fear the immediate cause of discouragement, there is nothing so evident, as
that a man may be frightened, and not discouraged, or discouraged and not
frightened: that is to say, a man may be frightened, and not frightened
neither. So much for Rhetoric But prithee Sweetheart; since thou will be
scribbling, write Truth, though thou can not afford us Sense. For the
Apprehending that Right Honorable Earl does frighten most true Protestants,
and good Englishmen; For, if that Right Honorable Earl has been all along so
vigorous an Assertor of the Protestant Religion, the Rights and Liberties of
the Subject, the Laws of the Kingdom, and the Authority and Prerogative of the
Crown, Can it do less than strike astonishment into the heart and mind of every
honest man, to find him accused of no less Crimes than High Treason at last?
The Conspiring to seize upon and secure the King's Person by violence; the
subverting the Government, and raising Men and Arms to that purpose? I believe
it frightens most men, and that most men are something apt to apprehend, that
he may not be altogether so good a Protestant and Patriot as he would have us
believe he was: If he be, we have reason to be afraid for his Innocence; if he
be not, we have reason to be afraid that the best part of the Kingdom has long
been miserably deceived and misled, and to dread the Ruin into which he was
seducing us. Therefore good Mr. Pamphleteer be pleased to recollect your self,
and do not forestall the Justice of the Laws, that must acquit or condemn him;
and let me moreover inform your worship of one thing, that if you are not
frightened at my Lord of Shaftsbury's being apprehended for a Traitor, I am
sure you ought to be ashamed of your Pamphlet.

As for Example: You are pleased to observe, That the Perjuries of Needy and
Suborned Villains may bring troubles upon Innocence. Good Friend of mine be
tender how you treat the King's Witnesses: For if want be once urged as an
Argument against the Validity of a Testimony, for ought I know there is not one
Jesuit has been hanged these three years, but maybe as little a Traitor as the
E. of S.

But for a shrewd Argument let you alone, I Will warrant you, (viz.) If he were
traitorously inclined (you say) yet he is wiser than to communicate Designs of
that Nature to such base and mercenary Rascals as are said to have witnessed
against him, or to enter into a Conspiracy, not only with beggarly Fellows, but
with Irish men and Papists. One part of this I Will grant you; He has not entered
into this Conspiracy with beggarly Fellows, Irish-men and Papists only; for (if
rumor may be believed) there are a great many Rich Knaves in the Pack; Though
(to return an Argument of your own upon you, and tickle you in the true
Protestant place,) who so fit to be employed in Designs of that nature, as
desperate beggarly Fellows and Villains? Now, if his Lordship's Wisdom would
not think Irish-men, (and Papists especially) Rogues enough to undertake the
dethroning of the King, and subverting of the Government. he had a secret
Complement for them in his heart, which I am afraid he will hardly thank you for
publishing. The time was (if your Protestant Pamphlets be all true) when
Irish-men and Papists were not thought so very unfit to engage in Designs of
that nature; But

Qui color albus erat, nunc est contrarius albo.
There Is Latin for you, Brother Pamphleteer; by which Language of the Beast I
suppose you will not fail to find me for a Jesuit, next time you have a need to
write again.

But, in the mean while, This Honorable Gentleman (you say) is he, whose whole
tenor and universal Conduct of his Life have spoken him, not only a Person of
the greatest Abilities, but of the highest Loyalty to His Majesty, and warmest
Zeal for His Service, that any these three Kingdoms have produced in this Age.
Verily, Friend, the Truth is not in thee: For this Honorable Gentleman
commanded a Regiment, that once with warm^st Z^al fought against His Majesty;
This Honorable Gentleman was He that did his utmost to confirm the Usurper
Cromwell in the Throne of His Majesty; This Honorable Gentleman was always a
Member of that Rebellious Authority that opposed His Majesty: And are not these
(and be ^ang'd to you) Arguments of Loyalty to His Majesty? Look you Friend, if
his Lordship can give no better Arguments of his Loyalty, when he c^mes to his
Trial, than you do in your Panegyric upon him, he may chance to march up
Tower Hill for his Loyalty; and, for ought I know, the Trick he will show there
may be the first good Service he ever did, or will do the Public.

If it were possible, thou Pamphleteer, I would be serious with thee; but thou
art a sort of a Thing that hopest to word people out of their sense and
understanding; and by a trowling of Syllables one after another in a gingling
order, would put off thy shallow incohaerent Nonsense, for matter of weight
and moment. I have observed often in half-judging Capacities, when they know
not well how to give an Account of what they have read, or, may be, only heard;
their usual way of passing their Censure is by gravely shaking the Noddle, and
solidly noting there is a great deal in it; So it may be justly said of thy
Pamphlet; There is indeed a great deal in it; but it is such stuff as once made
up a certain Cardinal's Equipage, only Lumber and Filthyness, fitter for a
Dunghill than any place else. Nay, can thou be less than ashamed, thou Son of
Simplicity! to wast the Paper Manufacture of the Kingdom at so unaccountable a
Rate? It Is enough to breed a Dearth of Rags in the Nation; and if once that
should happen, which way would thou contrive to hide thy Nakedness* Would
the E. of S. do himself Justice, he ought to prosecute thee for a Libel upon
him: For, is it less than a Libel to praise him for his unwearied Cares and
Endeavors to obviate the formidable Growth of France? Fie for shame, do the
Honorable Gentleman Justice, and tell the World who it was counseled the
breaking the Triple League, and so by disuniting the common Interest of the
Peace of Europe, made way for all the War and Desolation that has since
followed amongst our Neighbors. If he (as you say) could not concur in Designs
which he conceived tended to the Ruin of these Kingdoms, and the endangering
the Monarchy, as well as to the subversion of the Protestant Religion, both
here and elsewhere, persuade him, if thou can, to lay by the at least 30
Pardons which he has passed since his first Ministry, and put himself upon his
Trial from that, to this present day of his Innocence. If to this Wise and
Noble Peer's Influence (according to your observation) His Majesty owes the
successful administration of his Affairs for many years together: tell us, if
thou can, what means the Riddle of so many Addresses from the last
Parliaments, remonstrating from a long date the defects and miscarriages of the
Government, and the Grievances that from thence have fallen upon the People?
tell us who it was that caused the first (...) up of the Exchequer, to the
distress of so many poor Widows and Orphans, whose All was lodged there? If the
Friends and Abettors of Arbitrariness and Popery at home are become his
implacable and professed Enemies, prithee tell us, if possible, how long it is
a since they first fell out? Was it before he would have brought all Elections
for Parliament to have been decided in the Court of Chancery, and so have
robbed the House of Commons of the greatest and most tutelar Privileges they
ever enjoy^d; or was it since? Rather, was it the goodness of our Just and
Gracious King, that could not be prevail^d upon by him to make (...) cru^l an
intr^nchment upon the Rights and Safety of his People, that caused this Noble
Earl to withdraw himself from the Affairs of his Sovereign, or not? Oh Truth!
Truth! how have thou been muzzl'd! But to proceed.

My Author's Worship is pleased (in his remark of the Seals being taken from
this Honorable Earl) to observe. That when They found that They could find
neither Ambition, nor Covetousness in him, to impress and work upon, so as to
bring him to Their Lure, that then They accosted him with such tenders of
Greatness, Honor and Wealth, as few but him would have had the Humility,
Self-denial and Uprigh^ness to refuse. In the name of Nonsense what would this
Laborious Bombastick Fool mean by his Impress, his Lure, and his Accost? Here Is
the taking the Seals from him, on purpose to give him good words, to bring him
to their Lure: (...) very politic fetch! What stuff is this to persuade any
reasonable understanding withal! Oh, but I had almost forgot; there is the word
They to season the Carrion with, viz. When They found, etc. And again, They
accosted him. Now this AEnigmatical Ass would have us believe there is a great
deal of meaning in that word They: That is, having mentioned the Popish Party
with scandal before, he would now join the King with 'em too; For, who else can
take away the Seals from a Chancellor? Or who else could accost him (as ^e
calls it) with tenders of Greatness and Honor? So that here is no less than
the King implicitly reflected on, as a Fav^urer of Popery; to affirm which, is
Treason by the known Laws of the Land; and from thence I appeal to every true
Subject of England, if a Cause thus defended, can, or ought to be thought well
of.

The rest of the page is filled with a long impertinent story of a Design to
accuse this Earl of Treason; that one Colonel Conquest was to have been his
Accusen; that all the Offices wherein he had been concerned were searched; and
that They greatly reckoned upon the House of Commons, as admirably molded for
their business, for the Fear many of 'em might have of losing their Pensions at
the end of the Sessions. Admirably well expressed upon my Life! This Rogue
would, by his good will, make that House of Commons a Cake of ^wey Dough:
Molded for their business! Very quaint truly! But here is he at it again, with
his old They: They greatly reckoned upon the House of Commons, as obliged by
their Pensions: Now, who can be esteemed to expect any thing from a Pensioner,
for fear of losing his Pension, but he that gives him his Pension? So that here
the Villain is throwing Dirt again in the King's Face; as if that were the only
way to get clear his filthy Patron. Here would he knavishly insinuate a
scandalous Interpretation of the King's Goodness, which ought to be no more
questioned than limited by the hands of a Subject; here is his Noddle itching
to make the world believe, That those Pensioners (as he calls them) were merely
bought by the King for Indirect and underhand-services; when upon a just and
impartial scrutiny, it will easily appear, that those Gentlemen were either
such, whose Estates and Fortunes had been impaired in the Service of His
Majesty's Father, that Royal Martyr of ever Blessed Memory, and that way gave
them pretense to His Majesty's Largess and Bounty; or else others, who from
their formerr Delinquency had returned with Penitence into the Mercy and
Service of their Master; and that way became Partakers of his Liberality, that
they might (if possible) be never more led away, by their wants or ambition,
into these Courses that ruined the Kingdom before; and enslaved us under the
heavy Yoke of an Usurper. But I am glad to find the Cause, now it is shaken,
thus dis^embogue it self, and hope it will open the eyes of every honest
English man, to have his heart and his hands ready to defend the King, his
Honor and Authority, from all the vile wicked Designs, and undermining
Mischiefs that have been contriving and hatching against him; And how far the
E. of S. may have been that way concerned, I think may, in some measure, be
guessed at, from the style and matter of the Defense, which this miserable
Scribler has the impudence to make for him.

Next, to wind up the bottom of this foolish relation, he is pleased to pass a
Compliment upon the Kings Council, for wanting at that time sufficient matter
to Accuse him of; and so proceeds forward to his They once more; and tells us,
how They having miscarried in their Attempts upon the E's life, change the
Scheme of their Designs, (good Lord what fine words are here) and lay a Plot to
blast his Reputation: And who says he so fit for this work, as the
Ecclesiastics, as being in a more Implicit Obedience to Them: So I am glad I
have got you here good Mr. Pamphleteero! Who are the Ecclesiastics and the
posse of the Clergy (as you are pleased to term it) reasonably to be thought
most obedient to, but the Head of the Church! So here the King is shuffled in
amongst your They again: Then you tell us, the Pulpits instead of commending
Jesus Christ to the Consciences of men, were employed through all parts of the
Nation in Blasting the E. of S. And (if all be true) it had not been much amiss
if it had been so, for it is requisite in Preaching (after the Praises of God)
to arm men's Souls against the practices of the Devil. Though it is evident,
that your Worshipful Dullness lies in this point most abominably, and I dare be
hanged (as you deserve) could the matter be enquired into, if ever (since Hugh
Peter's his time) any one of the E. of S. Names, has been so much as mentioned
in a Pulpit; by which, and what went before, it is easily to be perceived, you
are neither a Friend to the King, nor the Church; and what Party you belong to
then, I leave every Honest Impartial man to Judge according to his Conscience.

But now I think better of the matter; What Spleenatick Fool but my self would
take the pains to bestow an answer upon this Dunce, this True Protestant, as he
calls himself! If he be a Roundhead, a Rumper, a Rebel of Old Jack Presbyter's
Stamp, why is he ashamed of his Title? Why does he Cloak his Schism under the
Name of True Protestant? for we know no True Protestant here, but such as are
so according to the Church of England, as it is Established by Law: For if
every one that Protests against Popery, be a True Protestant; for ought I
perceive, the Great Turk has as much pretense to that Title as any body. That
this Vermin then is not of the Church of England, is easily to be conjectured
by this treatment of its Clergy: That he is not an over good Subject, is
apparent enough by the Company he has found out for the King; yet this is he
that dares defend the cause of a man, under an Accusation of the most
detestable Treason in the World, exhibited against him by several Witnesses,
whose worth and Validity none once so zealous to defend and justify as the
Earl himself and his Party were, though now they have the misfortune, to fall
under our Authors displeasure, and to be treated with no better. Titles, Then
Beggarly Fellows, Indigent, Mercenary and Perjured Rascals, Beggarly Rascals,
such as have acknowledged that they are Hired to Swear what they have done,
etc. Now to do the World Justice, and to do the Laws Justice, which it is to be
hoped will do the E. of S. Justice; let us enquire, who these Beggarly Rascals
are that were hired to Swear what they have done.

In the first place, Heyns so much talked of of late (as report tells us) is
one of those who has a large share in the Charge against this Noble E. Good Mr.
Pamphleteero is he a Beggarly Perjured Rascal? I believe my L. S. will not take
it very well at your hands to treat his old Friend and Acquaintance so coursly;
for such he once was certainly, else, why did he and several Lords more
Petition for a Blanck Pardon for him some few Weeks since; under the Title of a
man of Quality and unquestionable Reputation? One that could give a farther
account of the Popish Plot then any had been discovered yet? Was he then a
Beggar? Was he then Perjured? No, I believe neither; for suppose the party were
so Charitable to keep him from Begging, and the Kings Wisdom in not granting
him a Pardon has kept him from being Perjured.

As for the other Witnesses against this Noble Peer; I believe it will be for
your Credit, as soon as you can, to retract your Reflections upon them too. For
if their Credit is not sufficient, as you say, to support such a Charge against
such a Peer of England, as the E. of S. is Committed for: How came it about
that some of 'em were once thought fitting, even by that Earl himself, to
support as great a Charge against several other Peers of England, (some whereof
are still Prisoners in the Tower) equal in Honor, and for ought I know
Superior in Honesty to your E. of S.

But some of these Witnesses you are pleased to observe, have acknowledged
themselves Hired to Swear what they have done; handle that point as you love
your Cause with Caution: I am afraid it will not be for your Earls advantage,
when it comes to be known who it was Hired them to Swear what they have done.

If this will not do, what think you of a Dying Evidence Fitz-Harris? His
Solemn Declaration at his Death, Signed and Attested by unquestionable Hands?
Certified by his own last Speech at the Gallows in every particular Article to
be true? If he was ever before thought a sufficient Witness against the Queen,
the Duke of York, the Earl of Danby, etc. Sure at his Death, under the awe of a
terrified Conscience, in the last Agonies of Contrition and Repentance, he may
be allowed to speak Truth of a L. H. and E. of S.

That he was thought a sufficient Witness before; I appeal to that worthy
Grand Jury, who (upon his single Information only, though then a Prisoner, just
coming upon his Trial for the Treason which he has suffered for since) thought
fit to find a Bill of Murder against the Earl of Danby, as concerned in the
Death of Justice Godfrey. Nay he was thought so good, so proper, and so
necessary a Witness; that all the Arts of Corruption, and all the Tricks of
Wrested Law, were made use of by the Faction to save him, Juries were packt,
that by their proceeding, seemed to have as little Conscience; as the Hamburgh
Sheriff that returned them had Loyalty. Insolent Advocates were found out for
him, to threaten the Judges in their Office, and if it were possible, to make
the Sword of Justice tremble in the Honest hand that held it; but it was kept
steady, to the Immortal Honor of that Glorious Judge; who when the History of
this Age, shall be written, cannot but be remembered as one of the first
Protectors and Supporters of Englands threatened Monarchy and Liberty.

These things then being granted (as they must be) that the Evidence of these
men against this Earl, or any body else, ought to have as much weight and
Credit, as against any other Subject in the Kingdom; and that they have been
heard with Credit against diverse other Subjects of the Kingdom, is manifest:
How comes it to pass upon an Indictment preferred the last Sessions at the
Old Bailey against one Stephen College for High Treason, there Swore positively
against him, by six several Witnesses, that the Grand Jury could fail to find
the Bill? When at the same Court, not long age, upon the bare Testimony of one
man, they found an Indictment of Recusancy against the Duke of York: Shall the
first Prince of the Blood be condemned upon the slender and doubtful Testimony
of one Witness? And shall not six be enough to make good a Charge against a
Wretched Joyner, a Profligate Factious Fellow, that has been for these three
years taken notice of as a Common Asperser of the Government, and a sower of
Sedition amongst the people? I appeal to all the world if this be Common
Justice! The cause of this can be nothing less, then the miserable decay of all
fear of Heaven, and Reverence of Virtue amongst us; when we see men entrusted
with Authority and Power, administering the severest Cruelty with one hand, and
stopping the Justice of it with the other: Nothing can redeem us from this, but
earnest and fervent Prayers to the Almighty Spirit of Truth, to assist and
defend us, whilst we make an early and resolute appeal to our Gracious
Sovereign, to interpose with his Authority, and restore us to the Security of
our Liberties, that the Laws may be turned again into their due Course and
Channel, that power may be no more entrusted in the hands of such men, as
practice the abuse of it to the overthrowing of all Justice, the destruction of
all Sanction and Unity amonst us, the encouragement of Treachery and Falsehood,
the Stifling of Truth, the Oppression of Innocence, and the confusion of our
general Safety.

God Save the King.
LONDON: Printed for A. B. 1681.


