AN ACCOUNT OF Dr. Still's late BOOK AGAINST The Church of ROME. Together With
a short Postil upon His TEXT.

Non omnia sunt quae videntur, nec videntur omnia quae sunt. 1672.

TO KATHOLIKO Stillingfleeton.
THe Book, Sir, which taken up with better affairs, you sent unto me, that I
might, after I had read it over, draw an Abridgment of it for you, with my own
thoughts super-added in the close, by way of a short Comment thereon, is the
second production, as it seems, of Doctor Stillingfleet against Popery. Less
displeasing it is I think to a Reader, and nothing so tiresome, as some other
Books which have issued forth on that Side against the ways of Catholic
Religion. For there is some Truth in his Citations, a seasoning of Salt and
comical Wittiness sprinkled all over; and no such thick gross venom of
maliciousness, wherewith other Books of that kind are over^harged, appearing,
though much of it lie ^id, throughout his Book. Indeed he per^erts all things
by his various subtilty: But that is no more, but what his own same and
interest, here principally aimed at, would re^uire. And we must give him leave
to de^ide also, and play and sport himself in his Book, as a Leviathan in his
own waters. It ^s his pastime and pleasure, and a sweetness qsteemed perhaps
necessary to his life. And who would be so ill-natured as to envy it him?
Besides, it is a pretty piece of Rhetoric, both fit and very efficacious to
create in his Protestant Readers an opinion of his unerring confidence, which
is the one great end of his Labors. And if we be thus kind, he will in
recompense of that our civility, give leave I suppose to Catholics, who see
him so jocund and supinely careless in his errors, thence to conclude the
strange inconsiderate security of the merry man.

But we must know, Sir, that this his elaborate Book against the Church of
Rome, as he speaks, although it be his second, yet is it not intended to be his
last: For, If Cathoicks have any thing to say, quoth he, either against our
Church, or in defense of their own, let them come into the open Field, from
when^^ they have of late so wisely withdrawn themselves finding so little
success in it. Thus he spea^^ in his Preface, threatening (if I understan^^^^
him right) another Knocker, as stout a o^^^ as this can be, if any one dare to
appear against him, or say so much as Boh to a Goo^^ And these words of his,
import I think a Challenge, called commonly a Defiance; which Catholics as
soon as they had read, thought it as much their duty, as it sounded to be the
Doctors desire, to fit their Slings unto their Arms, and meet him. But the
thing proved alas to be but a Copy of the Doctors Countenance, quite differing
from his heart. For the Presses, guarded enough before against Catholics, was
presently within a month after his Book came forth, so stoutly beset, so
frequently invaded, so violently searched night and day, especially by the
industry of one of them, who entering into the Printing-houses, cried out aloud,
And what! have ye here any thing against the Doctor Stillingfleet? hah! that
what before was difficil, and extremely dangerous, was now become impossible.
So that I believe no Catholic in England can do him the favor which the
Doctor thirsts after so earnestly in his Lips. He challenged the Papists for
his Credit, and stopped up their way for his Security: He would first make the
world believe they cannot answer him, and then provides that they shall not.
This seems to be his mind.

And yet I think, Sir, there be few Protestant Gentlemen in England who desire
not as earnestly as any Catholic, to see some Reply to his Book: So little do
they think themselves concerned in a Scroll which neither defends their
Religion, nor hurts or touches ours; wherein nothing is said, but what might as
well be spoken by a Mohammedan, Jew, or Pagan; and the most part of that which
is put to disable Catholic Religion, diminishes Christianity it self. Some of
them offered themselves to print a Reply for us: But they offered but words.
For they found that the Bishop durst not give a License to any of our Catholic
Books, only so far as to secure the Printer from danger; although the Doctor
be a Foe to their Rank and Order, and Catholic Religion a Friend. This is,
truly Sir, a very sad case, that they can freely give one a License to defame
men, and yet dare not give others a License to clear themselves. Doctor Cousins
when he was in Paris, spoke up and down so freely against Catholic Religion,
that their Clergy hearing of it, came to him, and told him plainly, That if he
had ought to say against their Religion, they would both get him a License from
the Bishop to print his Book* and themselves pay the whole charges, and then
answer him when they had done, for his satisfaction. But we poor Creatures can
obtaint no favor in our own Country, no leave to speak or justify our
selves, no License to print a Book for our defense, when we are both
scurrilously libelled, and falsely slandered, and imperiously challenged to
answer: Nor is there any open field for our poor men to come forth into, that I
know of, but Tybourn; and that is perhaps the Doctors meaning. It does mightily
amaze our Catholics all over the Land, to have their ears thus beaten with
slanders, which are both of a high nature, and still notoriously false, year by
year, without any end; thereby to make us odious to our Neighbors, and them to
God. Our blessed Lord have pity on us; and either open, if it may be thy will,
our Magistrates hearts toward us, or stop the Ministers mouths against us;
that our good Name and Peace may return unto thy great Glory. We are, if we be
silent, proclaimed guilty; and if we speak, insolent. What can we do, Sir,
here, but still commend our selves unto our heavenly Lord, who miraculously
preserves us. We do either subsist after this life, or not. Our Protestant
Contrymen must needs believe one of these two things: Either some Religion
is true, or it is all a fiction. If it be all a fiction, and there is no life
to come, then are they as guilty as we; nay something more; for they have taken
away our Churches from us, for themselves to dissemble in. If there be a life
to come, and this everlasting, then can there certainly be nothing of greater
importance in this world, than to know, when many ways are pretended to it,
which of them is the most authentic and truest, wherein we may be both happy
and safe for ever. Why then are we, who are the first, not permitted to speak,
while all others are permitted to blaspheme us? If we prove to go amiss, the
danger is our own: and if we be in the right, it cannot be any danger unto them
to know it. All the positive things of Religion which any of them do keep, they
have them all from us, we borrow nothing from them. And the negative points
which separate them from us, seem to us as false and impious, as they can
possibly appear true to them. They have as many Articles to believe as we,
only some of them which made the separation are affirmative to us, and
negative to them: And one Affirmers word is to be taken in Judgment before ten
Deniers. And yet will they neither read our Books, nor suffer us to print any,
when we are falsified, and mis-interpreted, and challenged and obliged to do
it, for fear I think our Religion should prove true. All rejoice when a Book is
written against Popery: but no man seeks to be informed. They will have it by
all means to be esteemed false, be it in it self what it will or can be. And in
that strange prejudice men venture to die, only for the pleasure of a Minister
and his Wife and Children, who must needs have it so.

The occasion of this his present book, entitled, A Discourse concerning the
Idolatry, etc. was, it seems, a question or two propunded unto Mr.
Stillingfleet, by I know not what Gentlewoman, who having heard the Doctor say,
That Protestants if they turned Roman Catholics, would lose their Salvation;
told him, That if Protestants say so, then are they full as uncharitable as
Papists themselves, who aver the like of Protestants: She therefore consults
some Catholic Gentleman in the business; I do not know whom neither. But he,
it seems, put into her hand two questions, to show to Doctor Still. in her next
encounter. First was, Whether the same motives which secured one born and bred
in the Catholic Church to continue in it, might not also serve to secure a
Protestant, who convinced by those motives should embrace it. The second was,
Whether it suffice to be a Christian in genere, or it be also necessary to
adjoyn to some Church of Christians in particular? These be the two questions.

The second of these two questions the Doctor resolves affirmatively; I affirm,
says he, that a Christian by virtue of his being so, is bound to join to the
Communion of some Church or Congregation in particular. Thus he resolves it,
and speaks not a word more of that business. Yet here we may take notice that
the said Resolution of his, is quite contrary both to a book of his called
Irenicon, written in the times of our late Anarchy, and also to his first work
written more lately against Popery. For all the whole scope of both these
books, is to show that a Christian by virtue of his being so, is not bound to
join in the Communion of any one Church in particular, or any Organical Body,
as he calls it. And that because every such body, either that is or has been in
the world, is liable to error, falsehood, and corruptions. And what necessity
indeed can there be in me to join in any Communion, which may go astray and
mislead me, since I cannot do worse if I remain free and all alone, and may
perhaps do better? But these contradictions are small matters. So long as the
Doctor opposes the Catholic Church, out of which they are all fallen, he is a
Protestant good enough, whatever he hold in particular, either contrary to
himself or any others.

The first question, which is the occasion and subject of this his present
book: he resolves negatively; averring, that the same motives which might
secure one born and bred in the Catholic Church to continue in it, cannot
secure a Protestant, convinced by them to embrace it. And this his Assertion he
discourses at large, and confirms by various Syllogismes; because invincible
hinderance may perhaps excuse the one, but not the other; because the
Protestant is safe in his own Church, and therefore has no necessity to leave
it: because there is imminent danger in the Roman Church; where there is so
much Idolatry, so many hindrances of good life and devotion, so much
divisions; so much uncertainty of faith in it. Unto these resolutions and
argumentations of his, the Catholic Proposer adjoined presently his own reply,
a very rational me thinks and good one. Hereupon the Doctor wrote and set forth
this his present book, called A Discourse against the Idolatry, etc. both to
enlarge his own arguments, and to disable the Catholic Gentleman's Reply. And
this was the occasion, purpose, and subject of the book you put in my hand to
peruse, and write to you the substance of it with some few brief thoughts of my
own upon it,

Indeed the whole book is a kind of Academick Act or Commencement: such a one
as we have once a year in our famous Oxford and Cambridge, written and printed
for peoples delight and pastime; and if so it please the Stars, for his own
honor and preferment by our Doctor. And it came forth very seasonably about a
fortnight before the Oxford; Act, to save the wits living here abouts, the
great charges and some kind of pains of a Journey thither, being now furnished
well enough aforehand with as subtle and good an Act, as that may happily be, at
our own Doors, and which may please the women somewhat better, in our mother
tongue.

The conclusions defended in this Holborn Act are these three. 1. Popery is
idolatrous. And this is accomplished in two of his positions which he calls
Chapters. 2. Popery is a hinderance to a good life and devotion. And this is
dispatched at one other breathing, named his third Chapter. 3. Popery is
divided and disunited in it self.
And this pust out in his fifth Chapter, which concludes his book, And in midst
of this great Act, rises up a prevaricating Tripos, to refresh our
wearisomeness, and make a little sport. And he takes up the whole Scene of his
fourth Chapter. And his Theme is, Fanatiscime: the Church of Romes
Fanatiscisme; or the Fanaticism of the Roman Church. And upon my word, it has
made many people merry, not the softer sex only, but the rougher and more
serious mankind. And all do so clap and commend the man, that one may well
believe he has received his reward; Idolatry, ill life and divisions of the
Roman Church, which are his three less wild conclusions, we have in part
already heard of; even as we have heard talk of Europe, Asia and Africa. But
Fanaticisme, his merriment is, I think, the proper and peculair discovery of
Dr. Stillingfleet himself: And he may deserve either to give or take a surname
from it; as Scipio Africanus took from Africa, and Vesputius Americus gave to
America his new found Land. What is it, that wit and industry cannot bring to
light, if they be jointly bent both of them upon the search? And a new
discovery especially of a rich pleasant Country full of curiosities is so
pleasant to the Discoverer himself, so naturally pleasant that I cannot but
think that Doctor Stillingfleet, at his invention of Fanaticisme, wherewith he
hoped to make many others merry, laughed heartily himself.

He begins his Book with the Roman Idolatry: and he does wisely in it. For
Idolatry is such a terrible thundering charge; that in all Readers judgments
that Church is half condemned already, which has that crime so much as laid
upon it. Men therefore choose rather to be accounted Atheists than Idolaters.
For the first argues wit, the other stupidity. Nor will one man of a hundred
trouble himself to read over a book written on any purpose of clearing from
that enormous crime either himself or religion professed by the Author of it.
Be the imputation never so false, yet is it still a blasting imputation; which
kills and overthrows, not so much by proving as by naming it. He must needs be
impious who is an Idolater; and he must be an Idolater who is called so. Be it
never so unjust, it is still a witty trick to cry out against him as an
Idolater, whose honor and livelihood we would here in England undermine. Sad
experience has proved this to be true too too often. And the Great God of
Heavens anger lies I fear heavily upon us for it. This thus far. Now forward,

IMAGE-IDOLATRY.
The Church of Rome worships God by Images, and is therefore guilty of Idolatry
by giving to the Creature the worship due only to the Creator. For God having
forbidden any such sort of worshipping him by his own law and commandments given
by Moses, wherein he forbids his people to make any kind of image, pesel
themunah, eikon glypton, sculptile, any thing represented either by carving
tool or pensil, ca^^ not own that worship, nor can any such worsh^^ terminate
upon God. And the reason of th^^ law of Moses is unchangeable, which is th^^
God's infinite and incomprehensible Deity cann^^ be represented. For which
reason the wisest (...) Heathen both particular men and Natio^^ judged all such
representations of the invisi^^ Godhead to be incongruous and unbecoming his
glory; And if this were inconsistent with Gods nature and will in the old Law
much more in the new, where we are taught to worship God in spirit and truth,
and to have no low unworthy thought of God. It might therefore seem more
rational to worship God in the Sun and Moon which have more of God in them, and
to say our prayers to the Sun and Moon then to any image or shadow; the same
argument which excuses the one will justify the other much more. For this
reason St. Paul teaches that the Godhead is not like to gold or silver or
stone, and blames those who change the glory of the incorruptible God into the
image of corruptible man. And the Heathens in doing this did ill: although the
wiser sort among them testify that they did not hold their statues to be Gods,
but that they worshipped God in them. And yet some ancient Fathers disputed
notwithstanding against that heathen practice and counted it idolatry.
Wherefore Germanus Patriark of Constantinople says expressly that Christians
make no representation of the invisible Deity; and Damascene that it is madness
to go about it. Wherefore the Synod of Constantinople and that of Frankford
pleaded hard against the making of any images amongst Christians however the
second Council of Nice vainly went about to defend them as innocent and useful
helps. Finally, Moses himself explicates by his deeds the meaning of his own
Law when he was so highly displeased with Aaron for the golden Calf he had made
the people in his absence. And yet Aaron did not make it to bring the people
into heathen idolatry, but to give them only a Symbol of the Angel who was to
go before the people: As also the two calves set up by Jeroboam in Dan and
Bethel were set up only to keep the people from going up to Jerusalem, and not
to bring them to the idolatry of heathens. And therefore Primitive Christians
never used any images, as the learned of the Church of Rome acknowledge.

1. This is the sum of the Doctors Discourse in this his first Chapter. And he
cannot but expect his Reader should have a mighty conceit of either his most
high or most deep Divinity, who has converst so much with the learned fort of
the Church of Rome, the graver sort of Philosophers, and wiser sort of
Heathens. Nothing does he here deliver, that was so much as thought of by the
common sort, the vulgar sort, the ordinary sort of Mankind. And O what pleasure
and content of heart will it be unto him, if he could meet with an adversary of
his learned sort too, who viewing his airy subtilties should oppose him
seriously, as if he were serious himself; and then distinguish as if he were
dealing with some solid Divine; and then ply him with proofs and testimonies,
refell him by shorter enthymems and longer syllogismes; subtly search in what
Mood and figure he speaks; and then tell him how his consequence flaggs, or
antecedent is ambiguous, till he have learendly consumed a hundred pages in
refutation of a trifle. Then surely will the Doctor be judged by all parties to
be as he would be thought to be, an able man.

2. The Catholic Chruch uses indeed both in their public and private
oratories, some pious representations of our holy Lord, either in his passion,
or birth, resurrection, or ascension, or miraculous working of some divine
miracle: And these holy figures of his are accompanied commonly with some
others of his blessed Virgin Mother, the renowned Apostles, valorous Martyrs,
holy Confessors, chaste Virgins, or other happy followers of our Lord, who
through many tribulations and a constant exercise of Christian virtues have
passed hence to a blessed life. All which do mightily avail, unto our
retiredness and recollection; when we enter into the house of prayer, a holy
place separated and sanctified for Gods service, from our own houses or the
streets. And the respect or esteem we have for such figures, is nothing but
what we bear either unto the sacred histories recorded of the same persons or
to those good rules of life and promises of Gospel, which those Worthies have
embraced, for the encouragement and imitation of us, who are now struggling in
that wicked world, which they overcame before us. For example, as we reverence
the history of Christ's incarnation, sounding in our ear; so do we look upon the
figure of it represented to our eye: As we love the story of St. Mary Magdalens
conversion; so do we like her picture. As we honor St. Paul's life and
martyrdom; so do we respect his image. And St. Lawrences most cruel passion
upon the hot burning Gridiron, when it is represented to us in a picture, we
are in the self same manner affected toward it, as we are to the invincible
virtue and patience there shown for the Love and honor of Jesus our Lord,
whose steps he followed. So that, what authentic history records to us in
words, of the virtue and valor of any of our Christian Ancestors; or what holy
Gospel tells us, of the glory and crown to be rendered unto the good works of
sobriety, charity, chastity, purity, patience, and the like: the same is
without words painted unto us by these compendious hieroglyphics, serving more
speedily then words can do, to fasten us unto a strict recollection in our
prayers by one short glance about us; and to a fea^ and awfulness of Gods
presence in that place where we are met together for his Service, accompanied
with the figures of so many of our pious Ancestors who are gone to Heaven
before us; and also to a dissipation of any worldly thoughts, that may, as they
are apt enough to do, at that time come along with us there unto our
hinderance. All this benefit we have by our Pictures, when we have happily no
book to look upon, or know not by our ignorance to read, or cannot by darkness
or other lettance attend unto that labor. And this is all the whole business
of Images, as to Religion. In the Road of Philosophy trodden by School-Divines,
where thousands of conclusions over and above faith are advanced and opposed by
one another unto the sharpning of their wits, many things are said about every
thing, as the creation, resurrection, and the like, which faith in the same
things is silent of; Nor are we in our defense of faith concerned at all in
them. And it may be essily discerned by our Catholic practice. what use we
make of our Images, when of a hundred people entering into a Church, not one of
them ever casts his eye wistly upon them, but contented with a general glance,
compose themselves presently unto their prayers and meditations they keep
silently in spirit toward God. And when our pictures are so sullied and
spoiled, that they will no more serve our use, we put them into the fire, as we
would do also a page of sacred Scriptures utterly obliterated and fouled.

. 3. Indeed all the whole business of the use of Images at all, is but a matter
of discipline and government, for the help of people in the great work of
recollection and prayer; as is the use of Churches, and the music used in
them, with the harp, viol, and other instruments, the use of beads and
prayer-books. All which our Religion could spare, and yet be not at all
impaired, as to any its essential or substantial parts. Nay there
inconveniences in any one of these things. Nor do I know any good thing in this
world without some inconvenience or other. It is enough for us that the
conveniences and benefits of any good we have or use, are more and greater than
the inconveniences be. Many worthy Prelates in Christianity have at times
excepted very strongly against Organs, as some hindrance of the great work of
spiritual contemplation which Christian people meet to, practice together in
their holy assemblies, the great paramount work of Christianity, especially at
Mass. But these men, although moved unto that their exception by a Zeal not
evil, yet were they fain to yield at last unto the prevailing reasons of other
Prelates which overbore their lesser ones. Some other of our Catholic Doctors
and Prelates would have had us to have used no pictures; that Jews and Pagans
might not catch at that pretense to cavil against our Christianity as they did.
But all these submitted at last, unto the prevailing part; by whom they were
made to understand that the inconveniences they urged were but imaginary and
small, the conveniences great and real. There have been not a few who have
excepted against much vocal prayer; because it took up too much of the time
which would be better employed in the more principal work of prayer in spirit.
But yet could they not carry it, although their reasons were very plausible aad
good; because that high and Angelical prayer in spirit, agreed not equally to
all men, or to any one consisting of flesh and blood equally at all times and
places, as vocal prayer does. Some have disliked even our material Temples,
built up so sumptuously as they are; because God immense and incomprehensible,
dwells not in buildings made by man's hands; Heaven is his Seat, and Earth his
Footstool; Yet could they not obtain, that our Churches should be therefore
pulled down, or not built up. Prayer-books were nothing at all in use amongst
Christians in primitive times; when they prayed almost altogether in spirit,
and used no other vocal prayer but that our Lord taught us. And yet this
hinders us not, either to make such books or use them in following times.
Instead of our beads in wood or metal, they used in ancient times a bag of
little stones, by the emptying whereof they knew that they had said over our
Lords prayer a hundred or perhaps three hundred times, according as any one in
his devotion had prefixed to himself every day of his life to do for Gods glory
and service. And there might be inconveniences pretended against our present
beads, especially those of gold and pearl. But they will not be thrown away for
that. Our Church-musick has been more than once opposed, and that by Prelates
most holy and renowned men, who deemed it an unsufferable lettance to the
spiritual recollection which Christians ought above all things to attend unto,
that they may have our Lords good Spirit, and his holy operations in them,
especially when they meet together at their holy Synaxis. But Church-musick is
kept up to this day, notwithstanding their reason against it, which is very
good, for other reasons no. less good and great than it; specified and urged by
the far greater number of pious Prelates for it. And yet if all or the greater
part of Catholic Prelates meeting together should take away all these outward
helps from us, beads and books, singing and Church-musick, pictures, and
Churches, and all, finding the inconveniences to be now greater than they have
been, and weightier than any convenience we have by them: though the thing
would seem very strange to us, yet ought we I think to obey them resignedly,
and attend wholly unto our spiritual mediations, either alone, or in our
Eucharistian meetings, and to the other good works commanded or counseled us
in Gospel in expectation of our future bliss and eternal happiness in God,
which can never be taken from us: though all things of discipline or helps in
government be alterable.

4. And now it is time to turn back and view the subject of this Chapter; that
we may see if any one period in it be true and pertinent. He tells us first,
that Papists worship God by Images, which logically is not true; Then that a
representation of the invisible Deity cannot be made; which is impertinent;
Then that the worship given to God by an image does not terminate upon God:
which is neither pertinent nor true. And so he proceeds on to the very end of
his Chapter, with sounds either empty or false, or both; neither heeding or
caring what he says, so he do but mention learned papists, and wiser heathens,
which may help to butterress up his reputation. I cannot but remember here, the
shadow or Ghost in Virgil which Juno made of Aeneas, to draw her beloved Turnus
out of the field; It seemed to fight and threaten, and press on and give back.
But nothing at all was done really.

Tum dea nube cava tenuem sine viribus umbram.
In faciem Aeneae, visu mirabile monstrum,
Dardaniis ornat telis, clypeumque jubasque
Divini assimilat capitis, dat inania verba.
Dat sine mente sonum gressusque effingit euntis
Morte obita quales fama est volitare figuras
Aut quae sopitos deludunt somnia sensus.
Ac primas laeta ante acies exultat imago
Irritatque virum telis ac voce lacessit.
And such a shadow of controversy is all this present Chapter, and his whole
book also: a foming face and feeble force: big but empty words: rumbling and
yet insignificant sounds: quick profers, and no progress: a daring shadow or
armed Ghost, without either body or bones. And yet such a thing as defies the
whole Catholic Church; steps out from the rest of his Camp and defies them all
alone defies them both in letters syllables and words* And this is all. For he
touches no body. Because Catholics by the advice and allowance of their
Prelates do keep amongst them the representation of the divine Founder of their
Religion, who appeared amongst us by his unspeakable Love in form of a Man; and
of some of his holy followers in the way he chalked out for us; therefore he
talks of Moloch and Milcom, Osiris and Isis, Chemosh and Astaroth, Baal Peor
and Rimmon, golden Bulls and Remphan, the calves of Dan and Bethel. And what is
all this for? Wy to overrun Papists, and beat us down; How can it do that?
These idols were set up by heathens in opposition to the true God, and in the
very place of God, as darkness in the night time is in the place of light. This
is true, what then? and therefore I must not forsooth keep the figure of Jesus
Christ or of St. Paul or other domestic of my own religion for my own
encouragement therein. What likeness, what consequence is there in all this?
Which is Remphan and where is Moloch? Which is the Calf and where is the Bull?
Nay and here it is worth our observing too, that Protestant Gentlemen and
Ladies of England, Ministers and Bishops too, have all pictures in their
Chambers as well as Catholics; even those of our holy Apostles and Martyrs as
well as others. And there they are good and lawful figures; but in our Chambers
they are Bulls of Basan, and Calves of Bethel among us. Catholic pictures are
against Moses his Law; but theirs are not so; Although they be representations
both in Heaven above and Earth below, and Waters under earth, expressy by the
same Law forbidden; for example Moon and Stars, Dogs and Cats, Whales and
Dolphins. The picture of Martin Luther in their Chamber is the lawful effigies
of a man. But Saint Stephen in our Closet is a Calf. Can any man who talks at
this rate, be thought to be one that has conversed either with the learned sort
of Papists or the wiser sort of Heathens: or one rather that had never any
conversation at all either with reason or men. O but Catholics worship God by
their images, which Protestants do not. I marry, this is a huge fault indeed,
that Catholics take thereby occasion to think of God and his manifold mercies,
and bless his name, and trust in him. For they no other way worship God by
Images: This is the mortal sin which Catholics commit. And if that illogical
speech of the Doctor, Catholics worship God by Images, be drawn into any kind
of sense, it can be no other than th^s, that Catholics take occasion by the
pious faces of their Martyrs to think of Gods manifold graces and mercies
toward them, and thereupon trust in him afresh, and bless his name: which
great error the Doctor, it seems, does carefully avoid. The ancient dev^ut
Christians thought of God and worshipped him by any thing, any good thing they
enjoyed; the verdant fields and sweet flowers, comfortable air, and pleasing
light, mountains, valleys and liquid streams; Plumbs, Pears, Apples, and
cheerful Grapes; by the virtue, charity and devotion of men, the ministry of
Angels, etc. But now we must take heed of that. We may taste a Plumb or a
Cherry, we may eat a venison Pasty and drink good wine if we can get it; nay we
may have fine pictures in our Chambers, even the picture of Jesus Christ
crucified, or any of his followers: we may have all this, if we be such good
Protestants as Mr. Stillingfleet, and never think of God, or worship God by it.
But if we worship God by it, if we think of God by it, then it is all poison to
us. All is suddenly turned to Moloch, to Remphan, to Baal Peor, to Ashtaroth,
to Aarons golden Steer and the Calves of Bethel. If we do but eat a custard
thinking of God, or worshipping God by it, presently it becomes a Remphan or
Chiun, the idol of the Arabians. Walking upon Hamstead-hill, as people use
innocently enough to do, if casting our eyes about the prospect we think of G^d
by it, as Catholics are wont, the hill before innocent is now become a Baal
Peor the idol of the Moabites. A Citizen walking to the Tower, may look
harmlesly enough upon the Crown and royal. Robes there. But he must take heed
then, that he fall not into a meditation of Heaven, or the glory of its great
King, to worship him in his heart by it. For then it becomes to him an
Adramelech, the idol of Sepharvaim. And he must beware of the like abuse when
he sees the Chamber and Table where his Majesty sits in Council with his Peers,
lest it become a Moloch to him, the idol of the Moabites. The very Flags and
Banners often seen in London-streets, make some simple soul to think of
Jerusalem above, the peace and happy company there, and the God of all: but
then O how suddenly is the Streamer metamorphosed and turned into Nesroch, the
idol of Senacherib. Some are so bold, when they either see or hear of any
corrupted by the French Pox and lechery, to thank God who has preserved them,
and worship God by it. And thereby sin no less grievously than Maacham the
Mo^her of Asa King of Judah in worshipping her idol Priap or Nimphleseth. A
gentleman called upon God not in words only, but very heartily, when a
troublesome Fly got into his Eye, and much afflicted him: but he little thought
that by that piety of his he had sinned as deeply as they that worship
Baalzebu^ the idol of Acaron. Nothing is more ordinary with Country Gentlemen,
when walking abroad they behold a goodly fair flock of sheep in pasture of
their own, than to thank God and worship God by it; but little do they think
good men, they are guilty of Idolatry thereby, as much guilty as they that
worshipped Ashtaroth, the idol of the Philistines. Nay a very cow or calf in the
meadows, if we take occasion by it to thank God for his benefits, or to worship
God by it, is the same thing then, as Aarons Moulten heifer or Jeroboams calves
set up in Dan and Bethel. And as it is for substance, so for the figures of
things. St. Paul's picture so long as we do not think of God by it, is a lawful
picture. But if we come once to think of God, to worship God by it, O then that
is a Calf too, Aarons Calf, one of Jeroboams Calves, etc. This thinking of God,
this worshipping of God by any thing, this is the pestilential blast, that
spoils all. It turns sweet into bitter, lawful into unlawful, things innocent
into sin, and good things to death. The representation of our blessed Lord
crucified for us, so long as we think not of him may pass for a good innocent
or at least indifferent thing; but if we once think seriously of him, if we
worship God by it, then, O Mr. Stillingfleet, what is it then? And yet answer
me not. For I will not have those blasphemous words here repeated. Speak them
to a Jew in order to Jesus Christ and he will embrace and love you. But a
Christian cannot endure to hear them.

5. Papists says he worship God by images, and so are guilty of idolatry,
Catholics may hear this, but can never understand what he means. They are
never taught in any of their Catechisms to worship God by Images. None of their
spiritual books wherein all religious Duties are importunately urged and
pressed upon them ever mention it: and their practice does not infer it. For if
it did, they would easiliest understand it who best know what themselves do.
They are taught, and do in their practice endeavor to worship God in their
heart and soul; and ardent affections streaming forth thence toward him. They
worship him with bended knees, lips and voice, hearts and eyes l^fted up unto
him. They worship him with the assistance of Gods good Spirit, the Priests
Sacrifice, and help of mutual prayers. They worship him by mortifying their
sensuality and carnal appetites, by giving alms and relieving the poor and
needy for his Love, by observing his Laws and Counsels, by resigning to his
good will and pleasure in all things, especially in time of afflicting
persecutions, when they suffer all manner of reproach, lies and calumnies, loss
of goods and sometimes life it self for his name sake patiently. They worship
him in Closets, in Church Assemblies, in the fields, as they are walling, on
Land or Sea, where they have opportunity to do it. Thus does their religion
teach them to worship God, as with the right causes and instruments; as by the
true effects and operations; as in the times and places seasonable for worship
and devotion. But how they should worship God by images, or (as he speaks
oftener in the context of his discourse) in images; this they do not easily
understand. When he lays any thing to Catholics charge, he ought to speak I
should think as Catholics do, and then he will be understood by them. It is
not to be conceived how any one can worship God by images, and in images, but
either for the real presence there; or ideal imitation; or some sort of
occasion of worship arising thence. And so God must be worshipped by them and
in them, either presentially, ideally, or occasionally. And it cannot be
presentially. For so God is no otherwise present in a picture than in the wall
it hangs upon: nor yet ideally; for the picture for example of St. Mary
Magdalen or St. Paul, is no idea of that invisible and glorious Godhead; nor
yet is any other, as the Crucifix for example or Christ our Lord in his Birth
or Resurrection; for all these figures are representations of his humanity, and
no idea's of his Deity at all. And Mr. Stillingfleet must needs mean one of
these two ways. For otherwise he could not charge them with idolatry for it.
And therefore I say that his charge is false and slanderous. But if he mean
that they worship God by images and in their images, occasionally; which is a
moral interpretation and the only true one: Then is such a work so far from
Idolatry, that it is a sublime piety. For what can they better do, then to give
God thanks for so great graces, mercies, helps, and comforts bestowed in Jesus
our Lord upon his Apostles. Martyrs, Confessors, and Virgins, when they look
upon their figures and pictures either in their contemplations, or patience of
Martyrdom, or conversion of the world, subduing and bringing flesh, Satan and
the world under their feet: especially if Catholics conceive thereby some
pious resolution, as well they may, of doing something the more and patiently
suffering for God, in imitation of those pious Heroes our Predecessors in
religion, and yet naturally but flesh and blood as we our selves are. I say all
this is signal piety, and our Christian duty. And according to, this moral
meaning Catholics if they do worship God by their im^ges and in their images;
do well and like good Christians. But the Doctor will not charge them I suppose
with a matter of so much truth and great piety as this is, although his words
cannot make out any other sense that is true, but only this moral one. And the
more logical sense of worshipping God by images and in images; ideally or
presentially is false. Let him even take which sense he pleases, either what
justifies Catholics or what salsifies his own assertion; It is all one to me,
whether we stand, or he fall.

6. He adds, that the worship of God by images does not terminate upon God;
because God has forbid it and so gives Gods honor to the Creature. This is
strange gibberish. An act that tends to nothing is no act. If it be some act,
it tends and has already tended to something; and it terminates upon that thing
unto which it tends, and whose act it is denominated. This is clear enough even
to a young sophomore, or one who indeed never yet came into the air of
Philosophy, if he do but understand the terms and words here used. For example
I cannot see a man in the street, except my vision terminate upon him; nor can
my vision terminate upon him, but I must see him. And it is all one whether I
see him close by me, or by my window or in a looking glass at home. For I
cannot see him any way but my sight must terminate upon him, and if it do not,
I see him not. And this course of nature is not hindered, not yet altered at
all, because that person may happily have forbidden me to look upon him either
this way or that. For our acts or actions are accomplished within our selves,
independently of any acceptance or disacceptance of them. Acceptance or
disacceptance, commanding or forbidding is another thing, extrinsecal and quite
differing from the substance of the act or action. For they specify only,
either the motive or event which may make the act either good or evil, either
grateful or displeasing, but not make it an act or no act, or not to tend where
it has tended. And so must my act of worshipping God by images, terminate upon
God, or else it is no act of worshipping God by them; however God may have
either commanded or forbid it. God has forbidden blasphemy; and yet the act
terminates upon him, otherwise it could not be a sin against him. And if Gods
worship by images do not terminate on God, whither on Gods name does it tend;
and how is God worshipped by them? This he does not tell us here, unless he
insinuate it is those following words of his, but gives the honor due to God
unto the Creature. But how can that be? If God should have forbid us by his law
to see a star through a tube; should we not therefore see it but the tube only,
or should not our sight then be terminated upon the Sar. So it seems by this
Doctors philosophy, who has conversed with the learneder sort of Papists, and
the wiser sort of heathens, but very little with himself. Holy fathers and
Doctors have often said, that the honor of an Image redounds to the Prototype:
but never thought or said, that the honor of the Prototype redounds to the
image, as it is here affirmed against both art and experience. But let us hear
him proceed in his discourse. He will surely let fall some sense or truth ere
long.

7. Gods infinite and incomprehensible Deity says he, cannot be represented. O
here it is. This is very true. What a comfortable thing it is to meet with a
draught of truth sometimes, when a man is dry and thirsts after it. But to what
purpose is this spoken here? Catholics have no representations of that
invisible Deity, nor none they look after. Figures they have of our Lord
Christ. born as man amongst us, and made flesh, and crucified, and ascending
into Heaven. Figures also of his holy followers and Martyrs: but
representations of the invisible Deity they never yet saw nor heard nor thought
of. On then. The wisest of heathens judged any such representations of the
Divine nature incongruous and unbecoming his glory. Indeed they were wise
heathens, and their judgment very right and good. Nor did I ever hear of any
Christian wise or unwise any otherwise minded. O how would this Doctor prevail,
if this wise Discourse of his, were as pertinent as it is true. But he trusts
and hopes well, that his good fate will so accompany his reader. that he shall
not doubt at all that every word that is true in his book is also to some
purpose. And to some purpose indeed it is: namely to have it thought, that he
is victorious in his maine design: although indeed and truth it belong nothing
at all to it. But let me not stop his carreere. If any such figure of the Deity
were inconsistent in the old Law, much more in the new where we are commanded
to worship God in spirit and truth. O uncontrouleable consequence, arising from
remisses most true. No man can or dare deny a^l this. Me thinks I love him here
for his reason, and cannot but grieve it should be all spilt in vain; so pure
it is and precious. A little more of this, while he is in a good mood. It seems
more rational to worship God in the Sun and Moon which have more of God in them
then a picture has, and to say our prayers to the Sun and Moon then to any
Image. Seems so Sir? It is certainly more rational: what should we doubt of?
And what a pity is it, there should be none to be found, who worship God in a
picture either ideally or presentially none who say their prayers to a picture
that this great blow of his might not beat the air to the indangering of his
elbows. Saint Paul testifies that the Godhead is not like either to gold or
silver or stone. Good St. Paul always said well; and his testimony is good at
all times; and especially now, when it hits so pat with the wiser heathens.
There be many Churches now in England which have since our reformation, the
Tetragram name of God written upon the walls within side in golden letters.
Unto those men who did this, it would not seem altogether impertinent, to tell
them, that the Godhead is not like to gold, silver or stone. But to such as use
only the effigies of our Lord according to his humanity, and his holy Apostles
and Martyrs, what a pity it is it should be impertinent and wholly lost. Let
him speak on some more of his truths. Germanus Patriark of Constantinople says
expressly that Christians make no representation of the invisible Deity: and St.
Damascene affirms it madness to go about it. Marry, God have mercy o'their
souls for this their express saying. Catholics would desire no better a
testimony for themselves if they wanted any, then this of those two great
Catholic Doctors; that no such representation they have, and none they go
about to have. O but he hopes, that all this being true will make strongly
against the Church of Rome. And will it so? I have heard say, there be a
thousand Churches in Rome, which are all Churches of Rome equally. Which of
them all are concerned in this talk, that their walls may confute him? But he
means Catholic people perhaps, oh, O, then all is well, they are safe enough
and unhurt by all this, which is but their own doctrine, and faith. At least he
has by these fair shreds of truth farced up a dozen pages in his book; And he
hopes that his protestant reader will believe it all to be most pertinent and
apposite discourse against papishes, though it be nothing less. And if they do
so think, he has his end, a happy man no doubt.

8. Moses forbad says he, the making of any graven thing, and the word which
Moses uses in that his law for a graven thing is general and signifies not an
idol only as papists say, but any picture, likeness, image or representation,
as Moses himself speaks, either in heaven above or in earth below or waters
under the earth, pesel, themurah, eikon glypton, sculptile, any kind of thing
that may be expressed either with the pencil or graving tool. Believe me Sir if
this be true it will undo all our Painters, who come flocking hither into
England as the only thriving place for them out of Holland, Germany, France and
Italy too; and here fill the Land with pesels, themunahs, eikons, glyptons,
sculptile's, and any things they can express with their pencils for our
delight; Dolphins, whales, and other fish of the sea; birds of the Air,
beasts, flowers, woods gallant men and fair women, all that ever Moses forbad
to be expressed. Nay I have seen my self in a protestant Church Moses himself
painted on the walls with glittering horns on his head and a pair of law
tables in his hand. But it may be Law makers do exemp themselves: at least some
Protestants may interpret as they seem to do, that Moses forbad to make the
figure of Jesus Christ but not his own. No man in England scruples to have any
of these eikons, no not the Doctor himself, notwithstanding this law of Moses
so expressly contrary to them all; no man doubts to set any painter or graver on
work. And yet must still this law be cast in the teeth of Catholics as
transgressors of it. For Gods sake why is St. Mary Magdalen in her penitential
weeds upon her knees, with beads in her hand, and eyes all blubbered and swollen
with tears, more against the law of Moses; than one of our delicate Paragons of
beauty, in her shining dress, lips of coral and sparkling eyes. O but
Catholics worship them. Sir this word in the sense and meaning of protestants
is as great a falsehood as was ever uttered by man. For Catholics neither have
nor can have any other relative esteem of any picture, than what they have to
the penitential works they represent, or to the worth and piety of the persons.
And an absolute esteem of the picture, this is measured out only by the
Materials, and artifice of the painter; according to which one picture shall be
worth five hundred pounds, and another representing the same thing, not worth
five shillings. And can we believe that our protestant young Gentlemen have no
veneration at all to our beauties set thus in their Majesty, nor no kind of
affections rising in their hearts toward them? Yea ten to one more of ill
affections, and, god wot greater, then any good ones we can have to our
crucified Je^us in our way of piety. And the difference indeed is only this,
that our reverence and affection is toward holy persons, and unto an imitation
of their piety, hope, patience, constancy, and charity: Their's to a
concupiscence of flesh and eyes. This and nothing but this if truth may be
spoken, makes them so wrathful and furious against our Catholic pictures.
Satan hates Jesus Christ and therefore inflames them to tear down his memories
and representations: but he loves pride of life; and those portractures must
stand that advance this. He is pleased with that which feeds concupiscence of
eyes: and concupiscence of flesh brings him in the disciples which Jesus Christ
loses.

Moses did forbid Jews who were traveling with him toward Palestine an
idolatrous Nation, to make to themselves, that is to say on their own heads,
without warrant of the Synagogue, or in imitation of the pagan rites, any of
the idolatrous images there and elsewhere to be met withal, or any similitude
at all, least seduced thereby, they leave their own God and religion to cleave
unto false gods and idolatry. This law of Moses and purpose of the law is so
clear, that he must be obstinately blind who sees it not. And what does this
concern our holy Catholic figures of St. Paul for example or Christ crucified,
more than Protestant figures of young Lords and fine Ladies; save that the one
moves us to the love of mortification, prayer, patience, chastity, the other
allures us from it; the one confirms Religion, the other weakens it. Besides
our holy pictures are allowed by the Church, the others forbidden. And this
indeed is the only aim of Moses, when he forbids the people to make to
themselves any graven images whatsoever; to themselves, that is on their own
fancies and upon their own authority: For such only were unlawful, and not
those they were commanded by just authority and allowed to make. See, says God
by Moses, I have called and named Besaleel, and I have filled him with the
spirit of wisdom and understanding and all knowledge of all manner of
workmanship, to devise cunning works to work in gold and silver and brass, and
in cutting of stones and in graving of wood, to work all manner of workmanship.
And I have appointed Aholiab with him; and in the hearts of all the wise I have
put wisdom, that they make all that I have commanded. And by virtue whereof the
said men and others after them wove and graved pomgranets and lilies, and
placed Cherubs upon the Propitiatory, between which graven Cherubims God
himself gave out his Oracles to Moses: as he did also heal the people by the
figure of a Serpent which Moses commanded to be set up. So that here is a vast
difference betwixt figures graven and set up by authority, and those which
people make to themselves. The one is commanded, the other forbidden. Aarons
Calf of gold destroyed the people, but Moses his Serpent of brass healed them.
These things are not now said afresh. They have been told to Ministers over and
again, but they are never the better for it. Indeed they love not to hear of
it, because it spoils their sport.

I add yet withal, over and above what is yet said, that neither that law of
Moses, nor any of his Ten Commandments, nor any other of his precepts either
ceremonial judicial or moral, does any way oblige Christians at all, as it
comes from Moses, who is not our Lawmakers or master, but ruler and leader of
the Jews. Nor do we Christians believe that theft, adultery, homicide or
blasphemy, is a sin because Moses forbad it, but because we have received from
Jesus our own Legislator who justified Moses law and ratified it in all the
said particulars, that so it is. And it is here to be observed that one of the
most solemn laws contained in those two tables, that I mean, which ordains the
seventh day to be kept holy day, unto which Moses adjoyns an irrefragable and
unchangeable reason, namely because God rested that day when he made this
visible world, beginning his work says Moses on the sunday wherein he created
light, and the friday following finishing the whole; even this law of his most
solemn and importunely urged by Moses, is annulled and abrogated amongst all
Christians even from the beginning of Christianity, for want of ratification of
it from our Lord and Master Jesus who is our Lawmakers and Prince. And the same
thing do I say of this his present law about figures, images and
representations of things by sculpture or pencil, which was only of temporal
concernment to the then present Jews against the danger of idols which then
filled the earth, and as mere a ceremonial law as the other, and equally
concerning a ceremony of worship. If our own Prelates whom Christ our Lord
instituted to oversee his flock should for reasons best known to themselves
take from us those little small helps we have by the images of some of our
Ancestors, Martyrs, Apostles, Virgins, Confessors, then would we be without
them, and yet not think our selves to lose one jot of our Religion for that.
But we will not forfeit them for any law made by Moses, except it be
established and ratified by our own lawmakers or his Prelates watching over us
under our Lord unto our good, if Moses should have made any law against them,
which indeed he did not, but only against heathen Idols. And if any one should
endeavor to have our Christian representations to be abolished because he
thinks and believes that Moses forbad them, then is that man say I, bound to
observe all the whole Law of Moses, as it is literally expressed by him, even
to the least apex or iota thereof. For the authority of a Legislator being the
same in all h^s whole law, must oblige equally in all its parts: and the
distinction then between judicial, moral, and ceremonial law, signifies
nothing; seeing that Moses his commands are equally peremptory, and press as
strongly in the one as in the other. This is no imaginary opinion of mine own,
but what reason and the Spirit of God moved St. Paul to aver as stoutly in the
case of circumcision, which is another of Moses Laws, as I do here. I testify
to every man, says he, who is circumcised, that he is bound to keep the whole
law. And this must needs be true, most certainly true: for by observing
circumcision because it was commanded by Moses, he subjects himself to the law
and authority of Moses as his Prince and Legislator; and consequently is bound
to observe him equally in all things which he commands with the same authority
and will to be obeyed, which is no less then all his whole law. And cursed is
every one, says the same Apostle, who is under the law and continues not in
all things which are written in the book of the law to fulfill them. Although
then it should be granted that Moses by his law prohibited all kind of figures
and representations, even those used by Christians, which he did not, yet if
our Lord ratified it not, it does not touch us at all. And that he did not
renew or ratify it, is sufficiently clear to Protestants, because no such law
of his is found among the Evangelists: and unto Catholics no less, because
there is neither Gospel nor Tradition for it. And if all men would separate
themselves from prejudice, which blinds and hardens them in their conceits,
they might easily believe that neither Christ's immediate Disciples nor any
Christians that succeeded them after our Lords departure, would have either
feared or hated the figure of our Lords countenance, if by chance they would
have met with it. But if any one notwithstanding, fully persuaded that Moses
made a law against all sort of images and representations, should upon that
authority of his abolish ours, he is bound also upon the same authority to
sacrifice an Ox, and observe all the whole law in all and every particular,
under the penalty of sin.

Since therefore by the order of God and Moses many graven things were made;
representations and similitudes both in Heaven and Earth notwithstanding the
said law; as the Serpent of brass (which must either be made by melting or
graving) pomegranates, lilies and various suchlike things both graven in stone
and interwoven in silks, Cherubins or Angels in the Propitiatory, even in Moses
time and afterward more fully and plentifully in Solomon's Temple; it is not
rationally to be doubted, but that this law of his was intended only to keep
those people close and constant to their own God and to their own Religion,
which was inconsistent with the idols of the Nations; and not for any purpose
of keeping Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, either out of their chamber hangings or
ours. I know the Jews do urge this Precept of Moses very eagerly against
Christians ever since Jesus Christ our Lord was rejected by them, whose image
and figure they cannot abide to see. But we must have patience with all men.

9. Moses says he, grounded this law of his upon a reason unchangable, namely
that Gods infinite and incomprehensible Deity cannot be represented. O profound
invention! This is such a law and ground of a law, as was never before thought
of. The ground and reason of making a law must be this, an impossibility of
breaking it. They must not make any representations of God, because God cannot
be represented. And the same motive or reason will be equally proper for all
the rest of the Commandments: They must keep the seventh day of the week a holy
day. The reason and motive; because there is not an eighth day to keep holy and
sanctify. They must honor their Parents. The ground and reason of this;
because none of the whole Camp had any Fathers or Mothers alive to dishonor.
They must not kill. The motive and reason is; because they were all shot-free,
and so firmly enchanted that none could hurt them. They must not commit
adultery. The ground and reason is; because there was never a woman in the
camp, which any man though provoked with the highest lust could pessibly come
near or touch with a pair of tongues. They must not steal. The great cause
thereof is, that there is noth^ng at all in the Camp for any man to take away.
Thus the Doctor imagi^es Moses to forbid any representations of God because God
cannot be represented. And such another discreet mounsieur was he who solemnly
commanded his bowyer not to make him any shafts at all of a piggs ta^le: and he
gravel^ gave him the reason for it, because quoth he of a piggs tail no shaft
can be made. Truth is, Moses never thought of any such law, nor any such reason
of it much less; but provided for the security of the Hebrews religion, that it
might remain unchangable and firm in the mids of those many Nations round about
them who worshipped false Gods and idols: as Moses very frequently interprets
himself and all the Prophets after him. Therefore says God by Moses, thou
sh^lt have no other Gods but me, thou shall not make to thy self any figures,
as the Gentills do, nor worship them. For I am a jealous God and will have no
intermingling of devilish idolatry with my service; And all the reason given
by Moses is gods jealousy not enduring any divine worship but his own. This is
the very truth and all the truth of this business, which this Doctor would turn
another way, thereby to make Moses seem as simple a man as himself. And those
idols forbidden by Moses did so involve an opposition to the true God and his
divine worship, that people could not possibly betake themselves to one, but
they must leave the other. Therefore did Moses forbid both other Gods besides
their own one God, and all idols together: which was by ancient Christians very
rationally and wisely reckoned all one and the same commandment: whereof no
less a man, then St. Austin himself is witness. But the memories of Abraham
Isaac and J^cob could bring no such danger with them. And that is our care, for
we are not in danger of loosing the faith of Jesus Christ by keeping the image
of him our crucified Lord among us; or forsaking the communion of Saints, by
retaining their portraictures before our eyes. We should ipso sacto renounce
our Lord and all his whole Religion, should we set up Moses his forbidden i^ols
and make it our religion to worship them as heathens did. But we are heartened
encouraged and confirmed in our Christian Religion by looking on the faces of
so many our glorious Martyrs, holy Anchorets, and Hermits, pious Virgins and
Confessors, who professed this our Religion before us, bravely triumphing by the
power of Christ's love and divine faith, over sins allurements, and deaths
ugliest terrors; though encompassed themselves with the like passions and
infirmities we are our s^lves environed round about. And when we are entered
into a Church amongst so many of our worthy predecessors, we compose our selves
more heartily to our devotion then otherwise we should do, in imitation of
them; remembering now that we are come up to Mount Sion, to the City of our
living God, to celestial Jerusalem, and society of Angels, to the Church of
Primitive Christians conscript in the Heavens. to God the Judge of all, to the
Spirits of just men perfected, to Jesus the mediator of a new Testament, and to
the aspersion of blood speaking better things then Abel.

10. The Heathens, says he did ill in their idol worship, and yet the wiser
sort among them testify that they did not hold them to be Gods but worshipped
God in them. Our acute div^ne having now by his fine wit so clarified Moses
law, that it might not so much concern Idolaters as our vulgar painters; he now
begins so to purify idolaters practice too, that they may seem but in the same
condition with our Catholic and best Christians. And who would not give his
penny to hear him act and speak. The heathens all in general are so excused in
their idolatry, Aaron in his act of apostasy, and Jeroboam in his great sin;
that they are all and each of them no otherwise faulty then the Church of Rome
in his books. Thus does Mr. Stillingfleet convert idolatrous Nations, while he
sits dreaming in his closet. Here he diminishes and there he exaggerates, here
he blacks with his pen and there he whitens; and then he cries out all is one,
all of the same measure, all of the same color. And truly I believe the great
Giant Goliath and little David might thus be made equal, if the Giant were
beheaded and cut off by the knees, on one side; and David on the other s^de,
set upon a high pair of stilts. While Catholics are made to do what they do
not, and heathens not to do what they do, on a supposal that all this is true,
there can be no great difference Let us then hear him what he tells us of
Heathens in general. The wiser sort among them, testify quoth he, that they
worshipped not the idols as gods but worshipped God in them. O very good? Thus
the wiser sort among the heathens say. But first who are these wiser sort? It
behooved him to let us know this. But yet for his own pocket-reasons he does
not. But 2ly what says he himself to it? O that is needless: for his reader
will understand well enough what he ought to think, when such a Doctor as
Stillingfleet tells him what the wiser sort have thought. No body would think
with fools, but with the wiser sort always. And his whole discourse proceeds
on this supposed knowledge of the wiser sort and according to it concludes. We
cannot therefore doubt of his mind. But have we no wise sort of ancient
believers who lived among the heathens, to testify unto us what the heathens
did? Have we no Apostles and Prophets to hearken to, no renowned and infallible
persons to inform us? Surely we have, and those so many, that we need not have
recourse either unto persons unknown amongst the heathens for their testimony,
or to Mr. Sillingfleet the ingenious tr^fler. He tells us that the heathens did
not worship their Idols as Gods, but worshipped God in them. But our Apostles
and Prophets tell us contrary things. Hear Moses speak, who lived among the
thickest of the Heathens, To whom did they sacrifice, O Moses, whom did the
heathens worship? Imm^laverunt Demoniis and non Deo, Deuteronomy. 32. They worshipped
not God but devils, they sacrificed to devils says he, and not to God. The
Nations change their gods, and indeed they are no Gods, says Jeremy chapter 2. but
my people have changed their glory unto an Idol. Baruch another Prophet brings
in his testimony chap. 4. You have provoked him who made you, says he, even
the eternal God, sacrificing to Devils and not to God. The holy Psalmist he
tells us no less peremptorily, That they immolated their Sons and Daughters to
Devils, and sacrificed to the idols of Canaan, Ps. 105. and that all the gods
of the Heathens are Devils, Ps. 95. Saint Paul our own Christian Doctor is
bold, and expressly, testifies both against Stillingfleet and his wiser
heathens; That the things which Centiles immolated they sacrificed to Devils
and not to God, 1 Cor. 10. And yet after all this our Doctor is not ashamed to
justify those his clyents the heathens. They did not worship their idols
says he, for Gods, but worshipped God in them. And whom shall we here believe?
Moses, Jeremy, Baruch, David, St. Paul and all our Christian Doctors, or
Stillingfleet rather and his wifer heathens unknown to himself? They sacrificed
to devils and not to God; they changed their glory into an Idol: they irritated
the eternal God, immolating to devils and not to God; they sacrificed their
sons and daughters to devils, not to God. Thus speak our Prophets and Apostles.
But Mr. Sillingfleet affirms, they sacrificed to God, they imolated to God,
they worshipped god and not devils, they worshipped not the idols but God in
them. But I discern well enough the cause of his mistake. Because they
abstracted the general notion of God, and applied it, each one to his own
idols; therefore he thinks he may say they worshipped God in them. But this is a
gross mistake. For to worship God in a thing and to worship a thing for God who
is no God, are two very differing cases. Christians worship God in Christ, and
they do well; heathens who worshipped their Idols for God did ill. Cromwell our
late Usurper after he had murd^re^ our good King and set the Crown upon his own
head, would have taken it well, if his Army had to^d him they honored him for
their King; but not, if they had said they worshipped the King in him. The
first word had sounded in his ears as a grateful slattery, the other as treason
to himself. To ^bstract the Deity and apply it to another subject unto whom it
does not belong, is as far as we are able to behead the true God and set h^s
Crown upon the shoulders of usurping devils. And because the true real Deity
cannot be removed, either by the pleasure of the Usurper or worshiper,
therefore are these idols devi^s and false Gods. God cannot be worsh^ped in
them because he is not in them; and if they be worshipped as Gods it is
Idolatry; or else there is no such thing as idolatry upon earth

Aaron, says he, made the golden calf, not to reduce the people unto heathen
idolatry, but for an emblem of the good Angel who was to go before them. Here
is another excuse of Aaron his small fault; which drove Moses his brother and
Prince into a great a passion of wrath as perhaps he ever felt: even so
prevalent a grief and anger, that it dashed in pieces the very rables of the
Law he had in his hands; though he was by the testimony of holy writ the
mildest of men: and all this it seems for an emblem: And why that emb^em?
since they had such an emblem before in the pillar of cloud by day and fire by
night; which was a more significant emblem of the angel who went before them,
then any calf of gold could be. The holy Prophets test^fie of those people and
Aaron, that in Moses absence this figure was melted and founded by them to be
set up in place of the God, who had hitherto conducted them with Moses now as
they thought vanished, out of Egypt into Arabia; and to lead them on the rest
of their way, as their supreme conduct, after the manner of Egyptian Deities.
They made a ca^f in Horeb and adored the figure, they changed their glory into
the likeness of a Calf eating nay and forgot their God, Psalm. 125. Now if they
forgot their own God, and slighted him, and cast him from them, and changed his
glory into a calf, and worshipped the very figure: then must that sculptil or
statue be now accepted for their God. The like testimony gives St. Sephen, Act.
7. They made says he, a calf in those days and offered sacrifice unto the
Idol, and made themselves merry in the works of their own hands. What can this
import, but that they had now altered their religion, renounced their former
God, and made to themselves a new one after the manner of Egypt. It is pity
Mr. Stillingfleet had not been with Aaron; his confidence would have pleaded
for him a little more handsomely then he did for himself. But the excuse perhaps
being hypocritical and false would have more offended Moses, then his former
fault. Aaron knew well enough what he had done. And although he somewhat minced
his fault, yet would he not tell a lie. I cast a little metal into the fire,
says he to Moses, and there came out this calf, The Doctor adds two pretty
reasons, why neither he nor the people, could ever think of declining then to
any heathen idolatry, First because they had no pretense of doing so. As though
the very absence of Moses, whom they had long expected and now thought lost,
were not pretense enough, unto some leading men in the Camp to raise a sedition
and thereby force Aaron to make them such idols, as they were acquainted with
in Egypt. It is well enough known, that by the contagion of those leading men,
the Camp was ever and anon in such like tumult and ready disposition to
apostasy. His second reason is, because no intimation is made that they sell
into heathen idolatry. What intimation is given thereof by the Prophet and St.
Stephen he takes it seems for no intimation at all. When they fell, says he,
into heathen idolatry, mention is made of their Gods, as Baal Peor, Moloch,
Remphan; but here Aaron is said to make a feast to the Lord: As though there
were not Egyptian idols as well as Syrian; and Osiris and Isis, as well as
Moloch and Remphan. And a feast made in honor of this their new God and
religion, might well be said a feast to the Lord. It was a policy in Aaron,
thus to speak, that the common people might not suddenly discern the
alteration. And we may easily believe that the leading men, who brought him by
persuasion and force unto this apostasy, suggested the said stratagem; first to
get the people more universally on their side without commotion: and then to
put something into their mouths for to say to Moses, if he should chance to
come upon them suddenly and take them beyond expectation in the fact. For that
it was a mere pretense of policy is evident by this; that they gave to Moses no
such account of any feast made unto their ancient true God; and secondly
because their principal Leaders had no purpose to make any, for they had now
forgot and put away their own true God and cast him out of their mind, as holy
text speaks, obliti sunt Dei sui.

The Calves set up by Jeroboam in Dan and Bethel, were only to keep the people
from going up to Jerusalem and not to bring them to any idolatry of the
heathens. Here is another excuse for Jeroboam and his peccadillo. Who would not
take Mr. Stillingfleet to be a very charitable man, who can cover such a
multitude of sins? and yet is it all no other but a secret prodigious malice
against Catholics, who must bear the more and hear the worse for it. Jeroboam
says he did not alter the divine worship, or give any occasion of idolatry:
No, no. He only kept the people, says he from going up to Jerusalem, whither
they used once a year to resort. And this could be no such great matter; since
they had the same service, the same sacrifice and adoration at home. But why
then is Jeroboam charged with idolatry in holy Scripture, as one that had done
evil above all that went before him, and made him other gods and molten images
to provoke God to anger, and to cast his own God behind his back, 1 Reg. 14 O,
ho, thence we conclude says our Doctor that an image set up for gods honor is
idolatry; as it is amongst papists. And is not this a pretty nimble leiger
demaine of a slight man. First who taught him that Papists set up images for
Gods honor? I have learned amongst them that they are set up for our
encouragement and imitation, and for an honorable memory of their holy Martyrs
and Apostles. But what ho^our can one of those images be to God? none at all I
think, except indirectly, because God is the blessed author of all good, whence
the said Apostles and Martyrs received their strength and grace. Secondly where
does this confident man find, that Jeroboam set up his images for Gods honor?
Even no where at all. His own boldness is so strong in him, that he says what
he lists without any ground or occasion at all any where, either among sacred
writers or profane. Thirdly whence does he ga^her his negative word, that
Jeroboam acted none of the heathen idolatry, nor brought the people to it? Even
from his own confident brain whence he has the other, expressly contrary to the
testimony of holy writ which speaks, as it were passionatly and very
emphatically of his notorious idolatry, wherein he did evil above all that were
before him, wherein he made him other gods and molten images, to provoke God to
anger, and cast his own God behind his back. Can he be Justly charged with all
this, only because he kept the Israelites from going up to Jerusalem, and made
them do those devotions at home which they were wont to do in that mother
City. Can only change of place suffice for the criminous imputation of
idolatry, where is the same adoration, same rites, same sacrifice, same
Priests, and same God. Is it possible that the same service and Common
prayer book read by Ministers of the same kind in London and Highgate, be Gods
service in one place, and idolatry in the other, all other things agreing but
only the circumstance of place? No indeed, it is not possible it should be so.
But it is very possible it should be said so. Mr. Stillingfleet here speaks it,
and speaks it stoutly, on his own head, even against all Divine authority and
upright reason. People may sin against ecclesiastical obedience indeed, by not
coming up to their parochial Church when they are commanded. But they cannot,
only upon that ground, be charged with idolatry, or making strange gods, or
casting their own God behind their back. He must be a very passionate Prelate,
and extremely unjust and sinfully injurious, who lays that imputation upon
people, upon no other ground or motive then that one circumstantial neglect of
place. And yet holy Scripture several times thus charges Jeroboam; and puts
such a blot upon his scutcheon both for his own idolatry, and that into which
he induced all the people, that he is seldom or never mentioned without his
black surname; Jeroboam who made Israel to sin. If it were true at least, as
Mr. Stilling-fleet here speaks, that Jeroboam and Isreal's sin were only a
circumstance of place, and that they and he did in their own tribes but what
was done in Jerusalem, then must it needs follow, that there were in the Temple
of Jerusalem such like representations, as those calves set up by Jeroboam in
Dan and Bethel, and indeed the very same with them. And thence we may gather
for our learning, if this be all true, an axiom of great truth and concernment;
namely, that one and the same piece of worship which pleases God in the
Catholic Church, is an abomination to him in the ways of heresy and schism.
The very same thing which in Jerusalem and the tribe of Judah were called
Cherubims; in Samaria and all the rest of Israel apostatised from them, was but
a calf.

11. Charles the great a noble Emperor caused Books to be set forth against
the Council of Nice where images had been established, called Carolin Books,
and assembled also a Council at Frankford* wherein both the said Nicen Council
was condemned, and all their reasons for images confuted, etc. That there were
both in the Council of Frankford and Nice too, some Catholic Prelates who
propounded difficulties against images cannot be denied. For when ever any
Council meets together about any affair, they dispute pro and con, ^oth for
and against it; that the Prelates having all things set before their Eyes that
can be said on both sides, might be the better enabled to determine. So
doubtless it was done by the Apostles themselves in their great Council held
in Jerusalem about Circumcision, where inquisitio magna facta est, great
inquisi^ion, disputation, and examination was made about it. All this is
certain enough. But yet, that either in Frankford or any where else, were made
after this their dispute any final or conclusive declaration against the use of
images amongst Christians; or that Charles the Emperor should either write
books or cause any to be written, either against images or the Council o^ Nice
wherein they had been then established; or summon that Council of Frankford to
withstand that other of Nice unanimously concluded by the Pre^ates and
confirmed by the general Pastor; this is a thing so apparently false and
fictitious, that there needs no more but the knowledge of those very persons
and times to prove it so. Charles the Great was one that adored the Roman
Church whereof he was himself a Member, above all Emperors that ever was
before or since his time. The Council of Frankford, wherein were little less
then three hundred Catholic Prelates, was peaceably concluded, and no
commotion followed upon it; which must needs have risen, if they had condemned
another Council lately celebrated and confirmed by all pastoral authority. Nor
was that Frankford Council ever annulled or any way censured either by P.
Adrian or any after him. Add to this, that the said Council was both begun and
finished under the same Po^e Adrian, and his Legates Theophilact and Steph^nus,
who had presided lately in the said Nicen Council, where the lawful use of
images was established. It cannot possibly be imagined that the same Pope and
Presidenes should conclude in Frankford quite contrary to what they ordered in
Nice but seven or eight years before. It is also certain, that the said Council
of Frankford, was summoned and assembled, not about images only as the Doctor
imagines, but about the question of our Lord Christ his filiation, as all
ancient histories testify, against Foelix and Elipand two Spanish Bishops, and
Claudius Taurinensis, who teaching that our Lord is rather to be called an
adoptive than natural Son of God, raised much commotion in Spain and France:
and this novelty of theirs was first condemned at Ratisbone, and afterward at
Frankford. For Foelix after his first condemnation, repaired to the Emperor
Charles his Court who then wintered at Rheginum; and there submitting to the
Prelates, was sent thence to the presence of Pope Adrian, where in the
Cathedral of St. Peter he revoked his Error. Elipand hearing of his submission
grew more violent, and by his books both regained Foelix again, and disturbed
all Germany, as he had France and Spain before. And now to prevent the
infection, the Pope and Charles the Emperor agreed to bring together a
conciliar Assembly of Prelates in Frankford, wherein presided Theophylact and
Stephanus, who had lately concluded the second Council of Nice. Whence it
clearly appears that Doctor Stillingfleet quite mistakes the business. Now if
the same Pope and his very self-same Legates presided first in the Nicen
Council, and then in Frankford, as the Doctor acknowledges, we may rationally
enough conclude, that the Nicen decrees about images, lately finished in the
East, were made known to the West by their acceptance and promulgation at
Frankford, where the business of filiation was decided: For this is indeed very
true. But no way can we think that the same Presidents would now undo, what
they had done a little before. And that this is indeed the whole truth in this
business, may be yet confirmed by the authority of the Council of Senon kept
not long after, which in their 14. decree thus speaks, Carolus magnus Francorum
Rex Christianissimus in Francorum furdensi conventu ejusdem erroris
iconomachorum suppressit insaniam quam inselicissimus quidam Fae'ix in Gallias
and Germanias invexerit. By this testimony it appears, that Felix over and
above his capital error about Christ our Lords adoption, was an iconomachus
too or adversary of images, and suffered at Frankford for both his errors:
which is not unlikely by the testimony of Platina and Paulus Emilius: For
Platina in the life of Pope Adrian, Biennio post, says he, Theophylactus and
Stephanus Episcopi insignes Adriani nomine, Francorum and Germanorum Synodum
habuerunt, in qua and Synodus quam septimam Graeci appellabant, and haeresis
Feliciana de tollendis imaginibus abrogata est. And P. Emilius in his second
book de gestis Francorum speaking of that Council of Frankford, Et imaginibus,
says he suns honor restitutus est. The like may be proved out of Blondus,
Sabellicus and other historians. So that all these things rightly considered
and put together, will sufficiently convince his relation of the Frankford
Council to be fictitious and groundiess. If the Council were assembled by the
Agreement of the Pope and Emperor, then not of the Emperor against the Pope.
If to suppress Elipand, Claudius, and Felix; then not the Nicen Prelates. If
under the same Pope and Presidents which presided lately in Nice, then not
against any thing determined and concluded in Nice. If upon the motive of
Elipands error against our Lords filiation; then was not an image the
principal occasion of it. If Felix were there condemned for his opposition to
images then were not images condemned. If Charles the great, one of the
devoutest to the Roman Church that ever reigned, so much swaied in that
Council, then would he not suffer the Roman Church to be there affronted and
censured. If an upright Catholic, he would not in spiritual affairs gainsay
the Prince of Prelates, who had so lately set his hand and seal to Nicen
defiinitions. In a word if Charles the Great called that Council at Frankford,
as the Doctor affirms, then without all doubt was that ratified there, which
was established at Nice a little before. For Charles was as much a Roman
Catholic as either Stephen and Theophilact, or the Pope himself, and knew as
well as any man, what obedience is due to the definitions of a Council rightly
consummated and confirmed, as that of Nice was. Binius the great Collector of
the Councils proves at large, that all this story of the Carolin books and
Frankford Synod assembled against that of Nice, is a groundless fiction. And so
do Alanus, Surius, Vasquez, and several other Doctors. And they are all amazed,
whence the rumor should arise, and by whom, and in what age or time. But I
cannot wonder much at it, since I heard lately of a French Gentleman, who
affirms and shows in a Book of his, that the English never conquered France,
nor ever gave them any one overthrow in battle. And when he was told by a
neighbor, of this his notorious falsehood; O, quoth he, my book two hundred
years hence, may pass for an authority as good as any that speak otherwise. And
so I think there may possibly be such impious men, who out of their present
malice may furnish out a lie to infect posterity, in after times. But he must
be an unconscionable wicked man who can do such a deed.

. 12. Primitive Christians never used any images, as the learned of the Church
of Rome acknowledge. He had done well to let us kn^w who are these le^rned of
the Church of Rome. But he will not do us that favor. And ^e must still take
his word for the judgment of the learned sort always. Nay we must bel^eve too,
that he is ever on the learned sorts side. It is indeed unlikely that figures
of those holy persons, who first spread our Christianity in the world, and made
it good both by their lives and death, should be frequent in prim^tive times.
First, because those same figures, although they be honorable memories both of
their persons and pieties, unto whose zeal and goodness we are so much
indebted; yet are they not so necessarily requisite unto any such perpose, but
that the Church can be without them. Secondly, because primitive Christians had
not amongst them any such plenty of Artists, as we have now a days to make
them. Thirdly, because Pagans would have mis-interpreted the end and meaning of
such figures, as this our Doctor does in the midst of daylight. But that in
those primitive times there was never any Christian so ill affected toward
those pious representations as is Mr. Still. appears sufficiently by the
testimony of those ancient Doctors, who mention incidentally the customs (...)
so those primitive times; especially about the figure of the Cross, which they
made continually on the^r forehead and breasts, as a preservative against
evil, and kept it all over their houses, particularly in their Bed-chambers and
closets, either framed in wood or stone, or painted in colors. There be
notwithstanding the deluge of time which swallows up all things, some monuments
yet left among us of the respect which those Christians then bore both to the
relics and figures of their Saints. The very chair of St. James the Apostle
and first Bishop of Jerusalem, Eusebius in the seventh book of his history
attests, that it was had in great esteem and veneration in all times, even to
his own days. Accordingly S. Clement in his six^h book of apostolical
constitutions gives this general testimony of that kind of piety in those
primitive Christians, (...), The very relics, says he, of Saints now living
with God are not without their veneration. Some remainds there be also of an
apostolical Council at Antioch, gathered out of S. Pamphilus and Origin,
wherein caution is given both against the Jews malice and Gent^le idols, by
opposing the images of Jesus and his holy fo^lowers against them both: (...)
(...). Ignati^s also that worthy apostolical Prelate, the third from St. Peter
the Apostle in the chair at Antioch, thus signally speaks of the sign of the
cross in his epistle to Philadelphia, (...). etc. The Prince of this world,
says he, rejoices when any one denies the Cross: for he knows the confession
of the cross to be his own ruin: this is the Standard against his power, which
so often as he either sees or hears it spoken of. he shakes and trembles: thus
speaks that glorious Prelate. The above named Eusebius testifies also in the
same book of his history, that he saw even in his time the brazen Statue of our
Lord Jesus, which was set up in Paneada in Palestin, unto his honor by the
woman cured by him of the blood flix; so notable for miracles, that they were
spoke of all the world over. This statue o^ our Lord when Julian the apostate
caused it to be thrown down, and his own to be set up in place thereof, a
strange sudden fire from heaven consumed the statue of Julian, as Zozomenus in
his fist book witnesses. And of the same bra^en statue of Christ our Lord write
also Theophilact, Damascenus and several others. And here we may take notice by
the way, that charity and devotion set up statues to our Lord, but apostasy and
malice pulls them down. And whether Dr. Stillingfleet, who busies himself so
much to cast down the images of Jesus our Lord and his holy followers, would
refuse to have his own set up for his great pains, either in Guildhall or
Cheapside, he knows best himself. Truly if that were done, I do not believe
that any of his neighbors or Countrymen would take him then for a calf of
Bethel. Of the Images of the virgin Mary made by St. Luke there is much fame
amongst the ancient writers, in particular Theodorus, Simeon Metaphrastes and
Nicephorus: The last of which does also attest in his second book, that the
said precious relick was carried up and down the whole habitable world of
Christians, who looked upon it with a most greedy and unsatisfied devotion. The
same Nicephorus adds moreover, how Constantius the Son of Constantine
translated the rel^cks of St. Luke from Thebes, of St Andrew from Achaia, and
of St. Timothy from Ephesus, unto Constantinople, with a vast concourse and joy
of Chr^stian people: and there with all honor and reverential respect
inshrined them in a cathedral Church dedicated to the Apostles. Of the image
also of Christ our Lord imprinted by himself in a handkercher applied to his
own face and sent to King Abagarus who requested his picture, write Evagrius,
Metaphrastes and others. Of another image of Jesus Christ made by Nicodemus,
which being ignominiously crucified by the Jews wrought many wondrous
mirac^es, we have a solemn testimony of Athanasius cited in the fo^rth action
of the seventh great Synod. And all this testifies that Christians in primitive
times were affected toward holy pictures and relics as Catholics are at this
day: at least not such haters and vilifiers of them as is Dr. Stillingfleet.
Nor can I conceive how any of the learned in the Church of Rome should be
ignorant of these things. Nay the very Church of England, which this Doctor
pretends to defend, has lately put the images of the Apostles and Primitive
Saints into their common prayer book and Primers printed by authority. So that
if the Doctor had opened his eyes, he might have seen clear enough, that all
this talk of his is now unseasonable, however it might have passed well enough
in the beginning of the furious reformation: when they pulled down all sacred
figures, and suffered none to be set up either sacred or common. When husbands
broke their wives pictures, and wives their husbands, least they should give
ill example to St. Peter and Paul, or encourage any of the twelve Apostles to
creep up again upon their walls. When children in obedience and duty to their
parents, spitting upon their effigies, said as they were taught to say, I
renounce the devil and all his works. When all the people fl^cked together in
all places to tear down Churches and Chapels, and private oratories in houses,
with a Now boys, we are free men, let us eat, drink and play, for to morrow we
shall dye. No more duty of any our daily prayers, no more fasting, no more
vows, no more troublesome adoration upon our knees, no more pining meditations,
no more penance, no more restitution, no more priest, no more altar, no more
cross or holy rood, no more Peter and Paul to be seen, no more languishing
memories of Saints, no more obedience to the erring Church, no more
self-examination, no more conscience scruples, etc. Those times indeed were mad
enough. But now people, as newly awaked from wine, begin to be wiser and look
more soberly about them. Even Denmark and Holland consider now in cold blood
the many sad mischiefs they acted in hot: nor is our own Country wholly
ignorant of the irreparable ruins of those mad times. However, our Doctor will
not have his sport spoiled, nor yet his game stopped. Punchienella, though
Bartholmew fair be ended, may be acted still either in Lincolns Infields or
Chairing cross or any where else, both now and then and seven years hence. It
will be still new to some body. He may also know that King James a wise and
learned Prince in the year 1617. gave order that the pictures of Saints should
be set up in his Chapel of Holy-wood house in Edinborough, as Spotswood
attests in his history of the Church of Scotland. And he cannot be ignorant
that several times order and command has been given to Protestant people by our
English Bishops, that they bow and do reverence at the name of Jesus, when its
spoken or read in the C^u^ch. Now the name of Jesus and figure of Jesus is all
one thing; the one of them representing to the ear, what the other does to the
eye. All this he might have considered. But his tongue is hot, and he must
speak although it be against himself, and the very Church he justifies, as much
as it is against the Church he arraignes. Indeed his whole discourse is so
frivously subtle and subtilely fr^volous, that no Church needs much to heed
what he says. This I know and am c^^tain of, that although he should be
confuted at large and confounded for ever by any Catholic Writer, yet shall we
be never the nearer to any quietness and peace. For the next man that wants a
rich benefice, will if he have but this man's confidence, collect another book
of popish idolatry out of this book of Dr. Still. as he gathered this of his
out of Henry Moore, Jeremy Ta^lor and sundry others his Predecessors; not
heeding at all any answer that has been given by former Catholics to the talk,
any more than Dr. Stillingfleet does here. They will ever write, one out of
another, and never regard what has been said to any one of them in defense of
that which they oppose, abecedarian scriblers. Nor can there be any end, so
long as there is a bishopric or fat benefice to hope for: and Catholic hands
so tied up, that they can print nothing unto their own justification without
insuperable difficulties and hazard.

I have read in London the Defiances of one Fencer to another, both of them in
print. Who accordingly do meet in Bear-garden without any control, there to
baste one another lustily for the peoples plea^ure. And it would be a pastime I
think equally delightful, not less profitable, and somewhat more civil, to see
two men reason down one another. We poor men should esteem it a great favor to
us, if our adversary might read his charge and we our defense, even in
Bear-garden. Since neither in Churches, Halls, Universities, or Schools are we
permitted to speak; or print any thing to speak for us. And Doctor
Stillingfleet who has made his defiance already, may which he has not yet
done, appoint the day. Not men and fencers only, but bulls and bears, cocks
and dogs, all are permitted to defend themselves when they are invaded, but
only we poor old Christians whose Religion has blessed our Land fifteen
hundred years. As if it were agreed on all hands that we should never be
rightly understood.

Mr. H. Thorndike a grave Divine and and learned Doctor in our present English
Church both affirms and strongly proves in his book called Just weights and
measures, that Roman Catholics are idolaters no way: adding also, That they
who separate from the Church of Rome as Idolaters, are thereby schismatics
before God. Thus speaks that learned man, the P^aenix of divines, who only
dares to be honest. And the mere authority of this eminent Protestant may
suffice to evacuate all the sophistry of this whole chapter of this Doctors
book: as also of that which follows in the next place about our holy Host and
Saints.

Now Sir, I must bid you farewell. And that you may not think me either idle or
neglective of my duty and respects to you, pray give me leave to tell you, that
what you see here printed but now, was written and ready for the Pre^s in
August last. And before October ended I had finished all my work upon Dr.
Stillingfleets Book, suchlike familiar Commentaries, as these upon his first
chapter be. But in all these six months I could get no more printed for you
either at home or abroad, than this poor fifth part of the whole, after my many
travels, vexations, expenses and dangers. Such obstructions are made about the
Presses, and so many violences offered here continually, far above any used
since we were born, that I can see no possibility for any whole book of ours to
shoot that gulf, be our cause never so innocent and good. Nay, they will here
print our catholic books themselves, as if they were their own, as Thomas a
Kempis, Granada, Parsons Resolutions, Drexellius, and the like. But if we be
taken printing them, the PRESS is broken, PRINTER punished, and we, if we be
found, in danger of our lives. And therefore I beseech you, Sir, be content
with thus much, or rather this little* The rest you shall have in written hand.
In the mean time let Dr. Still. triumph and crow as he pleases. He is made and
has made him. self sure enough. Although he has defied the whole catholic
world and all that know of it, having something to say, are both willing and
ready, yet will no man come forth into the open field against him, because they
cannot. He thinks himself wise no doubt; wiser than millions of men: and may do
so still. For my part, Sir, I find him as wise as one man; and no more. Farewell.

FINIS.

