CICERO AGAINST Catiline, IN IV. Invective Orations.

Containing the whole manner of discovering that Notorious CONSPIRACY.

Done into English By CHRISTOPHER WASE.

Id. Cic. -- Concedat Laurea Lingua. Plin. lib. 7. cap. 3. in fine. Salve
primus omnium Parens Patriae appellate, primus in toga triumphum, linguaeque
auream morite, and facundiae Latiarumque literarum Parens; atque ( ut Dictator
Caesar hostis quondam tuas de se scripsit) omnium triumphorum lauream adepte
majorem, quanto plus est ingenii Romani termi^^s in tantum promovisse, quam
imperii. LONDON, Printed by T. N. for Samuel Lowndes over against Exeter House
in the Strand. 1671.

To the Worshipful JOSEPH WILLIAMSON Esquire, Secretary to the Right Honorable
the Lord ARLINGTON (Principal Secretary of State) Keeper of His Majesty's
Papers of State, and a Member of the Honorable House of Commons in Parliament.
SIR,
THis small Essay does in Justice and Gratitude address it self to your Hands,
being the Product of a few Spare-hours while I was conversant about some
Occasions of yours, which time you were pleas^d to express that you put to your
Account, while employed to my own Benefit. Of what prodigious Parts this Author
was, and indefatigable industry, how grave a Senator, how profound a
Politician, how incorrupt a Magistrate, it needs not that I tell you; nor
whether as Tully is worthily accounted the Chief of Orators, so these Consular
Invectives may not be esteemed the very Flower of all his Orations. My part is,
because I am conscious how hardly those advantages can be discerned through a
gross and cloudy Translation, to find out a Competent Judge of such Labors,
and a favorable Advocate to excuse the insuperable defects in rendering
Languages each by other, which are often inadaequate, and in signification,
credit, phrase, variety, incommensurable one with the other. Spirits that are
most delicious, we find to be most vo^atile, and hardly ^ndure the
transpor^^ation. Paterns may be with less di^^i^ulty matched for the Cloth than
the Color. Tully however cannot be so rudely handled, but an artificial
Method, strong Arguments, and diverse Figures both of Words and Sentence will
discover a sound Constitution. The Change of Customs, Different Laws and Humors
may somewhat darken the Complexion: Yet my hope is through all will be
discerned Tully. But why do I flatter my self to think that you can find
leisure from public and weighty Business to arbitrate in these Scholastic and
lighter Speculations? Therefore having first begged that your prudent and
painful endeavors may be still successful and accepted to the acquiring new
Talents, which you so faithfully improve; and for my sel^ requesting to hold
such place in your esteems, as a mind ever-studious to be truly thankful, may
render me capable of, I take leave to remain

SIR, Your humble Servant and Honorer CHR. WASE.

Some Ancient Testimonies concerning these Orations.
Cic. in Orat. de se-ipso. A nobis homo audicissimus Catilina in Senat^s
accusatus obmutuit.

Sal in Conj. Cat. Tum M. Tullius Consul, sive preasentiam ejus timens, sive
i^i commotus orationem habuit luculent^m atque utilem Reip. quam postea
scriptam edidit.

C. Velleius Patercul. l. 2.34. Catilina metu consularis imperii urbe pulsus est

Plin. l. 7. c. 30. Sed quo te M. Tulli piaculo taceam? -- Tuum Catilina fugit
ingenium.

Quintil. lib. 2. c. 17. Annon divina M. Tullii Ciceronis eloquentia --
Catilinae fregit audaciam?

Mart. Dixerat O Mores, O Tempora Tulius olim Sacrilegum struere cum Catilina
nefas.

The Contents of the Four ensu^ing Orations, wherein the Consul
I. Advises Catiline, then present in the Senate, to forbear the Town. II.
Encourages the People, by extenuating the Forces of the Rebel, and reclaiming
the secret Accomplices. III. Reports to the People the particulars of the
discovery of the Plot, with the Arraignment and Conviction of the Conspirators
at the Bar of the House. IV. Puts it to the Question, What is the Houses
pleasure concerning the Priso^ers.
The First ORATION Against CATILINE, made in the SENATE.
The Argument
In the year after the Founding of Rome DC, Lucius Sergius Catilina, a Nobleman
of Rome, of excellent Endowments both of Body and Mind, but depraved through
ill habits; having been trained up under the Usurper Sulla, and through his
whole time practiced in Acts of great Licentiousness, stood with many other
Competitors for the Consulship; but was accused of Corruption and missed it,
Marcus Tullius Cicero and Caius Antonius being chosen: Whereupon he entered into
a dangerous Conspiracy of raising a Civil War, cutting off the Principal of the
Senate, and Firing the City. On the VI. and VII. of November in the Nights were
held secret Councils with the chief Conspirators, at the House of one M. Lecca
a Roman Senator, where, among other particulars concluded for the carrying on
the Design, two Knights then present, undertook early that Morning, under
color of a Visit, to kill Tully in his Bed: But he was immediately advised of
this imminent danger from Q. Curious a false Brother, by Fulvia, and that
attempt frustrated. The same day, being the VIII. of November, the Consul calls
a Senate in the Temple of Jupiter Stator, within the Tower of Rome; where met
also Catiline, either to palliate the matter, or purge himself. Upon sight of
whom, Cicero being stirred betwixt Fear and Anger, stood up, and thus bespoke
him:

1. HOw long, Catiline, will you abuse our pa^ience? How long shall that fury
of yours hector down even us too? To what bound shall your unbridled
Audaciousness fly out? Has the Night-Guard of the Palace nothing daunted you?
Nothing the Watches about the City? Nothing the Fears and Jealousies of the
People? Nothing the Concourse of all the honest able Men? Nothing the holding
the Senate in this place of strength? Do the looks and faces of all these in
presence nothing at all dash you? Are not you aware that all your Plots are
discovered? Are not you advised, that your Conspiracy is palpably known to all
here? What you resolved upon last Night, what the Night before, where you were,
who were in your Iuncta, of what Debates passed between you, who of us do you
think is not fully informed?

2. Oh what times! what a world do we live in! All this the Senate understands,
the Consul sees, yet this fellow lives, lives I, and comes into the House, is
present at the Public Council; marks with his eyes and designs each one of us
for slaughter: Meanwhile We, Courageous Men, think we have discharged our duty
to the State, if we can shift his weapons and fury. Long since, Catiline, thou
should have been led by the Consuls Order to Execu^ion; upon thine own head
should have been turned that destruction which thou have been so long
contriving against all of us.

3. Could that most honorable Person Much of the divisions in the Popular
State of Rome, was about a Levelling the State, in such sort a^ that the
over-weal^hiness of some Grandees, and extreme indigence of the Generality,
might be taken away, and a middle Proportion of Estates, the very soul of
Democracy, might be established; to support Marriage and enable to Warfare, two
great Instruments of Empire. To effect this, C. Licinlus Stolo procured a Law,
limiting each Citizen within the possession of 500 Acres; and also to a rate of
great and small Ca^tl^ and Servants to keep them But as this Law was above 120
years ever it could be obtained, so within less than 200 years i^ was undermined
and quite overthrowns and all Italy found engrossed into the Hands of a few
Lords, who leas'd it out to Slaves and Barbarians. This mischief C. Laeli^s
sought first to redress, but was wrought off by the Wealthy Party, and thereby
acquired the Title of the Wise. Then Tiberius Gracchus undertook the reviving
of it, with the Advice of Crassus the High Priest, Mucius Scaevola, the Eminent
Lawyer, then Consul, and Appius Claudius his Father-in-Law; upon most moderate
condi^ions, not of restori^g the Lands illegally held and refunding the mean
profits, but of parting with them for a valuable consideration, to their poor
^ellow-Citizens (himself, his Fa^her-in-Law Appiu^ ^laudius, and his Brother C.
Gracchus being Ioynt-Commissioners for the dividing those Lands.) and
contenting themselves with 500 Acres, and their Children with half as much. Yet
in the very publishing of it, he was taken off, as was su^pos'd^ by Scipio
Na^ic^, who was, through the envy of the Fact, fain to retire from his Country.
Pub. Scipio, The High Priest, being then a private man, ^lay Tib. Gracchus,
when he did but lightly shake the State of the Government: And shall We,
Consuls, tamely endure Catiline, striving to lay the World desolate with Fire
and Sword? To pass by those instances of an old date, that Quintus Servilius
Ahala slew with his own hand Sp. Melius for distributing Corn to the Commons in
tim^ of great Dearth, fell under suspicion of affecting a Supremacy: Hereupon
Qu. Cincinnatus is made Dictator, or Protector, and Captain General; (an
Officer not appointed but in time of great fea^, and to continue but Six
Months) he nominates Q. Servilius Ahala his Lieutenant General or Magister
Equi^um; who summoning Sp. Melius, upon his nonappearance before him, sent and
stabbed him.
Spurius Melius, when he went about to alter the Government. There has, there
has been in Times of Old, such Courage in the State, that Men of Valor have
restrained a dangerous Citizen, with more severe punishment than the most
violent Enemy. We have now too made against you, Catiline, a strict and grave
Act of Senate. The State wants not advice, nor this House resolution. We, I
must speak boldly, We Consuls, are wanting in the Execution.

4. The Senate once made an Order, That Lucius Opinius An order for the Safety
of the Common-w^alth. Hereby wa^ committed to the Consuls a Power of levying
War and executing Martial Law upon Citizen of Ally, not allowed but in case of
extreme danger.
the Consul should see that the safety of the Commonwealth should not be
molested. One Night did not pass over his head, but C. Gracchus ca^ry'd on the
design of his Brother and among other Laws, that of dividing ^he Lands of
Conquest; himself, M. Fulvius ^laccus and Papi^ius Carbo being
Ioynt-Commissioners: ^he two former were slain by Order of L. Opinius, and the
Son of M. Fulvius sent to intercede for hi^ Father, being a comely and bashful
youth, when sent back, with charge of coming no more, returning, by his Fathers
order was cruelly killed in prison, having nev^r bore Arms. L. Opinius was
after upon some occasion condemned and banished.
Caius Gracchus, descended of a most Noble Father, Grandfathers, Ancestors, was
slain upon some suspicion of Factiousness; Marcus Fulvius, a Consular Person,
was slain, and all his Children by a like Act of Senate. The security of the
State was committed to C. Marius and L. Valerius the Consuls. Did the
Government respite L. Saturninus, Tribune of the Commons, and Ca. Servilius
Praetor, one day from punishment? But We now have left the edge of Authority to
grow blunt these twenty days; for we have a like Act of Senate, but shut up in
Tables, as a Sword lying in the Scabbard; by which Act of Senate, Catiline, you
should have been immediately executed. You live, and that not to abandon, but
to fortify your boldness. I desire, my Lords, to be merciful, I desire withal
not to be thought careless in so imminent dangers of the Commonwealth. But now
I begin to condemn my self of sloth and cowardliness.

5. There is a Leagure in Italy against the State, pitched at the Entrance into
Tuscany, the number of the Enemy increases day by day; but the Commander of
that Leagure, and the General of those Enemies, we see within the Walls, nay,
in the very Senate; daily ploting some destruction against the State. If,
Catiline, I should now order you to be apprehended, if, to be executed, I think
I should have reason to fear, least all honest men, should rather say, this was
done too late by me; then that any should say it was too cruelly done: But for
a certain reason I do forbear that, which long since should have been
performed: Then will I take thee off, when as no one shall be found so
impudent, so desperate, so like thy self, as not to confess it justly done.

6. As long as there shall be any one that dares justify you, you shall live;
but so, as now you do, hemmed in by me with many and strong Guards, as not to
be able to stir against the Commonwealth. Many Eyes, and Ears too, that you
are a little aware of, as hither to they have, shall spy and watch your
Actions. Catiline, What would you have more, if neither night can shroud in its
darkness your wicked Cabals? Nor a private House within its walls, the words of
your Conspiracy? If all come to light, all break forth, change then that mind,
be ruled by me, do not think of Slaughter and Burning, you have hands upon you
on all sides; all your Plots are as open as the day, which you may recollect
with me.

7. Do you remember that I should say in the Senate on the One and twentieth of
October, that, On a certain day would be in Arms ( which day was to be the 25
th of the same) Caius Manlius, the Executioner and Instrument of your Treason.
Catiline, was I mistaken, not only in a thing, so great, so furious, so
incredible; but what is mch more strange, in the very day. I said in the House
too, that, You had pitched the 28 th of the said Mon^th, ^or the assassinating
of the Nobles; (...) what time many Principal Men ^f the State left the Town,
not (...) much for their own preservati^n, as to suppress your designs: Can you
deny on that very day that you was so penned up by my Guard and diligence, that
you ^ould not stir to prejudice the ^tate; when you said, though ^he rest were
gone, The killing of ^s that remained, would serve your ^urn?

8. What when as you were ^onfident you could surprise Prae^este by an assault
in the night, on ^he very first of November? Did ^ou observe that that Colony
was ^y my Order secured with Guards ^f mine to watch and ward there? You act,
you plot, you think nothing, but what I not only hear ^f, but see too, and
plainly per^eive. Recall to memory with me the other night, and you wi^^ find,
that I am much more inten^^ly vigilant, for the preservatio^ than you for the
destruction of the State. I say, that the night b^^fore last, you came among
the Vine-dressers, I must speak plain^ to the house of Marcus Lecca, tha^ very
many Abettors of your fu^^ and treachery, had their meetin^ there; Dare you
deny it? Wh^ do not you speak? I will make (...) appear, if you deny it; for I
se^ Salust reckons up xi Senators of the Conspiracy, Lentulus, Antonius,
Longinus, Cethegus, P, and Ser. Sulla, Vargunteius, Annius, Lecca, Bestia, and
Curious.
some here in the Senate tha^ were there with you.

9. Immortal Gods! wherea^bouts are we? What a Govern^ment have we? In what
City d^ we live? In this, this very place are some, of our own House, m^ Lords,
of this most Venerabl^ and Grave Council of all the World, which project my
ruin and all yours, together with the destruction of this City and the Empire
of the World. These ^ersons, I that am Consul, be^old, and take their Votes
about ^he Government; and those that should have been cut off by the ^word, I
do not yet wound with my word. You were then, Cat^^ine, at Lecca's house that
night; You divided Italy into Posts, you appointed every one which way it was
concluded he should march; you selected whom to leave at Rome, and whom to
carry with your self; you divided the several parts, at which the City was to
be ^ired; you gave assurance you would speedily leave the Town; only, you
said, One petty business, that is, my being alive, stayed your Journey. There
were C. Cornelius Sulls and M. C^^^thegus. Appian. Salust joins with C.
Cornelius, L. V^^^gunteiu^, but him he had nominated as a Sen^tor before.
two Roman Knights presently replied, They would remove that obstruction, and
promi^sed they would that very night, a little before day kill me in my Bed.

10. I was in^o^med of all th^^ full as soon as your Company w^^ broke up, and
secured and guarde^ my house the better; kept ou^ those that you sent in the
mornin^ to give me a Visit, having before told several persons that such would
come at the very same time. Which things being so, Catiline, hold o^ the course
you have begun, ge^ you out of Town at length; the Gates are open; take your
Jour^ney. That Army of Manlius^ does too long want you to head it carry out all
your Accomplices wit^ you, at least as many as may be^ rid the City, you will
deliver m^ from much fear, so there be but ^ Wall between you and me. You ca^
no longer continue among Us, ^ will not bear it, I will not suffer it^ I will
not endure it.

11. Great thanks be to the Immortal Gods, and particularly to Jupiter Stator,
the most ancient Guardian of this City, that we have so often already escaped
this so villainons, so dreadful, and so dangerous a plague to the State; the
safety of the Government must not any more be hazarded in one person. As long,
Catiline, as you plotted against me, Consul Elected, I secured my self, not by
any Public Guard, but my private diligence. When as at the last Consular
Election, you would have slain me the Consul and your other Competitors in the
Field; I dashed your wicked attempts, by the assistance and strength of my
friends, without giving any alarm to the Public: In a word, as often as you
struck at me, I opposed you by mine own interest; although I saw, that my
destruction was inseparable from the great affliction of the State.

12. But now with open face, you strike at the whole State, you bid ruin and
desolation to the Temples of the Immortal Gods, to the Buildings of the City,
to the l^fe of all the Citizens: In sum, to all Italy. Whe^efore, since I
dare not execute that which were principally to be done, and is proper to this
Empire, and the severity of our Ancestors, I will do that which is more gentle,
as to censure; more useful, as to the public safety. For if I should order you
to be slain, the relics of your Accomplices would still stick in the
Commonwealth: But if you, which I frequently advise you to, shall march off, a
great and dangerous sink in the State, of your Comrades, shall be drained out.

13. What Is the matter, Catiline? Do you make any question to do that at my
Order, which you were before a doing of your own accord? The Consul commands an
Enemy to go out of Town, Do you ask, Whether to Banishment? I do not command
you. But if you ask my Counsel, I advise you; For what is there, Catiline,
which can any longer be pleasing to you in the City? wherein there is none,
bating that Gang of desperate Conspirators, but fears you; none but hates you.
He is reported ^o have married her that was judged his Daughter, to have killed
his Brother, and got him after he was dead excepted from pa^don.
What mark of domestical baseness has not been branded upon your life? What
private disgrace does not asperse your Name? Have your Eyes ever been refrained
from any lust? your Hands from any attempt, or any villainy from your whole
body? What young man is there by your pleasures inveagled, whom you have not
furnished, either with a weapon to boldness or with an in^enrive to lust?

14. For example, newly He is implied to have made ^way his first Wife, to make
^ room for Aurelia Orestilla; whom, because she did not like to have a grown
Step-son, he is also recorded to have gra^ifi'd with the taking him also off
out of the way.
when by the death of your former Wife, you had made house room for a second
match, did you not by that villainy add another incredible villainy? which I pass
by, and am well content should be wrapped up in ^ilence, least such an inhumane
act should have been thought to have had being, or not to have been avenged
under this Government. I pass by the decay of your Estate, all which you will
find to hang over your head next Quarter-day. I come to those points, which do
not concern the private reproach of your Vices, nor the necessitousness and
baseness of your Family; but do more nearly relate unto the well-being of the
State, and the life and safety of us all.

15. Can it be delighful to you, Catiline, to behold the light o^ this world,
and to draw the breath of this air, when as you know, there is none of these
present, that is not informed that When L. ^orqua^u^ and L. Cotta designed
^onsuls, were to ^nter upon their Office, L. Catiline, P. An^ronius, and C.
Piso, about the 5 th of December conspired to kill them; afterw^rds they put it
off to the 5 th of the following February, what tim^ they combined no^ only to
kill the Consuls, bu^ most of the Senators^ which had been effected, had not
Catiline been ^ver-forward to give the word, before all the Conspirators we^e
m^t together: this was two years past, and is called his former Conspiracy.
the day before New-years-day, Lepidus and Tullus being Consuls, you It was
forbidden to wear Arms in the Place of Assembly, in the Judgment Hall; and in
the (...)^
wore Arms in the Assembly, that you had got a Crew together to kill the
Consuls and Nobles; that no good meaning of yours, nor yet fear, but the
fortune of the Commonwealth, hindered your treason and rage: But I pass by
those things, as neither obscure, nor long since committed. How often would you
have killed me, when designed, how often since entered, upon the Consulship? How
many passes of yours, so made, that they seemed unavoidable, have I put by by a
slight turn, and as the word is, with the motion of my body? You plot, you
pursue, you contrive nothing, but I have timely notice of it; and yet for all
that, you will never give over working and designing.

16. How many, many times already has that Dagger been wrung out of your hands?
How often by some casualty dropped and slipped down? yet you cannot for your life
be without it, which Dagger, under what Vow and Consecration it is, I know not,
that you should have such a superstition, that it must needs be stuck up for a
Monument in the Consuls heart. But now, what life do you lead? for I will so
deal with you, not as though I were moved with anger, as I have reason, but
wi^h compassion, as you have no reason to expect. You came even now into the
Senate, did any one of this great Company of so many friends and acquaintance
of yours, do you any reverence? If such a thing as this never happened to any
in the memory of man, do you wait for them to speak out their indignation, when
you are already cast by the grand consent of their silence? Nay at your coming
in, great room was made for you; farther, ^ll the Consular Persons, who had
been oftentimes designed by you for slaughter, so soon as you sat down, sat
them farther from you, leaving that part of the Seats bare and empty.

17. How do you think that is to be taken by you? Truly if my Servants were in
such fear of me, as your Fellow Citizens stand in dread of you, I should think
fit to quit my House: Do not you so think it fit to quit the Town? And if I saw
my self under so great suspicion and displeasure of my Countrymen, though
unjustly, I would rather withdraw my self out of their sight, than be under
their continual frowns. And do you, when your Conscience must tell you, that
you have incurred the just and long deserved hatred of all, make any scruple to
avoid their sight and presence, whose very souls and hearts you break? Suppose
your Parents were afraid of, and fallen out with you, and you could by no means
recover their favor, I conceive you would retire some whither out of their
sight. Now your Country, which is the common Parent of us all, hates and fears
you, and judges of you, that for this great while, you unnaturally contrive
nothing but treason against her. Will you neither reverence her Authority? nor
be guided by her Direction? nor stand in fear of her Power?

18. Which, Catiline, thus addresses to you, and in a manner, thus silently
be-speaks you; There has been no violence for these many years past, but by
your abettment; no lewdn^ss but by your contrivance; you are the only man,
that have carried away free and unpunished the murders T^ pass by those of
lesser mark^ he slew of those in the Black Book o^ Sulla, L. Caecilius, M.
Volumenius, L. Tanusiu^, and M. Marius, Gratidianus, one dear to the People and
intimate with Tully, whose ^eeking head and full of spirits, be carried in his
hand to Sulla, from the one end of the City, beyond the Bridge, to the other.
of many Citizens; you, When L. Catiline was Chief Justice in the Province of
Africa, he so pillaged the subject, that he was accused of Bribery by Clodius,
whom he so corrupted, that he shamefully betrayed the Cause, and so came off;
again being indicted of Murder, for his many slaughters in the Action of Sulla,
by the favor of the Nobility, who favored Sulla, he was cleared.
the vexation and plundering of the Allies; you have not been only so great as
to slight the Laws and Judgments, but also to pervert and break through them.
Your former Actions, although not to be born with, yet I digested as well as I
could: but now, that I should be all over in a fright for your only sake; that
at the least stir Catiline should be suspected: no Plot can be thought to be
laid against me, but through your Treachery, is intolerable: Wherefore with
draw and rid me of this terror; if true, to prevent my destruction; if false,
to remove at length my fears.

19. If your Country should thus address to you, ought she not to obtain it;
although she could not force you? Nay further, you have offered your self into
custody; nay, you said, To clear you of all suspicion, you would go dwell with
Marcus Lepidus; who not entertaining you, you had the confidence to come to me,
and desired that, I would secure you in my house. When you had from me too this
Answer, that, I could by no means be safe with you under the same roof, that am
in great danger, whilst we are within the same Ci^y Wall. You came to Q.
Metellus the Praetor, by whom, when you were rejected, you took up your Lodging
at your own Comrades, honest Marcus Marcellus: Him in good time you took, as
one very careful to watch you, and very acute to discover you, and very
courageous to punish you. But how far may he be thought from Goal and Irons,
who judges himself worthy of Restraint?

20. Which things being so, Catiline, do you make any scruple, if you cannot be
contented to die here, to go into some foreign place? and to commit that life
of yours, conveyed away from many due and well dese^ved punishments, to Exile
and Obscurity? Move it, say you, in the house, for that is your request; and if
the Senate shall vote, you must be banished, you say, you will submit. I will
not move it, which is a thing goes much against my disposition; and yet I will
so order the matter, that you may so understand the sense of the House
concerning you. Catiline, Go out of the Town, put the State out of fear, go
your way into Banishment, since you look for that word. What is the matter,
Catiline? Do you mind? Do you observe the silence of all present? They are
contracted, they are still. What, do you expect they should speak and give
Order, whose meaning you will know by their silence?

21. But if I had said the same thing, to this worthy young Man, P. Sextius, if
as much to Ma. Marcellus, a Person of great Valor, the Senate would
immediately have laid violent hands, with all the reason in the world, upon me,
that am now Consul, in this very Sanctuary, where we are: But for you,
Catiline, being they are quiet, they give their consent; being they are
contented, they vote it: being silent, they proclaim it. Nor only the
Senators, whose Authority it seems is with you very dear, their lives cheap;
but also those Roman Knights, Men of great honor and worth, and other valiant
Citizens, which attend at the Senate, whose number you might see, and perceive
their affections, and even now plainly hear their very words; whose hands and
weapons for this good while, I have had much ado to keep off from you. I can
easily prevail upon them, that if you leave these parts, which you are plotting
to ru^n, they shall all wait upon you to the City Gates.

22. But wherefore, do I talk, Can any thing daunt you? Can you ever be
reformed? That you should ever think of withdrawing? Intend to leave the Town?
Would the Immortal Gods would give you such a frame of heart^ Although I
foresee, if you upon the terror of these words, should take up a Resolution to
go to Banishment, what a storm of Envy would hang over us? Though not so much
at the present, whilst the memory of your villainies is fresh, but in after
times. But I stand not much upon that, so the Calamity might be your own in
parti^ular, and severed from the dangers of the State. But that you should be
sensible of your own Vices, or fear the Penalties of the Laws, or comply with
the necessity of the times, is a thing not to be expected: for, Catiline, you
are none of those that either shame should keep you back from baseness, fear
from hazard, or reason from rage.

23. Wherefore, as I have often said to you before, go your ways, and if you
have a mind, to procure me ill will, your Enemy, as you give out, go directly
to Banishment. I shall hardly endure the censures of men, if you do so;
scarcely stand under the load of tha^ Envy, if you should go into Banishment at
the Consuls Order: But if you had ^ather be instrumental to my praise and
glory, match out with your dangerous Crew of Tray^ors, go straitwayes to
Manlius, stir up the discontented people, separate your ^elf from the well
affected, make War upon your Country, triumph in your unnatural robberies,
that you may be thought not to have been cast out by me among strangers, but
invited to your own.

24. But what need I invite you, who I know, have sent some to wait for you in
Arms at Forum Aurelium. I know a day is pitched upon and agreed with Manlius,
by whom I know too that Silver Eagle, which I trust will turn to the ruin and
confusion of you and all yours; which set in your House was the Chapel of all
your Treasons; is sent away. Can you want that Image, which you used to pray
to, when you went out upon a Murder; from whose Altars you often carried your
polluted hand to the assassinating of Citizens? Go your ways at last, whither
that unbridled and raging lust of yours has long time hurried you; for this
occasion does not bring you any grief, but a kind of incredible pleasure; to
such sottishness has nature bred, your will practiced, and fortune guided you.
You never longed for, I do not say, Peace, but any War, save such as is
unnatural. You have got a party of lewd persons, not only lost in their
fortunes, but also in their hopes. Here, what complacence will you find? What
joy will you triumph in? What pleasure will you rant in? when amidst so great a
number of followers, you will neither hear of an honest man, nor see one. Those
labors of yours, that are so much cried up, have been trained to this course
of life: Lying perdue, not only to watch a Mistress, but to take a Purse;
Watchfulness both over the sleep of married men, and the Estates of the
murdered. You have now an opportunity to show that you^ brave hardiness in
hunger, cold, and want of all things, wherewith you shall shortly find your
self pinched. I gained so much, what time I put you from the Consulship, that
you might rather in Banishment attempt, than in the supreme Government effect,
the ^in of the State^ and that the thing, which was treasonably by you
undertaken, might rather ^ear the Name of Rebellion, than War.

27. Now, My Lords, That I may remove, and deprecate from me, a kind of almost
just Complaint of my Country, mark I beseech you, attentively what I shall
say, and treasure it up faithfully in your minds and memories: For, if my
Country, which is far deare^ to me than my life; if all Italy, if the whole
Commonwealth should speak to me, Marcus Tu^ly, What do you mean? Would you
suffer him to go forth, that you know certainly to be a Rebel; that you see
will be the General of the War; that you are sensible, is expected as Chief
Captain in the Enemies Camp; having been the Contriver of the Treason, the
Chief of the Conspiracy, the Raiser of the Slaves and desperate Citizens: that
he may be thought not so much let out, as set on the Town? Will not you command
him to be put in Irons, to be carried to Execution, to be punished with death?

28. What I pray hinders? Is it the old Custom? Nay often in this State,
Persons out of Commission have put dangerous Citizens to death: Or the Laws
which have been made about the punishing free Citizens of Rome? But never in
this State have those, who revolted from the Government, preserved the
Privileges of Freemen. Do you fear the Envy of Posterity? Now you fairly
requite the People of Rome, who has exalted you, a Person known for your self
onely^ without any Commendation of your Ancestors, so early to the supreme
Magistracy, through all the degre^s of subordinate Offices; if for envy or the
fear of any danger, you neglect the safety of your Countrymen. But if there be
any fear of Envy, is the Censure of Severity and Courage more greatly to be
feared, than that of Baseness and Cowardice? Do you not think, when Italy shall
be made desolate with War, the Cities plundered, the Houses a-fire, you shall
then fall under a flagrant Any?

29. To these most sacred words of the State, and the minds of those men, which
are of the same judgment, I shall answer a word: Had I, my Lords, Judged it
most expedient for Catiline to be put to death, I had not allowed that
Sword-Player one hours respite to live: For if those most eminen^ and
honorable Patriots were so far from polluting, that they rather ennobled
themselves with the blood of Saturninus and the Gracchi, and Flaccus, and of
many others in former times: Truly I have no reason to fear, least this
Murderer of the Citizens being slain, any envy should rise against me for the
future. But if never so much did hang over me, yet I was always of this
Judgment, to think Envy gotten by Virtue to be no Envy but Glory.

30. Although there are some in this House, who either not se^ what is
imminent, or dissembl^ what they see; who have cherished the hopes of Catiline
with ^e^iss Votes, and have con^irmed ^he rising Conspiracy, by not believing
it: whose Authority many, not only out of malice, but of simplicity following,
had I executed him, would have said, it had been a cruel and tyrannical Act.
Now I understand, if he shall arrive, whither he intends at the Camp of
Manlius, no body will be so foolish, as not to see it was a Plot; no body so
bold as not to confess it: But if he singly was slain, I understand this plague
of the State might be a little suppressed, but not wholly extinguished: But if he
fly out, and carry his party along with him, and gather to the same place all
other desperate persons, from every part gleaned up; not only this so ripe a
plague of the Commonwealth will be extinguished and rooted out, but also the
very strings and seeds of all mischief.

31. For, my Lords, this great while, are we engaged in the danger, and the
snare of this Conspiracy. But now how it comes to pass I know not, the ripeness
of all Treasons, and old rage, and boldness, is broke forth in the time of our
Consulship. Now if this one person shall be taken off, we shall be thought
perhaps relieved of our cares and fears; but the danger will stick close, and
will be locked up in the bowels and veins of the Commonwealth; as often times
men in an acute Sickness, when they are tossed with hea^ and fever, if they
drink cold water, seem at first to be eased; then afterward, are more
grievously and violently afflicted: so this Disease in the Body Politic being
abated by his punishment, will return more violently, if the rest be left alive.

32. Wherefore, my Lords, Let the Malignants fall off, let them separate from
the honest party, let them draw to a head: In a word, as I have often before
said, Let them be parted from us with a Wall; let them leave plotting against
the Consul in his own house, investing the Judges Bench, surrounding the Senate
with their Swords, making Fireballs and Brands, to burn the City. Lastly, let
it be written in every ones Forehead how he stands affected to the State. I
promise you this, my Lords, there shall be so great diligence in us Consuls, so
much authority in you, so much courage in the Roman Knights, so great consent
in the honest party, that you may see the whole Plot discovered, laid open,
suppressed, and punished, by the going out of Catiline.

33. The Heathens had a strong Su^erstition about the accidents, or Voices of
Birds or Men, particularly at the Entering upon a Journey, especially in any
great Undertaki^g ^ that they were ominous, if good, to the ^lessing, if bad,
to the Blasting their Design. Therefore he thus ^oe-speaks ill success to his
designed Expedition.
With this Prayer after you, Catiline, wishing, It may prove preservation to
the State, ruin and confusion to your self, and destruction to all those, who
have combined themselves with you in all villainy and treason. Go your way to an
unnatural and rebellious War: This being spoken in the Temple of Jupiter
S^ator, has a greater presence of (...) and Dev^tion, and a kind of solemn
Excommunication, some Image of which was even among the Heathens in use toward
men guil^y of Treasons, Murders, and such high Misdemeanors.
And thou, Oh Juppiter, who at the same dedication as the City, were
consecrated by Romulus, whom we truly style, the Stay of this State and Empire;
repulse him and his Accomplices from the Altars, and other Temples; from the
Houses and Walls of the City; from the life and fortunes of all the Citizens:
And all the Maligners of the well-affect^d, Enemies of their Country,
Plunderers of Italy, confound them both quick and dead with eternal punishment.

The Second ORATION Against CATILINE.
The Argument.
Catiline having flung out of the Senate, went home, and there reflecting upon
the unsuccessfulness of the Morning attempt upon the Person of the Consul, and
seeing the City strongly guarded, concluded it safest with what forces he could
suddenly and secretly carry wit him, to gain the Camp of Manlius: Wherefore
having given Lentulus and Cethegus in charge to strengthen his Faction in the
City, and at convenient season to put in execution the Results of their former
Counsels, in order to a general Insurrection, when he should draw up with his
Army toward the City: at Midnight he left Rome, with 300 in company. The next
day, being the IX. of November, Tully calls the People to the Place of
Assembly, both to justify to them his challenging Catiline of Conspiracy the
day before, and to warn them to stand upon their Guard against the Confederates
that still remain behind in the Town.

Gentlemen,

1. AT last with much ado, have we either expelled, or let out, or else waited
upon L. Catiline of himself, going out of Town, foaming with rage, breathing
Treason, unnaturally plotting the destruction of his Country, and menacing you
and this City with Fire and Sword. He is gone, he is got his way, he is
escaped, he is broke loose: No longer shall any mischief against this Town be
brewed by that Monster and Prodigy of Men within the Town. And without
controversy have we prevailed against him, that was the only Ringleader of
this Intestine War: For no longer now shall that Stabbing was infamous in all
Ages, whence those Braves or Assassines that were noted for Cowardly and
Desperate lying in wait to murder men^ were from the Poniard which they
carried, being in Latin Sica, called Sicar^i.
Dagger be busy amidst the ribbs of us; nor shall we be afraid in Mars's Field
was a piece of Town ground (the Ancient Crown-land) which the Romans at the
expu^si^n of Tarquin the Proud, seized and converted to the use of Electing
their Magistrates in it. Now there was a Statu^e in Rome, Tha^ none should
bring a Weapon in^ to the Place for Assembly of the People, nor into the
Senate, nor into the Judgment Hall. But Catiline had in ^ former Conspiracy
come to the Consular Election armed, with design t^ cut off the Consuls. And
now Tully some few days before, at the late Election of Consuls, as going in
fear of his life, had come into the Field of Mars, wearing a great remarkable
Coat of Male.
the Field of Mars nor in the Marketplace, nor in the Senate, nor in a word,
within our own doors. He has quitted his ground, when he fled the City. We
shall now openly wage a just War with a declared Enemy, no body contradicting:
undoubtedly we have destroyed and bravely vanquished him, what time we put him
from private plotting into open Rebellion.

2. But that he did not carry ou^ of Town, as he designed, the point of his
Sword stained in blood; that he went and we alive; that we have wrested the
weapon out of his hand; that he left behind him the Citizens in safety, and the
Town standing: what mortification do you think it to be, and heartbreaking to
him? Now lies he grovelling on the ground, and is sensible that he is a lost and
ruined man, and oftentimes turns his Eyes back upon the City, lamenting, it has
escaped his ravenous Jaws; which City seems to me to look more cheerfully,
since it has disgorged and cast out so pestilent a fellow.

3. But if there be any now, as all of you ought to be, affected, that upon
this very point, wherein my Oration does boast and triumph, should greatly
accuse me, because I did not rather apprehend so Capital an Enemy than let him
escape; it is none of my fault, Sirs, but the times; L. Catiline should have
been long since taken off and executed, and both old Presidents and the
severity of this Empire, and the public interest required it at my hands. But
how many, think you, were there, who would not believe my Information? How
many, that out of simplicity could not have thought it? How many that even
justify it? How many, that out of corrupt Principles, abetted it? Now if upon
taking him off, I had judged all your danger removed, long since had I cut off
L. Catiline, not only at the hazard, of losing my reputation, but also my life.

4. But when I plainly saw, though you had been all satis^ied in the cause, if
I had put him to death according to his demerit, it could not be that I might
prosecute the Accomplices, so much should I be maligned: I brought it to this
pass, that you might then openly fight, when you manifestly saw your Enemy;
which Enemy, Gentlemen, how much you need fear, now he is gone, you may
understand by this, that I am troubled at nothing more than that he went out of
Town so ill attended; would he had carried along with him all his forces! He
took me out Tongillus, that he was scandalously reported to have been fond of
in his Childhood; Publicius and Munatius, whose debts contracted in Taverns,
could bring no fear to the State: He left behind him men, how considerable? o^
of what vast debts? how potent? how noble?

5. Therefore that Army of his^ in respect of our Gallick Legions, and that
Levy, which Q. Metellus made in the Picenian and Gallick Country, and these
forces, which are daily listed by us, I greatly slight, an Army made up of
desperate old men, debauched Farmers, and Country Beggars and Bankrupts, men
that had rather forfeit their Recognizance than quit his Colors, whom if I
should show, not so much as the Front of our Army, but only the Sheriffs Writ,
they will drop down, These that I see flaunting in the Market, nay, sitting in
the Senate, that are perfumed, that shine in Purple; I had rather he had
carried out his Soldiers with him; who, if they tarry here, take notice, that
not so much that Army, as these, that absent from their Colors, are to be
feared by us; and so much the more dangerous are they: because they are
sensible that I am informed of their designs; and yet are not conce^ned at it.

6. I see, to whose share Apulia is allotted, who has Tuscany, who the Picenian
Country, who the Gallick, who it was, that required he might carry on the
massacring and firing the City. They perceive all their Plots of the other
night have been brought to me, I declared them yesterday in the Senate,
Catiline himself was put in a fright, fled upon it. What do these stay for? I
assure them they are much mistaken, if they suppose my forbearance will always
continue. What I waited for, I have already attained; that you might all be
convinced there is a manifest Plot against the State, unless perchance there be
some, that imagine men of Catiline's temper do not abet Catiline. There is no
longer room for patience, the nature of affairs calls aloud for severity, yet I
will still allow them one favor; let them be gone, let them march out, let
them not suffer poor Catiline to pine away, for lack of them. I will show them
the way, he is gone the Aurelian Road, if they make haste, they will over-take
him before night.

7. Oh happy State, if it could drain out the sink of the Town. In truth, upon
the throwing off Catiline only, the State seems to me much eased, and on the
mending hand: For what mischief or villainy could be devised or thought on,
which he did not contrive? What Sorcerer in all Italy, what Hector, what
Highway-man, what Assassine, what Paricide, what Forger of Wills, what Cheat,
what Whoremaster, what Prodigal, what Adulterer, what infamous Strumpet, what
Debauchel of Youth, what debauched, what desperate person can be found, but
confesses Catiline was his great acquaintance? What Murders have been committed
these late years, that he had not a hand in? What abominable Rape, but of his
setting.

8. Now where was there ever such a spirit of inveigling youth as in him? who
did himself love some unnaturally, was scandalou^ly prostituted to the
unnatural love of others; some he promised the enjoyment of their lust, others
the death of their Parents, not only by his instigation, but by his
assistance^ and now, how of a sudden has he got together a great many men of
desperate fortunes, not only from the Town, but from the Country also? There
is none in debt, either in Rome, or any corner of all Italy, that he has not
drawn in to his incredible Confederacy in Treason.

9. And that you may perceive his different Inclinations in things of a
con^^ary Nature, there is none in the Fencing School, any thing forward to bold
attempts, but confesses, he was Catiline's Intimate: None any thing wanton or
loose on the Stage, but gives out that he and Catiline were in a manner all
one. And yet this very Person, inured to suffer Cold and Hunger and Thirst, and
watch in pursuit of Whoredom and Villainy, was cried up by these his Companions
as one hardy; when as the Aids of Industry and Instruments of Virtue, were
wasted upon Lust and Violence.

10. Now if his Comrades would go along with him, if the scandalous Crew of
desperate Persons would quit the Town, happy should we be, the State blessed,
and an Immortal Renown upon my Consulship! for the lusts of men now-a-dayes are
grown immoderate, their attempts inhumane and unsufferable; they think of
nothing but Massacres, but firing, but plundering, they have spent their own
Estates, they have squandred away their Fortunes, their Stock has been long
since gone, now their Credit begins to fail them; yet they have the same pride
as when they had a plentiful Estate. Now if amidst their Drinking and Gaming,
they only regarded Riot and Whoring, they were indeed little hopeful, but yet
tolerable. But who can endure this, that Cowards should lay wait for the
Valiant, Fools for the Wise, Sots for the Sober, Sluggards for the Vigilant?
That sit me at Treats with their Misses in their Laps, their Brains swimming
with Wine, Stomachs over charged with Meat, Garlands on their Heads, daubed
with Sweet Ointment, weakened with Whoring, and belch out in their talk the
slaughter of the honest Party and the firing of the City.

11. Over whom I am confident there hangs some fate, and that the rewards long
since due to their boldness, baseness, treachery, and lust, is either imminent,
or certainly approaching. Whom, if my Consulship, because it cannot cure, shall
cut off, it will not prolong some small and inconsiderable time, but many Ages
to the State: for there is no Nation, which we need fear, no King that can wage
war with the People of Rome: Pompey had a^ that time cleared the Mediterranean
of Pirates, and had well-nigh dispatched the long Wa^ with Mithridates King of
Pontus.
All foreign Affairs are quietly settled by Sea and Land, through the valor of
one man; the Plot is within; the danger locked within; the Enemy is within: We
have a Conflict with Luxury, with Madness, with Treachery. I declare my self,
Gentlemen, General in this War. I am contented to be maligned by desperate
persons. What can be healed, I will use all means to heal; what must be cut
off, I will not suffer to spread to the common destruction: Therefore either
let them be gone, or let them be quiet; or, if they do abide, both in Town and
in the same mind, let them expect what they deserve.

12. B^t some there are, Gentlemen, that say, Catiline was by me thrown into
Banishment. Which, if I could effect with a wo^d speaking, I would throw out
them that say so. For he, I Will warrant you, poor, timorous, and over-modest
man, could not bear the reproof of the Consul: as soon as commanded to go into
Banishment, obeyed Orders. Nay yesterday, when I was almost murdered in my own
house, I summoned a Senate into Jupiter Stator's Temple: I informed the
Senato^s of the whole matter, whither when Catiline was come, what Senators
spoke to him? who saluted him? In a word, who looked upon him, so well as a
forlorn Citizen, and not rather as a most dangerous Enemy? Nay the Chief of
that Order left the part of the Seat, toward which he came, naked and empty.

13. Hereupon, I, the severe Consul, that throw men into Banishment with a word
speaking, questioned Catiline, Whether he had been present, or no, at the It
was a fundam^ntal Law in Rom^ of the XII. Tabl^s, not to h^ld Night Me^^ings
within the City^ and there was a ^^^binian S^^tute, Q^^ conciones ullas
cl^ndestinas in (...)^ be con^^avisset, more majorum capital sup^licio
mult^retur. Po^tius Latr^^, H^ that s^all draw together (...) Meeting^ within
(...) City^ (...) suffer the pains of High Treason, which was with the Romans
to (...) ^yed to ^he Whipping-Post, scourged, and beheaded.
Night Meeting in M. Lecca's House^ when he, though bold enough, yet
self-convinced, was at first silent, I made furthe^ discovery, what he treated
of that Night, where he had been^ what h^ had resolved upon for the next night;
and informed how the whole Course of the War wa^ projected by him. When as he
stopped and stayed, I questioned him, Why he should make any demurre of going
thither, whither he had long since intended^ having I know, sent before, his
Arms, his Axes, his Rods, his Trumpets, his Ensigns, and that Silver Eagle, to
which he had set up at home a Chapel for his Treacheries.

14. Did I throw him into Banishment, that I saw was already entered upon a War?
For that Captain Ill warrant you, that has encamped in the Fesulan Country,
proclaimed War against the Roman people upon his own account, and that Camp
does not now wait for Catiline to be their General, and now being thrown into
Banishment, he will ^urn aside to Ca^iline leaving the Town, wrote Le^ters upon
the way to his friends and the Prime of the Nobility, that being he saw himself
^ircumvent^d by false Accusation, and could ^ot withstand the (...) of his
(...) with dr^^n to (...) se^^les; (...) in (...) no^ (...) he we^^ conscio^^
(...) himself of any such crime, but to prevent all occasion^ (...) ^^^t^rbing
the public Peace.

(...) is ^ famous Port in France, planted from Asia in (...) ^imes of the
Persian Empire; of old renowned for (...), ^ith other Virtues, Policy,
Learning, and an emi^ent affection to the Roman State.


Mars^illes, as they give out, and not into this Camp^ Oh unhappy condition,
not only of steering, but of saving the State. Now, if L. Catiline, hemmed in,
and disabled by my Counsels, Labors, and Dangers, should take a sudden fright,
alter his purpose, desert his Party, abandon his resolution of raising War,
from this Carier of Treason and Rebellion, should turn his Course into flight
and Exile; he will not be reported to have been by me disarmed of the weapons
of his insolency, nor astonished and affrighted by my diligence, nor put
besides his hopes and endeavors; but uncondemned innocent man, to have been
thrown into Banishment by the Consul, with foul and threatening words: and some
will have it be thought, if he shall do so, not that he was guilty, but
unfortunate, nor that I was a most diligent Magistrate, but a most cruel Tyrant.

15. I can well afford, Gentlemen, to bear the storm of this false and
unreasonable aspe^sion, so the danger of this dreadful and unnatural War be
diverted from you, let it, since they will have it so, be said that he was
thrown out by me, so he do, but go into Banishment: but take my word he will
not do so. Sirs! I shall never wish of the Immortal Gods, for the abating any
hard opinion of me, that you should hear L. Catiline is in the head of the
Enemies Army, and marching in the Field; yet within three days you will hear
it: and I much more fear the other thing, least the time may once come, wherein
it prove a greater fault that I let him go out, than that I threw him out: But
there being some, that say he is persecuted, when he went of himself, what
would those men have said, if he had been executed?

16. Although these very men, that give out that Catiline is gone to
Marseilles, do not so much complain, as fear that it is so. None of them has so
much tenderness for him, but had rather that he should go to Manlius than to
those of Marseill^s. But, in truth, had he never before designed, what he now
goes about, yet he had rather be killed in Rebellion than live in Banishment.
But now, when as nothing has yet befallen him, besides his own desire and
design, but that he went out of Rome, and we alive; let us rather wish he
would, then complain that he does go into Banishment.

17. But why are we thus long discoursing of one Enemy? and that Enemy that now
declares himself so, and whom I no longer fear; because there is, as I always
desired, a Wall between us; we speak nothing yet of those, that dissemble that
tarry behind at Rome, that keep amongst us? whom I do not so much endeavor to
punish, if it could any way be prevented, as to cure and reconcile them to the
State. Nor do I see, why that should not be possible, if they take my Counsel;
for I will relate to you, Gentlemen, of what sort of men those forces are made
up, then will I apply to the particulars the best Remedy my advice and
persuasion can provide.

18. One Rank of them is such, as, though they have great debts, yet have
greater Estates; out of love to which, they can by no means afford to get
themselves clear. The appearance of these men has the fairest show, for they
are substantial men; but their intention and pretense is most impudent. Should
you be plentiful and splendid in Lands, in Houses, in Plate, in Retinue, and in
all Accommodations, and do you stick to diminish some of your Estate, and to
purchase a good reputation? Why, what do you look for? For War? What? Do you
then think in the Common Desolation, that your possessions shall be sacred and
untouched? For In Cases of extraordinary public Necessities, there have been
framed Acts or P^oclamations, for the Releasing all old Debts to a certain day.
Such was the Jubilee among the Hebrews, such the Act called (...) or (...)
among the Greek^, as t^^se Novae Tabulae of the Romans; and such in some
measure are Acts in these later times, for the releasing of poor Prisone^^,
that shall swear themselves not worth 5 or 10 l.
a Bill to cancel old Debts? They are much mistaken, that look for that from
Catiline; I will help them to such a Bill, but it must be a Bill of Sale. For,
they who have Estates, can be preserved by no other means; which, if they would
have done sooner, neither (which, is the most foolish thing in the World) tire
out their Rents with paying interest; we might have had more able and honest
Citizens of them. But such men as these I think not very much to be feared,
because they may either be reclaimed, or, if they shall continue in the same
mind, they seem rather to me, such as will join their prayers than their arms
against the State.

19. Another sort is of those, that, though they are deeply in debt, yet they
affect Tyranny, they would be Princes; those places which they cannot look for,
if the State continue in peace, if it be Like the Fish^rm^n in ^he Fable, who
troubled the Waters, that ^e might c^tch the ^ore Fish.
disturbed, they hope they shall attain: Who should have this advice given
them, the selfsame, as all the rest, to despair of obtaining that, which they
attempt: First of all, that I my self am vigilant, active, provident over the
State; then the well-affected are in great Courage, great Concord, in very
great number; that there are great Forces of Soldiery; lastly, that the
Immortal Gods will aid and assist this invincible People, most renowned Empire,
and most beautiful City, against such a prodigious Treason. But grant they had
obtained, what they pursue with such madness, do they hope, that in the ashes
of the Town, and blood of their Citizens, which with a traitorous and an
unnatural heart they have conspired, themselves should be Consuls, or
Protectors, or indeed Kings? Do they not see, that they lust after that, which,
if they could compass, must needs be granted some Fugitive or Fencer?

20. A third sort is well stricken in years, yet trained up to hardiness; in
which rank is Manlius himself, whose Charge Catiline has now taken. Sulla
having overthrown the Marian Party and mastered the State, placed his
Victorious Army in the attainted Lands; which h^ divided amongst 47 Legions.
These are persons of those Plantations, that Sulla settled, all which I take
to be of honest Citizen^ and valiant Men. But these are Planters, who live too
high and pro^d upon their unexpected and new got moneys: These, whilst they
build like Princes, whilst they pride themselves in their Manor Houses,
Coaches, great Retinues, Entertainments, Furnitures, are sunk into so great
Debt, that if they would ever come out, Sulla, must be again raised from the
Dead by these: who have also drawn in some Farmors, poor and needy men, upon
the same expectation of their old Rapines; both of whom, I place, Sirs, in the
same Rank of Robbers and Plunderers. But I advise them this, Let them leave off
their madness, and dreaming of Sequestrations^ and Protectorships: For the
Country having been burnt, retains such a dread of those times, that
now-a-dayes not only Men, but the Brutes themselves, in my opinion, would not
endure such outrages.

21. The fourth sort indeed is heterogeneous and mixed and factious, such as
have been long since sunk; such as never can hold up their head again; such as
partly by idleness, partly by ill manageing their business; partly by bad
husbandry, are tottering with old Debts: who being tired with Suits, Judgments,
and Outlawries, are said to flock in great numbers, both out of Town and
Country to that Camp. These men I judge not so much to be stout Soldiers, as
Shifting Bafflers: Which persons, first, If they cannot stand, even let them
fall; but so, that not only the State, but not so much as their next Neighbor
should be sensible of it: For I do not understand the reason why if they cannot
live in credit, they should desire to fall with dishonor; or why they should
suppose it less pain to sink with many, than in sinking alone.

22. A fifth sort is of Paricides, Murderers, and in a word, of all
Malefactors; whom I do not entice from Catiline, neither can they be torn from
him; and in truth let them perish in Rebellion, being so many, that the Prison
cannot hold them.

23. But the last sort is, not only in their Roll, but also in their course of
life, that which is properly Catilines, of his List; nay of his Lust and Cap:
such as you see with set and oynted Hair, either Beardless, or with spruce
Beards; in The measure of commendable and proper habit, is such as either
conduc^th to, or at least consists with readiness of Action in every ones
place; therefore the Romans condemned in Men, especially Soldiers, Garments
with Sleeves and Trains.
Tunicks, with Sleeves, wrapped in Mantles, and not in Gowns: All the indust^y of
whose life and labor of watching, is laid out in Revellings. In this Crew, all
Gamesters, all Adulterers, all loose and debauched persons do keep. These fine
and soft Lads, have not only the Trade of Courting and being Courted, nor of
To sing, play on Instruments of Music and dance curiously, were qualisications
of no credit at Rome, and looked upon as light and aerie, nor suitable to the
Roman gravity, but in high esteem among the Grecians.
Singing and Dancing, but also of flourishing Daggers and scattering Poison;
who, unless they be gone, unless they perish, though Catiline should perish, be
well assured, this will be a standing Nursery of Catilines in the State. But
what do those poor wretches mean? Can they carry their small Girls with them
into the Camp? And how can they be without them, especially these long Cold
Nights? Or in what sort can they bear the A ridg^ of Hills running the length
of Italy North and South from the Alps to the Straight of Sicily.
Appennine, and those Frosts and Snows, unless they think they shall the more
easily endure the Weather, because they have practiced to dance naked at Feasts?

24. A War greatly to be dreaded, when Catiline has about him this ^ewd
Lifeguard! Now, Gentlemen, draw up your Garrisons and your Armies against
these precious Forces of Catiline; and first, against that broken and battered
Fencer, range your Consuls and Generals; then against that naked and
weather-beaten party of shipwrackt Creatures; draw forth the flower and
strength of all Italy. Now the Cities of the Plantations and Boroughs shall
balance Catiline's Fastnesses in the Woods: Nor in trut^ ought I to compare
your other Forces, Tro^phies, and Strong holds, with the want and beggary of
that Rebel.

25. But if, waving all these things, whereof we have suppli^s, he is in want;
the Senate, the Knights, the Roman People, the City, the Treasury, the Customs,
all Italy, the several Provinces, Foreign Nations; I say, if waving these
things, we would match the bare causes which are in dispute one with another;
by that only we may apprehend how flat they are laid: For, on the one side
modesty fights, on the other, scorn; on this part, Purity, on the other
Debauchery; on this side Credit, on that side Knavery; on this Loyalty, on that
Treason; on this side Stayedness, on the other Madness; on this side Honor, on
that Baseness; on this Government, on that Lust: In sum, on this side,
Equity, Temperance, Courage, Prudence; all Virtues, contend with Oppression,
with Luxury, with Cowardice, with Rashness, with all Vices. Lastly, Wealth with
Want, Right Reason with Absu^dness, Good Judgment with Infatuation. Lastly,
Fair Hope engages with the Despair of all things. In such a Combat and Battle,
though the Affections of men should with draw, would not the Immortal Gods
themselves oblige so many and so great Vices to be over-thrown by these most
Excellent Virtues.

26. Which things being so, Gentlemen, do yo^, as I have before said, watch and
ward your private houses: I have taken Order and provided, that the City be
sufficiently guarded without putting you into any fear or Alarm. All your
Planters and Burgesses, having been certified by (...) of this Nights Excursion
of Catiline, will sufficiently defend their Cities and Bounds. The Fencers,
which he thought would make him a great and a sure party, although they are
better affected than some of the Senators, shall yet be secured. Q. Metellus,
that I upon prospect of this, sent before into the Gallican and Picenian
Country, will either surprise him himself, or suppress all his motions and
endeavors. But for the settling, dispatching, and ordering all other things,
we will immediately move the House, which you see is summoned.

27. Now for those which have tarr^ed behind in Town, and in truth, which have
been left there by Catiline, to the destruction of it and all you; though they
are enemies, yet because they are natural Citizens, I would warn them again and
again. My forbearing hitherto, if it have seemed to any too slack, has waited
for this, that what was hidden, might break out. For the time to come, I can
forget no longer that this is my Country, that I am their Consul; that I must
either live with them, or die for them. There is no Porter at the Gate, no
Scout upon the Road, if any will go out, they may shift for themselves: But
whoever shall stir in the Town, that I shall discover not only his acting, but
any attempting, or endeavor against his Country, he shall find; that there
are in the City, vigilant Consuls, there are excellent Magistrates, there is a
Courageous Senate, that there are Arms and a Prison, which our Ancestors have
appointed to be for the avenging of unnatural and notorious Villainies.

28. And all this shall be so carried, Gentlemen, that the most important
affairs with the least noise, the greatest dangers without alarm, an intestine
and domestic War, the cruellest and greatest as ever was recorded, may be
suppressed under my single Conduct and Generalship in the Long Robe: Which I
will so manage, Gentlemen, if it be any ways possible, that not so much as any
Criminal in the Town may endure the punishment due to his Treachery. But if
open Rebellion, If the imminent hazard of my Country, shall force me from this
temper of mind, I shall be sure to compass that other thing, which in so great
and so dangerous a Rebellion, seems a boldness to wish, that no honest person
may miscarry, and that by the execution of a few, ye may be all preserved.

29. Which things I promise ^ou, Gentlemen, not upon Confidence of my own
Wisdom, nor the Counsels of Men, but upon many, and those undoubted Intimations
of the Immortal Gods; by whose guidance, I have come to this hope and
resolution; who now, not at a distance, as they were wont in forme^ times, from
a foreign and remote Enemy, but here in presence, do defend their Temples, and
the Houses of the City with their power and assistance; whom you, Si^s, in duty
ought to petition, worship, and implore, That what City they have pleased to
raise to be most beautiful, flourishing, and powerful, they would preserve from
the unnatural Treason of most desperate Citizens, all the power of Foreign
Enemies being subdued both by Sea and Land.

The Third ORATION Against CATILINE.
The Argument.
The Conspirators that were in the City, omitted no time or means to strengthen
their Party, gaining all Citizens that were ill-inclin'd or discontented, and
Strangers too: For Lentulus observing that the Allobroges, a Nation about
Savoy, that now is, were deeply engaged both on public and private accounts,
applies one Umbrenus, who had traded there, to their Ambassadors; promises
relief of their condition, requires them to power in a Party of Gallick Cavalry
to join with the Italian Infantry. They preferring certain favor before
uncertain hopes, reveal the matter to Q. Fabius Sanga, Patron of their
Country, he discovers it to Cicero, but is advised to put the Ambassadors to
hold on fair with them, and so sound the depth of the Business, with means to
discover it. They according to dir^ction, insist for an Oath signed under their
hands, to carry their State, which Lentulus, Cethegus, Statilius gav^, Cassius
only promised. The Night of their departure homewards, Cicero lodges two
Companies under the Captains C. Pontinius and L. Flaccus, one on either side
the Pons Milvius, which way they necessarily pass, and intercepts them, their
Guide Titus Vultureius, and with them a Box of Letters both to Catiline and
their Senate. Then by break of day summons a Senate into the Temple of Concord.
What was there done that day, b^ing the V. of December in the Evening, informs
the People at the Place of Assembly.

1. YOu see, Countrymen, the State, and all your Lives, your Goods, Estates,
Wives, and Children, and this Seat of the most renowned Empire, the most
fortunate and beautiful City, this day by the peculiar love of the Immortal
Gods toward you; by my labors, counsels, and dangers, rescued from Fire and
Sword, and out of the very Jaws of destruction, and preserved and restored to
you.

2. Now if those days, wherein we are delivered, are no less delightful and
remarkable to us, than those whereon we are born; because the joy of our being
preserved is certain, the condition whereunto we are born, uncertain; and
because we are not sensible of our being born but take delight at our being
preserved. In truth, since that we have extolled in love and glory Romulus,
tha^ founded this City When Romulus was for his absolute and rough disposition
in Government, torn in pieces (as some suspected) by the Senate: the same
senate to allay the grief of the People and color that Action, voted him
Divine Honors: what time also Julius P^oculus a Roman Knight, made Oath that
he had app^ared to him in a Shape more excellent than humane, and by him sent a
certain Message to the Senate, upon which depended the future glory of that
Empire.
to the Immortal Gods, he, sure, that has prese^ved this City so founded and
enlarged, shall have reason to find some esteem with you an^ your posterity.
For we have quenched those Brands, which were put to, well-nigh, and laid
about, the Temples, Oratories, Houses, and Battlements of the whole City. We
too have bea^^en back the Swords drawn a^gainst the State, and have warded off
the points of them from your Throats.

3. All which having been in the Senate cleared, manifested, and discoverd by
me, I will now in short report to you, Countrymen, that you, who both are
ignorant, and desirous to be informed, may know, both how great, and how plain
they are; and by what course traced out and taken. First of all, since
Catiline, a few days ago, broke out of the City, having left in Rome the
Accomplices of his Treason, and the most stout Commanders of this Unnatural War,
I always have been vigilant and provident, Countrymen, how we might be safe
amidst so great and secret Plottings. For then, when I routed Catiline out of
Town (nor do I now fear the Censure of that word, the contrary being rather to
be apprehended, that he went out alive) but then, when I desired him to be
banished the Verge of this Court, I either thought that the rest of the
Conspirators would have gone out together, or that those who tarried behind,
would be weak and disabled without him.

4. But now since I saw tha^ those, who, I know, were in^lamed with the
greatest rage and malignancy, were amongst us, and tarried behind at Rome, I
employed all my time day and night, to discover and see what they consulted and
designed; that so, seeing my report could find but small credit with your Ears,
by reason of the hainousness of the Treason, I might render the matter so
evident, that you should then in your minds provide for your safety, when you
saw with your Eyes the naked Conspiracy: Therefore, as soon as I came to know
that the Ambassadors of the Allobroges had been tampered with by P. Lentulus,
to raise a Transalpine War, and to put all Gauland into an uproar, and that
they were sent into Gauland^ to their Countrymen, and under one, with Letters
and Instructions to Catiline, and that Vulturcius wen^ along in their Train and
carried a Letter Express to Catiline: I thought I had an opportunity to put
into my hand, that what was the hardest point, and what I always wished for
from the Immortal Gods, the whole matter might be clearly discovered not only
by me bu^ by the Senate and your selves.

5. Therefore yesterday, I sent for L. Flaccus and C^ Pontinius Praetors, most
valiant and confiding persons; I declared the whole matter, showed them my
pleasure. Now they, as men of an eminent and singular affection to the State,
without excuse or delay, undertook the business: and when it drew toward
night, got secretly to Pons Milvius a Town two Mile from Rome i^ the Via
Flaminia, where was a Bridge over the Tyber not unlike our Bow-Brid^e.
Pons Milvi^s, and there in the adjoining Towns so divided themselves, that the
Bridge and the River Tyber was between them. They carried also along with them
without any suspicion many stout men, and I too had sent thither many choice
youths^ wearing Swords, out of the Towns where Mark^ts were kept ev^ry Ninth
day, and Causes heard, or Sessions and Assizes held, were called Prae^ecturae.
Reate is a Town of the Sabines, the very Navel o^ It^ly and Country of Varro.
Jurisdiction of Reate; whose service I continually make use of in guiding of
the State.

6. Now the Third Watch being near ended, so soon as the Ambassadors of the
Allobroges, with a great Train began ^o be upon the Bridge^ and Vulturcius with
them, they are assailed, Swords we^e drawn both by them and by ours. The matter
was known only to the Praetors, was unknown to the rest. Then at the coming in
of Pontinius and Flaccus, the Fray, that was engaged in, is appeased. Whatever
Letters were in that Retinue, are delivered with the Seals entire to the
Praetors; the persons apprehended are brought before me about break of day:
Hereupon I sent for the most dangerous Contriver of all these Plots, Cimber
Gabinius, suspecting no such matter; then afterward P. Statilius is fetched,
and after him Cethegus; latest of all came Lentulus. I suppose because in
making dispatches, late last night he had sat up beyond his ordinary hour.

7. Now when it was the opinion of the most eminent and honorable Men of the
City, who upon hearing the matter, came early to my house in great number; That
the Letters should be first opened by me, before they were moved in the House,
lest, if there should be nothing in them, so great an Alarm might seem to have
been rashly given the City. I said, I would not, but in a public danger,
propound the matter first to the Public Council. For, Countrymen, if that had
not been in them, which I was informed of, yet I did not suspect, that in so
great dangers of the State, the blame of over-diligence, were to be feared by
me, I suddenly called a full House, as you see.

8. And in the mean time, presently at the advice of the Allobroges, dispatched
C. Sulpitius the Praetor, a stout man, to search for Arms in the House of
Cethegus; from whence he brought out a great quantity of Stiletto's and Swords.
I called in Vulturcius without the Gauls, and by the Order of the House passed
the Public Faith to him, advising him, that without fear he wo^ld discov^r
what he knew^ thereupon he, being s^arcely come to himself from a great fright,
said, that he had instructions from Pub. Lentulus to Catiline, and Letters that
he should use the assistance of Slaves, and bring his Army with all expedition
up to the City; to that intent, that when they had fired the City in all
Corners, as it was laid out and divided, and had made an infinite Massacre of
the Citizens; he might be at hand to glean up them that escaped, and join his
Forces with these City Commanders.

9. But the Gauls, brought in, said, They had an Oath and Letters given to them
by P. Lentulus, Cethegus, Statilius, to their Nation; and that such Orders were
given them by these, and by L. Cossius, they should send their Cavalry with
all speed into Italy, and for Infantry they should not want. Also that Lentulus
had assured them out of the Syb^^s Books and the Prophecies of Southsayers,
that he is that Third Cornelius, to whom the Sovereignty and Empire of this
City must come: That Sulla and Cir^na had been before him; and that he said
this year was fatal for the destruction of this City and Empire, being the
Absolu^ion] Marcia and Licinia were absolved by L. Metellus High Priest, with
the whole College, only Aemilia condemned for Incest.
10 th, year after the Absolution of the Virgins, and Bu^ning] L. Scipio and
Norban^s being Consuls, the Capitol which had stood from the time of the Kings
400 years and upward, and was before the Usurpation of Sulla burnt.
the twentieth since the Burning of the Capitol. They said too that there was
this Controversy between Cethegus and the rest, that whereas Lentulus and the
others would have the Massacre made, and the City burnt on the The ^east of
Saturn was the 19 th of December, what time the whole City used to go to the
Moun^ Aventine, there to sacrifice and keep Festival as it were in the
Country. The Chief Magistrates were therefore then to be out of Town, and much
license allowed the Apprentices and Slaves, who were for that time of mis-rule
exempted from the commands of their Masters.
Saturnalia. Cethegus thought, that was too long.

10. Now, not to be tedious, Countrymen, we commanded the Letters to be
produced, which were said to have been delivered by each person respectively.
The first we showed to Cethegus, he knew the Seal; we cut the thread; read it:
There was written with his own hand, To the Senate and the People of the
Allobroges, that he would effect, what he had assured their Ambassadors:
desiring that they also, on their part would effect what their Ambassadors
should direct them. Then Cethegus, who a little before had made some answer
about the Swords and Daggers which were found in his House, and had said, That
he was always a Lover of good Blades: Upon reading the Letters, being dismayed
and confounded, through the Conviction of his Conscience, was of a sudden put
to silence. Statilius was brought in, he knew both his Seal and his Hand; the
Letters were read to the same purpose in a manner, as he confessed it. Then I
showed Lentulus his Letter, and inquired, Whether he knew the Seal? By nod he
owned it. I marry, said I, It is a Noted Seal, the Image of your Grandfather, a
most Honorable Person, who bare a singular affection to his Country and
Countrymen, which might of it self, though dumb, reclaim you from so great a
Treason.

11. The Letter in the same tenor, to the Senate and People of the Allobroges
is read, if he had any thing to say for himself in this matter, I gave him
liberty. Thereupon he first denied it, but a little after, the whole
Information being produced and declared, he stood up, asked the Gauls what he
had to do with them, that they should come to his House? Asked Vulturcius also
the like, who having answered him in short and coherently, with resolution, by
whose means, and how often they came to him; and having asked him, Whether he
had spoken nothing to them about the Sybils Books? Then he of a sudden, being
for his wickedness infatuated, showed, how great the force of Conscience is.
For, whereas he might safely have denied that, of a sudden, contrary to the
expectation of all, he confessed it: So, not only that wit of his, and P
Lentulus was a Nobleman, that year one of the Eight Pretores U^bani, or Chief
Justices of Rom^, In speaking, his ma^ter and language however indifferent, yet
the Comeliness of his Person, Gesture of his Body, full of Art and Gracefuln^ss,
a sweet and loud Voice, did wonderfully set off.
practice of speaking, wherein he always had good ability, but also through
the greatness of his manifest and convict Treason, that That he wanted not
confidenc^, may be j^dg'd by (...) for being pressed for ^aving cheated the
State, he jok'd in the Senate, he could not give his Accounts, bu^ must hold
hi^ Leg (as e^ Boys-play, they that miss the Ball) to be s^ung a^. Leg is
(...) Surname of that Family, and given him as a Nickname. Also in a certain
Trial having bribed the Judges, and coming off by t^^ Voices, ^e said, I here
was so much money lost as the other had, when it had been enough to have come
off by one Voice.
impudence, wherein he surpassed all, and presumptuousness failed him.

12. But Vul^urcius of a sudden requires, that the Letters should be produced
and opened, which, he said, were given him by Lentulus to carry to Catiline.
Thereupon Lentulus being exceedingly confounded, yet knew his Seal and Hand^
Now they were written without any Name, but thus: Who I am, you shall know of
this Bearer, whom I have sent Express to you; look that you play the man, and
consider what pass you are come to, and see what is at the present necessary
for you. Look that you take on the Aids of all, even of the meanest. Then
Gabinius brought in, when as at first he began to answer peremptorily, at last
denied nothing of that which the Gauls charged upon him.

13. Now as to me, Countrymen, whereas those Arguments and Proofs of the
Treason seem most certain, the Letters, Seals, Hands, lastly, the Confession of
every one; so did those other seem more sure, their Color, Eyes, Looks,
Silence: For they were so amazed, so fixed their Looks on the ground, so slily
now and then eyed one another, that no longer by others, but they seemed to be
by themselves discovered. The Proofs being produced and declared, I put the
Question to the Senate, What they would resolve upon for securing the State?
Most severe and courageous Votes were given by the leading Men, which the
Senate followed without any dissent; and because the Order is not yet drawn up,
I shall repeat to you, Countrymen, by heart what the Senate voted.

14. First of all, The Thanks of the House were given me in an ample manner,
because by my courage, counsel, providence, the Commonwealth had been delivered
from most imminent dangers. Then L. Flaccus and Caius Pomplinius are deservedly
and justly praised; They w^^^ committed not into the public ^aole but confined
under the custody of c^rtain Great m^n.
because they had courageously and faithfully executed what I committed to
their Charge. Ca. Antonius a valiant man, my Colleague, has his share of praise
given him too, for having removed those that were engaged in this Conspiracy
from his Cabinet Council and the Secrets of ta^te. And thus they resolved, That
P. ^^^^tulus to P. Lentulus Spinther who was then Aedili^ ( an Officer a^ a
Mayor.)
P. Lentulus having first laid down the Praetorship, should be taken into
Custody: Also that C. Cethegus to Q. Cornificius.
C. Cethegus, L. Statilius to C. Caesar.
L. Statilius, and P. Gabinius to M. Crassus. Only these four were then taken
Publius Gabinius, who were all personally present, should be committed: In
case they should be taken.
and the same was voted too against Lu. Cassius, who had sued for a Commission
to fire the City: against A Burgess of Terracina^ who having inti^^tion that
the Plot was discovered^ attempted to fli^ but^ was ta^en (...) the way and^
brought tres^^c^, h^ was acc^^^ingly committed to Co. Terentius the Senator.
M. C^parius, to whom^ as it was informed, Apulia was allotted, for drawing in
the Herdsmen: against P. Furius, who is of those Plantations, that L^ Sulla
settled in Fesulae: against Q. Magius Chilo, who together with this F^rius, was
alw^yes busy in this practicing the Allobroges: against P. Umbre^us, a
Freedman, by whom as it was evidenced, the Gaul^ were first brought in to
Gabinius.

15. And the Senate used such Gentleness, Countrymen, that, out of so great a
Conspiracy, and such a power and multitude of homebred Enemies, the
Commonwealth being preserved by the punishment of nine most rotten members, it
is supposed the minds of the rest may be cured. And further, a Thanksgiving to
the Immortal Gods for their exceeding goodness, was voted to be kept upon my
account; which has never been done before to any in the Long Robe since the
Foundation of the City, but to me: and it was drawn up in these words, Because
I had delivered the City from firing, the Citizens from slaughter, and Italy
from war. Which Thanksgiving if it be compared with others, Countrymen, this
difference may be sound, that others have been appointed for serving, mine for
the preserving of the State. And that which was in the first place to be done,
is passed and performed. For P. Lentulus, although discovered by his Proofs and
Confessions, had been by the Judgment of the Senate The form of his degrading
from the Chief Iustice-ship was such, that he was disrobed of his Scarlet Gown
in the Senat^, and put on Mourning Weeds suitabl^ to his condition, as being a
Criminal under Trial.
degraded not only from the Dignity of Praetor, but from the liberty of a
Citizen, yet did lay down his Magistracy; that, what C. Marius, that excellent
person never scrupled at for the killing of C. Glaucia, the Praetor, against
whom there was no Vote passed by name, we might be delivered of that scruple,
in executing Lentulus a private man.

16. Now, seeing, Countrymen, you have the unnatural Generals of this most
wicked and dangerous Rebellion, in hold and prison, ye ought to judge, that all
the forces of Catiline, all his hopes and strength, these dangers of the City
being prevented, are fallen to the ground: whom indeed when I turned out of
Town, I foresaw this in my mind, Countrymen, that if Catiline were got out of
the way, I had no reason to fear, either the drowsiness of P. Lentulus, or the
fat guts of L. Cassius, nor the hotheaded rashness of Ca. C^thegus. He was the
only person of them all to be feared, but so long as he continued within the
Town, he had intelligence of every thing; he had access to every body: He had
ability, had confidence, to break the question to them, to feel them, to
practice them: He had a Head shaped for any Exploit; and to that Head, was
wanting neither Tongue nor Hand. Now for the execution of his other business,
he had certain choice and suitable Instruments: Nor yet, as soon as he had
given a thing in Charge, did he reckon his work done; there was nothing but he
overlooked himself, compassed in good time, watched and drudged for; could bear
Cold, Thirst, Hunger.

17. This person, so eager, so forward, so audacious, so subtle, so watchful at
his Treason, so active in mischief, had I not driven from his secret Ambushes
in Town, to open action in the Field (to tell you, Countrymen, what I think) I
had not easily prevented this great mischief from falling upon your Necks. He
would not have pitched you the Saturnales, nor so long before have given out
the fatal day for the destruction of the State, neither would he have been so
far overseen, as that his Seal, his Letters, no, not that any witnesses of such
open Treason should be produced. All which, now in his absence, have been so
carried, that never was theft in any private house so openly detected, as this
so great Conspiracy in the State has been found and convicted. But if Catiline
had tarried in Town to this day, although as long as he was here, I obviated
and prevented his designs, yet, to speak with the lowest, we must have fought
with him, nor could we ever, as long as that Enemy had been in Town, with so
great peace, such quiet, such silence, have freed the State from so great
dangers.

18. Although all these things, Countrymen, I have so managed, that they may
be perceived to have been foreseen and carried on by the Council and Guidance
of the Immortal Gods. Which, as we may conjecture, because the conduct of such
weighty affairs may hardly be judged within the compass of humane policies, so
indeed in such present manner of late have they aided and assisted us, that we
might almost see them with our Eyes: For, to wave those things, Meteors like
Torches in the West, seen by night, and the Heavens as it were all on fire; to
pass by Lightnings, Earthquakes, and the other Prodigies, which have happened
in our Consulship, so many, that the Immortal Gods seem with a Voice from
Heaven to have proclaimed the things which are now come to pass. This one
thing, Countrymen, which I shall mention, must neither be omitted, nor
neglected.

19. For ye must needs remember, when Cotta and Torquatus were Consuls, that
many Turrets in the Capitol were struck with Lightning, what time also the
Images of the Immortal Gods were beaten down, and the Statues of Ancient Men
overthrown, and As w^ engross our Acts of Parliament and ^ile the Originals up
in the Records; so the ancient Romans when their Law had been the third
Market Day approved by the People, engraved it in Brass Tables and laid it up
in the Treasury. The XII. Tables so engraved, were laid up in the Tower.
the Brass Tables of the Law melted; Romulus too, that founded this City, was
smitten, whom, you remember to have been gilt in the Capitol, a Babe, and
sucking with the Wolves Teats in his Mouth. At what time, the Diviners, having
been convented from all Etruria said, That Slaughters and Fires, and the
abolition of the Laws, and Civil and Domestic Wars, and ruin of the whole City
and Empire did approach; unless the Immortal Gods, attoned by all means, should
by their absolute power almost alter the course of Fate.

20. Therefore upon their Interpretations at that time, both Plays were for ten
days celebrated, and nothing omitted, which might tend toward the atonement of
the Gods. The same Southsayers too gave order, To make a larger Image of
Jupiter, and to place it on high, and turn it East, contrary to what it had
been before; and said, They had hopes, if that Image, which you see, looked
toward the East, and the Iudgement-Hall and the Senate House, it would come to
pass, that those designs, which were secretly plotted against the safety of the
City and Empire, should be brought to light; so that they might be clearly seen
by the Senate and People of Rome. Now those Consuls agreed with Workmen to have
it erected in that posture; but the slowness of the Work was such, that it was
neither set up by the former Consuls, nor by us till this very day.

21. Here, who can be so destitute of Truth, so obstinate, so senseless, as to
deny this whole visible World, and especially this City, to be ruled by the
providence and power of the Immortal Gods? For whereas such Interpretation was
given, that Slaughters, Fires, and Subversion of the State, were in contriving,
and that by lewd Citizens; which at that time for the hainousness of the
Crimes, seemed to some incredible: You have found those things, not only
designed, but also attempted by unnatural Citizens. And is not that so plain a
thing, that it may seem to have come to pass by the Guidance of the good and
great Jupiter, that when as to day morning, both the Conspirators and the
Informers against them, were by my order carried into the Temple of Concord, at
that very time the Image was setting up? Which being placed, and turned toward
you and the Senate, both the Senate and you have seen what things were
contrived against the safety of every one, to be all brought to light and
manifested.

22. So much the more hatred and punishment were they worthy of, who have
endeavored to wrap in a deadly and unnatural Flame, not only your Seats and
Houses, but also the Temples and Oratories of the Immortal Gods; whom, if I
should say that I resisted, I should take too much upon me, and were
intolerable. It was that, that Jupiter that resisted them. He was pleased to
preserve the Capitol; he, to preserve these Temples; he, this City; he, all of
you. By the guidance of the Immortal Gods, I received these impressions and
impulses, and attained to these so evident proofs. Now this practicing of the
Allobroges, a business of such importance, would never truly have been so
sottishly trusted by Lentulus, and the other homebred Enemies, both to
Strangers and to Barbarians; nor Letters committed, unless by the judgment of
the Immortal Gods so desperate an attempt had been deprived of ordinary
prudence; nay, that Gauls being of a State hardly well-reduced, which is the
only Nation left, that seems both able and not unwilling to make War with the
Roman People, should yet neglect the hope of Empire and of great advantages,
freely offered them by Patricians, and should prefer your safety before their
own power: Do you not think that this came from God? especially when they might
have overcome us, not by fighting, but by holding their peace?

23 Therefore, Countrymen, seeing that a Thanksgiving is voted before all the
Images, solemnize those days with your Wives and Children. For many honors
have been justly and of due given to the Immortal Gods, but in truth none ever
more justly: For being rescued from most cruel and miserable destruction,
rescued without slaughter, without blood, without Army, without fighting, in
your Gowns, I being your Commander and General in the Long Robe, ye have
gotten the Victory.

24. Now call to mind, Countrymen, all Civil Dissentions, not those only,
which ye have heard of, but these also, which your selves do remember and have
seen: L. Sulla suppressed P. Sulpitius a Tr^bune of the Commons, would have got
certain Laws passed; the Consuls oppose; he wi^h the favor of Marius fal^s
upon them and kills the Son of Q. Pompey, who was Son in Law of Sulla the other
Consul; Sulla brings up his Army ^o Town, overthrows the Tribunes, and exc^p^s
from pardon for Life or Estate, 12 men, whereof P. Sulpi^i^s is taken and
slain; but Marius by ship got over to Africa, C. Marius is called the Preserver
of Rome, because he ov^rthrew two powerful and victorious Armies of the Gauls
pressing into Italy, the one at Ambrun, the other at Aix l^ Chappelle.
P. Sulpitius; he banished C. Marius, the Preserver of this City, and many
valiant men, he partly banished, partly slew. C. Cornelius Cinna would have got
certain Laws passed when L. Sulla was abroad; Cn. Octavius the other Consul
forced him away by the overthrow of his party in Town, d^graded him from the
Consulship, and proclaimed him a Rebel and T^aitor.
Cn. Octavivius being Consul, chased out his Colleague from the Town by force
of Arms. All this place was covered with heaps of Corpses and the blood of
Citizens. Afterward Cinna afterward gathered forces in Italy, and Marius
coming over joins with him; as also Sertorius and Cn. Ca^ho, they march up in
four Bodies and take Rome.
Cinna and Marius prevailed. But then Cn. Octavius the Consul, Q. Catulus, ^.
Merula the Priest of^ Jupiter, M Antony and C. Caesar two most eminent Orators,
Crassus the Father and Son, and other Noblemen of the adverse party without
number were slain; the S^nate met him; as he passed by them with a Band of
Slaves at his heels, whomsoever he did not reach out his hands to salut^ them,
the Slaves presently slew.
the most eminent men being slain, the eyes of the City were put out;
afterward Sulla upon the ^ews of this pieces up a Peace with Mithridates and
brings home his Army into Italy, overthrows his adversaries, but then h^ filled
the City and all Italy with slaughter, killed 90 Senators, of which 1^ were
Consular men; 2600 Knights, 70000 Roman Citizens in cold blood, over and above
innumerable slain in Battle.
Sulla avenged the cruelty of this Victory; with how great diminution of the
Citizens and calamity of the State Eith^r because it w^^ fresh in memory, or
for the atrocity of the fact.
it need not be mentioned. M. Lepidus about the funeral and disanulling the
Acts of Sulla, Q. Ca^ulus ( Son of Q. Catulus ^bove) said to be slain by Cinna,
when their Consulship was ended, they sought it out in the Campus Martius,
where Lepidus being beaten, ^^ed into Sardinia, and there died a natural death.
M. Lepidus dissented from Quintus Catulus, a most gallant and valiant man, not
so much his own destruction brought sorrow to the Commonwealth as that of
others.

25. And these dissentions were of this nature, Countrymen, as ^ended not to
the aboli^ion, but the change of Government. These men did not desire the State
should be confounded, but that themselves should be the principals in such as
was. Nor would they have the City burnt, but themselves to flourish in it^ yet
all these dissentions, whereof none desired the destruction of the State, were
such, as they were decided, not by an accommodation of parties, but by the
Carnage of Citizens. But in this War, the greatest and cruellest of any
recorded; such a War as never any Barbarians waged with their own Nation: in
which War, this Condition was resolved upon by Lentulus, Catilin^, Cassius,
Cethegus: That all they, who could save themselves in saving the City, should
have no Quarter given; I have so behaved my self, Countrymen, that all of you
are preserved in safety. And when as your Enemies had reckoned, that so many
Citizens should survive as were the remainder of a boundless Massacre; and so
much of the City should stand, as the flame could not take in, I have preserved
both City and Citizens safe and sound.

26. For which so great actions, Countrymen, I require from you no Preferment.
Reward of Virtue, nor Triumph.
Badge of Honor, nor Statue. M. Cato the Elder said^ I had rather men should
enquire why has Cato no Im^ge? than why has h^ one? And Agesilaus the
L^cedemonia^ General when the Greeks in sia had ordered him Stat^es to b^ se^
up in their most famous Cities, wrote to them to this purpose, Let there be no
Picture nor Molten or Graven Image of me; and dying, requested the like ^f his
Friends; for if, says he, I have done any worthy Action, that will of it self
be my Monument: but if not, all Statues that can be made, can be no Monument to
me. Alike m^deration of spirit Tully pres^rv'd, when having been Pr^consul or
Lieutenant of Asia, and gov^rn'd in that Charge with great integrity, would yet
admit only verbal ackno^ledgments, but continued to refuse erecting Statues to
him.
Monument of praise besides the everlasting memory of this day. I would have
deposited and erected in your Bosoms, all my Triumphs, all Ornaments of
Honor, Monuments of Glory, Badges of Praise. No dumb thing can take with me,
nothing silent; in a word, nothing of that nature, which men of not any great
merit may attain. In your memory, Countrymen, shall our Actions be cherished,
in your discourses shall they grow up, in the Records of History shall they
come to age and full strength; and I judge, that the same length of time, which
I hope will be parallel to Eternity, is propagated both to the preservation of
this City, and to the memory of my Consulship; and that at one time in this
State were Pompey and Caesar.
two Citizens; the one whereof has bounded the extent of your Empire, no^ by
the Terrestrial but the Celestial Regions; the other preserved the Mansion and
Seat of the same Empire.

27. But because there is not a like fortune and condition of the things which
I have acted, as of those, who have waged foreign wars; because I must live
with them I have vanquished and subdued; they have left their Enemies, either
slain, or brought into bondage. It is your part, Countrymen; to provide, if
others good actions advantage them, that mine may not come to prejudice me.
For, that the treacherous and unnatural intentions of audacious men, might not
hurt you, I have provided: that they may not hurt me, it is your part to
provide. Although Countrymen, my self cannot be hurt by them; for there is
great protection in the good Party, which is gained to me for ever: Great
dignity in the State, which will always silently defend me; there is a great
aw of Conscience, which whosoever shall slight, when they go about to hurt me,
will betray themselves.

28. There is further in us such resolution, Countrymen, that we are so far
from giving way to the boldness of any, as we do always voluntarily defy all
Traitors. Now if all the assaults of the homebred Enemies diverted from you,
should return upon my single person^ you, Countrymen, must look to it: In what
condition you would have them hereafter stand, who shall interpose themselves
to Envy and all dangers for your preservation. For my self, what is there more,
that can be acquired to the content of life, especially since I see no higher
step, that I care to ascend either in Place of Honor from you, or in Praise of
Virtue.

29. This, Countrymen, in truth I will effect; what I have managed in my
Consulship, when I am come to be a private man, to maintain and improve. That
if any Envy for preserving the State, has been incurred, it may turn to their
hurt only that ^ear it, but to my glory. In sum, I will so deport my self in
the State, always to remember what I have acted, and give diligence, that it
may appear, to have been managed by virtue and no^ ^or^une. You, Countrymen,
seeing it is now Night, go pray to that Jupiter, the Guardian of this City and
your selves, and go away to your Houses, and though the danger be now over, yet
watch and ward them as ye did the Night before; that ye may not long be put
to that trouble, but continue in peace without interruption, I shall provide.

The Fourth ORATION Against CATILINE.
The Argument.
The Conspiracy being thus fully discovered, a Senate is called on the VI. of
December, with Order that a Reward be bestowed on the Ambassadors of the
Allobroges and Titus Vulturcius, for giving Information of the Plot, and in the
Night to avoid a Tumult of the People, the Prisoners were conveyed into the
Common Gaol; but L^ntulus by diverse of his Liberti and Clients, spread into
several Quarters, assayed to hire Workmen and Shopkeepers to rise and rescue
him. So Cethegus animated his Fencers and stout men that were in his Crew, to
make their way in to him with their Weapons. Upon notice of which Tully calls
the Senate again on the VII. and puts it to the Question what the House please
should be done with the Prison^r^? Where finding them divided, and some out of
tenderness to him, inclinable to a less severe Censure, he persuades them to
be unanimous, and before Night pass their Sentence with diligence and courage.

1. I See, my Lords, all your faces and eyes turned toward me, I see you
solicitous, not only for your own and the Commonwealths danger, but, (although
that be prevented) for mine also. Your affection to me in this perplexity, I
take kindly, and thankfully, amidst my grief^ but I beseech you, for the
Immortal Gods sake, lay that aside, and forgetting my safety, think upon your
selves and your own Children. For my part, if this have been made the Condition
of my Consulship, that I must undergo all extremities, all pains and torments,
I shall endure them, not only courageously, but even contentedly, so that by
my pangs, deliverance and honor may be brought forth to you and the Roman
People.

2. I am that Consul, my Lords, who have never found the Pleading Hall, wherein
all Equity is preserved, nor the Camp consecrated to the Election of Consuls:
nor the Senate, the supreme relief of all Nations, nor my own House, the Common
Refuge; nor Bed, ordained for repose; nor lastly, this Seat of Honor, the
Ivory Chair, free from the danger of my Life and Plots. I have concealed much,
endured much, yielded much, have with some regret of my own in your fears,
healed much. Now if the Immortal Gods are pleased to have this the issue of my
Consulship, that I should rescue you, my Lords, and the Roman People from a
miserable Massacre, your Wives and Chil^ren and the Vestal Virgins, from most
violent haling; their Temples and Oratories, and this the most noble Country
of every one of us, from a most execrable flame; all Italy from war and
desolation; whatever fortune shall be proposed to my single person, let it
fall. For if P. Lentulus, seduced by Fortune Tellers, has thought his Name
should be fatal to the destruction of the State; why should not I r^joyce, that
my Consulship has been almost fatal to the preservation of the Commonwealth.

3. Wherefore, my Lords, look to your own interest, provide for your Country,
pr^serve your Wives, Children, and Estates; defend the Name and safety of the
Roman People; forbear your tenderness for me, and to be anxious on my behalf.
For first, I have grounds to hope, that all the Gods, that are Tutela^ to the
City, will render unto me according to my desert. Then, if any thing should
fall out amiss, I shall be contented and ready to die: For Death can never come
dishonorable to a Valiant Person, nor untimely to him that is Consular, nor
unfortunate to a Wise man. Neither yet am I so obdurate as not to be moved with
the affliction of my most dear and loving Q. Cicero.
Brother here present, and with the tears of all these you see me surrounded
with. Nor, but that Terrentia.
my Wife dismayed, my Tullia.
Daughter distracted with fear, and the little Babe M. Tullius the younger.
my Son, whom the Commonwealth seems to hug as the Hostage of my Consulship,
do often call my thoughts home; nor am I unconcerned for my Crassipes was the
first husband of Tullia, after, she married Dolabella (here present) and last
of all (...). Piso.

Here is to be noted the decorum which was observed, that his Brother and
Son-in-Law wore at several distances present, to move compassion, the Women and
little Child kept at home.


Son in Law^ who stands here in my sight, waiting for the issue of this day. I
am moved at all these things, but to that side, that they may be all preserved
with you; although any violence should overwhelm me, rather than that they and
we should be involved in the univers^l ruin of the State.

4. Wherefore (my Lords) apply your selves to the preservation of the
Commonwealth, look well about for the Storms, that hang over you, unless you
provide against them. It is not a Tib. Gracchus, that would the second time be
made Tribune of the Commons, not G. Gracchus, that endeavored to stir up men
to the Claims of Public Lands; not ^. Saturninus, that slew C. Memmius is
called in question, and brought to the Trial of your Severity: But those are in
hold, who tarried at Rome for the burning of the City, the massac^ing of all of
you, and letting in of Catiline. Their Letters, Seals, Hands, are produced, in
a word, every ones Confession; the Allobroges are practiced, Slaves raised,
Catiline invited: such a Plot was laid, that all should be cut off, and none
left, no not so much as to deplore the Name of the People of Rome, and lament
the Calamity of so great an Empire.

5. All this Informers have declared, the Criminals have confessed, your selves
have by many Verdicts already prejudged: first, in that ye gave me thanks in
singular terms, and did declare that by my virtue and diligence the Conspiracy
of desperate men was discovered. Then in that ye obliged P. Lentulus to lay
down the Praetorship. Then that you voted both him and the others, on whom you
passed Sentence to be committed; and especially in that you ordered a
Thanksgiving in my behalf; which honor has not been given to any in the Long
Robe before me. Lastly, In that yesterday, you gave most large Rewards to the
Ambassadors of the Allobroges and Titus Vulturcius. All which things are of
that nature, that those who have been put in prison by name, may, without any
Controversy appear to have been condemned by you.

6. But I have resolved to move the Question anew to you, both concerning the
fact, what you judge of it, and concerning the punishment, what you resolve
upon? yet I will only premise what belongs to my place as Consul. I long since
saw a great malignancy working in the State, and certain new mischiefs brewing
and stirring: but that, so great, so deadly a Conspiracy as this was made by
Citizen^, I never dreamt. Now whatever it be to which your minds and
resolutions bend, you must determine it before night. How great a Treason has
been discovered, you see. If you think but few to be accessory to it, you are
greatly mistaken. The mischief is spread farther than you imagine. It is
diffused not only over all Italy, but has past beyond the Alps, and creeping
secretly, has already seized many Provinces. It can by no means be crushed by
forbearing and delaying; whatever way you think ^it, it must suddenly be
punished.

7. I see as yet but two Votes, the one of D. Silanus, who resolves, that, They
which endeavored to destroy these things, should be punished with death. The
other o^ C. Caesar, In (...) Roman D^mocracy ^elonies and Mu^ders ^er^ not
p^nishable by Death nor ^o^fe^ture of Estate, but the Party convict was
banished and lost his Freedom, which wa^ all that they implied in the common
acceptance of what the^ te^med a Capital Offense or Punishment. The instance^
of those that under color of High Treason were put to death, have been in all
the Ages of that State but rare and numerable; such as seem to have much of
violence upon je^lousies of a prevailing party; for ought app^ars in Histo^y
no^ v^ry (...) grounded, rather than any crimes du^y proved, ^s suspicions of
desiring the A^^^r^tion of St^te or affecta^^on of usurping a Kingly Power,
upon an interpret^tion of some Actio^^ that might alike flow from men of
Public Spirits, but othe^wise the Privilege or ind^ed Prerogative of the
Citizen and Fre^man of Rome^ was no^ grown almost un^ounded. The Valerian, the
Porcian, the Sempronian Law^ ha^ so fenced the Persons of that Imperial People
from suffering, and were so largely interpr^t^d in their favor by Po^ular
Governors, that it was made a Question, (...) h^re, whethe^ D^^th o^ ^n^ other
Corporal Punishm^nt, might in any case be i^^^ict^d by ^he M^gistrate upon a
Roman Citiz^n^ The N^gative of which Caesar maintain^. To which absurdity the
G^ver^ment of a Fr^e Stat^ naturally reduces it self; for where the Majesty is
in ^ll, ther^ the Persons of all ar^ ^acr^d, and thi^ is ^ota libert^^, or the
very dissolution of Government, and alike demonstrates the Perfe^tion of
Monarchy, where Law ha^^ the largest extent and Authority the high^st ^a^ction.
who excludes the penalties of death, but takes in all Extremities of other
punishments. The one and the other both according to his dignity and the
Atrocity of the Fact deals with the highest severity. The one judges, That,
They who endeavored to deprive us all, and the Roman People of life, to ra^e
the Empire, to extinguish the name of the Roman People, ought not one moment to
enjoy li^e and this air we breath in^ And quotes Presidents that this sort of
punishment has been often used against seditious Citizens in this State. The
other is of this judgment, That, Death was never appointed by the Immortal
Gods for a punishment, but either a natural necessity or rest from labors and
miseries; therefore that Wisemen never unwillingly and Valiant Men have often
cheerfully embraced death: but that Bonds, and those everlasting, have in truth
been invented for the singular punishmen^ of unnatural wickedness. Hereupon he
orders, that, They should be imprisoned in the several Buroughs. This thing,
if you command it, seems to carry oppression with it; difficulty, if you
require it; yet let it pass, if it be your will and pleasure. For I shall
promise, and I hope prove the man that does not th^nk it suitable to his
Office, to dispute that which you shall determine for the public good.

(...) in Hell, because it seems they were of judgment, That if those were
removed, death it self were not to be dreaded.

9. Now, my Lords, I see, what it makes for my interest, if you shall follow
Caesar's Vote; seeing he has stood that course which is coun^ed popular in the
State, perchance I shall have less reason to dread the insults of the People;
he being the Author and Perswader of this Resolution. If you shall choose the
other, I do not know, whether I shall have any further trouble at all. But yet
let the advantage of the State prevail over the Considerations of my private
dangers. For we have from C. Caesar as his own dignity and the honor of his
Ancestors required, this his Vote as an Hostage of his perpetual good affection
to the State. It is to be discerned; what difference there is, between the
vanity of Demagogues and a mind truly popular, seeking the safety of the People.

10. I see some body of those that would be counted popular, absent, that they
may not pass S^ntence on Roman Citizens in good time. The same person both the
other day committed Cethegus and P. Lentulus Roman Citizens, to prison, and
voted a Thanksgiving for me, and yesterday highly rewarded the Informers. Now,
none can question what he, who has voted imprisonment to the Malefactor, thanks
to the Judge, reward to the Informer, judges concerning the whole case and
business. But now C. Caesar conceives, The Sempronian Act was made concerning
Roman Citizens, whereas he, that is an Enemy to the State, can by no means be a
Citizen. In a word, that^ The very Maker of the Sempronian Act, by Order of the
People was executed for his Treason. He too, does not think, that, Lentulus the
Prodigal, an^ the great Corrupter of the People^ having so bitterly and cruelly
plotte^ the subversion of the State^ an^ the destruction of the City, can be
called popular. Therefore like ^ soft and good natured man, h^ sticks not to
commit P. Lentulus to everlasting Chains and darkness^ and enacts for the
future, That no one, may vaunt himself in the release ^f his punishment, and
com^ to be popular to the ruin of the State^ He further adds, The Confisc^tion
of their Goods, that the want a^^ begg^ry of the body may follow (...) the
torments of the Soul.

11. Wherefore, whether you shall conclude upon this, you will furnish ^e with
a Companion to the Assembly, that is beloved and ^aking with the Roman People,
or, if you shall follow that other Vote of Silanus, you will easily justify me
and your selves from any aspersion of Cruelty, and I shall have it granted that
that was far the gentler Cause. Although, my Lords, what Cruelty can there be
in punishing the Inhumanity of so great Treason. Now I judge as I am sensible
of the nature of the fact; for so may you and I long enjoy the quiet of the
State, as my earnestness in this case does not proceed from any bitterness of
spirit: (for who can be milder than I?) but from a king of singular tenderness
and compassion^ For me thinks I see this City, the light of the whole world,
and the Citadel of all Nations of a sudden sinking in one Con^^agration: I see
in my mind my Country buried, heaps of Citizens, miserable and unburied, the
Look of Cethegus, and his rage swaggering in your slaughte^ passes before my
eyes.

12. But when I consider Lentulus, upon the Throne, as himself confessed, that
he expected by Prophesies, this Gabinius his Cou^tier clad in Purple, Catilin^
come with his Army; then ^ dread the shrieks of honest Women, and the ^light of
Virgins and Boys, and the haling of Vestal Priestesses; now because these
things seem to me miserable an^ pitiful in the Excess; therefore I show my self
severe and earnes^ against those, who designed to accomplish them. For I put
the case, if any Master of a Family having had his Children dashed i^ pieces by
his Servant, his Wife killed, and his House burnt should no^ in^lict a most
sore punishment upon the Slave, were he to be thought gentle and merciful^ or a
most inhumane and cruel creature? In truth I should think him hard-hearted and
senseless that should not ease his own grief and torment with the grief and
torment of the Malefacto^^ So we toward those men, which would murder us, ou^
Wives, and our Children, who endeavored to raze the particular House of every
one of us, and this General Seat of the E^pir^, who attempted to place the
Nation of the Allobroges in the ruins of this City, and in the ashes of the
Consumed Empire. If we shall be most eager, we shall be accounted merciful^ if
we shall be slack, we must undergo the infamy of the greatest Cruel^y^ in the
destruction of our Country and Countrymen.

13. Unless perchance, L. ^^^sar be^or^ (...) gave his Vote against Len^ul^s^
made a Preface to excuse his Alliance, and show h^ was not unse^sible of his
Sisters calamity, though bound in duty to tender the public s^fety.
L. Caesar, a most valiant and well-affected Patriot might be thought the other
day by any one somewhat cruel; when ^e said his Brother in Law, the Husband of
his own Julia the Aunt of C. Caesar and Relict of M. An^o^ius Criticus, the son
of M. Antony the Orator and father of M. Antony the Tri^mvir, afterward
married P. Lentulus^ Plutarch notes that the execution of him was the ground of
that deep g^udge which was in M^ Antony ever after, and at last cost ^ully his
life.
Sister, a most virtuous Lady, when he was there present and in hearing, must
be put to death; when he further said, that, His Grandfather was slain by the
Order of the Consul, and his young So^ Ambassador from the Father, executed in
the Prison; whose action how far short came it of this? What Plot was there
laid to confound the Common^wealth? C. G^acchus his Laws were to give the
Soldiers Clothes over and above Pay, to distribute ^^rn amongs^ the Poor by
^ickets constantly, to divide Lands of Conquest by way of Plantations. To give
the Italians equal Voices with the Romans in choice of Magistrates, to appoint
an equal num^er of Knights to be Judges, as was before of Senators only. To
make^ it punishable if any Magistrate should put a Roman Citizen to death
uncondemn'd, that is, without a particular Order from the general Assembly of
the People^ and a seventh to limit the Age of being pressed to the Wars to 17
years and upward.
A corrupt humor of pro^useness was then stirring in the State, and a kind of
stickling for parties. Now at that time the Grandfather of this Lentulus, an
honorable person, in Arms pursued Gracchus, and then received in his Body a
sore hurt, that the Majesty of the State might in no point receive abatement.
This here present to subvert the foundations of the State, called in the Gauls,
raised the Slaves, invited Catiline, allotted us to be assassinated by
Cethegus, the other Citizens to be murdered by Gabinius, the City to be set a
fire by Cassius, all Italy to be laid wast and plundered by Catiline. You may
be timorous, I warrant you, lest in so barbarous and unnatu^al a Treason you
may be thought to have passed too severe a Sentence, when ye ought much rather
to dread least by remissness of punishment you should be rather judged cruel to
your Country, than by severity of Execution, too vigorous toward its most
bitter Enemies.

14. But, my Lords, I cannot conceal, what I hear boldly spoken; for words are
given out, which are come to my ears, of some as would seem to fear my having
strength enough to put in execution what you shall this day enact. All things
are provided, ready, and concluded upon, my Lords, both by my great care and
diligence, as also by the far greater forwardness of the Roman People to retain
their Empire, and preserve their common ^^rt^nes: All men of all ranks, nay of
all ages are here: The Marketplace is full; all the Avenues of this House and
Temple are full: For since the foundation of the City, this is the only case
has arrived, wherein all persons are of one and the same mind, excepting those
who seeing themselves must perish, choose rather to pull down all than to fall
alone.

15. These men I am willing to exclude and separate; for neither do I reckon
them in the number of bad Citizens, but of most desperate Enemies. But the rest
now (Immortal Gods!) with what concourse, with what earnestness, with what
courage, do they conspire to the common honor and safety? There had been a
long contest from the times of the Gracchi between the Senate and Knights about
being Judges. The Sempronian Law admitted the Knights, this continued some 50
years, L Sulla settled it on the Senators only. These proved very corrupt;
afterward the Aurelian Law made by Aur. Cotta, divided the power equally
bet^een the Senators, the Knights, and the Commissioners of the Treasury at
Wars.
What do I mention here the Roman Knights, that so render to you in supremacy
of Order and Counsel, as that in good affections to their Country, they
contend with you; whom after many years dissension this day and this Cause
joins to us, having reduced them to an agreement and unity with our Order,
which Conjunction consummated in my Consulship, if we shall hold steadily in
the Commonwealth I assure you, no civil and homebred mischief shall hereafter
accrue to any part of the State. I see the Commissioners of the Treasury, most
courageous persons; and also all the Clerks have flocked hither with the like
affection to defend the State, whom this day having casually drawn to the
Treasury, I see to be turned from attendance upon their Lot to the Common
Safety. All the multitude of Freemen assists, even of the meanest.

16. For who is there, to whom these Temples^ the very face of the City,
possession of Liberty, in a word, this very light, and this common ground of
his Country, is not both dear and also sweet and delightful? It is worth the
while, my Lords, to observe the Factions of the Freedmen, who having by their
industry purchased the fort^ne of the City, judge this in truth to be their own
Country. Whereas The Sen^tors were omitted in the beginning of this
Enumeration, as being there present, to and before whom h^ spoke, and so
unnecessary to be mentioned. Yet the Fact on that secretly f^vor^^ ^^tiline,
was so great in the House, that he sorely taxes them, though obliquely, in this
passage.
some bo^^ here, and born in the highest rank, have not judged it their
Count^ey, but an Enemi^s City. But why do I mention men of this rank, whom
their private fortunes, whom the Common State, whom, lastly, that liberty,
which is most sweet, has raised to defend the safety of their Country? There
is no Slave, that is but in a tolerable condition of service, but dreads, but
desires to withstand the audaciousness of desperate Citizens, but contributes
as much as he dares, and as much as he can, to the common endeavor after
safety.

17. Wherefore, if what has been said, do chance to weigh with any of you,
that a certain Pimp of Lentulus's, bustles about the Shops, hoping that the
minds of indigent and simple men may be wrought upon with money; such a thing
indeed was set on foot, and attempted; but there were none found so much either
in fortune miserable, or in Principles debauched, but desired that very
Tradesmen and Shop-keep^rs.
place of his Stall and work and daily earnings, Iourneymen and Laborers.
but his bare lodging and bed; Loy^ter^^s and Beggars.
nay, but the very idle course of their life, to be in safety: yea far the
greatest part of Shopkeepers, or in truth (for it should rather be so said)
that whole Rank is very fond of peace; for all their Tools, all their
day-labour and gain is supported by the populousness of the Towns, and
cherished by peace; whose gain, if it be impaired at the Shutting up of their
Shops, what would become of it, at the burning of them?

18. Which things being so, my Lords, you do not want the Guards of the Roman
People, look to it, that ye be not thought wanting to the People of Rome. You
have a Consul reserved from many dangers and plots, and from the midst of
death; not for his own life, but for your safety: All ^anks do conspire in
mind, affection, endeavor, courage and voice, to preserve the State: The
common Country, beset with Firebrarnds, and the Weapons of the unnatural
Conspiracy, humbly holds forth her hand to you: To you comments her self, to
you the life of all her Citizens, to you the Tower and Capitol, to you the
Altars of the Household Gods, to you the continual and everlasting Fire of There
was no Image of Vesta, but a fire burning constantly on the Altar, and k^pt by
Virgins. A Cus^ome that s^ems to have been derived from the Chaldaeans, ^ho
worship^ Fire.
Vesta; to you all the Temples and Oratories of the Gods; to you the
Battlements and Houses of the City. Besides, this day you must pass judgment
upon your own Lives, the Breath of your Wives and Children, the Fortunes of
all, your Houses and Healths.

11. You have a Lead^r, regarding you, forgetting himself, an opportunity not
always given. You have all Ranks, all Men, ^ll the Roman People, which in a
Civil Case we now first behold in one and the same mind. Consider, how one
Night has almost confounded an Empire, founded with what Labors? A liberty
established upon what Valor? Fortunes improved and raised, by what bounty of
the Gods? That such a thing may never herea^ter be not only effected, but
contrived; you must this day provide. Nor have I spoken all this to press you,
who in your affections do almost outrun me: but that my voice, which ought to
be leading in the Government, may appear to have discharged the duty of a
Consul.

20. Now before I come home to my Vote, I Will premise a word concerning my sel^.
I see that I have drawn upon my self so great a multitude of Enemies as is the
Party of the Conspirators, which you perceive to be very great; but I judge to
be base and weak, contemptible and lost. But if in any time to come that Party,
headed by the fury and treachery of any person, shall come to be more prevalent
than your Honor and that of the State; yet I shall never repent, my Lords, of
my Actions and Counsels: For Death, with which perchance they menace m^, is
appointed for all; but so great a praise of life, as you by your Acts have
honored me with, no one has attained to: For, ye have voted to all others
always Thanks for having well-served; but to me alone, for having preserved
the State.

21. Let that Scipio be renowned, by whose Conduct and Valor Hannibal was
obliged to face about into Africa and quit Italy^ Let the other Africanus be
adorned with excellent praise, who razed two Cities most incensed against this
Empire, Carthage and Numantia: Let Lu. Pa^lu^ be accounted an extraordinary
person, whose Chariot, the once most puiss^nt and noble King Perses honored:
Let M^rius be in eternal renown, who freed Italy from Siege and the fear of
Bondage: Let Pompey be advanced beyond them all, whose actions and gallantries
are contained in ^he ^ame Coun^r^ys and Bounds, as the course of the Sun. There
will be in truth amidst the praises of these persons, some room for our Glory;
unless perchance it A plain Allusion to the Complement that Pompey put upon
Cicero coming to congratulate him at his return from the overthrow of
Mithridates; when in the hearing of many he said he should have lost his labor
in bringing up ^ Third Triumph, had not Tully obliged the State by preserving a
place wherein he might Triumph; for it might be supposed that ^h^s: ^rati^n was
finished afterward, when pu^lish'd by Tully.
be more to open us Provinces, whither we may escape; than to look that they
that are absent, may have a place, whi^her they may return victorious.

22. Although in one point the Condition of a Foreign Victory is better than
that o^ a Domestical one; because Ou^landish Enemies either are subdued and
brought into bondage, or reconciled, and judge themselves obliged by that
favor. But they which from the Rank of Citizens, depraved by some false
Principle, are on^e turned Enemies to their Coun^rey, when you have put them by
their mischievous intentions, you can neither by Force restrain, nor by any
kindness reconcile: Wherefore I see I have entered into an implac^ble quarrel
with revol^ed Citizens, which yet I have good confidence may be by your and all
honest men's assistance, and through the memory of those great dangers, which
shall always stick not only in this people, which has been preserved, but
also in the discourses and minds of all Nations, fairly beaten off from me and
mine. Nor indeed shall there ever be found any so great power which can
infringe and shake the Union that is between you and the Roman Knights, and
such an harmony of all ^he well-affected.

23. Which things being so, my Lords, instead of a Generalship of an Army, of a
Government, which I have neglected; Instead of a Triumph and other Badges of
Pra^se, which have been slighted by me, in rega^d of the Cities and your
preservation: Instead of Clients and Provincial Friendships, which yet with my
Estate in Town, I do with no less labor support than purchase: Instead
therefore of all these things, and in reward of my singular affections toward
you, and for this diligence, which ye behold in preserving the State, I require
nothing more of you, but the remembrance of this time and my whole Consulship,
which, while it shall continue fixed in your minds, I shall judge my self
incircled with a most impenetrable wall. But if the Two ye^rs afte^ Tully was
banished upon the score of this h^ving executed the Conspirators, by P.
Clodiu^; and eighteen years after had his Head and Hands cut off by the Son in
^a^ of P. Lentulus, M. Antony.
violence of of the ill-affected, shall deceive and over-match my expectation,
I commend to you my little Octavius Augus^us accordingly in process of time
took M. ^ullius, Cicero 's Son, to be his Colleague in the Consulship, and
gratified him with liberty to throw down a^l the Statues of M. Anton^, and to
enact that none of the Family of the An^onies should ever after be named Mark.
Son, who assuredly shall have guard enough, not only for preservation, but
also for honor, if ye shall remember, that he is his Son, who has alone at his
own peril preserved the whole State.

24. Wherefore, My Lords, Resolve cautiously, as ye have begun, and stoutly,
concerning your own and the Roman Peoples Being, that lies at Stake,
concerning, your Wives and Children, concerning your Temples and Religious
Places, concerning the Houses and Mansions of the whole City, concerning Empire
and Liberty, concerning the safety of Italy, and concerning the whole
Commonwealth; for ye have a Consul, who shall never dispute to follow your
Orders, and is able, whatsoever you shall decree, as long as he shall live, to
defend and by his own interest maintain.

FINIS.

