ELEVEN SERMONS Preached upon Several Occasions. AND A PARAPHRASE, and NOTES
Upon the First, Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth, Seventh and Eighth Chapters of
St. JOHN.

WITH A Discourse of Church-Vnity. AND Directions, how in this Divided State of
Christendom, to keep within the Unity of the Church.

By WILLIAM CLAGETT, D. D. Late Preacher to the Honorable Society of Gray's Inn.

IMPRIMATUR.

April 25. 1693.

Geo. Royse, R. R. in Christo Patriac Dom. Dom. Johanni Archiep. Cantuar. a
Sacris Domest.

The Second Edition.

London: Printed for William Rogers, at the Sun over against St.
Dunstan's-Church in Fleetstreet. 1699.

THE CONTENTS.
SERMON I. Romans 1.17. FOR herein is the Righteousness of God Revealed from
Faith to Faith, as it is written, The Just shall live by Faith. SERMON II. and
III. Heb. 11.6. But without Faith it is impossible to please him: For he that
comes to God, must believe that he is, and that he is a Rewarder of them that
diligently seek him. SERMON IV. Matthew. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that labor
and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. SERMON V. and VI. Romans 8.28. We
know that all things work together for good to them that love God. SERMON VII.
Preached at Court. Eccles. 3.15. For that which has been, is now; and that
which is to be, already has been, and God requires that which is past. SERMON
VIII. An Assize Sermon. Matthew. 5.38, 39, 40, 41. Ye have heard that it has
been said, An Eye for an Eye; and a Tooth for a Tooth.

But I say unto you, that ye resist not Evil, but whosoever shall smite thee on
the right cheek, turn to him the other also.

And if any Man will sue thee at the Law, and take away thy Coat, let him have
thy Cloak also.

And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain.

SERMON IX. An Assize Sermon. Matthew. 5.34, 35, 36, 37. But I say unto you swear
not at all, neither by Heaven, for it is God's Throne;

Nor by the Earth; for it is his Footstool: neither by Jerusalem, for it is the
City of the great King.

Neither shall thou swear by thy Head, because thou can not make one Hair
white or black.

But let your Communication be Yea, yea; Nay, nay; for whatsoever is more than
this, comes of evil.

SERMON X. Matthew. 7.21. Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which
is Heaven. SERMON XI. John 7.17. If any man will do his Will, he shall know of
the Doctrine, whether it be of God.
A Paraphrase and Notes upon the First, Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth, Seventh
and Eighth Chapters of St. John.

A Discourse of Church-Unity, with Directions how in this Divided State of
Christendom to keep within the Unity of the Church.

The PREFACE.
IF it may recommend a Book, to declare the Author of the Discourses it
contains, the Reader may be assured that this is another Volume of Dr.
Clagett's Works, never extant before.

Some of the following Discourses he Preached at Court, and at Assize-times,
and upon such like Public Occasions, which therefore cost him some pains more
than ordinary in the Preparation, as likewise did other Sermons in this
Collection, particularly that about the Nature of Faith. His sudden Thoughts
upon a Subject were so mavelous good, that they seemed to flow from a
Fountain of Reason, and discovered a great Readiness of Judgment in him; but
they were very clear and full Discourses, which he took any Time, and a
particular Care to compose.

The Occasion of his Writing the Paraphrase, published in this Volume, was
this: It was intended (as I have been informed) that a Commentary upon the
whole Bible should be set forth by Divines of our Church: For such a Work being
too big for one or two, was to be divided amongst a sufficient Select Number,
every one of them taking his Part to expound; and Dr. Clagett made choice of
the Gospel of St. John. This was a brave and noble Design, which I hope is not
quite laid aside: For seeing in our Age God has raised up such Excellent Men
in this Church, as the Christian World has scarce any where else, so very
Eminent, and so Celebrated for their Admirable Composures, their Writings, and
Sermons, it is great pity methinks that a Church of England-Exposition of
Scripture should be wanting all the while, forasmuch as this would be
altogether as beneficial to the World as any of the great Things our Worthies
have done. And were there ever abler Men, and fitter for the Work of
Interpreting Scripture, since the time of that Inspiration by which the
Scripture was given? In the late Reign those Texts of Scripture were examined
which the Romanists quote for their Cause, and the showing clearly, that Popery
has no Foundation in Scripture, did very good Service to the Truth. But were a
general Exposition of all the Sacred Books of Scripture put forth into the
World by the same Men, this would rescue perverted and abused Texts out of the
hands of all Sectaries and Heretics whatsoever. I need not show at large how
vast would be the Advantage of such a Work to the Church of God, both now, and
in Ages to come. Dr. Clagett, who exceedingly approved the Design, was very
forward to prepare his Part in the Work; he published his Paraphrase upon the
Sixth Chapter first by it self, because he saw that was needful to be done at a
time, when the Papists to make Proselytes boasted much of some Passages in that
Chapter, as undeniably proving Transubstantiation; but his intent was to go
through all the rest of the Chapters of St. John; and he had finished his
Exposition, if it had pleased God to continue his Life.

Here is also added a small Tract concerning Church-Vnity; showing how we are
to maintain the Unity of the Spirit in the midst of Divisions. A Discourse that
was very seasonable then when it was written, and is so still.

These several Discourses of the Excellent Author I have sent into the World,
not doubting but they will be found to be of that Use and Benefit to all that
read them, which was my end in the Publication of them.

N. C.

The First Sermon.
ROMANS I. 17. For therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to
faith, as it is written, The just shall live by faith.


THESE words are a reason given of what the Apostle said in the former Verse; I
am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ; for therein is the righteousness of God
revealed, etc. i. e. Because God has revealed in the Gospel what that
Righteousness is which he will accept from us in order to our Salvation. The
righteousness of God signifies that Righteousness which God requires, and which
he will accept from man. And what this Righteousness is, is revealed in the
Gospel; that is, the Gospel plainly represents to us, what manner of persons we
must be in order to our Justification. Now there are two things which he lays
down in the remaining part of the Text.

1. That this Righteousness proceeds from Faith: The righteousness of God from
faith to faith.

2. That this principle of Righteousness was mentioned in the Old Testament; As
it is written, the just shall live by faith.

And therefore we are first to enquire,

1. What is the meaning of that Passage, from faith to faith? In what sense is
the Righteousness which God requires said to be from faith to faith? I answer,
that the meaning is this, The Righteousness which pleases God, is that which
must begin from Faith, which must still proceed from Faith, and which at last
must end in Faith: For this is a saying like to that in Romans 6.19. As ye have
yielded your members servants to uncleanness, and to iniquity unto iniquity,
even so yield your members servants to righteousness unto holiness; For by
serving iniquity unto iniquity, is meant adding one sin to another, and daily
growing worse: And by serving righteousness unto holiness, is meant, adding one
degree of goodness to another, and growing better. And thus here the
Righteousness which is from faith to faith, is a Righteousness which first
proceeds from Faith, and is always built upon it afterward, and is at last
perfected by it. For that which the Apostle intimates by these words, is, That
the Righteousness of a good Christian, having Faith for the ground and reason
of it, does increase as his Faith increases; and that the more he is rooted and
strengthened in Faith, the better he grows, and he pleases God the more. This
seems to be the most natural interpretation of these words, viz. That Faith is
all along the Principle and Ground of that Righteousness which God expects, and
is pleased with. But then,

2. What relation has that Passage out of the Old Testament to this matter, As
it is written, the just shall live by faith? I answer, That the Apostle does
hereby design to show that though the Promises of the Gospel are incomparably
more excellent than those that were made under the Law, yet it was the belief
of God's Promises then, that held good men to the performance of their duty,
and entitled them to the favor of God: The words are taken out of Habakk.
2.4. God had promised the Jews, that they should return from their Captivity in
his appointed time, v. 3. therefore, says he, though the vision tarry, wait for
it, because it will surely come; but the just shall live by his faith, that is
to say, The sure belief of this Promise would support good men in the service
of God, under the Captivity in an Idolatrous Land, and their Faith should be
rewarded with a return into their own Country in God's appointed time. In like
manner Christians, who have better promises, viz. of an Heavenly Country, do
in this Faith work that Righteousness which the Gospel requires; and for thus
living by Faith in this World, they shall live for ever in their Heavenly
Country. Faith was the foundation of the Jews observing their Law of outward
Works, and it was rewarded with such Blessings as that Law promised: But the
Gospel of Christ, as we read in the foregoing Verse, is the power of God unto
salvation; and therefore it is still true, but in a much higher sense, that the
just shall live by faith, because the Gospel requires an inward and spiritual
Righteousness, to which we are brought by the belief of promises of spiritual
and eternal good things, and because such Faith shall bring us to everlasting
life. Thus much for the Explication of the Text.

And now my work shall be to enquire upon what ground it is, that the
Scriptures do attribute so much to Faith as they do; and to show, that this is
done without any disparagement at all to Godliness and Virtue. And I have
chosen this Argument to discourse upon, that it may appear how unreasonably we
of the Reformation are charged by our Adversaries, as we often have been, with
Solifidianism, as they call it; that is, with attributing all to Faith, and
leaving no necessity for Righteousness and good Works. We do indeed with the
Scriptures say, That we are justified by faith, and that the just do live by
Faith; but we do with the Scriptures also affirm Faith to be the principle of
obedience; and there is a righteousness from faith to faith, without which we
cannot please God, nor be justified before him: We do also renounce the merit
of good Works, and resolve the acceptance of them into the Grace and Mercy of
God in not imputing our sins to us; and when we have done all, they are the
gracious Promises of God, and it is not the dignity of our own Righteousness
that we rely upon; but then we say, it is the faith of these Promises that
makes us live to God by Repentance and good Works, which are so necessary,
that we are dead without them. Now from hence indeed it follows, That where
there is that faith which God requires, holiness will follow: For if we are
justified by faith, if he that believes shall be saved, and yet without
holiness no man shall see the Lord, then they that believe, are holy; which if
it be found true, then we, not to say the Scriptures, are justified in
attributing so much to Faith as we do; that it is by Faith we please God, that
we live by Faith, and that we are saved by Faith. On the other hand it seems
hard to understand, how those great things should be spoken of Faith, when
there are many that do not hold faith and a good conscience, but hold the truth
in unrighteousness: And since it follows more certainly, That a man believes
because he is holy, than that he is holy because he believes, it should rather
have been said, that a Believer shall live by his Righteousness, than that the
just shall live by faith; and yet following the Scriptures we say, that we live
by faith, and are justified by faith. To clear this difficulty, it will be
requisite to consider well these two things.

1. What the Nature of Faith is? And

2. What power it has, or what efficacy must necessarily be granted to it, and
when it has that power and efficacy?

I shall not only aim at making the notions of these things clear, but also
profitable unto Godliness.

1st then, As to the Nature of Faith; I do not see that the Scripture means any
thing by Faith, but a persuasion of the truth of something that is affirmed,
upon the Testimony of one that affirms it, or upon some other reason besides
sensible evidence, or immediate knowledge. And thus Divine Faith is a
persuasion of the truth of those things, which we have God's testimony for: And
that we are thus to understand these words, Faith or believing in the
Scriptures, is very plain, because otherwise the Scriptures must have altered
the common sense and signification of words: But can we think, that when our
Blessed Savior required believing under the penalty of damnation, and that
when the Apostles and Evangelists wrote the New Testament, in which they laid
the same stress upon Faith, that Christ himself had done before them; that
they, I say, should mean something else by the word, than what it signified
according to common use, and yet that they should not tell us so? The Writers
and first Preachers of the Gospel did indeed treat of new Subjects, viz. of
those new Revelations of God's Will, that had been lately made: but when they
made use of words, that had a known meaning, they did not depart from the
received signification of those words: But by Faith or believing, men always
understood, being persuaded of the truth of some Proposition. And thus Faith is
described in the Scripture, where it is described most fully: In St. John
11.25. says our Savior, He that believes in me, though he were dead, yet
shall he live; but this is explained, v. 27. I believe that thou art Christ the
Son of God, that should come into the world. And again, John 8.24. If ye
believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your sins. Moreover, that Faith by
which the Church should stand, wanted nothing surely that belongs to the nature
of Faith, and that is thus expressed? We believe and are sure, that thou art
Christ the Son of the living God; and this because not flesh and blood, but God
had revealed it. Thus Abraham's Faith which was imputed to him for
righteousness, was his accounting, that God was able to raise up Isaac even
from the dead. And all the holy men mentioned in Heb. 11. are said to have died
in faith, being persuaded of the promises.

As to those that think there is more in the nature of Faith, than this comes
to, they either return to this in other words, or add something that does not
belong to the nature of it; those that say, there must be a particular
application of the Promises where there is true Faith, say well; but then
application is nothing else but a persuasion of, or an assent unto a single
Proposition: For instance, I am persuaded, that God sent his Son into the world
to save mankind, is a general persuasion; Christ came for my Salvation, which
is the Application, is a particular one; Without holiness no man shall see the
Lord, therefore without holiness I shall not. This last is but persuasion, and
there is that in the former, therefore Faith in both: Again, if resting and
relying upon Christ is said to be Faith, the meaning must be, either that I am
assured Christ will save me, and this is being persuaded of the truth of that
saying, or else that I rely upon his Person; but a Person cannot be believed
otherwise, than by believing something of him, or something that he has said.
Some there are that think the nature of Faith does consist in a certain degree
of Persuasion; and the Romanists tell us, there must be Infallibility in it:
But now there is a weak as well as a strong Faith; and though a greater degree
of Assent is more working and powerful, yet the nature of Faith is in the
least. Lastly, some good men are apt to think, that the goodness of the Will
and Affections, nay, and Holiness of Life, belongs to the nature of true Faith;
but this cannot be, because although Faith, where it is in that degree that it
ought to be, there, as I shall show, it will produce holiness of Heart and
Life; and therefore Faith is sometimes spoken of in the Scriptures as
comprehending those good Affections, and those good Works, which it causes, yet
sometimes they are distinguished from one another, and therefore they are not
the same; so that when all is done, the whole nature of Christian Faith does
consist in this, That it is a persuasion of the Truth of those Doctrines which
Christ has made known to us. Now for the second Point.

2. Concerning the power and efficacy of Faith, we are to consider, that there
are these two things attributed to it; our Justification, and our Holiness or
Obedience to the Gospel. And here we will first consider.

1. What Efficacy Faith has as to the Justification of him that believes; and
this I shall show very briefly and plainly in these following particulars.

1. Faith may be said to be justifying or saving, in that it puts a man into a
good way of being justified; and thus believing that Jesus is the Christ, may
be said to be justifying Faith, because it is the first step toward
Justification; and believing his Precepts with his Promises and Threatenings, is
in this sense a more Justifying Faith, because it brings a man nearer to that
state in which he shall be justified. But,

2. If we speak of Actual Justification, and continuance in God's favor, then
not any, nor all the proper acts of Faith taken together, but separate from
Repentance and Obedience, are sufficient; for where God has made more
conditions than one necessary, there the performance of all but one, will not
suffice; and therefore where forgiveness and salvation is promised to one
single condition, there the presence of all the rest is supposed; He that
gives a cup of cold water to a disciple in the name of a disciple, shall not
lose his reward; but shall cold water, wash away the treachery of Judas, or the
injustice of Pilate? He that confesses that Jesus is the Christ, has eternal
life; but still to be carnally minded is death; He that believes and is
baptized, shall be saved. Nevertheless it is true, that the unrighteous shall
not inherit the Kingdom of Heaven; and therefore where nothing less than
Salvation is promised to Believing and Baptism, all that which in reason should
follow, is meant, though it be not expressed.

3. If we speak of final and irreversible Justification, this is neither to be
obtained by Faith nor Obedience, without perseverance in both. God does in this
Life justify true Believers, but not once for all, till they have fought their
good fight, and finished their course. As the Lord in the Parable forgave his
Servant, and yet called him to account for his Debt, when he proved cruel to
his Fellow; for this showed that his pardon was but conditional; So likewise,
says our Savior, shall your heavenly Father do unto you.

Now I confess, what has been said in answer to the first and second
Inquiries, gives no sufficient account why we are said to be justified by Faith
so frequently in the Scripture, but rather seems to make it more unaccountable:
For if there be no more in the nature of Faith than assent to Truth, this seems
to be a very common attainment, not deserving those great things that are
spoken of Faith in the Scripture: Can that be the Faith, by which all good men
have wrought righteousness, which has been held in unrighteousness by as many
wicked? And then as to the power of this Faith in order to Justification, Can
that be the faith of God's elect, which the Reprobates have as well as they? Do
the just live by that Faith with which others perish? How is that Faith imputed
to them for righteousness, which does but aggravate the condemnation of these?
Nay, how is that justifying and saving Faith, which the Devils have as well as
we; for they assent, and therefore believe, and tremble because they believe?

Let us therefore proceed to the second Consideration concerning the power and
efficacy of Faith; viz. To make men attain to that righteousness which God
requires and accepts. Now if upon a just examination of this matter it will
appear, that Faith, if it be in men, as it ought to be in them, will make them
obedient and holy, and therefore that the wicked want Faith that is properly so
called, and have not that Faith which God in the Scripture requires, then there
will be no difficulty in conceiving why the Scripture so often and so
remarkably says, that we are justified by faith. Here therefore I shall
represent what those things are in which the force of Faith lies, to govern our
Hearts and Lives; and then I may leave you to judge, whether it would not
produce the effect of holiness, when they are all together; and consequently,
that there is a defect of Faith in all ungodly men. Now,

2. The power and efficacy of Faith to make us holy, lies in these three things.

1. In the nature of the things themselves that are believed.

2. In the manner of believing them.

3. In the permanency of the belief it self, or rather in the dwelling of our
mind upon it.

I shall begin with considering what influence it has by virtue of the things
believed.

1. The Truths we believe, do represent good and evil to us; they are not
Points of Doctrine, which we are never the better nor the worse, whether they
be true or not; but they are of very near concernment to us, and are therefore
fit to work upon our desires and affections.

2. What we believe, does represent to us our greatest good on the one hand,
and what we have most reason to fear on the other: If a good thing that is
offered us, may be disparaged by a greater good that stands in competition with
it, it does not much inflame or move the Affections: Now he that believes
aright, apprehends the Joys of another Life to be so great, that there is
nothing in this to rival them; this is that which made the Patriarchs to count
themselves Pilgrims and Strangers upon earth; they desired a better (i. e.) a
heavenly country.

3. We are persuaded that this Inheritance belongs to us upon our care and
faithfulness in doing the will of our heavenly Father. If we had absolute
assurance of the heavenly Country, this Faith might well cause satisfaction in
the benefit; but if we are to abstain from fleshly lusts that war against the
soul; or we are sure to be excluded, if we assent not only to the truth of the
Promise, but to the condition of the Promise, then our Faith works by fear and
hope, and puts us upon fulfilling the condition; but if men do not believe the
condition, it will be an harder matter to persuade them to obey, because it
will be so easy for them to persuade themselves that they need not.

4. We are also persuaded, that the condition, viz. doing the will of our
Heavenly Father, is through the grace of God possible; otherwise the belief of
an Eternal Happiness in the Life to come, would not stir us to labor for it:
This is one reason why the Devils tremble only though they believe, because
they cannot assent to the Promises as made to Them, for they are not made to
Them; and if we should want the Faith of the possibility of Salvation, all the
rest of our Faith would make us miserable and desperate, but not active and
careful to work out our salvation.

In short, if we believe the truth wherein the greatest good is promised, and
that it is promised upon condition of obedience; and that the condition is
enforced by the threatening of the greatest punishments, and that it may well be
performed: then in this Faith there is nothing wanting as to the matter of it,
to make us fruitful in holiness and good works: But if we do not believe all
this, but only some part of it, our unfruitfulness may well be imputed to want
of Faith; but this I confess does not go very far to satisfy the difficulty,
because many believe all needful truth, and yet remain unholy. Wherefore let us
go to the second Point. Viz.

2. The manner of believing Divine Truth; for there is very much of the power
of Faith to sanctify us in this very thing. Let us, for instance, take the
first Article of the Creed, I believe in God, or I believe that God is. To
believe this considerately, and distinctly, is to believe that there is an
Infinite Being, an Omnipresent Being: and that he is holy, just, and good: But
now our believing that God is, has no power to make us circumspect in our
actions, and careful of our thoughts, but by such distinct persuasions and
considerations as these, which are truly and properly Faith: Nor will these
distinct considerations have much power neither, unless they be distinctly
applied to our selves: God is infinite in all Perfections, and therefore I am
to serve and worship him; he is Omnipresent, and therefore he is with me, and
sees me in all that I do, and knows every one of my secrets, and even every
thought of my heart, and therefore how shall I dare so much as to regard
iniquity in my heart? He is infinitely Wise and Good, and therefore in this or
in any other matter it would be extreme folly as well as sin to follow mine own
will in opposition to his: Now all this is Faith, or believing true Doctrine;
and it is by such distinct apprehensions and applications as these, that we
must be enabled to overcome the World, and to purify our hearts: But if we
believe in that manner, as to rest in the general Doctrine, and to go no
farther, I do not see how our Faith should be operative much more than if we
had none at all; and if the general belief of one Article is therefore
fruitless, because it is but general, and not resolved into the awakening
Considerations that are under it, nor applied distinctly to our selves under
such Considerations, then also will the believing of the whole Creed in this
fashion, without particular persuasions and applications, be fruitless also;
and it may be said of us, that we understand neither what we say, nor whereof
we affirm; and then what we say and affirm, can have no great force upon us to
make us subdue our Passions, and mend our Lives. But though this will go a
great way to resolve the unholiness of men professing the Faith, into want of
Faith, yet I think it does not altogether satisfy, that where Faith is as it
should be, there will be an holy mind, and a godly life; because there are many
men of clear and active thoughts, and conversant in the study of Religion, that
do not live by Faith; for as the Faith of such men cannot in reason be thought
to be a confused and indeterminate persuasion; so it is too plain by
experience, that some such do retain the Faith, but make shipwreck of a good
conscience. And therefore let us consider the third thing wherein the power of
Faith consists, viz.

3. The permanence of it upon the mind, or a constancy of frequent
consideration upon what we believe: That is to say, let us suppose a man that
does not only believe all matters of Faith that are needful, and apprehend them
distinctly and particularly, and with application to himself; but likewise by
very much consideration of these things, has made them present and habitual to
himself; and of such a man I say, That he is under the whole power of Faith,
and he it is that overcomes the world: For such a Believer has two advantages,
which cannot fail to make him a good man.

1. His Persuasion or his Faith is present to his mind, when he most needs it;
(i.e.) upon all occasions of temptation; so that he will be ready in the
strength of it to say with Joseph, How shall I do this great wickedness, and
sin against God? But now though one believes all the awakening Doctrines of
Religion, yet if he does not think of them, nor lay them to heart, when the
Devil, the World, and the Flesh are busy with him, it is all one with him at the
time, as if he had never heard of the Articles of Christian Faith; and for the
present he is as much without the Operation of Faith, as if he had none at all:
It is with him, as it is with a man in a swooning fit, there is indeed life in
him, but it is without sense and motion; and for the time he differs not from
one that is dead; or rather, as there is a principle of sense and motion in the
one, without any act of either, so is there indeed in the other a Principle of
Faith, but no Act of it, and it is therefore as if it were not at all. Distinct
and particular application of what we believe, will do much toward the
restraining of a man's lusts; and this is properly Faith; but then that Faith
which once was, and now is not, can do nothing at present; which is the case of
too many persons professing Christianity, That their belief of Divine Truth is
oftener absent than present, because they do not think of those things which
should govern them, and assist them under Temptations, but by chance, or when
they cannot help it; their business is to put those things out of their minds,
and not to fix them there. And this is the first advantage of one that is
constant in his consideration of the Truths whereof he is convinced, that they
are present to him when he stands in need of their help, and indeed never at
any great distance from him. The

2d. Is this, and that is the greatest of all, That he has a true and lively
sense of these things, as often as they return to his mind; and he always
believes them as he should do, under a vigorous apprehension of his own great
concernment in them. To believe that there is a God, and a Life to come; and
that the Son of God came to be our Savior, and will come to be our Judge; that
through the Infinite Mercy of God, and through the Death and Passion of our
Savior, we may obtain Forgiveness of Sins, and Eternal Life; to believe these
things, I say, according to their nature, and our concernment in them, is to
have a due sense of them, and to be justly affected with them more than with
all other interests whatsoever, because these indeed are the greatest of all:
Now it is by a Constancy of Believing, (i. e.) of Considering these things, and
making them present to us, that we come to that Faith which consists in a right
apprehension, and a just sense of them: Nor will any other means do without
this; and indeed all means of Grace are ineffectual without it, and they are
then effectual when they bring us to this degree of Faith: The Prayers that we
make are unprofitable, if they do not help to fix our minds upon God and Divine
Truth, and by their frequent returns make a sense of Religion natural and
familiar to us: Our reading the Scriptures, and hearing good Doctrine and
Exhortation, and our assembling for the worship of God, is unprofitable to
Godliness otherwise, than by accustoming of us to think as we should do; that
is, to be affected with the Doctrines of our most holy Faith: Good education
and good examples do no otherwise promote the work of God in our minds, than by
awakening our consideration of that Truth, which is to renew us in the spirit
of our minds: Afflictions and Judgments, the Fears and Apprehensions of Death,
the amazing Calls of God's Providence, cannot of themselves work the
reformation of an evil heart and life; if they do it, it is by beginning to
bring men to that Consideration which they continue afterward, till they come
to a Faith that answers the nature of the things they believe, which consists
in a just sense and apprehension of them; but this is not to be gained, but by
a constant Consideration, because they are spiritual things, or future things
after this life, which are the main Objects of our Faith. If a sick man
believes that he shall gain his health by such a method; or a poor man, that he
shall get an estate; or a prisoner, that he shall recover his liberty; or any
man, that he shall come to his end in this world by such a course of means,
there is no need of much Consideration to persuade himself to try it, because
without any pains taken with himself, he is naturally possessed with a lively
persuasion of his concernment in things of this nature: But in Religion it is
otherwise; tho the interest be great, nay, the greatest of all, yet it is not a
sensible nor a present interest in comparison, and so our Faith must be renewed
day by day, that we may be affected with it, as reasonable creatures ought to
be; and by much thinking of it, (i. e.) by many Acts of Faith, arrive to such a
sense of God, and our interest in Religion, as the nature of the thing
deserves. And this is that Faith which overcomes the world, which purifies the
heart, and makes a man a new creature.

I deny not, That wicked men believe, and do contrary to a sense of their duty,
and of their obligations to God: I acknowledge, that they have so much Faith,
as makes them uneasy under their guilt, somewhat loath to commit sin, and
ashamed and afraid when it is committed: I grant that they have Faith truly so
called; but then they want Faith too, that Faith which is properly so called
also, and which the Scripture requires: Either they want the Faith of assenting
to some needful Truth, which perhaps does not often happen; or they want the
Faith of a distinct and particular persuasion and application to themselves,
which happens more often; or they want the Faith of frequent assenting, of a
permanent persuasion fixed in their hearts by consideration; which I doubt is
the frequent defect: But now the Scripture does not barely require, that we
should once for all persuade our selves of the Truths of God's Word; but
moreover, That the word of God should dwell richly in us; and that we should be
rooted and established in Faith; that Christ should dwell in our hearts by
Faith and the like; which is plainly to require a fixed and lively sense of
Divine Truths upon our souls, caused by much conversation with them, and
thinking upon them: Now this I say, That every act of Meditation, or Thought
upon these things, is a distinct Assent to them, and is therefore truly and
properly Faith: Now because we are to interpret Scripture by Scripture,
therefore this Scripture, That by Faith we are justified, is to be interpreted
by the aforesaid Exhortations; and consequently, by Justifying Faith we are to
understand an habitual and permanent persuasion of the great Truths of
Religion, effected by a frequent and just consideration of them; and such Faith
will justify, because it will sanctify; it will procure the relative change of
putting us into a state of Favor with God, because it will procure the real or
personal change of subduing our corrupt affections, and making us obedient to
God from the heart: For suppose a man by constant consideration to have gained
such a sense of Spiritual things, as by assiduity men come to have in all
matters they frequently think of, and converse about, how is it possible, but
he must be a good man in the rest of his life? But men are but half persuaded,
that never think of these things, but by chance, or when they cannot help it:
So that this is the great point wherein we exercise liberty in matters of
Religion; viz. Whether we will consider or not; (i. e.) Whether we will often
persuade our selves of the great Truths of God, and a World to come; or but
very rarely: This is the main hinge upon which our state turns; and here lies
the principal power we have, still, under the Grace of God, to help and reform
our selves; which seems to be suggested by the Scriptures insisting so much
upon it, That we are justified by Faith; for this shows us where our strength
lies: Nay, the just himself lives by his Faith; and it is by Faith that he
perseveres in Righteousness: And where such Faith is, as I have now described,
it will not fail to influence the mind and conversation: For we are led by
persuasion to evil as well as to good; and when a man does ill, it cannot be,
that at the same time he should be persuaded to do well: No wonder therefore,
that the Scripture concludes of all wicked men, That they are not persuaded of
the truth of those things which they profess to believe: They profess, says,
the Apostle, to know God, but in works, they deny him, Tit. 1.16. But works
neither deny nor affirm any thing, they only show whether we our selves do one
or the other. If then all that are disobedient, are in a true sense
unbelievers; then all who fully believe, are holy. By Faith Abraham when he was
tried, offered up Isaac; but if the command to offer up his Son, was the Trial
of his Faith, then had he not obeyed, his belief had not been true: Therefore
also where the belief is true, where it is a fixed and lively sense of God and
Religion, where it does not come in as a sojourner, but dwells richly in the
Soul, it will sanctify and cleanse it.

In short; This permanent persuasion of the Truths of the Gospel, being that
without which we cannot bring forth fruit unto God in all good works he has
required of us, and with which we shall, it must necessarily be the faith by
which the just do live.

Finally therefore, my Brethren, Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his
might: put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the
wiles of the devil; stand, having your loins girt about with truth, and having
on the breast plate of righteousness, and your feet shod with the preparation
of the gospel of peace. But above all, take the shield of faith, whereby ye
shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked; and take the helmet
of salvation, and the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God. By all
which it appears, That Christian Truth is our Armor against Sin; and therefore
let that humble man's Prayer be ours, and our care answerable; Lord we believe,
help thou our unbelief. And may the God of Truth increase our faith in us, that
it may be fruitful in good works, to the glory of his Name, and our eternal
Salvation, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Second Sermon.
HEB. XI. 6. But without faith it is impossible to please him: for he that
comes to God, must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that
diligently seek him.


THE words are the most comprehensive that I can find in all the Bible, for
bringing all that is necessary to be said concerning the true nature, the full
extent, and proper use of Faith under one Text; which possibly you will
acknowledge, if you consider with me the very deep, and yet clear sense of
these excellent Words.

The first clause of them contains a general Proposition. But without faith it
is impossible to please God.

The second contains a proof of that Proposition; for he that comes to God
must, etc.

By comparing the Proposition, proved with the proof thereof, we shall come to
understand every phrase and word of the Text.

For if we enquire,

1. What is here meant by pleasing God in the general Proposition; let us see
what answers thereunto in the following words; and we shall find by pleasing
God is meant the doing of those things whereby God is pleased; for says the
Apostle, He that comes to God, must believe that he is. Now to come to God is
an obvious phrase, signifying to worship God: Wherefore it being supposed (as
the Apostle's form of arguing makes it necessary) that to worship God, or to
come to him, is to please him; it must needs follow, that to please God
signifies the doing of those things whereby God is pleased: But hence we must
not conclude, that the worship of God, properly so called, is the only thing
that is pleasing to God; because the Apostle's intent in the proof of his
general proposition, is to give some particular instance of each part thereof,
(as I shall show all along in the Explication of these words). There are other
things which please God besides Worship, viz. all kinds of virtue and moral
Goodness; such as Justice and Mercy, Fidelity and Truth, Meekness and Patience,
Sobriety and Temperance; and it is true of these things, as well as of Worship,
that without faith they cannot be performed, because they are all such things
as God is pleased withal; and it is said in general, That without Faith we
cannot please him. From hence it is plain, that we are thus to understand the
phrase of pleasing God, when the Apostle says, Without Faith we cannot please
him, viz. Without Faith it is impossible a man should be a worshipper of God,
and a practicer of Virtue: More distinctly thus; Without Faith a man cannot
Love God, or Fear him, or Trust in him, or Obey him, or Honor him, in his
Thoughts, Words, or Deeds: Nor can he be Righteous and Charitable, Meek and
Humble, Sober and Temperate: Or in a word, That without Faith it is impossible a
man should be truly Religious in his life and actions. If it be enquired,

2. What the Apostle means, by Faith, without which it is impossible to please
God; let us look to the following words again, and we shall find the Faith the
Apostle speaks of is,

1. In general, a persuasion of the truth of some proposition, or an assent
thereunto that it is true; for he says, He that comes to God must believe
that he is. To believe therefore, to be persuaded that this proposition is
true, viz. that there is a God, is an instance of the Faith whereof the Apostle
speaks.

Likewise he that comes unto God must believe that he is a rewarder of them
that seek him. To believe therefore, or to be persuaded of this proposition,
That God is a rewarder of them that seek him, is an instance of that Faith, of
which the Apostle speaks; and consequently by Faith is here meant in general, a
persuasion concerning any Doctrine or Proposition, that it is true.

2. By consequence also, as to the nature of those propositions, which the
Apostle says we must believe, if we will please God, we find more
particularly, that the Faith without which we cannot please God, is a
persuasion of the truth of those propositions, which are proper arguments and
motives inducing a man to do those things whereby God is pleased; for the
Apostle says, He that comes unto God must believe that he is. And plain it
is, that to believe that there is a God, is a reason why men should do those
things which please him: He says also, that he that comes unto God, must
believe that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him. Alike plain it
is, that to believe God to be such a rewarder, is a reason, or motive, inducing
a man to do those things whereby God is pleased; and consequently the Faith
which the Apostle speaks of, is a persuasion of the truth of those Propositions
or Doctrines, which are proper motives or inducements to the doing of those
things whereby God is pleased. But hence we must not conclude, that there are
no other Doctrines or Propositions besides those here mentioned, that are
proper motives to Religion; because all that the Apostle intends (as I noted
before) is to give some particular instances to show the truth of the general
proposition. Although therefore there be other Doctrines which are motives to
Godliness and Virtue; yet if without the belief of these, a man cannot be
induced to do those things which please God; that was sufficient for the
Apostle's purpose to prove, that without Faith it is impossible to please him:
And that there are other Doctrines of like use with these, I shall show in due
place.

If it be enquired,

3. Whether by Impossible, the Author of this Epistle means properly something
that is absolutely impossible; or more largely, something that is exceeding
difficult, or highly improbable, as sometimes the word is used to that purpose:

I answer; This is to be resolved, by considering also the following
propositions to be believed; the former of which is of that nature, that it is
absolutely necessary to be believed in order to Worship and Virtue, viz. That
there is a God: Without this belief it is utterly impossible, it implies a
contradiction, that a man should be a Worshipper of God, and a practicer of
Virtue. But the latter of these beliefs, that God is a rewarder, etc. is not in
the same degree necessary that the former is, because it does not imply a
contradiction, That that man who does not believe that God is a rewarder of
them that seek him, should be a Worshipper of God, because it is barely possible
he may Worship God upon a belief that there is a God, and a bare hope that he
is a rewarder, etc. But then if we consider the woeful corruption and degeneracy
of Mankind, and the power of those Temptations we are under, it is so utterly
improbable that without this belief men should set themselves to do those
things which please God, that according to the usual manner of speaking, it may
be ranked with things impossible.

So that I do thus understand the Apostle as to what he says concerning the
impossibility of pleasing God without Faith; That there are some Doctrines so
necessary to be believed in order to the practice of Religion and Virtue, that
it is naturally impossible a man should be a Worshipper of God, and a doer of
Righteousness without the belief of them; and of this sort he has given us one
instance, viz. That there is a God; That also there are some Doctrines so
necessary to be believed in order to the practice of Religion, that it is
morally impossible a man should be a Worshipper of God, and a worker of
righteousness, without the belief of them: And of this sort he has also given
us one instance, viz. That God is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him.

Thus I have by comparing one part of the Text with another, given you, as I am
persuaded, the true sense of the whole, and that, as I hope, with great
clearness of truth and plainness of words. And according to this Explanation,
the words of the Text may be interpreted according to this Paraphrase.

Without the belief of some such Doctrines as are proper and suitable motives
to the worship of God, and the practice of Virtue, wherewith God is pleased; it
is impossible any man should fear God and work Righteousness: For some
Doctrines there are so necessary in order to that end, that it is impossible to
conceive how a man should find himself obliged thereto, without the belief of
those Doctrines: Some Doctrines also there are so necessary to be believed in
order thereunto, that without the belief of them, no man finds himself
encouraged to the practice of Religion: For instance, the Worship of God is a
part of Religion, without which he will not be pleased with us; but it is plain
that no man can be a worshipper of God, without believing that there is a God;
because if he does not believe this, he cannot conceive himself bound to
worship God. It Is also plain, that no man is likely to worship God, without
believing that God is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him; because if
he does not believe this, he cannot conceive himself encouraged to be a
worshipper; and this is as evident in all other instances of Religion, that
it is impossible men should perform them as they ought, if they believe not
those Doctrines whereby they are encouraged to them.

In the words, as they are thus explained; several truths there be, which lie
couched beside those, the suggesting whereof is the main scope and design of
the Text.

1st. Of all, It Is plainly implied, that the practice of Religion (i. e.) of
Worship and Virtue, is that which pleases God: For pleasing of God here, is
further explained by coming to him, and diligently seeking him; a very
considerable instance of Religion. The same thing is true of all other
Religious duties, and all Moral virtues whatsoever, that they also are
well-pleasing to God, and that he likes and approves them in us; he loves
and praises us for them, that they are delightful and acceptable to him. Were
the inculcating of this matter the chief design of the Text, I would here at
large represent unto you, why the Religious practice, the holiness and virtue
of a Christian, is acceptable and well-pleasing to God. I would make it plain
to you, that it must be so, because his Religious Practice is an acknowledgment
of the Sovereign Authority of his Maker, since it is the Christians obedience to
Divine Laws; because also it is his undeniable confession of the Goodness of
God, a plain testimony of his love to God, and a visible demonstration how
excellent and profitable the Laws of God are, and how good they render those
persons that observe them: Because it is in like manner the Christians true and
sincere acknowledgment of the Divine perfections. I would likewise show you,
that although God cannot be pleased with this honor done unto him by his
Creatures, because of any advantage he himself receives thereby; yet he is
pleased with it, because of the advantage accruing thereby to us, because he
delights in the good of his Creatures, in their happiness and well-being;
which it is as impossible for them to attain without the worship of God, and the
practice of Virtue, as to reconcile light unto darkness, or to make
contradictions to be true. If this also were the main scope of the Text, I
would not leave this consideration till I had convinced you thoroughly, what a
mighty spur to Religion and Virtue this persuasion is, that they are
well-pleasing to God. I would not let you go till you granted me, that it is
the noblest Ambition which can inflame the Souls of men to become the true
Worshippers of God, and the sincere workers of Righteousness; since this is
your way to gratify and please so great and excellent a Being as the Eternal
God, to stand high in his esteem, to be greatly accounted of by him, to become
acceptable to him, and considerable with him. But this is only the insinuation,
not the direct aim of the Text.

2. These words do also intimate to us, that the practice of Religion and
Virtue is the end of Faith: For the Apostle plainly speaks of those Doctrines
we believe under the notion of means to arrive at Godliness and Righteousness.
When he says without believing God it is impossible we should come unto him; he
implies that it is therefore necessary we should believe there is a God,
because it is necessary we should worship him: When he says, without believing
that God is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him, it is impossible to
seek him diligently; he sufficiently implies, that it is therefore necessary to
believe that God is such a Rewarder, because it is necessary to seek him
diligently. In a word, when he says without Faith it is impossible to please
God; he plainly enough intimates, that therefore Faith is necessary, because
the practice of Godliness and Virtue is so, i. e. that Religious practice is
necessary as the end, and Faith as the means to that end.

I would here have shown you, what the true Notion of Fundamentals in Religion
is, viz. That only is Fundamental in Religion, which is a Doctrine necessary to
be believed in order to a Christian life; and all Doctrines necessary to be
believed for that end, are Fundamental Doctrines: That the belief of those
Doctrines, is laying a foundation upon which the superstructure of Religious
practice, of Worship and Virtue, may and ought to be erected. But that if it
were required what is Fundamental, i. e. necessary to fit a man for Heaven,
that then the practice of Religion and Virtue is the only thing necessary for
that end; but that Fundamentals in Doctrines, are only those beliefs that are
necessary to Righteousness and Godly living. And this I should have insisted
upon, to confute all the vain pretenses and frivolous hopes of all Orthodox
believers, that never yet learned to live Orthodox Lives, that have laid a
specious foundation of Christian Faith and Knowledge to no purpose in the
world, but to proclaim their own folly and madness in neglecting all thoughts
of building that superstructure of Christian life and practice thereupon, by
which alone we can ascend to immortality of Bliss in that house of God not made
with hands eternal in the heavens.

But this also is no more than insinuated in the words of the Text; therefore I
shall insist no longer upon it, though so plainly hinted, that I could not
altogether pass it by.

3. These words do expressly declare, that some Doctrines there be which are
fundamental to Religion, (i. e.) the belief whereof is necessary to the worship
of God, and the practice of Virtue; and consequently without the belief
whereof, we cannot conceive how a man should be induced to a Religious and
Virtuous life. And this is the main scope and design of the Text, whereof I
shall speak as fully and distinctly as I can, showing from the Text what these
fundamental Doctrines be, in the assent whereunto, or the persuasion whereof it
is most plain, that the nature of Faith, properly so called, does consist;
according to the latitude of which Doctrines the extent also of Faith, as to
Fundamentals, is to be measured; according to the influence of which Doctrines
upon the wills of men to induce them to the worship of God and the practice of
Virtue, the right use also, the true purpose and design of Faith is to be
understood.

It remains therefore, that we duly consider the Doctrines themselves, the
necessity also, and sufficiency of them to induce men to Religion and Virtue.
And this will fully answer my design, which is to show the true nature, the due
extent, and the right use of that Faith, which is one of those Divine
Qualifications and Graces whereby we are fitted for Life eternal.

All that can be thought necessary to be said for this purpose, may be reduced
to Four heads of Discourse: whereof the

1. Shall be to inquire, What those Doctrines be, which are fundamental or
necessary to the practice of Religion and Virtue.

2. To demonstrate that the belief of those Doctrines is an adequate or
sufficient foundation thereof, or inducement thereto.

3. To give an account of those other Doctrines in Christian Religion, which
are necessary to be believed, and why they are necessary.

4. To apply the whole Discourse by an exhortation, To add unto Faith Virtue,
and that Life wherewith God is pleased.

1. I am to show what those Doctrines be which are fundamental to the practice
of Religion and Virtue. Before I attempt the performance whereof, it will be
necessary for me to premise this Apology, That I do not here intend a Catalogue
of those Fundamentals which that Excellent man Mr. Chillingworth refused to
give, and which he demonstrated to the Romanists was a vain thing to require,
almost impossible to lay down, and if it were never so easy, yet very needless
to show: For that Notion of Fundamentals, wherein he and his adversary used
that word, was different from that wherein I now use it. Fundamental with them,
was any Doctrine, which upon any account was necessary to be believed by every
Christian. These Doctrines I do not speak of at present as such; but I intend
in due place to give an account of them, showing what relation they have to
those Doctrines I am about to lay before you.

But by Fundamentals, I mean those Articles, or Propositions, which are
necessary to be believed in order to a good Life; and what these be, every
Minister that pretends to be skilled in the Gospel, (which is the power of God
to salvation), if his pretense be tolerably good, may and ought to lay down:
For this attempt signifies no other thing, than to show what powerful
obligations the Faith of Christians engages them by, to live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present world.

In laying down these Fundamental Doctrines, I shall observe no other rule and
method than what is offered here in the Text. You are to remember what I even
now made plain to you, That it was not the Apostle's purpose to instance in all
Doctrines that were necessary to be believed, as a Foundation of Religion and
Virtue; but only in some that were so necessary; because that was sufficient to
prove his general Proposition, That without faith it is impossible to please
God. As for those others which are of like necessity to be believed in order to
that end, I shall (as I said) lay them down in that distinct Method to which I
am led by the Apostle's Words; the great and deep Wisdom whereof, the more I
ponder, the more I admire.

For here it is very observable, that the Apostle when he designs to prove, That
without Faith it is impossible to please God; he does first instance in a
proposition necessary to be believed for that end, which is a Doctrine of
Natural Religion, viz. That there is a God. He does secondly instance in a
Proposition necessary to be believed for that end, which is a Doctrine of
Revealed Religion, viz. That God is a rewarder of them that diligently seek
him. But in what sense it is a Doctrine of Revealed Religion, I must briefly
explain to you, to prevent mistakes.

That God will reward every rewardable Creature, is to say no other thing, but
God is Just; and this is known by the light of nature; but in strictness, no
man is rewardable but he that is sinlesly righteous; for he that offends, is
liable to punishment. Now of all mere mortals, there is no man that is sinlesly
obedient: Whether therefore God will reward us if we diligently seek him, tho
we are sinners, this depends only upon the free will and pleasure of God, and
consequently cannot be known by us, but through Revelation: The belief
therefore of this truth, That God is a rewarder of such men as we are, if we
diligently seek him, is the belief of a Doctrine that belongs to Revealed
Religion.

It is further to be remembered by us, that the Apostle does instance in this
Proposition, of Natural Religion, That there is a God, in behalf of all other
Principles of Natural Religion that are of like necessity to be believed with
it. Likewise, that the Apostle does instance in this Proposition of Revealed
Religion, That God is a Rewarder of them that seek him, in behalf of all other
Principles of Revealed Religion that are of like necessity to be believed with
that.

It deserves also our notice, That the Proposition of Natural Religion which
the Apostle instances in, is the first Principle and Foundation of Religion,
necessary to be believed first of all: That also the Proposition of Revealed
Religion which he instances in, is the last Principle that makes up the
Foundation of Faith, as I shall show in its place: So that all the other
Doctrines of Faith that are fundamental to Religion and Virtue, lie between
these two; viz. The first Principle of Natural Religion, That there is a God;
and the last Principle of Revealed Religion, That he is a Rewarder.

My business is to show, What those Principles be, which lie between the lowest
and highest part of the Foundation; and they are discoverable what they are, by
showing what is of equal necessity to be believed with these Doctrines, in
order to the inducing of men to the practice of Religion and Virtue.

1. I shall, according to this rule, show what Doctrines of Natural Religion
are fundamentally necessary to be believed, in order to Worship and Virtue. 2.
According to the same rule, what those Revealed Doctrines are, which are of
like necessity to be believed for the same end.

The Doctrines of Natural Religion are these; 1. That there is a God; which is
here instanced in. 2. That there is a Providence. 3. That some things there be,
wherewith God is pleased, and some wherewith he is offended.

Now concerning all these Principles, I affirm, That they are so absolutely
necessary to be believed, that not one of them can be spared: It Is the belief
of all these things together, from which resulteth the necessary obligation of
men to worship God, and work righteousness; so that if the belief of any one of
them cease, all sense of obligation to pious and virtuous practice, must
withal fail and perish. Some there are which add unto this Foundation the
belief of a life to come; but unfitly, upon these two accounts.

1. Because the belief hereof is not in the same degree necessary to the
practice of that which is pleasing to God, as the belief of the forementioned
things, for if a man had but an uncertain hope of a future life, but firmly
believed the other truths, it is barely possible, that by the motive and
inducement of such belief, joined with such an hope, he might be persuaded to
do those things which he is convinced God would be pleased withal: And it seems
probable that the Apostle in the first place does instance in a sort of
Doctrines, without the belief whereof it is naturally impossible men should
conceive themselves obliged to Godliness and Virtue; and all the Principles of
Natural Religion are such: And that in the second place he instanceth in a sort
of Doctrines, without the belief whereof it is morally impossible men should
conceive themselves sufficiently encouraged thereto; and all the Principles of
Revealed Religion are of that nature.

2. It Is clear enough, That the Faith of a life to come is grounded upon
Revelation; for tho it appears exceeding probable to natural reason, yet by the
discourses of those men that wanted a Revelation, it appears withal, that
generally it was an exceeding hard matter to arrive at any certainty about it,
while they were only left to the light and conduct of natural reason in this
matter: It Is only the Testimony of God in the Resurrection and Doctrine of our
Savior, that has cleared the world from all Disputes about it: It Is only the
Gospel that has brought life and immortality to light. Upon these Reasons I
conceive this belief is not to be ranked with those that I have already named
under the head of Natural Principles; whereof the first is,

1. That there is a God: This, as I said, is the Fundamental Principle of all
Religion, without which there is no obligation to worship; and without the
belief of which there can be no sense of any such obligation, without the
belief hereof no man can think himself obliged to Virtue, since the denial
thereof supposes, that there is no authority to which a man can be accountable
for his actions. But this thing I take to be so clear, that there is no further
necessity of insisting upon it.

Since then the belief of a Deity is the Foundation of all Religion, it would
in this place be most advisable to show upon what grounds the belief of this
most important and fundamental Article of Religion stands, since all the
Consequences naturally issuing from it, will have more or less power and
efficacy with us, according as we are more or less under the power of this
belief, That there is a God. Now although the manifesting of these Reasons, upon
which this belief is established in humane nature, the discovering of that Rock
upon which this first stone in the Foundation is laid, should be supposed never
so needless in this Congregation; yet considering the great and general
importance of this Doctrine, it cannot be suposed tedious to any Hearer, unless
withal I had reason to suspect there were any persons here to whom the
Demonstrations of a Diety bring such evil Tidings, that they would gladly
embrace the most frivolous pretenses to avoid them: Upon which Supposition
nothing could be more needful, than to wrest their vain and running hopes away
from them, That possibly there is no God, by the force of that reason, which
shows it to be eternally and immutably true, That there is. Wherefore tho I
shall be saved much of that pains which would be otherwise requisite, by the
care I have formerly taken in particular Discourses, to guard this part of the
Foundation, and to establish the belief of it in your minds; yet I must needs
observe that decorum, of allotting it as considerable a place in my Sermon, as
it has in the Text, and as the Dignity of the Subject requires.

To believe that there is a God, is to believe that there is a Being infinitely
perfect, (i. e.) Infinite in Wisdom, Power, and Goodness, which ever was, and
ever will be, and which is the Creator and First Cause of all things: This is
that Notion of God, to which Natural Reason leads us, inasmuch as by that Being
which is called God, we are to understand that which is Infinite in all
Perfections. Several there be which desire no other Argument to prove there is
such a Being, besides that Testimony which every man finds in his own breast.
And indeed, the universal consent of mankind in this matter, even of people
whose Manners and Religions being as distant as their habitations were remote,
show that they were never united in this persuasion by Compact or Confederacy:
Add to this likewise, the Fears of a Diety in them who could only be supposed
to invent this stratagem of governing the world, (if an Invention it be) viz.
in Philosophers and Princes, who were much to blame to be afraid of their own
fancies, if it was but a mystery of State, to possess the people with the
belief of a Deity. This, I say, so universal a Confession of this Doctrine is a
pregnant evidence, that it is indeed written in the very minds, and the sense
thereof interwoven into the very Natures of men; and if it be so, there cannot
possibly be any other cause offered of so uniform and constant an effect, to
satisfy a reasonable man, besides the existence of such a Being, which all men
are persuaded of, and who has wrought into our Souls, when he made us, the
Testimonies of his Eternal Power and Godhead.

But although the urging of this Argument of Universal Consent, for the proving
of a Deity, together with clear Answers to all Objections that can be brought
to weaken it, be according to the most impartial Judgment, I can make,
sufficient to conclude any but an unteachable mind, that is unwilling to
believe there is a God, because it is for its interest there should be none. And
although I am verily persuaded, that whereas indeed many there are who live
like Atheists, yet there is scarce any of them (to the glory of Religion be it
spoken) who deliberately dies an Atheist; yet I confess this Argument from
Universal Consent does rather suppose that there is no need of Arguments to
convince an Atheist, than offer any unanswerable means of Conviction to him: If
such a Creature there be in the World, he will say to all this, that the
Argument supposes that to be true, which he himself is an example of the
falsehood of, viz. That all men believe the Being of a God: And though it may be
replied, That some few Monsters there are in all the products of Nature, and
it is no more to be inferred, that the belief of a God is not the sense of
Mankind, because he is of another opinion, than it is the Law of Nature that men
should be born with two Heads, because a two-headed Monster once appeared in
the World: Yet if he should be so immodest and stubborn, as to conclude against
all the rest of Mankind, that they are mistaken, and he (if alone he be) is
alone in the right, have we then nothing left to confute this wretched
Creature, and by undeniable Reason to prove that Mankind is in the right, and
that there is a God? Yes, we have: They are the Works of Nature, which there is
no man, but must see, and can enquire into; and they demonstrate the Being of
their Maker. If it be possible (which for ought I know it is) to deface the
Testimonies of a Deity which are written within us, it is not yet possible to
blot out those Testimonies of his Being which are left without us. Most plain
it is, that we find our selves in a World contrived into admirable beauty and
order, and furnished with that mavelous variety of things excellent and
ufeful, that the whole scheme and fabric of Nature, to the dullest Observer,
appears to be an effect of great Wisdom and Council, i. e. of an understanding
Being. Nothing is more plain, than that this World could not make it self:
Nothing is more plain, than that a Cause it must have, if of any great Effect
it be reasonable to require the Cause, or at least to affirm that it has one.
Whatever the Cause of this World is, it could not make it self, for that is a
perfect Contradiction. By inevitable consequence therefore it follows, That
something there is which is so perfect, it needed no cause to produce it (i.
e.) that there is an Infinite Everlasting Being, which is God the Maker of all
things. But to pursue this Argument in a more obvious, but equally convincing
manner: We ordinarily distinguish between the Works of Art, and the Works of
Nature: By the Works of Art, we mean those Effects that are produced by the
skill of Man; by the Works of Nature, those Effects which are constantly
preserved and performed to our hands. Now that those which we call the Works of
Nature, are the Effects of a Divine Skill (as we confess the Works of Art are
of Human Skill) is demonstrable beyond all reasonable Contradiction. If I see a
Statue curiously carved, a Picture elegantly described, or a Monument with an
Ingenious Inscription engraven upon it, I must so necessarily conclude, that
the Statuary, the Painter, and the Graver, has been there, that if I should
either affirm, that these things came by chance, or were eternally what they
are, I should be in danger of being sent to Bedlam. But this I will offer at
any time to demonstrate, That the meanest, the most minute, the most
contemptible Works of Nature, have really more beauty and uniformity, more
variety, and to say nothing else, more wonder in them, than the most exquisite
and rich Inventions, the most magnificent and ingenious Contrivances of Human
Art. Bring me the vilest and poorest Insect, that flies above the ground, or
crawls upon it; bring me the simplest Flower, the most common Plant, that is
scattered abroad in the Fields, I will show beyond contradiction, that the
beauty, the proportion, the parts, the growth, and the motions of these the
most contemptible Works of Nature, do infinitely transcend all the Performances
of the richest Humane Fancy. That the nearer we look into the Works of Art, the
more unpolished and rude they appear to be, as he that would please himself
with gazing on a Picture must view it at a distance; but if he come too near,
the ruggedness of the Paint makes it look like an ugly thing, and so it is more
or less in all the Contrivances of Human Art.

But as all Philosophers know, the more minutely we search into the Works of
Nature, even those that are most contemptible to see to, and which vulgar eyes
pass by without observing; if they be the Snow that falls on the ground, the
Wings of the smallest Fly, or the meanest Animal that creeps upon the Earth,
the more advantageously and minutely they are seen, the more uniformity,
smoothness, beauty of color and figure, and variety of parts, discover
themselves in them; which plainly shows how much the Works of Nature transcend
those of Art.

Now shall I, who confess here is more of Council, Wisdom and Power, seen in
these most ordinary Works of Nature, than in the best effects of Human Skill,
shall I be ashamed not to confess the Art of Man in these, and yet doubt
whether those be the Products of a greater Artist? What shall I then say of the
Earth that bears me, and nourishes me; of the Air that is extended for me to
breath in; of the Clouds that drop their fatness upon me; of the Heavens that
cherish me; of the Sun that divides the Day and Night, and gives light and
heat to the World, and of all the Ornaments of Heaven and Earth; and what of my
self, who am endued with a Body of wonderful contrivance, and with those
greater privileges of Reason, Will and Understanding? Are all these things too
without an Artist that made them thus? No madness is comparable to the but
doubting that they are: He that does so, must either want his Senses, or his
Soul. He must either deny that these things are what he sees them, Effects of
great Wisdom and Understanding; or he must affirm, That such Effects there may
be without a Cause proportionable to them; he must either say that something
made it self, or that there was no need that these things should be made (i.e.)
he must affirm, that which is impossible may be otherwise, and hold
Contradictions to be true.

Well then might the Apostle say, The invisible things of him from the creation
of the world are clearly seen, being known by the things which he has made,
even his eternal power and Godhead. So that when I consider the mighty evidence
of those Arguments for the Existence of a Deity, which are drawn from the Works
of Nature, I cannot see wherein they differ from Demonstrations, though some
there be who are not pleased to call them so; and I do not question, but he
that can be an obstinate Atheist against them, would also, if it were for for
his interest, deny that three and three is six, or contradict the plainest
Proposition in Mathematics. Upon the whole matter, when I consider the Works
of God, I would rather choose (if there were any choice in these matters) to
believe all the Tales of the Roman Legends, as my Lord Bacon, observes, and I
add, tho Transubstantiation were cast into the Scale, than believe that this
great Body is without a Mind that informed it.

And thus at last I have said something more than I intended upon the first
Doctrine of Natural Religion, That there is a God, proving it to be true by
natural Reason, as indeed it is only to be proved: For we cannot prove it by
Revelation to a Gainsayer, since to attempt that way, is to beg what we should
prove, viz. That there is a God whose Revelation this is. This therefore is the
first Principle of Religion, without the belief whereof there can be no
obligation conceived to Faith and Worship, and the practice of Virtue. I
proceed to show what the next are, in which I shall be very brief, because the
truth of those is very evidently consequent from the demonstration of this.

2. It is fundamentally necessary to Religion and Virtue, That we believe there
is a Providence, i. e. that God is the Governor of that World which he made,
and still preserves; and more particularly, that he governs Mankind in a way
suitable to his Nature, by prescribing Moral Laws to him, and expecting
obedience from him; that he sees, and takes notice of all our Actions; that he
observes all that we do, and all that we suffer, and superintends all the
Affairs of Humane Life.

And if there be a God, it is clear by natural Reason, that there is such a
Providence, and that upon several grounds. I shall instance but in one.

It is not consistent with the Divine Wisdom to make such a frame of things, as
were not fit to be regarded and governed by him afterward, (i. e) to be a
Creator, and not to be the Lord and Governor of his Creation. More
particularly; It is repugnant to the Truth and Wisdom of God to create such a
being as man, whose Faculties teach him, that he is capable of honoring his
Creator, and receiving good from him, and then not to regard whether he be
honored by his Creature or no, and to leave him to the Conduct of Chance for
the procuring of that which is good for himself. But it is also plain and
evident from the Continuation of the Works of Nature in their serviceableness
and usefulness to men, that God does still govern the material World, and that
in order to the good of men, which is a clear instance of his Providence over
them, and that he minds and regards them. Now without the belief hereof it is
evident, that no man can think himself obliged to the practice of Religion and
Virtue; for though there be a God, yet if he minds not our Actions, there is no
reason why we should fear to offend him, or take any care to please him; or how
can a man be persuaded to worship God, if he believes not that God regards his
Worship? What reason can be pretended, why he should pray unto him, unless he
be convinced that God hears his Prayers? What consolation can he have under any
distress, what trust can he place upon the Divine Power and Goodness, if he
thinks that God is not concerned in Human Affairs, and has no respect to the
Calamities of men, and governs nothing by his Providence? In brief, it is most
plain, that whatsoever obligation to Worship and Virtue arises from the belief
that there a God, supposes also the belief of Divine Providence, that God is
the Governor of Mankind, and takes notice of their Actions.

3. It is fundamentally necessary to Religion and Virtue, that men believe that
with some things God is pleased, and that with others he is offended (i. e.)
that there is a difference between good and evil, which can by no means be
altered, and taken away: That some things are so good, that they can never
become evil; and some things so evil, that they can never become good: And if
we believe there is a God, such must be our persuasions concerning good and
evil; for if Justice be an indispensible Perfection of the Divine Nature, then
is there an eternal relation between a promise, and the performance thereof;
and it is impossible that Fidelity and Truth should ever cease to be fitting,
lovely, and beautiful things. If the Goodness of God be necessary to his
Nature, then the relation between Compassion, and an indigent Creature, is
Eternal; and Charity and Mercy are things immutably good. And thus in all other
instances of Virtue it might be made to appear from the Perfections of the
Divine Nature, whereof they are the imitations, that they can no more cease to
be good, than God can cease to be what he is; and consequently, that the
Dispositions and Practices contrary to them, are immutably evil. It can never
be good to condemn the Innocent to oppress the Weak, to be cruel and
implacable, to be sunk into sensuality or worldliness: No Power in Heaven or in
Earth, no Will, no Authority can make it ever cease from being a most comely,
fitting, due thing for a Creature that is endued with Reason, to praise his
God, to honor him in all his Perfections, to love his Infinite Goodness, to
trust in his Infinite Power and Wisdom, to reverence his great and holy
Majesty, and to obey his Will in all things: the rectitude and duty hereof
cannot be altered any more, than the truth of a Mathematical Proposition; upon
this belief depends the persuasion, that Worship, and all Virtue and Goodness
is pleasing to God, and the contrary displeasing to him; and this is as
certain, as it is certain that God is immutably good, and loves that which is
most excellent and perfect.

This sense of good and evil is that also which is wrought into our very
Natures; the Heathens themselves, who wanted a Revelation, were yet subject to
this Law of their Minds, being terrified and punished by the Conscience of
evil, when they transgressed that Law; cherished and rewarded by the Conscience
of good, when they observed it: It was this sense that gave them courage and
assurance when they did well; and that touched their guilty minds with remorse,
and made them tremble, when they did ill.

I will not trouble my self to enquire how far it is in the power of custom in
Sin to blot out these Apprehensions in the minds of men; but let a man's
Conscience be seared never so incurably, though he has no inward sense to
inform him perpetually of the difference between good and evil, yet that
difference is demonstrable to him from the Being of a God, as I have shown, and
that is the most irrefragable way of proving it against the most hardened
Sinner. But plain it is, that the belief hereof is absolutely necessary to the
pleasing of God: For what though a man believe there is a God, and that there
is a Providence which governs the World, if yet he be not persuaded, that some
things there are, by the doing of which God is pleased, he will never take care
to please him by the doing of those things? If he is not persuaded some things
there are, by the doing whereof God is displeased, he can never be afraid of
offending him by the doing of those things: If he thinks there is no difference
between good and evil in the nature of things, he cannot think himself obliged
to make, or observe any such difference in his Actions; unless he believes,
that to worship God, and practice Virtue, is good in it self, acceptable to
God, and rewardable by him, nothing can effectually oblige him thereunto:
unless he believe the contrary to be evil, displeasing, and punishable, no
religious belief whatsoever can deter him from it; So that to believe this
difference between good and evil, between things that God is pleased withal,
and wherewith he is displeased, is of absolute necessity to Religion and
Virtue, or the doing of those things whereby God is pleased: And all these
things are so fundamentally necessary in order to that end, that it is
naturally impossible, and it implies a contradiction, that a man should be a
Worshipper of God, and a doer of Righteousness, without the belief of them: But
from the firm persuasion of these things, there arises a full obligation to do
all those things whereby God is pleased.

But alas! such is the degeneracy of Mankind, our propensity to wickedness, the
Temptations of the World, etc. that if we believe no other motives besides
these in order to Religion and Virtue, it is very unlikely that they should
have their effects upon us. We know we are Sinners, and should we be ready to
justify our continuance in Sin, by pretending that we know not whether God
would pardon us upon our repentance: We know our best Actions are imperfect,
and we should be ready to question, whether God would accept what we could do,
and make that a pretense of neglecting to do what we might: We know our own
Frailties, and the difficulties of Religion and Virtue, and should in all
likelihood deliver our selves from all care of pleasing God, under color of
the impossibility of performing it by Humane Endeavors: We know the enjoyments
of pleasures and profits of Sin are present to us, and we should be apt to
question, Whether it would be any thing better, if we should forego them, when
the conscience of our duty required it. It has pleased therefore the All-wise
and All-good God, out of his tender Mercy and Compassion to Sinners, to remove
all these hindrances, and by Revelation to supply all these defects, and
satisfy us concerning all these doubts, viz. by adding to the Principles of
Natural Religion these following Motives and Inducements to Godliness and
Virtue:

1. That God will pardon the sins of all those that repent.

2. That he will accept our sincere endeavors to please him.

3. That by his Spirit he will assist us in them. And,

4. That he will at last reward us for them.

All which are the Doctrines of revealed Religion, and make up the entire
foundation of Faith, having all their dependence upon Faith in Christ.

The Third Sermon.
HEB. XI. 6. But without faith it is impossible to please him: for he that
comes to God, must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that
diligently seek him.


I Come in the second place to show, what Doctrines of Revealed Religion are
fundamental to Godliness and Virtue; those are such which are immediately
necessary to be believed in order to the removing or subverting of those Doubts
which would hinder men from the care of Piety and Virtue, notwithstanding their
belief of the natural Principles of Religion. If we suppose a man to believe a
God, a Providence, and the difference between good and evil, we must needs
conclude this man lies under a very powerful obligation to the practice of
Worship and Virtue; and if the efficacy of these Motives be not subverted by
other Principles destructive of all care, to please God, it may be expected
that the man who believes thus much, should indeed be a Worshipper of God, and
a Practiser of Virtue: But if it be most true, that men are, through the sad
degeneracy and corruption of their Natures, extremely averse from that which is
good, and prone to that which is evil, even all Mankind, more or less, and
consequently, that they are very ready to lay hold upon all pretenses to excuse
themselves the Service of God, and obedience to his Will? If it be true also,
that there are several Questions in Religion, which unless they be satisfied,
the doubting of them will afford so many pretenses to throw off all care to
live virtuously and godly; and that these Questions cannot be satisfied, nor
consequently the Doubts removed, by the Principles of Natural Religion: then it
follows, that those Principles; though the belief of them be absolutely
necessary, yet by reason of the present evil state of Mankind, are not
sufficient to constrain them to the practice of Religion and Virtue, but must
be assisted and strengthened by such Principles of Revealed Religion, the belief
whereof will wholly remove all those Pretenses which would be alleged in
behalf of an ungodly vicious life.

It might be pretended by the natural man, who believes that there is a God, a
Providence, and that some things are pleasing, and others displeasing to him:
That these are not sufficient Reasons why he should become religious and
virtuous; because knowing himself to be a Sinner, he could not tell whether God
would pardon the Sins he is guilty of, without which it would signify little to
his advantage to endeavor to please him for the future: Clear it is by Natural
light, that God is a hater of Sin, but whether he will pardon a Sinner
depending merely upon his Free Will, the belief thereof must necessarily depend
upon Revelation. Almighty God has by Revelation made known to us, that he will
pardon the Sins of men upon their repentance.

This therefore is the first Principle of Revealed Religion, that is
fundamental to Godliness and Virtue, That God is ready to pardon the Sins of
men upon their repentance.

But by the natural man, i. e. one that believes there is a God; it might
further be alleged, That though he were assured that God would forgive him all
his past sins upon his return to obedience; yet he is ignorant what degree of
obedience it is with which God will be pleased for the future: A perfect and
unsinning Righteousness he knows no man is able to arrive unto in this state of
imperfection; and whether God will accept of our doing what we are able to do,
considering all our evil Circumstances, we cannot know, unless he is pleased to
inform us that he will: Almighty God has therefore by Revelation made known to
us, that he will accept of the sincere endeavors of men in the practice of
Religion and Virtue.

And so the second Principle of revealed Religion, the belief whereof is
fundamentally necessary to a good life, is this, That God is ready to accept of
sincere obedience.

But considering the great Temptatations we are beset withal, the natural
aversation in us to good, and propensity to evil, the bad Examples of the
World; the power of Custom, the prevelancy of Passions, the frailties of Humane
Nature; It is further questionable, whether Humane Endeavors can arrive at
such a measure of Righteousness and Obedience, which may justly be called
sincerity in doing the whole Will of God; and if that Righteousness be
impossible to us in our present Circumstances, without which God will not be
pleased with us, there is but little comfort in the belief that he will pardon
us upon repentance, and accept of our sincere endeavors of obedience; there
are but weak motives to those endeavors. Almighty God therefore, to encourage
us against the fears of our own frailties, and the temptatations of this World,
has been pleased to reveal unto us, that he will afford us the assistance of
his Holy Spirit in a manner and measure proportionable to all the Difficulties
of Religion and Virtue.

And so the third Principle of Revealed Religion, the belief whereof is
necessary to Godliness, and Virtue is, That God is ready to assist our
endeavors of doing his will.

Lastly, it is possible to be alleged by the natural man, That though all
these things be true, yet he has no sufficient inducement to Religion and
Virtue, unless he were assured, that all his self-denial, his resolution, and
overcoming his evil Appetites, his foregoing the present pleasures of Sin, his
diligence and constancy in well-doing, would be recompensed by obtaining of
better things in the room of those advantages he foregoes to please God in the
doing of his duty.

To take away this Plea, Almighty God has moreover revealed unto us, that he
will bestow a Crown of life immortal, of endless glory and happiness upon every
one that perseveres in well-doing. And the last Principle of revealed Religion,
the belief whereof is necessary to the doing of those things whereby God is
pleased, is this, That God is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him.
Which is the Proposition or Doctrine of Revealed Religion instanced in by the
Apostle, and that, as I told you, in behalf of all other Doctrines of Revealed
Religion of like necessity to be believed.

And thus I have shown you how all those other fundamental Doctrines of Faith,
without which we cannot do those things that please God, are comprehended in,
and lie between those which are mentioned in the Text, viz. the lowest of them,
That God is: and the highest and last of them, That he is a rewarder, etc.

Having thus shown you what Doctrines of Revealed Religion are fundamentally
necessary to be believed, to encourage men to the practice of Piety and Virtue;
I shall speak more distinctly, and yet briefly, to each of them; showing how
they are to be understood, what grounds we have to believe them, and what force
and efficacy the belief of them has to persuade us to Godliness and Virtue.
And,

1. That God will pardon the sins of those that repent. Without Revelation we
cannot have assurance thereof, because it cannot be concluded from mere natural
light, that God will actually pardon a Sinner: The reason is, because a Sinner
is obnoxious and liable to just punishment, and to inflict a just punishment is
consistent with Goodness: So that we cannot argue merely from the goodness of
the Divine Nature, which is otherways abundantly expressed to us, that God will
remit that punishment, because it is not inconsistent with his Goodness not to
remit it. That God therefore would pardon the sins of men, and remit his right
to punish them, as they deserved, depended merely upon his own pleasure,
whether he would or not, and consequently it must be a secret to us, till he
was pleased to manifest it to us by Revelation. And we that do believe, that
God will pardon the sins of those that repent, do believe it upon this ground,
That the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ is the true Revelation of God's Will
to Mankind, in which Gospel it is plainly declared, that God will pardon those
that repent. The great and evident design of the whole Gospel being this, to
call sinners to repentance upon this motive, That they shall obtain remission
of sins, if they obey that call to repentance which God has given them by his
Son Jesus. That which is promised, is Pardon; the condition upon which it is
promised, is Repentance; both which afford a powerful motive to the practice of
those things which please God.

For that God will pardon a Sinner, what does it signify but this, That he will
not reckon his former sins to him, and that all his future acts of obedience
shall be reckoned to him, as if he had never been guilty of any sin. Now plain
it is, that hereby all those Jealousies of the power and severity of God, which
can dishearten the Sinner from seeking to be reconciled unto him by submission
and repentance, are utterly removed: Hereby he is assured, that God is neither
inxorable, nor implacable; his prayers will be heard, his repentance will be
accepted, and there is a certain way opened by which he may return into the
favor of God. Now he that believes this, is under the power of a strong motive
to live so as to please God for the future: For as nothing does more deeply
engage men in an obstinate and unreclaimable course of wickedness, than the
apprehension that they have sinned beyond hope of pardon; so nothing is more
apt to soften them into dispositions of repentance, than the kind and merciful
offers of forgiveness which he makes, who has it both in his right, and in his
power to destroy them.

This we are sensible of in the carriage of men toward one another; and why
should we not suffer as kindly impressions from the Gentleness and Charity of
God, as we do from the good nature of men? Certain it is, that no one man has
been so rude and ungrateful to another, as every Sinner has been to his Maker;
and as true it is, that no misery can equal that which would befall him from the
unappeasedness of God's anger; and therefore no Gentleness and Mercy, no
tenderness and Charity is comparable to that which God has expressed toward
him, in proclaiming himself ready to pardon upon repentance. It Is true, we see
there are such inflexible Natures in the World, as are not to be mended by
forgiveness, and the kindest usage; there are men of such incorrigible Tempers,
that are not at all the better for God's pardon, or the Kings, but then these
are veary hateful persons, and deserve not to be pitied.

But if men are reclaimable by kindness (as all men should be) what can sooner
melt them into thoughts and purposes of amendment, than that their great and
bountiful Creator, against whom no man can sin without being guilty of the
greatest baseness, because he sins against the greatest goodness; against whom
no man can sin without exposing himself to the greatest miseries, because he
sins against the greatest Power: that he, I say, should bear so tender a regard
to his lost and undone Creatures, as to forbear his right to punish them, and
allure them to amendment by declaring that he will do so, because he delights
not in the death of a sinner, but had rather he should turn, and live: This, if
any thing, must needs work upon our hearts, and humble our wills, and dissolve
our affections into a disposition of the most ready and dutiful obedience to
him for the future.

Again, if we consider the condition upon which this pardon is offered to
Sinners in the Gospel, the belief thereof must needs be a strong foundation of
Godliness and Virtue. For that repentance, upon the condition whereof pardon is
promised, is neither more nor less than a real conversion from the love and
practice of Sin and Unrighteousness, to the love and practice of Virtue and
Holiness: It is neither made up of confession of sin, and sorrow for sin, or
wishing and proposing to be better, nor of external Penances, fruitless
Ceremonies, vain Commutations, purchasing Dispensations, and buying
Indulgencies; not one, or all of these put together, is repentance. Any man
that has his eyes in his head, may plainly perceive, that the Repentance to
which pardon is promised in the Gospel, is altogether as broad, and as long, as
to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously and
godly in this present world.

So that God Almighty has not issued out his pardon to any one Sinner in
absolute and irrespective terms, and then left it to his good nature, whether
he will thank him for it or no, whether he will be kind, and leave his sins; or
ungrateful, and continue in them: And they are very foolish, who fancy
themselves such Darlings of Heaven, that for their sakes God had no respect to
the holiness of his own Nature, the honor of his Laws, and the wisdom of his
Government, in determining to pardon them, and receive them into his grace and
favor. Now to prevent all such presumtion and fond conceit, it is as plainly
revealed to us in the Gospel, that God will not lose his right to our
obedience, as that he will forbear to use his right to punish us; and that he
will forbear that no longer, when he sees his goodness does not lead us to
repentance. The same Divine Revelation which assures us God is so good, that
he will pardon a Sinner; does likewise assure us he is so just and wise, as to
pardon him only upon his repentance: And indeed, to pardon the incorrigible is
not mercy, but weakness; he only is in a compassionable condition, that is
sorry for his sins, and sins no more.

Seeing then Repentance consists in the practice of Religion and Virtue, and
that is the indispensable condition of our pardon, and that out Pardon is
infallibly secure upon that Condition: From the belief of all this, there
arises a most pregnant and forcible engagement to the greatest care we can
exert of living in the love and fear of God, and keeping his Commandments.

2. The second Principle of Revealed Religion, the belief whereof is necessary
to excite us to the practice of Godliness and Virtue, is this; That God is
ready to accept of sincere obedience. This likewise is only to be known by
Revelation; seeing, if God had pleased, he might have left us to the rigor of
that original Law of Righteousness which required unsinning duty, and according
to which no Sinner can be justified; (i.e.) he might have measured our
Repentance (the Condition of our Pardon) by our amendment, according to the
strictness of that Law, without making any abatements for Human Frailty, for
invincible Ignorance, for surprise, and those unduenesses of passion, and those
inadvertencies which are things of daily incursion. But had it been thus,
little comfort could we have had from the belief that God will pardon us upon
our repentance and obedience for the future, if he would accept of nothing for
that repentance and obedience which was short of that absolute perfection,
which it is morally impossible for any man in this state of imperfection to
arrive unto: For he that proffers a benefit upon terms impossible to the
Receiver, does but disquiet him the more, taking away with the one hand what he
gives with the other. Therefore Almighty God, further to encourage us to
repentance, and the practice of Religion and Virtue, has not only promised to
pardon our former sins upon that condition, but he has so described to us in
the Gospel, what that life is which for the future he will accept and be
pleased withal, that we have no reason to be deterred from attempting his
Service by any jealousies of his austerity and rigor toward us: That which he
requires of us, is to love him with all our hearts; from whence it follows,
That the service and duty he expects from us, is no other than what is a
natural emanation from, and a real expression of such a love to him, which is
to do what we are able, that we may serve him in holiness and righteousness all
the days of our life. Now to love God with all our hearts, i. e. to love him
above all things, is a very possible, and the most reasonable thing in the
World; That obedience therefore must be so too, which is the natural effect of
such a love to God: That obedience which is the effect of due love to God, is
consistent with sins of mere frailty, of unaffected ignorance, of unavoidable
surprise; because these sins neither proceed from an evil will, nor are wholly
vincible in our present state; but that obedience which is the effect of due
love to God, cannot consist with deliberate, much less with presumptuous sins.
It cannot consist with wilful, much less with customary transgressions of known
and open Laws; it cannot consist with sins proceeding from affected ignorance,
much less with sins against knowledge, which it is in a man's power to avoid: It
cannot consist with these kind of sins, because it is clear, that the reason why
men commit them, is not because they cannot, but because they will not forbear
them: But he that loves God with all his heart, will do what he can to please
him; and he that does so, is accepted by Almighty God, i. e. he is reckoned by
him a righteous man, and according to the moderation and gentleness of the
Christian Law, not accounted a Sinner; in which sense we are to understand
those words of the Apostle St. John, He that is born of God, sins not: So
that as for sins of infirmity, which do indeed stand as much condemned, and
will as as certainly exclude us from the favor of God, according to the terms
of the Original Law, or the first Covenant, if God should deal with us by those
measures, for those sins; I say, they are consistent with the favor of God, to
us according to the terms of the Christian Law, or the Second Covenant; because
we have an advocate with the father, Jesus Christ the righteous, who is our
High Priest, and is touched with the feeling of our infirmities; through whose
intercession they are remitted upon our keeping from all wilful sins, and our
endeavor after perfection: But if we sin wilfully, there remains no more
sacrifice for sin; i. e. the Sacrifice offered for us, will not avail to make
such sins consistent with a justifiable state: No; they must be actually
repented of, and forsaken; it is only upon those terms that our Sacrifice
remains in force and power to obtain our reconciliation to God. Here I
confess I have just occasion to proceed upon a Discourse concerning the
difference between sins of weakness, and sins of wilfulness; to show as exactly
as the case will bear, wherein lies that sincerity of obedience which God is
ready to accept, and which he will be pleased with us for: But this would be to
slide into an Argument that belongs not to the general design of that subject I
am now upon, and would also draw out the discourse upon this Head into an
unfitting length.

To supply therefore the want of a particular discussion of those cases that
belong to this matter, I shall need do no more than put you in mind, that the
sincere obedience which God will accept, is that which proceeds from a true
Love to God. Now if it be true (as true it is) that the greatest danger of
defeating the purpose of this Faith, that God is ready to accept of sincere
obedience, to oblige us to obedience, lies on this side, lest men should
mistake that for sincere obedience which is not, (i. e.) reckon those to be
mere infirmities, which are wilful Sins, and indulge themselves in known Vices
under a pretense, that it is not in their power to avoid them: This danger may
be in some sort prevented, by exhorting of you to keep your selves in the love
of God, by those many strong and clear Motives thereunto, which every Christian
may be under the power of. For he that truly loves God, is under the
constraint of an inward Law, though of the highest liberty, yet of the greatest
necessity to do every thing whereby God is pleased; his love to God, while he
cherishes and maintains it in him, will guard and secure him from all wilful
Sin most diligently and carefully: It will keep him far from the brink of
danger, and from any approaches to presumption. It needs not be informed, what
are the precise limits between good and evil; it is too curious, in doing well
to want the knowledge, how far we may go without doing ill: Love is the Noblest
Principle of well doing; it gives largely without pinching; it obeys liberally
without grudging; it studies not what liberty may be taken without displeasing,
so much as how to please abundantly; and in doubtful cases it always determines
on the best and safest side, viz. on that side where our love is a party: And
thus we are to understand those words of the Scripture, that love is the
fulfilling of the law, i. e. it is a safe, it is an infallible Principle of
sincere and universal Obedience.

Now is not the belief of this Doctrine, That God will accept of our sincere
endeavors of obedience, a mighty encouragement to the practice of Religion and
Virtue, since hereby we are assured not only that our former Sins shall not
hinder our Reconciliation to God; but neither also shall our infirmities and
frailties for the future separate us from the favor of God? How does this
belief deliver us from all fears of serving a rigorous and an austere Master,
that will not consider our frailties, nor make abatement for the evil
circumstances we are in? No; God is very earnestly desirous of the good of his
Creatures; he will not only pardon them, but he will not impose impossible or
grievous Tasks upon them; he considers we are but dust, and makes allowance for
our degenerate natures; he requires no more of us, than what such Creatures, as
we are able to do, and indeed, than what is necessary to make us justifiable
before him, to make us capable of entering into his Kingdom.

How cheerfully therefore should we set our selves to obey him whose Charity to
us is so large, whose Government over us is so gentle, whose Yoke is so easy
and light? How resolutely should we betake our selves to that practice of
Religion and Virtue, which although it will admit of many imperfections, yet if
it proceeds from a sincere disposition to please God in all things, will
certainly be accepted by him that is our Maker, and the Lord of all things; by
whom to be owned and approved, to be regarded and beloved, to be justified and
commended, is the highest Glory that a Creature can aspire unto.

3. The third Principle of revealed Religion, fundamental to our encouragement
to the practice of Religion and Virtue is, That God is ready to assist by his
Holy Spirit the sincere endeavors of men to please him: Though a man were
assured that God pardoned Sin upon Repentance; though he believed that
Repentance was to be measured by sincerity, which though it excludes wilful
Sin, yet it excludes not imperfections and humane frailties: Yet if he believed
this very sincerity was above an human attainment, and that it was morally
impossible for a man to be universally good, so as to keep himself free from a
guilty Conscience, this would very much discourage him from endeavoring any
thing in this kind.

The truth is, considering the degeneracy of Human nature, the strength of our
Passions, the unreadiness of our Reason, the importunity of Temptations, and
the vigilance of evil Spirits; If men were left merely to themselves, and the
Providence of God was no more concerned for the cherishing and maintaining good
Principles and good Affections in men, than it is about any other matter, the
happiest tempered men would make but very inconsiderable Improvements in Virtue
and Holiness, if any at all; and the general inability of men toward that
which is good, is not only testified by the Scripture but may be collected by
experience: Now what can more effectually remove the discouragement arising
from this Consideration, than to be assured, that if we set our selves honestly
and uprightely to keep a good Conscence in all our ways toward God and man,
the Providence of God will be concerned for us in so special a manner, that he
will bestow upon us the assistance of his Holy Spirit to Crown our Endeavors
with success and perseverance, (i. e.) such Divine help as shall answer our
needs, and bear a full proportion to all the difficulties we must go through
with: That God will do this for us, is knowable only by revelation; and it
being promised, we have no reason to doubt of the reality of the Promise,
because we are ignorant of the manner how the holy Spirit works upon the
minds of men so unperceptibly, as that his motions can only be known by the
effects of them, viz. our good purposes and practices. This ought to be no
prejudice to the belief of the Holy Spirit's assisting good men in a course of
Religion and Virtue; for though one man cannot persuade another man, or convey
his own thoughts into another's mind, but by making way by his senses; yet the
holy Spirit can inform and persuade us by immediate impressions upon our minds,
without making use of our senses, or any thing else that belongs to our bodily
frame: Now that God has promised his Spirit for all those purposes, which are
necessary, to our spiritual improvement and happiness, is plainly understood by
that saying of our Savior to his Disciples, If ye being evil know how to give
good things to your Children, how much more shall your heavenly Father give the
holy Spirit to them that ask him? Now the good things which earthly Parents are
there supposed to be so ready and willing to impart to their Children, being
such as are generally necessary for the maintenance of Life, as Bread, etc. In
like manner, by the holy Spirit which our heavenly Father is so ready to bestow
upon his Children, we must understand all Spiritual helps necessary for our
improvement in Religion and Virtue, viz. which hold the same proportion to the
good of our Souls, which Bread, etc. holds to the welfare of our Bodies; this
upon our asking, (i. e.) upon our sincere endeavors after it, we may promise
our selves from the bounty of God to us, since he has promised it to us, viz.
such grace and spiritual help as shall be sufficient for us. God will give to
none of us less, and he is unreasonable that expects more: Now is not this
evidently a strong Motive to Godliness and Virtue, that God himself will
cherish and maintain us, will help and support us, will prosper and guard us by
the influences of his Holy Spirit upon us?

Have we such a Patron and Defender to overlook and care for us, that we do not
fall by our Spiritual Enemies for want of necessary help? and yet can we be
disheartened and dismayed? Can our Courage and Resolution leave us? Can our
hearts sink within us, when such powerful Aids are near, when such mighty
encouragements are by us? Is it not from hence plain, that no man can fail of
doing those things wherewith God will be pleased, and his favor obtained, but
it must be through his own fault and slothfulness in not obtaining by his own
endeavors, or in not improving by his good Actions, the graces of the holy
Spirit wherewith he might have arrived to a Regenerate estate, and persevered
therein. For God has not made a feigned, but a sincere promise of his Spirit
to work and increase his graces in us; and if the promise be real, it can imply
no less, and it needs not imply any more, than a sufficient provision for our
spiritual needs; and if that provision be not effectual in the event no body is
to be blamed for it but our selves.

The belief therefore of this Article of Revealed Religion, That God is ready
to assist by his holy Spirit our sincere endeavors to please him, is a Motive
of great force to persuade us to the practice of Religion and Virtue; both
because the Promise of God's Spirit made to us is sufficient to encourage us
against all our fears of the difficulties of Religion, and our own weakness to
overcome them; and likewise because it cannot but show us what great
aggravation our sins must receive, if we continue in them, because thereby we
resist, and do despite unto the spirit of grace.

4. The last Principle of Revealed Religion fundamental to a holy Life, is that
which is mentioned in the Text, viz. That God is a rewarder of them that
diligently seek him: This point of belief is not knowable, but by Divine
Revelation, because it depends on the will and pleasure of God, whether he will
reward our diligent seeking of him, or no; for if it were discoverable by
natural reason (as it is not) that God would certainly pardon our Sins upon
Repentance, that he would accept of our sincere endeavors of obedience, that
he would by his Spirit assist our endeavors to please him; If all this could
be concluded from the general notion of Divine Goodness, yet Natural Reason
could not give us any other confidence about the effects of that pardon, and
our sincere endeavors to please God, which are excited and assisted by the
Holy Spirit; I say the highest confidence we could arrive unto about the good
effects of these things, with regard to our selves, could amount reasonably to
no more than this, That hereupon we should be exempted and released from that
punishment which is due unto our sins. For that God should pardon Sinners, and
that he should prescribe unto them such excellent and useful Laws, as should
tend to their advantage in this Life, and which should recompense the obedience
of them with a present reward, and thereupon should remit the penalty due to
sin; this must needs argue as great goodness in God, as any Sinner could with
reason or modesty expect the manifestation of toward himself; but that he
should over and above requite our imperfect, if sincere obedience, with free
and ample rewards in the Life to come; that those rewards should be the highest
and fullest, which our natures are capable of; that the continuance of them
should be as long as our Beings; that they should be no less than immortal
glory and happiness, than an Eternal Crown of Righteousness, than Life
Everlasting, than the Society and Fellowship of Angels, than the glorious and
happy employments of Spirits made perfect, than the sight and fruition of God
for ever; this is such abundant benignity and good will toward Sinners, that
it can flow from nothing but self-moving goodness, free grace, and unsought
kindness and benevolence! This could never be known by us, but by God
Almighty's Revelation of his purpose and intention so to do, if we would labor
to please him in all things: This with modesty could never be expected by us,
if the declared Promise of God thus to deal with us had not given us confidence
to believe it, and made it our Duty so to do. That we might therefore want no
motive and encouragement to the practice of Religion and Virtue; He who by his
Son Jesus Christ calls us to repentance promising pardon thereupon, and
acceptance and assistance, has moreover by the same Messenger, who has
declared to us the things of God, his secret and hidden purposes of Mercy and
Goodness toward Sinners; by him I say, he has assured us, that the righteous
shall go into life eternal, into a state of immortal glory and happiness
reserved for them in the Heavens.

This also, after all the rest, is a pregnant and strong motive to the practice
of Religion and Virtue; since as the rest show the possibility thereof, so this
satisfies us of the great advantage that will accrue to us thereby, since God
himself will be our rewarder, if we diligently seek him. If indeed we had no
reason to believe, that it would make for our advantage to accept of God's
pardon, and to study to please him in all things for the future, the present
Pleasures and Profits of Sin would captivate the minds of men, and leave us
less reason to wonder at the wickedness of the World; but since the Bountiful
and Righteous God has bid an everlasting immense reward for our poor, and to
him unprofitable, but to our selves most beneficial Services; what can be said
in our excuse, if we undervalue so magnificent and free a Gift, such rich Grace
and Bounty? If this cannot prevail with us to do those things which are so
reasonable in themselves, that a truly good man finds there is little need of
any other temptation to do them, what shame will it be to us if we prefer a
Moment before Eternity, and those Advantages we see (but which we know will
perish in a little time) before those that will never end, which indeed we do
not see, but which we believe, and doubt as little of, as if we saw them; if we
choose the pleasures of sin, which are but for a season (and those unworthy to
be chosen by us, if there were no danger in them) before those pleasures which
remain for us at God's right hand for evermore.

The Fourth Sermon.
St. MATTHEW. XI. 28. Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I
will give you rest.


NO kind of grief sits so heavy upon the mind of man, as that which is made by
the guilt of sin, and a just fear of punishment. And because our Lord in this
promise of rest, could not mean to exclude those that labor under the greatest
weight, but rather to invite them above all others; I shall therefore at this
time consider, what that Rest is which he promises to guilty minds; persuading
my self, that as no Argument can be more profitable, so none will be more
welcome and grateful to all that desire to be saved.

As for those who are so bewitched with the pleasures of Sin, that they feel not
the stings of it; who drown the cries of their Conscience in the noise of
laughter and madness; these, as long as they are able to make this miserable
shift, are not in a condition to desire other relief, nor do they care where it
is to be had. But they who apprehend how fearful a thing it is to fall into the
hands of the living God, and that their sins have made them liable to his
Justice, they indeed are prepared to obey the Call of Jesus, and to try if he
will perform what he promises.

And this is the great Prerogative of the Gospel, that it alone can pacify the
Conscience, and give ease to a mind that labors under the weighty care of
being reconciled to the offended Majesty of God: It gives that satisfaction, I
mean, which in the end will not deceive. And no other is to be valued. For what
am I the better for a false assurance that all is well, which perhaps will
vanish to morrow, and then leave me under an amazing disappointment; which the
longer it lasts, makes my danger the greater; and if it lasts to the end of my
life, has all along hindered me from using the true means of safety? What is
this better than a pleasant dream that holds a man fast asleep, while the fire
is raging in his House, and there is none to wake him till the flames have cut
off everry way by which he might escape? Therefore when our Lord promises that
we shall find rest unto our souls, he does undoubtedly mean, that repose of
mind, those comforts and joys that will not betray us in the end. And this is
not the least commendation of that Rest which he gives, that it is well
grounded, that our Souls shall be staid upon Principles of Truth, and such as
we may safely rely upon.

Secondly, The Rest which he promises, is complete and full, and in that
respect also is fit to quiet all those cares and fears that vex the minds of
miserable Sinners. For he has promised the forgiveness of all our sins, and
given us assurance of God's particular favor and protection; nay, and of
eternal life and glory in another state, when this life once vanishes away. He
has told us, that his Death was a Sacrifice for the expiation of our sins; He
has required us to be once baptized into his Name for the Remission of Sins;
and to repeat the Commemoration of his Death, and our assurance of his second
Coming, to give us life and glory by repeating the Communion of his Body and
Blood, and showing forth his death till he come. The Doctrine which he
revealed, and the Authority which he delivered to his Church, is all a Ministry
of Reconciliation and Forgiveness: And we have reason to take his word for all
this, because he was by mighty proofs demonstrated to be the Son of God. Now
thus far all things are as we would have them; and nothing as yet appears, but
that we may discharge every unquiet thought in the Arms of Jesus.

But in the third place, let us also consider the Condition required on our
part for the obtaining of this rest. And this truly seems to be very easy,
since no more is required, then coming to Jesus for it. Come unto me all ye,
etc. For whatever is meant by this Condition, we might hope that it is no hard
thing which is expressed by so easy a word; and that we need not fear to go to
the bottom of its meaning. Elsewhere our Savior says, I am the bread of life,
he that comes to me, shall never hunger; and he that believes on me, shall
never thirst. So that to come to Christ, is to believe in him, and therefore to
be persuaded of the truth of his promises; which must needs be a gentle
Condition, because there is so much reason why we should believe them; and we
can have no prejudice against them. And I doubt most men would be glad to rest
here, without traveling any farther: And so without question they might, if it
were not for this one thing, that in the Doctrine of our Savior there are not
only gracious Promises, but holy Precepts also; and that so great a stress is
laid upon keeping them, that if we do not, we are but where we were before; our
sins remains, and the wrath of God abides on us. For, says our Savior, Not
every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven, but he that does the will of my father which is in heaven. Now if we
are to believe him in this too, then coming to Christ must of necessity signify
more than bare believing, even doing his will also; which in the following
Verses is expressed by learning of him, and taking his yoke upon us. And here it
is that we begin to fall in our opinion of the Grace of the Gospel, and our
Lord's Invitation, because he seems to take away with one word, what he
promises with another. On the one hand he offers rest, on the other he requires
labor. But yet, he that is Truth has said, that if we will come unto him, we
shall find rest; and withal, that we have no reason to be discouraged with the
Condition: Learn of me, says he, for I am meek and lowly in heart; i. e. be
not afraid to submit to my Rules, for I do not impose them in pride, or for my
own sake, but in Charity for yours. Take my yoke upon you, for it is easy, and
my burden is light. And now we are got thus far, we may with this
encouragement venture to the end, and dare to look upon every circumstance,
which seems to make our duty grievous.

There are but two things of this kind, and they are the perfection of that
duty which the Christian Law requires, and the penalty of disobedience.

1. The perfection of the Rule; which requires a more exceeding Righteousness
than either the Law of Moses, or the Law of Nature. And this is one reason why
the Christian Baptism is the Sacrament of Regeneration, whether to Jews or
Gentiles: Because they must become new men, and as it were born again, by
living up to those Divine Principles, and holy Rules, which are peculiar to the
Christian Doctrine; by practicing that piety, and purity, and charity in all
their conversation, which seems to be more than enough for the happiness of
single persons, or of Societies, in this World; but which is necessary for an
everlasting happiness in the life to come.

And here are these causes of complaint.

1. That there is a severe restraint laid upon our Natural Appetites and
Inclinations, which often carry us as violently to those Satisfactions which
the Law of Christ forbids, as to those which it allows. There is in every man
by nature the love, either of pleasure, or greatness, or revenge, etc. and this
Inclination for the most part stifned by custom, so that he cannot be a
Christian without self-denial, and putting himself to pain. And the duty of
this kind may be so grievous, that as Jesus himself has described it, it may
be like cutting off a right hand, and pulling out a right eye.

2. His Law has made no allowance for the prevailing Opinions and Customs of
the World. In common account, to forgive one injury, is to be exposed to
another; to refuse a Challenge, is to be marked for a Coward; to use plain
dealing, is the way to die a Beggar; and to neglect several opportunities of
gain or pleasure, though for Conscience sake, is to go for a Fool. But though
it is a grievous thing to lie under contempt, yet the Doctrine of Christ,
without consideration of this hard case, has tied us up to contrary Rules, and
expressly required us not to be conformed to this world.

3. We must guard our selves against innumerable temptations to the sins of
Lust, Covetousness, Envy, Ambition, and the like inordinate Affections, to
which a Christian must by no means consent. The very opportunities of doing
ill, are in some cases hard to be refused; and moreover, every sin has its
proper incentives, which beset us in all places. And these are so busy and
importunate, that some think it impossible to be religious without retiring
from the conversation of the World. But what rest can there be in perpetual
circumspection, and standing upon our guard? And yet Jesus himself thought this
necessary for us; Watch and pray, says he, that ye enter not into temptation.

4. The Law of Christ prescribes to the Thoughts and Affections, as well as to
the overt Action. He that does not defile his Neighbor's Bed, may be an
adulterer in his heart: And he that hates his brother, is a murderer. If it be
hard to forbear the action, what pains must be taken to conquer the Desire, to
make it an obedient Slave, and not suffer it so much as to dispute? And yet
this is the case, neither body nor mind, neither deed nor thought is exempted
from the obligation of this terrible Law; but we must cleanse our selves from
all filthiness both of flesh and spirit.

5. It is not easy to suffer; yet if need were, we must take up the Cross, and
be always in mind prepared to endure reproach, the loss of Goods, yea, and of
life it self, for righteousness sake. And the Scripture, speaking of this, does
acknowledge, that no chastisement for the present is joyous, but grievous: So
that in giving up our names to Christ, we seem to commit our selves to a Sea of
troubles, instead of making to a Haven of rest. He that will be my disciple,
says Jesus, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.

This is enough to show the strictness of the Rule, and the perfection of
Virtue and Piety which the Gospel requires; but that which makes all more
grievous, is the second cause of Complaint.

2. The penalty of Disobedience; For this is no less than exclusion from the
Kingdom of Heaven, and a more intolerable Sentence at the day of Judgment, than
those shall receive that never heard the Doctrine of Christ. And the hour is
coming, in which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall
come forth; they that have done good unto the resurrection of life; and they
that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation. And our Savior has
plainly told us, by what Rule the Good and the Evil shall be judged; The words
that I have spoken, the same shall judge you at the last day.

And now that we have heard these things, we may be exceedingly amazed, as our
Lord's first Disciples were, when they heard the like and say, Who then can be
saved? or at least, where is the truth of his Promise? For the condition of his
Promise is so hard, and the consequence so terrible, if we fail of the
condition, that the extreme danger, and the great uncertainty, seems to create
a new trouble, not well consistent with the promised rest. He is indeed true
and faithful that has promised; But whilst my Soul is troubled, how can I
believe that it is at rest? How therefore shall we bring these things together?
The truth is, nothing has more exercised the wits of men, than to find out
expedients for this purpose. And for my own part, I have that experience of
Human Frailty on the one side, and that desire to be saved on the other, that I
never lend my ear more willingly, than to him that shows me an easy way to
Salvation. And I am sure he attaques my Affections to so much advantage, that I
can have no prejudice against his way; and nothing but evident want of truth
could make me afraid to trust it.

Some have said, That Christ himself has fulfilled all righteousness in our
stead; and that upon our faith his righteousness is imputed to us for
justification. This, I confess, would cut the knot which we would fain unty;
for if this be true, the Gospel does not only release me from punishment, but
from duty too. But where has our Lord, or his Apostles, said any thing to this
purpose? Indeed he has promised to save me from God's angry Justice, and that
because he was a Sacrifice for Sin offered in my stead. But I find that he has
imposed upon me the keeping of his Commandments, as a condition of that
Salvation; and therefore I conclude, that he did not perform them in my stead
too. Nor can I conceive how the holiness of Christ should be made an argument
in the Scripture to follow his Example, if it may be improved into a good
reason why we need not follow it. So that the Merit of Christ will not save me
the labor of becoming a new man; and if that will not, I am sure no other
Merit can. And these men not willing to trust their own Invention, do at last
confess the plain truth of the Scriptures, that without holiness no man shall
see God. And they say farther, that it is not only hard, but impossible for a
man left to that freedom which belongs to his Will, to become regenerate. But
then what comfort does this persuasion leave? Why, they tell us, that
Regeneration and Holiness shall be wrought in our hearts by an Almighty
operation of the Holy Spirit, such as that whereby God will at last raise us
from the dead. Now I confess that nothing can be more easy, than to become a
good man this way, because under the dispensation of irresistible Grace it is
impossible to be otherwise. And I am not so vain as to refuse so great a
blessing, if it were in my power to refuse it. But what if the Scripture has
no promise of such Grace? Nay, what if it had, unless I knew how to obtain it?
or that I was one of a thousand, and could not miss it? What if I must be left
to the common way of watching and praying, and working out my Salvation! And
what if all this will be to as little purpose, as if I had done nothing at all?
Is this the rest that Jesus has promised we shall find to our Souls?

Let us therefore try another expedient; what may be done by severe fasting and
penance. Will the punishing of my Body satisfy for the sin of my Soul? This I
think would almost do the business; because it is a greater pain to deny a
craving Lust, to stop a growing Passion, and to resist a strong temptation to
wicked Pleasure, or unjust Gain, or desired Revenge, than to go through a
reasonable course of outward mortification: But can these things compensate for
the omission of necessary duty, or satisfy for the commission of known sin,
when under a more imperfect Law God refused harder things than these? Shall I
give my firstborn for my transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my
soul? No; He has showed thee, O man, what is good, and what does the Lord,
etc. Bodily Austerities, no doubt, are pleasing to God, and profitable for our
Souls, when they are intended to express a just indignation at our selves for
having sinned; when to break the wicked custom, they are imposed as penalties
and revenges to be inflicted as soon as we have committed any wicked Action;
when they are added to the inward trouble of the mind, to make us weary of
sinning; and used to starve and mortify the evil Appetite. For such reasons as
these it is necessary to keep the body in subjection. But if bodily exercise
profits nothing, unless it be profitable unto godliness, and helps to make
the Soul the better, we are still driven back to that hard point, which we
would fain lose the sight of, That without a new heart, and a new life, there
is no hope of God's pardon.

I shall try but one refuge more, which indeed gives a fair prospect of relief;
and that is, what comfort may be had from the power of the keys wherewith
Christ entrusted his Church, when he said, Whose sins ye remit, they are
remitted unto them; and whose sins ye retain, they are retained. Now this
assures me, that when the Church received me by Baptism into her Communion, she
gave me a right to remission of sins; and that if she deprives me of it by
excommunication, she can by absolution restore me to it. And therefore I will
never break the Peace of the Church by Schism, nor lose it by contempt of her
Censures. But then I doubt the Church cannot forgive sins more effectually than
God does; who is thus represented to forgive, in the Parable of the Lord that
forgave his servant ten thousand talents: He forgave him indeed, and yet he
required the Debt afterward upon his unmercifulness to his Fellow Servants,
which evidently shows that the Pardon was but conditional. So likewise, says
our Savior, shall your heavenly Father do unto you. And the Church cannot do
more than God does, who himself requires Conditions; and therefore has not
given to man the power of dispensing absolute Pardons, unless we can think,
that to ratify the word of a man, he has obliged himself to disannul his own.
And because he has reserved to himself the final Judgment of all, whose sins
are either remitted or retained in this World by the Authority of the Church;
therefore the Kingdom of God, that is, the Church, is compared to a Field where
the tares and the wheat grow together, the time not being yet come for an exact
separation. For these Reasons all are forced to confess, that the peace of the
Church does then only ensure the favor of God, when the Key does not err. But
what if my Conscience tells me, the Key does err; and that whilst I do not
forfeit the Churches Peace by scandalous Crimes, I do yet depart from God by
hidden Iniquities? Can the erring Key open to me the Gate of Everlasting Life?
I would fain believe, that the bringing of these secret sins to light, and
purposing to offend no more, would help at last; and that a Deathbed
Repentance could by the power of the Keys be made effectual to Salvation. But,
O Blessed Jesus! how can I believe that thy most holy Doctrine should be but a
Rule whereby to confess sin, and to purpose against it, instead of a Rule
obliging me to forsake it!

To conclude this matter; If we leave that one path of Obedience, we may try a
thousand By-ways; but the Truth, which cannot be corrupted, will send us back
again to that plain truth of our Savior, If thou will enter into life, keep
the commandments; which like the flaming Sword that turns every way, keeps the
way of the Tree of Life against all ungodly and unrighteous men.

If therefore that Rest which our Lord promises, is not to be had out of the
way of Obedience, it remains that we must find it in that way, if we find it at
all. Let us therefore try for better success here, than we have yet had. Let us
see, whether the exactness of Rules, and the indispensableness of Obedience,
must needs make us uneasy under the Discipline of Christianity; or rather, if
the Grace of the Gospel does not mitigate all the severity of its Laws, without
making any of them void. Now the first mitigation I shall consider, is this.

1. That the Gospel leaves room for repentance of known and wilful Sins
committed after Baptism; a most remarkable instance of which Grace we have in
the Discipline of the Church as it stood in the Apostle's days. For when the
Incestuous Corinthian was brought to Repentance, St. Paul commanded the Church
to forgive and comfort him, lest he should be swallowed up with overmuch
sorrow. And surely as God forgives those open Scandals for which the Penitent
was cut off from the Body of Christ; so upon repentance he will forgive those
secret Offenses too, which can make no forfeiture of Church Communion. If after
sin there were no hope of pardon upon new obedience, it would indeed be very
grievous to be obliged to obey so perfect a Law under so bad a Penalty. For
then if a temptation should once prevail, we were irrecoverably lost; I say, if
we have violated the Law of Christ heretofore, we are in a desperate case,
though we should never do the like again. But blessed be God, it is not thus
with us. Though we have heinously failed of our duty, yet we may with good
comfort repair our past neglects by future diligence; being assured, that if we
do, God will not impute to us our former sins; so that the Law of Christ was
not intended for a snare, nor made perfect, that occasion might be taken
against us, but that we at length might be perfect too. And for ever blessed be
his Name for the Grace of accepting Repentance, that Grace which gives the
worst of men some good hope, if they will lay hold upon it in time, and without
which the best of men could have no hope at all.

2. The utmost perfection which the Gospel requires, is not expected but upon a
gradual improvement, and such improvement is by no means grievous. It were
intolerably hard indeed, if we were obliged, under penalty of Damnation, to
perfect holiness all at once; (which burden they bring upon themselves, who
leave all to a Deathbed Repentance) if it would not turn to good account, to
grow better, to press forward toward the mark of our high calling; to die unto
Sin daily, and live unto Righteousness. But why is God patient, and
long-suffering toward us? Why does he allow us one year after another, but that
we might recover our selves by degrees, he in the mean time being ready to
pardon us as we repent, and to accept us in the way of growing better? And this
is great Grace to every man, but most of all to him who is accustomed to do
evil, and cannot presently learn to do well, i. e. to do well universally. For
he may now begin his Repentance well, though he cannot yet complete it: He may
forbear the outward sin, though he cannot yet repress the inordinacy of his
Desires; he may avoid the temptation which he cannot resist; he may pray for
the Grace of God, and read the Holy Scriptures; he may attend to good
Exhortations, and make good Resolutions, and think of them afterward, and
desire the Counsels and Prayers of good men. He may do many things in Religion
when it is not in his power to do all; and by doing those which at present are
in his power, he is in the way of enabling himself to do those which at present
are not. Now that is no grievous task which will easily go off by degrees, and
which we may therefore make easy, by an early beginning, and allowing our
selves time for it.

3. As we grow more exact in obedience to Christ, so our uneasiness under it,
wears away. and at length it ends in the most pure and perfect delight that the
Soul of man is capable of. Self-denial, and the resisting of Temptations, will
at first be painful, especially to those that have been used to live without
rule and restraint. And there might be some color for complaint, if this would
always last: But the more earnestly we apply our minds to the duties of
Repentance, and a Holy Life, the first discouragements will vanish the faster.
But more particulary.

1. It is not so hard to begin well, as our Prejudice and want of experience
represent it. For we begin with the help of mighty Arguments, such as cannot be
equalled by the Temptations of the World. Should not the hope of Heaven have a
strong influence upon a man endued with free will, especially when joined with
the fear of Hell? Is there any difficulty in being concerned for Everlasting
Salvation, in being afraid of Everlasting Burnings? And yet where this concern
is, it cannot be hard to lay a good foundation of a new life. It is not
grievous to love him above all things, who is our Creator and Savior; and
therefore why should it be thought a grievous thing, for his sake, especially
when it is for our own too, to break off our sins by repentance? Besides, God
has not left us to grapple with our unruly Affections by the mere force of our
own reasoning upon motives, and the use of our natural liberty; but has
moreover promised the assistance of Supernatural Grace and Blessing to those
that ask him. And is it hard to have recourse to the Fountain of our Beings,
the God of Grace and Mercy, and with earnest Prayers at least twice a day, to
beseech him that he would endue us with wisdom and patience, and safely guide
us through all the discouragements of this World, the importunities of fleshly
desire, and the Temptations of the Devil, till we find every good work habitual
and delightful: And this one thing, viz. fervent Prayer, makes a wonderful
alteration in the mind, and brings a kind of new Soul into a man. Again, No
sooner is Repentance well begun, but a man begins to look up to Heaven without
his wonted consternation; he is no longer in a strait between the dread of
God's Justice on the one hand, and a prevailing love of his Sins on the other,
nor constrained to put God out of all his thoughts, or to be in pain under
them. Finally, now that he has conquered his first Aversions, he is sure of a
complete Victory, if he pursues his end, which is a comfort that the wise of
this World have not in their way. How many are they that covet wealth and
greatness with the same greediness, labor for it with the same industry,
contrive for it with the same wit, and wait for it with the same patience; but
this with very different success; one of them thrives, and another decays as
fast; and for one that comes to riches and honor, perhaps ten find the
greatest part of their care rewarded with nothing but experience of this
world's uncertainty. Nay in these things Chance is often seen to do more than
Wisdom; and the wary and diligent man is disappointed, while the lazy and
foolish prosper. But whoever made it his design and business to be saved, and
in order to that to be good, who found it too hard for him? These and many
other Arguments and invitations a man shall meet with at his first setting out
to run the race of a Christian Life, which wonderfully break the difficulty of
his undertaking. But,

2. When he has arrived to a spirit and habit of Obedience, then is the Promise
of Christ perfectly made good to him, that he shall find rest to his Soul. Then
he can with full advantage compare that sweet freedom he enjoys from the
tyranny of lust and passion, with that servitude in which he once was to
inordinate desire, to foolish hope, and to those sower affections of malice,
envy, and revengefulness, which are to the Soul what the Stone and Strangury,
and the most tormenting Diseases are to the Body. Then he can compare the ease
of going by one constant Rule of Piety and Honesty in all his ways, with the
labor of serving diverse and contrary Lusts, and with the distraction and
uncertainty of being still put upon new expedients to serve a present turn.
Then he can compare the Comforts of a good Conscience, with that grief of being
told by his own mind that he had done ill, which alone is more painful than all
the hardships of Religion. But he needs not gather how well it is with him at
present, by reflecting upon his former restless State: For those very heights
of Christianity, which at first troubled him most of all, he now finds to be
the causes of the greatest satisfaction and delight. That Command of forgiving
and loving Enemies, which once made him almost despair of being a good
Christian, now that he has subdued his Passions to it, gives him a world of
ease, and makes him feel a tranquillity of mind which another man's malice
cannot disturb. Thus the purity of his desires and thoughts, and the altering
of his natural temper from what it was, makes those good works to be performed
with freedom and pleasure, which were once tedious and unnatural: And yet he
was at first strangely discouraged at that obligation which the Law of Christ
lays upon our Inclinations and Thoughts. Nay, that once frightful condition of
taking up the Cross, now that he is come to a resolution upon it, has fixed his
tranquillity, and left him free to enjoy all the reasonable pleasures of
prosperity, without vain fears of what may happen hereafter, which is a Peace
that the World can neither give, nor take away. So that the hardest Duties will
give us the most perfect Rest; which plainly shows, that they are not so
terrible as they seem at a distance; for if they were, we should be sure to
find it, when we make a through trial of them; but then we find that they are a
rejoicing to the heart.

But when all is done, what is dry reasoning upon these things, to a lively
experience of them? And how can the Resentments of a good man's Soul be
understood, without feeling them in our selves? They are Comforts too great for
common expression: Nay the very best of holy men, and those with the advantage
of Inspiration, have been hard put to it to describe them. Oh how I love thy
law! says the Psalmist, it is my meditation all the day. I have longed for thy
salvation, O Lord, and thy law is my delight. Great peace have they which love
thy law, and nothing shall offend them. My soul has kept thy testimonies, and
I love them exceedingly. Thus also St. Paul represents himself, and his
Brethren, under all the trials of their patience, to be as sorrowful, yet
always rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich; as having nothing, and yet
possessing all things. What are these expressions, but the overflowing of a
pure and sincere Joy, which words cannot reach; and of which we can have no
just conception, till we taste and see how gracious God is; till we come to
Christ, and learn of him, and take his yoke upon our selves: Then shall we find
rest to our souls.

Little thanks therefore do they deserve from Jesus, or from his Disciples, who
pretend to show an easier way to Heaven than that of Repentance, and New
Obedience. What need of invention and wit to avoid those Commandments, in the
keeping of which there is so great reward; that labor in which there is so
much rest, unless by Rest we mean Laziness? Why should we at once cheat our
selves of that true Rest which Christ promises under his Yoke, and of that
Rest too which remains for the people of God in a better Life? And there is
no coming to the later but by the former. We may possibly deceive our selves
for a time, yet that day and hour is coming that will undeceive us all, as our
Lord has forewarned us, and that in such plain and pregnant words, that if we
well mark them, they will not suffer us to be deluded with false hopes. They
are those words wherewith he concluded his Sermon on the Mount; and with them I
shall conclude also. Many shall say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we
not prophesied in thy name, and in thy name cast out devils, and in thy name
done many wonderful works? And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you;
Depart from me ye that work iniquity. Therefore whosoever hears these sayings
of mine, and does them, I will liken him unto a wise man, who built his house
upon a rock, and the rain descended, and the floods came, and the wind blew,
and beat upon that house, and it fell not; for it was founded upon a rock. And
every one that hears these sayings of mine and does them not (but expects
to be saved another way) shall be likened unto a foolish man, who built his
house upon the sand: And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the wind
blew, and beat upon that house, and it fell, and great was the fall thereof.

Thus have I shown you the old path, and the good way; That was my part; And
now it is yours and mine to walk in it. And then we shall find rest for our
souls.

Which God grant for the sake of Jesus, to whom with the Father, and the Holy
Ghost, be ascribed all honor, praise and glory, now and for ever. Amen.

The Fifth Sermon.
A SERMON Preached at WHITE HALL.
ROMANS VIII. 28. We know that all things work together for good to them that
love God.


THis saying was at first delivered for the Comfort of those Christians under
Persecution, to whom St. Paul administers much Consolation in the latter part
of this Chapter: But it is very proper to be insisted upon at any time, for the
encouragement of good men, and to persuade all others. For in so uncertain a
World as this, what should we desire more than to be certain of this one thing.
That all things shall work together for good, which as the Text says, shall
happen to them that love God. Now to fasten those good thoughts upon our minds
which this Text does very readily suggest; I will distinctly consider these
several particulars contained in them. For,

1. The universality of the expression is observable, viz. that All things
shall work together for good. And,

2. The manner by which good comes from them, which is expressed by their
working together for good.

3. What that good is for which all things work together.

4. Who they are for whose good all things work, viz. they that love God. And,

5. The certain assurance we have of all this, and that is implied in the first
words, we know; we know that all things work together for good to them that
love God.

Which things cannot be spoken of so distinctly, but that they will sometimes
run into one another; but I shall have a particular regard to each
Consideration, under these several Heads. And,

1. Let us consider the universality of the expression, All things shall work
together for good. Now by all things we may understand,

1. All that happens in this life, whether it be good or evil; which
interpretation will be sufficiently justified by what the Apostle says in the
two former Verses; Likewise also the Spirit helps our infirmities, for we
know not what we should pray for as we ought, but the spirit it self makes
intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered; for he that
searches the hearts knows what is the mind of the Spirit, etc. The meaning
of which is this, That when we are under any Affliction, we know not whether it
be best for us to be delivered, or to continue as we are; but the Spirit of God
disposes our minds to submit to his pleasure and wisdom; and whatever our
particular desires are, to wish in the general what God sees is best for us,
which we cannot utter in particular, because we are ignorant what that is. But
God knows it, and withal he knows our hearts, and sees that by his Spirit we
are wholly disposed to submit to his choice. And then he adds, And we know that
all things, etc. i. e. though we do not know in particular what God will choose
for us, yet we know, that whatever our Lot shall be in this life, it shall be
for the best: So that by all things, we are led to understand all those things
of which we know not what we should pray for as we ought; and thus they take in
the prosperous as well as the adverse part of our lives. Now because there are
dangerous temptations in prosperity, which do often prove hurtful to men in
their Souls and Bodies too; it is therefore no small privilege of a good man,
that his Piety and sincere Love to God, does not only keep him from the harm
which may come of a plentiful enjoyment of worldly Blessings, but also make
them truly serviceable to him, and to work for his good; and that God will
continue him in such a state, as long as he sees it is best for him.

But then,

2. Although this meaning is by no means to be excluded, yet the principal
sense seems to be this, That even all those things which we are naturally
afraid of, and would willingly escape, that is, all the evils of this mortal
life, shall work together for good. This, I say, is the principal sense,
because it was the Apostle's Design in this Chapter to support the minds of the
Christians to whom he wrote, under the troubles they endured for the sake of
Christ. And as this meaning was chiefly intended, so it represents a truth
which would be most desired. For (1.) Relief is needful only against causes of
Fear and Sorrow, such as the Evils of this World are, and here it is given. The
best men commonly have a mixture of good and evil for their portion in this
life. But we think that the prosperous part will take care of it self; and that
it is the other only that calls for assistance and comfort. And therefore all
will grant, that this Divine Truth gives security where there is most need of
security; and administers ease and help in every case that requires it. And
then (2.) because we lie open to innumerable Accidents, and the kinds of
misfortune to which we are liable, are not to be counted particularly; the
universality of the expression makes our comfort and security equal to our
dangers. For the number of them cannot dismay us, where without exception to
any one, provision is made aagainst All; where the remedy will not fail, not
only if any one, but if every one of them should happen to which we are liable.
And (3.) Because all things are not alike grievous to every man, because all
men have not the same tenderness in every part of their Natures; but one thing
affects this man with more grief and smart, and another is more sensibly
wounded by other Adversities; therefore the consolation afforded by this Truth
is still more desirable, inasmuch as it brings remedy in this case also; for
where all Evils are said, the worst is not excepted. And lastly, Because the
affirmation is general, it is an equal antidote against the fear of Evil, and
against the bitterness of Sorrow when it happens; it suffers not our present
Enjoyments to be killed with the fear of the future, and it supplies us with
hope and patience when Evil is present. So that if we consider the universality
of the Expression, it is a very rich Promise which is supposed in the Text:
since as to the occasions upon which a good Christian may need comfort, there
is nothing wanting in it to satisfy him; for all things shall work together for
his good.

2. We are likewise to consider the manner whereby these Evils of life produces
good to them that love God; which, as I take it, is intimated in that
expression of working together. All things shall work together for good, etc.
For here are these two particulars to be observed. (1.) That there is a natural
tendency in these Evils themselves to procure us some good. (2.) That
nevertheless there must be a concurrence of other Causes to effect it.

1. That they themselves do in their own nature tend to do us good; and for
this reason they are said to work for good, not only that good is wrought out
from them, but that they work it; for indeed they are in themselves not
improper and unfit means for this end. And therefore when God afflicts any good
man, we may be sure he delights not in the pain which he suffers, no nor does
he afflict him merely to show his Sovereignty and Dominion over him; nay not
always so much as to show how by his Power and Wisdom, he can make things
produce Effects contrary to their own nature; but because he does in his Wisdom
see that the Evils he sends will naturally lead toward a good end. And we know
it by undeniable experience, that an uninterrupted prosperity in this life, is
that which the weakness of our Nature could bear as little, as the other
extreme; and it would be a great deal worse for us than that mixture of one and
the other, which is the common portion of Mankind. Now therefore, because in
choosing our Condition, God has still a regard to that which is for our good;
every true Servant of God under distress, may not only conclude in general,
that it is good for him to be afflicted, but likewise in particular, that that
affliction which he is under, is more for his good, than another would have
been; that it is the proper means which God has chosen for his improvement,
and the procuring of those effects which are most needful for him: Therefore
also, if more burdens than one are upon him at the same time, or if one
follows upon the neck of another, that none of them could be well spared: but
that they work together, one for one good end, another for another, all jointly
for his true happiness. And if this be true with reference to single persons,
it must needs be so with respect to the Church, or to any Body of Christians,
adhering to the true faith and obedience of the Gospel; since the Providence of
God is more watchful for a common, than a particular Interest; and since this
truth was mentioned by the Apostle in behalf of Believers that felt the same
troubles. So that we are as to all Evils of this World, to consider God not as
arbitrarily disposing of our Concerns, but rather as wisely choosing fit means
for our happiness. And this consideration will serve to repel all murmuring
thoughts against his Providence, and to dispose us not only to contentation,
but even to thankfulness, under the Adversities of life; and that because it
seems they are so far from being ill meant by Providence toward us, that they
are chosen by God as proper means working for our good; not only Adversities in
general, but those which happen in particular, more than others would have
done. But then,

2. There must be a concurrence of other causes to make them effectual for our
good. I cannot certainly tell whether that be meant by that phrase of working
together, for I do not know but the Apostle might mean no more in this place,
than that all things that happen to God's Servants, shall work together, that
is, one with another promote that which is best for them in the end. But I am
sure the thing is true, that other causes must be present to work together with
these; and because the Apostle knew that they would be supposed, therefore they
are fit to be mentioned.

And (1.) The Grace of God which is necessary to all good effects which his
Providence designs to work in and for us; that will not be wanting. For if any
thing that is grievous befalls us by his Providence, he will not deny us that
inward assistance of his Holy Spirit toward a good use of it, which is
needful, because the outward means of doing us good, is not of our own choosing,
but his. And this is one reasonable account of that saying of David, In very
faithfulness thou have afflicted me. For God has promised to be good and
gracious to him; And this Promise was so made good by those Troubles that befell
him, and the supports he had under them, and by that Grace of God which
disposed him to make a good use of them, that he could not but acknowledge the
Truth and Fidelity of God upon this account, as much as for all the Glories and
Prosperities that ever fell to his share. But then (2.) Something is required
of us to convert all Evils that do or may befall us, into such advantages as may
be made of them. They indeed give us the opportunity, and God give us the
ability, but then we must perform our duty. They work as Occasions and Means,
God works as the Supreme Director and Mover, but it is our part to work as the
immediate Instruments of our own good, and that by more Consideration, and more
earnest Prayer; and herein lies the tendency of Worldly Crosses to do us good,
that they do of themselves dispose a good man to those things more than
ordinarily. And it is in this sense that we are to understand the saying of the
Wiseman; Sorrow is better than laughter, for by the sadness of the countenance
the heart is made better. That is to say, (1.) It is disposed to consider more
seriously; for it takes away all that levity and ariness of thought which in
some degree does almost necessarily attend an unmixed prosperity; and it does
also suggest many profitable thoughts which seldom come to our minds at another
time. This very Divine Truth, That all things work together, etc. is not so
often thought of when we need not the support of it, as when we do; nor the
Infinite Wisdom and Goodness of the Divine Providence, nor the rich Promise of
being raised up to everlasting Life. There must be the consideration of such
things to make all things work for our good; otherwise this Text were set here
in vain; nor need we to have known the truth it holds forth to us, if without
laying it, and other things of the same nature to heart, they would work good
for us by themselves. (2.) Fervent Prayers are requisite for the same end; for
otherwise the Apostle needed not have told us in the foregoing Verse; Likewise
also the Spirit helps our infirmities, for we know not what to pray for as we
ought, but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us with groans that
cannot be uttered. In which words, as I have already intimated, the Apostle
encouraged his Christians to earnest Prayer; assuring them, That in their
Circumstances, the Holy Spirit of God would guide them to pray for things that
were good for them; though in all their Prayers for temporal things, to submit
their Desires entirely to the Will and good disposal of the Almighty, who would
accordingly answer them, by doing what was best for them. Now frequent and
earnest Prayer does wonderfully dispose the mind of a good man to a strong
dependence upon God, and brings back great Consolations and Strength from him,
and confirms it in a steadfast and unmovable resolution of keeping a good
Conscience, and looking for that Mercy of God unto Eternal Life. It is by such
Actions of our own, that all things work together for good; and all Evils of
life do themselves work for it, by disposing us to these things i.e. to
Consideration and Devotion: to consider the Sovereignty, Wisdom and Goodness of
God, the Vanity of this World, our infinite concerns in a better life, more
seriously and closely than we have done; and to pray to God for all needful
things more affectionately and heartily. Now where such Dispositions as these
are followed, there all the good fruits of worldly Evils will grow plentifully,
which, what they are, comes next to be considered; in the mean time we have
gone thus far, That there is nothing wanting in them, as they are occasions and
opportunities of doing good for our selves; and that through the Grace of God,
and our own using them aright, and cherishing those good inclinations and
dispositions which they beget in our minds, they will actually produce the good
ends for which they are sent.

3. Let us now consider what that good is for which it is said that all things
shall work together; what kind of good it is, and what is the degree of it. If
we consider the kind, it may be truly said in the first place, that sometimes
it is of the same kind with the evil, and that God sends the temporal evil to
bring about a temporal good. Thus Joseph who was designed by Providence to be
so great a Man in Egypt, when it was to be the Granary of that part of the
World, was first to be sold like a Slave, and afterward to endure a vile
Imprisonment; every new Misfortune all the while proving a step to his
greatness. Even wise men do seldom choose for themselves all the ways of doing
well in the World; the event is, to show which are the best means, because our
welfare here depends more upon God's Providence than our own wisdom. How often
is it seen, that a man's best chance that ever he had, arose from a
disappointment? And this after those methods of his own designing which he
built confidently upon, turned to no account? But then all the Adversities of
good men will not admit of this answer; nor does this way of showing, that all
things turn to good for them that love God, if it were generally true, it does
not, I say, suit so well with the Design and Spirit of the Gospel, which does
not raise worldly Expectations, but takes off our Affections from this World,
and propounds to us the Rewards of a better for our Contentation, Patience and
Self-denial. And therefore we must in the second place lay our stress upon
this, That those evils of this World, which have no recompense from it, and
those that have, work together for good of another kind, and a far better kind,
to those that love God; and that is their Spiritual and Eternal good. For the
making out of which, I need to insist upon no other ground but this, That there
is no Christian Virtue which is not this way plainly improvable to greater
perfection.

For (1.) there are some religious qualities which an absolute prosperity seems
to have little use of, and therefore for want of exercise they seldom grow
under it to great perfection. Of this sort we may reckon, Trust in God,
Dependence upon his Providence, and Resignation to his Will; but most
assuredly, Contentation, Patience and Ingenuity in Religion, in opposition to
serving God out of a Mercenary hope of this World's Blessings from him, are for
the most part but little used, and cannot be clearly proved till it comes to
the trial.

But (2.) whatever Virtues they are that shine forth in a prosperous condition,
they are capable of being wrought to a higher degree of perfection under the
contrary. For instance, a good man will not fail in thankfulness to God, when
he is surrounded with all manner of good things. But when evil happens to him
he will be much more thankful, he will more carefully observe what God has left
him, and make more grateful acknowledgments of his bounty for a part, than when
he had all together. Nay, he wisely considers, that Afflictions are the Tokens
of God's Paternal Love to him, and is therefore thankful for that goodness from
whence they came. Humility toward God and Man is another Ornament of a
prosperous state, but it is by no means laid aside under the troubles of Life,
which oblige us more effectually to acknowledge the Sovereign Power and
unsearchable Wisdom of God, and with Job to humble our selves before him in
dust and ashes; which also because they level us with those that were once
below us, do therefore make us see how vain a thing it is to glory in worldly
things, and to bear up our selves upon the Opinion of those outward advantages
we have above others. Moreover, do we learn Charity and Compassion toward our
Brethren, by that ability which God gives us to be helpful to them that need? I
add also, that we learn it yet more perfectly by feeling our selves that which
in others proves us to be Merciful and Compassionate toward them. Nay, this is
one reason the Apostle gives why our Savior himself has so great a Compassion
for us; We have not an high priest who cannot be touched with a sense of our
infirmities, but was in all points tempted like as we are. Finally, if the
moderation of our Desires and Temperance in the use of this World's good
things, and a quiet expectation of Death may be gained and demonstrated in the
fullness of prosperity, the declining and abatement of it will not hinder but
rather promote these dispositions; for by Patience we are yet more disentangled
from worldly desires, and our sensual Appetites are moderated, when they are
not so plentifully served; and all the Crosses of this Life make us expect
Death with more Tranquillity and Assurance. Now since the evil of this Life does
not only raise these Virtues, which are very little excited by a confluence of
all pleasures, but moreover does equally improve all the rest; then it is a
spiritual good which they work for them that love God; and consequently the
increase of their Eternal Reward. For it is not to the Great and the Fortunate,
but to the Meek, the Humble and Charitable, and to those that hunger and thirst
after Righteousness, that the Kingdom of Heaven is promised. Therefore says
the Apostle, God chastneth us for the present, that we might be partakers of
his holiness; now no chastning for the present is joyous but grievous,
nevertheless afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto
them which are exercised thereby. And thus much for the kind of good which
outward evils may produce; let us consider the degree of it. Now this I say,
that if all evils work together for good, then I know the degree of that good
which is wrought, to be greater than the degree of that evil by which it is
wrought; for if the good were less than the evil, then it had been better that
I had not been afflicted; nay, if it were but just equal, I had then been
troubled only to be where I was before; and therefore the good must be greater.
Wherefore also if the evil be very great, the good will be proportionably
greater, and by consequence the greatest evil that can befall a good man, will
through the Grace of God and his own Care, redound to a good greater than it
self. All which may be true, and yet such a man may not always be sensible of
it. For (1.) the change which is made in a good Christian's mind for the
better, cannot well be so sensible as the alteration which is made in his
outward Correction, by any considerable cost or pain. Indeed when adversity
proves an occasion of turning every one from a plain and gross way of
wickedness, so great an alteration must needs be felt, but the difference
between the degrees of Piety and Wisdom, is not so sensible as the difference
between a state of Virtue on the one hand, and of Vice on the other. And
therefore if a righteous man behaves himself well under any Chastisement, he
may conclude himself better for it; and that the benefit is greater than the
evil, though he does not feel them both alike, especially since the improvement
of the mind, though in it self not very great, is yet a greater good than the
pain that caused it is an evil. A great bodily affliction is not lost, if it
has taught us a little more wisdom. If the inward man be renewed day by day, we
are well recompensed, though the outward man decays faster. (2.) God does
sometimes send evil to prevent our falling into sin, and then we cannot be so
sensible what we gain by it, because we were not aware of that danger we were
running into, if God had not applied a timely prevention, who consults our
safety, not always by staying till a sudden remedy is needful, but by keeping
off an approaching mischief which he forsees, whilst we have no apprehension of
it. And certainly those things work for our good, which keep us from
backsliding and growing worse. Upon these two accounts the benefit is as real,
though not so sensible as the sharpness of the means; and so we may rest,
without the trouble of any objection, upon the truth of God's word, That upon
our prayer and submission, no ill ever has or shall befall us in this World,
without redounding to a greater good. I have thus spoken concerning the
universality of the expression, all things; concerning the manner whereby good
is produced by them; and what is the kind and degree of that good for which
they work together. I proceed,

4. To consider the qualification required for the receiving of the benefit.
They shall work together for good to them that love God; i. e. to all righteous
and godly persons, who are said in the very next words to be called according
to purpose, that is, who answer their call to Christianity by a steadfast
purpose of Heart to live according to it, and if need be, to dye for it. Now
when it is said, that all things shall work together for the good of such, the
meaning is not, that no evil shall work for the good of any other. For the
Chastisements of this Life may bring a wicked man to repentance, but it is more
certain abundantly that they work for good to the righteous; inasmuch as they
desire to be made more conformable to the Image of God; they do already value
the riches of the mind above outward advantages; they are already disposed to
receive all good instruction, and upon all vicissitudes to turn themselves to
God by Prayers and Thanksgivings; they have already lived by Faith, and are
therefore prepared to seek Consolations from his Word more diligently, when any
pressing need requires; to them it is less hard to obey in suffering, having
been already accustomed to do the Will of God; they have had experience of his
goodness, and do love him above all things, and therefore are always disposed
to take every thing in good part from him, believing in his Wisdom and
Goodness. Finally, they have a Title to the special Grace and Favor of God
already, and therefore cannot fail of more abundant supplies upon all needful
occasions. Upon all these accounts, which it is sufficient but just to mention,
it is evident that a sincere Lover of God has so many advantages toward
making the best use of all accidents of Life, that we may be assured they will
work together for his good. Which brings me to the last Point, and that not of
the least consideration; viz.

5. That we know they will thus work; for this is the Comfort which brings all
the rest home to us, that we are well assured thus it will be. If when the evil
were present, the remedy were absent, it were no remedy to us, and it would be
absent from us, if we were ignorant of it. As for the evils of this Life in
general, we know it is a vain thing to expect a total exemption from them; it
was therefore necessary for the relief of our minds to know likewise that they
shall work for good to us. As for those in particular which we are naturally
most afraid of, we know not certainly whether they will all befall us or not;
but under this uncertainty we are again relieved, by knowing that if they do,
they shall turn to our benefit. But how do we know it? We know it many ways.
(1.) From the goodness of God, who does not delight in the grief of any of his
Creatures, much less of those that love him. He would not therefore send
affliction, were it not to be converted into a means of greater good. The
troubles and pains of this Life are in themselves evil, and therefore all that
they can be good for, is to be a means of some good or other, for they can
never become good in themselves, and for their own sakes; and therefore God
would not inflict them, if they were not good in their consequences. (2.) We
know it farther, because we are sure our Lord Jesus has made a complete
satisfaction to the Justice of God for the Sins of those that are truly
penitent; so complete, that upon the account of satisfying God's Justice, they
are neither liable to Temporal nor Eternal Punishments. But yet God sometimes
punishes good men in this World, he often visits them with affliction, since
therefore his Justice is already satisfied, it must be resolved into his Wise
Mercy and Kindness toward them, that he visits them with his Rod, and suffers
them not to go without some Chastisements. (3.) We know it, because good men
are so disposed, that it is almost natural for them to reap great advantages by
all the Changes and Chances of this Life; it is no more than what the state of
their minds, and the course of their Actions has promised all along, as we
observed before. But, (4) Above all we know it, because God has said it; he
has said it, and therefore to be sure he will do all that is requisite on his
part to make it good; he has said it in this very place, and in innumerable
places of holy Scripture, as many as contain promises of his Presence, will and
Favor to his people in all conditions of Life. Now to sum up all; Seeing all
evils of this World, none excepted, shall work for our good; seeing they do of
themselves contribute toward it, by offering to us very considerable
opportunities of benefitting our selves; seeing the good for which they work is
greater than the pain we endure; and that the greater the evils are, the good
will therefore be greater; seeing a good man is so disposed as to use those
opportunities for his own advantage, which they yield; seeing he is farther
enabled by the Spirit of God so to do; finally, since we know all this, and are
as certain of it as the goodness of God, as the meritorious Death and Passion
of our Savior, as the reasonableness of the thing, and as the promise of God
can make us; then it is plain that in this Divine saying there is nothing
wanting to encourage and comfort all those that truly love God, and do his
Will; or to persuade all others to do so too, which I proposed to show at first.

And now Brethren, what remains, but that knowing these things, we be so happy
and so wise as to do accordingly; and therefore that we be thoroughly persuaded
to secure all the good things to our selves we have been considering, either by
keeping always a good Conscience, or by unfeigned Repentance. This indeed were
a good application, and this ought to be the conclusion of the whole matter.
But time would fail me to insist upon even this Exhortation as the case would
bear; which I shall therefore reserve to the next opportunity, intending then
also to pursue some other Points; viz.

How this Doctrine does consist with Prayers and Endeavors against Adversity,
and how far it is a Rule to such Prayers, etc.

How it ought to influence the judgment we make of the happy or wretched estate
of man in this life.

How true and profitable a point of Wisdom it is to reckon upon the
uncertainties of this World.

Why a righteous man only can do it without solicitude, and losing the comfort
of present Enjoyments. And lastly,

How seasonably a vehement Exhortaion to Piety may be grounded upon all these
Considerations.

The Sixth Sermon.
ROMANS VIII. 28. We know that all things work together for good to them that
love God.


THE remaining Points are now to be pursued, the first whereof was this.

1. How this Doctrine does consist with Prayers and Endeavors against
Adversity, and how far it is a Rule to such Prayers and Endeavors. 1. How it
consists with them. For if outward pains and troubles work for a good much
greater than the evil that belongs to them, and if we have so great an
assurance of this as we pretend; why does the Church pray against all
Adversity? Why do religious men avoid it as well as they can, no less than the
rest of the World? It should seem more agreeable to their faith in God in
general, and to their belief of this Principle in particular, to force miseries
upon themselves, or at least to desire God to send them. But they, as well as
others, provide for their health, and send for the Physician when they are
sick; for their livelihood, and use the Law to secure or recover their Rights;
for their welfare every way, and in all their distresses take counsel, and use
means for their relief; depending all along upon God for success by continual
prayers. So that none seem to believe in good earnest what we pretend to know,
unless perhaps something of this may be seen in those who affect poverty,
renounce all propriety in worldly Goods, impair their Health by a sparing and
ill Diet, and at certain times whip their own Bodies: And yet we are apt to
think there is more noise than truth in these appearances; we are sure there is
superstition in the practice, and we suspect hypocrisy in the pretense; and
that men do these things more to amuse the World, than to benefit themselves.
Since therefore we know that evil works for a greater good, why do we avoid
evil? I answer,

1. When all things are said to work together for good, though Evils are
principally meant, because the design of the Apostle was to administer comfort
under them; yet, as I showed at first, the good things of this life are by no
means excluded. And therefore the good that comes of evil can be no reason of
running into adversity, or pulling it upon our selves, unless good could come
to us no other way, which is contrary to what the Text affirms, which says, All
things shall work together for good.

2. One principal Reason why all things work together for good, is this,
Because it is God that out of all things chooses that which he sees is the best
for us. Now the avoiding of Adversity is so far from being inconsistent with
this belief, that on the other hand, to bring it upon our selves, would destroy
a main reason of it, viz. That it is of God's choosing, and not our own. If by
any wicked way I compass a worldly end, the good thing is not properly of God's
giving. If by my own folly and wilfulness I fall into misery, the evil is not
properly of God's sending; in both cases I have been my own Carver, and
therefore have no reason to expect good from either. I cannot hope for Gods's
blessing upon the one, or the other, since I did not commit the issue of my
Affairs to his Providence, and Wisdom, but was resolved to be my own Chuser. So
that the Operation and Grace of God being one indispensable cause of the profit
which good men make of the evils of this life; the good that comes of them can
be no reason why they should expose themselves voluntarily to Evils, but it is a
very good reason why they should not; and that because we cannot expect God's
Blessing, where we lean to our own Wisdom altogether, and will not submit our
affairs to the Wisdom of God.

But now if it be said, That by this Arguing a man that contrives for his own
welfare and prosperity, cannot hope that it will work for his good, when he has
compassed it, because he chooses for himself as absolutely, as if he pulled
Calamities upon his own head: It Is easily answered, That he is not his own
chuser in that case, as he would be in this; for he that brings evil upon
himself, or neglects what is necessary to prevent it, does absolutely choose it;
but so does not he choose the good things of this life, that contrives for them
within the bounds of Honesty and Religion, for he still leaves the issue to
Providence. This can only be said of them that by ways of Injustice, or any
kind of sin, grasp at worldly Prosperity; it is of these truly said, that they
will be rich, and great, and make their Fortunes here; that they trust not in
God, but lean to their own Wills; that they refer nothing to his Wisdom, but
will dispose absolutely of themselves. And no less true would this be of a man,
who on the other side should abandon himself to Adversity. And, as I said
before in both cases, God's Wisdom being no way acknowledged, and submitted to,
his Grace cannot be expected.

3. To both these Considerations, let us add that of the natural aversion we
find in our selves to pain and want, and other evils of the Body; and it will
be very evident, that the Doctrine of the Text infers no obligation to inflict
them voluntarily upon our selves, but is very well consistent with our Prayers
and endeavors to avoid them. As to these Evils, it could never be required
that we should not fear them when we are in danger, nor feel them when they are
present, nor desire to deliver our selves from them; because these are the
necessary results of our Nature. All that could be expected, was, that we
should fear them moderately in proportion to what they are, and bear them
patiently; admitting those comforts under them, which they do not exclude, and
removing them by all such means as will not bring greater mischiefs upon us.

But let no man think, that because Religion does not pretend to extinguish the
sense of bodily Good and Evil, and that because it is a natural Sense, therefore
it should not require the mortification of Lust, Covetousness, Envy, and such
inordinate Appetites, because they are natural too; and we find that we go down
hill, when we give way to them. For there is a vast difference in the case; for
these wretched Inclinations do not grow from any necessary ingredient in our
Natures, they do not arise from any thing that belongs to our Essence; they are
no part of our original Constitution; but they are the Diseases and Corruptions
of our Nature, which we have contracted since we came out of the hands of God.
But now hunger and thirst, and the pain of heat or cold, and the sense of
bodily Evils, is rooted in the very Nature of man, as it was created first of
all, and can no more be separated from it, than we can be divided from our
selves. And therefore there is good reason why we should be allowed to yield in
this case, tho not in the other. If the vicious Inclinations we spoke of
before, were truly natural, all men would undoubtedly be libidinous or
covetous, or envious and cruel, etc. but all men are not so; some have
crucified these Affections and Lusts of the Flesh, and are temperate, chaste,
just and merciful. But hunger, and thirst, and pain, all men feel alike; which
shows that this sense, and consequently the fear of these things, and the
desire of ease and relief, are truly natural, and belong to the purity and
integrity of those Natures in which God has made us. And therefore those
Philosophers that would teach men to live without fear, and without pain, let
what outward things happen to them that could happen, were mere Romantic
Pretenders, and did by no means take the right way to guide Mankind to
happiness. True Religion wisely considers humane Nature, and allows it to be
afraid of, and confesses that it cannot but feel adversity, and forbids us not
to decline it, if prudently we can, if honestly we may. But if it is not to be
avoided, it represents to us so many Advantages that may be made of it,
administers so many Comforts under it, as may keep the bitterness of grief from
our hearts, and make us patient and contented, nay and thankful to God, for
choosing for us that wholesome, tho bitter Medicine, which tho we are loath to
take, yet we dare not refuse when it comes from his hand. And what
inconsistence is there, between keeping off those Evils by our Prayers and
Endeavors, which it is impossible for humane Nature not to recoil from; and
believing, that when they cannot be avoided, God will turn them to a greater
good, because it plainly appears to be his will and pleasure that we should
undergo them? Thus our Blessed Savior, who was never contrary to himself, on
the one hand bad his Disciples rejoice, and be exceeding glad, when they were
persecuted for righteousness sake, because great was their reward in heaven;
and yet on the other hand; when they were persecuted in one city, he bad them
flee to another. Nay, though he himself, for the joy that was set before him,
endured the cross, despising the shame; he yet nevertheless testified the
reluctance of Humane Nature in that Prayer, Father, if it be possible, let this
cup pass from me, which yet was no ways inconsistent with his submission, but
made it more worthy of praise. Nevertheless, not my will, but thy will be done.
Which puts me in mind of the next Point, viz. That although this Doctrine does
not reprove, yet it is a Rule to our Prayers and Endeavors against all the
evils of this Life.

For instance, 1. That our Prayers be with submission to the pleasure of God,
as well because he is infinitely wiser than we are, as because he is infinitely
above us. And the more particular our desires are, for the most part they ought
to be offered with more express reservations to God's supreme and wise disposal
of us. For it is in worldly things, that that holds true, We know not what to
pray for as we ought; and therefore we should add folly to our ignorance, to
desire passionately this or that, when we know not what we desire, and whether
it would work good or evil to us, if we had it. And this is a Point so
discernable, that the wise Heathens saw it. What else could Juvenal mean in
saying, Charior est, etc? Man is dearer to God than to himself; we, led on by a
blind Passion, desire things, and have them not, because God sees how they
would prove; but we see no more than what is present.

2. The assurance we have that all things will work together for good, is a
close restraint from the use of all unlawful methods in keeping off the evils
of life. To do evil that good may come, is in it self manifestly unlawful; but
this is a great aggravation of it, and takes away all excuse, that we know evil
will work for good to them that love God. When we prosecute our worldly designs
with Heat and Passion, it happens not seldom that we strive against God's
purpose to do us a greater good by a disappointment; but this may pass for an
excusable ignorance, so long as we keep our selves within the compass of honest
and lawful endeavors. But when once we transgress those bounds, we make our
selves guilty of inexcusable sin, inasmuch as we break the Commandments of God,
and wound our own Conscience, either to obtain that which may be for our hurt,
or to prevent that which may be for our good. In a word, we may upon other
accounts be satisfied, that to do evil for a good end is damnable; but he that
knows all things shall work together for good to them that love God, if He
himself loves God, can be under no temptation to do evil that good may come.

3. And lastly, this belief is a proper means of separating, all our thoughts
for this life, from anxiety and vexation. I have already said, it is a vain
thing to suppose that it should reduce us to a perfect indifference about the
good and evil of this World; but it may and ought to temper our cares, and
bring us to reasonable moderation about it; for by the same reason that evil
must affect us with grief or fear; the good which it will yield, may on the
other hand supply us with hope and joy, and the consolation will be stronger
than the affliction, because the good will be greater than the evil.

And in the mean time our care and thoughtfulness should be the less, because
God himself cares for us, and has undertaken for the event. Thus much
concerning the consistency of the Apostles Doctrine, with Endeavors and
Prayers against the evils of life, and the Rules which it prescribes to them.

2. Let us consider how it ought to influence the judgment we make of the happy
or wretched estate of men in this Life. And this is that which we ought to
learn from hence, Not to judge of this case by the outward appearance only, or
by the present state of men's circumstances in this World. As to this point,
whether it be well or ill with a man, it is not by any means so considerable
what his outward Condition is, as what use he makes of it now, and how it will
end hereafter. Take him with all the worldly Prosperities about him, that the
heart of man can wish; but do not presently pronounce him blessed, nor wish thy
self as he is. There are other things of greater concern than those that
appear, which ought to come under consideration. Does not his fullness lead him
to forget God? Do not his Pleasures carry him away into Intemperance? Does not
his greatness lift him up with pride? Are not his Affections captivated by this
World? Are his Fortunes made to administer to Piety toward God, and Charity to
men, or to provide for the Lusts of the Flesh? And will he be the better or the
worse for them in the end? These are the material Questions. No man is to be
envied that abuses good things to his own hurt, and undoes himself with
prosperity. And certainly he is in the much happier condition, who converts all
Adversities to a good use, and grows better within, by being worse without; who
turns himself to God more effectually by Repentance and Prayer, upon ever pain
or loss that he sustains; who cleaves faster to his God for being forsaken by
the World; and when all things are unquiet without him, takes the more care to
keep all quiet and calm within, and to make his true happiness fast and firm to
himself. Such a man may seem unhappy to the eye of the World. But happiness is
a thing that dwells within doors, and does not often show it self abroad; we
can seldom tell where it lives by outward signs. Therefore do not seek for it
any where, but in God, and in thy own mind: Think not that thou have found it,
when thou see a man encompassed with all kinds of outward prosperity. It does
not pass from one man to another with Silver and Gold; it neither goes nor
comes with House and Lands; it does not descend with Titles and Inheritances;
it does not wait in a retinue of Servants, nor mingle it self with Flatterers;
It is not served up at a plentiful Table, nor is it put on with fine Clothes,
no nor kept or lost with the health of the body, nor does it always go along
with a cheerful Countenance. It is no visible Estate, but a secret Treasure;
and when thou have found all the former things about a man, still thou must
look into his mind, to know infallibly whether he has gained this, or not; and
so much reason, and no more, thou have to believe all is well with him, as thou
have to take him for a good man, one who loves God, and is beloved by him. So
that we are not to judge of our whole estate here in this World by outward
things, because all the true happiness of men, which they have in present
possession, lies in the mind; and if they have it not there, they have it not
at all. Much less are we to measure it by outward appearance, when we consider
that the greatest part of it is in reversion: When it is once seen to what
account the good or the evil of this life turns at last, how a man has improved
himself in Patience, in Charity, in Faith, in dependence upon God, and in
dependence upon the World; then we can more certainly pronounce whether it has
been well or ill with him all along. And all will understand it clearly, when
it is once seen who shall appear with Christ in glory. In the mean time, they
are in good Circumstances who do not only in all Conditions repose themselves
upon God, and a good Conscience, but to whom all things that befall them are
working for a good that is yet unseen, but will certainly be manifested in due
time. Especially since it is a good that will shortly begin, and never end. For
the things that are seen are temporal, but the things that are not seen are
eternal. But then,

3. If all things shall work together for good to them that love God, then may
a good man, without any abatement of his present Comfort, reckon upon all the
uncertainties and Vicissitudes of this World. For he knows that future Ills
will as certainly work for his good, as if they were present; and though they
are supposed, and as yet uncertain, yet the good is certain upon supposition
that the evils happen. And it is no small advantage to be able to count upon
adversities without disturbance; for this is one way to reap all the comfort of
present enjoyments, without suffering them to do us any hurt. We shall not
stake our contentment and satisfaction upon them, when we consider how
uncertain they are; nor let our Affections cling too much to them, because they
may slip from us before we are aware. We shall use them with sobriety, and
charity, and thankfulness, not knowing but in a little time this may be all the
comfort we shall take in them. But most men do not care to think of the future
any other way, but in that of Self-flattery. To morrow shall be as to day, and
much more abundantly. They put away the evil day far from them, and cannot
endure to consider it, till it is upon them, and it is impossible to put it off
any longer. And then how can comfort find a way into their Hearts, whose
beloved enjoyments are suddenly gone, and nothing is left but the guilty
remembrance of having abused them to Folly and Lust? I know not what difference
there may be upon other accounts between the satisfaction which the good things
of this life yield to a wise man on the one side, and those pleasures which
fools reap from them on the other. But there is this difference sufficiently to
the good man's advantage, that the comfort he finds in them is consistent with
Principles of Truth; he does not conceal the Truth from himself; he does not go
on in a vain presumption, as if these things would always last, but uses them
as things that perish in the using, and loves them as things that may be lost;
and without trusting them, does from time to time take all the reliefs and
pleasures that a reasonable man can desire from them. In the mean time, the
uncertainty of these things does not sit uneasy upon his spirit, because he
knows that while they last, they shall work for his good; and when they fail,
that shall do so too. But on the other hand, how extravagantly soever a
licentious man pleases himself, and indulges his Appetites in his prosperity,
he is all the while beholden to ignorance, and mistake, and foolish
presumption, for his present Enjoyments. Tell him of the fickleness of his
Fortunes, and the changeableness of the World in its best estate; that he is
well to day, but may be as ill to morrow; and if he believes this, it strikes
him into a dullness, and damps his spirits, and spoils all his gaiety. If he
believes it not, then it is a plain case, that he lives in the Fool's Paradise,
and makes a shift to be merry, by keeping himself in ignorance, and taking care
not to think. Beloved, if a man has nothing but this World to trust to, he has
great reason to be melancholy. And it is a very ill sign, if we cannot endure to
consider that it will fail us one time or other, but had rather live on without
presaging the least alteration in our Affairs, till it happens unavoidably. And
thus many Persons dream out their days, without so much as reflecting seriously
upon the most common, and yet most concerning them in the World, viz. that they
must die. And therefore when they are almost drawing to the last gasp, the
Physician must in Charity give them still some hopes of life, lest they should
die with the fear of death; a plain sign that they never counted upon their
Mortality to any purpose, but laid the whole weight of their welfare upon this
life, and the pleasures of it, without considering how weak a foundation they
built upon all along. It becomes us as we are men, and much more as we are
Christians, to take this life as it is, and all the Pleasures and Enjoyments of
it as they are, and to affect them no farther. And next to the consideration of
that Eternal state in the life to come, in comparison to which, this is but a
shadow; there is no belief that makes a serious Contemplation of the
uncertainty of all things here below more easy and quiet, than that of this
truth, That all things shall work together for good to them that love God. For
surely that belief which supports any man under any evil when it is present,
will not let him feel any disturbance at all from the possibility of it when
it is not present.

4. Let me therefore in the last place conclude all with an earnest Exhortation
to Piety, and the keeping of God's Commandments; and that upon the present
motive, that then the comfort of this Truth belongs to us, that all things
shall work together for our good. If we were to study what to wish, and might
have it for the wishing, I do not know what we had more reason to desire for
the quieting of our minds, and giving us the truest peace and tranquillity, than
that all things should work together for our good, and that we should know it,
and be well assured of it. But nothing can be wanting to an absolute assurance
of it, but that we love God, and keep his Commandments. If it were left to our
choice, whether we would have an assured interest in this Promise, and in that
Grace and Providence of God, which will make it good; or whether we should from
time to time have the disposal of our own Condition, and be left to our
particular Desires, and be always masters of them; we should be very fools to
trust our selves in our own hands, and to take our selves out of the hands of
God, even this very folly would show how unfit we are to be our own Carvers;
and what foolish work should we make, if we were wholly to dispose of our
selves! We should be sure to devise things to our own hurt, and be always
gratifying a present Appetite, and serving a present turn, till we had lost all
rule and government of our Passions; we should grow wanton and self-willed, and
nothing would be able to please us, or make us happy, but any thing almost to
make us miserable. And in whose hands are we most safe? in our own, who should
undo our selves even with things that are not in themselves hurtful; or in
God's, who will make things that are not good in themselves, to work for our
good? Can we be better provided for, than to be taken care of by Infinite
Wisdom, Goodness and Power? He that made us, knows our Nature better than we do
our selves, and he loves us more wisely than we love our selves, and he can do
infinitely more for us, than we can do for our selves; what have we therefore
to do, but with entire obedience and submission to put our selves under his
guidance and protection, and to beseech him that he would permit us to resign
all our Affairs to the disposal of his Providence, and that he would please to
send us that which he sees is most expedient for us? If my whole Fortune in the
World depended upon an Affair too intricate for my skill, and far beyond my
power to manage; surely nothing could be more welcome than the Assistance of
such a Friend upon whose Fidelity I could rely with the greatest confidence,
and of whose Wisdom I could make no doubt, if he would undertake it for me. And
if he directed me what to do in a plain and easy method, and required me to
leave the rest to himself, and wholly to rely upon him for the event, certainly
I should at once follow his Directions, and ease my mind of all farther Cares.
Such is the Case we are speaking of, with this difference, that to God only we
are to pay absolute Obedience, and in God only we can put an absolute
Confidence. Our great business is to be happy, and this is a matter beyond our
skill and power to effect for our selves: But God has undertaken it for us;
only he has given us a Rule, a plain Rule, whereby we are to walk, which does
not require cunning and subtilty, but simplicity and honesty to follow it. For
the Rest, he has promised to bring it about, and to dispose all things for the
best in order to our good. And therefore why should any doubt remain in our
hearts; why should we doubt to commend our selves to God, by Prayers and
Repentance, and doing his Will? And then why should we doubt whether it will go
well with us at last? If it were possible that any thing should be hid from
God, or that his Will should change; if multitude of Cares could distract him,
or length of business tire him, or any one passage of our lives escape him; if
his Power could be at a stand, or his Goodness cease; if he were not the same
yesterday, to day, and for ever; then indeed we might sometimes question,
whether those things that happen to us were for the best. But because he is
God, and not Man, we may believe that all his Providence over us are grounded
upon Reasons of Wisdom and Goodness, though we do not discern them in
particular; and that they will all contribute to the perfection of our
Happiness, though we do not see how at present. Only we must love him, and
serve and obey him; we must not alienate our selves from him by an evil Heart,
and wicked Actions; but conform our Wills to his Will, and our Conversations to
his Laws. It is nothing but want of this that disables us from casting our care
upon him. In God there is strong confidence; but if our confidence in him be
not strong, it is not because his Providence, and Wisdom, and Power, and Truth,
will not bear it, but because our Guilt will not bear it, our evil Conscience,
our love of this present World, or something or other that estrangeth us from
God. And it is the Character of wicked men, that they live without God in the
world; not only because they live without respect to his Laws, but also because
they live without any relief or benefit by his promises; and because they live
in this World without loving and fearing God, they sustain the present
punishment of living in this World without putting their trust in him, i. e.
without the greatest comfort of life, to which the whole World cannot afford
the like. Wherefore, Beloved, let us remember upon whom this blessedness
comes, and be careful not to lose our part in it. To which end we must look
back upon our past sins to repent of them, and look forward upon the remaining
part of our life, with an unalterable Resolution not to forfeit our Interest in
the special Grace and Providence of God, for the obtaining of any worldly Good,
or the avoiding of any worldly Evil; which to do, were the greater folly and
madness, because we know that if we love God, and are called according to
purpose, i. e. as I explained it, are true to our Profession of Christianity,
then all things shall work together for our good. Let us, Brethren, lay these
things to heart; for the more we think of them, the more we shall be confirmed
in a hearty belief of them. They will be a direction and a comfort to us as
long as we live, nay and they will support us in the hour of death; and then
they have done all our work for us, for the last enemy that is to be destroyed
is death; and death it self shall work the greatest good of all for us, in
delivering of us from this evil body which our Savior will change into the
likeness of his glorious body, according to his wonderful working, whereby he
is able to subdue all things unto himself. Wherefore my beloved, be ye
steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye
know your labor shall not be in vain in the Lord.

The Seventh Sermon.
A SERMON Preached at COURT.
ECCLES. III. 15. That which has been, is now, and that which is to be,
already has been, and God requires that which is past.


THE former part of the Text, That which has been, now is, and that which is
to be, has already been, is in sense the same with v. 9. chapter 1. There is no
new thing under the Sun; that is, as the Ages of the World go on, the same
Events come about again.

The latter part of it. God repuireth that which is past, seems to have this
meaning, that God still requires the same behavior from us, that he has ever
required of those that have been before us.

Which two Considerations being intended to promote the general end of the
whole Book, i. e. to make men fear God and keep his Commandments: I intend to
illustrate both, and to show how useful they are for that purpose.

Now these sayings are to be understood, as many other Moral and Proverbial
sayings are, where what is universally affirmed is to be understood as to the
greater part. The meaning cannot be this, that there is no Diversity of Events
to be seen in the several passages of men's lives, or in the several Ages of the
World; for as the wise man observes in the beginning of this Chapter, To every
thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under heaven. A time to be
born, and a time to die; a time to plant, and a time to pluck up that which is
planted, etc. Nor can the meaning be, that nothing happens in one Age of the
World, but it has happened in every Age. For sometimes God creates a new
thing. The Son of God was to come in our Nature but once before the end of the
World. There have been Ages of Miracles, but we have seen none for many Ages
together. Such rare and extraordinary cases as these are not intended; and as
to all the rest, the meaning is this, That if we consider the diversity of
Events which befall Mankind, and the Vicissitudes of good and evil which they
undergo, these varieties are still so repeated in the several Ages of the
World, that the difference is not so considerable as the agreement; in the main
they are the fame, though the circumstances be diverse: Just as the seasons of
the Year are the same, in which nevertheless there may be great diversity of
Weather; not always the like Sunshine or Rain, fair or foul Weather, barren or
fruitful Seasons; yet still the same Spring, Summer, Winter, and Autum, do
return in their course.

And as the case of all Ages is much alike as to the Events that befall men, so
it is not much different as to the Duties required of them. For in all times
from the beginning to the end of the World, the Moral part of Religion is the
same, viz. to fear God, to be Just and Charitable to men, and to govern our
Passions by Reason, by the reverence of our Maker, and the expectation of a
final account. And God has once for all required some Duties by a particular
Revelation, by which we are obliged to the end of the World. Nay, and the
Circumstances which make the doing of these things more or less difficult, are
not new, since the same, or the like, have frequently returned heretofore; and
when we are gone, will be repeated again. So that still God requires that
which is past.

Now because, as I told you, these Considerations are of great use; that they
may have the stronger impression, I shall try to show, that it must needs be
so; that it cannot be otherwise, if we take one thing with another, but that
that which has been should be now, and that which is to be, already should
have been.

1. From the beginning of the World to the end of it, they are the same things
of which the good or evil of Mankind is compounded. The welfare of the world
always did and ever will consist in such things as these; In a just and wise
Government; in constant obedience to it; in peace and security; in prosperous
undertakings; in having good Parents and good Children, and good Relations; in
a good name; in competent maintenance; in liberty and health, and in agreeable
conversation. There are no new sorts of happiness peculiar to one Age, which
are not as desirable by another; nor any kind of misery that one has suffered,
but another must feel the same uneasiness and pain under it, when it happens.
And therefore because it is the good and the evil that happens to men, which
makes up a great part of the History of the World, they must be in great part
the same things that are brought over again. Especially since for the most part
one of the contraries is inseparable from us; we must either want, or have
enough; live in Health or Sickness, in Freedom or Servitude, etc.

And therefore when we are in great pain, or suffer wrong, when a good Husband
or a beloved Child dies, though we complain and lament, as if so sad a case
never happened before, and perhaps say so too; yet these are but words of
Passion, for there have been the like complaints before, and the same reasons
of complaint too. We are not made in a different Mould, and to a different
Sense from those that have lived in former times; for they were affected with
pain and grief as we are, and from the same causes too. For which reason, when
Providence either punishes or rewards in this life, when it either punishes the
wicked, and tries the righteous by adversity, or rewards the righteous, and
insnares the wicked with prosperity; it goes the same way to work, either
inflicting that which is equally ungrateful to all men, as Pestilence, Sword,
Famine, Disappointments, Losses, and the like; or sending the contrary things,
which are always grateful. So that as to the good or the evil which happens in
the several Ages of the World, There is no now thing under the sun, but that
which has been, is now, and that which is to be, has already been.

2. All men have the same natural Passions and Appetites, which they either
govern or not govern as they ought to do, and which according as they are well
used or not, will perpetually produce the same effects of good or evil. The
Affections of Envy, Pride, Ambition, Revenge, Covetousness and Voluptuousness,
have reigned amongst evil men in all Ages. And injustice still proceeds from
the same Covetousness or Partiality: Rebellion at home, and unjust Invasions
from abroad, from the same Ambition and Desire of Rule. Cruelty from the same
Revengefulness, or Fear, or Anger, or Hatred; Luxury from the same inordinate
Love of Ease and Pleasure; and insolent contempt of others, from the same Pride
and over-weaning Conceit of one's self. These Vices have their Root in the
ungoverned Passions of humane nature, and in the abuse of man's free will. And
therefore since God has left Mankind to a natural liberty and power over their
own actions, under the disadvantage of bad inclinations, and with the help only
of such grace as may be resisted, no wonder that there is so great a similitude
of Events still returning, because so much of the good that happens to us
depends upon Wisdom and Virtue, and so many of the evils of this life upon
Folly and Vice. It has always been seen, that Justice and Faithfulness,
reverence of God, and good will to Men, Unity and Charity, and good Manners,
have enabled men to do well for themselves. But when they degenerate, and their
Manners are corrupted, then their Prosperity begins to be undermined. And if
they grow from bad to worse, God will suffer them to reap the fruit of their
own doings, and all their Sins to ripen into those Mischiefs which they
naturally produce: In which also it is not hard to trace the footsteps of a
Divine Vengeance. Indeed it sometimes happens, that the race is not to the
swift, nor the battle to the strong; neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet
riches to men of understanding, nor yet favor to men of skill, but time and
chance happens to them all. i. e. Through the overruling Providence of God,
things do sometimes happen otherwise than by common Rules, which though it does
not fall out so seldom as to be always new and surprising, yet neither does it
happen so often, but that the contrary is the ordinary course of things; and
for the most part a Faithful man shall be trusted, a Charitable Man shall be
loved, a Religious and Virtuous Man shall be honored, an honest and diligent
man shall thrive; the integrity of the upright shall guide them, but the
perverseness of transgressors shall destroy them. The wise shall inherit glory,
but shame shall be the promotion of fools. So that not only the good and evil
of this life are in all Ages the same, but the causes of both are the same too;
that is to say, the Virtues and the Vices, the Wisdom and Folly of Mankind, and
the wise Providence of God superintending all, and always governing all for the
best. And therefore that which has been is now, and that which is to be, has
already been.

3. This must needs be so, because they are but few in comparison that learn to
be wise by the Examples and Instructions of former Ages. Alas! we do not often
take warning by the miscarriages of others, though we saw their course and
their end with our own eyes. If we take any notice of their Examples at all, it
is but to learn how we may play the fool with more discretion; to be as bad as
they were, and to come off better than they did; and so we go on as boldly as
those that went just before us in the same dangerous way, till we are surprised
by the same unhappy end, and all our Experience comes too late to do us any
good. But then how much less are we instructed by the Histories of Ages that
are long since past and gone? And yet it was for our Instruction that God spoke
at first to the Fathers by the Prophets, and at last to the World by his Son.
And when he took the Wise in their own Craftiness, when his Judgments were
abroad in the World, and he visited men for their Sins; These things happened
to them for examples, and they are written for our admonition upon whom the
ends of the world are come. But now do we every where see that fruit of these
observations which might be expected? How comes it then to pass, that we see so
little Righteousness and Fidelity, Integrity and Uprightness, Unity and
Charity; so little of the Fear of God, and the practice of Virtue in the World?
As much older as the World is, it seems not to be much wiser than it has been;
but as one Generation passes away and another comes; that that comes, begins
as if it were the first; and learns little or nothing to the purpose, by those
which are past away. Of all which perverseness, the people whom God chose to
himself were an instance never enough to be admired. When at first he redeemed
them from their enemies, they believed his words, and sang his praise; but they
soon forgot his works, and tempted God in the desert; they forgot God their
Savior, who had done great things in Egypt; they committed Idolatry, they
murmured and rebelled, and they were plagued for it, and God lifted up his Hand
against them to overthrow them in the Wilderness. But for all this, when their
Posterity came into Canaan, they Sacrificed to the Idols there; and then God
gave them into the hand of the Heathen; and upon their Repentance many a time
did he deliver them. But all would not do, they provoked him more and more,
till Ten Tribes were quite cast away, and the other Two sent into Captivity for
Seventy years. After this indeed they were cured of Idolatry, but they
presently fell to corrupt the Moral part of Religion, and to make the Temple a
Sanctuary for ill Manners. How can we forbear deploring the wretched folly and
unteachableness of man, and admiring the infinite Patience of God! At length
God sent his Son into the World to bring in the Everlasting Gospel, the clear
knowledge of God's Will, the certain assurance of a life to come, and the
Doctrine of the Cross; to constitute a Society of Believers, to unite them by
Sacraments, and to establish the Faith upon Miracles and Divine Demonstrations.
This dispensation did indeed produce mighty Effects, and so many Heroical
Examples of Virtue and Piety in every one of the three first Ages of the
Church, that perhaps the whole World for about 4000 years before, was not in
all that time able to show an equality to any one of those Ages. But by degrees
the Purity and Virtue of the Christian Communion abated; and though the Church
has in the worst times brought forth some Sons and Daughters unto God, some
genuine Children unto our Heavenly Father, yet alas for human Nature!
Christendom has been a Stage of as gross Hypocrisy, as scandalous Errors, and
as great Sins, and Miseries arising from those Sins, as ever any part of the
Heathen World was. Time wears off the sense of extraordinary things, and we
grow to be but indifferently affected with the noble Works that God has done in
the days of our Fathers; and by our stupidity we constrain Providence to awaken
us to consideration by new warnings, and to revive that sense of Duty which is
so apt to decay while we are let alone.

All which things being considered, we are bound to bless and praise the
Infinite Goodness of God, who has not left us without a Testimony of himself,
both in the Light of Nature, and the particular Revelations of his Word, and
the Footsteps of his continued and unwearied Providence over us. For if
notwithstanding all this, if notwithstanding plain Instructions, convincing
Examples, clear Warnings, and undeniable Testimonies, Mankind is still so apt
to forget God, and to run into all miscarriages; then how insupportable had the
Lusts and Vices of the World been, if there had been no Revelation, no
Providence, no Faith, or Religion, no fear of God at all; if he had left
Mankind to themselves, without his checks and restraints, his control and
government, undoubtedly the Earth had not been able to bear the violence of its
Inhabitants, our Reason and Free Will had made us but the more dangerous Brutes
to one another, and the Societies of Mankind had been long since dissolved.

The sum of what has been said is this, That good and evil are the same in all
Ages of the World; that the liberty of humane nature, and the passions of
humane nature are the same too, and therefore the causes of good and evil are
the same, in respect of man; That mankind is very apt to forget former
instructions, and to need the like warnings that their Forefathers had, which
therefore God in his Wisdom and Goodness repeats unto them. So that since we
are of the same mould with those that have been before us, and with those that
are to come after us, and there is the same wise providence over all, it
follows that the like variety of events must still come about again, and that
which has been, is now, and that which is to be, already has been.

Amongst other good uses that may be made of such Considerations as these, this
certainly is one, That we should always dispose our selves to receive our
portion in this World, be it better, or be it worse, with as much moderation
and equality of temper as we can. If thou art prosperous, and thy Affairs
succeed according to thy desires, do not for this cherish Pride, and
Self-conceit, and vain Opinions of thy self, as if thou only were fit to be
regarded; others have been as fortunate as thy self, and yet examples of this
World's inconstancy; and perhaps too they thought as highly of themselves, and
were as meanly thought of. Art thou in Adversity? this also has been a common
case, and therefore do not repine at Providence; evil, men have been punished
for their sins, and good men tried by afflictions. We, as well as others before
us, carry the causes and seeds of much trouble in our frame and constitution,
and we cannot prevent a great deal of evil that comes by the free will of
others, nor hinder the operations of Providence which governs all. And
therefore we should not suffer our Affections violently to run after any of the
desirable things of this World, but take the World as it is, and then make the
best on it, according to the wise man's advice in this Chapter, who speaking of
the turns and vicissitudes of things, I know, says he, there is no good in
them, but for a man to rejoice and to do good in his life; that is, that every
man should eat and drink, and enjoy the good of all his labor; that no man
should deny himself a supply of his reasonable needs and desires, whilst he has
wherewithal; and that upon no pretense whatsoever, he should excuse himself
from doing good to others, whilst it is in his power. For this is all the good
of this life, that is our portion under the Sun, to use present comforts wisely
and charitably; to do good to our selves and others; to take reasonable
pleasure in the Gifts of God, and to admit all reasonable comfort under
adversity; say; and in a word, to take in good part our mixture of good and
evil as it falls out, but at no hand to expect more from the world than it will
yield, and to lay a greater stress upon it than it has been ever able to bear.
This undoubtedly is one design of the Wise man in this Book, to show the vanity
of this world, and thereby to lessen our fondness of it, and yet to teach us us
how to make a wise and good use of the comforts it affords; remembering all
along, that the greatest good of all, is to fear God and keep his Commandments.

And so I proceed to the second particular, That God requires that which is
past; that is, as it is expressed in the foregoing verse, That men should fear
before him; for therefore does God in the variety of his Providence bring
about the same things, because it is the same end which he designs from first to
last, viz. to teach us the fear of God, and to bring us to Religion and Virtue.
This he has required from the beginning of the world, and will do so to the
end of it; and therefore no wonder that from first to last he uses much what
the same variety of methods, by which men should learn to fear before him.

The main thing intended I conceive is this, That we should be as far from
being displeased with the Duty that God requires of us, as with the
circumstances our worldlyly condition in which he has set us; and that upon
the same account, since as he governs by steady Rules of Providence, so he
governs by steady Rules of Duty; and our condition in both respects is very
much the same with theirs that have been before us. And we cannot be in such
circumstances, making our Obedience hard to us, but others have been in the
like. To forgive injuries, though they be great, is no new burden, for no man
perhaps has lived in the world but has met with great provocations. To abstain
from unlawful pleasures, though our Appetites prompt us never so violently to
pursue them, is no strange Duty; for those that have been before us had the
same natural Passions and Inclinations that we have. To live by Rules that are
contrary to the Customs and Examples of the Age we live in, may seem
unreasonable to an inconsiderate man; but this has been the case of good men in
almost all Ages of the World. Neither is thy Duty a new thing, whatever it be,
nor the difficulty of performance new, whatever that be: still God requires
that which is past.

Let therefore no man think, that he would be a good Christian, if he had a
good Estate; that he would be an honest man if it were not the way to die a
Beggar; that he would be very humble, if he were once great, and above
contempt, that he could forgive wrongs, if his Enemies were not very spiteful
and implacable; that he would serve God, if he would make a Hedge about all
that he had; and observe the Rules of Religion, if he were not under unusual
Temptations to the contrary. Say not thou, that the Age in which thon live,
and the Circumstances in which thou art, will not bear the practice of strict
Piety and true Virtue. Say not thou what is the cause that that the former days
are better than these, for thou do not inquire wisely concerning this thing.

For, 1. There is no end of these pretenses and excuses; such things as these
may always be said, and there will be always more or less occasion to plead
them, and therefore they are never to be allowed. It seldom happens that we
conclude truly, when we compare our own Circumstances with other men's, and
conclude to our own disadvantage, as if God required easier things of them than
he does of us; and therefore it is not wisely done to begin with an inquiry,
which is almost certain to end in a false Judgment, especially when we make a
false Judgment to excuse an evil practice.

But then if it were allowable for men thus to argue in excuse for themselves;
The World is not so good a World as our Fathers found it, for my Affairs in it
do not succeed so well as another man's, and my Temptations are greater than
his, and therefore I am excusable, if I do not come up to the Piety and
Integrity of others. If this I say were once allowed, how hard would it be for
God to please man, and to keep him to his Duty, and that, if nothing else were
to be said, because of the perpetual false Judgments we should make in
comparing our selves with others? Every man being sensible of his own
Temptations, and the inconveniences of the Times in which he lives, and of his
own Temper, and of his proper condition and circumstances in the World; would
think Providence had been partial against him, and that the Duties of Religion
pressed harder upon himself than upon any other person: A poor man would think
his rich Neighbor had more time, and greater obligations to serve God than
himself: The wealthy man would believe that the poor man has more leisure for
Prayer, and fewer Temptations to earthly-mindedness than he has; God would lose
the thanks of every man, that could fancy another more happy than himself; and
the Duty and Service of every man, that could fancy his own Temptations to be
stronger than all other men's; and because we feel our own good and evil, and do
but guess at other men's by their outward appearance, we should run into all
manner of false judgment in comparing them with one another; but that there
might be no pretense for this wretched way of arguing, God has not only tied
us up all strictly to the same Piety and Duty, but is pleased to let us know,
as the truth is, that upon the whole matter, there is nothing new under the
sun; that upon the whole matter he has made no difference between the present
and former Ages, between our selves and other Persons: Thy Neighbor perhaps
has not all those very Temptations thou have, but then he has his own; he has
perhaps some obligations in one kind, which thou have not, but thou have the
advantage of him in another: Every condition of life has not only its proper
inconveniences, but its proper advantages; and what is lost in the difference
of our state from others, or in the change which we may suffer our selves, is
made up another way; prosperity and success should make us love God better; but
disappointments on the other side, and adversities, do very often make it more
easy for us to love the world less; in a word, seek no excuses for neglecting
Piety and Virtue, from the difference of Times, Fortunes, Temptations, and the
like, between thy self and those that live in this, or that lived in former.
Ages, for thou art likely to make but a foolish judgment, and wilt unavoidably
run into great mistakes in making the comparison, and the reason of thy sin
will not bear the judgment of the All-seeing God, nor the examination of the
last and terrible Day: But do thou believe God to be impartial, and to have
tempered the Seasons and Ages of the World, and the different condition of
Persons with a wise equality, with an unerring judgment. And do thou give up
thy self to follow and to comply with his wise Providence. And though his
judgments in respect of others be unsearchable, and his ways past finding out,
yet thou shall find that all his ways toward thy self are so wise and so good,
that at last thou shall not wish there had been the least alteration of them;
And therefore I proceed farther, and in pursuance of what has been said, add in
the second place:

2. Suppose that in some notable respects thy case may differ from another
man's, yet this difference is not so great, as to make any material difference
between thine obligation and his, to do that which God requires: Nor can we be
less obliged so to do, than our Forefathers were; for in every Age it may be
said, That which has been is now; and in every Age God requires that which is
past, and that under the same Motives and Obligations, without any difference
so considerable, as to turn the Balance one way or other; for let the World go
which way it will, an Impious man is a Fool and a Wretch, and the Righteous man
is Happy and Wise for himself, and therefore certainly that is a very good
condition, and a good World for thee, in which thou may be as good as thou
please to be.

What condition can be better for a man, than that which puts him under the
immediate Protection and special Providence of God, who is not only the
disposer of long Life, and Wealth, and Honor, and Security, but of a greater
thing than all these, and that is, a contented and cheerful mind; nay, if thou will go and learn thoroughly all the qualities of a good man, and a good
Christian, some of them, as thou will find, will guard thee against the anger
and displeasure of others; others will conciliate their friendship and good
will, and all together will breed reverence and high esteem, and thou will find
that to be true which St. Peter said of his Times, Who will harm you, if ye be
followers of that which is good? Let it be once plain, that thou art ready to
good, but especially that thou art a Friend to the miserable, and all men will
rise up and call thee blessed, and if need were, thou should be assisted by
those that have not the heart to do such things themselves, and shall feel the
benefit of what humanity they have, if they have any left. Let it it be once
plain, that thou art averse from doing the least injury, but can forgive the
greatest, and do seasonable good turns to all Persons upon occasion; that thou
art candid in thy Censures, and discreet in Reproofs; and that the affectation
of seeming wiser and better than others, has nothing to do in thy Wisdom, and
in thy Concern for the Honor of God, and the happiness of Men; this will go a
great way to make a bad man ashamed to be thy enemy, so that he will not abuse
that man's name who seeks not his own Honor, and yet is tender of another
man's; nor do ill offices to one who is known to do none but good ones: Every
one will probably show himself a Friend to him that is a Friend to all.
Finally, let thy Devotion to God be inartificial and unaffected, let it be
expressed by all decent signs of reverence and seriousness, without ostentation;
and withal, let it be shown by an universal regard of thy actions as done in
his presence; let it infuse manliness into all thy Mirth, and guard thee in all
thy Pleasures from any approach to Intemperance and a brutish Sensuality; let
it be seen in governing thy Passions, in tempering thy Discourse, in modelling
thy Behavior, in making thee a good Man or Woman in all thy Conversation, and
then thou may venture thy self abroad in an ill-natured World, and in a
degenerate Age, and the odds are very great on thy side, that tho others may be
flattered, thou shall be reverenced, and that even those who will not afford to
give thee a good word, will be more unwilling to give thee a bad one; if they
will not do you any good, yet that they will do you no harm. All which is not
only probable in the speculation, but for the most part verified by experience.
And therefore upon this account it should seem that God lays no heavier burden
upon one than another, but that he still requires that which is past.

But suppose things should not always happen according to common Rules, but
sometimes leave their ordinary Course; as suppose a righteous man must suffer
for his righteousness; then I say, we must leave the consideration of this
world, and go to that of a better. And why should we not suppose that so
incomparable a state of Blessings reserved for a good man in the World to come,
and justly esteemed, and earnestly desired by him, should not only make all
present inconveniences very light, but in comparison none at all. Most
certainly the Blessedness of an Everlasting state, does in it self infinitely
outweigh all the transitory pleasures of the world; and if we believe and live
accordingly, they will outweigh them in our esteem and affection; and then
inward peace and the hope of Heaven will satisfy us, that true Religion is a
means of the best happiness that can be attained here, though it does not bring
worldly prosperity. And it does indeed make me very happy, though it does not
bring me to honor; if it does but teach me humility, though it does not make
me wealthy, if it does but make me contented, though it does not give me the
abundance of outward pleasures, nor free me from injuries and wrongs; if it
does but bless me with a quiet Mind and a good Conscience, with a steady
government of my Passions, with meekness and easiness to forgive, with the
sweet hope of a better Life, which when all is done is the true ground of a
quiet and serene Enjoyment of our selves in this. Now these in all Ages of the
world, have been the Reasons upon which good men have built their resolution
and their practice of Virtue.

For they lived in all good Conscience, not because they expected the Riches
and the Pleasures of this world in recompense of their Piety and Justice, not
that they thought their Virtue would be a fence about all they had to secure
their Goods from Rapine, their Names from Reproach, their Persons from Affronts
and Injuries, and this course of Life from common or uncommon Troubles and
Afflictions. They did not hope to make a gainful Traffic with Heaven by their
Prayers and Charity, for the increasing of their Treasures upon Earth. It Is
true, God has often blessed good men with strange Prosperity in this world, but
that was not their end, nor the reason of their dependence upon God, and doing
his Will. But they were such as they were by Faith. By Faith they wrought
righteousness, i. e. they did the thing which God required, because they
expected an heavenly Country, and believed God to be a rewarder of them that
diligently seek him, tho not always with the Idolized Pleasures and Greatness,
no not always with the ease and quiet of this Life, yet without fail, with
those pure and ravishing Joys of a better World, which will shortly begin and
never end.

So that the Duties which God requires of us are the same; and whether the
Temptations be exactly the same or not, which make our Duty any thing
difficult, yet the Motives and Reasons are the same which take away the
difficulty, and make it equally easy again. And if as to God's Grace and the
Reasons of doing well, and the encouragements which good men always find in his
Love and Favor, we are upon equal terms with all that have been before us, we
may be very well content that we are as liable and obnoxious to all the
untoward accidents of Life, as any of them ever were. For here is the same
Reason Encouragement and Assistance to do what God requires, and to be happy
therein, as there ever was.

And why should not the same causes still produce the same effects? For on the
one side, those holy Men and Women that are now with God, had the same
Appetites and Passions to govern, that we have; they endured the same
Temptations, and overcome them; they had the same natural sense of good and
evil that we have; and were encompassed with infirmities; and yet they walked
by Faith, and performed their Duty to God, not to be admired and courted by
men, but to be seen and rewarded of God. On the other side, we have the same
God to trust that they had, the same holy Word of God to direct us, the same
Promises to inflame us, the same holy Spirit to assist us, the same Everlasting
Reward to encourage us, which they had: So that God has made no difference
between them and us. And let not us, I beseech you, make so great a difference
between our selves and them, as to miss of that peace and satisfaction which
they once enjoyed in this World, and of that infinite Reward which they have in
part attained to in a better. A Reward so vast, that it is all one within a
trifle, whether with or without Tribulation, whether with ease or difficulty,
with pleasure or pain we enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. For which God of his
Infinite Mercy prepare us by his his holy Word, by his gracious Spirit, by his
wise Providence, through our Lord Jesus Christ. And now to God Almighty, the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, be ascribed all Thanks and Praise for ever and
ever. Amen.

The Eight Sermon.
AN Assize Sermon.
MATTHEW. V. 38, 39, 40. Ye have heard that it has been said, An eye for an eye,
and a tooth for a tooth: But I say unto you, That ye resist not evil, but
whosoever shall smite thee on the right cheek, turn to him the other also: And
if any man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let him have thy
cloak also: And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain.


I Am very sensible, that the Duty here prescribed is so contrary to the Lusts
and Passions of men, and to some Principles of Honor and Wisdom which are
current in the World, that it will be no very easy matter to persuade most men
to practice it. We are beholding to them, if they will allow it to be a
speculation fit for the Pulpit; but if we pretend to offer it as a Rule for
daily use, we must pardon them there; for it does not seem by any means to be
accommodated to the state of Mankind; and it is pursued without any respect to,
or regard of, the daily Occurrences of life. What living would there be for us
in the World, if we should forgive Injuries and Wrongs as fast as they are
done, and put up Affronts as often as they are put upon us? This would
encourage the insolent man that has done us one injury, to offer a greater;
and by our tameness in bearing the injustice of one man, we invite another to
deal as ill by us, or worse than the former; which is the way to be affronted
by every Scoundrel, and trampled upon at every man's pleasure. No, but let us
make men afraid of presuming to do us any harm, by letting them see what others
have gotten by it; we must make them Examples, that dare put any contempt upon
us, if we would live quietly, and maintain our Honor; and when others sees how
dangerous a thing it is to provoke us, we shall be respected and courted by
them, they will be afraid to offend us, and think themselves happy in our
friendship: But to sit down quietly under Abuses, is the way to be scorned and
insulted over by every body; Tell them of forgiving Injuries that want a Spirit
to resent them, and have not Courage enough to revenge them; this is a
Principle fit for none but Cowards, or Fools; either for those that are so dull
as not to understand an Affront, or so fearful that they dare not return it;
but it comes too late for men of Honor and Mettle, that know what is their
Interest, and are able to defend it: And there is no reason in the world why
they should expose themselves to Injuries and Abuses, when they have Strength
and Courage enough to guard themselves from them. Thus in truth they say in
their hearts, as they plainly show by their Actions, revenging every little
Disrespect, or Affront, or Injury of any kind, by returning an equal, or very
often a vastly greater mischief upon the wrong-doer, and this to secure
themselves, as they pretend, from further wrongs, by making all that observe it
careful to forbear offending them in like manner, as they would be encouraged
to do, if the present Injury were tamely past by, and nothing done to revenge
it.

But in the first place, This Objection was well foreseen by our Savior; he
knew it would be pretended against the Duty of forgiving Injuries, that this
would be to pull great inconveniences upon our selves, and invite every body
that had any thing to get by it, to multiply Injuries against us: And therefore
he prescribed the Rules of Forgiveness in those very terms that imply he
considered the Objection well enough. But I say unto you, resist not evil;
resist not the evil, or the injurious man; but whosoever shall smite thee on
thy right cheek, turn to him the other also. The latter words are not to be
taken in a literal sense, as if I were to offer my self to a second stroke
after I had been struck once: But in a moral sense (i. e.) venture a second
injury, rather than go about to be revenged of the first, though it should be
never so probable that the wrong-doer would take heart by thy meekness to add
another abuse to the former, thou shall not secure thy self by revenge for all
that: And so if any man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let
him have thy cloak also. Not that I am presently to part with more to him than
he has unjustly gotten by a wrong Verdict; but that I am to venture another
loss, rather than be revenged for the first: And so is the other instance to be
understood: From whence it is plain, that our Blessed Savior was not unmindful
of the Objection that one would be apt to make against his Rule, though if this
matter had not been so plainly implied, one would think a little modesty would
serve to acknowledge, that God is wiser than man, and it is better for us to be
governed by his Will, than by our own foolish Reasonings; at least, if we would
be thought to be Christians, we should not think much to take the Authority of
Our Lord and Master for a sufficient Reason to do as he has commanded us. And
yet I do not think it difficult to give such an account of the goodness and
reasonableness of this Law of our Savior, that when we have considered it, we
shall find, that we have far more reason to thank him, than be offended with
him for it: To which purpose I shall first endeavor more particularly to
explain what duty that is which is required of us in these Precepts.

1. And in the first place, Let us consider what Light is offered to them from
that Law of the Jews: It has been said, An eye for eye, and a tooth for a
tooth: from whence our Savior takes occasion to introduce his own Precept, But
I say unto you, Resist not evil: From which we shall learn what we are to
understand by not resisting: The Passage to which our Savior refers, we find
in Exodus 21.24. There was a Law, That if a Woman with child was hurt by men
striving together, the Judge should return according to this Rule, That life
should go for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot:
Which Law of Retaliation was also to take place against the false Witness, that
he should suffer the same punishment which his Neighbor was in danger of by
reason of his Testimony; Deuteronomy. 19.21. Thine eye shall not pity, but life shall
go for life, eye for eye, etc. But in Levit. 24.20. The Rule is general; If a
man cause a blemish in his neighbor; as he has done, so shall it be done unto
him, breach for breach, eye for eye, tooth for tooth. So that this was the Law
by which their Courts of Judicature were to proceed in redress of Injuries;
That he who had injured another, should suffer as much injury as he had done
himself: Wherefore, when our Savior does from hence take occasion to say,
Resist not evil, his design was to abridge his Disciples of some liberty that
was allowed to the Jews in the matter of impleading their Adversaries in Courts
of Judicature: For if by these words, Resist not evil, he had meant only, that
no private person should upon an injury received, proceed immediately to ease
himself, and redress the wrong by doing the like to the injurious man, but stay
till the Cause was heard, and the Law had decided the Matter; he had then
forbidden no more than what the Jews knew was unlawful already; wherefore it is
plain, that something is here prohibited, which was formerly allowed. For, says
our Savior, But I say unto you, Resist not evil: But this is not to be
understood, as if he had prescribed to places of Civil Judicature, how to
proceed against Offenders that were brought into them, but he has still left
them to proceed according to their several Laws and Customs: For his Kingdom
was not of this World, he came not to reverse or alter the Forms and Methods of
Government, but left them upon the same foundation standing as they did before.
So that although here is an abridgment of some liberty that the private Jew had
before; yet if after this Prohibition of our Savior, had any of his Disciples
demanded Justice according to the Law of Retaliation against an Offender in
some case where he ought not to have done it, according to his Master's
Doctrine, yet it had not been only lawful, but requisite for the Magistrate to
have given Sentence according to Law: and the same holds true in all Christian
Kingdoms and Commonwealths.

Thus much concerning the sense of not resisting evil.

2. But in the second place, Although the Precept seems to be general, yet I
shall make it plain, That it is not all sorts of Injuries that we are required
not to complain of, but to sit down tamely and silently under them, And that 1.
By showing the nature of those Injuries that are particularly instanced in; And
2. By proving from thence, that they are only Injuries of that nature which we
are not so much as to resist by course of Law.

1. Let us consider the nature of those Injuries which are the instances of
that evil we are not to resist. And,

1. It is plain, that they are only private Wrongs, not direct Offenses against
the public good and safety, not Contempts of Authority, nor the violation of
Laws made purposely for the security of Government.

2. And these private Wrongs are supposed also to be of a light and supportable
nature, such as may very well be born by a Wise man, without suffering any
considerable prejudice, while he neglects to prosecute the Offender at Law; And
that you will see by the following Instances, which I come now to explain.

The first is, That of smiting on the cheek; Whosoever shall smite thee on thy
right cheek, etc. To smite upon the cheek, signifies proverbially that smiting
which was intended for a disgrace, or a mere affront; and this usually was by
striking with the Palm of the hand; which because it was mostly used by the
Greeks toward their Slaves, it came to be a Proverbial Expression of using a
man scornfully and imperiously, and to include any kind of smiting, which,
according to the common interpretation of the word, redounded only to the
disgrace of him that suffered it; not endangering the Life, or hurting the
Limbs. So that the Injuries which our Savior notes in the first place, are
those which go no further, than the exposing of a man to the laughter of the
People, who take it for a mean and dishonorable part to put up a mere Affront,
to bear the lightest Indignity, or to be content under any contumelious Words
or Actions: And his Rule in this case is, That we should rather venture the
suffering such another Injury, than make it a matter of public Complaint.

The second instance is this: If any man shall sue thee at the law, and take
away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also. The Injuries that are intended
under this instance, are against a man's Estate and Possessions, as the former
were against his Body and Reputation. And here likewise it is plain, That the
damage sustained by this Injury, or the like, is very supportable, and such as
can hardly be felt by a man that enjoys a competent Estate, as he is here
supposed to do, who is not to revenge such a loss. For the inner and upper
Garment, which were tokens of men that were well to pass in the World, shows
that he would be much to blame to trouble himself, or any body else, about a
loss so inconsiderable to him. And our Savior's meaning in this Instance, is,
That if a Controversy arise between thee and thy Neighbor about some little
matter of property, where thou art sure the right is on thy side, and the
Money, Goods, or Land, in dispute, is as much thine, as the Clothes on thy
back, and if by a Suit at Law he orders the matter so, as to rob thee of thy
right, Thou shall trouble thy self no further, but sit down quietly by the loss
which thou art very well able to bear. And if another man be in possession of
something that is thine, detaining thy right from thee, and the matter be not
considerable, then if thou have no other way to relieve thy self but by Law,
thou shall not in such cases as these run presently to Counsel, and commence a
Suit, but bear such lesser Injuries with silence and patience: So that a
Christian ought not to go to Law for small matters, not only when his Right is
uncertain, but when it is clear; not only where there is no danger of inviting
such another Injury as he bears at present, but where there is: And the words
of our Savior are as plain to that purpose as any thing can be, and nothing
less can be understood by them.

The third instance is this: And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go
with him twain; And under this Instance are contained all little infringments
of our Privileges and Immunities which some men are exceedingly tender of, and
are ever ready to make a great Combustion, rather than suffer them to be
invaded in the least degree. The meaning is, That if the Officer that is to
press men for public Carriages should compel thee to go a mile unjustly, that
is, one fourth part above the ordinary Stage that the Law appoints, which is
but a small matter, thou shall not make a quarrel about it, tho thy patience
may prove an occasion of his compelling thee the next time to go two miles more
than there is reason for: So likewise in all matters of this nature, If our
Freedoms and Immunities are lightly invaded, if too much service be required;
if an Office be put upon a man which is some breach upon his Privilege (though
he may sustain it without great inconveniencie) in these, and the like Cases,
it is the plain Command of our Savior, That we should make no public
Complaint, nor prosecute the Person at Law, for the maintaining of our
Privilege. This I take to be a plain and true Account of the meaning of the
Instances.

The manner of our Savior's Expressions was suitable to the Customs of the
Place where he was, and to the way of discourse in that time; but the Doctrine
he delivers is a Rule for all times and places, and obliges every one of his
Disciples, i. e. altogether, to remit tolerable and small Injuries, whether
against Body or Reputation, as in the first instance; or Estate and Possession,
as in the second; or Freedoms and Privileges, as in the third.

And now I proceed to show, That the limitation of the Rules belongs to the
general Prohibition, Resist not evil. And that

1. Because if our Savior had meant, that no kind of Injuries were to be
resisted, there had been no need of adding any particular instances of evil
that were not to be resisted.

2. If the greatest as well as the least Injuries were not to be redrest by
course of Law, then seeing our Savior was pleased to tell us, under what
Injuries in particular he would have us to sit down quietly, we cannot imagine,
but he would have instanced in the greatest; for all men are certainly more
unwilling to bear a greater than a less wrong. If therefore no kind of evil
were to be resisted, if this had been his meaning, he would have said, If thine
Enemy seek to take away thy Life, or to ruin thy Estate, or to deprive thee of
thy Liberty, thou shall not guard thy self against him by the Laws of thy
Country; and then these instances had certainly shown, that the general
Prohibition was to be understood without any limitation at all: For this is a
true Conclusion, I must bear the greatest Injuries without complaint, therefore
I must bear the less; but it cannot be concluded, I must bear the less,
therefore I must submit to the greater. Wherefore, I say, since it had been our
Savior's Intention, that we were not to right our selves against any Injury by
course of Law, the Instances mentioned do not come home to the purpose; it is
therefore plain that was not his meaning.

From what has been said, it will now be very easy to represent from our
Savior's Rule, what a Christian may, and what he ought to do, when he is
provoked by the rudeness, or injured by the malice, or any way usurped upon by
the Power and Policy of his Neighbor. And,

First of all, It is very plain, that all private Revenge, whether of greater
or lesser Wrongs, is utterly unlawful: And the truth is, for men to go about to
right themselves any other way after an Injury received, than by course of Law,
that needed not to have been forbidden by our Savior, for it was unlawful
before; and it is unjust in every man, tho much more unbecoming a Christian,
than any one else, since he is obliged to set an Example of that forgiveness
and meekness of spirit, as for some Injuries to seek no redress at all, no not
by Legal Proceedings.

How strange a thing is it then, that the way of personal Revenge should grow
into fashion and credit amongst Christians! a way of revenge so directly
contrary, not only to the Law of our Savior's Religion, but to right Reason,
and the common Principles of Justice. For let but this Principle be once
admitted, let it be published in the World, That every man may right himself
his own way, when he is injured by another, and what horrible consequences must
it needs produce? For when one man has wronged and abused another, to allow the
injured Party to right himself in the way of personal revenge, is to provoke
the wrong-doer to a new attempt against him, and by consequence to prolong and
continue the quarrel, till it be ended in the destruction either of the one, of
the other. What a woeful thing is it, that if once an Injury be done, and
contention be begun between two men, to conclude that they must never be
reconciled, but proceed to mischief each other till one of them be utterly
destroyed! and yet that is the natural consequence of private Revenge, which
therefore no man should give the least countenance to, that pretends to Reason
and Humanity. Besides, it is in it self an unjust thing to do evil to another,
because I have received injury from him; for a man cannot justly be both a
Judge and a party in his own Cause, as every man is who presumes to vindicate
his own Wrongs; he that complains, is not to give Sentence, and then to execute
it; but to refer the matter to indifferent Persons, or to Common Justice, that
the Redress may be according to Reason and Law: But if he takes Revenge for
himself, as he is not fit to be a Judge in his own Cause, so neither has he any
power to be so: Whatever evil he determines to inflict upon his Enemy, he is
unjustly resolved upon; and if he succeeds, it is unjustly done, for it belonged
not to him to punish his Adversary: Vengeance is God's only, and theirs to whom
God has committed it, viz. Kings and Magistrates. But Because another man has
done evil, it is not lawful for me one jot the more to do evil too: He has
injured me, but I must not therefore be unjust to him, by assuming a power over
him that I have not; nor be injurious to the Commonwealth, by bringing many
Disorders into it; or to the Sovereign Authority, by usurping some part of it;
or to the Law, by putting it out of office: Nay, I might add, to my own Soul,
by breaking the Law of God, by doing despite to Religion, by casting scorn and
contempt upon the best and most excellent Rules of it. In short, private and
personal Revenge (be the Injury what it will) is of most pernicious
consequence; it is a savage and barbarous Custom, it is extremely unjust in it
self, and monstrously impious and unchristian. But,

2. It does not follow from this Doctrine of our Savior, as I have already
shown, that we must lay our selves open to all manner of Injuries and Wrongs
whatsoever; but if great injustice be offered, or considerable damage be done
to us we may guard our selves against the former, and redress the latter by
proceeding according to the Laws. Were it not that the Law gives relief and
redress to the Innocent, and allots punishment to the Evil doer, every thing
almost would be out of order, and hardly any body secure, but he that makes
himself so by Iniquity and Oppression; and things would soon be brought to that
pass, which the worst of men can desire to see.

Therefore if a man be greatly injured by his Neighbor, it is but reasonable
for him to make public Complaint of it, that the Injury may be redrest; or if
it be but designed, that he should guard himself against it by such means as
the Law provides; and that not only for the sake of a man's own Interest, which
in great matters he is not to neglect in wisdom for himself, but in charity
also to the Evil doer, that if possible, a check may be given to his evil
course: The hands of the Violent are to be tied up, and the mouth of the
Slanderer is to be stopped, when they proceed to commit great Iniquities; that
whether they are either restrained, or punished, they may bethink themselves of
the evil they have done, and by shame, and fear, and suffering, be driven to
repentance: At least very necessary it is for the good of the World, and for a
caution to others, that they who meditate mischief, and are Examples of great
Injustice, should be Examples of the unsuccessfulness, and the punishment of it
too; that those who would be inclined to imitate the former, may be aware of it
in consideration of the latter. And therefore we are to thank God, that there
are temporal Laws to restrain men, or at least to punish Offenses and Wrongs
that men may commit one against another. And if we are to be thankful for them,
most certainly it is very lawful, yea very prudent and necessary to make use of
them for the redressing or guarding our selves against great Injuries: For if
we should not use them, in this case there would be no use of them at all: Now
this it is that plainly shows our Savior's Rule here in the Text, to be no
hard and grievous thing, that although it certainly bars all private Revenge,
and restrains men from making the utmost advantage of Human Laws, yet it leaves
every man free to secure himself, against great Injuries, or to redress
himself, after they have been done him, by the benefit of the Laws; and
therefore it is no great trial of his patience and meekness, that our Savior
has here required. But,

3. In the third place it must be added, That in prosecuting him that has
greatly injured us, or defending our selves against one that would, we must
beware of a revengeful and bitter spirit; for this is as much against the
reason of the Law, as retaliating the smallest Wrongs; which a man would not
do, if it were not more to ease an angry mind, than to get reparation for the
wrong, if he did not design the troubling and vexing of his Adversary, and the
pleasure that comes that way, more than any real profit to himself: Therefore
to perform our Savior's Rule in righting our selves upon the greatest Wrongs,
we must turn out all hatred, malice, and revengefulness out of our minds,
designing no more harm to our Adversay, than what is necessary for the righting
of our selves, or for the ends of Common Justice; and when we have a man, that
has deserved any ill of us, at an advantage, we should use it moderately, and
rather be satisfied with less reparation than is due to the nature of the
Offense, than exact the extremity of what may be due by Law. But,

4. We are bound in duty to our Savior altogether to remit less Injuries and
Offenses, viz. such as he has mentioned in the particular Instances, i. e. not
only to forbear righting our selves by our own Authority, but even by troubling
Courts of Justice about it, although the Magistrate were bound to do us right,
if we complained of the lightest Offenses that were by Law punishable. In
short, As to mere Affronts, and inconsiderable Debts, and ordinary Trespasses,
and such Injuries as may easily be born withal, this Rule of our Savior holds
generally and universally true: But I say unto you, Resist not Evil.

The only difficulty in the understanding of our Duty in this point, is, that
of being always able to determine between Injuries that are so little, that we
must absolutely remit them, and such as we may redress by just appeal.

But to this, I say, where the Case is plain, as it is very often, there is no
room for pretending the difficulty: He that offers at a man's Life, or at his
Estate, or at his good Name, by a dangerous Calumny, he does exceed the degree
of doing wrong, which is not to be resisted: But on the other hand, a mere
Contempt, and such a light Encroachment upon our Privileges, or Freedoms, or
any of our Rights, as our Savior here mentions, can yield no matter of doubt,
whether they are little enough to be past quite over. And therefore in the
first place, be sure to perform thy duty of this kind in all cases, where it is
plain; and if thou gainest so much honesty and ingenuity, as that comes to, it
will give thee some light and direction where the case is doubtful.

There is indeed such variety in the Circumstances of Men, that that which to
one man would be a very small and inconsiderable Injury, would happen to be a
very great one, and hardly supportable by another: But if it be really
difficult to know whether the Injury committed be little or great, all things
considered, To this it might not be unfitly said, That in doubtful Cases it is
always best to take the safest course, and to choose that side which will secure
our Conscience, rather than that which we are prompted to by our worldly
Interest.

But I add further, That if a man be honest and discreet (which such Rules as
these suppose men to be) it is no hard matter to know what Injuries are so
small, that according to our Savior's Rule, they are totally to be remitted.
There is a natural sagacity in a good mind to discern between good and evil in
these things, and by which it can apply general Rules to particular Cases. It
is not said in Scripture, or any Law, how much Wine is lawful to be drunk at a
time, and yet Drunkenness is forbidden; nor how many hours in a day are to be
spent in honest labor and industry, and yet I am not to be idle: Nor is it
possible that any such particular Rules in these matters should be laid down,
which can reach the Case of every man in every circumstance: So is it in this
matter; that may be a very great injury to one man, that is but a little one to
another: And that he may be able to discern the difference, he must either make
use of his own honesty and discretion, or of some bodies else: The latter way
may be very good, either when a man is in danger of being partial to his
worldly Interest, and over-valuing a small Injury, or of leaning too much to a
scrupulous. Conscience, and undervaluing a great one. It may then be very fit
to take advice of a man of known wisdom and integrity, who being indifferent,
is best able to judge in the former; and being honest as well as discreet, may
also judge of the latter case, and then to follow his Judgment. This is the
best way a man can take, and God requires no more, than the using of the best
means we can to apply Rules given in general terms to our own particular
Circumstances; and he that does accordingly, may and ought to be satisfied in
his own Conscience, that he has done his Duty. But if a man's mind be
furnished with the Principles and Reasons of his Duty in the matter of
forgiveness of Wrongs, if also he be a discreet man in the ordering of his
other Affairs, there is no reason to fear, but he will be likewise able of
himself to discern between Injuries that may be altogether born withal, and
those that may and ought to be redrest: But the truth is, that which men are
chiefly wanting in, is a sense of their Duty. And therefore what I have further
to say, shall tend to the awakening of us into such a sense, by representing
the Reasons and Motives to the meekness and patience which our Savior requires
of us: And if these do prevail in our minds, there is no great reason to fear
on the other hand, lest we should be so indiscreet as to suffer great harm,
without using lawful means to help our selves. And therefore,

First of all, Let us consider the Example of God himself toward us, whom we
have daily provoked by our sins, and yet he has born with us hitherto, and
patiently waited for our repentance. If God were so hasty with us, as we are
apt to be with one another, we had been long since consumed in his displeasure.
It is most certainly true, that his forbearance and long-suffering is the
ground of men's presumption in going on to offend him. If sentence were always
speedily executed against an evil work, the heart of the sons of men would not
be set in them to do evil: And yet although he knows that forbearing to punish
us when we deserve it, very often proves the occasion of multiplying
provocations against him, he notwithstanding is patient and long-suffering
toward us; not only forbearing to inflict those punishments which we every day
deserve, but continuing those blessings to us which we every day forfeit. But
what a great deal of sin and presumptuous disobedience had been prevented, if
God had been so ready to take fire against us, as an angry man is to prosecute
his Neighbor with revenge? But then who of us could thus long have stood
before him? which of us had not long before this perished under the strokes of
his angry Justice? and who are we, that nothing can ease our minds under the
sense of any petty wrong, but present revenge? that we must have immediate
satisfaction for every Affront, or secure our selves against possible Injuries
for the future, by making an example of every man that trespasseth upon us?
What pride and haughtiness, what foolish and overweening conceit is there in
this one thing! If we do but consider that our Maker (infinitely great as well
as good) has been infinitely provoked by us, and has yet thus long mercifully
spared us: If his goodness, his forbearance, and long-suffering leads us to
repentance, namely, to repent of all our other sins, much more of this, which
is so directly contrary to his Example, much more, I say, of a proud malicious
and revengeful spirit, especially if we consider, that he that is for judgment
without mercy, shall have no mercy; that this is the Rule by which God will
proceed against us in Judgment, That he will not forgive us our trespasses, if
we from our hearts do not forgive every one his brother their trespasses; and
therefore, unless we will deprive our selves of God's mercy in that day, when
we shall be most sensible that we need it; unless we choose to be judged in
rigor, and dealt withal according to the extremity of Justice, we must lay
aside anger, malice, and revenge, and put on bowels of mercies, kindness,
meekness, longsuffering, forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if
any man have a quarrel against any, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven
us.

What should I speak of the Example of our Blessed Savior himself, who
suffered the greatest indignities, who bare the most Contumelious Reproaches,
who was provoked by the most Outrageous Affronts and Injuries, who yet when he
was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not, but
committed himself to him that judges righteously; who at last underwent the
most ignominious death of the Cross, and even then, when the sense of his pain
and reproach was most bitter to him, prayed to his Father to forgive his
Enemies, and excused as well as might be, their inexcuseable wickedness, by
saying, They know not what they do.

It is a great shame for us to make any difficulty of passing by ordinary
Wrongs and Trespasses after such an Example, or at least to pretend that we are
his Disciples and Followers, while we are so contrary to him in temper and
disposition.

2. Neither are we left without all guard against future Injuries, if we
silently pass over those that are committed against us at first; for this is in
it self a proper way to secure us against wrongs for the time to come; although
it is pretended, that patience will but expose a man to further Abuses, yet
generally it is true, that revenge exposes him to a great many more: For hereby
the quarrel is continued, which else in all probability would have been at an
end; but if we fall to revenge, we put our Adversary upon new attempts against
us, whose anger or pride had been in likelihood satisfied, if we had not again
provoked him: Besides, if he be one that seeks our mischief, he will not fail
to multiply abuses and wrongs upon us, because he sees, his Designs take place
(i. e.) that we are inwardly moved and disquieted at his ill using us: Whereas
by patience and forgiveness we show him, that it is to no purpose for him to go
about to molest us, and that he is ever like to be disappointed, when he would
create us any harm or trouble: By deep resentment of a little Injury, we make
it a great one; and if we are resolved to be even with every foolish and
inconsiderate person, we shall be sure to vex our selves, and to be revenged on
our Adversary at our own cost: He that lightly passes by an Offense, has done
with it, but he is still in pain that cannot rest till he is revenged; and
therefore if we would consult our own ease, and disappoint our Enemy, we must
get the better of an angry and turbulent spirit, and let Vengeance alone, which
such Creatures as we are cannot pursue, but to our own harm and vexation: And
indeed this is the proper way to gain our Enemy, and to make him be at peace
with us, when we forbear to prosecute him, and make him smart for his fault,
especially if it be in our power to be revenged; that is a likely way of
melting him into sorrow and repentance that he has wronged us at all; for
though there are some so cross and inflexible, that they grow worse by
forbearance and gentleness; yet sure the generality of men are not so savage
and untractable: There are few men, but if you give them time to consider it,
will repent of having done you the least harm, after they see you have forgiven
them, and that no rancour is left in your mind against them: The true reason
why one man that has abused another is apt to meditate more mischief against
him afterward, is, because he imagines, that now a breach is made, it will
never be repaired, and that the unkindness will never be forgotten; and
therefore his last way is to secure himself, by adding more injuries to the
former: But therefore, if he were indeed convinced, that thou bear no
ill will against him, and art fully reconciled to him, it is probable, that he
would be very glad to give over doing thee any wrongs, and take the opportunity
of becoming thy Friend, and then thou have gained thy Brother to thy self; and
which is more, thou may have gained him to God too. But if this Course
should fail, there is another which seems to be so effectual, that it cannot
but take place, and that is to do him a good turn that has wronged thee; which
is the Apostles Advice, Be not overcome with evil, but overcome evil with good:
which implies that this may be done; and indeed it is morally impossible, that
this way should not take place: For although ordinary kindness and good turns
may be despised, yet one of so exceeding a nature, as doing good against evil,
seems to have an irresistible force to prevail with an ill man: Every good turn
that thou do to an Enemy, is doubled by this consideration, that he has not
deserved it, but the contrary; and surely he will be ashamed till he has
requited thee in some measure, not only by acknowledgment of his fault, but by
returning the benefit: Therefore if thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst,
give him drink; so shall thou heap coals of fire upon his head, i. e. Thou
shall melt him into sorrow, that he has wronged thee in the least, and make
him thy Friend for the future. So little reason is there to suspect, that
unless we be revenged of every Injury and Affront that is offered to us, we
expose our selves to more Injuries and Wrongs than we have suffered already:
And therefore that Objection which our Savior saw would be made to his
Doctrine concerning forgiveness of Injuries, does in conclusion appear to be no
real Objection against it.

And now let no man suppose that this Rule of putting up Affronts and
Contempts, Wrongs and Injuries daily, with patience and forgiveness; is rendered
fittest to be preached to men of mean Spirits and Callings, who are in good
manners to be content with Affronts, and to put up all Injuries that are
offered them by their Betters; but that it is not proper for men of Quality and
Honor, to whom it would be a disparagement to sit down under Wrongs and Abuses
as tamely as a Peasant ought to do, for this is a most unreasonable pretense.
On the other hand, There is nothing that becomes men of birth and breeding, of
great place and renown in the World, more, than forgiveness of Injuries: This
is an argument of so much greatness of mind, and command over our own Passions,
that nothing can be greater; and to leave it to men of lower degree, is to
disparage themselves, and to lose one of the greatest advantages of their high
Estate in the World. It Is the glory of a man to pass by an Offense, says
Solomon; and we all know, that the Royal Prerogative is in no one thing more
eminently seen, than in pardoning Offenses, and extending mercy to those that
are under the Sentence of the Law: And why should it be thought difhonourable
to do that which God does, who is good to the unmerciful and the unjust; to do
not only that which he requires, but that, I say, which he does; and if any man
can be so foolish as to think meanly of us for so doing, we cannot help it, and
should not be troubled at it upon our own, but only upon his account: For he is
the wise and exact Person, whose praise is not of men, but of God.

Thus have I endeavored to recommend to your meditation and practice a Rule,
which, if it be one of the hardest, is also one of the most excellent Rules of
Religion: It is for the glory of the Gospel that we can show it in our Bibles:
It will be for our glory if we can show it in our practice: But let us not
forget the absolute necessity of submitting to it, if ever we hope to enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven; and there is no Argument so powerful, as that which
is drawn from necessity: So necessary it is, that our Savior thought fit to
make us acknowledge it every day in our Prayers, and has put it in as a
Condition, that we must our selves undertake for, when we ask forgiveness of
God: Forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.
Such great care has he taken to inculcate the great necessity of this practice,
that though he repeated no other part of his Prayer; and although this seems to
be the plainest, yet he repeats the substance of this; For if ye forgive not
men their trespasses, neither will your heavenly Father forgive you your
trespasses. But then with what face can they pretend to be Christians, with
what quiet can they think of a Future Judgment, who take pleasure in the doing
of Injuries and Wrongs, who are as forward to trespass against their Brother,
as they are backward to forgive their Brother's Trespasses? If I were to
describe what a true Christian is, by taking some one point of Christian duty,
the performance whereof does in all reasonable construction imply all the rest,
it should be this, That he is one* who would not for the world do the least
injury, but can forgive the greatest. And God grant that this may be our
practice for the rest of our lives.

The Ninth Sermon.
AN Assize Sermon.
MATTHEW. 5.34, 35, 36, 37. But I say unto you, Swear not at all; neither by
heaven, for it is God's throne; nor by the earth, for it is his footstool;
neither by Jerusalem, for it is the City of the great King; neither shall thou
swear by thy head, because thou can not make one hair white or black; but let
your communication be yea, yea, nay, nay; for whatsoever is more than this,
comes of evil.


THat Religion and the fear of God, and a sense of his Authority, are
Principles supposed by the Laws of God, is from hence evident, that in great
part the process of our Courts depends upon Testimony given under the
obligation of an Oath; for though the use of an Oath there is required by
Humane Authority, yet the peculiar obligation it lays upon us to speak the
Truth, is antecedent to all Humane Laws, being founded originally upon our Duty
to God; wherefore though an Oath in respect of some use and end of it, may be a
Civil Act, yet in respect of the reason whereby it obliges, it is an Act of
Religion; for this reason it is highly conducible to the end of Civil
Government to maintain a sense of Religion in the minds of men; and
particularly it must be of great use to make them observe those Laws of God,
which are plainly designed to secure the reverence which is due to an Oath, and
to keep men at a wide distance from the danger of Perjury: Such is that Law of
our Savior, which I have read to you, which therefore does not tend more to
the Honor of God, than to the Common Good of Mankind; and this no man can be
ignorant of, who considers what a vast influence the use of an Oath has upon
all the Affairs of Humane Life. This is that whereby we come to confide in one
another about things of the greatest moment to our lives; this is that which is
so often necessary to secure our Properties, to save us from wrong, and to make
even our Enemy to do us right; it is this which all Processes in Courts of
Judicature are governed by, which is supposed to all Administrations of
Justice, and gives an end to all Controversies about matters of Fact, which
will be no otherways decided; it is this which must either direct or misguide
the wisest Magistrates, and make their Sentence it self either right or wrong;
and by which we are either strongly guarded against Injury, or almost
inevitably exposed to it; of how great consequence therefore must it be to the
good of all men to have the reverence of an Oath secured, and to make every man
tremble at the thought of Perjury, since the World cannot be well-governed, nor
the Administrations of Justice go forward, without the use of Oaths; and yet we
had better be without them, in as many cases as there are wherein Men are not
afraid to be Forsworn; and yet alas! it is the daily complaint of our Age, that
the fear of an Oath is almost banished out of the World: And although it be
really a thousand times more dreadful to profane the Name of God, by calling
him to be a witness to our Lies, than it would be to play before the Mouth of a
Canon while it was Firing; yet, if we may believe the Reports which are
sometimes made from Courts of Judicature, there are very few Peasants so
pusillanimous but they are hardy enough to Swear to any thing; and with equal
confidence to contradict one another in the plainest matters, and when under an
equal obligation to speak the Truth, by the Invocation of the dreadful Name of
God. Now if we would enquire how the sacredness of an Oath is grown into such
contempt, I do not question, but the common and frequent use of Swearing in our
ordinary Conversation, would be found at least accessory to that dishonor
which is done to God, and that mischief to men by the so frequent Perjuries of
our Age. Oaths are grown so familiar with us, that men have forgotten the
nature and true use of them, and are not sensible, that they call the Divine
Vengeance upon themselves, if their Testimonies be not exactly true; they have
been prostituted to the meanest Services, and profaned by common use, and then
no wonder if the Sacred Obligation peculiar to them be forgotten, when they are
used in those special cases, for which they ought to be reserved; therefore if
we would do any thing to recover the fear of an Oath amongst our Contrymen,
we must endeavor to do it by means contrary to those, whereby it has been so
generally lost, that is, by abstaining our selves, and not only so, but by
dissuading and restraining others as much as in us lies, from that familiar and
fashionable Swearing, which is one of the great reproaches of our Age; to which
end I shall endeavor to explain the meaning and reason of these words of our
Savior.

And in them I shall consider,

1. The Law it self, Swear not at all, but let your communication be yea, yea,
nay, nay.

2. The sanction and reason of this Law, viz. 1. The Authority of our Savior,
But I say unto you. 2. The nature of the thing it self. For whatsoever is more
than this, comes of evil.

In the Law it self we are to consider the Prohibition, and the Precept.

1. The Prohibition; which contains,

1. A general Rule, Swear not at all.

2. Some particular instances whereto the Rule extends, Neither by Heaven, nor
by Earth, nor by Jerusalem, nor by thy head.

3. The Reason why the Rule extends to these Instances; not by Heaven, for it
is God's Throne; not by the Earth, for it is his Footstool; not by Jerusalem,
for it is the City of the great King; not by thy Head, for thou can not make
one hair white or black.

Let us begin with the general Rule, Swear not at all; from which words the
Anabaptists and Quakers have contended, that an Oath, or an Appeal to God, that
what we say is true, is in no case lawful: I shall here show the contrary, and
prove that the meaning of the Rule is this, That we are not to Swear in our
common and daily Conversation with Men; and this will appear,

1. By comparing the Prohibition with the Precept.

2. With the particular instances whereunto the Prohibition extends.

1. With the Precept, But let your communication be yea, yea, nay, nay, (i. e.)
let this be the manner of your ordinary discourse, barely to affirm or deny, or
if need be, sometimes with vehemence, which perhaps is intimated by the
repetition of yea and nay.

Now it is plain, if this be the sense of the Precept, that the Prohibition
does not extend to Cases which belong not to the common and ordinary
Conversation of Men, such as the deciding of Controversies for the security of
the public peace, the assuring of sidelity to the Government, and the
ratifying of Leagues, etc. which are cases properly excepted from this Rule of
an usual and ordinary communication with each other, because they are no part
thereof; but I confess, I do not lay the stress of the proof upon this Argument
only, but on this together with the second, which is founded upon comparing the
general Rule with the particular instances, whereby the use of it is explained,
neither by Heaven, for it is God's Throne, etc. Our Savior's design in these
words cannot be better understood, than by considering what those corrupt
Principles concerning the matter of Swearing were, which had crept in among the
Jews; and first, as their own Authors tell us, it was generally held amongst
them, that they ought not to Swear by the Name of God in light and trivial
Cases, but they believed it was no Sin to Swear upon any occasion by a
Creature, that was a remarkable instance of God's Favor and Providence, as by
Heaven, or by the Earth, or by Jerusalem, or by their Head, which are the
Instances here noted by our Savior. Secondly, some of them, and particularly
the Pharisees, taught, that the Guilt of Perjury was not incurred, when a
falsehood was attested by these kind of Oaths, excepting only in the Cases of
Swearing by the Gold of the Temple, and the Gift upon the Altar; by which Oaths
they acknowledged themselves to be bound, as we find Matthew. 23. (i. e.) either
to speak the Truth, or to the Penalty of False-Swearing: Hence, I say, that our
Savior's words, Swear not at all, neither by Heaven, etc. being spoken to
Persons who well enough understood the Doctrines and Practices of their
Countrymen in this matter, could not reasonably be thought to have any other
meaning than this, That they ought not to Swear by the Creatures of God in any
of those Cases, wherein it is unlawful to Swear by the Almighty himself, (i.
e.) in their usual Communication with one another: For it seems the Jews
themselves were not arrived to that insolence, which it is so dreadful to
think, that Christians nowadays should not scruple, of profaning the Name of
the most high God, by calling him at every turn to be Witness of their talk:
And therefore our Savior found it needless to forbid them Swearing by his
Name, for they already believed that to be an impious thing; but he tells them,
they must neither Swear by Heaven, nor by any thing else; as if he had said,
You have been allowed to liberty of Swearing as often as you please, provided you
do not use the Name of God himself; it is ordinary with you to Swear by Heaven,
and Earth, and by the Temple, and your Lives and Souls, and that in those Cases
wherein you rightly believe it would be a profane rudeness to invoke the
Majesty of God directly; But I say unto you, Swear not at all, you shall not
henceforth take the liberty of using any kind of Oaths in those Cases wherein
you are not to appeal to God himself; but upon all these occasions, whatever
you assert, or whatever you promise, use the simplicity and plainness of some
affirmation or denial. And thus our Savior restrained the licentiousness of
those common Swearers, that thought they might safely Swear by Heaven, and use
the like Oaths at any time, and upon any occasion; and withal corrected that
abuse which the Doctrine of the Pharisees had brought into this Practice, viz.
That Men were not liable to the guilt of Perjury by such Oaths as these were,
which I shall more distinctly show under the third Head. The meaning then of
our Saviors Prohibition is not this, That it is unlawful at any time to Swear
by the Name of God, but that it is unlawful to Swear by any Creature in any
Case, wherein it would be so to appeal directly to the Knowledge and Justice of
God himself.

2. As to those Instances by which the general Rule is explained, it is
observeable,

1. That Swearing by any of the Creatures is forbidden, not only by Heaven and
Earth, which with the rest are particularly mentioned by our Savior, because
these forms of Swearing were most in use amongst the Jews.

2. We are to note, that our Savior calls it Swearing, to use these forms of
Speech in attesting what we say; they are not so many words lost, as we may be
inclined to think, but we bring upon our selves the obligation of an Oath by
the using of them, as shall presently appear. If indeed any ways of speaking
have obtained amongst us, which look like Swearing, but are not, being
altogether unapt to excite any Thought of Divine Justice, I do not question,
but they are to be laid aside too, because surely the Prohibition of Swearing
at all, excludes not only all real, but all broken, apish and insignificant
Oaths; but if it were not so, one would think that a small measure of Sobriety
and Wisdom should keep a man from debasing and vilifying the acknowledged forms
of speaking that are peculiar to Oaths, by applying them to such senseless
sounds, as make them to signify nothing: It Is a good Rule which a wise man has
given, That all forms, besides those wherein there is an immediate appeal to
God, are better avoided, when there is need of Swearing, and when there is no
need; we should not Swear at all, neither by Heaven, nor by any thing else: Let
us now consider,

3. The Reasons why the Prohibition extends to these instances, and the like,
not by Heaven, for it is God's Throne; and he that swears by Heaven, swears
by the Throne of God, and him that sits thereon, Matthew. 23. Not by the
Earth, for it is his footstool; it is a remarkable subject of his Providence;
and to Swear hereby, is in effect all one as to appeal to God, that upholds it
by his Power: Not by Jerusalem, nor any holy place that has a peculiar
relation to God for the same reason; nor by thy head, for thou can not make
one hair white or black, (i. e.) thou have no power over thy life, and art so
unable to subsist independently upon God, that thou can not so much as alter
the color of thine Hair: Now since thy Head, thy Life and Safety depends upon
the Divine Providence, to Swear by thy Head, and by thy Life, and consequently
by thy hope of Life and Salvation, is indeed to Swear by him, upon whom thou
dependest for thy life, and who only has all power to save and to destroy; so
that the general reason why these Oaths are to be avoided, is because they are
equivalent to formal Swearing by the Creator of all things, and contrary to the
Opinion of the Pharisees, brought an equal Obligation upon him that used them,
with Swearing downright by our Maker: Now they acknowledged, that Swearing
directly by the Name of God, and where that was used, was not lawful in their
ordinary occasions of speaking, our Savior proceeds upon this supposition, and
infers therefore it is not lawful to use those other Oaths upon those
occasions, because they implied an appeal to the Justice and the Omnipresence
of God himself. And thus I have endeavored to explain the Prohibition
contained in this Law of Christ.

As for the Precept, But let your communication be yea, yea, nay, nay, it needs
no farther inquiry into the sense of it, the plain meaning of them already
appearing to be this: Content your selves with bare affirming and denying
whatever you have occasion to speak of, without adding thereto any kind of
Oaths and Imprecations.

And thus much concerning the Law it self, which one would think were as easy
to be practiced, as it is to be understood; and certainly it is great pity that
any man should need much persuasion to keep it; but if it should be so, we do
not want Arguments clear and strong enough to prevail with any considering
Person; and these are contained in the Sanction of this Law, which is the
second thing I am to speak to, and which I have already told you is founded,

1. Upon the Authority of our Blessed Lord and Savior.

2. Upon the reason of the Law it self.

1. The Authority of our Savior, who established this Law by these words, But
I say unto you. I do not find any such express Prohibition of Swearing in
ordinary Conversation as this, before our Saviors time; not but that I think
the unlawfulness of that liberty which here he abridgeth his Disciples of,
might by good consequence be inferred from the Writings of Moses, and the
Prophets; but what need we look for any other Rule in this matter, besides this
which is so plain and express, and which we have received from the Son of God
himself; there can now be no dispute, whether we may lawfully Swear in those
Cases wherein an Oath is needless; for our Lord's Command is so full against
it, that a question has been made, though upon no just ground, Whether it be
lawful for a Christian to Swear at all; now if the sense of our Savior's
Authority can prevail with us to do any thing in obedience to him, it will not
fail to govern us in this matter, where the performance of his will is so easy,
and the violation of it is not rewarded by any gain or pleasure, nor solicited
by any Temptation that can fasten upon our sensual Lusts and Appetites; nor can
be resolved easily into any other Cause, but a Spirit of Contradiction to the
Gospel of our Lord; which may make us astonished, that in an Age pretending to
the Worship of God, in a Nation formed into a Christian Church, so many should
be found of almost all Qualities and Degrees, who bid defiance to the Authority
of our Savior, by refusing to make so small an acknowledgment of it, as the
keeping of a Law so easy, as this, that we should thus put into our Discourse a
peculiar Character to let the World know, that we are no Christians, though we
were Baptized into the Name of Christ; least it should not be observed by our
practices, that we should take care to discover it by our language, that we are
none of those who believe Jesus to be the Son of God: If we had no other
reason, but the Will of our Lord and Savior to rule us in this matter, that
certainly should be enough to conclude us; he that should want a farther
obligation, deserves to be ranked with Heathens and Infidels; and yet the thing
which our Savior here forbids, is evil in it self too, and contains many foul
and detestable Immoralities in its own nature; and therefore the common
Swearer's Sin, how enormous must it needs be, who refuses to do a very small
matter to avoid so great a guilt! That the heinousness whereof may yet farther
appear, I shall proceed to the

Second Consideration under this Head, viz. The Reason of the Law it self,
which is contained in these words, whatsoever is more than the plainness of
affirmation and denial in common discourse, comes of evil; I will therefore
endeavor these two following things.

1. To make it appear what those evil dispositions are which this practice
implies.

2. To examine the pretenses that are only possible to be alleged in excuse of
it. Now if men are led to it by no good Principle; if the dispositions
thereunto are wholly evil; if evil be implied in the very pretenses brought to
excuse it; nothing can be farther desired to demonstrate that this is to be
concluded, viz. That it is an Immorality to Swear in our Communication; and
whatsoever is more than that simplicity of Language which our Saviors Rule
confines us to, comes of evil.

The true Principles and Causes enclining men to this practice, are these.

1. Want of Reverence toward God.

2. Carelessness of avoiding the Crime of Perjury.

3. Immodesty and Pride.

4. Lightness and vanity of mind. And indeed there must be all these things
together to make up a common Swearer; for if he either had reverent Thoughts of
God, or feared to be Forsworn; or if he had but a little modesty and good
manners, or any tolearable measure of a steady and serious spirit, any one of
these things would secure him.

1. Customary Swearing betrays great irreverence toward God; for unless a man
had very mean and dishonorable Thoughts of God, how durst he make so bold with
him, as to affirm nothing so silly, and transact nothing so trivial and mean,
but he must summon God to be his Witness? Reverence of the Deity is always
expressed by separating holy things from vile and common uses; and because an
Oath is an appeal to the Knowledge and Justice of God, it is greater rudeness
to press it to unnecessary Services, than it would be for the meanest of People
to call the King out of his Throne to hear every idle Tale they brought against
one another. If an Oath be an holy thing, let us use it as we do those holy
places, which we do not put to all Employments, but reserve them for their
peculiar use. What a contempt of Religion would it be for men to bring their
Markets into the House of God, and pretend to sanctify their worldly Affairs
and Pleasures, by transacting them in the place of his Worship? I do not see
but it is altogether as irreligious to mix our talk with Oaths upon every
occasion; for hereby we make as cheap with God, as by prostituting any other
Sacred thing to a common and trivial use.

2. It argues a man not to fear that horrid Crime of Perjury; for if he were
afraid of it, how cautious and deliberate would he be, e're he ventured to
affirm any thing upon Oath? He would consider whether it were exactly true,
whether it were certain, or only probable; whether he was not liable to
mistake, or misinformation, in the case, and many other things which are often
necessary to come under consideration with that man that trembles at the
thought of Perjury; but the light is not more clear at midday, than that
common Swearers trouble themselves with none of these Thoughts; what they say
at a venture, they boldly Swear; what they rashly utter, they as rashly add
Oaths and Curses to; their habit of Swearing makes them not one jot the more
wary in their talk; and the slipperiness of their Tongues, not at all the more
afraid of an Oath; which is a plain Argument, that they have little
apprehension of Perjury, and are not afraid to be Forsworn; for I say, did we
ever find that those who are given to Swearing, are more deliberate and slow to
speak than other men? Do they weigh their words with more exactness? Do they
refrain from looseness of talk, and dissoluteness of Mirth and Jollity more than
those who are content to speak upon their honest word? No, but on the contrary,
they are usually more free and prodigal of their discourse; their words are
guided with less consideration and judgment, and their Tongues hang more loosly
in their Heads than is observeable in other men; nay, it is well known, that
they are then most plentiful of their Oaths, when they are least able to govern
their talk with discretion, (i. e.) when they are drunk either with Wine or
Passion; and what numerous Perjuries then in all likelihood are these men
guilty of! nay, it is not improbable but some of them may be Forsworn every day
they rise; for though men may please themselves with thinking that they do but
swear in jest, yet the obligation of an Oath is not to be laughed away; when
men swear they will do this or that, which it may be, they intend not at all;
or that such a thing is true, which they know is false, they are nevertheless
guilty of Perjury, for not minding that they are so, since a Sin cease not to
be what it is, merely by the stupidity of a man's Conscience; but all that can
be said in this case is, That they are not apprehensive of the guilt, nor
afraid of the crime of Perjury, which is that Immorality, that I charge the
common Swearer withal; and this St. Austin was so sensible of, that the reason
which he assigns why our Savior prohibited unnecessary Oaths, was this, ne
perjuri simus, lest we should be forsworn, which every man is in apparent
danger of, who promiscuously adds Oaths to his Talk, as I have already noted:
And doubtless he that refuses to secure himself from Perjury that way which
our Savior has prescribed, declares plainly enough that he is not so careful
against it, as a due sense of the foulness of that Sin would make him; That in
the business of an Oath men are obliged to proceed with great care and
deliberation, is a thing so plain, that I should be ashamed to go about the
proving of it: And I am consident, if men would tie themselves to weigh the
Truth of every thing they affirmed, before they would venture to Swear to it,
they would spare a great many of their Oaths; and if they found it were exactly
true, they would be immediately sensible, that it deserved not so solemn a
confirmation, and be ashamed of the vanity of doing so great a thing to no
purpose, which is a consideration that I shall by and by more particularly
offer. In the mean time,

3. Needless Swearing argues Immodesty and Pride, and an arrogant spirit. Few
things are more unseemly in a man, than to affirm every thing with confidence,
and to be peremptory in all his talk, for this is to impose upon his Company,
and leave no room for any body to be of another mind; and such Companions are
shunned by all wise Persons, as being void of that modesty and sobriety which
make men sociable and conversible; but what shall we say to those who are not
only positive and dogmatical in their common discourse, but assert every thing
almost which they say, upon Oath? Certainly in this kind of Behavior there is
as much ill Manners toward men, as there is rudeness toward God; for what
greater instance can be given of an imperious and a peremptory temper, than to
seal our talk with Oaths, and leave no room for another to doubt of what we
say, under the pain of accusing us of Perjury? A modest and wise man, when he
delivers his judgment in many things, where possibly he might, without fear of
being accused of Arrogance, be peremptory and conclusive, yet chooses to
declare himself, with that reservedness, as may invite another man to show all
his reasons to the contrary, without fear of displeasing him; and this we all
know is a great Ornament to any man's Conversation, and of excellent use to
maintain peace, and good will, and good correspondence in all Societies; But
light is not more contrary to darkness, than the custom of Swearing is to this
human and gentle temper; wherefore it betrays immodesty and arrogance.

Lastly, it proceeds also from great vanity and lightness of spirit, which
appears in these two plain instances of it.

The first is, in making no difference between matters of serious importance
and consideration, and such as are frivolous, and of little consequence; in
treating those with the same spirit and behavior, that are suitable only to
these, which is an undoubted argument of childishness, and a frothy mind; this
is that which the Swearer is apparently chargeable with; for otherwise how
could he in the same light humor, wherein he is delivering something to make
the Company laugh, presume to profane so sacred a thing as an Oath is, by
accompanying a poor silly Jest with it: Does the taking of an Oath require no
more seriousness than is necessary to the telling of a Tale? Or can it be fit
to tie so grave a thing to a sentence, which if it were written down, would
within an hour after, perhaps, appear hatefully ridiculous? And yet nothing is
more common with those that allow themselves in this Sin.

Secondly, It is an Argument of vanity to take more pains for the confirming of
what we say, than the thing does at all deserve. It is plain, that the greatest
part of our Conversation with one another by discourse and correspondence, does
not require any solemn confirmation of the truth of our words, much less the
Testimony of an Oath; which being the greatest security we can give, he must be
a very lightheaded Companion that will throw it away at every turn, who cannot
tell what was done yesterday, or make a Promise to his Friend or Acquaintance
about the ordinariest matter, but out comes an Oath, or a Curse, to bind his
words withal: Methinks I could convince any man of ordinary sense, that there
is that levity and madness implied in this custom, which if it were but seen in
other things, would bring a man within the danger of Bedlam; for suppose a man
were to make a Promise to his Friend of that kind which ordinarily happens in
our Conversation, as that he would give him a Visit, or a Meeting where he
should appoint, but for the present would not suffer him to go, till he had
gotten an hundred of his Neighbors together to be Witnesses of his Promise;
what a ridiculous Fancy would this be? And if a man should ordinarily do thus,
he were likely enough to be begged, if any thing were to be gotten by it; for
nothing is more plain, than that the ordinary assurance of a man's word is
sufficient for these matters, and will either pass for them, or he had as good
be banished out of human Society, or sent to some other place at least, where
being not so well known, he may be the better trusted; but it is as clear as
when the Sun shines, that he that will not make such a Promise under an Oath,
nor let his Word go without calling God to witness it, by invoking his Justice
and Vengance if he falsifies, (for that is the meaning of an Oath) he does
really ten thousand times more to confirm his Promise, than if he had summoned
Town and Country together, than if he had gotten all Mankind, nay, and all the
Angels in Heaven together to be Witnesses between him and his Neighbor. Can
there readily be a more ridiculous vanity thought of than this, to give away
the best security I can afford of my fidelity, upon every trifle? I wish all
those who have been guilty of this Sin, would so endeavor after an ordinary
Reputation amongst men, as to be ashamed of it for the future.

Thus have I shown what those evil Principles are from whence Swearing in
ordinary Conversation proceeds. It comes of irreverence toward God,
carelessness of being Forsworn, Immodesty and Arrogance, Lightness and Vanity of
spirit; that is to say, if a man has either the fear of God, or a detestation
of Perjury, or Modesty, and a good Manners or any Sobriety and Seriousness, any
one of these things will be sufficient to keep him from using needless Oaths,
and therefore the common Swearer is destitute of them all; and consequently it
must needs be a foul Immorality, which grows out of a Complexion of all those
evil Principles that are contrary to these good and virtuous dispositions.

I am in the

Second place, to examine the pretenses that are only possible to be alleged
in the excuse, or for the mitigation of this Crime; and if I can show, that
evil is implied in these also, the conclusion will yet be more evident, that
whatsoever in our ordinary Conversation is beyond affirmation and denial,
comes of evil. I do not think that any excuses will be heard for that man who
goes on in any known sin, much less in his behalf who lives in the violation of
so plain and easy a Law as this which forbids common Swearing; but because
there are many given to this sin, who are ready to excuse themselves presently
when they are admonished, and to ask your pardon, if you seem to be offended
and grieved, and then think that they have given you reasonable satisfaction,
as they hope they have done the like to God, by confessing that truly they
ought not to swear in this fashion, and God forgive them for it, but yet they
go on still to do the same thing; one would think there were some notable
Temptation to this sin, which would go very far to extenuate the guilt of it,
and which rendered the avoiding of it so very difficult, that all the regard
which could reasonably be expected to be given to that Law of God which forbids
it, is to confess our fault, and cry God's mercy every time we commit it; and
that a good natured man ought to be very well satisfied with the
acknowledgment. I have already shown, that this is a Sin which stands in need
of an excuse as much as any: I shall now show, that there is none less capable
of an excuse, by examining what is usually pretended for it. I never heard that
any Swearer ever fancied his Oaths to be for his Health, or his Wealth; that
they prolong his Life, or increase his Estate; that they give the Wine a
brisker flavor, or bring the Gamester any good luck; that they ease him of his
pains, or set off his Pleasures. I suppose you are all sensible, that these
pretenses would be very ridiculous, and truly they are not much better that
follow; as,

First of all, That they are an Ornament to a man's discourse; that they set
off his language; and if they are well placed, they make a sentence run the
better. I should have been ashamed to mention this excuse, but that they say it
goes a great way with some people. Now this very excuse betrays
Fantasticalness, and Pride, and comes of a foolish affectation to be counted a
Wit, which every body almost knows to be an argument of a mean and degenerate
spirit; the reason why at any time Oaths and profane Talk are affected for this
purpose, is, because they are sometimes observed to surprise the Hearers, which
makes the profane Person conceit that his Wit is acknowledged, when in truth it
is only the extravagance and boldness of his Talk that is wondered at. Folly,
that is something out of the road, is more commonly apt to provoke laughter,
than a surprizal that is truly ingenious; and therefore for a man to have an
Opinion of himself, merely because he is able to make the Company stare upon
him, arises from nothing but a mixture of Pride and Ignorance: As to this
particular matter of Swearing, it is plain that an Oath signifies only to the
affirming or denying of what is said, but adds nothing to the weight of the
sense, or to the style wherein it is expressed; it may startle a modest man, but
it cannot please any wise man, because it neither mends the matter, nor helps
the phrase. But it is not strange, that that should go for Wit, which the very
basest of the People can make use of with as much freedom and discretion, and
with as good a grace as a man of the best quality and breeding can do? for the
truth is, there is nothing required to this kind of pleasantness, but to get
ones forhead furnished with Impudence: which if the meanest Peasant be capable
of, he is then qualified for a good Companion, merely by having a memory large
enough to take in half a dozen Oaths, and a Tongue in his Head to use them as
occasion serves; which, experience shows, may be done, without any natural
Sagacity, or Rules of Art.

2. It is sometimes pretended by common Swearers, though I think but rarely,
That men will not believe them without an Oath: and what is this but to
confess, they have been so notoriously given to Lying, that no body dares trust
them upon their bear word? for a man that is known to make conscience of
speaking the Truth, finds no difficulty of creating a belief of what he says
amongst any of his Friends, without making any appeal to God. Besides the Oath
of a common Swearer, gives indeed but very little assurance of the truth of
what he says; if I know a man to be afraid of an Oath, his Oath shall satisfy
me beyond any other testimony that he can give; and upon the Oath of such a
man, a Court of Judicature may proceed with confidence; but what regard can
reasonably be had to his Oath above his simple and bare word, as we use to say,
who is known to swear upon all occasions? if he does not lie, it is well, but of
this I have no peculiar assurance by his Oath, because it is as ordinary with
him to swear, as to speak; and therefore in Athens, a Common Swearer's Oath was
not allowed, nor accepted of in their Courts; and sometimes the testimony of a
man of known Probity and Honor was admitted without it; this last seems to be
imitated by the wisdom of our Laws, which suppose the Asseveration of a Peer to
be equivalent to the Oath of another man; and therefore for another man to
Swear needlessly, is to disparage the Reputation of his Fidelity; but for a man
of Honor to do so, is to renounce his Privilege; and for any man to do thus,
is not only to bring the honesty of his Word, but the truth of his Oath also
into question.

3. The most usual excuse framed for the extenuation of this Impiety, is that
of sudden Passion; thus when some men are a little provoked, or when they are
surprised with some unexpected good Fortune, or any unlook'd-for misadventure
befalls them, either their Rage or their Joy bursts out presently into Oaths,
and they pretend they cannot help it; for they have no other way to discharge
their minds, and give vent to their Passions, but by Cursing and Swearing; now
is not this a plain confession, that they have lost the government of
themselves, and have no rule over their own spirits? So common it is for men,
while they are framing an excuse for one sin, to betray themselves guilty of
another; what greater argument can lightly be given of an impotent mind, than
that every petty accident is able to bereave one of all consideration, and make
him cease to be his own man till the fit is over? And the truth is, though
Passion be brought in to mitigate the business, yet it is plain enough, that
any trifling occasion is able to set these men a swearing, that make this
excuse for themselves; when provocation is alleged to mollify this Crime, one
would think it must arise from no less a cause than if he should find his house
in flames, or his friend attempting the honor of his bed; but upon
examination, this same emotion and heat of spirit, is pleaded for the begging
of your pardon, when a man swears upon the most trifling and inconsiderable
occasions: And what can excuse that childishness and impotency of mind to which
these men have thus given themselves over? But let never such extraordinary
causes of joy, or grief, or anger happen, it is an unmanly thing to set no
bounds to these Passions, and they are never less unbridled, than when we make
such undue expressions of them, as Oaths and Curses are; St. James gives us
this Rule, Above all things, my brethren, swear not, neither by heaven, neither
by the earth, nor by any other Oath, James 5.12. But the particular Case
wherein he thought this Rule was useful, was that of Affliction, for he had
before exhorted them to whom he wrote, to take the Prophets for an example of
suffering affliction, and of patience, and particularly recommended to them the
meekness and patience of Job for their imitation, ver. 10, 11. But if they
could not perfectly equal such great examples as those were, yet at least he
strictly enjoins them not to be transported so far into Anger and Impatience as
to break forth into Oaths: But above all things, my brethren, swear not, but
keep your selves within the bounds of modest and Christian Language; and that
they might see that he allowed them to have a sense of the good and evil of
this World, and was far from thinking it a Virtue to be stupid, and dull, and
unconcerned about either the Comforts, or the Calamities of human Life; he
directs them how they may convert the Passions which are thereby excited, to an
excellent and profitable use; Is any man among you afflicted? let him pray; Is
any merry? let him sing Psalms, ver. 13, 15. If any man be overtaken with
worldly misery, let him turn himself to more devout and earnest Prayer, that
God would either remove his burden, or give him patience under it; if he be
surprised with some new blessing, let him break forth into the Praises of God,
to whose Bounty and Goodness he stands obliged for it. Thus to improve the
excitations of joy and grief within us, is a demonstration that our Passions
have not overwhelmed our Reason and Understanding, but left us the free use of
our selves, to do what becomes us as Men and Christians; but in either case to
lash out into Oaths, is a plain token of an impotent mind, that has no rule
over it self, but is hurried away by intemperate Passions, which is matter of
so much shame to a reasonable Creature, and much more to a Disciple of Christ,
that we should blush to confess so much evil against our selves, as to make it
the excuse of any other Sin.

4. If Swearing be excused under the notion of a compliance with the custom of
other men who are our Friends and Companions; this pretense indeed carries a
show of civility and kind nature; but for all that, is the silliest that can
readily be thought of, and the making of it argues a mean and degenerate mind;
for although in things of an innocent and indifferent nature, it is commendable
for men to remit of their own way and humor, and to suit themselves to the
customs and manners of those whom they converse with, yet to be complaisant in
all things without exception, is the way to grow as profligate and vile as the
Devil would wish any man to be; for what wickedness could want Authority, if
this pretense were once admitted? What is this but to proclaim that a man has
lost all sense of difference between good and evil? And that he has left off
to judge all things according to their own nature; that he has no more use
left for his Reason; that his Conscience is no longer in his own keeping, and
that he is now fit to herd with the Beasts that follow the foremost without
discretion. The Laws of Truth and Goodness are immutable; and another man's
violation of them, gives me no dispensation to do so too; I may not prostitute
my Conscience to the Lusts of other men, who are to be governed by the Laws of
God as well as I; if they call my resolution not to provoke my Maker, an
humor, in this matter I were a Fool not to be tenacious of my own humor; in
this case there can be no reason why he that is in the right, should go over to
him that is wrong, unless he that sets the evil example could change the nature
of things, and made evil not to be evil, and sin and punishment to be other
things than what they are.

Lastly, The common way of excusing rash Oaths, by pleading an habit, implies
the greatest evil of this nature that can be; for this is but to confess that a
man is guilty of this sin in the highest degree, an evil custom being the
height of wickedness.

Thus both by showing what those dispositions are which lead to common
Swearing, and by considering the excuses that are usually framed in the behalf
of it, I have discovered the Immorality thereof, and that it comes of evil.

I might here add the Authority of wise men, who had no particular Revelation,
to guide themselves by, and yet condemned this practice, and dissuaded all men
from it; for these Persons could discover the evil of it only by the light of
Natural Reason, which they could not have done, if it had not been evil in its
own nature. Plato wrote smartly against Swearing upon light causes; Hierocles
tells us, It is a dishonor to truth to confirm it lightly with an Oath.
Epictetus gives this advice, Avoid Swearing altogether, if thou can, if not,
as much as thou can. In a word, The wise and sober Heathens were generally of
this mind, That an Oath was to be reserved for Cases of necessity; and the
practice of common Swearing was not in use amongst any but Stageplayers and
Slaves; nor do we ordinarily meet with Oaths in any of their Writers, excepting
the Comedians, and some of their dissolute Poets; but the grave men and
Philosophers took not the liberty themselves, and dehorted others from it. And
this may serve to confirm us in the belief of its Immorality; for what so many
wise men agreed in condemning, seems to be condemned as evil, by reasons common
to all men, and possibly such as I have offered to your consideration; so great
a shame and ignominy it is to Christians to allow themselves in a Custom so
easy avoidable; that is condemned by the light of Nature, however by the
Authority of the Son of God, whose Disciples we profess our selves to be.

Thus have I finished what I had to say upon this subject, having been willing
to say all that was any way proper to oppose a custom tending so manifestly to
the dishonor of our Nation, and the discredit of our Church, and the scandal
of Christian Society, and finally, to the ruin of Men's Souls for ever; for
without universal obedience to the Laws of Christ, whereof this is one which I
have been preaching to you, we cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; for
which reason if I had chosen any other command of our Lord and Savior to
discourse upon, I had been as vehement in urging you to the obedience of that,
as I have been in pressing this.

Now the God of mercy grant that we may walk before him blameless, and be holy
in all manner of Conversation as becomes the followers of Jesus; To Him with
the Father and the Holy Spirit be ascribed all honor, praise, and glory, now,
and for ever. Amen.

The Tenth Sermon.
MATTHEW. VII. 21. Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into
the kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of my father which is in
heaven.


THE Point determined in these words is of the highest concernment to us in the
world, viz. Who of those that hope for Salvation by Christ shall not, and who
shall enter into the kingdom of heaven. The former is described in that part of
the Text, Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord; The latter in the close
of it, But he that does the will of my Father which is in heaven. Let us first
consider the former part, Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord; which
being compared with the Clause opposed to it, is evidently to be thus
interpreted; Not any one that says, Lord, Lord, and does no more than say so,
but neglects the doing of God's Will, not any such person shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven: By calling Christ Lord, is meant an open profession of
Christianity; and by calling him, Lord, Lord, is meant a vehement profession of
it, such a Profession as is to be seen in all the ways of making known to the
World what Religion we are of. For instance, When we do not only not renounce
our Baptism, and suffer our selves to be called Christians, and call our selves
so, which is common to the most careless Professors of Christianity in the
World; but when also we do solemnly confess that Faith in the Assemblies of the
Church into which we have been baptized, and frequent the Table of Our Lord to
show forth his death, and join in public Prayers, and are zealous for the
purity of Christian Profession, and contend against Error, then we are those
that call Christ Lord, Lord, (i. e.) who make a vehement profession, that we
are his Servants and Followers: Now whereas our Savior says, Not every one
that does this, shall enter into the kingdom of Heaven, the plain meaning is,
That he does not exclude this outward profession as unnecessary, but that he
makes it insufficient of it self in order to salvation.

1. He does by no means exclude it as unnecessary, or as a Condition that may
well enough be spared, he said upon another occasion, Ye call me Master and
Lord, and ye say well, for so I am, John 13.13. And St. Paul tells us, That as
with the heart man believes unto righteousness, so with the mouth confession
is made to salvation, Romans 10.10. Nay, it is so necessary, if we will be saved,
to confess Christ and his Truth publicly in the World, that no danger will
excuse us from it: For the doing of this, if need be, we must venture all that
is dearest to us in this life, nay, and life it self: It was on this account
that our Savior told his Disciples, Whoever will come after me, must take up
his cross, and follow me. It is the confession of the true Faith added to holy
living that has made Martyrs of Saints: since it was properly for confessing
Christ with their mouths, for contending in the behalf of Truth against Error,
for serving God in Religious Assemblies according to the Gospel, for their
common Prayers and Worship, for celebrating the Holy Communion, and for doing
all those things in which the outward profession of true Christianity stands,
that they laid down their lives, and have been tormented many of them, not
accepting deliverance; and therefore our Savior, who here says, Not every one
that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter, etc. has also said, Whosoever
shall confess me before men, him shall the son of man also confess before the
angels of God; But he that denies me before men, shall be denied before the
angels of God, Luke 12.8, 9. So that although confessing Christ be not of it
self enough for salvation, yet it is always necessary to it; and sometimes it
is of that force, that one may conclude nothing else is wanting, and that is,
when we confess with great hazard to our selves in this World. But one reason
why it is sometimes so exceedingly praiseworthy, and signifies all other
necessary qualities, is because it is always a duty; for if it were in it self
but indifferent, and might be omitted without breach of our duty to God, it
were a foolish thing not to omit it, when our own safety and welfare in this
World required us to forbear. In a word, Confession with the mouth, assembling
our selves together for Prayer, Baptism, and the celebration of the Holy
Communion, and every other part of outward Religion, in which the profession of
Christianity stands, are all of them required in the Scriptures; which we are
not to wonder at, since it is evident, that the Honor of God, that Charity to
men, and the Interest and maintenance of Christianity, do require it also.

1. The Honor of God does plainly require it; for if it be fit and necessary
that God should be honored by us (i. e.) confessed, praised, and prayed unto,
who does not see, that all this ought to be done not only in private singly,
but in public jointly, unless one should think, that we have Reason and Speech
given to us for transacting common Affairs of the least moment, and not of the
greatest, viz. those which concern our dependence upon God, and our subjection
to him: Hence it is that David in the Psalms called his Tongue his glory,
because he did therewith praise, and confess, and glorify God amongst men. And
in the New Testament we are not only exhorted to glorify God with our Mind, but
with our Mouth too. Nor can any thing be more plain at first fight, than that
without this, it is impossible that God should be honored, as it is most fit
he should be in the Societies of Mankind. And,

2. The outward profession of Religion is no less requisite to the good of the
World, to which we in charity are to contribute what we can: For there is
nothing more necessary for the common welfare of Mankind, than a sense of God
and Religion, which although it has its foundation in our very Natures, yet as
many other natural Inclinations, may be strangely weakened, and in danger to be
lost, if it be not supported by use and exercise; and what is there more
necessary for the maintaining of a common sense of Religion, than a common
profession of it? And therefore in a matter of so great moment as this is,
every man ought to be an Example to his Neighbor, and all men should encourage
and animate one another: Nor can any one single person withdraw from the
profession of Religion, but in so doing he grows an enemy to Mankind, and as
much as in him lies, he teaches others to be so too. But then,

3. Above all, The interest and maintenance of Christianity requires a public
profession of it: For Christianity does not only consist in the belief of such
and such Doctrines, but in meeting together also for the Worship of God
according to them, which is the most comprehensive instance of outward
profession; for when our Lord instituted a Church, and his Apostles did
afterward gather men to it, nothing could be more plain, than that he made a
profession of his Doctrine, and the outward Service of God according to his
Gospel, a part of Christianity; for without this, it is impossible that
Believers should be a Body or a Society, as they are: And therefore that man
that lives without Christian Communion, or which is all one, without Christian
Profession, cannot rightly be called a Christian, but has rather renounced his
Baptism, by declaring in effect, that although he was admitted by Baptism into
the Body of Christ's Church, yet now he will have nothing to do with it: But if
the secret belief of the Doctrine of Christ, without any appearance of
Profession of it, were enough to make a man a Christian, as I think it is not,
yet such a person would deserve very ill of Christianity to conceal his belief;
for it is by our profession of it, that it must be upheld in the World, and
propagated amongst those that do not yet receive it; and he that dissembles his
Faith, does therefore his part, and gives his consent, that the True Religion
should fail from among the Children of men: And there is no doubt, but that
amongst other Reasons, the Gospel requires, that Believers should profess their
Faith, and be a visible Communion of Worshippers, that so the Doctrine and
worship of the Gospel might be upheld and maintained in the World. The truth
is, there is that wickedness amongst men, that so holy a Doctrine as that of
our Savior's will not be readily entertained; and there is that folly and
superstition everywhere, that so reasonable and excellent a Worship, as that
which the Gospel prescribes, is not apt to take with most people; and for this
reason, Error and Superstition are things that men will run into of themselves.
When therefore our Lord brought into the World the knowledge of Divine Truth,
and of the way how God would be worshipped and served, he did therefore make
his Disciples a Society of men professing the way of Truth and Purity, that his
Doctrine might spread in the World, and keep all the ground it should gain by
every man's making profession of the common Faith: For which reason Origin
thought, that when Our Savior said, Upon this rock will I build my Church, he
meant by the rock every Christian that should do as St. Peter had done, (i. e.)
who should make open confession of that Truth which St. Peter confessed,
because the Profession of every Christian did something to support the Interest
of the Gospel in the World.

A great many more things might be said to this purpose, to show, that what is
meant here by saying unto Christ, Lord, Lord, (i. e.) an outward profession of
true Christianity, is so far from being an indifferent thing, that it is a most
necessary duty, standing upon plain Commands and plain Reasons; nay, so
necessary, that without it we cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; no,
though it should bring never so much trouble upon us in this World, and
therefore to be sure when it brings little or none at all: And upon this
account it had doubtless been a true saying, if it had been said, Notevery one
that in other things does the Will of my Father, shall enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven, but he that also says unto me, Lord, Lord (i. e.) who does moreover
make an outward profession of being my Disciple: This, I say, had been true,
but then it had not been so instructing and useful an Admonition as it is in
the Text, because it is incomparably more certain, that he who does the Will of
God in all other things, will out wardly profess the truth of the Gospel, than
that every one who does profess it, will live according to it. And therefore
our Savior laid his Caution, where the danger was; and so I come to the

2d. Point, That an outward profession of Christianity, is not of it self
sufficient in order to our Salvation, inasmuch as it is moreover necessary,
that we should do the Will of God (i. e.) that we should do his Will in all
other things; and in general, that our Affections and Practices should be
answerable to the truth we profess, which is a thing so plain, if we once come
seriously to consider it, that there is as little need of proof to make it out,
as one would think there was of this Caution of our Savior, not to trust in
outward profession, when our hearts and lives are contrary to what we profess:
What is a professed Christian, but one that declares himself to believe, That
the unrighteous, the unmerciful, the unclean, the ungodly, shall never enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven; one that declares to the World, that his chief
business is to be saved, and that without holiness no man shall see the Lord:
And therefore whilst himself lives in ungodliness, and is led away by worldly
Lusts, he is the most absurd person in the World, and so much more ridiculous,
than a man that has skill in any thing but the proper business of his Calling
by which he must live, as the Concerns of another World are above all our
Interests in this: For such a man to maintain the hope of Everlasting Life, is
a contradiction to his own Faith and Profession, such a contradiction to his
Profession, that he exposes himself to have the lie given him by the World;
such a contradiction to his Faith, that his own Conscience one would think
should give him the lie too: But yet as plain a case as it is, that mere
profession, without doing the Will of God, is not enough to save us; our
Savior nevertheless thought fit here and elsewhere plainly to admonish us of
it, that we might not deceive our selves: And the Apostle foretold, there would
be men having a form of godliness, and denying the power thereof; and therefore
it should seem, that how plain soever the mistake is of trusting to profession
without a practice answerable to it, yet men would be very apt to fall into
that mistake.

There are these two things, which I shall hereupon take occasion to speak to.

1. That Experience has proved the proneness of Mankind to this folly of
presuming upon mere profession, that God is pleased with them.

2. What are the causes and occasions of so wretched a conceit, so void of all
shadow or pretense to reason.

1. As to the proof of it, that it has been so, I shall need to insist but
little upon it, because, alas, the thing is too apparent in our own days, and
every man that is guilty has a testimony of it from his own Conscience, if he
will hearken to it, too plain to be denied: Our Blessed Savior himself found a
great deal of this folly and madness among the Jews, especially amongst the
Scribes and Pharisees, when he came into the World: Their Fathers had for 400
years been cured of Idolatry, and the fondness of the gods of their Neighbors
round about them; they had smarted too severely for that, ever to return to it
again: But they soon fell to make the Profession and Worship of God according
to the Law, a dispensation for Luxury and Injustice, and Unmercifulness and
wicked living, instead of a restraint from it; plainly showing thereby, that
their Fathers did not like the True Religion, because it was too good for them,
since their Posterity not daring to revolt from the outward profession of it,
yet soon learned to reconcile it with a licentious practice. Nay, if we will
take St. Paul's word, who did not use to reprove without cause, they thought
that the same sins which they were guilty of with the Gentiles, would not have
so bad a construction made of them, nor be so displeasing to God, as they were
in the Gentiles. For as it appears from Romans 2. they judged the Gentiles for
doing evil things, and did them themselves, thinking all the while to escape
the righteous judgment of God: And what was the reason of all this? They had
the Temple of God amongst them: the Promises made to Abraham and to his
Posterity; God's Service according to the Law, of Moses, Sacrifices according
to the Law, and Washings, and diverse Ordinances, in the observation of which
they put their trust, and believed that no Israelite should go without his
portion of happiness in the life to come: In this state our Savior found them;
they trusted in Moses, and said, we have Abraham to our Father, they built and
garnished the Tombs of the Prophets, those very Prophets that had been so ill
entertained by their Forefathers for declaring against their sins; and because
they did this external honor to the Monuments of those good men, they excused
themselves from following their Instructions, being full of hypocrisy and
iniquity, and all uncleanness. Now this being so notorious in our Savior's
time, and having been so for some Ages before, it seemed needful that his
Disciples should be warned against the like fatal mistakes, into which there
was no little reason to be jealous they would fall: For by how much a greater
Person Jesus was than Moses, and his Sacrifice more excellent than the
Sacrifices of the Law, and his Religion a more rational and perfect Religion,
than any that had been before, so much greater danger there might be, least men
should trust to their relation to Christ, and to the Sacrifice of Christ, and
to the profession of the Faith of Christ, without an holy heart and life: If
the Jews could say, We have Abraham to our Father, and this were enough to
quiet their guilty fears; it was to be feared Christians would say, We have
Christ Jesus our Lord and Master, our Deliverer and Savior, and make the same
use of it: If they trusted in Moses, there was some reason to suspect that
others would hereafter lay hold upon Christ, and think themselves safe enough
by making their boast of him, no less than the Jews had done before of Moses,
and consequently great reason for this earnest admonition, Not every one that
says unto me, Lord, Lord, etc. Nay,

2. Notwithstanding this and the like forewarnings, yet men have, and do in
this manner delude themselves; inasmuch as our Savior upon this occasion told
his Disciples before hand, Many shall say unto me in that day, Lord, have we
not prophesied in thy name, and in thy name cast out devils, and in thy name
done many wonderful works? which certainly was spoken of those Workers of
Iniquity that lived in the early days of the Church, whilst Mirales were yet
continued in it: And this was a terrible instance of the proneness of men to
fall into this kind of presumption; That some of them who did not only hear,
but preach the Gospel of Christ; who did not only see, but do Miracles in the
name of Christ, should yet be workers of iniquity; that they who had faith to
cast out devils out of others, should not have faith enough to dispossess
themselves of their vile Lusts, and to cleanse their own hearts and ways. But
when Honor, and Power, and Wealth became the Rewards of professing
Christianity, the instances of this folly and madness grew still more numerous,
and more open, and men more easily passed for Christians, than in former times,
though they were as lustful and revengeful, as vain and insolent, and
altogether as worldly and vicious, as other men, they then came into the Church
with more ease, and were turned out of it with more difficulty, and they
continued in it under a Discipline less severe than in former times; and no
wonder then, that upon the increase of Bad Examples, there were still more and
more who looked for Salvation by the Name of Christ, that had little or nothing
of his Spirit, and were themselves Christians in nothing else but in name and
profession. And now let us consider,

2dly, How it comes to pass that men can thus deceive themselves, as to rest
upon so false a foundation of hope and comfort, as a mere profession of the
Name and Religion of Christ, without being such persons in life and soul, as
their profession requires. Now,

1. The first and most general cause is this, That men are willing to be thus
deceived; and no man is in greater danger of falling into a mistake, how
pernicious soever it be, than he that has a mind to believe it no mistake: Our
Savior in this Sermon, whereof the Text is a part, speaks against causeless
Anger, and an adulterous Eye, and a revengeful Spirit, and Vainglory, and
Worldly solicitude, and a great many other things, which are often as hard to
reform, as it would be to cut off a right hand, and to pull out a right eye,
especially where a corrupt Inclination is confirmed by custom in sin: This is
indeed the principal cause why men will conceit any thing, though it be never
so foolish, rather than they will feel an indispensible obligation to repent
and reform their wicked ways. It Is true, when a man has had some experience of
it, the practice of Religion in all his conversation becomes the joy of his
life; and he finds more pleasure in a constant course of piety toward God, of
justice and mercy toward men, of a sober and temperate use of the good things
of this life, than can possibly be had in the ways of sin; but whilst one is
under the power and lust of Passion, his indulgence to his own Appetite, is
like drink to a man in a Fever, who, till he recovers his health, knows no
other pleasure, nor is there a greater torment to him, than to be denied it:
Now they are those Rules of Christianity which concern the government of our
Affections and Passions, our Manners and Practices in the general course of our
conversation, that are directly contrary to those corrupt Inclinations of
Mankind; whereas the obligation to profess a Religion, and to worship God
amongst those that do so, does not of it self thwart them, otherways than it
brings the other part of Religion to mind, which is, to act accordingly in all
our conversation: And therefore men would fain believe, that their care in one
part shall supply the defects in the other; that is, That saying, Lord, Lord,
shall stand them in good stead, although they do not the will of our heavenly
Father. To this we may add,

2. That there is as great a difficulty on the other side to throw off all fear
of God, and all concern for a Life to come, as there is to come up thoroughly to
that which Religion requires. And we have infinite reason to bless God for this
difficulty, (i. e.) that he has made it, I will not only say as difficult, but
more difficult, for us to become mere Atheists and Infidels, than even bad men
have made it to become true and sincere Christians: For he has left those
natural impressions of his own Being upon our hearts, and has given such
evidence to the World of the truth of the Gospel of his Son, that it must needs
be an hard thing for us to grow downright Atheists, or even Unbelievers; and
for the most part, do what we can, we are held under the sense and awe of
Religion; and if we will make an evil course of life easy to our selves, it
must not be done by throwing off all pretense to Religion; for then we should
be self-condemned without any relief, and have nothing at all to trust to; but
it must be done by putting some cheat upon our selves, consistent with the
profession of Religion; that is, by flattering our selves, that a diligent
profession of it will serve the turn; and they are these two things taken
together, viz. the unwillingness of men to leave their sins on the one side,
and the unavoidable apprehensions of God, and a Life to come, and a general
conviction of the truth of Christianity on the other, that have not only made
many Persons take up this false way of comforting themselves, but have also
made them easy to receive diverse Errors which help to support this, to expect
spiritual relief from things blessed by man, without any appointment from God,
and to place Religion in things which have neither reason of their own, nor
Divine Authority to make them valuable. Certainly if it were either easy for
Mankind to throw off all pretense to Religion on the one hand, or if they could
easily be persuaded to break off their sins by repentance on the other, it had
been a much harder thing to corrupt Religion, than Experience has shown it to
be: But so long as there will be Conscience, and a sense of God, and an
apprehension of a life to come, as there will be while the World endures; and
so long as there will be lust and passion, vice and wickedness more or less
amongst men; so long also they will be very desirous to believe those Doctrines
that promise security, without an effectual reformation: And in the company of
more mistakes tending to the same comfort, it will be a very hard matter indeed
to convince a man of that mistake, that his form of godliness will supply the
want of the real power of it: But alas! where Truth is professed without the
mixture of any Doctrinal Errors of this kind, there is still too much room left
for this practical Error, of holding the truth in unrighteousness: For whilst
some men are led into sin by Error, do not others who are guilty of the same
sins, hope that they shall be overlooked for the sake of their opposition to
those Errors, and the professing and maintaining the contrary Truth? It Is true,
that our Church, according to the truth of the Scriptures, and the clearest
reason that there is for any thing in the world, holds forth a necessity of
actual reformation, in order to God's Pardon, and eternal Life; and we disclaim
all manner of ways to supply the want of effectual repentance, and a thorough
change of heart and life from Sin to God. But, my Brethren, let us lay one
Particular seriously to heart under this General, and that is this, That our
very Profession of this Truth, in the natural and proper sense of it, That
without holiness no man shall see the Lord, will not serve our turn, without
the practice of it; our profession of the necessity of an holy life, is not
that holy life which is necessary: And if the unavoidableness of professing
some Religion, and the desire we have to keep our Sins too, works this way upon
us, as to make us trust in the purity of our Profession, we are guilty of one
Error as pernicious, if we continue in it, as if a thousand more were added to
it. I say, if we continue in it; for there is this advantage of a true and pure
profession of Christianity, that whosoever makes it, to use the words of our
Savior in a sense something different, he is not far from the Kingdom of God;
there is less to do, to recover him to repentance; no false Principle being in
the way to hinder it: he lies open to Exhortation, and Persuasion, and every
serious Instruction and Admonition smites his very Conscience; he feels the
truth that is delivered to him; there is that within him which confesses it
all, and will not easily let him be quiet, till it has made him a new man. But
to proceed.

3. In some Persons a dishonorable opinion of God may be the reason of
expecting his Rewards, without performing the Duties of Purity and Charity; I
fear there are those in the world who think, that God has appointed the
confession of his Name with Prayer, and Thansgivings, and other holy Offices of
Religion, that by these things men might give him the satisfaction of hearing
the greatness of his Perfections, and the excellency of his Works applauded by
his Creatures; and therefore that these things being performed, they have
entitled themselves to his thanks and favor: But this is in truth to have but
a very low and mean opinion of the Divine Majesty, and seems to suppose God to
be altogether such an one as our selves, who, perhaps, are so vain, as to take
great delight in our own praises, and love to be flattered into a great opinion
of our selves: If we believe worthily of the Divine Nature, we must say, That
because God is holy and good, therefore he will have men to be so; and that he
expects to be glorified by us, to be confessed and adored; not that he needs
us, or is taken with our commendations of him, but because it is infinitely fit
and reasonable, and equitable, that we should thus worship him; and because
this is a necessary means also of forming our minds and actions into the
likeness of what God is, and of what he does in the World: We are mistaken, if
we think that our Savior is beholden to us for keeping up the profession of
his Name, or that some great Interest of his is served, when Religion gets
ground upon the World, because there will be more and more to speak his Praise,
and to celebrate his Goodness, and his Greatness; as if he were like some one
of those great men, who, if they have Flatterers enough, and can make others
seem to honor them, though there be no such matter, are very well pleased: The
Religion of our Savior was not sent into the world for the ostentation of his
Power and Greatness; and he plainly told us, that he sought not his own honor:
It is indeed our indispensible duty to honor him before all the World with all
expressions of gratitude and humble reverence; and we are most inexcusable and
wretched Creatures, if we do it not: But the end of his Religion was to turn us
from our iniquities, and to make us a peculiar people, zealous of good works;
and so far as this Design takes, so far he approves of us; otherwise he has
plainly told us what we are to expect from him, even that Sentence, Depart from
me, ye that work iniquity, I know you not.

4. The conceit and expectation of some unpromised mercy of God, must
necessarily be one ingredient into the presumption o^ those men, that hold the
truth in unrighteousness For the Threatenings of God's Word are so undeniably
plain, that a man of sense, who believes the truth, as it is in Jesus, can have
no ease under a guilty Conscience, but upon a supposition, that God will, or
may at least, abate something of the rigor of his threatening and accept of
less, perhaps, a Deathbed Repentance; of less, I say, than he has required:
This seems to be at the bottom of their Confidence, of whom our Lord foretold,
that they should say, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name, etc. that
is to say, they had been instrumental to maintain and support his Doctrine in
the World, and expostulate now with him, as if they always had some secret hope
this would at last be accepted, though there was no promise of it beforehand.
But to prevent this presumption, Our Savior has said beforehand, Then will I
profess to them, I never knew you, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity; which
plain dealing was very necessary: For though it is true, that he that threatens
punishment, does not delight in taking punishment, but intends to prevent the
fault; yet when God threatens for this end, and adds moreover Declaration upon
the Threatening, That he will not spare, if the fault be not prevented; it is an
affront to him to presume that he will spare for all that.

To conclude; Let us seriously lay to heart these words of our Savior, which
are an answer to the most concerning Question in the World, who are they that
shall be saved? Not every one that says, Lord, Lord, but he that does the will
of our father which is in heaven. He that can say, I was by my natural temper
and inclination thus and thus, but the Religion of Jesus, and the Worship of
God according to the Gospel, has given me a new heart, and a new nature; and
though I was addicted to sensuality and uncleanness, and to the Vices of my
natural Constitution, yet by the Grace of God, and power of Faith, I am what I
am, quite another man than I was by my corrupted Nature. So much as there is of
this in the World, so much true Religion there is in it, and no more, and so
many as there are, who can thus approve themselves to God, so many shall be
saved, and no more: All other Reliefs will fail, all other Foundations will
ruin a man in the time of his distress, they will deceive him at the hour of
death, or at the day of Judgment; and therefore that men might not deceive
themselves, our Savior concludes his Precepts and Cautions in this effectual
manner, Therefore whosoever hears these sayings of mine, and does them, I
will liken him to a wise man, that built his house upon a rock; And every one
that hears these sayings of mine, and does them not, shall be likened to a
foolish man, who built his house on the sand, and the rain descended, and the
floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house, and it fell, and
great was the fall of it. But let not that happen to us, which St. James says,
He that is an hearer of the word, and not a doer thereof, is like to a man that
beholds his natural face in a glass, and for the time knows himself, but
then goes away, and straightway forgets what manner of man he was. Which
Similitude is not so much intended to expose the nature of the folly in hearing
and believing, and in doing nothing; as to assign the reason of it, (i. e.) If
ye would not be hearers only, but doers of the word, take care that the
convictions of Truth, and the impressions which it makes upon your minds when
you hear it, do not slide away, just as the Image of a man's Countenance, which
the Glass has made in his imagination, vanishes away when he turns from the
Glass, and he does not so well know his own, as any other man's face: The
Doctrine of our Savior does represent us to our selves, and shows us our own
Actions, what they are; and our Consciences witness thereto, while we hear
those plain and powerful words of his which are laid up in the Evangelists* But
if we straightway forget what we are, and what we should be, and take no care
to make his word abide in us, then, as the same Apostle says, we shall be
hearers only, but not doers of the word, deceiving our own selves.

The Eleventh Sermon.
JOHN VII. 17. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine,
whether it be of God.


AMongst the many Arguments in Scripture persuading to an upright Intention,
and honest Conversation, this in the Text is fit to be propounded, and
considered; as being not only weighty in it self, as all the rest are, but
adapted to allure the curious temper of man, and most proper for them who are
most inquisitive after knowledge; and likely to be effectual with the most
prudent, who aim at the best knowledge. For,

1. The knowledge spoken of in the Text, is that of the Wisdom of God, or his
Revelations to Mankind by Jesus Christ; and it is of infinite importance to us,
for it concerns the welfare of our immortal Souls, and this should invite us to
endeavor after it through the most difficult methods that could be propounded:
But,

2. For our great encouragement, the method laid down in the Text is easy to
apprehend, and obvious to all Capacities; it is easy likewise to put in
practice; it requires nothing but a willing mind, If any man will do the will
of God; if he will but walk according to his present light, if he intends to
learn that he may practice, he shall know.

3. The Promise is universal in respect of the Object, being made to all, If
any man will do his will; no man who is capable of being sincere and honest, is
excluded, therefore every man is concerned in the Promise; the Condition is not
only possible to all, but being performed, the Promise is sure to all;
therefore this method will fail no man. For,

4. The promise is made by him, who is the way, the truth, and the life; he
himself, whose Doctrine it is that we would learn, and best knows that method
by which we may learn it, has given us this assurance, That if we make Piety
and Virtue our first design, we shall know.

5. The Promise is universal in respect of the matter of it, he shall know of
the doctrine (i. e.) of the whole Doctrine, whatsoever is necessary or greatly
profitable to the end of knowledge: He shall not therefore only learn in
general, that the Doctrine of Christianity is of God, but the particular
Doctrines that are so: so likewise he shall know the same things better than he
did before; this method will confirm us, and give us the best assurance; it
will keep us from wandering, and doubting afterward; and if we shall know the
Truth, and know the same more perfectly, then the motive is proper to be used
in all Ages of the Church, and we have reason to think our selves concerned in
it.

Lastly, It is yet a greater encouragement to follow this method, if we
consider that no man can possibly miss of Happiness in that way, which our
Savior here prescribes for the attainment of the best knowledge; what reason
have I to take that way of arriving to sound knowledge, which has not only so
great a promise to secure me that I shall not miss of that end, but which
undoubtedly, will secure a farther end, and one much better, and more desirable
than that, the love of God, and the complete happiness of Soul and Body for
ever! But now although a man could by other methods arrive to knowledge, yet if
in the mean time he neglected to do the Will of God, he does not at all provide
for his Happiness; for tho he had as clear an apprehension as an Angel, though
he received Revelations from the mouth of our Lord himself, or by the
Inspiration of the Holy Ghost: though he had an Infallible Guide to determine
all Controversies for him, and to clear up the darkness of every doubt; yet if
all this, while he has a perverse and vicious Will, and is carried aside by
wandering and unruly Affections, and leads a wicked life, he is certainly in a
way of error as damnable as Heresy; but he that arrives at knowledge this way,
does thereby also secure his Salvation, and Eternal Happiness; which certainly
is a most powerful recommendation of our Savior's way, especially if you add
this consideration, that it has the advantage of all other methods by which we
can hope to gain a fight understanding in Religion.

I know it will be objected, That Impious and Profane men have apprehensions as
capable of judging what is true, and what is false, as Good men, and oftentimes
their Abilities are greater, and their Parts quicker, than those of the sincere
and godly; and moreover, that some wicked men have arrived to greater knowledge
in Religion, than thousands of Religious persons ever had.

To this Objection I answer,

1. That supposing an equality of other means and abilities, he that is sincere
toward God, has many advantages above a wicked man in order to the gaining of
that knowledge, to which the wicked may possibly arrive.

2. That there is some knowledge in Religion proper to the godly, which the
other continuing as he is, can never gain: Now if that which is possibly to
both, may be more easily and certainly attained by the good man, supposed to be
equal in other respects to the wicked; if there be something also that cannot
be attained by the wicked, though in other respects never so superior to the
good man, then is not the Rule of our Savior disparaged by the pretense now
mentioned, but we have still as great reason to take his method, as there
seemed to be at first.

Now there are these two things, which I hope to make out by the following
Discourse.

First of all, That supposing the good and the bad to be equally endued with
natural Abilities of understanding, and equally to enjoy the external means of
knowledge, the former has great Advantages above the latter, for the gaining
of that knowledge in Religion which is possible to both; this will appear from
these two general Arguments.

1. That sincerity of heart, with a religious life, is in it self a fit means
to attain knowledge; and that the contrary disposition and course of life,
renders a man very unfit to discern divine Truth.

2. That there are many great promises of knowledge and wisdom made to godly
men, and to none else; but that, of his Justice, he has threatened, and by the
same Justice does often infatuate the understandings of the wicked.

1. That a sincere intent toward God, and doing his Will, is a fit means of it
self to attain knowledge. For in the

1st place, It takes in all that is good and profitable in any other way of
coming to the knowledge of the Truth: For is searching the Scripture a good
means? doing the will of God includes that, for it is his will that we should
search the Scriptures. Is harkening to our Sipritual Guides another way? It is
the will of God that we should know them that labor amongst us, and are over
us in the Lord, and admonish us. Is an impartial examination of those grounds
upon which the several Parties in Christendom pretend to hold the truth? It is
the will of God, that we should prove all things, and hold fast that which is
good; that we should not believe every spirit, but try the spirits whether they
are of God. Is it the use of our own reason, and arguing from Principles of
natural Religion? This is plainly supposed in the command of trying their
Doctrines, who pretend to instruct us in Revelation. Is it of any use to
enquire into the sense of Ancient Churches, if we are able to do it? this is
not hindered, but furthered by doing the will of God, which always supposes a
sincere desire to know the truth; for this sincerity gives a prosperous
influence to the labors of the diligent and learned; whereas, if the interest
of ambition, or covetousness, does mix it self with the studies of men, and
infect them with a secret disloyalty to the truth; it does most commonly blast
their endeavors, through the corruptness of their end, making them bend their
wit not so much to know the truth, as to serve their Cause. This is the first
consideration, That whatever is good and profitable in any other way, is
included in this.

2. The obedient and honest mind is peculiarly fitted for the evidence of
Divine Truth, which is enough to satisfy the prudent and considerate, and those
that are willing to learn, but not to bear down the prejudices and passions of
the untractable. To this purpose we may consider, That our Savior accommodated
his Instructions to the tempers of the humble and willing: But when he met with
the captious Pharisees, he returned them Answers like their Questions;
designing rather to silence their Arrogance, than to inform them, and convince
them of the truth; for he perceived all that labor was lost upon men of their
perverse minds, which was abundantly sufficient to satisfy those there that
were wise and modest, and disinterested. Thus after they had been cavilling at
his Doctrine, he asks them, whose son Christ was to be? they said David's; if
David then, says he, call him Lord, how is he his son? where he left them
speechless, without explaining the difficulty; for he knew Reason would not
serve them: So when they asked him, By what Authority he did those things which
he did, and this after they they had known his wonderful Works, he did not
vouchsafe to give them a direct Answer, but replies to their Question with
another; The baptism of John, was it from heaven, or of men? He knew they would
say, They could not tell; Neither tell I you, says he, by what authority I do
these things. How evident and reasonable soever the institution of the Gospel
is, it was not delivered in such a way as should certainly prevail against the
obstinacy of the wicked, and enlighten the minds of them that love darkness
rather than light, because their deeds are evil, but in such a way as would
satisfy all that love the truth, and are resolved to follow it: Hereby God has
made great distinction between the humble and honest on the one side, and the
proud and insincere on the other, while the best knowledge is easy and ready to
the former, but in comparison hard to the latter.

3. Due reverence, and love of God's Word, is it self apt to promote the
understanding of it, which is a great advantage which the good man has above
all others: what a man admires and delights in, engages his whole Soul, and
makes it all attention; and in that posture the mind apprehends more readily
and clearly. On the other side, no man makes a good proficiency in that which
he studies with an alienated mind; and indeed it is impossible he should, since
he does not put his strength to the work, and his Soul is hardly present with
the business he is about: What other reason can we give, why men that are
accurate at one sort of business, are heavy and inapprehensive at others? for
the Soul in it self has a capacity equally open to the embracing of all
Reason, that therefore which makes the difference, must be their value of, and
delight in one subject, and their aversion from the other: It is no wonder
then, if David, as he speaks of himself, was wiser than all his enemies, and
understood more than the ancients, and had more understanding than his teachers
themselves; For, says he, I have kept thy precepts, I love thy law, it is my
meditation all the day long, and the commandments of God are ever with me. We
see by experience, that men arrive to great skill in the business which they
have in liking and esteem, because they frequently exercise themselves in it,
and daily employ their thoughts about it. Now that veneration of Divine Truth,
that value of Christian Knowledge, which is implied in a sincere intent to do
the will of God, is incomparably greater, and more operative and effectual,
than that which is founded either upon desire of praise, or preferment, or the
mere pleasure of speculation only; Therefore that esteem which the good man
has for Divine Truth, will enforce a more frequent and attentive meditation
thereupon; and that assiduity will procure a better understanding of it; and
this again more delight and pleasure in it; and if such proficiency and such
satisfaction do thus whet one another, and if they are not caused but by a
great value and esteem of Divine truth, then the good man who values it most,
has a singular advantage in his study and search after it.

4. Every prevailing Lust and Passion is in it self an impediment to the
knowledge of the Truth: For instance, the affection of the praise of men is
that which frequently perverts a right judgment of things; it was our Savior's
own Expostulation with the Jews, How can ye believe, that receive honor one of
another, and seek not that honor which comes of God? John 5.44. One would
wonder what a strange delusion the Pride of the Pharisees kept them under; the
Delusion was so great, that they could not judge whether they believed or
disbelieved what they read in Moses; for our Savior tells them, v. 46. Had ye
believed Moses, ye would also have believed me, for he wrote of me. Could we,
or could they themselves have thought, that they who trusted in Moses, that
they who were the great Teachers of the Law of Moses, that they who rejected
Jesus, because they thought his Doctrine overthrew the Law of Moses, should be
mistaken in their own belief of Moses? and yet he adds, v. 47. If ye believe
not his writings, how shall ye believe my words? By which we may learn these
things:

1. If vain glory had not infatuated these men, if the conceit of their own
wisdom, had not kept them from doubting of what they once thought, if they had
been humble enough to permit the Writings of Moses to convince them, they must
needs have read there, that Jesus was the Christ.

2. If one sin be predominant in a man's heart, as Pride; he may be so deluded
by it, as not to believe that to be in the Scripture which is plainly there,
and this too in a matter of great importance and concernment, as the case now
mentioned plainly shows.

3. Much more will the judgments of men be perverted by several Lusts and Vices
in conjunction with one another, if to Pride and Ambition, Covetousness and
Envy, and Revengefulness be added; the fatal influence whereof upon the
Understanding is so plainly discernable in the gross mistakes of those men that
are engaged to serve a by-Cause, and to maintain a Party against all the World:
Did we not know it by experience, we should think it incredible, that in these
circumstances, men of learning and subtilty should not be able to judge of the
strength or weakness of Arguments, of the true or false interpretation of
Scripture, of the pertinent or impertinent application of it, even where the
case is so plain, that it requires neither subtilty nor learning to make a
judgment of it. Could any disinterested man believe, that from the saying of
Saint John in the conclusion of his Revelation, If any man shall add unto the
words of the prophecy of this book, God shall add unto him the plagues that are
written in it; that from this Saying the unlawfulness of all Human Forms and
Constitutions in Divine Worship might be inferred? that is to say, Because a
Curse is threatened to any that shall attempt to corrupt, the Bible, by making
any alteration in the Revelation of St. John, therefore nothing is to be done
in God's Worship, which is not positively required in the Word of God. And yet
by such applications of Scripture as this, the pretense has been carried on by
men of name and authority in the World. Would it ever have come into a man's
head to suspect, that the Power of the Roman Bishop to depose Kings and
Emperors, might be argued from those words of our Lord to Peter, Feed my sheep?
If Ambition and Covetousness, and the serving of a Cause, had not intervened,
he would think the Sheep of Christ were to be fed with wholesome Doctrine, and
to be instructed in the duties of Patience and Constancy under Persecution, and
not with those inhuman Principles, which turn them into Wolves; and it is plain
enough, that without any wit, and with infinitely greater probability, the
quite contrary conclusion may be several ways inferred from these words; the
quite contrary, I say, to what they of the Church of Rome would infer from
them. I shall not stand to expose their arguing from those words, Thou art
Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church, in behalf of the universal
Supremacy of the Roman Bishops, and that because of the allusion of Petrus to
Petra, which if it would hold good for St. Peter's being the Rock, how it will
serve to make Boniface or Clement the Rock too, would be hard to say; or if it
did, that Rock implies Universal Supremacy, would not suddenly have been
thought of, if it had not been to serve a Cause; there would be a little more
color in those words, and I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of
heaven; were it not plain, That when the Keys were given to him, as they were
not till after the Resurrection of Christ, they were given to all the other
Apostles, as fully and effectually as to him: But suppose that had been said of
Peter, which St. Paul said of himself, that the care of all the Churches was
upon him, which is a Saying more likely to conclude an Universal Pastorship
from, than the other, how many learned Treatises may we think had been written
upon it before now? But for all that, if any man should in earnest offer that
place to prove that St. Paul was Christ's Vicar General on Earth, he would be
answered no other way than by contempt: So foully are the understandings of men
overruled by their affections, after they have wedded a Cause, and resolved to
go through with it, and to maintain it right or wrong; but that which is still
worse is this, that where the Spirit of Faction prevails, and worldly Interest
is carried on under the pretext of Religion, the understandings of men are
frequently disabled from judging right between good and evil; otherwise how
were it possible for men to believe that Hypocrisy and Lying, and Perjury, and
Murder, and Treason, are in some cases not only excuseable but laudable? that
they should commit such Crimes as these, not only without regret and horror,
but with a cheerful Conscience, and the expectation of heaven in reward of
their actions? Wherefore, that I might not lose the use of my understanding in
most plain and evident matters, that I might not be weaker than a Child, or an
Idiot, I would never engage my self with the Contentious and Factious; I would
not dare to trust my self with a Party, and would not serve a Cause, but
acknowledge a mistake, though it were my Friend, and follow truth wherever it
led me: For nothing is more evident in the experience of the world than this,
That when men are led aside by their worldly Interests, when their Reputations
are engaged, and they are made fast to a Party, their understandings are so
disabled, that in a short time they confidently put themselves upon defending
things most unjustifiable, and believing things that are most incredible and
impossible: Let us therefore allow St. Peter's direction, to lay aside all
malice, and all guile, and hypocrisy, and envyings, and evil speakings, and
that for the reason by him given, viz. that we may desire the sincere milk of
the Word; that we may desire and aim at the knowledge of the Truth; for where
that Assembly of Sins is got together, or indeed where any one of them is, it
is apt to extinguish that very love of Truth, the very desire of knowing it.

To proceed; Luxury also, and Voluptuousness, and an impure course of Life, is
a very great impediment to the knowledge of the truth; sometimes by introducing
such Diseases as shatter the understanding, and dull the apprehension; they
that always swim in sensual delights, meet with rough and tempestuous Seas
sometimes, that shake their Bodies, and at length Reason lik a drowning Pilot
drops off, and is drowned in pleasures; it often happens that the Epicure grows
crazy before his time, and when his airy Fancy is evaporated by the heats of
Youth, and his Wit is grown flat and unweildly, he himself becomes contemptible
to the younger Debauchees that reign in his stead; Temperance and Regular
living have a kind influence upon the Intellectual Abilities of men to nourish
and preserve them, and lengthen them, and all the while to make them more fit
for their proper employment; but much more are they requisite to qualify us for
a good understanding of Divine Truth, because it requires a serious
consideration, and diligent attention, which the Epicure is a stranger to,
because she is spiritual, and the mind cannot converse with her, while it meets
with the fumes of sensuality; because she is of a purifying nature, and not
more an Enemy to uncleanness, than the Voluptuary is averse from her; good
reason therefore had St. James when he showed how we should receive the Word
with meekness, to exhort us, that we lay aside all filthiness and superfluity
of naughtiness.

In a word, The bent of the will and affections have such a sway over the
understanding, that daily experience shows how the same things appears
differently to men, nay to the same men according to the temper they are in;
for instance, if persons that have lived long friendly together, chance to fall
out, immediately former actions and speeches are remembered and commented upon,
and an ill construction put upon them, though till that time they were taken
well enough, and yet the things are the same, and the understandings of men
were as able before as now, only there is dislike now instead of the kindness
that was before; no wonder then if a vicious inclination, and a guilty
Conscience to obstruct the entrance of truth and sound knowledge into the mind,
since they must needs create an aversation to it; discourse to a greedy
worlding, of Immortality, and laying up treasure in heaven, and he can hardly
understand what you say, it is as insipid talk to him, as a Lecture of
Philosophy to a Child, that understands nothing but play; but fall upon some
discourse that tends to getting, drop but the hint of a good Bargain, he
greedily embraces every word, and is as apprehensive as heart can wish; and
guilty men are apt to fortify themselves against all that can be said to
dissuade them from their beloved sins; and that is reason enough, why sin does
more or less bar up the understanding against Divine Truth; Men love darkeness
rather than light, because their deeds are evil.

Now the conclusion from all this is evident, on the one side, one habitual
worldly Lust is enough to hinder the true apprehensive of heavenly things; and
then how can they who drink iniquity like water, who labor to quench the
Spirit, be fit to receive Divine Truths, and to understand the things of the
Spirit of God? On the other side, a sincere intention toward God, removes all
those impediments which obstruct the force of truth, and moreover gives several
advantages of its own toward the attainment of sound knowledge; therefore it
is in it self a fit means for that end; A scorner seeks wisdom, and finds
it not; but knowledge is easy to him that understands.

2. There are many great Promises of Knowledge both in the Old and New
Testament peculiar to good men, but God has in Justice threatened, and by the
same Justice he does often infatuate the understandings of the wicked. Now if
goodness does of it self lead to knowledge; if there be a supernatural blessing
that goes along with the sincere man to prosper his endeavors after knowledge;
what greater advantages can we desire in order to this end, than those which
sincerity toward God intitles us too? Thus the very Text has the force of a
Promise; If any man will do his will, he shall know; we have our Savior's word
for it, and to be sure he will make it good; and it appears by other places,
that something more is here meant, than that knowledge is naturally promoted by
goodness; in Psalm. 25.9. it is said, The meek he will guide in judgment; and
immediately again, The meek he will teach his way: Now certainly here is
something promised to the meek that is not common to others; and the guidance
and teaching which is promised, denotes clearly a blessing on their
understandings. But now if this be promised to meekness, we cannot doubt but
God will more plentifully fulfill his Promise to those who add to meekness,
purity and temperance; and to that, an universal love and fear of God, and
charity toward man, especially considering that this Promise is repeated again
to such Persons, ver. 14. The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him,
and he will show them his Covenant; where God's Covenant explains what is meant
by his secret, and by his way, ver. 9. That way of God in ver. 10. is said to
be mercy and truth; the Covenant of Mercy revealed by Christ, which was a
secret in former Ages; so that the good man, he that sincerely loves truth, and
intends obedience, is here promised a signal blessing on his endeavors to know
the Covenant of God revealed in the Gospel, whether enjoining the Duty he
expects from us, or promising those benefits and rewards in this or the other
life which we may expect from him; this very Promise we have again repeated,
Prove. 3.32. His secret is with the righteous; it had been enough if God had
passed his but once, but since he has so often repeated it, we cannot doubt
but that good men shall be blessed with a better apprehension of the things of
the Gospel than others. In John 8. the like Promises are made, and the like
Conditions upon which they are made, are annexed, ver. 12. He that follows
me, shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life, shall know
all things requisite to Life Eternal, ver. 32. Ye shall know the truth; but
it is upon this condition, ver. 33. that ye continue in my word, and John 14.21.
I will love and manifest my self to every one that loves me, and keeps my
Commandments. Upon the account of these and the like Promises, as well as upon
other grounds, we may say with the Psalmist, Psalm. 111. The fear of the Lord is
the beginning of wisdom; it is the best, most auspicious entrance upon it; and
they that do thereafter, have a good understanding, having good security that
they cannot fail of it.

To conclude this particular: From all these Promises we may be most assured,
that every man following the rule of Christ, shall not fail of so much
knowledge as will secure his Eternal Life, and even that is a mighty
encouragement, to observe this Rule. If any of us were sure that some Angel
attended us constantly, observing all our actions, insinuating good counsels,
and exciting good thoughts, when our Passions grow wild, and we are on the
brink of sin; it would infuse a great regard of all we did into us, and we
should reckon our selves happy men: Certainly it is more happy to be under the
guidance of the Holy Spirit of God; what can be more desirable than to have him
who is Wisdom it self opening our ears, and sealing Instruction to us; blessing
our searches into holy things, and accompanying our meditations with a ready
and prosperous apprehension? And this is that we are sure of, whilst we are in
the way of doing God's will, because we are sure he is not slack in his
Promises: But this advantage will appear so much the greater, if we consider
that God does sometimes deliver up wicked men to darkness of understanding, and
has threatened that he will do so. That he has done so, St. Paul shows plainly,
Romans 1. by the example of the Gentiles, because they detained the truth in
unrighteousness, ver. 19. and did not glorify God with that knowledge which he
had given them, they first became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish
heart was darkened, ver. 21. So they fell to Idolatry, ver. 22. and then we find
that he gave them up to vile affections, and a reprobate (i. e.) an
undiscerning mind, which knew no difference between good and evil; and that God
will deal so with us if we deny him by our works, it is but reasonable to
expect, though he had not said it; but he has given us sufficient warning in the
threatening to the Church of Ephesus, Rev. 2. Repent and do thy first works, or
else I will come unto thee quickly, and remove thy candlestick out of its
place; their Candlestick is removed, and now they are in Turkish darkness, and
so the burden of Ephesus is fulfilled. But why, I beseech you, should that
admonition be so often repeated in the second and third Chapters, He that has
ears to hear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the seven Churches; but to
let us know, that the threatenings there denounced, belong to the Churches of
Europe, as well as of Asia; and to England, as well as to Ephesus: And seeing
every one has ears to hear, and therefore ought to hear, therefore every
particular man is as liable to the same severity as whole Churches; and
therefore as by the sins of a Nation, God may be provoked to deliver it up to
darkness and delusion, and to believe lies; so for the sins of particular
persons, he may give them over to a Lying spirit, and suffer Seducers to
prevail upon them, so that they shall not see the plainest truths in Religion,
nor discern the most gross and monstrous Errors; Because they received not the
love of the truth that they might be saved; for this cause God shall send them
strong delusions, that they should believe a lie, that they might all be damned
who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness, 2 These. 2.11.
It is not therefore unreasonable to conclude, that the contempt of all holy
things that reigns amongst many wicked men, is from the Judgment of God, giving
them up to a reprobate mind; their habitual Vices have violated their natural
Instincts, and raised out the sense of good and evil; and moreover the
vengeance of God's wrath is upon them, giving them over to their own vileness,
permitting them to run on in wickedness without the checks and restraints of
his good Spirit, and to defy the goodness of God, and to laugh at Counsels and
Admonitions, and to make haste to their own perdition, thereby fulfilling that
Prophecy of Daniel referring to the Times of the Gospel, The wicked shall do
wickedly, and none of the wiched shall understand, Dan. 12.10.

Of what has been said, the sum is this, If godliness be in it self a fit
means to promote the knowledge of truth; if it has moreover a sure word of
promise, which the unrighteous have not, That the righteous shall be assisted
in the search of truth, and if on the other hand, ungodly men are under so many
natural impediments that obstruct the knowledge of the truth, and moreover lie
under such severe threatenings of blindness, it must needs follow, that
supposing the Good and the Bad to be equally endued with natural Abilities of
understanding, and equally enjoying the external means of knowledge, that the
former has vast advantages yet above the latter, which was the first thing to
be shown. The

Second is, That there is some knowledge of Divine things, that cannot be
attained by the wicked man while he so continues, though in other respects he
be never so much superior to the righteous, and that is, the experimental
knowledge of Religion, which does above all other things confirm the Faith of a
good Christian; he that does the will of God, understands the power of good
Principles to fortify him against temptations, to restrain him from sin, to
keep him to his Duty, to render it pleasant and delightful to him, to moderate
him in his prosperity, and to support him in adversity, and by all this he
understands the great worth and excellency of true Religion incomparably better
than any man, who can talk learnedly, and argue dexterously about it, but never
felt the life and power of it in his heart; for this reason it is that the
Faith of good Christians, who are not so well verst in subtle reasonings as in
religious practice, cannot be shaken by the objections of a Sophister, because
they have that inward sense of the power and excellency of Divine Truths, which
is above all other argument: They know by experience, that in the keeping of
God's Commandments there is great reward, and cannot therefore be entangled by
any artificial objections against it; but that I may not be mistaken, I do not
pretend, that the pleasure which a man finds in believing any Doctrine, is
always an argument that the Doctrine is true: There are some Doctrines in the
World that tend to licentiousness, that weaken the obligations to an holy life,
and therefore are sweet to the carnal man, because they can put him in
possession of great joy in himself, before he has that good title to it, which
can only be founded upon repentance and holiness; therefore it is neither false
nor allowable always to argue from the experience a man has of the sweetness
and pleasure of his persuasions to the truth of them, as many misguided Souls
have done; but for all that, it is most certain, that Religion consisting in
the belief of truth, and the practice of goodness, a man shall understand the
power of the one, and the excellency of the other by experience, better than he
can by mere speculation; for the nature of things that are to be done, is never
so fully understood as by doing them; and the force of Truth is never so
thoroughly felt as when it makes the Will and Affections, as well as the
Understanding, submit to it; now the best way to avoid arguing to our selves
fallaciously from our own experience, and being imposed upon by the joy and
pleasure which those persuasions yield, that tend to carnal security; the best
way (I say) to avoid this, is to follow our Savior's rule, by laying the
foundation even of experimental knowledge in doing the will of God, and
applying our selves with all sincerity to the keeping of his Commandments,
because then we shall never argue from experience, but in favor of the truth,
(i. e.) of true Virtue and Holiness, and of those Principles which lead to the
practice of it: And most certainly, there is that comfort and satisfaction in
believing Divine Truth, there are those Joys in living according to it, which
can never be thoroughly understood, but by the practice of Religion and Virtue,
which no man can have a just conception of, till he has tasted and seen how
gracious God is. Solomon says, That the ways of wisdom are pleasantness, and
all her paths are peace; but then we shall never thoroughly understand this,
till we walk in them: in the keeping of God's Commandments there is great
reward; but how shall we find this reward, but in keeping of them? It may be
described to us by others but as imperfectly as the Pencil does Life and
Motion, the best descriptions will fall short of the subject; and if we be
alienated from the life of God, we cannot fully conceive it: Nay, most commonly
the delights of the righteous are things flat and insipid, and the
representation of them is nauseous and irksom to the carnal worldling, and he
is hardly in a better condition to understand it, than one that is born Blind
can apprehend that saying of Solomon, Truly light is sweet, and a pleasant
thing it is to behold the Sun.

The sum of all is this, That if sincerity toward God in doing his will, is a
great advantage toward the obtaining of that knowledge which is possible to
the wicked man, the knowledge of speculation, if also that knowledge is gained
by it, which the insincere have nothing at all of; if the righteous do not only
better apprehend the weight of arguments, but understand more, by having their
senses exercised to discern between good and evil; then have we great reason to
follow our Savior's method, If any man will do his will, he shall know of the
doctrine whether it be of God.

Only let us remember, that this knowledge is not to be gained, this blessing
is not to be procured to our selves, either by my discourse, or by your
hearing, what has been said concerning our Savior's words, no nor by granting
the truth and reasonableness of what has been offered in illustration of them;
but only by putting our selves seriously upon the trial of this way, by doing
the will of God; for what has been said of Divine Truths in the general, holds
good of this in particular, That the excellency of our Lord's method for the
gaining of good knowledge in the things of God, cannot be thoroughly judged,
till we have applied our selves to the use of it; and I doubt not, but those
that have made trial, do acknowledge the truth of what has been said.

FINIS.

