TWO LETTERS Written by the Right Honorable EDWARD Earl of CLARENDON, late
Lord High Chancellor of ENGLAND: One to His Royal Highness the Duke of YORK:
The other to the DUCHESS, Occasioned by Her embracing the Roman Catholic
Religion.
SIR,
I Have not presumed in any manner to approach Your Royal Presence since I have
been marked with the Brand of Banishment; And I would still* with the same awe
forbear this Presumption, if I did not believe my self bound by all the
obligations of Duty to make this Address to You. I have been too much
acquainted with the presumption and impudence of the Times, in raising false
and scandalous reproaches upon Innocent and worthy Persons of all Qualities and
Degrees, to give credit to those bold Whispers which have been too long
scattered abroad concern^ng your Wives being shaken in her Religion: But when
those whispers break out into noise, and public Persons begin to report that
the Duchess is become a Roman Catholic: When I heard that many Worthy Persons
of unquestionable Devotion to your R. H are not without some fear and
apprehension of it; and many Reflections are made from thence to the prejudice
of your Royal Person, and even of the Kings Majesty's; I hope it may not
misbecome me, at what distance soever, to cast my self at your Feet, and
beseech you to look to this matter in time, and to apply some Antidote to expel
the Poison of it. It is not possible your R H. can be without Zeal, and Entire
Devotion for that Church, for the Purity and Preservation whereof your Blessed
Father made himself a Sacrifice; and to the Restoration whereof You have
contributed so much your self, and which highly deserves the Kings Protection
and yours, since there can be no possible defection in the hearts of the
People, whilst due Reverence is made to the Church. Your Wife is so generally
believed to have so perfect Duty, and Entire Resignation to the Will of your H.
that any defection in Her from her Religion, will be imputed to want of
circumspection in You, and not using your Authority; or to your connivance. I
need not tell the ill consequence that such a mutation would be attended with,
in reference to your R. H. and even to the King himself, whose greatest
security (under God,) is in the affection and Duty of his Protestant Subjects.
Your R. H. well knows how far I have always been from wishing that the Roman
Catholics should be prosecuted with severity; but I less wish it should ever
be in their power to be able to prosecute those who differ from them, since we
well know how little moderation they would or could use.

And if this which People so much talk of, (I hope without ground,) should fall
out, it might very probably raise a greater storm against the Roman Catholics
in general, than modest Men can wish; since after such a breach, any Jealousy
of their presumption would seem reasonable. I have written to the Duchess with
the freedom and affection of a troubled and perplexed Father. I do most humbly
beseech your R H. by your Authority to rescue Her from bringing a Mischief upon
You and her self, that never can be repaired; and to think it worthy Your
Wisdom to remove and dispell those reproaches (how false soever,) by better
Evidence then Contempt, and hope You do believe that no severity I have or can
undergo, shall in any degree lessen or diminish my most profound Duty to His
Majesty or Your R. H. but that I do with all imaginable Obedience submit to
Your good Pleasure in all things;

God Preserve Your R. H. and keep me in your favor, Sir, Your R. H. most
Humble and Obedient Servant, CLARENDON.


THE Earl of Clarendons LETTER TO THE Duchess of YORK.
YOu have much reason to believe that I have no mind to trouble you, or
displease you, especially in an argument that is so unpleasant* and grievous to
my self; but as no distance of place that is between us, in respect of our
Residence, or the greater distance in respect of the high condition you are in,
can make me less your Father, or absolve me from performing those obligations
which that Relation requires from me: So when I receive any Credible
advertisement of what reflects upon You, in point of Honor, Conscience, or
Discretion, I ought not to omit the informing You of it, or administering such
advice to You, as to my understanding seems reasonable, and which I must still
hope will have some Credit with You: I will confess to You, that what You wrote
to me many Months since, upon those Reproaches which I told You were generally
reported concerning Your defection in Religion, gave me so much satisfaction,
that I believed them to proceed from that ill Spirit of the Time that delights
in Slanders and Calumny; but I must tell You, the same Report increases of late
very much, and I my self saw a Letter the last week from Paris, from a person
who said the English Ambassador assured him the day before, that the Duchess
was become a Roman Catholic; and which makes greater Impression upon me, I am
assured that many good men in England, who have great Affection for You and me,
and who have thought nothing more impossible, then that there should be such a
Change in You, are at present under much affliction, with the observation of a
great Change in Your course, of Life and that constant Exercise of that
Devotion which was so notorious; and do apprehend from Your frequent
Discourses, that you have not the same Reverence and Veneration, which You use
to have, for the Church of England, the Church in which you were Baptized, and
the Church the best Constituted, and the most free from Errors of any Christian
Church this day in the World; and that some persons by their Insinuations have
prevailed with You to have a better Op^nion of that which is most opposite to
it, the Church of Rome, then the Integrity thereof deserves. It is not yet in
my power to believe that Your wit and understanding (with Gods blessing upon
both) can suffer you to be shaken further then with Melancholic reflections
upon the Iniquity and wickedness of the Age we live in, which discredits all
Religion, and which with equal license breaks into the Professors of all, and
prevails upon the members of all Churches, and whose Manners will have no
benefit from the Faith of any Church.

I presume You do not entangle Your self in the particular Controversies
between the Romanists and us, or think Your self a Competent Judge of all
difficulties which occur therein; and therefore it must be some fallacious
argument of Antiquity and Universality confidently urged by men who know less
then many of those You are acquainted with, and ought less to be believed by
You, that can raise any doubts or scruples in You; and if You will with equal
temper hear those who are well able to inform You in all such particulars, it
is not possible for You to suck in that poison which can only corrupt and
prevail over You, by stopping Your own Ears and shutting Your own Eyes. There
are but two persons in the World who have greater Authority with You then I can
pretend to, and am sure they both suffer more in this Rumor, and would suffer
much more if there were ground for it, then I can do; and truly I am as
unlikely to be deceived my self, or to deceive You, as any man who endeavors
to pervert You in Your Religion: And therefore I beseech You let me have so
much Credit with You, as to persuade you to communicate any Doubts or Scruples
which occur to You, before You suffer them to make too deep an Impression upon
You. The common Argument that there is no Salvation out of the Church, and that
the Church of Rome is that only true Church, is both irrational and untrue;
there are many Churches in which Salvation may be attained as well as in any
one of them: And were many even in the Apostles time, otherewise they would not
have directed their Epistles to so many several Churches, in which there were
different Opinions received and very different Doctrines taught. There is
indeed but one Faith in which we can be saved, the steadfast belief of the
Birth, Passion and Resurrecti^n of our Savior; and every Church that receives
and embraces that Faith is in a state of Salvation; if the Apostles Preached
true Doctrine, the reception and retention of many Errors, does not destroy the
Essence of a Church; if it did, the Church of Rome would be in as ill, if not
in a worse Condition, then most other Christian Churches, because its Errors
are of a greater magnitude, and more destructive to Religion. Let not the
Canting Discourse of the Universality and extent of that Church, which has as
little of Truth as the rest, prevail over You; they who will imitate the
greatest part of the World, must tu^n Heathens, for it is generally believed
that above half the World is possessed by them, and that the Mahumet^ns possess
more then half the remainder: There is as little question that of the rest
which is inhabited by Christians, one part of four is not of the Communion of
the Church of Rome, and God knows in that very Communion there is as great
discord in Opinion, and in matters of as great moment, as is between the other
Christians.

I hear you do in public discourses dislike some things in the Church of
England, as the Marriage of the Clergy which is a point that no Roman Catholic
will pretend to be of the Essence of Religion, and is in use in many places
which are of the Communion of the Church of Rome; as in Bohemia, and those
parts of the Greek Church which submit to the Roman: And all men know, that in
the late Council of Trent, the Sacrament of both kinds, and liberty of the
Clergy to marry, was very passionately pressed both by the Emperor and King of
France, for their Dominions; and it was afterward granted to Germany, though
under such conditions as made it ineffectual: which however shows that it was
not, nor ever can be looked upon as matter of Religion. Christianity was many
hundred years old, before such a restraint was ever heard of in the Church; and
when it was endeavored, it met with great opposition, and was never submitted
to. And as the positive Inhibition seems absolutely unlawful, so the
Inconveniences which result from thence, will upon a just disquisition be found
superior to those which attend the liberty, which Christian Religion permits.
Those Arguments which are not strong enough to draw persons from the Roman
Communion, into that of the Church of England, when Custom and Education, and a
long stupid resignation of all their faculties to their Teachers, usually shuts
out all Reason to the contrary may yet be abundant to retain those who have
been Baptized, and Bred and Instructed in the Grounds and Principles of that
Religion, which are in truth not only founded upon the clear Authority of the
Scriptures, but upon the consent of Antiquity, and the Practice of the
Primitive Church; and men who look into Antiquity, know well by what Corruption
and Violence, and with what constant and continual Opposition those Opinions
which are contrary to ours, crept into the World; and how unwarrantably the
Authority of the Bishop of Rome, which alone supports all the rest, came to
prevail, who has no more pretense of Authority and Power in England, than the
Bishop of Paris or Tole^o can as reasonably lay claim to; and is so far from
being matter of Catholic Religion, that the Pope has so much, and no more to
do in France or Spain, or any other Catholic Dominion, then the Crown, and
Laws and Constitutions of several Kingdoms gave him leave; which makes him so
little, (if at all,) considered in France, and so much in Spain: And therefore
the English Catholics which attribute so much to him, make themselves very
unwarrantably of another Religion than the Catholic Church professes; and
without doubt they who desert the Church of England, of which they are Members,
and become thereby disobedient to the Ecclesiastical and Civil Laws of their
Country, and therein renounce their subjection to the State, as well as to the
Church, (which are grievous sins) had need have a better excuse then the
meeting with some doubts which they could not answer; and less then a manifest
evidence that their Salvation is desperate in that Communion, cannot serve
their turn: And they who imagine they have such an evidence, ought rather to
suspect that their Understanding has forsaken them, and that they are become
mad, then that the Church which is replenished with all Learning and Piety
requisite, can betray them to Perdition. I beseech you to consider, (which I
hope will overruled those ordinary Doubts and Objections which may be infused
into you) that if you change your Religion, you renounce all Obedience and
Affection to your Father, who loves you so tenderly, that such an odious
mutation would break his heart; you condemn your Father and your Mother, (whose
incomparable virtue, and piety and devotion has placed her in Heaven) for
having impiously Educated you; and you dec^are the Church and State, to both
which you owe Reverence and Subjection, to be in your Judgment Antich^istian:
You bring irreparable dishonor* scandal and prejudice to the Duke your
Husband, to whom you ought to pay all imaginable Duty, and whom I presume is
much more precious to you then your own Life; and all possible ruin to your
Children, of whose company and conversation you must look to be deprived, for
God forbid that after such an Apostasy, you should have any power in Education
of your Children. You have many Enemies, whom you herein would abundantly
grat^fie; and some Friends whom you will thereby (at least as far as in you
lies) perfectly destroy; and afflict many others who have deserved well o^ you.

I know you are not inclined to any part of this mischief, and therefore offer
those Considerations, as all those particulars would be the infallible
Consequence of such a Conclusion. It is to me the saddest circumstance of my
Banishment, that I may not be admitted, in such a season as this, to confer
with you; when I am confident I could satisfy you in all your Doubts, and make
it appear to you, that there are many Absurdities in the Roman Religion,
inconsistent with your Judgment and Understanding, and many Impieties
inconsistent with your Conscience; so that before you can submit to the
Obligations of Faith, you must divest your self of your Natural Reason, and
common Sense, and captivate the dictates of your own Conscience, to the
Impositions of an Authority which has not any pretense to oblige or advise
you. If you will not with freedom communicate the Doubts which occur to you, to
those near you, of whose Learning and Piety you have had much experience, let
me Conjure you to impart them to me, and to expect my answer before You suffer
them to prevail over You.

God Bless You and Yours.


