A TREATISE OF WOOL, AND THE Manufacture of it: In a LETTER to a FRIEND.

Occasioned upon a Discourse concerning the great Abatements of Rents, and Low
Value of Lands.

Wherein is showed how their Worth and Value may be advanced by the Improvement
of the Manufacture and Price of our English WOOL.

Together with the PRESENTMENT of the Grand JURY of the County of Somerset, at
the General Quarter Sessions begun at Brewton the Thirteenth Day of January
1684.

LONDON, Printed for William Crook at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar.
1685.

SIR,
IT is now seven years since I published a Treatise of this Nature; it came
forth then accompanied with something concerning Hospitality, and the
Consumption of our Cattle; But the Age at present being not that way inclined,
I have wholly omitted that part; and shall only offer in this, that which
concerns our English Wool, and the Manufacture of it. For I find that a great
many are very busy about this Commodity, and the Trade of it; But yet I do not
find any Proposals offered, whereby the Price of our English Wool may be
advanced; I shall therefore lay down this Assertion; That the greatest cause of
the Abatement of Rents, and low Value upon Lands at this day, (which I suppose
every man that has any is sensible of,) has been the great fall, and low
price of Wool for these few years past. Then on the contrary, the only way to
raise our Rents, and to bring our Lands to their former worth and value again,
must be by advancing the price of our English Wool. Now which way this is to be
done, will be the Subject of this following Treatise; which is desired may be
accepted, as it is freely offered (to wit) as the real intention of a true
English man, for the benefit of his Native Country.

The Occasion of publishing this at this time, was merely accidental; for being
at White Hall some few Months since, I heard of great Complaints made, with a
Petition to the King and Council, setting forth the Transportation of our Wool,
to the great Prejudice of our Clothing Trade, and the ruining of our Poor for
want of Work; with many dismal Apprehensions of the evil Consequences thereof:
but not one word offered which way either to advance the Trade of this our
Woollen Manufacture, or to raise the Price of our English Wool; But the whole
Design I perceived was for the Clothiers Advantage to buy Wool cheap, and for
the Merchant and Drapers to have Cloth at a low price; both very destructive,
not only to the Kingdom in General, but also to the Trade it self; as shall
hereof be made appear.

The Complaint I confess was of great Concernment, that our Wool, and other
Materials for the making of Cloth, as Fuller's Earth, etc. ought not to be
exported; the many Acts of Parliament in all Ages since King Edward the Third,
for preserving this Trade and Manufacture to our selves, and prohibiting under
severe Penalties, the Transportation of our English Wool, is sufficient to
convince us of what absolute Necessity the Manufacturing of our Wool was looked
upon to be, as to the Wealth and Trade of our English Nation; And what
Advantage our Ancestors in former Ages (even to the times of the late
Rebellion) made by this Trade of Cloth. The Account of the Russia and Turkey
Company, but especially the Hamborough Company, which took off so many thousand
Cloths yearly, may serve us only to bewail the present Decay of so great a
Trade. So that our Business now is not only to prohibit the Exportation of our
Wool, but more chiefly to advance the Trade and Sale of our Cloth; whereby the
price of our English Wool may be raised again to what it was formerly worth.
For to what purpose is it to keep all our own Wool at Home, and to admit all
other Wool to come in Gratis; if we have not vent enough for that of our own
growth. I confess it may sometimes enrich the Clothier by buying cheap, but I
am sure it will impoverish the Gentlemen and Farmers, by selling at so low a
price; therefore, if by the following Discourse our ancient Trade for this
Commodity may be restored, and our Wool brought to a more considerable price
then it now bears, whereby the Rents and Revenues of the Kingdom may be
increased, and our Lands brought to their former Worth and Value again; I hope
this small Treatise may be accepted.

Sir, You may please to remember upon the Discourse we had on this Subject,
that it was your desire I should give you the Heads and Substance thereof,
against the next meeting of the Parliament; that as you found a convenient
Opportunity and compliance with you herein, by some of your Fellow Members,
with whom you did intend first to advise, you would accordingly proceed in it
for the Public good: but the Business of the Popish Plot then breaking out,
all things of this nature were then put off, and this also was laid aside. But
meeting with this Opportunity, I thought it a very fit time to retrieve it;
especially considering that neither our Wool, or our Clothing Trade have since
advanced, but on the contrary grown worse and worse; even to so low an Ebb,
that it is impossible to sink lower. And that it being at this time more
particularly in his Majesty's Royal hands, to dispose and regulate the sale of
Cloth at that great and chiefest Market in the Kingdom for the same at
Blackwel-hall in London, by appointing such Officers, and such Regulation of
the sale of Cloth there, together with such Rules and Orders to be observed,
both by the Clothier, Merchant, and Draper, according to the several Laws and
Statutes heretofore made, for the Encouragement of this great Trade, as in his
Princely Wisdom shall be thought most fit and convenient. And although many
offers have been made of late years for England's Improvement, which shows that
we are sufficiently sensible of our decaying Condition, if we could but tell
how to help our selves; yet it is a very great Question whether several of
those Designs might in the end prove for the real Good and Benefit of this
Kingdom, as to endeavor the planting of several Foreign Commodities, whereby
to engross the Manufacture of other Nations to our selves; for the saving, as
we allege, many thousands of pounds at home, which they cost us abroad; and
the cutting of so many Rivers to make them Navigable, through the very heart of
most parts of the Kingdom, to London; whereby all our Trade and Carriage might
pass up and down without Wagons and Horses, at far cheaper rates than now they
do by them; with several other the like Projects, that carry with them fair
Pretenses of Thrift and good Husbandry; while on the other hand it might easily
be made appear, that many of those Designs would prove so disadvantagious to
us, notwithstanding the specious show of Profit. That our Lands which are
already fallen a fourth part of their ancient Worth and Value, would not then,
in most parts of the Kingdom, yield the one half, especially the Pasture and
Meadow Grounds. For it is not the having all things of our own growth on the
one hand, and the saving of our Money on the other can make us Rich; neither
can our Increase and Plenty in some sense be said to be our Wealth, if we have
not a suitable Vend and Consumption thereof. Besides, Nature has otherwise
provided, and so furnished each particular part of the World with something
which the rest want, whereby to preserve a Friendship and Commerce together.

Sir, I have hinted at this, that the following Discourse might meet with the
less Prejudice, when the Design of it shall appear, that it is not for the
prohibiting any Foreign Commodity, or for the engrossing all within our own
growth; but that which we call our own growth and Manufacture, may be spent, if
not by others abroad, yet among our selves at home: And this I think is so
reasonable, that no Nation in the World, but will allow us that Liberty.

Let us now proceed to that which is intended in this following Discourse; and
in the first place, to show how much our Estates and Rents are fallen from
their former Value within these few years, and what may probably be the Causes
thereof, with some ways and means that may be conceived necessary to restore
them to that value and esteem again.

First then, that our Rents are abated, and that the Value of our Lands are
fallen, most men's particular experience will justify me in the truth hereof;
For from twenty years purchase, the usual rate not many years since, they are
now sunk to eighteen at the highest; and in some places sixteen or seventeen
years purchase is the selling rate, and these very same Estates at a low under
value; so that if we sum up what an hundred pounds a year, the Rent well paid,
was worth thirty or forty years since, in the beginning of the late Rebellious
Wars, we shall find, that the real value of our Estates are a third part less
than they were then; and but two parts of three, of what Money they would have
yielded then, can now be raised where any man has occasion to sell. For
Example, Let an hundred pound a year be the standard, the just value then that
this hundred pound a year would have yielded at twenty years purchase, is two
thousand pound. Now there is twenty pound a year with the least, and in many
places thirty pound a year Abatement in Rent out of this hundred. We will touch
the Sore as easy as possible, and allow but twenty per Annum abatement in
Rent, so there remains but eighty pound, which at eighteen years purchase comes
to 1440 pound; so that at this rate, here is near a third part lost of the real
Value what the Lands and Estates of the Kingdom were formerly worth. And this
we may believe, that that Parliament about seven years since were very sensible
of: Witness their many Debates in their several Sessions about raising Money
for his Majesty's supplies, and the great care the Houses then took in all
those Debates, that none of those Supplies should be provided for by a Land
Tax, whilst there could any other way possibly be found out, or thought upon;
and those small helps, as the Excise on the Law etc. which were so long a
raising but a very inconsiderable Sum, at last cannot be looked upon to stand
the King and Kingdom in any stead, should there be any extraordinary occasion
for Money. If we should expect any supply from the Merchant, and from Trade,
they will tell you that there is as much Custom and Excise laid upon all sorts
of Commodities as the Trade is able to bear; This shall be the general Answer
of the whole Body of Merchants, and the Whole-sale-dealers throughout the
Kingdom, especially in London, so that little help is to be expected from them.
Have we not reason then to endeavor the Restoring our Lands and Rents to their
former value and esteem, when we have hardly any other way left for the
Preservation of our Lives, Estates, yea, and our Trade too: for should there be
any extraordinary Occasion for a speedy supply of Money, when all Heads and
Wits are puzl'd which way to raise it; there can be no speedier way possibly
found out, then by a Land Tax (or Subsidy) which is much the same, provided our
Lands and Rents may be raised to their former value and esteem.

This being then the true state of the Case, and the Condition we are fallen
into, since the beginning of the late Wars; let us now proceed to examine the
Causes of this great Mischief, to make way for remedying the same; and these
may be sum'd up into these two grand ones (to wit) Our Wool, and Cattle, the
latter of which was endeavored to be provided for, by that Irish Act which
utterly prohibited the bringing in of any sort of Cattle out of Ireland into
this Kingdom, upon forfeiture thereof; when there was the same Reason, at the
very same time, against the Importation of their Wool, (to wit) to prevent the
beating down the Rents of that part of the Kingdom which depended most upon
breeding.

Let us now proceed, and enquire into the Reasons of the low Rates and Prices
of our Wool, and we shall find that we may bring them under these few chief
Heads.

First then, The great quantity of Spanish Wool sold here at very low Rates,
and that made into Cloth, and the most part of it (to our shame) worn by our
Selves; is a very great Cause of the Abatement and low Price of ours.

Secondly, The not wearing, and other ways using the Cloth made of our own
Wool, both by our selves at Home, and by our People in our several Plantations
abroad, may be looked upon as another Cause of the great Abatement of the Price
of Wool.

Thirdly, The decaying Condition of the Merchant-Adventurers, and Hamborough
Company, who did formerly send away so many of our English Cloths into Germany,
and all those Eastern Parts of Europe, more than now they do, may be reckoned
another Cause of the low Price of Wool.

Fourthly, The not making our Cloth of that Size and Substance as it ought to
be, as by several Statutes to that purpose, it may appear, and for which the
Alnage Office was at first Established.

And Lastly, The great Abuses and Cheats of late years put upon our Clothiers,
by the Brokers and Factors at Blackwell-Hall, to the breaking and undoing of
many of our young Clothiers, especially if their stocks be small; These may be
accounted some of the chief Causes of the great Abatement and low Price of our
Wool.

We will Examine them in their Order. And first, concerning the Spanish Wool.
If we look no farther back than 1660, the Year of his Majesty's happy
Restoration, We shall find that the Superfine Spanish Wool (as they term it)
was sold for four shillings, and four shillings and four pence the pound, and
the other sorts at three shillings, and three shillings and six pence the
pound, according as it was in goodness: And our Wool at that time was sold for
sixteen pence and eighteen pence the pound. Now this present year 1684, and
seven or eight years since, the Supersine Spanish Wool, is not worth above two
shillings, or two shillings and two pence the pound, and the other sorts at
twenty pence and two and twenty pence the pound; and our Wool will not yield
above seven pence or eight pence a pound; so that in less than twenty years
time our Wool is fallen the one half and more; and so long as the Spanish Wool
is sold at this low Rate, it is not likely that our own can Advance in price:
And if so, then our Rents, especially those Farms that depend most upon Corn
and Sheep, must continue at this low Ebb they are now at, if they fall no
lower. The removal then of this great Mischief, is the next thing we are to
Consider; and herein I must content my self to receive the Censures of several
Persons of the contrary Party, I mean those Persons whose Fortunes and
Employments lie principally in the Buying, not growing of this Commodity; but
they are not so many.

First then, Spanish Wool must of necessity Advance something toward the price
it was formerly at, when our Wool yielded sixteen pence and eighteen pence the
pound: For that being so much finer than ours, and bearing but a low Price, we
cannot expect ours should Rise; and if this Advance of the Spanish Wool is not
to be expected from abroad, then we must endeavor what can be done at home.

If some Duty or Custom were laid upon it (I shall not presume to propose the
Sum) so as to bring it to bear a considerable Rate, his Majesty by this means
would receive a good Addition to his Revenue, and our Wool would be brought to
a considerable Price. As for the Prohibiting this or most other Foreign
Commodities, we may find upon Examination, and by Experience too, that that way
will not so well answer our Design, as the laying a sufficient Duty upon them
more or less according to the quality of the Commodity. I will Instance only in
the Irish Act; if ten or twenty shillings, more or less, upon a Bullock, and
five shillings upon a Sheep, or thereabouts, had been laid as a Duty upon them,
instead of Prohibiting them; we had not only continued still our Trade and
Commerce with them, but his Majesty had received e're this many a Thousand
pound for his Custom. For, as the Case now stands, the King receives no
Advantage by them; his Officers in all Ports where they are landed (being not
obliged by their Office, take no notice of them) do rather help the concealing
them, than any way endeavor a seizure: Which if otherwise, they were then all
bound by their Offices to receive his Majesty's Duty; and then each Bullock and
Sheep paying so much Custom, they could not under-sell us, which was the great
Design of that Act. viz. The keeping up the price of our English Cattle, so
that an Impost upon Wool, as well as all other Commodities, will better Answer
our Interest and Designs against them than a Prohibition: for here can be no
other shift, if the Officers be honest and careful, but the paying their Money.

But here will arise an Objection.

If this should be so, that a Duty should be imposed upon the Spanish Wool,
then would the Dutch and other Nations get away our Trade, by under-selling us
in all Places where Spanish Cloth is a Commodity: for if we must pay dearer for
our Wool than they, we cannot expect to have any Trade (with them) where this
Commodity is vended: for neither will our Clothiers make it, or our Merchants
buy it, if they cannot see some probability of Profit and Advantage.

To this Objection; We must believe that the Dutch are a People that will lose
no Opportunity of Profit where they can get it; and if they could vend more
Spanish Cloth than they do, we must also believe they would make more if they
could; they having the same liberty to buy the Wool as well as we, but there is
little danger of their getting this Trade from us this way. For they have their
hands as full already, and do make as much Cloth as they have People to employ
about it, with respect to their other Business and Manufactures.

As to the other part of the Objection, that concerns the Dutch, that if we
give more for Spanish Wool than they, then we must of course be under-sold by
them, and so by consequence lose our Trade.

We must first be informed what sort of Spanish Cloth it is they chiefly make,
and where it is vended, to do us this hurt. As for the sorts of Cloth they
make, they are most blacks, and many of them sold here, and worn by our selves;
and this I hope may be remedied; but for the Medlies, I suppose they make but
few, for the French and others with whom we trade for them, cannot be furnished
by any other Nation in the World but by us: so that if we raise the price of
them among our selves, we shall not be in danger to be under-sold by the Dutch.

But what is all this to that which we have to say for our selves? Here is a
fourth part of the real Value at least of our Kingdom within these few years
lost, and that principally by the fall in price of this one Commodity; and we
have no way possibly left to raise Money upon any urgent Occasion, but by our
Estates. And have we not reason then (as I said before) to endeavor our utmost
to restore them to their former value and esteem again. Which way had it been
possible for the Nation, in the late War, to have maintained so many vast
Armies in all Parts and Corners thereof, had not that War begun upon us in the
very height of our Wealth and Plenty, when our Wool at that time was worth
three times the price it now yields, with a full Trade for our Cloth both at
home and abroad; especially into Germany, Sweden, and all those Eastern
Countries; and our Cattle then paid sufficient profit, both to the Breeder and
Grasier, and Gold was as plenty with us then, as it was in Jerusalem in the
Reign of King Solomon; there was no throwing of Farms into the Landlords hands,
no Complaining of hard Rents, every Commodity of ours then yielded a Profit,
for we had a Consumption for them, and the Poor could not want Victuals, when
the Kitchen was accounted the best Room in the House. But to proceed.

The second cause of this great Abatement of the price of our Wool, may be
this, viz. The wearing and using of so much Spanish Cloth our selves, both at
home and in our several Plantations abroad; whereas if we were but enjoined to
wear, and otherwise to use no Cloth but what is made of our own English Wool,
we should find some alteration in the price of it in few years; and I doubt not
but our Clothiers could pick out enough of the finest sort of it to make Cloth
very little inferior to the Spanish. And it is easy to be made appear, that
we spend as much Spanish Cloth in our own Kingdoms and Plantations belonging to
the Crown of England (and a great part of that too not manufactur'd by our own
People, as Dutch black) as is worn in all the Kingdoms of the World besides,
and more. So that if any shall object against the laying a Duty upon the
Spanish Wool, I hope they will give us leave to enjoin our own People to wear
no Cloth but what is manufactured by our selves, and made of our own Wool; and
if this Consumption of our Cloth at home be added but to that Trade we have yet
left abroad for it, we should soon find an Increase in the price of our Wool.
And I know no reason why any should be offended with us for endeavoring our
own Interest and Advantage, the general design of all Nations: neither can this
spending of our own Cloth among our selves hinder any thing of our Trade abroad.

And that this may appear to be no new or upstart Project, the Statutes of 2
Edward the 3. Cap. 1, 2, 3. may sufficiently satisfy us; in which Kings Reign
it was, that the Manufacture of our Wool began to be our National Employment.
For among all our Staple Commodities, Wool had at that time the Precedence, as
being the most principal and ancient Commodity of the Kingdom, wherein the
generality of the People were deeply concerned; and the Manufacture of it,
though of long use among our selves, yet it received but little Encouragement
for a Trade into Foreign Parts, till these times; the Flemmings having the
principal Manufacture then by the continual supply of Wool that they received
from hence.

But the Wisdom of this great Prince soon discerned of what unspeakable value
the Manufacture of our own Wool would be to the Trade of this Kingdom; who,
like a provident and careful Father, looked farther than his present time; and
who, beingwell acquainted with the Flemmings Affairs, by a joint Engagement
with them in the War with France, had therein gained so good an Opinion amongst
them, that he might adventure to change a Complement for a Courtesy; the
Staples where our Wool was sold being now taken clean away, and by the Statute
of 2. Edw. 3. Cap. 1. made Felony to carry any Wool out of the Realm: He now
prosecutes his Design for the settling of the Manufacture at home, and
represents to those Flemmings the Danger they were in by the bordering Wars
with France, and the peacable Condition of England, and freedom of the People
that are Subjects here; Propounds an Invitation for them to come over hither,
wherein he promises them the same Privileges and Immunities with his own
Subjects: which they accepted, and came over, and brought their Manufacture
with them, which could never after be removed hence. So as now the Manufacture
and our Wool were joined together; and so long as they agree together, both
will thrive; but if they once part, (as the Spanish Wool at this time puts fair
at it) they will both be losers in the Conclusion.

The Manufacture of our Wool being brought to this Settlement at home, this
Heroic King Edward the Third, makes this other Statue in the same 11th year of
his Reign, That no Merchant, Foreign or Denizon, nor any other, after the Feast
of St. Michael, shall cause to be brought privately, or apertly by himself, nor
by any other into the said Lands of England, Ireland, Wales, and Scotland,
within the Kings Power, any Cloths made in any other Places than in the same,
upon forfeiture of the said Cloth, and further to be punished at the Kings
Will, as is aforesaid.

But because this Nation formerly had been, and still is too much wedded to the
wearing of Foreign Manufactures, the importing of which did hinder the using of
our own homemade Manufactures; (for too much of them make our own a Drug, our
Nation Poor, and our People to want Work) As a Cure for this Disease, our own
English Cloth is enjoined by a Law to be worn by all Persons under the Degree
of a Lord; and then the Wisdom of the times thought fit to provide for the true
and perfect making of Cloth; several Statutes were made in this Kings time,
Richard the Second, and were also confirmed by Queen Elizabeth, and King James;
but especially in the fifth year of Edward the 6th Cap. 6. For the Length,
Breadth, Weight, and Goodness of all sorts of Cloth; with several Proviso's to
prevent Frauds and Abuses both in the making and selling thereof: such care our
Ancestors have had in all former and latter Ages, for the improvement of this
our Woollen Manufacture, by which we may plainly see, of what absolute
Necessity it is to be encouraged and advanced: Shall it now by us (after so
much Care and Industry used by them to settle and bring it to our Doors, and
into our very Houses) be neglected, and scarce thought worth the Entertainment,
for fear of I know not what Jealousies of disobliging some Foreign Nation, by
putting a Duty on their Wool. Shall their Wisdom and Prudence that judged this
Manufacture and Trade for it, the great Support and and Glory of our Nation, be
called in question by our carelessness; and shall we suffer our selves to be
thus cheated of it, when we are as well able to maintain and defend it as they;
and by Exprience find, that it is our chiefest, if not only Manufacture and
Support of the Strength, Honor, and Wealth of our English Nation. For which
way can we continue a Trade long, that have no Money of our own growth, but
only what is brought unto us for Commodities; and if we can find nothing of our
own to barter and exchange for, we must in short time sink our trade abroad, if
we intend to keep our Money at home; our Staple Commodities must therefore of
Necessity be advanced and encouraged, to enable us by the return thereof, to
hold a Commerce with those Parts of the World that must supply us: for if Trade
be maintained barely out of the main Stock, the Kingdom in time must needs be
decayed, and so brought to Penury; it being our Magazin.

A third Cause of the great Abatement and low Price of our Wool may be this,
viz. The decaying Condition of the Merchant-Adventure, and Hamborough Company
within these few years; a Company that vended many thousands of our English
Cloths yearly; for after that our Staples for Wool were taken away, and the
Manufacture of our Cloth settled among us, this Company also had their Motion
from Flanders through Holland, until at last it came to be fixed, for the
convenience of those Eastern Countries, at Hamborough And it would not be
needless if the discreetest of them were advised with, to know the Reasons they
can give of this loss or decay, at least, of their Trade in Germany, and all
those adjoining Kingdoms. For a Trade of so large extent, and vast covernment
to us, ought not thus easily to be parted with. And there may possibly, upon
such an enquiry, something appear, that a great cause of this decay of that
Trade proceeds from our selves; which if so, there may then be some way found
out to recover that Ancient Company of the Merchant-Adventurers, their Trade,
Credit, and Esteem again; the only Company that transported most part of our
English Cloth. And we may more then probably guess, that the two following and
remaining Causes of the low Price of our Wool, which I proposed, to wit, the
not making of our Cloth of that size and substance as it ought to be, and as it
was ordered in former times to be made, as by the several Statutes before
recited may appear; and the Cheats and Abuses of the Brokers and Factors at
Blackwell-hall (a sort of People never heard of there, before the beginning of
the late Rebellion; and in those times there settled, that their Masters, who
first granted them their Charter, and made them a Corporation, might have the
more time and leisure to attend their other Employments of more weightier and
public Concernment) might be a great means to help ruin this our Trade. But
for the regulating a Business of so great a concern, I shall not presume to
propose the Method; there will be Application sufficient from all parts of the
Kingdom, were there a Committee appointed purposely for this Business; whereby
we might have some Hopes and Encouragement that our English Cloth may be a
Commodity again. And upon their Arraignment, there will be Bills plenty enough
brought in for their Conviction: For, from Men not worth much when the device
began, they are now many of them worth 5, and 10000 l. and some of them 40 and
50000 l. a Man; while many of the lower Rank of our Clothiers daily break and
run away; those men by their Wiles and Tricks creeping into their Estates: for
they have brought the Trade to that pass, there shall not now be a Cloth sold
in a Marketday at Blackwell-hall, by many of our Clothiers, if these men have
not the selling of it; and it would grieve a man's Heart to see how harmlesly
the poor Clothier waits at the heels of his Factor all the day long whither he
pleases to lead him; and when he puts into a Drapers Shop, he hears of nothing
but of bad Trading, uncomfortable News, and no Money stirring: for they are both
agreed to send the poor man out of Town without selling a Cloth himself;
neither shall he perhaps, hear in a long time what is become of his Cloth,
whether sold or not, until it be for the Factor's Convenience to give him an
account, or until a Draper or a Cloth-Merchant or two break, and then it is ten
to one but he may have an account, that some of his Cloth is gone that way: So
that as the Manufacture of our Cloth is now managed wholly by private Interests
and Designs, were our Trade abroad for it never so good, it is not probable
(lying in such hands) it should ever be restored to its ancient Credit and
Esteem. It therefore begs, and that earnestly, if we value the Strength, Honor
and Wealth of our Nation, that we should use our utmost Endeavor to advance it
to its just Worth and Reputation again, by freeing it from this great Monopoly,
and to set it at that Liberty, that the laborious and careful Clothier, who not
only spends his time, but hazards his Stock, and that small Fortune he began
with, for his own Maintenance, and those many he does employ in his Trade, may
have so much Favor as to sell his own Cloth himself; that what honest Profit
can be made thereof, he who only deserves and takes pains for it, may receive
it, to the Encouragement of that Manufacture, which must help the Price of our
Wool, which must help the Advancement of our Rents, etc. And not the lazy
Factor, whose only Labor is between Blackwell-hall and his Counting House, and
who suck the Gains from the honest Clothier, through the very Heart of himself,
his Family, and all the Poor therein employed, and thereby ruins our Trade,
the great cause of the Abatement of Rents, and the Improverishment of our
Kingdom. And as these Factors are the greatest Enemies to this Trade in
general, that either Malice or Envy could possibly set up, so if they be but
narrowly looked into, they will appear, for the most and Richest part of them,
as to their Principals to the present Government, the same with those who first
brought them thither, and who, by the Influence they have upon the Buyers, and
the Command they have upon the Clothiers, are able to draw more People into
Faction and Rebellion, than any other sort of men in the Kingdom besides.

There would such another Generation of Men be brought to the Bar from
Smith-field too, who put as great Injuries and Abuses upon our young Grasiers
especially, by buying and selling of Cattle there, and yet Butchers by their
Trade, who can either dull or raise the Markets at their Pleasure; so that we
may see into what hands the two great Commodities of our Kingdom of late years
are got; but this latter only by the by. We will go on with our Woollen
Manufacture, which being once more retrieved, let the Alnage-Office have a
whet, and be strictly look into, that they should not only receive their Fees,
but perform their Duty, that we may rightly know how far short our English
Cloth will come to the Spanish, when well and truly made; that by this means we
may recover it that Credit and Esteem it once had, both at home and abroad. For
methinks we are all asleep; we see a Trade snatched from us to our Ruin, and
yet seem to be unconcerned; Nay, which is worse, we help forward with it our
selves; and though we are taken notice of sufficiently, and jeered for the
French Apes, an English man pictured with a piece of Cloth under his Arm, to
choose his Fashion, yet I thought it had been always understood to be Cloth made
of his own Wool.

Having now given some particulars that may be great causes of the low Price of
our Wool, with some ways and means for the restoring of it to its former value
and use again, which each particular carries along with it; I shall wind up all
with that Act of Parliament made some years since, for the burying in Woollen:
and he that will but read that Act, may very well satisfy himself, that the
Parliament were sufficiently sensible of the great loss we were like to be at,
if some way or other were not found out to consume our Wool; and certainly they
were worthy Patriots for their Country, that first moved for, and afterward
pursued it to an Act, however it has not been received or obeyed as it
worthily deserved; we will therefore examine, and give some Guess how much Wool
might have been buried, since that Act of Parliament was first made, without
any Disparagement to the Dead, or to the surviving Friends of the Deceased; and
we shall find that a very great part of the Wool now in the Kingdom, I speak as
to the quantity, out of Cloth, had been at this day under Ground.

In London is buried one year with another (when no Plague or other Epidemical
Distemper Reigns) about twenty thousand, which, by Observation of some, bears a
seventh part with the Kingdom; so there days in England an hundred and forty
thousand yearly, with the least; and we will allow two pounds of Wool for a
Shroud, one with another, which amounts to two hundred and eighty thousand
pound of Wool yearly buried; so that in every ten years we shall spend this way
about twenty hundred thousand Ponds, a good proportion of one years Growth; but
with this Advantage to our Poor, that it is first made into Cloth. So that had
that Act of Parliament been duly observed, as it was our Interest so to do, we
may plainly perceive what quantity of Wool we had by this buried in our own
Kingdom of England (for I have not reckoned either Scotland, Ireland, or any of
our Plantations into this account) but if all could be brought within the
compass of this Act, and the charge of seeing it punctually performed,
carefully observed, we should not only spend in all these Kingdoms and Islands
belonging to the Crown of England, a most incredible quantity of our own Wool
manufactured by our selves, but save above threescore thousand Pounds Sterling
a year of our Money, which we lay out for Linen Cloth purposely for that use,
as may appear by examining this Charge by the former Rule; Equivalent to a
Story we have of one of our Kings, who finding a great glut of Cloth in the
Kingdom, beyond their Vent and Trade for it, bought it, and caused it all to be
burnt. And the Dutch, those subtle Traders, as it is generally reported of
them, when their Ships are fraighted with their Spices in the East Indies for
that years Provision into Europe, they return the rest in Smoke, by causing the
overplus of that years growth to be burnt at their own Factories; So that the
Consumption of every growth of our Wool is of absolute Necessity toward the
Improvement of our Rents, and for recovering that third or fourth part of the
real Value of our Kingdom, now lost since the fall and low price thereof.

But before I conclude wholly with this Cloth-trade, the chief and only
Manufacture of this Kingdom, I shall premise something by way of Quere, as a
Remedy to this great Mischief; and whether it may prove of advantage to the
growth, and Manufacture, and Trade of this Commodity, I shall leave it to far
better Judgments to determine.

Suppose there were a Company of Merchants of this Staple, settled by Patent or
Charter, as such Companies there are; the East India, Turkey, etc. that should
buy up in Spain every years growth of the Spanish Wool themselves, and thence
transport it, or as much as they should judge convenient for our Trade, hither,
to be manufactur'd by us; where a Duty should be imposed upon it, according as
it should be judged the Trade would bear, in order to the Advancement of our
own; for there lies the bottom still of the Design. I ask the Question, Where
would the Inconveniences arise? For the Truth is, a Business of this Nature is
more fit to be discoursed of by a Committee, than meddled with by any private
Person; I say, if such a Company were set up, what would be the Objections
against it?

For, first the Spaniard can receive no Prejudice by it; we shall by this means
rather advance something the Price, than any way abate it.

And secondly, for the Hollanders, I suppose we should make no scruple of
getting the Trade from them, for this Cloth Trade is our Ancient Right, and did
always belong to our Nation, and no other People in the World could in reason
pretend to the Manufacture of it, the Staple growing upon our own Soil. And
since there is now another sort of Wool started up within these few years,
which proves to the Prejudice of ours; I see no Reason against me, if we can
compass to make both our own and that too, but that we may justly ingross it if
we can, without offering any Injustice to our Neighboring Nation; and then,
what is their Growth and Manufacture, as Linen Cloth, and the like, if they
will quietly desist, and yield up this to us, as it is our Right, we may, I
presume, be persuaded (I speak only for my self) to do the like by theirs.

But if we examine this Business a little farther, we shall find, that there
may be a necessity for the laying a Duty upon this Spanish Wool; and that it
will be impossible while the Trade is free, and that every man may buy and make
what he please of this sort of Cloth, that ever our Wool should advance in
price; for as the Rates now go, unless the Spaniard raise the Price, our
Merchants will not, and our Clothiers drive the old Design in buying as cheap
as they can; so that between them they will keep down the price of ours; for
one man in a Fair or Market may beat down the Price of what he deals in, by
under-selling his own Commodity, but where is all this Spanish Cloth made that
does us this harm? Were it the Manufacture of the whole Nation that kept all
the Poor at work, there might be something said for it; but it is all made (I
mean the Medlies) in the Corners of Two Shires, (to wit) Somerset and
Wiltshire, and that within the compass of twenty or thirty miles at most; and
not an hundred (I speak with the most) Principal Clothiers concerned in the
making of this Spanish Cloth; what damage can the Engrossing then of this
Spanish Wool, or putting a Duty or Custom upon it do the Nation? It is very
true, there are many that call for the Liberty of the People, that every Man
may Buy and Sell as he please. And it were well if these Men would consider
themselves as well in the Relative as in their own Personal Concerns: For if
every Man were Independent, his Liberty were so too; but so long as any Man is
a Member of a Kingdom, his Liberty must likewise depend upon the good of the
same Kingdom. And if it be not good for a Nation that every man should buy and
sell, and wear what he paid for, as he please, he must not think himself
injured, if his Liberty, as an Englishman, be confined, so long as his Country
has an Interest in his Commodity and Trade, for its Safety and Welfare as well
as himself. So if the Trade for Spanish Wool, which is now at Liberty, were in
the hands of one particular Company, it would not then lie in the power of any
private Persons to sink the Trade and Manufacture of our Wool, as now they can:
For certainly, a Liberty for a Private Trade, in some cases, may bring that
Mischief upon the Public Concern of a Nation, not easily to be removed again.
I will only instance one Passage, which may be fresh in every man's memory,
that had then any Concern in Wool, to show what command the great Clothiers,
Factors, and others have of that Commodity and the Trade for it.

When the Peace was last made with the Dutch, about ten years since, by the
Mediation of the Spanish Ambassador, and the French left wholly out in that
Agreement, the price of our Wool, in less than a Months time, did rise from 18
s. and 19 s, to 25 s. and 26 s. the weight, that is a quarter part more than it
would yield a Week before the News of that Agreement with Holland. But the
Scene quickly shifted, for the Parliament being soon after Prorogued, our Wool
did not so fast advance before, but now it came tumbling down; so that it
returned not only in a Week or Fortnights time to its former price, but passed
by without any stay or stop, until it was almost impossible to run lower, even
to 12, and 13 s. the weight.

What should be the reason of this? was there more Wool now discovered, or was
there like to be less Trade? Certainly, there was as much Wool in the Kingdom
of our own growth an hundred years ago as now; We have no increase of Sheep;
for all those Lands that now feed, (to wit) our Downs and Sheep-Pastures, could
never be employed to other Use. Then it must be in the Trade. And if so, then
we may see where the Command of that lies; as those Dealers like the Motions of
the Times, they shall either advance or sink it at their pleasure, for the
Trade lies sullen, and must be roused; it has been so long managed by some
particular Persons, that they now look upon it, not so much the Staple
Manufacture, and chief Commodity we have to support the Wealth and Honor of
our Nation, as a Business only for some few men to gain Wealth and Estates by.
But to proceed.

Now what quantity of this Spanish Wool is brought yearly into this Kingdom,
and here made into Cloth, and how much of it is transported when made, is worth
our Enquiry. And upon this Enquiry, I doubt it will appear, that there is as
much Spanish Cloth spent and worn among our own People, as the Spanish Wool
will make that is imported; for in lieu of those few Medlies we send abroad in
Trade, we have a supply of Blacks, etc. brought out of Holland to us, and here
sold at double the rate of that made in our own Kingdom of the same goodness:
For at this day the very Servants and Mechanics, especially in Towns and
Cities, will scorn to wear any Cloth but Spanish, if their Purses can but reach
the price. It is not many years since that Spanish Cloth of the same goodness
they now make, was sold for 23 s. and 24 s. the yard by the Clothier, which he
now sells for 15 s. and 16 s. the yard: and so long as it can be bought at this
low price, there is scarce a Cobbler but will have his best Suit of it. In a
word, all the Ruin that has happened to our Clothing Trade by the low price
of our Wool, cannot be imputed to the Exportation of our English Wool, but to
the Importation of the Spanish, and other Foreign Wool, without paying any Duty
or Custom for the same. And this, among other Grievances attending the Clothing
Trade, the Grand Jury of the County of Somerset, at their General Quarter
Sessions, presented as the Grievance and Complaint of the whole County: the
which I have here set down verbatim, as it was to have been presented to the
late Kings most Excellent Majesty, in Council.

Somerset. At the General Quarter Sessions of the Peace held at Brewton, in and
for the Country aforesaid, on the Thirteenth day of January in the Thirty Sixth
Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, by the Grace of God
of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, King, etc. The Presentment of the
Grand Jury there was as follows; viz.
HEARING the daily sad and lamentable Complaint of the greatest part of the
Clothiers of this Country, concerning the great Decay of their Trade, whereby
many of them with in few years last past have been ruined and undone; And
finding by sad experience the great fall that is happened of late on the price
of English Wool, that Commodity now yielding but little more than the one half
the Value of what it was wont to be sold for at the beginning of the late
unhappy Rebellion in this Kingdom; And having seriously considered these
things, do humbly conceive the Causes of these great Evils to be the
Importation of Spanish and other Foreign Wools, without paying any Custom or
Impost for the same; And the great Abuses that have been put upon the Clothiers
at the Principal Mart for Cloth in this Kingdom, by a sort of People called
Factors; Men first set up in the late Times of Distraction, and increasing ever
since in Number and Power, till now at length they have gotten the sole Command
and Sale of most men's Cloth brought thither to be sold; And have thereby
advanced themselves from little or nothing to be Men of great Estates, and as
much impoverished their Masters, who sadly complain of these Abuses, and are
left without prospect of a Remedy: The Consideration of which Mischiefs growing
more and more upon us, and, if not timely prevented, being likely in the end to
prove the Ruin of this ancient Staple Commodity and Manufacture of our
Kingdom, has caused us at this time to make this following Presentment.

First, That the Wool of this County in particular, as well as of the whole
Kingdom in general, is the greatest Staple we have; And that which adds more to
the Rents and Improvement of the Real Value of the Lands and Revenues thereof,
than any one Commodity whatsoever; And that it is as much our Interest (if not
more) to improve the Rents and Revenues of the Lands and Estates of this
Kingdom, as to Maintain the Trade, without which Improvement we shall in no
case be able to raise any considerable Sum of Money by a Land Tax, if any
sudden or extraordinary occasion should require it.

We Present therefore, That the Importation of Spanish, and other Foreign
Wools, without paying any Duty or Custom for the same, is a very great
prejudice to the price of English Wool; and so consequently contributes much to
the Abatements of the Rents and Profits issuing from Lands.

We Present, That the making of Woollen Cloth is the greatest Manufacture of
this Kingdom, and that wherein many thousands of poor People are employed and
set to work, and thereby Relieved and Maintained; and that since the time that
the Art of Clothing was first known amongst us, it has continued free, until
the beginning of the late Rebellion, there sprung up a sort of People, who,
under the name of Factors of Blackwell-Hall, have gotten into their Power the
Management and Disposal of most of the Cloth that is sold there: And besides,
are grown to be the greatest Merchants of Oil and Dying-stuffs, but chiefly of
Spanish Wool; all goods belonging to the Clothing Trade, of whom the Clothier
is forced to buy, the Factor having his Stock both of Cloth and Money in his
own hands; And therefore We present, that these Factors of Blackwell-Hall are a
Public Nuisance and Prejudice to the Clothing Trade; and to have been the Ruin
of many poor Clothiers, and the Causes of many other Mischiefs and
Inconveniences that now lie heavy upon us.

Item, We farther Present, that this Honorable Bench will be pleased to
implore the Royal Power and Prerogative of His Sacred Majesty, for convenient
Remedies to these great Abuses; And that this Presentment may be with all
Submission presented to His Majesty as the Grievance and Complaint of the whole
Country.

Thomas Ludwell, Joseph Gappy, Barnard Russ: William Ridcut, Thomas Pitman,
John Bradny, John Mulford Sen. Thomas Gapper Jun. Thomas Field, William Lewis,
Thomas Biging, Thomas Harvye, John Mabz, Worcester. Brice, Henry Strode, Gabriel
Iveleife, Robert King.

Vera Cop' Ex' per

Ph. Bennet, Cl. Pac.


This is a true Copy of the Grand Juries Presentment, which we agree to, and
desire it may be presented to His Majesty in Council by Mr. Clarke.

Weymouth. Fitzharding. Fra. Powlett. E. Phelipps. John Hunt. Ed. Berkeley.
Tho. Wyndham. Fra. War. Will. Basset. Geo. Clarke. Jo. Harington.





