IMPRIMATUR

THO. TOMKYNS.
Ex Aed. Lambethanis, Nov. 29. 1673.
ANIMADVERSIONS Upon a Book, Entitled; FANATICISM FANATICALLY Imputed to the
Catholic Church, By Dr. STILLINGFLEET, And the Imputation Refuted and Retorted
by S. C. By a Person of Honor.

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred Majesty, 1673.

TO Dr. Stillingfleet.
SIR,
HAving lately, it may be later than most men in England who are inquisitive
after Books, had a view of a little Book (in answer to a Book of Yours which I
had not then seen) Entitled, Fanaticism Fanatically Imputed by him (Dr.
Stillingfleet) to the Catholic Church; I had read very few leaves in it, when
I was able warrantably to say, that Mr. Cressy was the Author of this Book; a
person whom I had long known, and familiarly conversed with, before he was
perverted in his Religion, and had often seen since; and upon the whole I must
confess (if there had not been some particulars in it, which could not suffer
me to be deceived) I could hardly have believed that so much pride, and
bitterness, and virulence could upon so little provocation, and with so little
excuse have dropped from his pen. The confidence of it amazed me, as much as
the rudeness; and though I could not expect that a man who had treated his own
Mother with so little respect, could have much reverence for your Person, who
have so vigorously defended her, and fully vindicated her from all the
reproaches that Classis of men have been able to cast upon her, and exposed
their malice and their ignorance more nakedly to the view of the world, than I
think has been ever done before, for which all her true children are, and
always must be indebted to you, and to your memory: I thought the little angry
Book fit to receive some answer, and the Author of it worthy of reprehension
and admonition, which he might receive with less disturbance from an old
Friend; and I thought it likewise unreasonable that you, whose studies are so
wholly engrossed by, and dedicated to the public, should be put to the trouble
to free your self from these feeble calumnies, which every man who has read
your Works is able to do, and every man who loves the Church, is bound in
justice to do: Besides, I was willing to invite other Laymen to show with more
efficacy their concernment for the Church, and the Protestant Religion, so
variously and maliciously assaulted on all hands, though God be thanked
impotently enough, that the defense of it may not be looked upon as the sole
duty of the Clergy. These were the motives that invited me to undertake this
little task, which I was not long performing, and yet even when I had finished
it (if so imperfect a draught can be called finishing) I chanced to have the
pleasant sight of your Answer to several late Treatises, etc. and I can with a
very good conscience assure you, that mine was dispatched before I did see it,
and therefore, especially since you have only taken a slight notice in the
Preface of Mr. Cressy's waspish invectives, I am willing, if you please, that
my short Animadversions may be likewise presented to his view, which is
entirely left to be communicated, or suppressed, or corrected according to your
judgment, by,

SIR, Your most affectionate unknown Servant.

ANIMADUERSIONS Upon a Book, Entitled, FANATICISM FANATICALLY Imputed to the
Catholic Church, By Dr. STILLINGFLEET, And the Imputation Refuted and Retorted
by S. C.
IT was the wish, not the hope of the most excellent Lord Bacon in his never
enough admired Advancement of Learning, that good Books had the quality or
faculty of Moses's Rod, that being become a Serpent, eat up, and devoured the
other Serpents, which were produced by the Rods of the Sorcerers or Magicians:
The number was so great in his time of idle, and impertinent, and Seditious
Books, and the number of the Readers who were delighted with them was likewise
so great, that Books of Learning, weight and importance found little
countenance, and few Men at leisure to peruse them, and he saw no remedy, but
by such a miracle: What would that great and discerning Person think, if he had
lived in these days, when the license of writing, and publishing light and
scandalous Books of all Arguments, without any rules or limits of modesty is
grown the Epidemical disease of the Nation, and a reproach to the Government,
in the violation of the Laws, the contempt of the Magistrate, and the general
contagion that is spread abroad, and threatens the very peace of the Kingdom,
at least disturbs the sober conversation of it? The spirit of Martin
Marprelate, which has for so many years been expired, or extinguished, is
revived with greater insolence, and improved, and heightened as well against the
State, as the Church in a petulancy of language, in a style so new, and
unbecoming Men of honest education, that the gravest arguments in Divinity it
self, and Texts of the Sacred Scripture are handled in a manner, and fashion,
and with such vain and Comical expressions, as have not used to be admitted in
the lightest arguments, or in sober and chaste mirth. The important and vital
parts of Government, the dignity of the Laws established, and even the Person
of the King himself, and the greatest Magistrates are arraigned, censured, and
inveighed against in such a bitterness of words, with terms so reproachful, as
have not been ever used in good company; and as if the English tongue were too
narrow to comprehend all the Ribaldry and filthiness of their thoughts and
inventions, they coin new words of contempt and indignation, and make use of a
Dialect never heard of, but in the company of Ruffians, and the lowest and most
debauched of the People, which for wit sake they apply to their vile purposes;
so that this extravagance (if not timely suppressed) does really seem to
threaten, not only a general corruption of manners, but of the purity, and
integrity of the Language, and of the good humor, and good nature, and modest
conversation of the Nation; and upon this occasion I cannot but lament the want
of that caution and prudence which was heretofore observed, when this unruly
Spirit first broke out in the time of Martin Marprelate, who had a contribution
of Jests, and Scoffs, and Comical inventions brought to him, by all the party
who desired to expose the Church and the Government of it, to the contempt and
scorn of the loose and rude People. It was not thought worthy of any serious
Man to enter into the lists with such adversaries, or to take notice of their
Pamphlets, but Men of the same Classis, of the same rankness of Wit and fancy,
and of honester principles were the Champions in that quarrel. Thom. Nash was
as well known an Author in those days, as Martin, who with Pamphlets of the
same kind, and size, with the same pert Buffoonry, and with more salt and
cleanliness, rendered that libellous, and seditious crew so contemptible,
ridiculous, and odious, that in a short time they vanished, and were no more
heard of. What was urged or insinuated by any Men of discretion and
understanding, that might make any impression upon sober, unwary, and
misinformed Men, was carefully and learnedly answered by Persons assigned to
that purpose, that the Church, or the State might not undergo any prejudice by
want of seasonable advice, without mingling any of the others froth or dregs in
their compositions, which they left to the chastisement of those who could as
dexterously manage the same weapons, and were fitter for their company: And
methinks grave and serious men, or they who ought to be grave and serious,
should be afraid of imitating such adversaries in their license and excesses,
lest they should get into a scoffing vein, which they should not easily shake
off, or lose their credit with worthy Men, for dishonouring the cause they
maintain ironically.

A man will hardly be thought provident enough, or solicitous for his own
peace, and credit, who having discovered this unruly frantic disease, will
expose himself to the malignity thereof, by approaching so near the company of
those angry Wasps, and Hornets, who are like to be willing to take any
opportunity to be revenged upon a Person, who has presumed to be offended with
their manner of writing, and in the same instant, submitted his own to their
censure, which is like to be liable to as many exceptions of weakness and
impertinence: To which I shall only say, that whatever other faults they shall
discover in this short writing of mine, they shall not find the same of which I
complain; I shall give no body ill words, nor provoke them by contemning their
Persons; and I choose rather to be at their mercy, than not to endeavor the
best way I can to divert men from that indecent way of reviling each other; and
instead of answering Arguments, to traduce the Persons who urge them. Truth is
of so tender, and delicate a constitution, that it is defiled by rude handling;
and has advantage enough to encounter and conquer its adversaries, by the
vigor of its own beauty, without aspersing the deformity of the other, farther
than unavoidable reason makes it manifest: I shall not interpose in those
Arguments, which are now most agitated in that scurrilous style that I complain
of, but choose to take upon me to make Animadversions upon a Book lately
published, at least lately come to my sight, Entitled, Fanaticism Fanatically
imputed to the Church of England, by Doctor Stillingfleet, and the imputation
Refuted and Retorted by S. C. The Author whereof professes himself an avowed
Enemy to the Church of England, and would be thought as much an enemy to the
foul custom introduced into the Controversies concerning it, and the liberty
men assume to deride Religion instead of vindicating it; to wound the
profession, by a petulant and scornful mention of the Professors; and by
expressions full of pride and vanity, and destructive to peace and government:
and yet how contrary soever this way of writing is to his practice and
inclination; he has some jealousy of himself, that upon the insupportable
provocation he has received, some phrases of bitterness may have escaped his
Pen, which he does believe he has very good authority not to make any excuse
for, and there being such plenty of that noisome Gall scattered throughout his
whole discourse, it will be but just to take a view of his provocation, and
whether his revenge be no more than proportionable to the occasion, and then
whether the imputation be not rather confidently retorted, than reasonably
refuted; and whether in the endeavoring the one or the other, the bounds and
limits of all modesty and civility are not so far transgressed, that the Author
is liable to just censure.

I do the rather enter into the List upon this occasion, because I may
infallibly presume, that I know the Author of that Discourse; for I no sooner
read it, which was long after it was published, but that it was manifest to me
by many particulars contained in it, in which I cannot be deceived, that it is
written by Mr. Cressy, with whom I have been acquainted very near fifty years,
and have very long esteemed him for his parts, and learning, and for his good
nature, and his good manners, all of which were in as great perfection then, as
they have been ever since, or are at present; and therefore as I shall treat
him with that candor that becomes an old Friend, so I do not suspect his
reception, and interpretation of it will be such, as is worthy of that temper
of spirit, which he professes to be of; nor do I despair of presenting some
considerations and reflections to him, which may so work upon it, as to induce
him to believe, that both in regard of the matter it self, and the manner of
treating Dr. Stillingfleet, he has swarved very much from those Rules which he
prescribes to others, and pretends to observe himself, and then the tenderness
of his own Conscience will instruct him what reparation he ought to make.

But before I enter into the debate, I must first declare, that the Religion I
profess and defend, is the Religion of the Church of England, and not the
particular opinions, much less the expressions of any member of it, how worthy
soever: and Mr. Cressy, who professes to be an adversary to it, ought to insist
only upon what is owned, and avowed by her, and not hope to wound her through
the sides, or by the weakness or passions of those who have deserted her, or
still adhere to her: And in the second place, that I do not take upon me to
write against the Catholic Church, of which the Church of England is a vital
part; or against the Religion professed in any Catholic Country, but against
the Roman Catholic Subjects of his Majesty's Dominions; whose Religion I take
to be different from that, which is professed and established in any Catholic
Country in Europe, and disavowed by all the Catholic Countries out of Europe.
And one of the principal reasons that engages me in this Discourse, is to
endeavor to draw the dispute that is between the Church and the Laws of
England, and his Majesty's Subjects of his own Dominions who profess to be of
the Roman Faith, into a narrower room, and within that compass that properly
contains it: And I have always thought that they have had too much countenance,
and too great a latitude allowed them, in reducing the contest to what concerns
all the members of the Roman Church equally with themselves; as if the Roman
Catholics of England withdraw their obedience from the Kings authority, and
oppose the Laws of the Land, so much to the damage of their Estates, and the
danger of their lives, if the Laws were prosecuted against them, only for the
support, and in the defense of the cause common to all other Catholics:
Whereas I say, the difference between us depends wholly upon the personal
authority of the Pope within the Kings Dominions, which is an argument never
used for the support of the Catholic Religion; if it were, all Catholics must
be of the same opinion. It was that, and that only that first made the Schism,
and still continues it, and is the ground of all the animosity of the English
Catholics against the Church of England, and produced their separation from
it; and if they will renounce all that personal authority in the Pope, and any
obedience to it within his Majesty's obedience (which I say again is not
admitted in any other Catholic Kingdom) they will purge themselves of all such
jealousy, or suspicion of their fidelity, as may prove dangerous to the
Kingdom, and against which the Laws are provided: their opinions of Purgatory
or Transubstantiation would never cause their Allegiance to be suspected, more
than any other error in Sense, Grammar or Philosophy, if those opinions were
not instances of their dependence upon another Jurisdiction foreign, and
inconsistent with their duty to the King, and destructive to the peace of the
Kingdom: and in that sense and relation the Politic Government of the Kingdom
takes notice of those opinions, which yet are not enquired into or punished for
themselves; let them disclaim that, and they will find themselves at great ease.

This is the only Argument I wish should be insisted on between us and our
fellowsubjects of the Roman profession; not that I think that the other
Doctrinal points between the two Churches are not worthy the insisting upon,
but that as much has been said already upon them on both sides, and as
convincingly as is necessary: Nothing new can be added, at least no man will be
convinced with what shall be added, who is not moved with what is already said;
nor does the mere difference upon any of those points naturally produce that
uncharitableness, those animosities of which we complain toward each other: No
man was ever truly and really angry (otherwise than the warmth and
multiplication of words in the dispute produced it) with a man who believed
Transubstantiation, more than he would be with another, who should come into a
room where he was reading by a Candle, and swear that the room was so dark that
he could not see his hand; but when he will for the support of this Paradox
introduce an authority for the imperious determination thereof, that the Word
of God has not commanded men to submit to, and the word of Man, the Law of the
Land has positively forbidden them to submit to, it is no wonder if passion
breaks in at this door, and kindles a Fire strong enough to consume the House.
This is the Hinge upon which all the other controversies between us, and the
English Catholics do so entirely hang and depend, that if that only were taken
off, all the rest would quickly fall to the ground; and therefore it concerns
Mr. Cressy, and the rest of his friends to fasten, and make that Hinge strong,
that it may support the rest from falling: And I cannot but observe how
unwillingly they are brought to touch this point, or if they do, it is so
lightly, as if it were too hot for their fingers; and upon the necessity of a
through examination of this material Argument, I shall be obliged to enlarge in
the Conclusion of this Discourse.

There is another reason that has principally invited me to this unequal
undertaking, that is, my Zeal to the Church of England, and a compassion of the
very ill condition it is reduced to, by an unworthy conspiracy, that was never
before entered into, against it, or any other established Church, in
undervaluing whatsoever is written by any Clergyman, how learned and virtuous
soever in defense of it; as if he were a party, and spoke only in his own
interest, so that they who would undermine it, by all the foul and dishonest
arts imaginable, have the advantage to be considered as Persons engaged in that
account, merely and purely by the impulsion of their Consciences, and for the
discovery of such dangerous errors, as are dangerous to the Souls of men;
whilst they who are most obliged, and are best able to refute those vain and
malicious pretenses, and to detect the fraud and the ignorance of those
Seditious undertakers, are looked upon as men not to be believed, at least
partial, and that all they say is said on their own behalf. This is a sad
truth, and a new Engine to make a Battery, at which Atheism may enter without
opposition, with all its instruments and attendants, that would make
Christianity it self ridiculous, that it may be contemptible. God forbid that
this Scarcrow should impose silence upon, or seal up the mouths of any Learned
and worthy Clergyman, who should open them the wider for this combination, and
contribute the more to the assistance and vindication of the best constituted
Church in the world, because it is in a distress by mockers, and scoffers, and
neutral or unconcerned persons, who make the approaches, and sap the ground to
open the way, and make the access the more easy, for more declared Enemies to
oppress and destroy it. This has been a motive to me, who have neither
dependence upon, or relation to any Clergyman, nor any temptation to imbark my
self in this quarrel; but my love of truth, and the most abstracted duty to my
Country; and likewise because I think, though the Clergy is best able to judge
of any difficulties in matters of Religion, the Laity is equally engaged in the
consequences which will inevitably attend any prejudices it shall undergo, or
be exposed to, and therefore ought in time to contribute their talent toward
the securing it, and not stand idle spectators of those stratagems which are no
less designed against the State, than the Church.

In the last place, the particular esteem I have of the profound Learning and
integrity of Dr. Stillingfleet, (to whom I am very little known) and his great
merit toward the Church of England, (whose worthy Champion he will not be
thought the less, for the untrue aspersions Mr. Cressy has presumed to cast
upon him, and which will easily be wiped off) has disposed me to interpose in
his Vindication, which is so much due to him from other Men, that I wish he may
not trouble himself with it. And having now observed Mr. Cressy's own method,
in giving first account of the reasons and motives which have prevailed with me
for this engagement; for which I cannot allege another that was most powerful
with him, obedience to certain friends, whose commands he ought in no wise to
resist, since I may honestly declare, that no Friend I have is privy to my
purpose, or knows what I am doing: I make have to wait upon him by his own
stages, and shall make no excuse for not affixing my name to what I write,
which I do purposely decline, not by the example of S. C. but by the assurance
I have, that the publishing my name would be so far from bringing any advantage
to the cause for which I am solicitous, that it would rather increase and
propagate the prejudice that is against it. I do therefore provide a more
natural countenance to support it; and which legally will supply the defect of
the name, by having it Licensed by lawful Authority, without which it shall
never be published.

IF Dr. Stillingfleet has in truth cast any contemptuous aspersions upon Mr.
Cressy; or if he has suffered any scorn or calumny, only for recommending to
devout Christians, instructions for the practice of Christian virtues, and
piety in the greatest perfection that this life is capable of: If he has
selected the most Sacred things and Persons in the Catholic Church, on purpose
to be contaminated with his Ink full of Gall and Poison, thereby administering
new Arms to Atheists: If he has endeavored to show, that all the Religion
professed in the World, and that thing that bears the name of a Catholic
Church for so many Ages before the time of Luther and Calvin, was nothing for
their Worship but Idolatry; for their Devotions but Fanaticism, and for their
doctrine and discipline, nothing but faction, ambition, and avarice: And if the
Doctor has employed his talent of reasoning upon these subjects, to discharge
his excess of spleen and choler, and to give free scope to all unchristian, and
even inhumane passions, (with all which the three first Pages do confidently
and directly charge him) I must confess that Mr. Cressy will not only be
excusable for any Zeal and confidence he shall express against such an
adversary, but that the Doctor has neither direction or authority from the
Church of England in either of the particulars, nor would I undertake to
vindicate him from that great guilt. But if nothing of all this be true, and if
the Doctor has neither said or done any thing of this with which he is
charged, Mr. Cressy shall but comply with his obligations in seriously
considering whether he has observed St. Paul's injunction; Let all bitterness,
Ephesians. 4. 31.
and wrath, and anger and clamor, and evil speaking be put away from you, with
all malice. And of the greater importance any controversy is, especially if it
has any relation to Religion, the swarving from that rule can never be
dispensed with, and therefore it will be proper in the first place to examine
the evidence that is to prove this charge, or charges against the Doctor,
before we consider the three Imputations, by which it is said he would fright
men from the Communion of the Catholic Church, or the other three Retorsions
by which Mr. Cressy is confident to wound the Protestant Churches, upon both
which, reflections will be made in the proper season.

Though I am no stranger to the writings of Dr. Stillingfleet, but have read, I
think, all that he has published, at least all that I have seen of his; and as
I always admired the strength and vigor of his ratiocination, and the
clearness of his style and expressions (a faculty not natural to all very
Learned and pious men) by which he renders the most difficult points, and which
are usually by others wrapped up in obscure terms, plain and intelligible to
vulgar understandings: So I have been exceedingly delighted with the softness,
gentleness and civility of his language, (which can never flow from an insolent
or proud spirit) in which he represents things, which in themselves are light,
and as such might be neglected, in a pleasant, not reproachful manner; a
dialect his adversaries are not acquainted with: And when he is compelled to
answer Arguments, or rather Allegations full of bitterness and reproachful
words, which would tempt another to take the advantage they are liable to, with
some sharpness; he passes by the provocation, and collects what can possibly be
found like reason, out of what is alleged, and refutes it with very much less
severity than the matter would justify, and seems sometimes to require. Yet
knowing Mr. Cressy well too, and that he is not of a quarrelsome disposition,
or apt to give ill words in his discourse, and to have a full understanding of
what he reads, that cannot be imposed upon; I had some fear that the Doctor had
upon some great provocation exceeded his former limits he had prescribed to
himself, and retorted the language of his adversaries with a bitterness natural
enough for them, though not to him: And that temper I wished might never depart
from him; and therefore I was in some pain till I could procure the Doctor's
Book that had raised so much passion in Mr. Cressy, and which I had not seen
before: But when I had carefully read those places to which the exceptions were
made, and examined as well as I could the signification or implication of every
word; I begun to suspect that I was mistaken in my former conjecture, and that
Mr. Cressy was not the Author of that Imputation Refuted; but when I again
reflected upon the reasons which had first produced that judgment of mine, I
found they had still the same strength, and had then nothing to hope, but that
his obedience to those Friends, whose commands he ought in no wise to resist;
for the writing and publishing his discourse, had prevailed likewise with him
to publish it in their, and not his own words, and I shall hereafter give Mr.
Cressy a warrantable reason, why I am still of the same opinion.

The first thing Mr. Cressy lays to his charge is, Page 11.
That he accuses the Catholic Church of Fanaticism, which he says no man ever
presumed to do before; and that he has written an invective against the life
and prayer of Contemplation, commended and practiced only in the Catholic
Church; it being a state which from the infancy of the Church (he says) has
been esteemed the nearest approaching to that of glorified Saints; and the
evidence that he produces to make this charge good is, That the Doctor that he
might make an entrance into the invective with a better grace, has produced on
his Stage antiquely dressed, the famous Teachers and erecters of Schools for
Contemplation, S. Bennet, S. Romaulde, S. Bruno, S. Francis, S. Dominique, and
S. Ignatius, exposing them to the derision of profane persons, for which he
threatens him shrewdly upon an Epigram in the Margent out of Martial.

Before he proceeds farther in his evidence, lest the Doctor may be too much
exalted with the novelty of his invention of his profanely employed Wit; he
does assure him that he has heard that kind of Wit before, when he was a young
Student in Oxford, in a repetition Sermon to the University, which, he says, if
fancy be alone considered, far better deserved applause, wherein the Preacher
descanting upon the whole life of our Savior, rendered him and his attendants,
men and women, objects of the utmost scorn and aversion, as if they all of them
had been only a pack of dissolute vagabonds and cheats: But presently the
Preacher changing his style, as became a Disciple of Christ, with such
admirable dexterity, and force of reason, answered all the Cavillations and
invectives made before, that the loudly repeated applause of his hearers
hindered him a good space from proceeding: Notwithstanding which the grave
Doctors and Governors of the University, though much satisfied with his
abilities, yet wisely considering that a petulant Histrionical style, even in
objections, did not fit so sacred a subject, and that it was not lawful too
naturally to personate a deriding Jew, obliged the Preacher to a public
recantation-Sermon in the same Pulpit the Sunday following. To which pretty
tale I should make no reply, since in the judgment of no dispassioned man, it
cannot be thought to be parallel to any thing the Doctor has said or done: Yet
I shall endeavor to convince Mr. Cressy, that his memory has not been
faithful to him, in preserving the merit of that case and sentence, and shall
give him cause to believe that I was likewise present at that Sermon, by
putting him in mind that it was preached by one Mr. Lushington, a man eminent
for his parts, upon those words in the Evangelist; And his Disciples came and
stole him away whilst we slept: Which gave him occasion to help the Soldiers
in their defense, in which he gave them leave to use some light expressions
against the witnesses for the Resurrection, which were not decent upon that
subject; but that part was quickly ended, when he put into the mouths of the
Disciples, to whom he likewise assigned a part, words very worthy of them, and
fit to be uttered in that place, and with which the gravest Auditors were
abundantly satisfied, though they were displeased with some light and
scandalous expressions in some other parts of the Sermon: Which he begun with
qu' elle Novelle, as if he came thither to ask and hear News; but under favor
of Mr. Cressy's memory, nothing of this was the ground of the sentence or his
Recantation; but a Parliament being then sitting, the Preacher had unwarily,
and very unnecessarily let fall some words which reflected upon their
proceedings, particularly that now every Pesant in Parliament, by the
privilege of his Vote there, cared not how he behaved himself toward the
King, or the Church, or to that effect; which made those who loved him best,
willing to censure him there, that he might escape a harder judgment in another
place: Whereupon the Vice Chancellor, who was Dr. Pierce (afterward Bishop of
Bath and Wells) commanded a copy of the Sermon, which being delivered and
perused by him, and a Delegacy of the Doctors, Mr. Lushington was reprehended
for the light and scandalous expressions he had used upon a subject too much
above those excesses; and was ordered to make a recantation Sermon for what he
had said of the Parliament; and had a Text likewise given him to that purpose;
the words concerning the Apostles in that of the Acts, And they assembled
together with one accord in one place: Which Recantation he performed with
great ingenuity and much applause. If these particular recollections do not
induce Mr. Cressy to concur in the truth of the relation, I doubt we shall find
few equal Arbiters to determine the difference between us; for this Sermon, if
I am not very much deceived, was preached in April 1624. or 25. of which I
believe that there be not many surviving Auditors besides Mr. Cressy and my
self.

In the next place let us examine how the Doctor came to provoke Mr. Cressy, by
laying this grievous charge of Fanaticism upon many members of the Catholic
Church, and to charge the Church it self to be guilty of giving too much
countenance to it: Mr. Cressy confesses that the first occasion was given him,
by charging the Church of England with Fanaticism; which is sure as new a
charge upon that Church as it can be upon the other, which he is so far yet
from retracting, that he still justifies it, by there being so many Fanatics
in the Church of England; whereas he knows there is no Fanatic in England, or
in any other Country, who does not avow a particular malice, and displeasure
against the Church of England, and if he does not, he is no Fanatic. There can
be nothing more contrary to Fanaticism, than the order, and discipline, and
steddiness of the Church of England: And it is not ingenuously nor generously
done of Mr. Cressy to charge that Church with inclining to, and favoring an
enemy, that he knows has rebelliously invaded her, and would destroy her: He
would not think it just, nor indeed would it be honest, to charge the Church of
Rome of inclining to, or favoring of Judaism, because many Jews live there:
And yet the public liberty and protection they have in their allowed
Synagogues, where they must both renounce, and contemn, and blaspheme the
Person of our Savior, is a greater argument of inclination, and of favor,
than can be charged upon the Church of England toward any Fanatics; all whom
it does heartily desire to convert or to remove out of its limits. This
unseasonable and untrue reproach, made it necessary for the Doctor to answer,
and refell that calumny, and as reasonable to instruct Mr. Cressy that his own
Church is much more liable to that accusation, than the other: And why this
provocation should be so innocent an assault for the one, and the defense by
the other should prove so heinous an offense, will require an impartial Judge
to determine; who will likewise discover which of them does most discover his
excess of spleen and choler, or gives most scope to all unchristian, and even
inhumane passions: And he cannot but observe the Doctor's commendable modesty,
that he would not give himself leave to retort the monstrous aspersion upon his
own Mother, without very exactly setting down the particular instances of the
ground of that his Retorsion, without any other sharp language than is
unavoidable in the mention of the matters of fact; a method Mr. Cressy does
warily decline in his bitterness toward his native Church; nor do I blame him,
for being so much displeased with the length of the Doctors discourse of that
subject, nor for his so slightly answering those particulars of which he takes
notice, and undervaluing the rest, rather than go about to answer them, of
which it will not be possible to avoid speaking more particularly anon; and in
the mean time I believe more of his Catholic, than of his Protestant Friends
do heartily wish that the task had been imposed upon him, to answer the points
in controversy between the Catholic Church, and the Protestants, and that the
Doctor's pleasant fourth Chapter had been left untouched, to those who will
needs be reading his Books; than that Mr. Cressy's extraordinary zeal on the
behalf of so prodigious a number of Saints and Miracles (which are very rarely
particularly urged by the learned Catholic writers in defense of their
doctrine) should invite men farther to examine those records, which the Church
it self has given so many orders to reform.

Mr. Cressy finds himself most concerned to vindicate the honor and the
sanctity of S. Benedict from the Doctors contumelious imputations; which
contumelious imputations, and whether the weight and vigor of the vindication
be answerable to the zeal, will be next examined, and the examination will be
the shorter, because he will leave the other Saints to answer for themselves,
but is obliged, in respect of the public interest that obliges the whole
Western Patriarchate, and especially England, to be tender of the honor of S.
Benedict, by whose disciples, if they were Fanatics, he says, Christianity
has been established amongst us; and in veneration to whom, such a world of
Religious Houses and Churches have been erected, and enriched with vast
possessions; and therefore he cannot without renouncing his duty as a Christian
Religious man, and an English man, conspire to his dishonor by silence;
whereas probably silence would have been the more seasonable vindication; and
truly I have no mind to rake into the ashes of a Person whom I believe to have
been a devout man in a dark time, according to his talent of understanding, and
who has been so long since dead; nor do I believe the Doctor had inclination
to have made that scrutiny, if it had not been made necessary to him, by a very
unnecessary reproach; and the more Mr. Cressy enlarges upon that argument, the
more he will be offended on the behalf, because he is in love with his own
mistakes; else he could not tell us that Englands Christianity was established
by the Disciples of S. Benedict.

Indeed there is some evidence, and for ought I know it may be true, that we
owe our glass windows, and our warmer habitations to one of his Disciples, our
Countryman Bennet, who was an Abbot here, and is a Saint too; who having made
many journeys into Italy, when he returned last from thence, brought with him
Architects, who taught our people to build Houses with Stone, which till then
were rarely seen, the habitations being commonly in Houses made of Earth, nor
was there till his time any glass windows seen in England: All this may be
true, and there are several Authors aver it, but Mr. Cressy very well knows
that Christianity was planted with us many hundred years before the birth of S.
Benedict, and we may reasonably believe by the Roman Records, to which we are
more beholding for those testimonies than to our own, and which are in truth as
full and clear, as in any other matter of fact in that first Age, that it was
sooner planted in Britain, than it was at Rome it self; for if Joseph of
Arimathea did come into England in the last year of Tiberius, it was before S.
Peter ever was at Rome. Sure it is that there was no Monastery built in
England, according to S. Bennet's rules, till near the year Six Hundred, so
that there is no reason to acknowledge, that he, or his Disciples planted
Christianity with us.

If Mr. Cressy will be offended with all men who examine the miracles of S.
Benedict, as they are mentioned by S. Gregory, or in the lives of the Saints,
with less reverence than he himself considers them, he will have as many
quarrels with Roman Catholics, as with Protestants; since there are very few
of them of his talent of learning and understanding, who give credit to one of
one hundred of those which are mentioned to have been done, though they are all
willing, (how piously they shall do well to consider) the Women, and the weaker
People should believe them all; nor does the less serious discoursing of them
in any degree reflect upon the honor of S. Gregory, or of S. Bennet himself,
much less imply that they were guilty of lying against the Holy Ghost; for S.
Gregory gives no other testimony of those miracles, than that he was informed
by four men who are named by him, and who had conversed much with the Saint,
that they were true; nor does it appear that the Saint himself did own or avow
the having done those miracles, which are imputed to him by other men; so that
if they should in truth be but pretended miracles, and visions, they cannot be
imputed to either of them as sleights of Legerdemain.

Besides, take them all to be true, as they are reported, most of them may be
proved to be no miracles; for if it was only the Nurses Sieve that she had
borrowed of a Neighbor to winnow her Corn, which was broken in two pieces, as
Saint Gregory reports, a youth without a miracle might join them together, to
wipe off his Nurses tears. Indeed if it was an Earthen-pot, that with the fall
broke into a hundred pieces (as the Author of the Lives of the Saints declares
it to be) it was a harder work for a little boy to put them together again. And
if he did after three years such austerity in a Cave, and such a spare diet as
the cure kept him to, find it necessary to roll himself in thorns to conquer
his amorous passions, the miracle is rather in the novelty of the invention,
than in the cure it wrought: Nor does it appear to be confirmed by the practice
of any of his Disciples since, who probably may have been liable to the same
temptations. He does very well to pass over all the other instances the Doctor
gives of the same nature, except his being spectator of the Soul of his sister
Scholastica (which implies a subtiler sight than any other Saint ever pretended
to) nor will I mention any of the rest, not so much as the Crow that buried the
poisoned piece of bread, which by the way was a miracle on the Crows part, more
than on the Saints: I say I forbear to mention any more of them, lest I should
be much less serious in it than the Doctor has been; for which I will only
make this excuse, that if Mr. Cressy will call to him any three friends, who
have been bred in as good company as he has been, and let them together read
S. Bennet's, in the Lives of the Saints, and if at least one of them be not as
pleasant upon it, and believes as little of it, as the Doctor seems to do, I
will ask his pardon for being less serious than he would have me upon such
occasions.

I think the Doctor may lawfully and reasonably suspect the truth of most of
those miracles which Mr. Cressy seems to believe, and conclude the falsehood of
many of them, without denying that any miracles were wrought by God's servants
in that Age; nor will he be scrupulous in denying that he has met with many,
or any learned and prudent men, who have been eyewitnesses of many, and
deserve to be believed. It is a wonderful thing that when God himself never
wrought miracle in the Old or New Testament, nor ever any qualified by him to
that purpose, but it was to some visible purpose to manifest his power and
glory, and always by persons eminent in his favor, and trusted and employed by
him in his particular service, and then that the miracles themselves, those
arcana imperii, were always exposed to the view and examination of those
natural senses which God has given men to judge by, of what they see and hear.
If Moses's rod had not produced the Serpent, and that Serpent had not devoured
the other Serpents which the Magicians rods had brought out in the sight of
Pharaoh and the Egyptians, so that they could not but confess, that they saw
the rod and the Serpent, and the execution it did, and then that it returned
again to be a rod; God would not have blamed Pharaoh for not believing any
thing that Moses had said to him. If the guest at the wedding feast had not
drank the first Wine, and seen the empty pots filled again with Water, and
found the Wine poured out of those pots of Water to be better than the Wine
that they had formerly drank; we should never have heard any mention of that
miracle. They who were raised by our Savior or his Apostles from the dead,
were seen dead by a multitude of the people, and some of them buried, and were
by the same people seen alive again, and conversed with by them. The Passion,
and Resurrection, and Ascension of Christ's, the chief evidences upon which
Christianity is founded, were the object of the sight of witnesses enough, who
proved what they had seen: Nor was there any one miracle that the senses of any
men could contradict to be any thing but what they seemed to be: And can Mr.
Cressy be angry with us for not giving credit to a mass of Miracles, most of
which are said to be wrought many hundred years before they were heard of, and
by men who we are not sure ever were in this world, since we do not meet with
their names in any other History, at least whose virtues were never heard of
but by their miracles, nor their miracles proved but by their virtues. Mr.
Cressy well knows, that the Church has been so oppressed with the numbers of
them, and so scandalized at the matter of them, that by its special order and
direction they have been several times purged, and many of them rejected for
the folly and impossibility of them; and the last purgation was made by the
Jesuit Ribadeneira, who is the Author of the Lives of the Saints to which Mr.
Cressy refers, and was Chaplain to King Philip when he came into England to
marry Queen Mary; and upon the experience he got there, he undertook to write
the History of England for twenty years, which whosoever shall read, may very
reasonably take it to be a History of Spain, since he shall neither find the
names of persons, or any transactions of which he ever heard before; and
therefore it may be reasonably thought, that he had no extraordinary faculty in
writing Histories, and that he had no better evidence of the miracles he has
preserved the memory of, than of those which were rejected out of the former
Legendaries.

That we may know that many good Catholic writers (for I shall only cite such
evidence against Mr. Cressy) mention such miracles, to which he is so
solicitous to have due reverence paid, as negligently as the Doctor has done;
I shall set down the Animadversion which is given us by the best Catholic
Historian of the Civil, together with the Ecclesiastical transactions that I
think is extant in any language, Monsieur Mezeray in his own words: The German
Monks of this time (says he) as it is the Genius of men to fain miracles always
in great dangers, tell us, that S. Uldrick Bishop of Ausburgh, who accompanied
Otho the second Emperor of Italy and Germany, in his expeditions of War, passed
the River Aisne dry-foot, and made himself the example for Otho and all his
Army to follow; the waters which had overflowed their Banks becoming
miraculously solid under their feet, and the River serving for a Bridge to
itself. It is very true this miracle is not inserted in the Life of that Saint,
the Bull of whose Canonization is the first that is extant in the first Tome of
the Bullarium, and was granted in the year 993. and there can be no reason why
that miracle was left out, since another is there recorded, as the principal
inducement to his Canonization, of the vindicative humor of S. Peter, which is
more wonderful; for it says, that as Uldrick was going to repose himself, S.
Afra a Martyr of Ausburgh appeared to him with a Vermilion countenance, and
took him out into the fields, where he found S. Peter, who was sitting amongst
a multitude of Saints, who demanded vengeance of God against those who had
persecuted them, and they cried out especially against Armenulphus Duke of
Bavaria, who was then living, and had demolished many Churches and Monasteries,
and given their Revenues to secular persons, and Armenulphus was condemned by
the judgment of all those Saints. Is it not pity that the other of passing the
River, if it had not been too much talked of, was not made use of to have
contributed to that Canonization? Because I do not intend to grieve Mr. Cressy
any more upon his miracles throughout his Book, except I may be thought obliged
to it; I will only in this place add a very memorable instance of the same
Mezeray, which he relates very pleasantly: That the Duke of Aquitaine, who was
then a Sovereign Prince, at his return from his third or fourth Pilgrimage from
Rome (for they were most esteemed, who made most of those Journeys) found his
Country enriched with a new Treasury. The Abbot of S. John de Angeny, having
found the Scull of a man in the wall, the report was spread abroad, that it was
the head of S. John Baptist. The people of France, Lorrain, and Germany (who in
those days, which were after the year One Thousand, run with great zeal after
all sorts of Relics) came thither from all parts: King Robert, the Queen, the
Duke of Normandy, and an infinite number of Lords brought thither their
Offerings. That of the King was a shell of Gold, which weighed thirty pounds,
which was a very admirable present in a time when Gold and Silver were fifty
times more rare than it is in these days: And truly when Monasteries came to
their wealth by such devices as these, it is not to be wondered at, that
succeeding times thought they might rob them of some part of it, without being
guilty of the sin of Sacrilege. In a word, since so many learned Catholic
Authors, either take no notice of the miracles imputed to the Saints by him who
has written their Lives, or mention them very Comically, since Cardinal
Cajetan calls them old Wives tales; and Cardinal Baronius, who in the course of
his History is obliged to relate many of them, yet in such manner as makes it
manifest he gave no credit to them: And since Mr. Cressy himself confesses that
no Catholic is bound to believe them; I can see no reason why it should be so
heinous an offense in Dr. Stillingfleet to express no more reverence toward
them.

Concerning the person of S. Benedict, I do not find that the Doctor in any
place calls him an Hypocrite, or a counter feit Enthusiast; he may have been
deluded by the effects of a distempered faney, as many well-meaning men have
been; and in truth I think Mr. Cressy is less tender of his honor than he
ought to be, by challenging all men to discover any thing in, or of S.
Benedict, that may abate that reverence to his memory, that he is bound to pay
him, and none disturb him in it, except they be haled by him to rake into his
ashes, which whosoever shall do cannot but find enough that will lessen the
esteem men would be willing to have of him. If Saint Bennet's rules contain
nothing but a collection skilfully made of all Evangelical precepts and
Councils of perfection: If there the Ecclesiastical office is so wisely
ordered, that the whole Church judged it fit to be her pattern, of which I
never heard before. If S. Bennet teaches his Disciples to begin all their
actions with an eye to God, begging his assistance, and referring them entirely
to God's glory. If there be nothing in his Rules, but what is mentioned by Mr.
Cressy (though there does not appear all things necessary in it, for a great
and a wise King to make choice of for his rule in managing his Kingdom, nor
does he tell us who that wise King was) S. Bennet may have been, and Mr. Cressy
might have continued a Protestant; all those ends, if there be no other in S.
Bennet's Rules, being as much commended and enjoined by the Church of England,
as they are by any thing prescribed in the other Injunctions; and if humility
and peaceful obedience are indeed so copiously and vehemently enforced, as if
in them the spirit of his rule did principally consist; he must not take it ill
if he be thought not to have studied or conformed himself to that Rule, when he
presumes to call a great King a Tyrant, a King that was Sovereign over all his
Ancestors, and lived and died as much a Catholic, and as much an enemy to all
Protestants as Mr. Cressy himself is at present; and how he comes to have
authority from the practice of his humility and peaceful obedience, to style
such a Prince a Tyrant, because he would not permit another Prince to be a
Tyrant in his Dominions, and over his subjects, cannot be easily understood,
except it be to insinuate to all other Princes what he thinks of them; and what
he thinks he speaks, when they shall deny obedience to the Pope, which the most
Catholic Kings frequently have done upon several occasions in the most
Catholic times.

In the mean time, if he well consider it, he must believe that that single
appellation of Tyrant (setting aside the distance of the Persons) is an
expression more indecent, more rude, and in all respects more reproachful and
scandalous than all the terms put together in Dr. Stillingfleet's Book can
amount unto, and to which he takes so great exception. But I cannot enough
wonder after all this at the meekness of Mr. Cressy's spirit, in which he is
willing even to appeal to the Doctors own judgment, if he will but vouchsafe to
read, and examine the rules of S. Benedict, which it is not possible for him to
do, without reading the second Chapter, in which he describes the duty of an
Abbot, who, he says, ought to be the more careful of his behavior, Christi
enim agere vices in Monasterio creditur, quando ipsius vocatur praenomine; for
he proves that our Savior was an Abbot upon Earth by that of S. Paul,
Accepistis spiritum adoptionis filiorum in quo clamamus Abba Pater, We have not
received the spirit of bondage again to fear, but we have received the spirit
of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba Father; by which Text S. Bennet thought it
was sufficiently proved that Christ was an Abbot. Is the reading of this Rule
now like to advance the honor of S. Benedict? Or is it possible for any man
who does read it, to believe the poor man (how good soever his meaning might
be) qualified to give rules which can improve knowledge or devotion? And in
truth I think every man who reads the Orders which were at first instituted by
S. Benedict, and the other religious men named, as every man may read them who
desires it, will find himself more in danger to be stirred to another passion
than choler, which is too predominant in the Doctor, if he be provoked to it
upon such an occasion, at least that he will not find himself obliged to be of
Bellarmine's opinion, that those Orders were instituted by the inspiration of
the Holy Ghost; and a man may honestly believe that there are not two men of
that Society, to which Bellarmine was a great honor, who do concur with him in
that opinion, further than in what relates to S. Ignatius.

For my own part I have always had more kindness and esteem for the Monks of
that Order, I mean for those of the English Congregation, and have had more
conversation with them, than with any other Religious of our Nation. They are
(very few excepted) all Gentlemen, and of very good Families (as Mr. Cressy is)
and of very civil and quiet natures, not petulant and troublesome to those who
do not think as they do: and they were very kind to all their banished
Countrymen in France and Flanders; for I have not known them in any other
Provintes in the times of the late persecution. I have been assured that they
expressed more affection and duty to the King, and were more useful to him,
even in assisting him with money in his greatest distresses, and performing
other offices for him, than all the other Religious Communities put together:
And they had the good fortune to have opportunity to be instrumental toward
his Majesty's happy deliverance, after the Battle at Worcester; the
consideration of all which has prevailed with the King to give them more
countenance and protection than he has done to any other Ecclesiastical order;
and which on their part they have so well merited, that I have not heard of one
Benedictine Monk (Mr. Cressy only excepted) who has embarked himself in
controversies in the present conjuncture, to the disqueting of himself and
others, and in throwing reproaches upon the Church of England; which may make
men think that they do not live all by the same rule, at least that they do not
interpret it by the same spirit; and yet after all this Testimony which is due
to them from me, I can by no means acknowledge or imagine why Mr. Cressy avows
it, That we owe to the followers and Disciples of S. Benedict the preservation
of almost all the Literature which remains in the World, which he says page 26.
Page 26.
and which all the other Orders methinks, which for the most part have been
much more industrious in that contribution, should not take well.

Besides, that as in the time of S. Bennet (which may be reckoned to be about
the year Five Hundred and Fifty) Learning did in no degree flourish; so it grew
less and less for Seven Hundred years after his time, or near so much, even to
the Age in which Erasmus lived, who knew the talent of the Monks and Friars
very well: And truly I think Mr. Cressy's Superiors may believe that he has
taken too much pains in collecting a bundle of reproaches of a false pretender
to Visions, Miracles and Inspirations, and an ignorant fool to be cast upon
their Founder, not one of which is laid to his charge by the Doctor, and must
therefore be imputed to another Author; and he has less reason to imagine that
those reproaches must fall upon S. Gregory, because he confirmed the Rules, and
writ the life of S. Bennet, both which he might do without being guilty of
either of those imputations. He never knew S. Bennet, and confirmed his Rules
long after his death, which makes some Catholic Writers believe that the Rules
were in truth not made by S. Benedict; and a known Catholic Antiquary, Mr.
Broughton, takes upon him to pronounce that S. Gregory himself was never a Monk
of that Order, which is a greater affront to it than any that the Doctor has
put upon it.

I do not know but that the Church of England has a just reverence and esteem
of the learning, and of the piety of S. Gregory, and a greater than Mr. Cressy
has, (as will appear anon) however as the most learned men, who write many
Books, seldom write all with the same perfection and accurateness of judgment,
and their Readers do not look upon all with the same estimation; so many do not
believe (and I doubt not many Catholics) that S. Gregorie's Dialogue of the
Life of S. Bennet, is for the learning or judgment of it, equal to the rest of
his Works: But Mr. Cressy is very hard to be pleased, who has been so very
angry with the Doctor for the rudeness and incivility of his language, and is
now no less displeased with him for his excess of civility in calling S.
Benedict Saint, which, he says page 31. Page 31.
If he was guilty of what the Doctor charges him with, savours something of
blasphemy. Truly though many men cannot comprehend how S. Benedict attained
that degree, yet no body is sure that he has it not, and his title does not
seem the worse, because he does not appear qualified by any particular
Canonization at Rome (there being I think no Record of any such) but by a
general consent amongst many devout persons, which is the title of all those
Primitive Saints, to whose memories our Church pays as much reverence as the
other does, before those very costly commencements were established at Rome,
which have lately conferred all those degrees, and the preliminaries to it: But
I think it is now the civility of most of the Provinces of Europe to treat all
men with the same style that they assume to themselves, or their Friends
attribute to them, and so we use to call those Saints who are commonly called
so, though we are not sure they are in Heaven, and he would believe that he
were very unkindly dealt with, if he should be charged with want of integrity
for calling the Reverend Prelates of our Church, Bishops, when if he did
believe them really to be so, he would not when he left the Church have been
re-ordained; and if he does not believe them to be such, his insincerity is
more to be reproved than our blasphemy in calling those Saints of whose station
we are not so well assured.

But Mr. Cressy has a greater insight into History, and a more discerning
spirit than any man of whom I have ever heard, if he has discovered, That the
greatest Judgment and Plague that God ever (no doubt in his just anger) brought
upon the Christian world, or any Christian part of it, in that general deluge
of the Goths, Vandals, Huns, Saxons, Danes, and other Pagan Nations, proved a
most unvaluable blessing (as he says page 32. Page 32.
) because God of those stones raised up children unto Abraham, that is, after
these inhumane miscreants had for many hundred years massacred many millions of
Christians, demolished so many Churches and Religious houses, and introduced a
brutish savageness into the very nature of the Inhabitants within the Provinces
of which they were possessed, some of their posterity became Christians, and
yet for almost an Age after their conversion, their manners remained still
almost as much Pagan as they were before. And for their building of Churches
and Schools of piety, hear what Monsieur Mezeray (who is much more conversant
with the transactions of those times than Mr. Cressy is) says, I know no time
in which there were more Churches and Abbeys built than in this, (speaking of
the Tenth Century, which was near the time when the most general conversion of
these Barbarians happened) The most wicked persons affected (says he) very much
the title of Founders, whist they ruined Churches on one side, they built
others on the contrary, and made sacrilegious Offerings to God of those things
which they had ravished from the poor; and therefore those structures are not
always the best Records of the piety of the Age in which they are erected; and
very few of the Monasteries into which Kings, and Queens, and Princes used to
retire for attending their Heavenly meditation were erected after the incursion
of those barbarous Pagans, and before which that numerous Army of Martyrs was
likewise expired, since that time must be reckoned under the Ten Persecutions:
So that the unvaluable blessing that Christian Religion received from that
impious inundation, is not yet discovered or understood; and less, that the
persons who by Gods blessed directions instilled into the hearts of men such an
heroical Faith, and Divine love were principally the Disciples of S. Benedict.
I must tell him again that Christianity was well cultivated before S. Bennet's
Rules were published or confirmed, which was not till after the year Six
Hundred; and from that time it received greater improvement from the piety and
learning of many devout Prelates, and from the learning and good lives of the
Clergy, and of other Religious men, than it has ever done by the disciples of
S. Bennet, except all the Monasteries that have been ever founded, and all the
professed Monks shall be looked upon as founded by him; upon which computation
I doubt many of Mr. Cressy's mistakes are to be imputed; nor is he probably
well informed of the numbers which have been converted to Christianity by the
Protestant Churches, though he takes upon him to know that there is not one
Village which he would hardly undertake, since he cannot but know that the
Protestants have many large Plantations in Provinces inhabited by Pagans,
whereof many have been converted; if he did not think that a conversion from
Paganism is to little purpose, if it be not to the Popes obedience, which is
not indeed a condition imposed upon the Protestant proselytes: And if he will
not allow us the having ever done one miracle, he is not of the mind of as
great a Catholic Doctor as himself, Dr. Harpsfield, who in his Ecclesiastical
History of England, after he has at large described the miracle wrought by
Edward the Confessor, in the cure of those noisome swellings (which has since
got the name of the Kings Evil:) Page 219.
He adds, Quam strumosos sanandi admirabilem dotem in posteros suos Anglorum
Reges, ad nostra usque tempora transfudisse and perpetuasse merito creditur:
And Mr. Cressy may be informed that no precedent King has more notoriously
cured multitudes of people of both Sexes, than the present King has done, both
whilst he remained in the parts beyond the Seas, and since his return into
England.

Truly Mr. Cressy has chafed himself into a very tragical height of choler,
when after his passionate and ungrave commination of what the Doctor shall
undergo at the day of Judgment, he defies him to say, page 35. Page 35.
publicly, or by writing to signify only his opinion, That S. Benedict, S.
Gregory, S. Francis, and the rest are now reprobate damned Souls in Hell, yet
such (he says) they must be if they were hypocritical Visionaries, and false
pretenders of Miracles, etc. and if such be not his opinion, nay, if he be not
assured that they are in a cursed condition, he asks, Whether his Tongue or Pen
was not set on fire of Hell, whilst he uttered such blasphemies against them,
as a perpetual monument of his rage till the day of Judgment, I cannot imagine
what storm has raised this tempest of words; where is this rage? where was
this blasphemy? Mr. Cressy will have too great an advantage against those who
differ from him in opinion, if they must be obliged to condemn all those whose
words which they are said to have spoken, they do not believe, nor those
actions which are imputed to them to be damned in Hell: Such fury may possess
Mr. Cressy, and some others (I hope not many) of his Religion, but our Church
allows no such presumption in her Children. Many melancholic and fanciful men
have believed that they have had visions and illuminations which have been but
the effects of their fancy and melancholy: Others have believed men to have
wrought miracles, which they never did work; and some things to have been
miracles which were not miracles, and no sober men will condemn either of those
to damnation: Nay, if any pious persons out of their zeal to Christianity have
believed it necessary to the promotion thereof, to devise miracles, and
persuade others to believe them (as many such frauds have been imputed to the
ancient Monks by Catholic writers) God forbid that we should believe that
those Souls are therefore in Hell. Mr. Cressy has a credulity toward miracles
greater than most Catholics, it may be than any one other learned Catholic;
and yet it is possible that he may not believe that vision or illumination
which S. Francis relates of himself; that when he had made his first Rule, many
thought it too hard, and desired that he would lessen the rigor of it;
whereupon he went up into a mountain called Palombo, and after many prayers and
tears to God, and long fasting upon Bread and Water, Spiritu sancto suggerente,
and Christo dictante, he writ those Rules which still are pretended to be
observed, and which upon this ground were confirmed by Pope Honorius the third;
notwithstanding all which, his own Friars of Assissium remained still
unsatisfied with the severity and rigor of those his second Rules, and obliged
their Superior to accompany them to S. Francis, who seeing them coming, called
to them, and asked them what they came for; to which they resolutely answered,
that his new rule was too sharp, and that they would not be bound to observe
it; he should make it for himself, but not for them: upon which S. Francis
turned his face to Heaven, and said to our Savior, Lord, did not I tell thee
that these men would not believe me? Tune audierunt omnes vocem Christi
respondentem in aere, Francisce, Nihil est in regula de tuo, sed meum est
quicquid est ibi; and volo quod regula sic observetur, ad literam, ad literam,
ad literam, sine glossa, sine glossa, sine glossa; and added, Ego scio quantum
potest humana fragilitas, and quantum volo juvare eos, qui hanc regulam
amplectentur, qui ergo nolunt observare eam, exeant de ordine; upon which he
pacified his Friars, and thought his Rules to be as much dictated to him by our
Savior, as the Law was by God to Moses upon the Mount Sinai, all this is
printed with his Rule, and with the Popes Bulls, and the testimony of S.
Bonaventure. If Mr. Cressy does believe this, he does believe more than any
learned Capuchin or Franciscan Friar does pretend to believe, and if he does
not believe it, he rejects S. Francis his own evidence, which is better than
has been given for any one miracle that is imputed to him: Certainly
whatsoever a man is not bound to believe he may very lawfully disbelieve; so
that I know not where the Doctor's fault is by Mr. Cressy's own judgment; for
he says, no man is obliged to believe them: After all which I cannot enough
admire and pity the strange ecstasy into which Mr. Cressy's passion has
transported him, that he should reprove the Doctor for not giving the same
credit to the Visions, and Dreams, and Revelations of S. Benedict and S.
Francis, as he is bound to do, to the prescription of diet which God himself
gave to the Prophet Ezekiel, and the command he gave to the Prophet Isaiah to
go naked and barefoot, or to the injunction our Savior laid upon his Disciples
in an extraordinary mission not to salute any man they met; that is, because he
believes the word of God, which every Christian professes to do, he should
likewise believe those visions and miracles, which few wise men think to be
true, and they who do, confess that they are not bound to think so; and
therefore it is the office of a Friend to desire Mr. Cressy once more to
revolve the three last pages of his second Chapter, and seriously consider,
whether there be not more wrath, and clamor, and evil speaking, and even
profaneness, if not blasphemy, than all put together in the Doctors Book can
possibly amount to in any candid interpretation.

I doubt he will have as ill luck in his third Chapter, and the worse because
the subject of it, Prayer and Contemplation, has not at all mollified his
spirit, or reduced his passion to any sobriety. Must a man be thought to be
averse to a contemplative life, or to be an enemy to, or a derider of the
Prayer of contemplation, because he is not much affected with the Rules and
prescriptions which Mr. Cressy and some other of his Friends have taken upon
them to give, for rendering the same more perfect and exact? And though the
Doctor is more modest than to make his own judgment and understanding an
argument to condemn what another man thinks very reasonable (which is the
syllogism the other out of kindness has made for him;) yet truly I have so
good an opinion of Mr. Cressy's understanding, that if he should tell me, that
he had held a discourse upon matter of Religion with a man who entertained him
for half an hour in a continued speech, with many proper, and in themselves
very intelligible words, which drew his best attention to what he said, which
was all pronounced in so grave a tone, that he suspected his own understanding
for not quickly comprehending what his meaning could be; but that after all his
intentness of mind, he could observe nothing but a heap of words improperly
mingled together, without any coherence or context to make any signification: I
should presently conclude, that what he had heard was unintelligible canting;
for what other definition can be given of unintelligible canting, than a
dialect of affected words, which have no congruity, and of which men of very
competent parts, and who hear patiently, cannot collect any sense? And I have
always believed that men who cannot express their own meaning, in words and a
method that men of good comprehension do understand their meaning, have not
clear notions themselves of what they do deliver; and if mystic Divines will
express their conceptions of the most pure operations of the Soul her self, and
likewise of God upon the Soul, in such terms and language, as none but those of
their own fraternity can upon hearing them know what they would have, they must
not take it ill if other men believe that they have a peculiar cipher between
themselves, which being in words, is only sense to them, and canting to every
body else: But without doubt Prayer, and whatsoever relates to it, should
always consist of language so plain and easy, that the meanest and lowest of
the people cannot but know what every word signifies. And as he is commonly
very unhappy in his application of Scripture; so he now prophanes S. Paul's
name to a purpose so contrary to what he would apply it to, that if there were
no other argument to convince him of his error, that Text alone would do it
very amply. S. Paul, who, he says, was the greatest Master of Language that
perhaps ever was, yet for want of words could not describe the ecstasy he had
been in, nor the vision that he had seen, but professed that no humane language
could describe them, nor humane fancy comprehend them, and therefore Mr. Cressy
says, that according to the Doctors grounds, S. Paul should be the greatest
Fanatic that ever was, yea the Father of all Fanatics, yet the Doctor dares
not call him so, whereas the Doctor only calls those Fanatics who will not
imitate S. Paul, but upon an imagination that they have seen somewhat which few
men believe they did see, will needs describe it in words which no body
understands: and though that great Master of Language, therefore forbore to
mention what he had seen or heard, because there were no words which would
serve the turn, he has helped S. Paul to proper words to do it by; and says
that it cannot be denied to have been a passive union of S. Paul's Soul with
God, but since S. Paul could not tell what it was, we are not bound to believe
that Mr. Cressy knows better, or can better express it; and it were to be
wished that his Friends, if they have such apparitions as they cannot
understand, they will be as modest as S. Paul, and not go about to describe
them, nor believe that they do understand themselves, what they cannot make any
body else to understand.

Since Mr. Cressy appeals from the Doctor to the indifferent Reader, upon his
sharp censure of some expressions in Sancta Sophia, and takes much pains to
make elucidations upon those difficult places which the Doctor thought hard to
be understood, and which he seems to believe will, by the pains he has taken,
appear very intelligible. I cannot but take my self to be one of those
indifferent Readers, who is not by any prejudice to the man, or to the matter
incapable of judging of the sense of what he reads: And I must confess that by
Mr. Cressy's favor and direction, I had one of those Books of Sancta Sophia
presented to me as soon as it was printed; which I was the more impatient to
read, because he had recommended it to me as a Book worthy to be read by all
Christians, since it meddled not with any Controversies, but was the greatest
help to devotion in general, that had been yet published; nor did he think
himself concerned in the commendation, since he always professed that he was
not Author of any thing contained in the Book, but of the method and
marshalling the several discourses out of Papers and Notes, not enough digested
by the death of Mr. Baker, who was generally esteemed a learned and devout man;
and truly I believe he might be so, and as I have heard (for I never saw him,
nor did Mr. Cressy I think) spent more time privately upon his own thoughts,
than in books or conversation. I cannot deny but that I did then think that
what was not very vulgarly said, which was honest, was very obscure and
difficult to be understood, which I did really impute to want of capacity in my
self, until I read many of the particulars to others much wiser, and in all
respects very competent judges of such discourses; and when upon a full
disquisition I found them of the same opinion, and that they knew not how to
make any thing that was said applicable to heighten their own devotions, I
begun to conclude too, that what benefit soever others might attain by reading
it (for I met with some women who professed to have received much benefit by
it) I should get little in taking more pains to comprehend it; and I remember
it came out much about the same time that Sir Henry Vane published a book of
the same subject, of the love of God, and the union with God; which when I had
read, and found nothing of his usual clearness and ratiocination in his
discourse, in which he used much to excel the best of the company he kept, and
that the style thereof was very like that of Sancta Sophia, and that in a crowd
of very easy words the sense was too hard to find out: I was of opinion that
the subject matter of it was of so delicate a nature, that it required another
kind of preparation of mind, and it may be another kind of diet than men are
ordinarily supplied with: And I am now the more confirmed in that judgment, by
finding all Mr. Cressy's glosses which he has taken the pains to make, to
inform his indifferent Reader of the sense of those hard places, do but make
the understanding thereof the more intricate, and that the Commentary is not
less obscure than the Text, and nothing is more wonderful than that the
illustration he makes to facilitate the understanding of what is conceived
obscure, by the Prayer in our Churches Liturgy, (which he says was borrowed
from the Roman, and I say was translated out of our own,) Lord, from whom all
good things come, grant us thy humble servants, that by thy holy inspiration we
may think those things that be good, and by thy merciful guiding we may perform
the same: I say it is strange that he does not so far discern, that this Prayer
is so easy that no one pretends not to understand the perfect meaning and
extent thereof; whereas he cannot but know that some men of more than common
understanding profess not to comprehend the other; and therefore it is too
magisterial a determination, that whosoever has not a capacity to understand
Sancta Sophia, is an enemy to mental Prayer, which no body can be who
understands it, or in the least degree has endeavored to practice it: Since
it is the best, if not the only way to keep the mind fixed upon the subject it
is solicitous for, and the object to whom the Prayers are directed, which in
the loud pronunciation of many words, is, it may be, to many men the most
difficult thing in the sacrifice of Prayer, especially if there be any
affectation of words, which insensibly carries the mind away from what it
should be intent upon, and the least moment of diversion puts a period to
mental prayer, which without any sensible motion has a vehemence that cannot
bear interruption, and as little any prescription of method from another man.

To the personal reflections and invectives against the Doctor, fuller of
causeless passions, and of bitterness, and virulence, than I have ever observed
in so little room in any book, I shall answer in a more proper place anon.

After Mr. Cressy has spent many pages in commending to his friends the having
a good opinion of Visions, and Revelations, and Miracles, and very pathetically
advises them to read the Histories of the lives of Saints, which the more they
have done, they may probably be the less inclined to conform to his opinions;
he professes that the only ground of the Catholics faith, is divine Revelation
made to the Church by Christ and his Apostles, and conveyed to posterity in
Scripture and Tradition; and we say that the ground of the Faith of the Church
of England is the same, leaving out the two last words, and tradition; not that
the Church of England is an enemy to, or disclaims the use of tradition, but is
not guided and governed by it, by reason of the incertainty of it: Where the
tradition is universal and uncontradicted, we have as much resignation to it as
they have; and therefore we do acknowledge the reception of the Scripture to be
by unquestionable and never doubted tradition: and that having thereby received
it, it has in it self enough to convince the Reader that it could not be
formed and invented by the wit of man, nor that it has not been disguised or
corrupted by the malice of man; and so we are possessed of the Scriptures by
the same tradition that they are; and whatever they believe by as confessed a
tradition, we believe likewise as well as they: But when they urge many things
as necessary to be believed by the authority of tradition, we do not reject the
authority, but deny the tradition, and say there is no tradition that will
warrant it; and how fallible that pretense is, needs no other manifestation
than that controversy of the observation of Easter, which continued half a
hundred years only upon the point of tradition with so much bitterness and
animosity; the Greek Church alleging that tradition was for them, and the
Roman Church the contrary; and if tradition was so doubtful a guide in those
Primitive times, when so few years had run out, what must it be now, when five
times as many are since expired. They therefore do not deal ingenously, who
amuse their auditors with telling them, that we reject all tradition, consider
not antiquity, submit to no authority, but every man chooses a Religion
according to his own spirit: Whereas they well know that the Church of England
does as much respect tradition when it is agreed upon (as all evidence must be
that is submitted to) and requires as much subjection to authority, and leaves
as little to the private fancy and imagination of men, and pays as much
reverence to the primitive Fathers where they concur together in opinion, as
the Church of Rome does; but denies any subjection to that Church, and believes
that her own children (with others she meddles not) should have the same
reverence for her determinations, as those others have for the Roman; since her
determinations are made with as much regularity, as lawful authority, and with
the unanimous advice of as learned men, as by the others, of which we shall say
more in the conclusion of this discourse.

If Mr. Cressy was not very confident that all for whom he writes, will
confidently believe all he says, and had not a mavelous contempt of all other
persons, he would not so positively say, That when examination is made of
miracles in order to the Canonization of any Saint, the testimony of women will
not be received, page 68. Page 68.
and gives the reason for it, because naturally imagination is stronger in them
than judgment, and whatsoever is esteemed by them to be pious, is easily
concluded by them to be true; which may likewise be the reason that his beloved
Sancta Sophia is so much valued by women, and his Miracles so much believed by
them only, and neither the one or the other in any degree regarded by any
learned men of the Roman Church: But his averment that the testimony of women
is rejected in those cases, is without any ground. Was not the single testimony
of the Nurse the only evidence of the first miracle that was wrought by his
adored S. Benedict in the mending the Sieve, or putting together the broken
pieces of the Earthen pot? If he were much conversant in the acts of
Canonization, as he ought to be before he publishes the Rules observed there,
he would have found that the seventh miracle wrought by Philip Nereus (the
Founder of the order of the Oratorians) for which he was Canonized, was, that
he cured diseases oftentimes by his word; as particularly in the case of Maria
Felici a Castro; in Monasterio Turris speculorum Moniali, quae continua febri
correpta, Philippo jubente statim convaluit: And his eighth was, that he cured
many sick people merely by his apparition; Ac Drusilla Fantina, quae praecipiti
casuprostrata, ac horribili capitis, oculorum and totius corporis collisione,
semiviva jacens, tribus Philippi apparitionibus mirabiliter liberatur: And he
would likewise have found in the Canonization of Ignotius Loyala his thirty
third miracle is, that of Isabella Monialis ord. S. Clarae, who being
threescore and seven years old, being in a very high place about business, by
mischance had a terrible fall to the ground, with which she broke her thigh,
and for above forty days adhibitis per Medicum and Chirurgum, eventu plane
irrito, medicamentis, and all hope of life being in the judgment of all,
hopeless and desperate, petita tamen pia cum religione and impetrata reliquia
B. Ignatii and super coxendicem applicata, statim sana est reddita, and
coxendicem and tibiam prius tumentem, atque immobilem, expedite, and sine
dolor movere coepit, and die proxima surrexit, ac libere and perfect
ambulavit. Many more of the like instances he will find in the fourth Tome of
the great Bullarium; and without the evidence of these three women, these
miracles had been lost, which could not but contribute very much to their
Canonization: Nor was the Testimony of women ever rejected in those cases, it
is probable for that very reason for which Mr. Cressy seems to think their
evidence ought not to be received, because imagination is stronger in them than
judgment, and that whatsoever is esteemed by them to be pious, is easily by
them concluded to be true; and such a Confessor as Mr. Cressy will easily
persuade them to believe that many things are pious, which he knows not to be
true: And in truth he has not answered the weight of the Doctors instance of
the visions of S. Bridget, and S. Katherine of Syena, with all the help that S.
Anthony and Cardinal Baronius can give him; the last of which apparently
believed neither of them; and his own addition is much less satisfactory to any
discerning person, that no Ecumenical Council has made a Canon with an
Anathema against all those who will not acknowledge all the Revelations of S.
Bridget to have been divine, and the belief of them necessary to salvation, and
that all that was done by the Council, was upon occasion of invectives made
against those Revelations by many Catholics to require Joannes a Turrecremata,
to peruse and give his judgment of them; which being favorable, the Council
approved them, says the Doctor, that is (says Mr. Cressy) freely permitted them
to be read, as containing nothing contrary to faith and good manners. The
Councils approbation was much more than that; but if it were no more, it does
not become the Catholic Church, or any National Church to give that
countenance to any new opinion that may encourage such a liberty, as he says is
taken by many writers to decry both the one and the other, and introduces
animosity, and uncharitableness between Christians, which has been notorious
enough in this particular: And since he confesses that many illusions and
fancies have been brought into the Church by pretense of such Revelations by
the several Sects and Persons named by the Doctor; as the Sects of Mendicants,
the Authors of the Evangelium aeternum, and the rest; all or most of which did
find countenance, and exceedingly disturb the peace of the Church, and who Mr.
Cressy confesses were Monsters raised up by the Devil in a cursed imitation of
the graces and gifts communicated by God to his devout and faithful servants:
There cannot be too much vigilance in shutting all doors at which such
illusions may enter, and no body is to be blamed, who is most jealous of their
integrity.

We come in the next place to his fifth Chapter of resisting authority, falsely
imputed, he says, to Catholic Religion, in which, he says, the Doctor does
very ingeniously absolve the Catholic Church her self, and lays the fault only
on the principles and practices of the Iesuitical party. Indeed the Doctor
cannot but absolve the Catholic Church from that reproach, except he thought
all Christian Churches liable to it; but he is far from absolving all
Catholics of the Roman Church from rebellion, excepting only the Jesuits
(though he instances most in them, because the books which most defend it have
been written by those of that Society) but nothing can be stranger than that
Mr. Cressy should so magnify the general obedience of all Roman Catholics,
that none of them were ever in rebellion against the King, or his Father, when
he knows very well, and has some marks of it, that the whole Irish Nation
(very few persons of honor excepted) joined in rebellion against the King; and
but for that rebellion neither Presbyterian, Independent or Anabaptist had been
able to have done any harm in England. For the Scots rebellion was totally
suppressed, and their Army disbanded before the Irish rebellion begun: It was
that which produced all the mischief that succeeded in England, and gave those
Sects in Religion opportunity to bring in their confusion to the destruction of
the Church and State, with such barbarous circumstances as are too horrible to
repeat, though they can never be forgotten: Was not that Rebellion begun, and
carried on entirely by the Kings Roman Catholic subjects? Was there one man
but Catholics who concurred in it? and did they pretend any other cause for it
but Religion? at least when they had the satisfaction they desired, in
whatsoever else they pretended, did they not continue it still under pretense
of Religion? Was not the secular and regular Clergy equally engaged to support
it? And did not the Pope himself contribute to it, if not contrive it? And was
not himself in the person of his Nuntio Rinnuccini, General of the Rebels, both
by Sea and Land? And can there be a greater manifestation that the Catholic
Roman Religion it self favored rebellion, than when their head of their
Church, and all Ecclesiastical Orders joined, and concurred in it? And it it
cannot but be observed, that though the Irish for ought appears only carried
on, or were active in that Rebellion, there was not any English Catholic that
made any public profession against it, nor did one English Priest, Secular or
Regular, manifest his detestation or dislike of it by any public writing: And
how much they favored it in private discourse, there wants not abundant
evidence: All which should be forgotten, as it is forgiven, before there be
such loud Encomiums published of the never-failing obedience of the Romish
Catholics, and the Records of later rebellions in France, as well as those of
the League should be razed out. It is to be wished rather than hoped that the
profession of Christian Religion in any Church had that impulsion in it as it
ought to have, that it preserved the professors of it from entering into
rebellion, and the practice of any other iniquity: Yet it may be truly said,
that there were very few who did so much as pretend to have a reverence for the
Church of England, that were ever active in the late rebellion: How far the
fear and consternation men were in, forced them to submit to that torrent which
over-bore them, ought not to be imputed, since it over whelmed multitudes of
all professions, who heartily abhorred those that they were compelled to obey.

It is a great instance of Mr. Cressy's good temper, if it be of his sincerity,
that he is so solicitous to purge the Jesuits from the imputations which are
more particularly cast on them: I believe they did not expect it from him, who
is not thought to agree with them in all which they account fundamental: Yet
truly the excuse he makes for them, is such, as if he invited men to keep up
their prejudice against them: That for as much as concerns the unsafe
Antimonarchical doctrine contained in those books cited by the Doctor, it is
almost a whole Age, since that they have been by their General forbidden under
pain of Excommunication, and other most grievous censures to justify them,
either in writing, preaching, or disputing, etc. Mr. Cressy speaks much of
retractation, and says well, That they who by writing or otherwise have
published scandalous doctrine, which has corrupted other men, do not do their
duty in being silent, and giving over to do that which will be no longer safe
for them to do, but that recantation and retractation is necessary, that they
may be known to be no longer of the samc mind. Is there any man of the society
that has written against that Anti-monarchical doctrine, who has endeavored
to confute Cardinal Bellarmine, or Mariana, or Emanuel Sa, or any of the rest?
Is not Bellarmine's book of the power of the Pope over Kings? are not all the
other books to be bought at every Stationers shop? Who knows any thing of the
Generals warrants but themselves? It was known to, and permitted by the Pope;
that is, the Pope was willing when their books were out, that they should be
quiet, and write no more, which would excuse them for not answering those
books, which Catholics as well as Protestants should write against them; and
that they might not enter into dispute with the College of Sorbon, which
detested their Principles: He says, It is well known that in this point,
Princes and States are generally become more clear-sighted, and more wise than
formerly they have been, and by consequence the Court of Rome also. It is
indeed well known that the Court of Rome adheres still to its own principles,
though they do not think fit to put Princes in mind what they are; well knowing
that all their Bulls and Interdictions and Absolutions, how long soever since
published, are still in the same force and vigor, as they were the first hour
of their publication; and it is very few years since, that upon an occasion of
some consultation between the secular and regular Clergy of Ireland to present
an address to the King, in testimony of their obedience, in which they
disclaimed any temporal authority to be in the Pope; the Court of Rome was so
alarmed by it, that Cardinal Barberine writ to them to desist from any such
Declaration, and put them in mind that the Kingdom of England was still under
Excommunication; and since that time, the Pope has made many Bishops in
Ireland, which his predecessors had forborne to do from the death of Queen
Elizabeth, to the year One thousand Six hundred and Forty; and this is the
clearsightedness and wisdom that the Court of Rome is lately improved in.

But he does assure you, that if an oath were framed free from ambiguity, and
without odious phrases inserted in it (wholly unnecessary to the substance of
it) the Jesuits would not make any scruple of joining with their Catholic
brethren in it: Alas! what authority has he to assure us this? He knows very
well that the Society will not trust him to frame such Oath; and that they and
he differ very much in their judgments in that point; and of all men, Mr.
Cressy is the most unfit for such an undertaking: He cannot forget that shortly
after he deserted the Church of England, and published his Exomologesis (which
in comparison of all that he has writ since may be looked upon as a modest
Book,) he did in that Book publish a protestation or subscription, which all
the Roman Catholics in England would be willing to take; and in truth it did
not differ much in substance or sense from the Oaths which are enjoined by the
Law; and no doubt he would have taken it himself, and did then believe that all
other Catholics might have taken it likewise: But within a short time all that
impression of that Book was bought up, or otherwise procured; and a second
Edition of it published, wherein there were very many substantial alterations
and additions from what was in the former; the protestation of duty and
obedience, which was in the first, was totally left out in the second
impression, it being not thought a fit obligation for the Catholics to enter
into: The discourse he had made of Purgatory was likewise left out, for he had
mistaken the tenent of his new Church in that particular: Many other
alterations were made, as must be confessed by any man, who will take the pains
to examine both Editions: There were also many additions, especially of
reproaches against the Church of England, and many bitter and virulent
expressions against the Clergy of that Church: And I know a person who meeting
with Mr. Cressy, expostulated with him upon all those particulars; and asked
him how it came to pass that those were left out, when his Book had been first
licensed by Dr. Holden, and another Doctor of the Sorbon, and why the other
calumnies were added which so much reflected upon the Clergy, contrary to what
in his own Conscience he knew was true, to all which he answered with
passionate protestations, that he never knew of one or the other till he saw
the second impression; that his Superiors were offended with the first, in
which there were some mistakes, and that he had entirely left it to their
discretions to do what they should think fit upon it; whereupon they had caused
it to be reprinted as it now stood, without at all communicating with him;
which it seems being a custom amongst them, gives me yet some hope that the
very unusual passion and incivility that runs through this discourse may be
added by the appointment and direction of some Superior: Since he is not so
much altered in his face or habit from what he was, when he was thirty years of
Age, as he is from that modesty and gentleness of nature, and smoothness and
civility of style, if all the expressions in his Book are his own, from the
time I knew him, and had conversation with him: But he finds it much easier to
revile than answer any Books the Doctor has writ in any time: Nor can his
opinion be doubted of the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, both which he has
often taken, and as often declared his detestation of the Covenant, which Mr.
Cressy will never be able to prove he ever took: And if he had, it could not be
wondered at, since by the age he was of when he published his Book in defense
of Archbishop Laud, (which some who knew it well, assured me to be but twenty
eight years:) I cannot suppose him to be, when the Covenant was first appointed
to be administered to all Scholars in the Universities, above the age of
thirteen years, if so much; and cannot be conceived to be at all instructed in
the principles of the Church of England, which had been long before that
discountenanced and suppressed: And no body doubts but that there are very many
reverend and learned persons, who have now great and unquestionable affection
and zeal for that Church, who did in their minority, and under that accursed
and tyrannical Government, take that lewd Covenant, and whose affection and
zeal is not the less for having taken it: But of all men it least becomes Mr.
Cressy to put them in mind of the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, when
himself broke from the obligations of them, and his own subscription, though he
was near, if not full forty years of age when he last repeated those
obligations; and himself acknowledges that the Doctor had the courage, even in
those ill times, to write against all the Religions which were then professed,
and countenanced, in his Ironicon that he is so angry with: And I do profess
that I am not of the Doctor's mind in all things which he says in that Book;
yet as Mr. Cressy will never undertake to confute it, so I am not sorry that no
body else has gone about to answer it.

I will not accompany Mr. Cressy in his uncharitable passion, which every
expression how lawful soever, that he dislikes, kindles in him, by treating
others as he does Archbishop Cranmer, whose memory will be preserved, as of a
most worthy Prelate, and glorious Martyr, notwithstanding the foul imputations
he is pleased to cast upon him: Yet I must tell him, that if that unhappy and
ill advised Queen (who had just reason to be offended highly with that
Archbishop) could have found that the Law would have condemned him for Treason,
she rather desired to have had him hanged for a Traitor, than to have him
burned for his Religion, since she wanted not other instances enough of her
severity in that kind: But the Law would not extend to serve her turn that way;
if it would, no body would have blamed her for having prosecuted him with the
utmost rigor, whereas many good men then did, and since have for proceeding
the other way with him. It is not new to find those who have been adjudged
Traitors by the Law of the Land, looked upon in his Church as Martyrs, which he
well knows is the case of some who were executed for the Gunpowder Treason: But
he will answer, that is no act of the Church, which has never declared them
Martyrs; it may be so, and it is as true, that the Church has in some times
Canonized those who were by Law known to be guilty of High Treason (though not
executed for it) as Saints; for whoever understands the Law as it was in those
days, cannot doubt but that Thomas Becket was guilty of High Treason, and might
legally have been proceeded against for it, as he was condemned afterward for
it; though the assassination of him was in no degree warrantable, or to be
excused: Many other examples of the same kind may be given; however it is a
very sorry exception that Mr. Cressy takes to Archbishop Cranmer's subscription
of his opinion, that he remits the judgment thereof wholly to the King: So,
says he, a final judgment both touching Government and Doctrine is by the prime
Bishop referred to a King of about nine years old, a great glory surely to the
English: Which is a suggestion below the wisdom and experience of Mr. Cressy,
who cannot but know that in all Kingdoms hereditary, that the King is not less
King for being but nine years of age, and that all sentences and judgments are
as much referred to him then as when he is at full age; and the transactions
are concluded in the same method and formality as they would be then: As that
opinion of the Archbishop was considered by the Privy Council, and whatsoever
was done afterward, which was not in all particulars agreeable to that
opinion, was concluded by the Parliament. Nor is he much graver in his Comical
discourse of the Kings Title of being Supreme Governor of the Church of
England, (for he knows that head is not in the title, though if it were, it
would be of no other signification) that the King may thereby ordain Bishops
and Priests himself, which he well knows the Crown always disclaims, and the
Church never admitted, but knows very well that the King has as much authority
to appoint and authorize those who shall do both within his own dominions, as
the Pope (who does neither with his own hands) has in his own Territories, or
others, where, by the consent of the Princes, he has that jurisdiction.

I shall say nothing in defense of the Hugonots of France, of whose communion I
do not profess my self to be; they are of age, let them speak for themselves;
yet I may say that I do not comprehend how their Confession of faith obliges
them to be Traitors and Rebels whenever the honor of God (which, he says, is
the defense of their execrable Religion) is concerned; and it cannot be denied,
that there have been many rebellions in France by the Catholics, since there
have been any in which the Hugonots joined; who for these many years have given
great testimony of their signal affection, and fidelity to the King; and when
they were known to have temptations which many Catholics did not resist: And
Mr. Cressy knows that there are many very learned men amongst them, whose lives
are not reproachable, and whose writings for the learning contained in them,
and the modesty with which they are represented, are thought worthy to be
answered by the reverend Bishops themselves, and other eminent and learned
Catholics, who are contented to answer their Arguments and their Allegations
with all possible candor and condescension, and without any bitterness of
language; and therefore I cannot but lament on the behalf of our Nation, and
our manners, and of the English tongue, that the good spirit of France, and the
urbanity that is there used in handling Controversies in Religion, has not
made greater impression upon Mr. Cressy, who has lived so many years amongst
them, as might well have disposed him to have followed their example, and might
have convinced him that rudeness of style and impetuosity of words in
contradictions of the highest importance which can relate to Religion, are not
essential to the being a good Catholic; and since he urges the great liberty
the Hugonots enjoy joy in France, as an argument against the severity (he will
call it by a worse name) of the Laws of his Country, which forbid any exercise
of the Romish Religion in that Kingdom; he will not take it ill that I put him
in mind, that as the Hugonots have great obligations to his most Christian
Majesty, their true and lawful King, for his clemency and justice toward them,
in defending and protecting them in the enjoyment and possession of all those
rights, privileges and immunities which are granted to them by the Law of the
Land, so they do enjoy no more liberty than by that Law is due, nor can it be
taken from them without a barefaced violation of the Law, which is of no more
force to defend the Subjects in their other possessions, than it is to defend
the Hugonots in the exercise of their Religion, and yet with all this right and
legal title to protection, no Hugonot in France dares revile the Bishops or the
Magistrate, much less the Religion that is established there; nor mention the
Laws without reverence, or do any thing that is scandalous to the government,
or that is not allowed by the Law; whereas a Benedictine Monk, who by being so
has renounced his subjection to his King, by choosing other Superiors for
himself, with obedience to whom, his obedience to the King is inconsistent; who
has deserted the Religion, and the Church in which he has been educated, and
to which he has vowed subjection, (and in that respect cannot but be less
acceptable than those who have never been subject to it) who is so obnoxious to
the Laws, that he cannot securely live one day, or set his foot in England;
notwithstanding all which this man has the courage to enter into it, publicly
to defy the Laws, traduce the Government, treat the Bishops, and the reverend
Clergy, and the Christian Religion that is established there by Law, and all
the professors of it, with those scoffs, and derision, and contempt, as if they
were Turks and Pagans, and if he had a warrantable mission to convert them,
would not yet in common prudence and discretion become him, and seems contrary
to any good and Christian intention; and all this while in his triumphant
style, as if he had subdued all Protestant Churches, he complains lamentably of
the cruel persecution against Catholics.

God be thanked the King has many good Catholic subjects of another temper of
spirit, who with all duty acknowledge the goodness and indulgence of the King,
in permitting them to live with that ease and security that they have enjoyed
from the time of his Majesty's blessed restoration, without any distinction
between them, and any other of his subjects; and desire nothing more than the
continuance of the same ease, and protection, and take care to provide, and
warily entertain Confessors of the same humble and grateful spirit. Is there
one Roman Catholic in England of the Laity or the Clergy, that has suffered
in the least degree in his Person, or his Estate, for being a Roman Catholic,
(whether many have not gotten by it, who would not have been considered under
any other title, many men do doubt) since the time of his Majesty's blessed
restoration? Did they ever enjoy the like tranquillity for a quarter of that
time since the Reformation? The King looked upon many of them, as persons who
had deserved well from his blessed Father and himself, which cannot be denied,
and upon the rest as good subjects, and upon all of them as men who had
suffered with him, if not for him, in the late barbarous times of Usurpation:
His Majesty graciously remembered the humanity he had found in many Catholic
Countries, and from some Catholic Princes, who always besought him not to be
severe to his Catholic subjects, when God should restore them to his
protection; and it was not agreeable to the gentleness and clemency of his
Majesty's nature, when he pardoned all the breach, and contempt, and violation
of the Laws, almost to the highest and foulest transgressors, upon his arrival
to awaken those Laws for the destruction of his poor Catholic subjects, which
upon the matter had slept even in that season of Tyranny, though a more
arbitrary power had been exercised for their ruin, as well as for theirs who
had been most active and faithful to him: And the whole Nation was as well
content with that his Majesty's lenity, and did not think it reasonable that
the general and universal joy, which filled the hearts of all men with the
blessing of the Kings return, should be eclipsed or interrupted by the tears
and sighs of their Roman Catholic neighbors, and that they who had born their
full share in the late persecutions, should undergo new vexations by the
exacting those penalties which they were liable to, by Laws which had been
necessary to be provided against them in times wherein there was more cause to
be jealous of them, than they hoped there was, or would be hereafter: This
cannot be denied to be the case of the Roman Catholics in England for many
years after the Kings return, until the rude and boisterous behavior of some
of them disturbed the happy calm they all enjoyed, and the vanity and folly of
others made that ill use of the Kings bounty and generosity toward them, that
they endeavored to make it believed that it proceeded not from charity and
compassion toward their persons, but from affection to their Religion, and
took upon them to reproach the Church of England, and all who adhered to it, as
if they had been in a condition as well as a disposition to oppress it, and to
affront and discountenance all who would adhere to it, and so alienated the
affections of those, who desired they should not be disquieted, and kindled a
jealousy in others, who had believed that they were neither able or willing to
disturb the public peace, to think that they were willing to attempt it, and
had more power to compass it than was discerned: This has changed the face of
that affair, and even compelled his Majesty to withdraw that countenance from
them, that he was willing should have been more propitious to them, if they had
known how modestly and innocently to have been happy under the shadow of it;
and this mischief the wisest and the soberest Catholics of England have long
foreseen would be the effect of that petulant and unruly spirit that swayed too
much amongst them, and did all they could to restrain it; and Mr. Cressy shall
do well to revolve how much he has contributed to this storm, which seems to
have a little shaken the repose they were in, and to take heed that the
Catholics of England may not undergo more prejudice from the distempered
carriage and behavior of him and two or three more, (for no body is incensed
against those who with gravity and sobriety defend and maintain the Religion
they profess) who have contracted a scurrilous style (that has been long laid
aside, and declined in such debates) to exalt themselves in against the
Religion of the Kingdom, and those who are obliged to defend it, than could be
brought upon them by any combination of the Presbyterians and Independants,
whom they do likewise as unskilfully to their purpose irreconcile to them, as
if they could subdue the whole Kingdom, and so care not whom they provoke. If
the noise, and clamor, and evil-speaking of these men do awaken the sleeping
Laws to take that vengeance upon them that they were ordained for, and which
yet remain in that drowzy posture, that their own modesty may reduce them to
the manners of Gentlemen and Subjects, or if the Kings mercy continue as
obstinate toward them, as their guilt and provocation, so that he thinks fit
still to abate the sharp edge of the Laws toward them, in which very few men
wish his Majesty less merciful, there are still other Laws which the dignity
of his Government will not suffer him to restrain, and which are provided to
vindicate those who do their duty, from the extravagant passions and insolence
of those who observe no rules of good behavior, and of peaceable conversation:
And what may be inflicted upon them of this kind, will be unpitied by all good
Catholics, and will never be thought a persecution of their Religion; and it
may be their Superiors, at least upon their observation to what ill use they
put their tongues, may exact from them that silence, for cherishing whereof,
their Order was first instituted, and hereafter only employ such in their
missions, as may return to them again without doing them any harm, or bringing
prejudice to the Religion they profess.

Mr. Cressy thinks he has a wonderful advantage against the Church of England,
because, he says, he can find no religious Orders in it, he cannot hear so much
as of one single person whom he might call a Fanatic, for leaving the flesh,
and the world, to the end he or she might entirely consecrate themselves to God
in solitude and exercises of spiritual prayer, and mortification; and if God
should call any one to such a state of life, there is an utter want amongst
them of instructors, or instructions proper for it. I will not enter into any
discourse of the benefits, or inconveniences, or ill uses which are too often
made of those Monasteries and Religious houses of the He Is and the She Is: I
have nothing to say against them, nor do I doubt that there are amongst them
many persons of great learning and virtue; and therefore I shall say no more,
but that most Catholic Kingdoms think the number of them too great, and
frequently forbid the erecting more of them, and the Popes themselves have done
the like in Italy, and have dissolved many of them; but I may say (which is as
much as is necessary to say) that we have no cause to lament the absence of
them in England, since any defects which arise by the want of them, is so
abundantly provided by the noble Colleges in both the Universities, and the
great Free-Schools all so plentifully endowed, not only for the good education
of Youth in all principles of virtue, piety, and good literature; but for the
support of them after they are bred, in the improvement of their parts for the
service of the Church, and of their Country; insomuch, that it may be truly
said that more Scholars are liberally maintained upon the sole charge and
charity of the several Founders, and greater emoluments assigned for the
encouragement of learning in England, than can be said of any Kingdom in
Europe, how much larger and richer soever; and I believe the Commonwealth of
Learning in all other parts does think (and with great reason) that all kinds
of Learning are at this day in as great a height and perfection, as they have
been in any age in any Kingdom of the world; and Mr. Cressy cannot forget,
though he does not care to acknowledge, that himself had his education in a
Religious house founded by Walter Merton, where he received a much more liberal
and bountiful education, and support, than he has ever had from S. Benedict;
and from whence he brought more learning than he has found in any other place
that he has since inhabited, or I doubt than he has yet about him. In this
Religious house, where I think he lived as many years as he has done since
under a worse discipline, he had opportunity and obligation to consecrate
himself to God in as much solitude as would contribute thereunto, and to
exercises of spiritual Prayer and mortification: He was as much bound to
chastity, and to all kind of temperance as the severe Rules and Statutes of a
magnificent Founder could oblige him; and which he was likewise sworn to
observe: And I believe he under went as severe, and a much more beneficial
Novitiate there (in which silence likewise was a part of the mortification) as
he did afterward at Douay, for I saw him in both those: It is very true,
there, and in all other Colleges, if they found that the obligations they were
under, were stricter than they could submit to, they are at liberty to quit
those benefits their Founder has bequeathed them, and to dispose of themselves
according to their inclinations, otherwise they may enjoy the other to their
lives end, as very many do, who prefer that solitude, before the pleasures of
the world: It is very true that the Church and State of England did by
observation and experience find, that vows did not make people chaste, who would
not be restrained by conscience of their duty to God, and that those actions
were not worthy the name of virtue and piety, (I speak still only of our own
Country) which were the effects of force, and want of opportunity to decline
them. In a word, the practice they had too much testimony and evidence of, made
them conclude that the mischief from those enclosures, constraints, and vows
was greater, and more apparent than the benefit and advantage; and so they
thought not fit to restrain that liberty which God and Nature did allow to all
those persons who would decline the profit of those Communities in which they
were possessed of them, and betake themselves to another condition of life: And
I doubt not but Mr. Cressy knows that many learned Catholics have always been,
and still are very averse to those vows and enclosures of Women, which seems
not to be much favored by the Church it self, the constitutions whereof
require a greater number of years than are now required before they receive the
vail, and whether the scandalous lives of many Religious men abroad brings not
a greater prejudice to the Religion they profess, than their habit and vows
brings honor to it, I leave to his observation.

The other defect he finds in our Church of want of instructors, and
instructions for those, in case God should call any one to such a state of life
in solitude and exercises of spiritual prayer and mortification, is yet more
strange. Without doubt if God does in truth call any one to such a state of
life; he will not leave him destitute of instruction and instructors, and he
may be very confident if he finds neither of those, that God has not called
him: Sure Mr. Cressy cannot forget the names of very many persons, it may be
both men and women, with whom, and in whose conversation he had the honor and
the happiness to spend many years of the most innocent part of his life; from
whose grave and learned information, and excellent example he might have led a
life more useful to God, his Country, and himself; and in which he would have
had less to answer to all three, than that which he has since by worse counsel
and example given himself unhappily to. And for Books I shall not supply his
Catalogue with the names of many more of the same kind, which he might as well
have mentioned, but I shall put him in mind of the excellent, pious and devout
Sermons, which are constantly preached in that Church, much better I believe
than he has heard in any other language; and there was no restraint upon him,
but if he had liked other Books of devotion better, he might have read the life
of Mother Teresa, that abounds in those visions he admires, and that mystical
Theology he delights in, and even his own Sancta Sophia, if any other man would
have taken the pains to have put it together, in that College he was bred in,
with the same liberty he has done either ever since, sure good Books are not
wanting in that climate For Miracles, whereof he says, we do not pretend to
one, not so much as the curing a Tertian Ague, to testify that our Reformation
is pleasing to God: I shall say no more than I have done: We have not many to
boast of, and very good Catholics think they boast of too many, and would be
glad to be without the mention of most of them; and I do believe that very many
pious men of his Church do believe that the restoration of the Church of
England from that dust and ruins, to which the barbarity, impiety, and
sacrilege of the late rebellion had exposed it, and in which the Roman
Catholics, his Majesty's own subjects more delighted and triumphed to see it
almost buried, than any other Catholics did, is a greater miracle of Gods
mercy, and power; and if we make our selves worthy of it, even a testimony of
his being pleased with it, then all those, of which they brag so much, are an
evidence that he is pleased with what they do. I have never had the luck to see
his Church History, which he is offended with the Doctor for stiling a great
Legend, which he knows is the style given to those Collections in all
Languages, and he challenges the Doctor more scornfully to give to the world a
pretty little legend of his reformed Saints. The Doctor could very well have
given him as large a list of as extraordinary persons of most profound
learning, and most exemplary lives of the Church of England since the
Reformation, as any other Christian Kingdom can supply him, who it may lawfully
be presumed since their deaths have enjoyed those sacred mansions of bliss,
which God has prepared for those who please him; but we are not ashamed that
our Church is too modest to confer the sacred title of Saints which God has
reserved to his own only disposal, for them to whom he had before assigned such
a proportion of grace as is answerable to that high station; and does not
receive the advice, nor communicate the power in that particular, of or to any
person or jurisdiction upon Earth; yet it shall be glad, and does pray that all
such whom the Church of Rome has presumed to call to that honor, without any
ambition or privity of their own, may really enjoy the same: And we do not in
the least degree apprehend the displeasure of God Almighty upon our Church,
because it does with all humility, and after all possible endeavor to be
capable of his favors, leave the disposal of all the places, and offices, and
employments in his own house, to his own gracious will and pleasure: And though
we do not pretend to know so much of their modern Saints, as to think that they
were of the same Religion with us: Yet we do presume to say that the primitive
Saints and Martyrs were all as much our Saints and Martyrs as theirs; that is,
that we are as much of the same faith with those, as they are: We are as firm
in the Apostles faith, who were the first Saints and Martyrs of Christ, as they
can pretend to be: We adhere as much to all the doctrine they taught, and
endeavor to practice all the duties which are enjoined by them, as sincerely
and diligently as they do. During the twelve persecutions, which were the times
when those prodigious Armies of Martyrs for their numbers were levied, it may
lawfully be presumed that very much the major part of them (for those
persecutions raged much more furiously in the East, than in any part of Europe)
never heard of the Church of Rome, none of them professed to have any opinion
in which we differ from them. The first and only subject of their Martyrdom
was, that they loudly avowed the birth, passion, and resurrection of our
Savior, and their peremptory refusal to offer sacrifice to, or to acknowledge
the power of the Pagan Gods; and the last would have excused them, and
preserved their lives, whatsoever they had thought of the other; so that there
was no other point of controversy in issue, but whether they were Christians,
and their mavelous, and without doubt divine courage in affirming that, and
asserting that doctrine so soon after they were informed of it, and before they
were acquainted with any other operation of it, than in their courage to lay
down their lives for it, was the whole ground and merit of their Martyrdom: For
according to the best evidence we have of those dark times, and of that darker
affair, we may reasonably believe that many thousands of those blessed Martyrs
lost their lives within a day, an hour, or less time, according as the wild,
and brutish rage of the Judge could find ways for their torture and execution,
after the moment of their conversion, in which the spirit and zeal of the new
Christians to die for their faith, was little more stupendous than the
implacable rage of their persecutors was, in the vindication of the honor of
their Pagan Gods; for which the husband condemned his wife, the father his son,
the brother his brother, and all relations, those who were nearest and dearest
to them, to the most exquisite torments that could be devised. Tantum Religio
potuit suadere malorum!

How the Church of Rome comes to ingross all these Saints and Martyrs to
themselves as their peculiar Patrons and Advocates, an evidence cannot easily
be comprehended, except they conclude, the because they have a power to make,
or to declare Saints, they have likewise a power to appoint them what they
shall do after they are Saints, which is a species of Logic they make often
use of to many purposes: For our parts we have as much reason to be confident
of all the good offices they can do us in Heaven, as the others are; but
because we do not know what their province there is, or whether there be such a
line of communication, that they know what we would have them to do for us, we
acquiesce in a profound veneration of their lives, and of their deaths, and a
full confidence that they do enjoy the reward of both, without importuning them
by any particular address of our own in our behalf; having an assurance in our
selves, that they will do us all the good they can, though our ignorance knows
not how to ask it from them, and this is all that our Church informs or
instructs us of our duty and behavior to Saints. And Mr. Cressy will not take
it ill that I tell him, if his Church History consists in the lives of any
Welsh Saints and Martyrs, or of those who were before the year six hundred, as
there were many more before than there were after, he cannot reckon those to
belong to the Church of Rome, since he well knows that before the arrival of
Austin the Monk in England, there had never been mention there of the Bishop of
Rome, but most of the Christians had been long before driven into Wales by the
tyranny and power of the Pagan Saxons, who spent their time more profitably by
subduing the other parts of the Kingdom, than they could have done by pursuing
them into those mountains and narrow retreats, where they could better have
defended themselves: So that the British Christians remained for some time, in
some quiet in those parts, and lived under the direction of their Bishops and
Prelates in the exercise of the Christian Religion, according to the
institutions which they had received from their first Planters; and after
Austin came into this Island with a worthy, and no doubt a very pious
intention, and God blessed him so much, that he converted a Pagan King, and
most of his subjects, who were at that time only they who lived within the
circuit of Kent, which opened a door to him, and those who succeeded him for a
larger conversion, for which his, and their name ought always to be mentioned
with reverence and gratitude, as blessed instruments God used for the good of
the Nation, though they were not the first Planters of Christianity in the
Island, as Mr. Cressy well knows; and that when Austin desired to confer with
the British Christians, and had two several meetings with their Bishops and
Prelates, they were so much offended with the proposition he made to them of
their subjection to the Pope, that they did not only positively reject that,
but would not consent to change the course of their observation of Easter, in
which they had always concurred with the Eastern Christians, nor yield to any
thing else that he proposed, left they might be thought to have any respect for
the Pope: So that I say, if his Saints are before the year six hundred, he has
no claim to them, but must either be content to be without their merits and
miracles, or that we may have an equal share with him, upon our joint stock of
Christianity, and I hope he has not in his History inserted the lives or
miracles of any, which have been left out as exploded upon the reformation of
more ancient Legends.

Methinks Mr. Cressy seems to imitate the example of angry women, who think it
lawful to give worse words than they receive, which is the natural progress of
choler; he provokes first the Doctor by reproaching him with the number of
Fanatics amongst us, to tell him, that there is Fanaticism likewise in many of
their Church, and so mentions the Visions and Revelations, and Miracles in many
persons of great esteem amongst them, and by those pertinent instances puts him
into great wrath: and he again to be revenged on him will no longer be
contented that we have too many Fanatics in the Church; but will prove that
the very nature and essence of our Church it self and our Religion is pure
putid-Fanaticism. A man would have expected upon this undertaking that he
should presently have singled one of the Articles of the Church that is so
founded, but that would have held him too much to the point, and restrained him
from those wanderings with which he is so delighted; that would withhold him
from falling upon the person of the Doctor, or upon the Presbyterians and
Independents, with whom no body can blame him for being angry, for they drove
him from the Church, by driving him from his preferments in the Church: And
from this charge upon the Church, without any one instance he falls again upon
the Presbyterians and Hugonots of France, and reckons up some of the opinions
they hold, and maintain, and then says (page 94.) That he must take the
boldness to tell him, Page 94.
(a great boldness indeed) that the Doctor himself does hold the same, and if
he denies it, it is because he is ignorant of what passes in his own mind. Now
the Doctor must be lost, for if his own denial cannot absolve him from being
concluded to be of an opinion, and Mr. Cressy knows better of that which the
Doctors ignorance keeps him from discerning, of what passes in his own mind, he
is to blame if he does not lade him with all opinions which he wishes he would
own: But to prove this intricate averment, like a great Magistrate he takes
upon him to administer many questions to him, and kindly to make answer to them
on his behalf, and so makes him as arrant a Fanatic as he can wish: Yet after
all this he is compelled to confess, with perhaps, That it would be rashness in
him to affirm that the Church of England does ground her faith upon such a
Fanatic principle, as the Doctor lays; and if the Doctor wrongs the Church of
England, he (good man) is unwilling to wrong her with him: And in this fit of
good nature he makes a kind of an Apology for the Bishops, who may be deceived
themselves in the Doctors principles, by the negligence that is used in
licensing Books to the Press, or rather the Doctors virulence against poor
Catholics was so highly approved by the grave Censor Librorum, that rather
than it should be hindered from doing mischief to them, he was content that the
Principles also should pass, which utterly destroy the foundations of his own
Church, and so concludes with some instances of the perfunctory care that is
taken in the licensing Books. The Church of England cannot but be now secure,
when a Benedictine Mark is so vigilant as to stand Sentinel, that she may
receive no prejudice from her own Children, and he does very well to put the
Bishops in mind, that they may be more solicitous what Books are suffered to be
printed, who have no less obligation upon them, to look that no lewd seditious
Books are sold, as that none such may be printed: And if this kind
advertisement of Mr. Cressy has that operation upon the Magistrates of all
sorts, both the Printers and Sellers, and it may be the Buyers of the multitude
of Popish Books, which are every day vented with as much freedom as the Book of
Common Prayer, they of his own Religion will have new cause to celebrate his
prudence, and acknowledge the great advantage he has brought to their cause,
by his pen, as he has to their persons by his modesty and his manners.

Mr. Cressy comes at last after very much passion, and much more virulence
against the poor Protestants, than the Doctor has expressed against the Roman
Catholics, to a matter of importance indeed, in which he believes (which might
have kept him from triumphing so soon) he is absolute master of the field, and
that is to peace and unity, which, he says, is more fit to be the subject and
argument of writings composed by Ecclesiastical persons, that is, unity of
faith and doctrine, (page 102.) Page 102.)
and in truth whoever is really an enemy even to that unity of faith and
doctrine, (how hard soever to be attained) must be an enemy to mankind; but I
must tell him too, that the writings of Ecclesiastical persons have not
hitherto in any age contributed to the production of that unity; I mean such
who have a pride and petulancy of understanding, and obstinacy of will, that
will suffer nothing to be called peace and unity, but a prostration of all
other men to their dictates. Mr. Cressy and his Ecclesiastical Friends affect,
and insolently prescribe a unity that is neither practicable nor desirable, and
there are other Ecclesiastical persons as humorous, who are such enemies to
unity, that they think it not necessary to peace, especially in Ecclesiastical
matters (that is in matters of Religion) all men may think, and speak, and do
what they please, and upon the irrationality of these last, the former impute
all the folly, and all the madness that would introduce the most uncontrollable
confusion, to those who observe order and discipline with more regularity and
obedience, than any of the pretenders will do. It must not therefore be the
Ecclesiastical persons, who have given each other too ill words to be of one
mind, who can procure this unity of faith and doctrine, that must constitute
this peace; but it must be the writings and actions of Magistrates, who by the
execution of those Laws and rules, which the wisdom of the State for which they
are made, have provided for that purpose, can infallibly establish that unity
and peace that is necessary for it: Magistrates who do not pretend any
jurisdiction out of their own limits, nor will suffer those who live within it
to be disobedient, much less to revile the Laws which are provided for the
public peace: Where there are no Laws, confusion is necessary and natural, and
where the Laws are not executed, it is as unavoidable, and in some degree
necessary: So that where unity is not as much provided for as is necessary for
peace, it is the Magistrates fault, and not the fault of Ecclesiastics, who
can only prosecute it by the ways prescribed by the Laws. I say where unity is
necessary; for nothing is more mistaken, or more misapplied, than this precious
word Unity: Who does not know, or has not had it frequently in his
observation, that men who have the same end affect several ways which lead to
that end, and he who goes the farthest way about may possibly come sooner to
the end, than he that believes he goes more directly to it? However if he comes
thither later, he is liable to no other reproach than being laughed at for
being longer upon the way than he needed to have been. I knew two Gentlemen of
good quality and fortunes, one of which I think is still living, who were very
near neighbors in Berkshire, and lived in that good correspondence and
conversation, as persons of quality and authority in their Country use to do;
they had both very frequent occasions to ride to London, and the house of one
of them was the confessed way of the other thither, but the difference was,
whether from thence the nearest way was by Windsor, or by Maidenhead, and in
that they were so great Opiniators, that they still parted at the door, and one
took the one way, and the other that which he conceived to be nearest, and in
twenty years they never made the journey together. How light soever the
instance seems to be, it will be found fit enough to be applied to very many
differences of opinion, which by the excess of fancy on the one side, and the
defect of judgment of the other, are blown up into a magnitude that dazles the
eyes of too many spectators; and for the determination of the rest, there wants
not a submission and obedience to authority; the difference only is where that
authority is placed to which obedience ought to be paid. We of the Church of
England hold ours to be due to the King, the Church, and the Law: Mr. Cressy
would have us pay it to the Pope, which we cannot submit to, not because he is
fallible, but because he is not a Magistrate who has any jurisdiction over us.
In matters that concern Religion, we resort to the Articles of the Church,
which we are obliged to conform to: He would have us observe the Canons of the
Council of Trent, which we are forbidden to do, and he as an English Catholic
is not bound to, upon which we shall enlarge hereafter; and this election to
believe that the Church of England, which flourishes at least as much in
learned and pious men, as any Church of the world, can better direct
Englishmen in the way to Heaven, than the Church of Rome, is the greatest use
we make of our reason which is not like to deceive.

What that union is that was intended certainly by our Savior, when he left
his Church established under spiritual Governors will best appear by the rules
he prescribed, and the directions he gave in order thereunto, which we may
lawfully believe he never intended for such a unity, as Mr. Cressy and his
friends dream of, and that he foresaw the same could never be, and depended
more upon what was necessary toward it upon the civil Magistrates, than upon
the Ecclesiastical power. He prescribed the essential principles himself of
that Religion which he intended should be established, and left persons trusted
by him who not only knew his mind, but knew all things which are necessary to
be known for the accomplishment of it. And no temporal or spiritual authority
under Heaven has power to alter any thing that was settled by him or his
Apostles, who were the only Commentators entrusted by him to explain whatsoever
might seem doubtful in what himself had said, and they performed their parts
with that plainness in what is necessary, that there remains no difficulty to
men of very competent ununderstandings, and it is as plain that they did not
affect such a unity in opinions, as these men would persuade us. If we will
believe our Savior himself, even after his Resurrection; Mark 16. 16.
He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved. What is this precious
belief that is required with such an inestimable benefit and reward? Nothing
but the Resurrection; he that believes the Resurrection, and is baptized into
that faith shall be saved. The only cause of our Saviors appearing at that
time, was only to upbraid his Disciples with their unbelief, and hardness of
heart, Ver. 14.
because they believed not them which had seen him after he was risen; he was
not offended with them for not believing it upon the word of several of the
Prophets, nor upon his own, having so often, and so clearly declared to them
that he should rise, and even the time when; how essential a point soever it
was in the Religion he had planted, it had such a repugnancy to humane reason
and understanding, which he never intended they should divest themselves of,
that he was not angry that they did not suddenly believe it: He well remembered
that John the Baptist, who could not but know much of Christ when he first saw
him, Mat. 3. 14.
and said, I have need to be baptized of thee, and come thou to me? and when
at his Baptism, which out of obedience he administered to him, the Heavens were
opened, and the spirit of God descended like a Dove, and lighted upon him, and
a voice from Heaven said, This is my beloved Son, etc. Yet after all this S.
John was so far from being clearly confident, that he whom he had baptized was
really our Savior, that being in prison, and hearing of the works done by him,
he sent two of his Disciples, asking him, Art thou he that should come, or do
we look for another? And after S. Peter had confessed that he was Christ, the
Son of the everliving God, and had seen him (together with James and John)
transfigured upon the Mountain, and had heard the voice from the cloud, This is
my beloved Son, Mark 9. 10.
yet neither of them could understand what the rising from the dead should
mean: And S. Luke tells us, that when our Savior informed the whole twelve at
his going up to Jerusalem, of all things that were written by the Prophets
concerning him, and which were then to be accomplished, That he should be
delivered to the Gentiles, and should be mocked, and spightfully entreated and
spitted on, and that they should scourge him, and put him to death, and the
third day he should rise again: Luke 18. 34.
They (the whole twelve) understood none of these things, and this saying was
hid from them, neither knew they the things which were spoken; Christ himself
thought it not fit to explain that most important point to them, well knowing
that in that point of his Resurrection, they must have another assistance to
their faith than his own words could give them; and therefore we see how long
it was before that Article could gain belief even after his actual
Resurrection, and how there he condescended to convince their senses in all
circumstances before he could obtain their belief in that point, which
concerned them more than all the rest, nor could less than the descent of the
Holy Ghost finish that part of the Creed, and propagate that doctrine: But when
he had vouchsafed after his Resurrection to be seen, and to be conferred with,
taken the way to satisfy their senses which could not be deceived, and which
could not but challenge and compel their belief, that they should not yet
believe seemed obstinacy and perverseness, it was not only infidelity, but ill
nature, incivility, and hardness of heart, want of that charity which he had so
often, and so solemnly enjoined them to practice, not to believe those who had
seen him, and whom he had sent to inform them. This was a countermine to blow
up the doctrine of his Resurrection, if men contemned the only evidence that
could be given of it, if they resolved they would not believe them who had seen
him dead, and buried, and seen him after he was risen, they might as well not
believe their own eyes when themselves should see him, that he added a terrible
commination to his short Creed: He that believes and is baptized, shall be
saved, but he that believes not shall be damned: Now they knew the reward, and
the penalty, they might choose for themselves: S. Paul did enlarge this Creed
very little in his gloss upon it: Romans 10. 9
If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thy
heart that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved: We must
publicly own and avow our faith, not dissemble our Christianity out of any
worldly consideration, out of hope to gain, or out of fear of danger: S. Peter
never denied his faith in Christ, lost nothing of his reverence for him, he did
only not confess with his mouth his relation to him, denied he had been in his
company, without the least disaffection in his heart, and it cost him so many
tears, and remains as a brand upon him to the end of the world, of his
unkindness to his master; his following him that he might see what they would
do to him, and be at hand to assist him if he stood in any need of his service,
when all the rest left him, to provide for their own security, could not
expiate for not confessing his relation to him, though impertinently urged by
those who had no authority to make the enquiry; we must always confess with our
mouth, acknowledge that he is the Son of God; we must believe the History of
his Nativity, of his Passion, and of his Resurrection, all which he has
manifested unto us himself, we have it from his own mouth, and we have done our
part.

If an exact knowledge in all particulars contained in Scripture were required
from us, or if it had been in any great degree necessary, there would have been
more pains, and care taken by the Apostles, who were enlightened to make a
short Commentary upon the whole Christian faith by Gods own spirit, and were
endued with the spirit of Prophecy, and so could foresee what doubts were most
like to arise by the excess of wit, as well as the weakness of our
understanding, to have determined and defined those things, in defining and
determining whereof so much time has been since spent, and so much
uncharitableness infused into the hearts of men, so that instead of learning
more of what Christ would have us know, we have almost unlearned all that he
would have us do; yet S. Paul, as if he foresaw that that Original corruption
and itch of knowledge would be propagated by the curiosity of mankind, begun
his preaching in his masters method, that they might not be terrified with any
imagination of the difficulty of his doctrine, he declared that that which may
be known of God, was manifest to them, for God had showed it to them: There are
no doubt many things fit to be known, and which we should be the better for
knowing, which are not so manifest, but it is not so necessary if it be not
manifest; and it is very observable, that when he tells them what became of
those under the Law, and the sins of the Gentiles, who did not like to retain
God in their knowledge, he mentions not what false opinions grew up amongst
them by reason of their not retention of him in their knowledge, Romans 1. 29, 30.
but that God gave them over to a reprobate mind to do those things which were
not convenient: Being filled with all unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness,
covetousness, maliciousness, full of envy, murder, debate, deceit, malignity,
whisperers, back-biters, haters of God, despiteful, proud, boasters, inventors
of evil things, disobedient to Parents: He does not so much as mention their
Idolatry in that place, because it was matter of opinion, which was the
greatest contradiction of the Majesty of God, but those vices which had proved
destructive to all humane relation and society; and the same Apostle finding
still that the infant Christians perplexed themselves with many difficulties
between the Law and the Gospel, took the pains as Moses had done, to abridge
the obligations of the Law, as was mentioned before to abridge the Religion of
the Gospel: If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, Romans 10. 9
and shall believe in thy heart that God has raised him from the dead, thou
shall be saved: He that cordially believes the History of our Savior, That he
was the only begotten Son of God, that he suffered death for the sins of
mankind, and that after he was put to death, and buried, he rose the third day;
the birth, and death, and resurrection of Christ has faith sufficient to
salvation, and all that is absolutely necessary to be believed, lies within
that narrow compass: Notwithstang the clearness of which definition and
authority of the Apostle, the wit of men, and even the zeal of Religion
produced many differences of opinion, and much faction amongst the believers,
many men thinking that this excellent foundation would very well support this
manner of building, and others that it would as well or better bear another
sort of building, rather this deduction than that would result from the same
proposition, S. Paul still adhering fast to the foundation, without much
examining the superstructures, tells them, Other foundation can no man lay,
than that is laid, 1 Cor. 3. 11, 12.
which is Jesus Christ: If they would keep themselves steady to that
foundation, let their superstructures be of gold or silver, precious stones,
wood, hay, or stubble, let their conceptions or deductions be of the finest
allay, the more probable and rational, or more gross and irrational, there will
at last be such an examination of every one of them, that the truth shall
appear and be made manifest; but for their comfort, to abate the
superciliousness of him who has more reason to think himself in the right, and
to raise the spirits of them who may be terrified with the consequence of being
in the wrong, he tells them, that they who have done their work best, raised
such doctrine upon, and from the foundation, as will endure the trial, that
doctrine shall stand, and they shall receive a reward; and that they who have
built less skilfully, raised imaginations too large, or contracted opinions too
narrow to be supported upon that foundation, their doctrine shall not subsist,
their opinions shall be disavowed, and condemned; yet because they departed not
from the foundation, let their mistakes and errors in judgment be what they
will, they themselves shall be saved; nor did he think the determination of
those buildings, how different soever, and vile the materials might seem to be,
were proper for the judgment of any but the Masterbuilder, the Architect who
had directed the foundation, who could only judge whether there were malice or
hypocrisy in preparing such superstructures to rest upon that foundation: 1
Cor. 4. 5.
Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come: Whosoever takes
upon him to judge before, presumes to judge before the cause is ripe for
judgment, which is not only beside the office of an upright Judge, but against
the rules of Justice; and it was very good husbandry as well as wisdom in the
Master in the parable, who though he saw the Tares, Tares not grown up by
chance out of the rankness of the soil, but Tares maliciously and industriously
sown by the labor and craft of an Enemy, would not suffer his active servants
to pull them up, he rejected the providence; Nay lest whilst you gather up the
Tares, Mat. 13. 29, 30.
ye root up also the Wheat with them, let them both grow until the Harvest: And
lest men should think by the ripeness of the Tares that the harvest was come,
our Savior himself interprets his own parable; The Harvest is the end of the
world, and the Reapers are the Angels; an unskilful hand will mistake the Wheat
for Tares, and a rude passionate hand will for expedition pull up both, that he
may be sure he has destroyed one; unskilful and unlearned men may believe that
to be an error which in truth is none, but enough consistent with the truth,
and angry men will not enough consider if it be in truth an error, what root it
may have taken from some unquestionable truth, and how far it may have
insinuated it self into the minds of good and pious men, which ought to be
undeceived by application and gentle remedies, and by time, but will violently
tear it from the hold it had, and make a greater wound than they found; disturb
the peace of a Kingdom* rather than connive at an error till it be ripe, and
the mischief thereof fully discovered; and when the malice of the disease is
evident, proportionable remedies may more easily be found. Our Savior was not
more careful of the season than of the Reapers; the season is the end of the
world, the Reapers are the Angels; dispassionate and unpartial Reapers, who
understand the nature of the Tares, and the hurt they have done to the Corn. It
is a complaint and observation as ancient as S. Gregory, Lib. 9. Ep. 39.
Quam multi sunt fidelium qui imperito zelo succenduntur, and saepe, dum
quosdam quasi Haereticos insequuntur haereses faciunt? Charity and discretion
can only preserve men from splitting upon those rocks, and the time prescribed
in the parable can only determine all disputations.

It seems an expression of a wonderful latitude which S. Paul uses to the
Philippians: Phil. 1. 15, 18.
Some indeed preach Christ even of envy and strife, and some also of good will;
what then? Notwithstanding every way, whether in pretense or in truth Christ is
preached, and I therein do rejoice, yea, and will rejoice: S. Paul found
opposition and contradiction (as all other Preachers have done since) even from
some other Apostles and Disciples; emulation was a strong passion, and well
grown in the infancy of the Church, and did no great harm: No doubt S. Paul
wished that all who were to preach Christ had had the same thoughts, and had
used the same words, and had had the same affection toward each other; which
unity would much have advanced the propagation of Christianity; but he knew
that was impossible, and that different apprehensions and different conceptions
must be always attended with difference of expressions; whilst the birth, and
life, and death, and resurrection of Christ was taught, though they who
preached him had their own passions and prejudices toward each other, he was
still glad that the number of the Christians were increased. There may be much
good done in the world without taking its rise purely from Conscience, and only
to please others, or to imitate others; and the like may be done to anger, and
to cross and contradict other men; and though the Authors of that good have
lost their reward, yet there is matter of rejoicing still that good is done. It
is very well worth our reflection, how little pains our Savior took (who well
foresaw what disputations would arise concerning Religion to the end of the
world) to explain any doctrinal points, or indeed to institute any thing of
speculative doctrine in his Sermon upon the Mount, which comprehends all
Christianity, but to resolve all into practice; and his Apostles though they
met with a world of questions and disputes, and in the highest points of the
mystery of Religion, were very short in their answers and determination, and
left no room for any contention in the understanding upon any matter of faith,
it depending purely upon believing what was past and done, and of which they
received unquestionable evidence; but in the application of this faith to
practice they were large in their discourses, and clear to remove all doubts;
they had observed into how many Schisms and Sects the Church of the Jews had
run by their several interpretations of the Law and the Prophets, of both which
they had all equal veneration, and from both gathered arguments enough to found
an animosity against each other, that vented it self in all the acts of
uncharitableness and denunciation of Hellfire to their opponents, and they did
all they could that the Gospel and the professors thereof might not be exposed
to the like mischiefs by the same disputations: Men might set their wits on
work to raise doubts and scruples, and improve them to what degree they please
by the subtilty of their own invention, they were difficulties of their own
making, not finding: Christ and his Apostles left their Declarations of what we
are to believe, and what we are to do, so clearly stated, that we cannot
dangerously mistake, and so much the more clearly by informing us what we are
not to believe, and what we are not to do, by the obligations of Christianity;
and as they did no doubt foresee the weakness and the wilfulness of the
succeeding times, and that men would make use of the Scriptures themselves to
the prejudice of Religion, they took care that they might know that there is
much in them above their understanding, and that they should govern themselves
by what is easy and plain to be understood therein: and above all, that they
should not presume to censure and judge those who differ from them in their
opinions, because Christ has reserved all those differences to be determined
by himself, and except it were inflicting Ecclesiastical censures upon
corruption of manners, and transgressing against Christian duties: It was some
Ages before the Church expressed any great severity upon differences in
opinions, and used such circumspection in the expressions upon their
determinations, as rather pleased all persons concerned, than strictly defined
the matter in controversy: The Primitive Church never prescribed any other
rule to themselves to judge by, than the sacred Scriptures, by consent of which
they made all their definitions and determinations: and as no man yet, at least
with any countenance of authority, has pretended to understand the entire
meaning of any one of the Prophets; so it was some time (a long time) before
the Revelation of S. John was received into the Canon of the Church for the
difficulty of it; and whosoever has since undertaken to understand it, has
received more censure than approbation from pious and learned men, nor have
they attained to credit enough to be believed; Seek not out the things that are
too hard for thee, neither search the things that are above thy strength, is
very good counsel, and proportioned to men's different faculties and
understandings; he that is stronger than I may search for things that are too
hard for me, and there is no harm in that search, but I who am weaker, am in no
degree obliged to make that search, nor shall fare the worse because I am so
weak. The Dialogue between the Angel and the Prophet Esdras may be very good
Divinity, thoughs it be contained in the Apocrypha; 2 Esa. 4.
He that dwells above the Heavens may only understand the things that are
above the height of the Heavens; 21. 26, 27.
The more thou searchest, the more thou shall marvel, for the world hastes
fast to pass away, and it cannot comprehend the things that are promised to the
righteous in time to come: Let us endeavor to do the things which we are
plainly enjoined to do, and which we can very well comprehend, at least let us
forbear doing any thing which we are as plainly forbidden to do, and we shall
in due time obtain those things which for the present we cannot comprehend.

It has been an artifice introduced to perplex mankind, and to work upon the
conscience, by amusing and puzling the understanding, to persuade men to
believe that there is but one Church, and one Religion in which men may be
saved, that by their confident averring themselves to be that Church, and of
that Religion, others may be prevailed with to be of their party, and they who
with most passion abhor their presumption, and so withdraw from their
Communion, adhere to the same unreasonable conclusion, and will not suffer them
to be a Church at all, or capable of salvation, and form their own Church upon
those principles only which most contradict the other; whereas there is room
enough in Heaven for them all, and we may charitably and reasonably believe,
that many of all Christian Churches will come thither, and that too many of
every one of them will be excluded from thence. There is indeed, as was said
before, but one faith, which no authority upon Earth can change, or suspend, or
dispense with; but Religion, which is the uniting, or the being united of pious
men in the profession of that Faith, may be exercised in several and different
forms, and ways, and with several ceremonies according to the constitutions and
rules of the several Countries and Kingdoms where it is practiced, and there
are so many Churches united in one and the same faith; and methinks the very
style and appellation used by the Apostles themselves, should discountenance
and abolish that quarrelsome proposition to the Church of, or at Corinth, at
Ephesus, at Philippi, and other places, to the seven Churches of Asia; and it
is observable that the Apostles in their method of writing and prescribing
their rules and orders to the several Churches, have a regard to the customs
and natures of the several people, and permit some things, and for some time in
one place, and to one People, which they do not to another; they who succeeded
them followed their example, and did not only permit, but encourage the People
to all actions, which they perceived did really contribute to, and improve
their Devotions, and so many things which afterward degenerated into
Superstition, had their original from fervent piety, and innocent Devotion, as
some kinds of Worship and Forms of Adoration, and an over easy belief of
Miracles, when there seemed less danger in that fervor which inflamed them,
than might have been in extinguishing that good Fire that warmed them, by an
over severe examining, and refining the Fuel that had kindled it. It is an
unanswerable argument of the truth of Christian Religion, of the Christian
Faith, that being so different from all things then known to Mankind, and so
much contradicting the very Principles of their belief, and knowledge in very
many things, it should in so short a time possess the hearts of so many
Millions of People of all Nations, of both Sexes, and of all Religions; and as
God did miraculously prepare, and dispose the hearts of men to the reception of
their faith; so as a natural means to that operation, he infused likewise into
them a profound reverence for the Persons of those who published this Faith,
and informed the People of the mysteries, and instructed them in the knowledge
of it toward the Apostles, and toward those who succeeded them, and observed
their Orders, and followed their examples; this Universal esteem of such
Persons amongst all Christians, created such an implicit belief in all they
said, and so entire a submission to all they required, that Men were not less
guided by them in all the affairs of humane life, than in their determinations
of the most spiritual matters which related to their Conscience; and this
general resignation continued in a great degree, until Religion grew to be a
faction, and reproach amongst Christians themselves, and the preaching it a
Trade to live, and to grow rich by, and Men studied it for preferment, and
practiced it for profit.

That unreasonable, inconvenient, and mischievous distinction of
Ecclesiastical, and Temporal, as it exempts things, and Persons from the Civil
Justice, and the Sovereign Authority, and as it erects another Tribunal, and
sets up another distinct Sovereign Jurisdiction Superior, and independent upon
the other, has cost the Christian World very dear in Treasure, and in blood,
and has almost heaved that Government (which ought to preserve the order, and
peace of Christendom) off the Hinges. That there are offenses, and crimes of an
Ecclesiastical, and Spiritual Nature, according to the manner, and custom of
speaking, and Persons who by their Functions, to which they are assigned
properly, fall under the same distinctions, is very true, and very reasonable;
but that any such difference in the appellation, should create a Schism in the
Government, that the civil justice of the Kingdom should not have the full
cognizance of either, and both, but that an other Supreme, and Sovereign
Jurisdiction should examine, and determine those things, and have the only
authority to regulate, reform, and punish those Persons, is such a solecisme,
such a contradiction, indeed such a dissolution of all the principles, and
substantial frame of Government, that there is not wherewithal left to prevent
the highest, and most dismal confusion that can be imagined; for if the same
Treason may not be determined before the same Tribunal, because of the
difference, and distinction of the Persons who are guilty of it, if the
Sovereign power over the Nation have only power to judge, and condemn the
Laymen who Rebel, and the Clergy which has fomented it, the Churchmen who
have preached it up as lawful, and necessary, and justifiable, may appeal from
that justice to another jurisdiction, which it may be wished good success to
that undertaking, which is now condemned, however will not be obliged to the
same rules of judging, which were to confess it self inferior; Is it not
possible that the same offense may be condemned and justified, and one Man
legally commended, and preferred for the same action for which the other is
censured and executed? Kings and Queens can never be the Nursing Fathers, and
Nursing Mothers of the Church, if they themselves shall be kept as Children in
the Nursery of the Vicar of that Church, if he shall exercise a Sovereignty
above the Sovereignty they have in their own Dominions. Aaron had a function of
his own Offices to perform, which were proper to him, and to his Tribe after
him, but he was inferior to Moses, Moses had the power over him, and it was
well he had so; had it been otherwise, he who was so ready to gratify the
people in their impious desire of having Gods to walk before them, and had no
other excuse for not only permitting, but contriving their abominable Idolatry,
but that the people were set on mischief, and said unto him, make us Gods, and
he said unto them, whoever has any Gold, let them break it off, so they gave
it, he cast it into the Fire and out came the Calf, which they worshipped
before the Altar which he built before it; what would not this Man have done
that the People would have required, and if Moses had not been the Sovereign to
have examined, and punished this foul transgression? Idolatry had probably been
established, as a Law by God's own High Priest, and as by his own Commandment;
He who had the presumption to murmur, and speak against Moses as Aaron did,
Numb. 12. 1.
would have rebelled against him, if God himself had not given him such a
reprehension as made him tremble, Wherefore were you not afraid to speak
against my Servant Moses? the speech was but between two, but it would hardly
have been stilled, if God had not stopped their Mouths, and struck his joint
murmurer with Leprosy, and sent him to ask mercy of Moses. It is no
undervaluing the persons, or their functions, to say it were better for the
Successors of Aaron, and for the Successors of St. Peter, and for the things
and Persons which are committed to their charge, if they, as their Predecessors
were, were subject to a superior visitation, which is more like, and more able
to reform things as they grow amiss, and to prevent dangerous innovations in
Church, as well as in the State; and surely that Sovereign power which is
trusted by God to provide for the peace and prosperity, and security of a
Nation, if it cannot as well prevent, and punish those enormities which grow up
in the Church, from the corruption of Doctrine, and contentions, and
contradictions in the practice of Religion, as any exorbitancies in state, is
so far from being sovereign, that he holds upon the matter the little authority
he has in other things, but precario of him who has the exercise of the other
jurisdiction. And as this mischief, and confusion is very demonstrable to all
men who understand the foundation, and rules of Policy, and Government, so the
benefits which accrue from this distinction, are not discernable by the eyes of
reason, or of faith. Temporal Princes, and Kings cannot have authority to
change Religion, nor are qualified to perform the Offices, and functions of
Religion; that is true. Nor has any Ecclesiastical and Spiritual power
authority to change Religion; The Pope whom some Men call the Church, nor a
General Council, which no doubt is the most natural representative of the
Universal Church, does not pretend that they can change Religion; Our Savior
left our Religion entire, and the Apostles left all things so plain which he
directed, that no power under Heaven can add to, or take from that body of
Religion, which they commended to all Christians; nor can it be more reasonably
imagined that God will suffer any Christian state to make such an alteration,
than that the Universal Church shall fall away from being Christian: but if
Christianity were deposited with one Churchman, or any body of Churchmen, we
have too much reason to apprehend what would become of it, by the progress
Arianisme once, and other Heresies too made in the World by possessing many
great, and learned Men, even of the Fathers themselves. So that we may say,
that the purity of Christian Religion has been in truth preserved by the piety
of Princes, with the advice, and assistance of their National, and
Ecclesiastical Councils, more than by any spiritual authority. Religion it self
then must not, cannot be changed, but the advancement of it, the information in
it, the exercise, and practice by which it is best to be made manifest, cannot
be so well provided for, as by that supreme sovereign authority to which God
has entrusted the peace, and prosperity of a Nation, which best knows how to
establish such forms, and ceremonies and circumstances in what pertains to
Religion, as are most agreeable to the nature, and inclination, and disposition
of a people. A conformity in humors and in manners, is a great introduction to
conformity in Religion, and will not suffer the pride, and affectation, and
singularity of any man to contradict the order established. This Sovereign
Authority knows best how to preserve Peace, in which the being of a Nation
consists, and how to reform errors which are grown, and prevent those which are
growing, by such ways as may not disturb that peace; and such errors as are
grown too obstinate, are too deep rooted to be pulled up without shaking the
whole peace of the Kingdom, he will let alone, drawing by degrees such
nourishment from it, as most cherishes it, until a fitter season for the entire
cure of it. No Reformation is worth the charge of a Civil War; Nor was it a
light reproach which Seneca charged upon Sylla, Qui patriam durioribus remediis
quam pericula erant, sanavit; The Remedy was worse than the Disease, and God
knows Christianity has paid very dear for the too hasty and passionate
application of remedies to very confessed diseases, when the disease was not
ripe for the remedy, nor the remedy proportioned to the disease. State surgery
cannot be used with too much caution, nor are the wounds, and sores of it cured
at once, or with one kind of medicine, but the lenitives and corrosives must be
applied successively, and if the first will do it, there cannot be too little
used of the latter; No sore is so ill cured, as that which is hastily cured.
There is no necessity, nor convenience that the outward exercise, and forms of
Religion be the same in all climates, and in all Countries; Nay, it is very
necessary that it be different, according to the natures, and customs of the
people. It would be very incongruous where genuflexion is neither the posture
of reverence or devotion, to introduce a command for kneeling; and there are
many particulars worthy of the same consideration. They do equally mistake, who
believe that the outworks of Religion must be equally, and with the same
passion guarded, and preserved, as the walks themselves, that no form, or
ceremony, or circumstance in Religion may not be altered or parted with, more
than the faith it self, and they who would be always mending, and altering, and
reforming according to every model and description they meet with, as a thing
indifferent, and only to please the fancies of men where there is no
indifference; there may be alterations made by, and according to the wisdom of
the Government, and as the good Order, and peace of the Nation requires, and
with the same gravity, and deliberation as all other mutations, and provisions
are made; but there must be outworks still, and such as may secure the walls
from rude approaches; every fanciful Engineer must not demolish the outworks
upon pretense they are too high, or too irregular, nor must the decency of the
prospect so much transport others, as not to suffer the least alteration in
them, though thereby the walls would be the better guarded. No one Classis of
men will dispassionately weigh all necessary consideration in this matter, but
that authority which must provide for the public peace, is the most competent
provider for this branch of it. It is no irreverence to the purest times, to
believe that in the first plantation of Christian Religion (I speak not of
infusion of Christian Religion into the Apostles, and the inspiration by the
Holy Ghost, but of the plantation of it by the Apostles, and those who
succeeded them, by the strength of their reason, and the powerful effects of
their lives, and actions) the same method, and order, and application was used
and observed as is in other Plantations: The Sun and the Soil are first
consulted, and husbandry practiced accordingly in the sowing of Seeds or
setting of Plants, and that husbandry altered and improved according to
seasons, and upon observation and experience what is most like to advance the
Plantation. If ever the Spaniard loses the West Indies (which it is probable
enough he will do) it will be by his positive and rigorous adhering to the same
rules which were most prudently established by Philip the Second upon the first
conquest of that Empire, and under which the Infant Plantation prospered
exceedingly, and not admitting any such material alterations since, as would
produce more benefit and advantage now, than the other did then, and which
time, and the people will make, if the policy of the Government do not first
introduce it, and then it is very hazardous that the presumption of doing it
will shake off that authority that should have done it. It may be observed in
the Plantation of Christianity, that where the age and the people were most
inclined to superstition, which in the first conversion and growth of Religion
they were not disposed to, at least to that worship and reverence which shortly
after degenerated into superstition, there was least care taken to introduce
Forms and Ceremonies into the Church; but when profaneness broke in as a
torrent, and the lives of Christians discredited the doctrine of Christ, and
the power of Princes was found necessary to reform the manners of the Church;
such Forms and Ceremonies were brought into the exercise of Religion, as were
judged most like to produce a reverence into the professors toward it, and to
manifest that reverence, in providing whereof General Councils meddled very
little, knowing very well that they could not be the same in all places, and
that every State and Kingdom knew best what ways and means were most like to
contribute to the general end, the reverence for Religion; and sure there
cannot be too intent a care in Kings and Princes to preserve and maintain all
decent Forms and Ceremonies both in Church and State, which keeps up the
veneration and reverence due to Religion and the Church of Christ, and the duty
and dignity due to Government, and to the Majesty of Kings in an age when the
dissoluteness of manners, and the profaneness and pride of the people too much
inclines them to a contempt of Religion, to a neglect of order, and to an
undervaluing and contending with the most Sovereign authority.

That the Secular power cannot provide for Ecclesiastical Reformations, because
Kings and Princes are not qualified to perform the offices and functions of
Religion, because they do not pretend to consecrate Bishops, to ordain Priests,
or to administer the Sacraments, is an argument to exclude them, as well from
the temporal as spiritual jurisdiction in the determination of matters of right
between private men, in the punishment of the most enormous crimes and
offenses. Justice must be administered according to the established rules of the
Law, and not the will and inclination of the Judge; and it cannot be presumed
that Kings can be so well versed in the Laws and customs which must regulate
the proceedings of Justice, and therefore may be excluded from the authority
and power of judging the people; and they are wonderful careful that you may
not believe that they would bereave them of that inherent power and authority
which they confess is committed to them alone; but why the one and not the
other, since they can as well provide for the one as for the other, is not so
easy to be comprehended by any rules of right reason. Kings provide for the
good administration of justice, by making learned men Judges, whose province it
is to execute the Law in all cases; and they provide for the advancement and
preservation of Religion, by making pious and learned men Bishops, and use
their advice and assistance in matters relating to the Church, as he does that
of the Judges in cases pertaining to the Law; and as he does other Counselors
in such things as have an immediate dependence upon the Wisdom of State; and
both Bishops and Judges are bound to render an account of their actions to
Kings, who have entrusted them; and if they have been corrupt in the discharge
of their several Offices, they are equally liable to the Kings displeasure, and
to such punishments as the Laws have provided for such enormities, which are
inflicted upon them by the Kings authority. And as no foreign power can be so
competent as the King's to administer this Justice, since it must either
control it, or be controuled by it; so it is no easy matter for the Pope to
prove himself a more spiritual Person than Kings are, who have been in all Ages
thought to have somewhat of the Priest and the Prophet by their very Office,
whereas some Popes have been pure Laymen, when they have been chosen to that
Supreme office, which is all the qualification they have to be more
Ecclesiastical after; and very many have been chosen Popes, who never were
Bishops, which is not a necessary qualification for that dignity, every
Deacon-Cardinal being as capable to be elected Pope, as the Priest and Bishop
Cardinal; and he that was a Bishop before consecrates no Bishops himself after
he is Pope, but that function is performed by other Bishops by virtue of his
Commission or Bull; and the same may as regularly be done by Bishops by virtue
of Kings Commissions in their several Kingdoms, otherwise it would be in the
power of Popes to extinguish the function of Bishops in any Princes Dominions;
and therefore the French Ambassador declared in his Masters name to Innocent
the Tenth, that if he persisted in the refusal to make Bishops in Portugal upon
that King's nomination, they should choose a Patriarch of their own, who should
supply that defect. But God be thanked that senseless usurpation and exemption
of the Clergy from the common justice of Nations, is pretty well out of
countenance; and since the Republic of Venice so notoriously baffled Paul the
Fifth upon that very point, other Kings and Princes have chastised their own
Clergy for transcendent crimes, without asking leave of his Holiness, or
treating them in any other manner than they do their ordinary Malefactors.

For the unity proposed and professed by us in the Creed, I believe one holy
Catholic and Apostolic Church, if it be well considered in what time that
Creed was made, which is not yet defined or determined by any Church; and if it
had been made by the Apostles themselves, according to the fancy of some men,
that every one of the Apostles should contribute his Article, it would then be
Canonical Scripture, which it is not pretended to be; yet I think it is agreed
by most learned men, that it was framed in the infancy of Christianity, and in,
or very soon after the time of the Apostles themselves, and then it can have no
other signification than Credo Sanctam Apostolicam Ecclesiam esse Catholicam,
which was a necessary Article at that time, when the believing that the Church
was to be universal, and to consist equally of Gentiles as well as Jews, was
one of the most difficult points of Christianity, and most opposed; and for the
Confirmation whereof the Apostles took most pains after they were all
reconciled to it themselves; and as it could have no other sense then, so the
restraining it to any one Church now, or to make it serve for a distinction
between Churches and Nations, and to produce a separation between them, must be
very unnatural if any sense at all. To conclude then this discourse of unity, I
know not how Mr. Cressy can refuse to submit to that good rule and
determination that S. Gregory long since gave upon the third Interrogation
administered to him by Austin the Monk, Cum una sit fides, cur sunt Ecclesiarum
diversae consuetudines, and altera consuetudo Missarum in sancta Romana
Ecclesia, atque altera in Galliarum tenetur? Respondet Gregorius Papa, Novit
fraternitas tua Romanae Ecclesiae consuetudinem, in qua se nutritam meminit,
sed mihi placet, ut sive in Romana, five in Galliarum, seu in qualibet
Ecclesia, aliquid invenisti quod plus omnipotenti Deo posset placere, solicit
eligas, and in Anglorum Ecclesia, quae adhuc ad fidem nova est, institutione
praecipua, quae de multis Ecclesiis colligere potuisti, infundas, non enim pro
locis res, sed pro bonis rebus loca amanda sunt. Ex singulis ergo quibusque
Ecclesiis, quae pia, quae religiosa, quae recta sunt elige, and haec quasi in
fasciculum collect a apud Anglorum mentes in consuetudinem depone. If Austin
had conformed himself to these Instructions, it is very probable that he might
have had as good success in reconciling the Eritish Church, who principally
insisted against any deference to the Roman, not comprehending any possible
reason for such a superiority; or if the successors of Gregory had been of his
temper and Christian prudence, Christendom had been much better united at this
day, or more innocently separated, and unanswerable reasons for the reformation
of some errors which had unwarily creeped in, or removing some scandals, which
could not otherwise be kept out, would not have been so often rejected, upon no
other reason than that the Bishop of Rome was not of that opinion, nor would
whole National Churches, because they have with the consent of the Sovereign
power removed some error which the other chooses to retain, be reviled with the
names of Heretics and Schismatics, and the universal be contracted within the
Province of Rome, and not be allowed to be members of the Catholic Church,
because they will not be subject to that of the Roman, which would usurp the
authority of condemning many more Christians than are contained within the
community thereof. To make any profession of a willingness to submit men's
judgments for the sense of Scripture to a lawful General Council, (besides that
I do not know that there is any difference upon any Text of Scripture that
concerns Salvation) I confess I take it to be very impertinent, and in that
respect not very ingenious, since it is manifestly impossible for any such
Council ever to meet, whilst that of Rome challenges the sole power of calling
it, and pretends to such a Sovereignty in it, that nothing must be debated by
it, but what is proposed by the Pope or his Legates, and all Kingdoms or
Provinces as well as private persons, who will not submit to his Sovereignty,
shall be excluded from thence under the notion of being Heretics; so that all
Protestants must appear as Delinquents to be censured and condemned, which
would be a strange condition to submit to, when no body can compel them to
appear but their own Sovereigns: Nor can it be called a free Council, where all
who ought to be looked upon as members of it, are not equally free. When
General Councils were first called, all the Christians of the world were one
man's subjects, who could both compel as many of them as he thought necessary to
be present, and to obey and submit to whatsoever was determined; whereas now
there being so many Kings and Princes who have much larger Dominions than the
Emperor, and are equally Sovereigns in those their Dominions, and none of their
subjects can appear there without their Sovereigns consent: And lastly, it
being a Catholic Tenent, that how numerous soever the convention in Council
is, and how universal soever the consent is in what is determined, the Canons
made there are not obligatory to any Kingdom before it be received and
submitted to in that Kingdom, upon which the Council of Trent is not yet
received in France, and in many other Catholic Countries; and therefore it
will be very hard for Mr. Cressy to justify the defending or urging the
authority of that Council in England, where it was never received, and has
been always rejected: And for these reasons it may reasonably be thought
morally impossible for any general free Council ever to meet, which must grow
every day more impossible as the Christian Faith is farther spread, and when
the whole world is converted, as we do not only pray it may, but believe it
will be; it will be very hard for the greatest Geographer to assign a place for
the meeting, where the Bishops from all parts may reasonably hope to live to be
present there, and to return from thence with the resolutions of the Councils
into his own Country.

For the Instruments and means of unity, which Mr. Cressy says were left by our
Lord to his Church, for the preservation of unity, (besides that most of those
means are as applicable to the Church of England, as to the Church of Rome,
though none of them in the terms he uses appear to be enjoined or left by our
Savior) let him but prove the Ninth and Tenth, That the ordinary authority is
established in the Supreme Pastor, the Bishop of Rome, and that his
jurisdiction extends it self to the whole Church, etc. and in case any Heresies
arise, or that any Controversies cannot be any otherwise ended, he has
authority to determine the points of Catholic truth opposed, etc. I say let
him prove this, and he has no need of any of the other means; and I will give
him farther this advantage over me, that if he can prove that I am obliged to
conform my judgment in any thing to the determination of the Pope more than to
the determination of the Bishop of S. Iago, I will go to Mass with him to
morrow; and Mr. Cressy himself might be a good Catholic if he had not
unwarrantably (to say no worse of it) subscribed to the Bull of Pius the
Fourth, which is no obligation by the Council, when he submitted to his new
Ordination, though he were of the same opinion. And if that Tenth proposition
of his be the doctrine of the Catholic Church, the College of Sorbon has
been often to blame in not consenting to it; and I know not how the Iansenists
in France can be excused for paying not more reverence to the judgment and
determination of two Popes upon the five Propositions; for Alexander the
Seventh confirmed what Innocent the Tenth had first defined, nor was the
silence that is since submitted to in those particulars, an effect of the Popes
authority, but of the Kings, which amounts to little less than a revocation, at
least a suspension of the Popes Decree.

The Argument that the Doctor uses from the Tragical miscarriages of Popes is
very apposite and convincing to those Propositions which Mr. Cressy would
persuade men to believe do establish his personal Supremacy. He says that our
Savior has committed a Supreme jurisdiction to the person of the Bishop of
Rome over the whole Church, that in case any Heresies arise, or any
Controversies, in causis majoribus, to determine the points of Catholic truth,
etc. To which there can be nothing more substantially answered for confutation,
than that the State of the Church must have been very deplorable and desperate,
if that had been a Catholic verity, when Pope Marcellinus sacrificed to Idols,
or when Pope Liberius turned Arrian, and would be much more lamentable in these
days, when the Church must remain in perpetual wardship and servitude under the
Pope, since no man can rationally expect a general Council to relieve her; and
when there is no other definition of Heresy in the Coena Domini, than that
which contradicts, or is contrary to the doctrine or practice of the Church of
Rome; and when the authority of the Pope is urged as the best expedient for the
establishing peace and unity in the world; can there be any thing replied more
pertinently for the conviction, than the mention of those Popes, who by the
assuming that authority, and purely for the vindication of it, have caused more
Christian blood to have been spilt, more horrible Massacres of Kings and
Princes and People, than all the Heresies in the world, and all other politic
differences have produced, if you cast in the Wars for the Holy Land, which may
justly be cast upon the Popes account, and (which is a circumstance very
infamous as well as lamentable) much the greatest part of this destruction and
ruin proceeded from the perjury of Popes themselves, after they had promised
and sworn to observe such pacts and agreements voluntarily entered into by
themselves, or from the Dispensations they granted to others to break their
Faith, and not to perform the contracts they had entered into; all which, he
says, being granted, nothing will follow; whereas certainly it must follow,
that the persons of such men are not capable or worthy of such trusts or
authority, which is as much as those arguments are urged for. Mr. Cressy would
be contented to confess that some Popes for about an Age or two did cause
intolerable disorders in the Church and Empire, (which by the way is argument
enough against those personal qualifications) upon condition that we would
gratify him with acknowledging that the Government of Popes did for a thousand
years produce excellent order in the world; which we are so far from granting,
that as we must confess that they were so modest for half that time, as to make
no claim to any such authority in Church or State; so from the time they did
claim it, it produced more bloodshed than all other quarrels whatsoever. And
as Mr. Cressy must have the assistance of very good Antiquaries to name one War
of a years continuance, that was ever composed by the authority or mediation of
any Pope, where there can very hardly be named one solemn bloody War upon what
Politic pretense soever it was at first entered into, but that has been
carried on either upon his immediate advice and interest, or fomented
underhand by his Council and assistance, of which the Rebellion in Ireland
must be one of the latest instances. It cannot be denied that some Ages have
been so ignorant and barbarous, that the Popes authority has been sufficient
to kindle the most cruel and the most unnatural bloody diffentions; and he has
never failed in contributing his utmost power to that end; and it can be as
easily proved, that in this last Age many rebellions and ravenous Wars have
fallen out, which might either have been prevented or quickly composed, as the
late Rebellions in France, and those in Catalonia, being both between
Catholics, if he as a common Father would have interposed his special
authority, and excommunicated those who he could not doubt were in Rebellion;
but he never would be induced to apply his power to that good end. The
Supremacy and Sovereignty of the Bishop of Rome was never the product of peace;
it grew very fat, and the bulk thereof increased to that unruly size in and by
the most bloody Wars which Christendom has ever been infested with, which
makes it discernable enough what diet they choose to feed upon; of which
appetite their late savage Bulls against the peace of Munster, and that of
Osningbrooke, when the Empire was even at its last gasp for want of blood, is
too great a manifestation. Nor have they to this day, how little noise soever
they now make, disclaimed any of those principles, or the pretense to any of
that power, by the exercise whereof so many intolerable disorders, as Mr.
Cressy confesses, were caused for about an Age or two in the Church, and in the
Empire.

I wonder Mr. Cressy should accuse the Doctor for arguing less reasonably in
mentioning the Schisms which have been in the Church of Rome, and the more
modern disorders, by reason of the quarrels between Bishops and Monastic
Orders about exemptions, and privileges, etc. But I wonder more at his
unskilfulness in the Ecclesiastical History, when he says, that all the
Schisms were after the Church was above twelve hundred years old, for before
there were scarce any; which is so great a mistake, that my old kindness will
scarce suffer me to take notice of it; The last Schism (as I think) before the
year twelve hundred was that between Alexander the third, and Victor the fifth,
which was after the year eleven hundred and fifty, and is reckoned by all
Ecclesiastical Writers to be the twenty fourth, or twenty fifth Schism, and it
is an unreasonable objection, that there can be no such power inherent in the
Pope, as he assigns to him, when it is so frequently uncertain who is Pope, and
that uncertainty has continued so long, and all the Princes of Christendom
divided in the reception of him, and the Antipope, sometimes three or four
together, act, and do all that the true Pope pretends to do, and is obeyed as
such in the Dominions of several Christian Princes; This sure cannot be thought
a light argument, by any but such who think the pretense too frivolous to
require an argument against it; and he says the mention of the quarrels between
Bishops, and Monastic Orders, and between the Regulars, and the Seculars, and
much more such stuff, implies no more, but that Subjects are often times
Rebellious to their Superiors, therefore it were better there were no
Superiors at all; when such stuff is an unanswerable argument, that the
authority with the which he would invest the Pope for peace, and unity sake,
does not produce either, where it is most submitted to; He says very true, that
it is not the Popes infallibility, but his authority which ends Controversies,
which is a good argument that they must remain unended, when either party does
not acknowledge his authority; and it seems the case is not very different,
when both sides do confess it, for he says that all Catholics do acknowledge
that they are obliged at least to silence when imposed by the Pope, yet it
cannot be denied, but that some have not complied with the obligation; but that
he says is not to be imputed to want of authority in the Pope, but to the
unruliness of men's passions and pride, and I say it serves the Doctor's turn,
if his authority be not such as can curb, and suppress the unruliness of the
passions, and pride of his own Subjects. He will not understand how the Doctor
can say, that the Church of England makes no Articles of Faith, but such as
have testimony, and approbation of the whole Christian World of all Ages, and
are acknowledged to be such by Rome it self, and in other things she requires
subscription to them, not as Articles of Faith, but as inferior truths, which
she expects submission to, in order to her peace and tranquillity. Mr. Cressy
is the only man alive that can find obscurity in this clause, and I confess his
exception to it is so obscure, that I will rather rely upon the Readers
understanding of the most exact plainness of it, than enlarge my self in any
explanation, and I wish that he could say as much for the Church of Rome, that
it makes no Article of Faith, but such as have the testimony and approbation of
the whole Christian World of all Ages; our complaint is, that he multiplies
articles of faith to that degree, that he will not suffer us to be saved for
believing all that most Christians believed for a thousand years together,
without the least doubt of their Salvation, nor will he yet let us know the
full extent he would have our faith reach to, for we are no less obliged to
submit to what he or his Successors shall declare hereafter to be matter of
faith, than to what is at present contained in the whole Canons of the Council
of Trent, which makes it absolutely necessary for the peace of Conscience, as
well as the peace of Kingdoms to protest against, and as far as in us lies to
restrain that exorbitant authority; but of all arguments it is a most pleasant
one, that if the Church of England believes nothing as of faith, but what the
Popes, and Church of Rome do likewise believe; Therefore it follows that the
Church of Rome, notwithstanding its Idolatry, Fanaticisme, etc. fails in no
necessary point of faith; which would be true, if it added nothing to that
confessed faith that must destroy it. He then involves himself in his old
circle of the Churches authority, and of that Churches being the Church of
Rome, and of the residence of that authority being in the Person of the Pope,
which whosoever refuses to submit to, must be an Heretic; to all which enough
has been said before, nor can I enlarge upon it, without saying somewhat that
I have said before, which I have no mind to do.

We come now to the Seventh, and Eighth Chapters concerning Penance, etc. upon
which I shall enlarge the less, because the Church of England is so far from
condemning Confession or Penance, that it uses, and commends both, and upon
Confession always satisfaction is enjoined there, as much as in the Church of
Rome; it is true that with us it is not so positively enjoined, that is, men
are not compelled to it; nor are those forms used in ours, or those
interrogatories administered, by which those secrets are extorted from Men and
Women, which they would willingly conceal, and which may lawfully be concealed
as in their Church, but Penitents are lest to their own liberty, and their own
method of drawing such information and comfort from their Confessors, as they
believe most useful to them, which was the original end of Confession, and from
which very many good Catholics believe there is at present too great a
deviation. God forbid the integrity and piety of any Church should be
suspected, much less condemned for the evil livers who remain within the pale
of it. No Church has ever yet, nor any will ever be but the triumphant,
without abundance of them; yet it being the principal end, and the most
manifest perfection of Religion to introduce an innocence of life, and a
sincerity of manners into all those who profess it, all Churches cannot too
severely affect that Discipline which has the greatest operation upon the
lives, and actions of their Children; whether there are not some corruptions
creeped into the common practice of auricular Confession, whether the ordinary
customary Confessors are not too remiss, or over curious in examining, and
consequently in informing their Penitents, or too easy, and perfunctory in
their absolutions, will not become me to determine, but Mr. Cressy well knows
that very many learned and pious Catholics do publicly lament the scandalous
corruptions which have been practiced, and countenanced in that vital part of
their Religion. Who those Apostates from the Catholic Church are, who have
left their Monasteries out of carnal liberty, and carnal lusts, I am not at all
informed, but if they are so carnally minded, I doubt some of them may be
instructed by him to ask him, how he forgot what he had formerly believed, and
whether he was in a moment inspired to answer to a new Catechism full of new
Articles of Faith? If conscience has had no influence upon them, they have
been very weak, and not Roman Catholics enough to be tempted by the Woman,
since they might have had the full use of her with much more good husbandry,
and less guilt, without leaving their Monasteries; for it is a ruled and a
vowed case by most, if not all their Casuists, that fornication is a less sin
than marriage, and the reason they give is, that the last is living in
perpetual adultery. Whoever has lived in those places which are most inhabited
by Religious Men, is very little conversant with the Catholic same, if he does
believe the major part of Religious Men to be enough mortified against that
liberty, though no doubt very many of them have subdued the temptation, and it
will not only be charity, but common justice to think that those Apostates over
whom Mr. Cressy so much infults, have been governed by their Conscience, since
it was hardly possible they could be invited by the Woman, having enough of
that Sex at their devotion, without the obligation, and impediment of marriage;
and till Mr. Cressy informs us why Monasteries are better Schools of Holiness
and Devotion, than our Colleges are, whose Discipline is as severe, admitting
cleanliness be to be preferred before slovenlines, and doctrine much stricter,
enough has been already said for their vindication, and need not be repeated.

I think I understand the excuse that Mr. Cressy makes for the notorious
transgressions which have been in the matter of confession, and absolution, in
reference to which he says the Doctor is not ignorant, that not very long
since, among several dangerous positions collected out of some modern Casuists,
such scandalous relaxations in administering the Sacrament of Penance had a
principal place, all which were not only condemned by the Bishops of France,
almost in every Diocese, but also a Book, the Author of which undertook to
defend them, was solemnly prohibited, and condemned by the Pope, since which
time he says such doctrines have been wholly restrained, and silenced; to which
I shall only say, that these modern Casuists continue still the greatest
Confessors in all Catholic Countries, and it is observable that not one
amongst them, has ever yet renounced, or disclaimed one of those dangerous
Opinions or positions which stand so condemned, and it can therefore hardly be
known that such doctrines are wholly restrained, and for their being silenced,
which they urge still as a matter of great reformation in those loud
differences, and as if all the passions, and inconveniences which arise from
thence were thereby suppressed, if not extinguished, whoever has any
conversation with those adversaries may quickly discern, that neither of them
has laid aside their propositions, or the animosities against each other, and
the silence contributes so little of charity that poor Monsieur -- since he was
known to be the Author of the Provincial Letters, can scarce enjoy peace in his
Grave; Indeed if the Bishops of France were not over-powred, and even silenced
too, by the Regular Clergy, those excesses would in a short time be well
reformed; The danger is, that in the method and form of customary confessions,
there remains still a contention between the Authority of the Scriptures, and
of the Church, without which it could hardly fall out, that so many men, who
all hours of the day and of the night indulge to themselves, even without
concealing it, the practice of those sins which the Scripture has prohibited
under the penalty of damnation, cannot be seduced by example, or importunity,
hardly by sickness, to eat flesh upon a day of abstinence, nor from profane or
unclean discourse in that very time, which can proceed from no other principle,
than that the disobeying the injunctions of the Church, (which without doubt
ought to be observed) is a greater sin, than those of our Savior; and men
would not run to confession as they wash their hands, with a resolution to make
them less clean as soon as they have done. If those fountains of confession and
absolution, from whence so many draw the waters of life, come to be poisoned or
profaned, they were much better be dried up for a time, or carefully enclosed
that men might not resort thither, till they are better instructed in the use
of them; and we may without breach of charity believe that very odious
corruptions and presumptions had broken into those sacred offices, when the
Church it self took so much notice of it, and could not prescribe a more secret
remedy than a public Bull, which Pope Pius the fourth thought necessary to
publish, Contra sacerdotes, qui mulieres poenitentes in actu Confessionis ad
actus inhonestos provocare, and allicere tentant, Bull. To. 2. Nor can we
suppose that this remedy wrought its effect, when another Pope near one hundred
years after was compelled to renew and enlarge that Bull with greater
penalties, as Pope Gregory the fifteenth has done, Contra sacerdotes in
confessionibus Sacramentalibus poenitentes sollicitantes, Bull. To. 3. In which
it is observable, that a greater latitude is permitted to Confessors for the
discovery of this horrible impiety, than is allowed for the discovery and
prevention of the foulest Treason; and after all this, the condemning the
dangerous positions of the modern Casuists has been found as necessary, which
is still an argument that somewhat was still amiss in the administration of
those Offices.

That great reverence was paid to the memory of many excellent persons after
their death, by visiting their Tombs, and other commemoration of their virtues,
and noble actions, has great testimony from antiquity, as ancient as we have
any evidence of the practice of any formal devotions amongst Christians: As the
Primitive Christians amongst the Jews did not decline going to the Synagogues,
nor the practice of all things which were in custom with that Nation, when the
same could be innocently performed; so amongst the Gentiles they observed
whatsoever was in great reverence amongst them, as the paying respect to the
memory of their Ancestors always was, and that did not contradict or offend any
Christian Precept; and it is not improbable that they might take that practice
from them, since the visitation of the Tombs and Sepultures of Martyrs is as
ancient as Martyrdom it self: but that those forms of Prayer for the dead,
which are now practiced in the Roman Church, were in use amongst Christians
from the beginning till Protestantism arose, Mr. Cressy will not prove; and
there is too great reason to doubt, that whosoever does believe, that enormous
sins which are unacknowledged and unrepented of at the death of the sinner may
be expiated, and consequently must be pardoned by what they who live after him
can do for him, has a great temptation to live without that strict guard upon
his affections, and his passions, which he might otherwise believe to be
necessary. But I do not think that any but illiterate Catholics have that
opinion, whether the most learned amongst them are not well content, that the
rest in this, and many other particulars should believe what they themselves do
not believe, I refer to Mr. Cressy; assuring him likewise, that if I did think
that my Prayers, or any thing else I could do, could purchase the least ease to
the Souls of my Friends, or of my Enemies, I would your them out with all may
heart, and should not fear any reprehension from the Church of England, which
has declared no judgment in the point, except it be comprehended in the
Article of Purgatory, and then the censure is no more, than that it is a fond
thing, which in that case I would be content to undergo; and for the many
Masses which are usually said for them, and which seems to give rich sinners
some advantage, I will say no more, than that to my understanding that Priest
who believes his Mass gives any benefit to the departed Soul, has much to
answer that he does not say it for charity, but takes ten pence or a shilling
(at the rate that Masses are sold in that climate) which seems to be more
literal Simony than any act that passes under that reproach.

For the matter of Indulgences Mr. Cressy seems to be entirely of the Doctors
judgment and opinion, and therefore I cannot but wonder and lament, that it
being upon the matter the only Chapter in which he has treated him with
civility, he chooses to conclude it so rudely, as to say that every prudent
Reader will easily discover from how poisonous a heart it issues, and to how
unchristian an end it was directed. My exceptions to Indulgences is, the deceit
and fraud that is in them, and the circumvention of the common people, from
which the Church it self cannot be excused; there is scarce a Village in all
the Catholic Dominions of the world, which has not one day in the year, if
not more, the benefit of an Indulgence, to obtain which they visit such and
such places and Churches so many times, and in this expedition, people of both
sexes, the lame and the blind tire themselves, when whoever can read Latin
finds, that if he complies with the Precepts and Injunctions, which are the
conditions of every Indulgence of hearty repentance of all their sins, and a
sincere amendment of life, and the like, he shall be sure to enjoy all the
benefits, and more than are promised by that Indulgence, though he should lie
in his bed, whilst others make those perambulations; and yet this kind of
fatuity is the ground of all those Indulgences, and of the Pilgrimages which
are undertaken, except for Penance, whereas if the conditions be performed,
they have no need of the Indulgence, and if they be not, they have no benefit
by it, though it costs even the poorest people some money, which they cannot
well spare in most places.

Mr. Cressy is not so sturdy a maintainer of all the points in difference with
the Roman Church, but he would willingly part with the Prayers in an unknown
tongue, though he says there is scarce a rustic so ignorant, but well
understands what the Priest does, through the whole course of the Mass; but I
must confess my self so much more ignorant than his Rustic, that though I have
seen many Masses, I never heard any, nor saw any Congregation so intent, as if
they did desire to hear any thing that is said, but whisper, and talk, and
laugh, except only at the Elevation; and if the Congregation be great,
especially at a high Mass, it is hardly possible that any considerable number
of them can understand one word that is spoken; nor is it held necessary, for
as the Priest takes more than ordinary care by an affected and industrious
pronunciation not to have what he says understood, so the people generally
think themselves only concerned in being present, and that it is not necessary
for them to hear or understand what is spoken, because all that relates to them
is done, and completely performed by the Priest. He confesses that it was far
from being the Churches primary intention, that the public office should be in
a tongue not understood by the people, for it was at first composed, he says,
in the language generally spoken and understood through Europe; by which I
suppose he means the Latin tongue, in which he is much mistaken, both that
Latin was generally spoken and understood through Europe; I am not sure that it
was the language of all Italy it self, or that in the first composing of
Liturgies, they were all one and the same, or in one Language. In the East, and
throughout the Greek Church we are sure they had, and still have different
Liturgies, and we have no reason to believe, that in the Latin Church the
Liturgies were the same throughout the West, but were such as the Bishops
allowed, or made for their own Dioceses. We know that the British Church
retained its Liturgy for many years; and that it was near, if not above one
thousand years (for it was not till the time of Gregory the Seventh) before
Spain parted with the Gothish Liturgy, and accepted that from Rome; and how
many alterations have been since made in it, is known to all who will inform
themselves; and after all, I think S. Ambrose's Missal is still retained in
Milan, notwithstanding the Bull of Clement the Eighth, and of the succeeding
Popes; and therefore I cannot doubt but that and very many particulars in
common practioe, are parts of that Religion of State, which may without breach
of charity or unity, be altered and reformed by the Sovereign in such order as
such mutations are made for the advancement of Gods service in such a Kingdom
or Province for which it is made. But Mr. Cressy would find himself as much
deceived even in the making up that breach, if the Popes consent be necessary
to it, as he was formerly in his draught of a protestation or subscription for
the fidelity of the English Catholics; yet we know that Pope Pius in the
beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, was very willing to have dispensed with
the usage of the English Liturgy, the Communion in both kinds, and whatever
else was practiced in that Church, upon condition that the Popes authority and
supremacy might have been resetled in that Kingdom, which he knew would be a
good bargain, and enable him to undo all the rest when he should think it
necessary; but Mr. Cressy would have proceeded more warily if he had before he
left the Church in which he was first ordained a Priest, procured a Reformation
in those two particulars, for which he is now so willing to compound,
Indulgences and the praying in an unknown tongue, which are greater blemishes
in the Church he has betaken himself into, than all he has left in that,
which he is departed from.

We are come at last to the Doctors exception against the Church of Romes
denying the reading of the Bible indifferently; and with this exception Mr.
Cressy makes himself very merry, as if the principles of the Religion of the
Church of England must fall to the ground, or, as he says, utterly go to wrack
if that liberty were denied; for how then should every sober enquirer into
Scripture frame a Religion to himself? And so pleases himself with endeavoring
to persuade others, contrary to his own conscience, that every one of the
Church of England has liberty to frame a Religion to himself, whereas he well
knows that every member of the Church of Rome has as much liberty to frame a
Religion to himself, as any one of the Church of England has, who is as much
obliged to conform himself to the doctrine of that Church, as the other is to
that of Rome. And for the opinion it has of the Scripture, it answers for it
self in these words; Article Sixth, Holy Scripture contains all things
necessary for salvation, so that whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be
proved thereby, is not to be required of any man, that it should be believed as
an Article of the Faith, or be thought requisite or necessary to Salvation: How
will this serve his turn to frame a Religion to himself? But then he recreates
himself with a Dialogue which he makes between the Doctor and one of his
Parishioners, which if he pleases, is his own case, whilst he triumphs in his
conquests of those poor people, which he perverts; what do those simple
creatures know of the authority of the whole Church, when he amuzes them with
points of Controversy of good works, and of Christ's very flesh and blood in
the Sacrament, contrary to the very evidence of all his senses, to which all
miracles have been subjected; have those people any other knowledge or
information of the sense of the Catholic Church than from him? and would it
not better become them to answer him, that in those points they would choose
rather to believe their own Minister, to whom the care of their Souls is
committed, than him who is a stranger to them? or if they have heard of him,
they ought the less to believe him. Whoever knows the Doctor and Him, or has
carefully perused their writings, cannot be blamed for preferring the former
before the latter. But then how can these people who read the Scripture, and
appeal to it, know that they have the true Scripture, which is the word of God?
which is a worn-out question, that has been as often answered as asked. The
Church of Rome has no other evidence of the truth of it, than we have, and the
Tradition that has derived it, does as much belong to the Church of England,
as to the other; there is no difference between us in any particular that
relates to Tradition, where the tradition is as universal or as manifest as it
is in that of the Scripture. The Doctor is so far from saying or thinking that
every Christian is to be a judge of the sense of Scripture, that he does not
believe that every Church is fit to be a judge of it; nor does it appear that
the Church of Rome it self, which would be thought to be Catholic, and instar
omnium, does pretend to understand, much less to judge of the sense of the
whole Scripture; and yet a very weak member of either may clearly understand
the sense of those particular places, which are necessary to be understood for
his salvation; as no man is so ignorant as not to know what the sense of
Adultery, and of Theft, and Murder, and the like, which he is forbid to be
guilty of; and if he be so ignorant, he will not be the more inclined to detest
them by reading the Schoolmen; and if he be of the Church of England he knows
whither to repair for advice and counsel in difficult cases, and refuses not to
submit to it. But that no authority may be able to do us good, he has obtained
a very extraordinary faculty to answer and avoid it, and which is the nearest
to smelling it out with his Nose that I have been informed of. The Doctor to
prove that the Christians in all times were indulged and exhorted to read the
Scriptures, besides many other arguments, backs his demonstrations, as Mr.
Cressy confesses, with an army of the ancient Fathers, who are cited by him,
and their doctrine acknowledged by several late Catholic Divines of the most
eminent account, and which he himself confesses to be true; but he says
notwithstanding that no Catholic, nor he thinks any other man in his right
wits will grant that every Porter, Cobbler, or Lawndress is capable to instruct
themselves by reading the Scriptures alone, or to clear the doctrine of the
mystery of the Holy Trinity, the Incarnation of our Savior, the Procession of
the Holy Ghost, etc. In all which I do not know that he has an adversary.
After he has asked the Doctor a question or two of his own judgment,
concerning the Fathers concessions in those cases, whether they did not suppose
that they to whom they gave this license, would for the sense of difficult
points have submitted their judgments to the Church. But then he undertakes to
know, that if there had been such an Architect of principles, as the Doctor, in
the time of the Fathers, they would not have been so zealous in their
exhortations to a promiscuous reading of Scriptures. For he says, and hopes you
will take his word for it, that the Doctors principles do evidently contain the
most pernicious Soul-destroying Heresy that ever assaulted Gods Church;
principles which banish peace, charity, humility and obedience utterly from the
Church and State; which if true, as they could never have entered into the
Doctors thoughts by reading the Scriptures, so there can be no such antidote to
expel those poisons, as by the Scriptures; for I will undertake to show very
plain places in Scripture, of the sense whereof there is no doubt made, for the
confutation of all those principles; and if he be of the Philosophers mind,
that more Syllogisms can be made for truth than against it, he will not think
the worse of reading the Scriptures for those principles; yet he concludes,
that if the Fathers had foreseen these mischiefs, they would never have given
such advice; yet he does confess that the four first general Councils never put
any such restraint upon the reading the Scriptures; for which he gives as good
a reason as his answer concerning the Fathers, because of the difference
between the Heresies of those times, and the Heresies of these times. The
Inventors of the ancient Heresies, he says, were great learned Prelates, and
subtle Philosophers, and the object of their Heresies were sublime mysteries of
Faith, examined and framed by them, according to the grounds of Plato' s and
Aristotle's Philosophy, etc. Hence, he says, it come to pass that in those days
the Scriptures might be read freely enough by ordinary Christians without
danger, especially considering their intention of reading them was not to find
out a new Religion, but to instruct themselves in piety, and to inflame their
hearts in the Divine love: page 161, 162. But our modern Heresies (he says) are
of a quite different complexion, they are conversant about matters obvious to
the weakest capacities, as the external administration of Sacraments, the
jurisdiction of Superiors Civil and Ecclesiastical, the manner of men's
devotions, the institution of Religious Orders, the obligation of Vows, the
Ordinances of the Church touching Fasting, Matrimony, Celibacy, paying of
Tithes, etc. Or if about sublime mysteries men are taught to examine such
mysteries by natural reason, and the verdict of their outwardsenses.

Is not the English or sense of all this, that toward the conviction of the
highest and the greatest Heresies which ever were in the Church, and which were
only worthy of the name of Heresies, and were condenned as such by the pure and
strong evidence of Scripture, the reading of the Scriptures might be permitted,
at least might be read without danger; especially because the intention of
reading them then was, that men might be the better for it: But that now in
these modern Heresies, upon the Sacraments, and the institution of Religious
Orders and Vows, etc. the reading the Scriptures are pernicious, and serves
only to find out a new Religion? I can in truth collect no other sense than
this from Mr. Cressy's distinction between the ancient and modern Heresies; or
for his conclusion, that those godly Fathers who are cited by the Doctor, and
truly cited, as he confesses, had lived amongst us, or if such Heresies had
been then spread amongst their Disciples, they would not have been so zealous
in their exhortations to a promiscuous reading of Scripture. I think they
would, because I am sure they would have had the same reason, and would have
wondered how any differences of opinion upon the Civil or Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, upon the manner of men's devotions, or upon the institution of
Religious orders, or the rest, come to be called Heresies? And who had
authority to declare them such? If nothing that has reference to any of these
particulars was in practice in their time, we have the less reason to acquiesce
in the new invention of them; and it will be the more worth our enquiry,
whether they who have put that brand upon them, were not rather parties than
judges and gainers by their determinations. If those particulars can neither be
confirmed by Scripture, nor defended by reason, we need not be troubled for
their being called Heresies, though there were no Scripture against them, nor
reason to confute them; both which we conceive we have clearly on our sides;
let us examine them in order* Concerning the external administration of
Sacraments, we take upon us to say, that they rob the people of half that which
our Savior instituted, and that (besides the novelty of it, for we say it was
near, if not full one thousand years before that violence was offered to
Christianity) they may as well defraud them of both, as of either of the
species, and the answer they give to it, can give no reasonable satisfaction to
any; for to that allegation that the body cannot be without the blood, and
consequently the bread contains both, if our Savior had thought so, he would
have instituted it in that manner; the whole obligations of mystery depending
only upon the institution, then our Savior well knew that in the sense they
put upon it, it would have been an institution directly contrary to the Law,
which our Savior never violated, for the eating the flesh with the blood was
utterly unlawful, and what was unlawful in the institution, cannot become
lawful since, by any authority under Heaven; and therefore they who cannot be
suffered to receive it in both species, are without the benefit of the
Sacrament that was instituted by our Savior, and that is all I shall say of
the external administration. For the examination of the mysteries by natural
reason, and the verdict of their outward senses; I shall only ask whether those
outward senses are proper judges, that that is bread, and that is wine, by
their sight, and their taste, and their feeling it, before the consecration,
which no body will deny. How different the operation thereof may be after that
mysterious action, and the spiritual effect of it, no man pretends to make a
judgment by his outward senses, but if he be admitted to taste both after the
consecration, why his senses should not be as competent discerners whether they
remain still bread and wine as they were, or are become flesh and blood, which
they were not before, I cannot comprehend; no more than why we should be bound
to understand those few words literally, which are so evidently contradicted by
our senses, which no other miracle ever was, rather than many other
metaphorical and allegorical expressions in which the Scriptures abound, and
which cannot be more controuled by the outward senses than this is. For the
jurisdiction of Superiors Civil and Ecclesiastical, what Judge can there be,
but the Laws of that Kingdom where such jurisdiction is to be exercised, and of
that Church which ought to settle the public manner of men's devotions? For the
institution of Religious Orders, and the obligations of Vows, the Bishop of
Rome himself does not pretend any power or authority to erect any Monastery,
College or Religious House in any Kingdom or Province, without the consent and
approbation of King or Prince, to whom the Sovereignty belongs; and if they do
admit such institutions to be made, and such obligations by vows to be entered
into, as are prejudicial to the peace and happiness of their Dominions, the
institution is theirs, and not the Popes; and when their reason or their
experience discovers any mischief or detriment to their other subjects, to
redound from those Institutions, either in their original or by new orders and
concessions, or that the subjects under those Institutions are become less
their subjects, than their other fellow subjects are, and that they depend more
on some foreign Prince than on them in their own Territories; they may, and
ought to alter the form and institution, or to suppress if they cannot reform
the whole; and if they cannot do this, they cannot provide for the peace and
happiness of the people committed to their charge: And the like for fasting,
(that is, the observation of public Fasts) Celibacy, paying of Tithes, they
can be no otherwise regulated, than by the Civil and Ecclesiastical Laws of
every Nation and Province, and are so regulated, and not in the same manner in
all the Catholic Kingdoms and Provinces in Europe. And therefore since that is
the greatest objection Mr. Cressy makes against the reading of the Scripture,
that the contradictions which arise upon those particulars may be improved and
inflamed into Heresies by the passion and humor of the Court of Rome, we will
rather acquiesce in the advice of the Primitive Fathers of the Church, and
believe that what the four first general Councils did not prohibit us to do, we
may lawfully continue the practice of; and since the Church of England in
conformity with the purest antiquity, permits and enjoins us to read the
Scriptures, we will obey its directions, without caring what that of Rome
forbids.

Mr. Cressy comes now in excuse of his just indignation against the Doctor's
Principles, to discover a secret that his own unhappiness, if not guilt, gave
the first occasion, that those principles should be known, and received into
the Church of England; and this discovery must be the more ingenuous, because
he is sure no man now alive knows any thing of it; Then he tells you a story of
his accidental finding, and buying at a Booksellers Shop Monsieur Dallies
Book, Of the true use of the Fathers, which he showed that night to his Noble
Dear Lord Lucius Lord Falkland, who reading a little of the Contents, desired
him to give it to him, which he willingly did, and that my Lord shortly after
sent him a most civil Letter full of thanks, both in his own, and Mr.
Chillingworth's name for that small present, telling him that that little Book
had saved him a most tedious labor of reading almost twenty great Volumes, and
then tells another story of Mr. Chillingworth; and I confess when I read this
notable discovery, and knew that I was no great stranger to the transactions
which had been in that time in that company, I could not suddenly comprehend
what his meaning or purpose was in making that relation, but I quickly found
that all his meaning was, under the style of his Noble Dear Lord (as in truth
he deserved from him the highest expressions of gratitude he could utter) to
traduce the memory of that incomparable Lord, and to cause him to be thought a
Socinian, and I cannot enough lament that he has found credit enough with two
or three Persons of the Church of England (who I am sure never knew, I think
never saw that excellent Person) to take upon them to asperse a Noble man of
the most Prodigious learning, of the most exemplar manners, and singular good
nature, of the most unblemished integrity, and the greatest Ornament of the
Nation, that any Age has produced, with the Character of a Socinian; Mr.
Cressy well knows that before that time of his Journey into Ireland, in the
Year One thousand six hundred thirty eight, that Noble Lord had perused, and
read over all the Greek, and Latin Fathers, and was indefatigable in looking
over all Books, which with great expense he caused to be transmitted to him
from all parts, and so could not have been long without Mr. Dallies Book, if
Mr. Cressy's presenting it to him, had not given him opportunity to have raised
this scandal upon his memory, nor could that Book have been so grateful to him,
if he had not read the Fathers; For Mr. Chillingworth, if Mr. Cressy had not
been very wary in saying any thing that might redound to the honor of any of
the present Prelates, he cannot but know that the present Archbishop of
Canterbury, had first reclaimed him from his doubtings, and they were no more,
nor had he ever declared himself a Catholic, except being at S. Omers amounts
to such a Declaration, before ever he was sent for by Archbishop Laud; and I
am very much deceived, which I think I am not in that particular, if Mr.
Chillingworth's Book against Mr. Knott was not published before the time of Mr.
Cressy's Journey in thirty eight, into Ireland, and I know had been perused by
him, and therefore Mr. Dallies Book could not interrupt him in his study of the
Fathers, nor induce him to fix his mind upon Socinian grounds, which now serves
his turn to reproach all men, and the Church of England it self, for refusing
to believe his miracles, or to submit to that authority to whose blind guiding
he has lazily given up himself, and all his faculties; Yet he does so much
honor to those grounds, that he does confess, that they obstructed a good
while his entrance into the Catholic Church, the contrary whereof I know to be
true, as much as negative can be true, and that he never thought of entering
into the Religion he now professes, till long after the death of the Lord
Falkland, and Mr. Chillingworth, nor till the same rebellious power that drove
the King out of the Kingdom, drove him likewise from the good preferments which
he enjoyed in the Church, and then the necessity, and distraction of his
fortune, together with the melancholic, and irresolution in his nature,
prevailed with him to bid farewell to his own reason and understanding, and to
resign himself to the conduct of those who had a much worse than his.

If the having read Socinus, and the commending that in him, which no body can
reasonably discommende in him, and the making use of that reason that God has
given a man for the examining of that which is most properly to be examined by
reason, and to avoid the weak arguments of some men, how superciliously soever
insisted upon, or to discover the fallacies of others, be the definition of a
Socinian, the party will be very strong in all Churches; but if a perfect
detestation of all those Opinions against the Person, and Divinity of our
Savior, or any other doctrine that is contrary to the Church of England (and
the Church of England has more formally condemned Socinianism, than any other
Church has done, as appears by the Canons, of One thousand six hundred and
forty) can free a man from that reproach, as without doubt it ought to do: I
can very warrantably declare that that unparalled Lord was no Socinian, nor
is it possible for any man who is a true Son of the Church of England, to be
corrupted with any of those Opinions. But in truth if Mr. Cressy has that
Prerogative in Logic, as to declare men to be Socinians, from some
propositions, which he calls Principles, which in his judgment will warrant
those deductions, though he confesses he does not suspect the Doctor will
approve such consequences, yet he is confident with all his skill he cannot
avoid them, that is, he is a Socinian before he is aware of it, and in spite
of his teeth; this is such an excess in the faculty of arguing, as must make
him a dangerous Neighbor, and qualifies him excellently to be a Commissioner
of the Inquisition, who have often need of that kind of subtilty, that will
make Heresies which they cannot find; All this invention is to persuade his new
friends, of that which they call the old Religion, that his old Friend's
Religion is new, that they have no reverence for antiquity, no regard for the
Authority of the Fathers, and only make use of their natural reason to find out
a new Religion for themselves; whereas in truth whoever will impartially, and
dispassionately make the enquiry, shall find that there is no one substantial
controversy between the Roman, and the Church of England, but what is matter
of Novelty, and has no foundation in Antiquity, and that the Fathers are more
diligently read, and studied in our Church, than they are in theirs, and more
reverence is paid to them by us, than by them, though neither they nor we, nor
any other Christian Church in the World, do submit or concur in all that the
Fathers have taught, who were never all of one mind, and therefore may very
lawfully have their reasons examined by the reasons of other men; This that I
say concerning the reading, and the reverence paid to the Fathers ought to be
believed till they can produce one Prelate, or Member of the Church of England
who has ever used such contemptuous words of the Fathers, Ego, ut ingenue
fatear, plus uno summo Pontifici crederem, in his quae fidei mysteria tangunt,
quam mill Augustinis, Ieronymis, Gregoriis, etc. Credo enim and scio, quod
summus Pontifex in his quae fidei sunt non posse errare, quoniam authoritas
determinandi quae ad fidem spectant, in Pontifice residet: which are the words
of Cornelius Mussus an Italian Bishop, and much celebrated amongst them for his
extraordinary learning, in Epis. ad Romans cap. 14. pa. 606. Michael Medina a man
as eminent in the Council of Trent as any who sat there, in the debate whether
a Bishop was Superior to a Presbyter, jure Ecclesiastico, or jure Divino, when
they who sustained the former, alleged Saint Jerome, and S. Augustine to
support their opinion, Medina said aloud, Non mirum esse si isti, and nonnulli
alii Patres, re nondum eo tempore illustrata, in eam haeresim incidissent; How
would Mr. Cressy, and his Friends insult, if a Doctor of the Church of England
should publish in Print by the authority of the Church, Illud asserimus, quo
juntores eo perspicaciores esse Doctores, and contra hanc quam objectant
multitudinem, Respondemus (inquit) ex verbo Dei, Exodus 23. In judicio
plurimorum non acquiesces Sententiae ut a vero devies, and yet they are the
words of Salmeron, a man of great learning amongst the Jesuits, and confessed
of all men to be so, in Ep. ad Romans 5. dif. 51. pa. 468. How would they triumph
upon the modesty of one of our Clergy, if when he had reckoned up the opinions
of most of the Fathers upon a difficult Text of Scripture, he should conclude,
Sed si meam quoque sententiam avet audire, libere fatebor, in nulla prorsus
earum, meum qualecunque judicium acquiescere; and yet these are the words of
Maldonate in his Commentary upon the 11 verse of the 11 chapter of St. Matthew, Qui
est minimus in regno Coelorum major est Iohanne Baptista; The question is not
whether these very eminent Men, and great Scholars, for such they were, said
well, and reasonably, but whether they who assume this liberty, should reproach
us who never mention the Fathers but with veneration, and rarely dissent from
them, but when they dissent from one another, for taking less liberty, or
whether they do ingenuously to desire the People should believe that they are
so severe observers of the Doctrine of the Fathers, that they never tread out
of their steps.

Why may it not become the Church of England to use the same expressions which
Cardinal Cajetan so long since did in his Preface to his Commentaries upon the
Books of Moses, in his excuse for having rejected many expositions of the
Fathers, Solis sacrae Scripturae authoribus, reservata authoritas haec est, ut
ideo sic credamus esse quia ipsi sic scripserunt? Why may it not become any
particular member of that Church in a particular point, it may be but in a
particular expression, to differ from a particular Father, when Petavius, who
had as exactly read the Fathers, and was as great a Master of universal
Learning as this Age has produced, presumes to say, Multa sunt a sanctissimis
Patribus, praesertim a Chrysostomo in homiliis aspersa, quae si ad exactae
veritatis normam accommodare volueris, boni sensus inania videbuntur, in
Epipha. pa. 244. These, and very many more of the like animadversions, and
detections by Monsieur Dally, anger, and vex Mr. Cressy, and his new Friends
much more than any disrespect he is guilty of toward the Fathers, of which
they cannot assign one instance; all that he says, besides the mentioning them
always with all possible reverence, is no more than what Mr. Cressy says of
them, and of the four first general Councils, and which indeed was the cause of
Monsieur Dallies writing that Book, that those Holy men, nor the times in which
they lived, knew any thing, or had heard of any of the points, especially in
controversy between us, and the Church of Rome, and therefore that it was a
vain affectation to appeal to them for a decision; I do not much wonder at any
thing Mr. Cressy says, upon this argument, for he owed to himself some
extraordinary observation, to make his tale of presenting that unlucky Book (as
he calls it) of Mr. Dally, to My Lord Falkland, and which he says persuaded
Mr. Chillingworth to have a light esteem of the Fathers; but I cannot but
admire, and grieve, that he has so much credit with any member of the Church
of England how obscure soever, as to persuade him to have the same opinion, and
thereupon to assume the License, and the rashness to asperse (as far as his
talent can contribute unto it) the memory of that most loved, and most esteemed
Lord Falkland (whose name he is not worthy to pass through his mouth) with the
odious reproach of being a Socinian, and that when no Person of the Church of
Rome has had the courage in so many years to attempt the answering that Book
de usu Patrum, one of the other Church should think it necessary to take the
quarrel upon him, and without any reason, or any instance of moment, reproach
Mr. Dally with his light esteem of the Holy Fathers, in language not in any
degree decent: nor was the matter, or the manner at all necessary to the other
part of his Book concerning the Church of England; nor can any Man who is
disposed to make that enquiry, meet with a greater encouragement to pursue it,
than by having read that Book of Mr. Dallies.

I am glad I am now come to Mr. Cressy's conclusion, which is not long, and
consists in a softer and more civil kind of scolding than the other parts of
his Book, but with the same bitterness, and has in truth in it somewhat of
ingenuity a man would not have expected; for after so many reproaches almost in
every page of his Book of being a Presbyterian, an Independent, an Hypocrite,
indeed all the calumnies cast upon him, which a good wit, and an ill nature can
suggest; he confesses at last that the Doctor in one of his Books, and the
place he cites, declares, That the Church of England upon the greatest enquiry
he can make, is the best Church of the World, which is a greater and fuller
vindication of him for all the contumelious aspersions cast on him, and a more
ample and clear testimony, because it is more innocent, that he is a true son
of the Church of England, than any Mr. Cressy can produce of his being a Roman
Catholic. Will any Presbyterian, or Independent, or Anabaptist make that
Declaration? he well knows they neither can nor will whilst they retain the
principles of their parties, and they cease to be of either party as soon as
they make that declaration; he confesses that the Doctor has subscribed, and
submitted to, and practices all that Church requires of him, and has farther
unprovoked given this ample testimony to it, that he was not obliged to do, and
which no man can give, that is divided in his affections, and equally inclined
to another Church that differs from it; and yet he is so jealous of the honor
and security of the Church of England, that Church that he has Apostatized
from, that Church that he has traduced and reviled with all the scurrility of
Language, of this Church in which he will not permit a possibility of
Salvation; he is so careful, that he will not allow the Doctor to be a member
of it, but advises like a loving Father, the drowzy and sleeping Prelates, to
be watchful over him as a spy and treacherous person, who whilst he persuades
them (poor simple creatures) that he will be a champion for their Church,
endeavors all he can to destroy and undermine it. How will Mr. Cressy answer
to his Superiors this preposterous zeal of his own behalf of a Church the most
odious, and the most formidable to them, that when it is even almost undermined
by Officers of its own, who are trusted to search and survey all its Vaults and
most secret Avenues, so that it is upon the point of falling, by taking away
the strong supporters which have hitherto upheld it, and erecting rotten or
mouldering pillars in the place, and all this benefit and advantage may be lost
or prevented by his fond and unseasonable advertisement, if the King and the
Bishops have prudence enough to make good use of it, by driving away or
discountenancing such a perfidious and unskilful champion. May they not from
hence apprehend, that as he came to them upon a sudden and unexpected, so that
he is upon thoughts of returning to the Church for which he has so much care,
and entering into a kind of correspondence with his adversaries, by giving good
counsel how to behave himself better. But how comes it to pass that this
miserable Doctor who he yet seems to think may mean well to be so stupidly
couzened and deceived, that instead of complying with his engagement to defend
the Church, he has betrayed her, and the whole cause to all the Fanatic Sects
which have separated from her, and with most horrible cruelty sought her
destruction, and with her the ruin of Monarchy? All this tragical demolishing
of foundations consists in this, that he allows all sober enquirers to be for
themselves judges of the sense of Scripture in necessaries, and judges likewise
what points are necessary. This saying of his has betrayed the cause of his
Church, and left her in a most forlorn condition, tottering upon foundations
and principles, which to Mr. Cressy's certain knowledge were not extant, at
least not known in England thirty years since. Let it be in the first place
observed (and it is sure worthy to be observed) that this most pernicious
proposition, which has in such an instant brought the Church of England into
such a tottering condition, is not made use of, nor so much as taken notice of
by any of those enemies of hers, the Presbyterians, Anabaptists, or
Independents, who have been so vigilant and industrious so many years to make
her totter, and yet now the work is so near done to their hands by a secret
friend, who is the more able to do them good, by his not pretending any
affection toward them; neither of them will put their cause upon that
proposition, nor apply it to their own designs, and therefore it is possible
that it may not be altogether so dangerous to the Church, as he would have it
supposed to be, and of which it is probable he would not have given notice if
he had in truth thought it to be dangerous. In the next place let us examine
whether the Doctor himself cannot make another and better interpretation of his
own words, than his implacable enemy has done; all good Physicians compound
their Antidotes according to the nature and malignity of the poison that their
patients have swallowed. Now the poison that Mr. Cressy and his lurking
brethren usually bait their traps with, and by which they catch most of their
prey is, Their confident denouncing damnation against those, and all those who
are not of their mind, that is, who are not received into the Church of Rome,
and not entirely submit to all her dictates: That the Scripture consists in
dumb letters, which cannot declare its own meaning, and therefore is liable to
be misinterpreted by the wit of bold and presumptuous men, as the founders of
all Heresies have been; and therefore they can only be safe who receive and
conform themselves to that interpretation of Scripture that the Church (in the
custody of which it is deposited) has given and declared to be Orthodox. That
that Church is the Church of Rome where there constantly resides a Supreme
Magistrate, who, in case any new opinions shall start up to the prejudic of
Religion, which have not been enough convinced by former definitions of the
Church has full authority committed to him by our Savior to declare and
determine what is agreeable or contrary to the sense of the Scripture, since it
cannot be supposed that our Savior would constitute an officer, and not indue
him with all necessary faculties, or not qualify him sufficiently for the
discharge of so great a trust; and from hence they resolve, that the greatest
danger of damnation is not from the commission of those sins against which the
spirit of God has so plainly denounced it, but in an obstinate presumption in
contradicting the opinions or directions of the Catholic Church, and refusing
to submit to the authority of the Vicar of Christ, who has the unquestionable
power to bind and to loose, to pardon and to condemn sins, having the Keys of
Heaven, and of Hell; and therefore whilst they will depend upon him, and put
themselves under his protection, they cannot but be safe.

This is the common poison which these men carry about them to administer to
those who they find most like to be deluded, and in the composition of it there
are some ingredients according to the humor of the compounder, which cannot be
according to the Catholic prescription, since that Sovereign power of their
Supreme Magistrate the Pope, is not, nor ever will be acknowledged to be an
essential part of the Roman Catholic Religion. Let us now see what Antidote
the Doctor has provided for the prevention or expulsion of this poison; to
confirm men in their absolute confidence and dependence upon the Scripture, the
force and virtue whereof that poison would enervate; he says, That it is
repugnant to the nature of the design, to the wisdom and goodness of God to
give an infallible assurance to persons, in writing his will for the benefit of
mankind, if those writings may not be understood by all persons, who sincerely
endeavor to know the meaning of them, in all such things as are necessary for
their Salvation, and consequently there can be no necessity supposed of any
infallible society of men, either to attest or explain those writings amongst
Christians; and this, and no more than this is the sense of that, which
contains all that confusion which Mr. Cressy thinks must bring confusion upon
his own Church, as into that of the Roman, and from thence the Doctor proceeds
to show how incompetent a Magistrate they have chosen to determine all
differences in Religion, which he proves by such arguments, as are very natural
for the proving thereof, and for the answering, and avoiding whereof we shall
be compelled anon to take notice of Mr. Cressy's admirable artifice, and
dexterity; Now if the Doctor has for want of skill in discerning consequences,
made choice of an improper medium to prove that which he has a mind to prove,
God forbid that there should be such Tragical effects to attend that
argumentation, as the destruction of Church, and State, and it would be as
unreasonable to condemn an argument, that he who uses it thinks to his purpose,
because it was never used till within thirty Years; One man says that the
Scripture is so very difficult, that no man can understand it, without
repairing to the advice of an adversary, who will tell him the interpretation
of it, to which he is to conform, let the advice be never so contrary to his
own judgment and reason; The other answers that the understanding all the
places of Scripture is so difficult, that men had need to consult very much
about it, yet that whatsoever is necessary toward salvation is contained in
such easy places of Scripture, that every man who sincerely enquires to know
the meaning of them, may easily do it, and is ready to name those places in
which there is no difficulty, nor any difficulty has yet been pretended, the
believing of which, our Savior himself has declared to be enough for
Salvation: Oh! but (says he) the consequence of this proposition makes every
man the judge of his own Religion, and he may be of what Religion he pleases;
The question is not, what the consequence is, which few men agree upon, one
consequence seeming natural to one, and another to an other, but whether the
averment be a good answer to the other suggestion, when an other more weighty
argument is urged, an other answer shall be applied, without the reach of his
consequences, and yet the Doctor has never said, that no man has need of any
information, or advice even in the easiest places of Scripture, and so that
Cobblers and Laundresses may choose a Religion for themselves, nor does believe
that any sober cr sincere enquirer, will fail in asking advice of those to whom
he ought to repair, if that which seems to others most easy, appear hard to
him, nor can any man appear to himself to be a sober, or sincere enquirer,
without enquiring to help his ill understanding, and then even the Laundress or
the Cobbler will be out of Mr. Cressy's reach by his arguments of damnation,
which will manifestly appear to them to have no foundation in Scripture, but to
be a presumption against it.

Certainly it is a new way, and a new Law imposed upon the handling of
Controversies, and was not in practice thirty Years since, that a man can no
sooner apply a proposition (let it be new, and not known to be urged before)
toward the confirmation of a Principle in one Religion, or toward enervating
a principle in an other, but that proposition is called a Principle, and
thereupon all the ill consequences are deduced from it, that may serve turn to
asperse his Person, wound his reputation, and to make the unhappy man who has
not been sharp-sighted enough in Logic to discern those consequences, nor
consents to any one of them, be looked upon, and abhorred as a Socinian, or if
that be thought worse, of a Turk; for the consequence by well stroking, will be
stretched as well to the one, as to the other, and the case of this unhappy
disputer is the more miserable, because though he intends very honestly, and
acknowledges none of the consequences, that is only by his ignorance of what
passes in his own mind, which a cunninger man than himself has discovered, and
assures him, and can easily prove that he does believe that, which he protests
he does not believe, by which no Classis of men seem to be liable to so many
woes, as they who make false syllogismes, and they who cannot discover when
they are false, for both these will be perplexed with ill consequences,
according to the mercifulness of the subtle man, who has the handling of the
man, and the matter. If I will not submit to the authority to which Mr. Cressy
will subject me to, because he says the Church requires my subjection, and I
tell him that it is an irrational claim, and my reason cannot therefore submit
to it; If I will not believe what he has in his hand to be a flint, when he
suffers me to handle it, and to put it into my mouth, because my senses tell me
that it is a piece of butter: I am presently concluded to be a man, who will
examine all matters relating to Religion by natural reason, and make my outward
Senses the sole judges of the mysteries of Faith, and of the interpretation of
Scripture, and therefore I am a Socinian, and do neither believe the Trinity,
the Incarnation, nor the other Elements of Christianity, and therefore no Name
can be bad enough for me, nor is it any matter what I say. And after all this,
I am no Socinian, and I do believe the Trinity, the Incarnation, and all the
other Elements of Religion, and my reason obliges me to believe them, because
they being all matters of fact, are manifested by such evidence, that I cannot
suspect nor can my reason contradict, though all the parts of it, it cannot
comprehend. Does not the most abstracted reason oblige me to believe that the
Scripture contains nothing in it, but what is true, when I have as great a
manifestation as the subject is capable of, that it is the Word of God, and
therefore it must be true; yet when Mr. Cressy, or the Pope himself (as he
frequently does in all his Bulls) applies a Text of Scripture to a very light,
or erroneous purpose, the same reason may enable and warrant me to declare,
that such an interpretation is not reasonable, and therefore it is to be
rejected; Must that greatest faculty that God has bestowed upon mankind, (and
therefore bestowed it upon him that he may judge by it) reason, be laid aside
or cast away, because there are some few things above the reach of it? and yet
even when that is true (for it is often thought to be true, when it is not, and
that some things are above reason which are not) reason shall contribute more
to that obedience that is requisite, than any stupid resignation to such
authority, as every day betrays it self in some weak or wilful determination.

It is more than probable that very many learned and pious men may be so
partial to the Doctor, as to believe that he is equally skilled in Logic, and
to foresee all consequences which may naturally follow from any proposition or
principle he makes use of, and that he can make it evident that none of those
direful consequences do result from them, which Mr. Cressy's subtilty does
discern, and if this should be so, his friends will have cause to wish, that he
had not been so transported with passion; for two principles which he has made
choice of out of thirty (whereas if half the other twenty eight sufficiently
evince what he would have, his work is done) which the Doctor for his ease had
abridged in the end of his Book, that he has upon the matter left all the rest
of his Book, at least those parts which are most dangerous to the Roman
allegation unanswered and unexmined, and that he has made too much have to his
conclusion, and to his triumphant Declaration on his own behalf, of the right
and justice whereof he makes so little doubt, that having treated his adversary
with that meekness from the beginning of his Book, he charitably concludes with
giving him good counsel upon the peril of his damnation; and truly the manner
of his excusing his so brief answering his Book, that is, his not answering it
at all, is very well worth the taking notice of. It may be the Doctor was
conscious to himself of having said many particulars throughout his Book, which
had not been urged above thirty years since; and upon the petulancy of Mr.
Cressy, and some other of his friends, were now become necessary to be pressed,
and therefore was so wary, as to quote Catholic Authors to justify all that
he alleged, the controversy being upon matter of fact, which need no other
proof on his side, than the authority he cited, and which in truth is not
capable of any other answer, but that he has alleged somewhat that is not
true. But that he says plainly he will not examine, for he observes in the
Doctors Book a world of quotations out of Authors he never saw, nor intends to
see, containing many dismal stories, and many ridiculous passages of things
done or said by several Catholics in former, and some in later times. He says,
If he had a mind to examine and say something in answer to them, an
impossibility of finding out those Authors must have been his excuse; but he
has a better excuse than that, for if the Doctor would have lent him those
Books out of his Library, he should have thanked him for his civility, but
should have refused to make use of his offer; for to what purpose would it have
been to turn over a heap of Books to find out quotations in which neither the
Church or himself is concerned? Not concerned, he says, though they had been
opinions or actions even of Popes themselves; it is to him all one whether his
allegations be true or false, etc. page 172. which is one of the most haughty
resolutions and declarations for a man who does in the next page call for an
applause for having so clearly overthrown his adversary, that has been heard
of; all those quotations are the testimonies of Catholic writers, which prove
somewhat that Mr. Cressy denies or contradicts, somewhat that he and his
friends have confidently affirmed; and by doing so, have obliged him to produce
that evidence, the truth whereof he will not vouchsafe to examine, because it
is all one to him, whether the allegations be true or false. An admirable
answer! He thinks it very reasonable to magnify his Religion upon visions, and
apparitions, and miracles, but cares not for quotations out of Catholic
Authors, of dismal stories and many ridiculous passages of things said and done
by Catholics, which are therefore cited toprove the frequent and common
delusions in those visions, and apparitions, and miracles, it is all one to him,
whether these allegations be true or false. That is very strange, if he should
say that in all times the Popes have constantly been the protectors of all
virtue and chastity; can any answer be more pertinent, than the testimony of
all the Catholic writers of that time, that after a world of other impieties
committed by him, a Gentleman of Rome found Pope John the Twelfth in bed with
his wife, and killed him? Can it be all one to him whether this allegation be
true or false? Is it possible that he is not concerned in the opinion and
actions of Popes, whose persons he declares as a point of Catholic Religion to
be necessarily believed to be the conservators of the purity of Religion, and
the determiners of any Heresy that shall arise or start up; and he has still
that comfort, that he is assured, That never Pope yet how wicked soever did
bring any Heresy into the Church; now is not he concerned (though I cannot
blame him for not daring to peruse or examine the Records of such deviations)
when he is put in mind of Pope Liberius, who though he did not bring Arrianism
into the Church, did support and maintain it, when he found it there, and being
Pope, became Arrian, which may periwade a man to believe that our Savior did
not depute him as his deputy to determine controversies in Faith. These and
much other vexations of this kind he preserves himself from by his firm
resolution not to examine any of the Doctors quotations; but whether he be so
absolutely unconcerned in them, whether they be true or false, shall be left to
his own party to judge.

Nothing will concern Mr. Cressy unless the Doctor will undertake to
demonstrate that it is unlawful, or but considerably dangerous to be a member
of a Church where any persons do or have lived, who have been obnoxious to
errors, or guilty of ill actions; and in this he has wisely provided for his
own ease, for he is sure the Doctor will not undertake to make any such
demonstration, and yet it may be it is one of the best arguments by which he
has gained most of the Proselytes he has made. There is great difference, as
has been said before, between remaining in a Church, where many errors are
received and practiced, and ill actions are committed, and leaving and
renouncing a Church upon pretense of some errors in it, to run into another
Church which has the same, or greater errors. But the difference is yet
greater between errors in a Church, and errors of a Church, errors and vices
committed, and practiced in a Church, and errors and vices committed and
practiced by a Church, such as the Church it self knows to be errors, and many
men believe the Church of Rome guilty of many of those. I will not mention the
common objection of the worshipping of Images, which the Church carefully
difclaims, and takes it very ill that any Catholic should be thought so
brutish as to worship and Image in wood or stone, and yet the sufficient
evidence of that brutality prevailed with some Emperors and General Councils
utterly to suppress them, and take them out of all Churches; and very pious and
learned Catholics have since, and still do very heartily with that they were
abolished for the scandal it brings upon the Church: For let that declare what
it will, nothing is more notorious, than that more than the common people do
literally and really pay adoration to the very Image; nor are they without
reason to persuade them that there is a peculiar virtue in it; for why should
the Saint be more propitious in one place than another, if the address were
only to the Saint, and not some advantage in the Image it self? Why should so
many more miracles be done by our Lady in one place than another, insomuch as
there is no Catholic Province but has distinct Images of her, which receives
more remarkable visits than others, and works more wonderful effects? Who can
read the life of S. Bernard, and find him with that fervor and vehemence in
his devotion before a Crucifix, that the Image bowed it self, and with both the
arms embraced him, and then returned to the stiffness of its posture? This is
testified in the most authentic account the Church has of his life; but there
are too many particulars in the lives of the Saints to charge the Church with
believing, and therefore it may be wondered at that they are so much
countenanced. But the instance I would insist upon is our Ladies House at
Lauretta, which is alleged to have remained still at Nazareth, till after the
year twelve hundred, (time enough to have reduced the greatest Palaces into
dust) but that after that time (some Catholic writers name the year when it
begun its journey) it was taken by Angels, the very house in which the lived,
and had received the salutation from the Angel, and carried to a mountain in
Dalmatia, and at three stages more, whereof one was a wood belonging to a widow
named Lauretta, many years rest intervening, it was brought to, and left in the
place where it now stands, and where it is covered with the most rich and very
beautiful Church, which for the good widows sake, in whose wood it rested some
years, is called Lauretta, and where her Image and her House receives visits,
and very rich presents from all parts where the Catholic Religion is
professed, for the reception and entertainment whereof a good Town is built,
several Religious houses, Pilgrimages made thither from far and near, and
hereby that people may without going so far as Nazareth see the house of our
Ladies abode; the Church in Plate and Jewels is richer than any other in the
world; not to speak of the incredible number of miracles which have been
wrought there since the miraculous coming of that Cottage thither. I dare not
ask Mr. Cressy whether he does believe this wonderful voyage or progress,
because I dare not say he does not, since he has brought his reason and his
judgment into such a mavelous captivity; but I would presume to ask whether
the Church, as it can be contracted into that denomination, (for if the Pope be
enough the Church to declare Heresies, and determine controversies which are
yet undetermined, methinks he should be Church enough to answer questions, and
in this particular he is more concerned, for being a Sovereign temporal Prince
in his own Dominions, as well as the Supreme Prelate, he is in some degree
answerable for the discretion and the good manners, as well as the Religion and
the Faith of his subjects:) May we ask whether it may be presumed that he and
his Consistory, with which he consults in matters of importance, that he does
believe this miracle, or may it be presumed he does not? To say he does believe
it, is to accuse him of such an impotency of understanding, as the most
illiterate Friar is hardly guilty of, as to imagine that a thing so monstrous
in nature, and so impertinent as to any pious or prudent effect, can be true.
To say that God can do as much, is an answer that may as well support the most
notorious fiction that is in Ovid's Metamorphosis; and it may be as well
replied, that God if he had done it, would have provided some such witnesses in
the way, as should have made it manifest that he had done it, whereas they who
have been at so prodigious a charge in beautifying and enriching that little
mansion, have not yet been able to purchase one Record of so long a voyage, but
satisfy themselves that they who take the pains to come thither, do easily
believe it, whereas more go thither to see those who do pretend to believe it,
than to see the Relic that draws men thither.

I never spoke with any Roman Catholic who knew so much of the story as I have
here mentioned (for most that have been there, or have heard of the stories of
it, have heard no more than that our Ladies own House is there, and for ought
they know Nazareth may be within three miles of it) who has pretended to
believe it, he was not bound to it, it was not of Divine faith, it might be of
humane and Historical faith. I ask him whether he believes it as much as he
does that Julius Caesar was Emperor of Rome? That he cannot say neither. In a
word, most Catholics laugh at it, as much as I do, and many of them are as
angry at it; so that I suppose it may become us to conclude that the Pope does
not believe it to be true, or rather that he knows it to be a fiction; and if
that be so, with what conscience and sincerity can he suffer, or indeed permit
such a Pageantry to be acted in his Territories to the delusion of so many
millions of Christians, and to the scandal and opprobrium of Religion, in
exposing the dignity of the Mother of our Lord to so much derision, only for
his own benefit and advantage; for it is no small revenue that accrews to the
Pope's Exechequer by the visitation and adoration of that Mansion of our Lady.
Many come to Rome in a year for no other reason than that they may worship our
Lady at Lauretta, and many go thither immediately without going to Rome, as
lately a great Ecclesiastical Prince did, and returned without so much as
seeing the Pope, after he had for the cure of his Hypochondriack indisposition
liberally presented our Lady with as many Jewels as are worth above five
thousand pounds Sterling, which she could not but receive very graciously, yet
his infirmity has increased ever since, though it may be his Present has much
added to the devotion of the place; for the fight of the richness of the Copes
and Plate, and other Utensils is a great part of the business of the Visitants:
Though it was a very pertinent scoff upon the occasion that was used by a
Legate in France, who was afterward Pope himself, when he passed in state
through that Kingdom, and found all passages thronged with people, who upon
their knees implored and expected his benediction; he repeated it often, with
the usual ceremony of making the sign of the Cross, with these reiterated
words, Sivulgus vult decipi, decipiatur; however, I say, it might be a proper
benediction for such occasion in the highway, yet to induce men to so solemn
Pilgrimages, and to the performance of so solemn acts of devotion, there ought
to be some such solid and substantial foundation of it, as may be a support to
real piety, which can hardly be imagined in this case; and I cannot tell
whether it were not rather to be wished that the Pope, and Cardinals, and
Prelates of the Roman Court, did at the expense of their reputation really
believe all that Machine, than suffer it to be showed without their own
believing it at the expense of their sanctity, at least of their ingenuity. Nor
could it seem strange to any man, if an honest man of a good understanding, who
has not been moped in his education with such discourses, and has in the
pursuit of his own satisfaction fallen into some doubts of things practiced in
his own, shall, if he had no other exception to it, refuse to cast himself into
the arms of such a Church that seems to believe, or without believing to
countenance such an imposture, or any other thing contrary to common sense, and
repugnant to all motions of Piety.

Mr. Cressy will not part with the Doctor without kindly putting him in mind of
his Souls health, and that being a genuine English Protestant he will find an
Excommunication denounced, ipso facto, against all such as shall (in the manner
there expressed) openly oppose any thing contained in the Nine and thirty
Articles, in the Book of Common Prayer, and of Ordinations of Bishops and
Priests, etc. which Excommunication (he says) is there declared to remain in
force, till the Offender repent of his wicked error, which he ought to revoke;
Having told him this, he wishes him to reflect upon his Book called Irenicum,
long since published by him, and comparing it with the Constitutions of the
Church, ratified with an Excommunication, and thereupon to ask his conscience
whether he has not incurred that Excommunication, since his guilt having been
public and notorious, no repentance, no retractation appears, etc. He foresees
that himself (who has so often subscribed to those constitutions, and so often
taken those Oaths which accompany them) will be thought liable to that
Excommunication, having so apparently renounced all the obligations, and showed
no other repentance than in a constant reviling and malice toward the Church
in which he received his Baptism, and therefore to clear himself from reproach,
he declares that the Doctor, cannot doubt of the validity, or legality of that
Excommunication, he for his part may, so the Doctor is to look only to himself;
But if Mr. Cressy had not been in great have, as it cannot be denied that he
has used great expedition in his conclusion, he might have thought himself
obliged for the more full conviction of the Doctor to have alleged those
particulars in his Irenicum, which have involved him in that Excommunication,
and then that that Book was published by him after he had subscribed to the
Thirty nine Articles, etc. neither of which he has done, nor I believe will
ever be able to do; I confess I have not the Irenicum now in my reach, and
therefore must only resort to Mr. Cressy himself for a vindication, and
methinks he contributes very fairly to it in a testimony he gives him (pa. 100)
without any purpose of good will toward him, where he says, It cannot be
denied, but that the Doctor did not, during the late calamities, join in the
clamor for destroying the Church, he was no root, and branch enemy, but on the
contrary generously undertook their defense, and with great boldness told his
then Masters (in his Irenicum) that though Episcopal Government, and
Ordinations, as likewise Deans and Chapters (which anciently were the Bishops
Councils) were not necessary, nor perhaps convenient as matters then stood, yet
neither was their utter destruction, they might if the state pleased be
retained without sin; in all which he believes he has laid an indelible
reproach upon the Doctor, but I must tell him, that he has therein given a
larger testimony of the Doctor's courage, and affection to the Church, than all
his revilings will be able to deface; For a young Scholar who had then no
obligation to the Church by Oaths, or Subscriptions, and knew little of the
constitution of the Church of England, to tell his Masters (as he justly calls
them) who had newly Murdered their King, and persuaded the People to believe
that Bishops were therefore suppressed because they were Antichristian, that
they might still be retained without sin, was such a flat contradiction to the
Doctrine they would have the People be taught, that he showed more courage in
saying so, than all the English Catholic Clergy ever expressed, who owed as
much Allegiance to the King, or would be thought to owe as much, as any of his
other Subjects, yet never wrote one line, or published one Opinion against
whatsoever the Rebels said, or did; He might well say that Episcopal
Government, and Ordination were not necessary as matters then stood, in a
Government whose foundation was laid in the most precious blood of the King,
and the most horrid Sacrilege, and Murders that were ever perpetrated by
Christians, and when no honest man would, or could be made a Bishop; But it is
too much countenance to Mr. Cressy's unwarranted calumnies to take pains to
absolve the Doctor from his aspersions, who stands an object of reverence and
esteem, with all men who have either for the Church.

However such is Mr. Cressy's modesty, that for the excellent performance of
his task, he desires no other Judges but the Prelates of the Doctor's own
Church, which could have been no excuse for me to interpose my poor opinion in
the matter; but when he so frankly calls upon any indifferent Reader to judge
between them two, whether with better success he has defended the cause of the
Church of England against the Church of Rome, or he (Mr. Cressy) the cause of
the Doctor's own Church against himself, I may hope that I may be looked upon
as one of those indifferent Readers who is called upon or authorized by him to
speak my opinion in the matter, and upon that supposition I do assure him upon
the reputation of an old Friend, that he has very much hurt his own Church, in
his very passionate, and uncomely way of defending her, and in seeming to look
upon some very Excentrick Lives in the estimation of most learned Catholics,
as essential parts of their Religion, and to make such Miracles, and Dreams,
and Apparitions, the very foundations of the Romish faith, which the most
credulous in the Church do but believe are possible to be true; and the wisest,
and most learned think never to have been: and lastly in undertaking to answer
a Book, which upon his own, or his Associates clamor was necessarily to be
full of citations of Catholic Authors, and Testimonies, contrary to what he
averred, and without applying any answer to them, to declare that he will not
examine them, nor cares whether they are true or false. So that his whole Book
consists in nothing else (besides the petulant, and insolent language) but
finding fault with the method of the Doctor's arguing, and his making use of
new, and other Principles, than have heretofore been insisted upon in arguments
of this kind, and leaves all the material parts of the Book unanswered, which
possibly may make his Superiors believe that he has not performed the task
they imposed upon him very laudably; For the Doctor having solidly discharged
all that can be expected from him, he needs no such private, and obscure
testimony as mine, which can do him no good, but he has the acknowledgement of
the King himself, and the Church, whose worthy Champion he deserves to be
esteemed, and it is like he performs the work the better, because Mr. Cressy,
and so many of his Associates are so much offended, and do so bitterly inveigh
against his Principles, and all for the novelty of them; that is, he says
somewhat that has not been said before, and which they are not provided to
answer, which is rather an argument that all disputing is to little purpose,
and that it is time to give it over, because neither party is reformed, than
that what he says is easy to be answered; there will be every day new
Principles, new Arguments to inform, and convince, and convert those who
obstinately persist in old Errors; They who are but moderately versed in the
Controversies about the Substantial points in difference between the
Protestants (I mean which are common with all Protestants) and the Church of
Rome, cannot but find that the Romish Champions have quite shifted the Scene in
all their arguments upon the most material matters, and have found new mediums
to support their cause; They are visibly weary (all but the Jesuits) of
insisting upon the Popes infallibility, you scarce meet with an argument from
it in any Book that is Printed, nor can you engage them in it upon discourse;
They are with great difficulty drawn into the matter of Transubstantiation, but
presently shelter themselves under the shadow of their Church, and if they
cannot avoid enlarging upon it, they neither use argument, or answer that ever
Bellarmine relied upon, being not satisfied with much he said in that point, or
Purgatory, or some other matters which he has handled more at large; insomuch
that it has been observed these many years, that Bellarmine's Controversies
are so gathered up, that they are not easy to be procured amongst the greatest
Booksellers, and if they are ever reprinted, they will pass a severe
expurgation; In these varieties, and lawful changes of the method, and order of
disputation amongst learned men, which cannot but be administered by the often
saying and repeating the same things, which are often evinced by a new medium,
after it has been long unmovable by an old, why should it only be unlawful,
or incongruous in the Doctor, or any other Writer in defense of the Church of
England to introduce new principles, if they will better contribute to the
maintenance of old truths, and which it is plain does stagger them, and forces
them to fall upon the Person, and decline the matter? yet I am contented for
the ending all disputes which are full of obstinacy, and uncharitableness, to
concur in the reference, and how ill soever Mr. Cressy and I have agreed from
the beginning of his Book hitherto, I am entirely of his mind in the matter,
and very words of his conclusion, That there is a horrible depravation in the
minds, especially of Ecclesiastics, which depravation can now only be cured by
the wisdom, and power of the Civil Magistrate, and to his wisdom and severity I
leave it.

I have now waited upon Mr. Cressy to the end of his Book, and I think have not
left any clause in it of any importance, unanswered; and before I conclude, I
shall observe Mr. Cressy's own method in giving him some Counsel, and Advice,
without taking much notice of his Postscript, in which there is little
addition of new matter, but from the same temper of spirit some variety of
bitterness, with some new very ill words; He wishes that if the Doctor thinks
not himself obliged in Conscience by breaking all Rules of piety and humanity
to do all manner of despite to his Catholic fellow Subjects, he would
hereafter please to abstain from reviling, and blaspheming Gods Saints, or
traducing the most divine exercises of contemplative Souls more perfectly
practiced only in Heaven; Alas! the Doctor wishes and desires that all the
English Roman Catholics, against whose corrupt opinions he has with much
strength of reason, and very little passion, writ very weightily, but never
against their Persons, would be his Fellow Subjects, give that evidence, and
security of, and for their fidelity, as their Fellow Subjects do; That they
would disclaim all kind of subjection to any other Sovereign, and which till
they do (and which the Catholic Religion cannot hinder them from doing) they
cannot reckon themselves, nor be accounted by others, his Fellow Subjects; And
I do heartily wish (not without some apprehension) that Mr. Cressy has not by
breaking all rules of modesty, and discretion, brought more prejudice upon the
Persons of his fellow-Catholicks, than all the Doctor's want of humanity has
done; It was a little too soon to awaken all the Protestants of England, that
they might discern in what an ill condition they must be in, if that Catholic
spirit that discovers it self unwarily in him, and others of his fraternity,
should have any prevalence, or much countenance in the State. To his
blaspheming, and reviling Gods Saints so absurdly charged upon him, enough has
been said before, nor is there evidence to induce the most charitable man to
believe that all those are Gods Saints, which stand in Mr. Cressy's Calender of
Saints, and it was very unadvisedly done that only one single line was not
expunged, if there was no more that gave the occasion of mentioning Saints, and
Miracles, and Enthusiasmes, which extorted from the Doctor all those
animadversions, which put the other into so much rage and fury, that for the
support of that one only line, he has writ this whole Book, that in every
line is full of nothing but Miracles, and Saints, and divine exercise of
contemplative Souls, which by his favor, is as new a Principle to defend the
Romish Religion by, as any the Doctor has introduced against it, and surely
contains more of that kind of Learning, than all the Books of pure, and solid
Controversy that have been written since Luther begun his Separation, as if he
had a mind to put the verity of the Lives of the Saints in issue, and to be
strictly examined, from which affectation I suppose his Superiors will divert
him, that they and their Miracles may be left to their own repose: And for his
most divine exercise of contemplative Souls, more perfectly practiced only in
Heaven, which is another new principle, and which, and the like, must
unavoidably be examined by new methods, and argumentations, it would be much
better to leave those obscure contemplations to the Persons who delight in
them, and find relief by them, which we may charitably hope is better
understood by them, than comprehended by us; but if they will not keep their
Cipher privately to themselves for their mutual correspondence and
conversation, but will constitute a new language in old words, for the
information, and amazement of other men, and will be then offended, and shortly
after condemn them for being without the effects, which pious Souls naturally
produce; they should not take it ill, if men who patiently hear what they say,
do in truth believe that they themselves are without any clear notions, and can
draw no sense out of that mist of words in which it is concealed. Mental Prayer
(which they would fain make their imaginations understood by) is a faculty
every devout man comprehends, it signifying no more than performing that in
thought, which is otherwise done in speech, and thoughts are as plain, and
easy to be understood as words can, and whoever cannot express plainly and
clearly to an other man whatever he thinks, rather dreams than thinks; but
because the very noise of words do very often, at least with some men, disturb,
or interrupt, or divert the thoughts, they do pray very allowably, and
effectually, and it may be more powerfully, who apply themselves to God, by
fixing their silent thoughts upon God, and upon what they desire of Him,
without using any words at all, and this is mental Prayer, which probably may
keep the mind more, and longer bent toward God, than the pronunciation of
words will enable or suffer it to be; and yet I doubt it must have frequent
intermission, and relaxation, and contemplation may hold its vigor longer upon
other arguments than in the exercise of Prayer.

Men are not to be blamed, and it may be less in our Country, which has and
does still suffer by men and women too of disturbed fancies, who pretend to
Revelations and Illuminations, and such Enthusiasms, not only to introduce many
extravagant opinions in Religion, but to warrant and justify unquiet and
seditious actions in the State, from some light within, which they insist upon
in large discourses of words hudled together, the meaning whereof other men
cannot comprehend, and therefore when they meet with this spirit revived again
in the writings of some modern Catholics within the space of nine and twenty
or thirty years, which had layn quiet, or much quieter for four or five hundred
years, and scarce a mention of them in the common Catholic Writers of those
times, it cannot be wondered at, that men are not willing to give any
countenance to those infusions which have so often been discovered to be mere
delusions, or that many who have read all Mother Teresa's visions and
ecstasies, and accidentally meet with some well exercised Quakers, are apt to
think their style very like, because they comprehend the sense of both alike;
and as it is some argument against the difficulty of a Book, that it is
translated into any other Language, than that in which it is writ; so when it
is translated into very many Languages, and understood by none, or by very few
who are not suspected for ignorance in the Language, it is a great
discouragement to the Reader, if it be no reproach upon the work, and I believe
and hope that it is a fate Sancta Sophia will not undergo, by being translated
into as many Languages as Mother Teresa has been. But it may be that the
objection which Mr. Cressy unwarily says, keeps women from being admitted for
witnesses of miracles in the Canonization of Saints (in which he finds he was
grossly deceived) may be a good qualification of them for the receiving and
applying extraordinary Illuminations and Revelations. Naturally (he says page
68.) imagination is stronger in them than judgment, and whatsoever is esteemed
by them to be pious, is easily concluded by them to be true; and I must confess
I have found more Nuns and Religious Persons who seem perfectly to understand
that dialect, than any other Catholics with whom I have conversed. I confess I
am so unwilling to think lightly, or speak pleasantly of any expedient that may
possibly in other men advance devotion, that I am most unwillingly drawn again
into the discourse of it, since I now find by casting my eye upon a little
Treatise written by a friend of Mr. Cressy's, or by himself, to illustrate that
subject, that I am totally incapable of understanding it; for though Mr. Cressy
confesses that many persons even in the Catholic Church have been seduced by
the Devil and their own pride, to pretend to lights received from God, which
were either the effects of a distempered fancy, or suggestions of the Devil,
which his friend likewise acknowledges, and seems prepared to give advice how
the one shall be discovered and distinguished from the other, in which I would
have been very glad to be instructed, but am utterly disappointed by the first
conditions that he establishes toward the discovery, which is, That the
persons who pretend to Visions and Illuminations must necessarily be Roman
Catholics, because he lays it a ground indisputable, that all pretenses and
appearances of that kind in any persons of a different Faith, are infallibly
Diabolical; which is so full a contradiction to the right of another sort of
Enthusiafts, who to many men seem to make their claim with as much reason, and
think that every instance that is urged out of the Scripture by this new Author
of all the infusions, and visions, and illuminations, and revelations from the
Creation to the end of the Revelation, may be as well applied to their
justification; as for that of the Roman Catholics, I am resolved to be no
farther engaged in the Argument, but for ever take my leave of it.

I am confident the Doctor is so willing to gratify Mr. Cressy, that he will
deny him nothing that is reasonable; but it is not a just request, when himself
has declared in his Book that he will not examine one quotation which the
Doctor has with notable industry and punctuality set down to prove all he has
averred; and that it concerns not him whether they be true or false; he now
requests him in his Postscript, that he will not hereafter abuse the world by
fathering on the Church the Exotic opinions of particular Schoolmen, (it was
his part to have showed what Schoolmen, and what opinions the Church has
rejected) and by representing the Churches Doctrines lamely, falsely and
dishonestly, which he says, is his enormous faultiness committed in his last
Book through every one of the points mentioned by him, which, he says, may be
visible to all heedful Readers; truly the more shame for him, that would not
have that advantage against him, when he was without any other, but he says,
irrefragable proofs are making ready of this, if the Searchers would be quiet,
and let the Printers work; but it is an even lay the want of that discovery
will be always laid upon the Searchers, though they cannot prevent the coming
out of any thing else they have a mind to publish. And it may seem strange
after his confession in his Book, that all is required in and by the Church of
England, is comprehended in the Articles, and Canons, and Book of Common Prayer
well known, and published; he would have it thought in his Postscript that they
know not where to find doctrines, for no other doctrines we defend, and he
shall do well to declare by what authority the Catholics of England conform
themselves to the Council of Trent, that has never been received in that
Kingdom, as it has not been in some Catholic Countries, and therefore is not
obligatory there; nor must he think he answers this question, by saying that
all Catholic Countries have received all that is of the Essence of Religion,
and reject only some Canons which are indifferent; for if any thing remains
indifferent after the determination of the Council, and may therefore be
rejected, it is manifest that the jurisdiction is not in the Council, though
confirmed by the Pope, but in that power that rejects it, and judges of the
indifferency. For his invitation of the Doctor to a Christening, that a
College in Cambridge may have another name given to it, than it is now called
by S. Bennet, or Corpus Christi College, the wit of it is enough answered,
when taken notice of.

The last Paragraph of his Postscript is a pure piece of Oratory, and may be in
imitation of no worse an Orator than Caesar himself, who when he had tried all
fair and foul means, threats and promises to draw Cicero to his party, and
found it was impossible to engage him to be active against Pompey, he only
considered how to make him Neutral, to sit still without doing any thing in the
quarrel, and writ to him, Neque tutius, neque honestius reperies quidquam quam
ab omni contentione abesse. So Mr. Cressy after he has heaped more ill words
upon the Doctor, and applied more reproachful Epithets to his grave and learned
person, and style, than has been gathered together in so small a volume within
these nine and twenty years; he concludes his Postscript with desiring him to
consider that Almighty God commands us to love Peace and Truth, Zach. 8. 19.
and then gravely informs him how they ought always to go together, and left
his too civil address to him should more work upon him, than would become an
adversary; he quickens him for the better application of his Text, by telling
him, that since he has demolished all Tribunals in Gods Church, which might
peaceably end controversies, and had endeavored as much as in him lay to
banish peace eternally from among Christians, it was expected from him that he
should give some testimony to the world, that he is at least a seeker, and
promoter of truth; and so proceeds very Rhetorically to persuade him that he
does not himself believe any thing that he says to others, because he is too
reasonable a man, and of too great abilities to think that such a Book as his
last can convert any Catholic, who cannot read without trembling at the
blasphemy of it, and without a horrible aversion from one, who would make their
Church and their Faith odious. Indeed I believe they will suffer very few of
their Proselytes to read that or any other of his Books, which may open their
eyes, or inform them of the darkness they are in. If Mr. Cressy's word may be
taken, as no doubt it will, he will tell them of blasphemies that may make them
tremble, though he has not in his whole answer named one; but if a man will
not (that is, cannot) give credit to all the stories which are told of S.
Bennet and S. Francis, he is straight a blasphemer of Gods Saints, as he who
will not submit to the authority of the Bishop of Rome, demolishes all
Tribunals in Gods Church, which might peaceably end controversies, and
endeavors to banish peace eternally from amongst Christians, whereas it is
only that Tribunal that hinders and obstructs the peace, which, but for that
judicatory, would be generally embraced.

The counsel I would now give to Mr. Cressy will consist in two kinds, the
first with reference to himself purely, the second with reference to the cause:
If he thinks fit any more to write against the Church of England, which I do
not dissuade him from, that he will state truly and clearly the difference
between it and the Church of Rome, which he has never yet done. I advise him
to remember that he has been a member and son of the Church of England,
cherished and educated in her, during the most vigorous part of his age, and
that he ows to that education all the learning he has; I will charitably
believe that he saw, or thought he saw good reason to withdraw himself from her
Communion, and that he is satisfied in his conscience, with his present state
of separation; let it be so; why should that hinder him from living fairly and
civilly toward her? It is an ungenerous thing to fall from straight embraces
to public revilings. Men of honor after they have contracted friendships with
each other for a long time, and afterward find cause from some mutation in
manners, and upon discovery of infirmities with which they can no longer
comply, to live at a greater distance toward each other, to repose less
confidence than they used to do, and by degrees to grow strangers; they yet
retain such a decent behavior, that standers by can scarce discover any
alteration of affections in them; they are never heard to speak ill, to
traduce, or disgrace one another, and believe that it is a debt and duty due to
their former friendship never to undervalue each others parts, or to bring the
honor of either into question; common prudence, and good breeding prevents
those excesses; and methinks in Religion the same temper should have a greater
influence, and Mr. Cressy should for his own sake allow some beauty to have
been in the Church that did so long detain him, and not desire to render her so
ugly and deformed, as takes away any excuse from any body for staying so long
in her company. This I expected from his natural genius, and from the
conversation he frequented, where bitterness of words was never allowable
toward men whose opinions were very different; and if any new illumination
has persuaded him that such urbanity is not consistent with the zeal that
Religious discourses should be warmed with, he should suspect it for delusion.
He has an excellent example given him, by a Catholic learned and Reverend
Bishop, the present Bishop and Prince of Condun, who treats an enemy more
inferior to him, and more liable to reproach, than the Church of England can
be imagined to be to Mr. Cressy, with such condescension and humanity, as if
they stood upon the same level with him. And no question those strokes make a
deeper impression upon all ingenuous men, than louder blows, and are with more
difficulty repelled. Whereas Mr. Cressy, like a rude and blustering wind,
disturbs all sorts of men who stand near him, offends and provokes all Classes
of men with his unnecessary choler. What can the King think to see his Laws and
Government so vilified by his scornful expressions, to hear his Royal Ancestor,
whose obsequies were kept and observed at Nostre Dame in Paris with the highest
solemnity by the first great King France ever had, in spite of the Pope's
Excommunication, called a Tyrant by one of his own subjects? What can all the
Protestant Nobility and Prelates of England think to see the Ecclesiastical and
Civil Laws of the Church and State despised and trampled upon by a man who
could not live an hour in that Air but by the Kings mercy? What must all the
peaceable and well-affected Catholics of England think, who have enjoyed so
long tranquillity by the King's grace and favor, to find the calm they were in
interrupted by the boisterous and unskilful noise of one of their own
Preachers, and to hear and see a jealousy kindled of their loyalty and good
meaning, by the impetuous breath of a Religious man, that if it be not allayed
by their prudence, may devour and destroy their chief and most beautiful
habitations. Mr. Cressy therefore shall do well and wisely henceforward to
demean himself with more temper and civility toward the Church, and all the
members of it, of whose clemency and gentleness he may yet stand in need; and
if his passion will not suffer him to live as a Friend, let his discretion
prevail with him to live like a Neighbor, at least like an old acquaintance,
as long as he thinks it convenient to enjoy the benefit of their quarters.

The advice that I give Mr. Cressy, with reference to the matter is, That he
will contract the Controversy into what concerns the Church of England solely,
and to say all he can against the Articles and Policy thereof, and not to make
any sallies against Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists, or other
Sectaries, who declare as great animosity against the Church of England, as
that of Rome has always, and therefore are more like to agree together. And
the first question that is proper and pertinent to be debated, and which
determination will go very far toward the reconciling all inferior
particulars is;

I. Whether a National Church has power, with the approbation and authority of
the Sovereign, to remove any errors or inconveniences which have been practiced
in that Church, either by an Original corruption, or by degenerating from what
might at first be innocent, into superstition or scandal; and whether the long
reception and continuance of what is erroneous or mischievous, can restrain the
Sovereign power from reforming it, when he finds it necessary in the same
peaceable order and method, as he provides Laws in other cases for the well
Government of his Kingdom?

II. Whether whatsoever is not of the Essence of Christian Religion instituted
by our Savior himself, or declared or advised to be practiced by the Apostles,
may not lawfully be looked upon as Religion of State, in that it may be
altered, or improved, or abolished by the Sovereign power for the better
advancement of those ends which are essential, and which no power on Earth can
make alteration in? And whether Gods promise to his Church be not to be
depended upon in every National Church where learning and piety flourishes,
that it shall not fall into enormous error, whereby Christianity shall receive
prejudice, and be not more like to advance and propagate devotion in that
Church and Nation, than any Foreign power whatsoever?

III. Whether the Bishop of Rome has any authority given by God in the
Dominions, and over the Subjects of other Princes, and what authority and power
it is, and what obedience and subjection it is, which the English Catholics
conceive themselves bound to pay to him by the obligation of their Religion? It
being absolutely necessary for the personal security of Kings and Princes, and
for the peace and quiet of Kingdoms, that it may be clearly made manifest, what
the authority and power is, that a Foreign Prince does challenge in an other
Princes Dominions contrary to and above the Laws of the Land, and what
obedience it is that subjects may pay to such a Foreign Prince without the
privity, and contrary to the command of his own Sovereign, nor can any general
answer be satisfactory in this point. They who conceive the Pope has a
Temporal and Spiritual power in England, must explain what the full intent of
that power is, that the King may discern whether he has enough of either as to
preserve himself and the peace of the Kingdom; and they who insist upon his
having a spiritual power as most of the most moderate Catholics do, without
imagining that it can in the least lessen their affection and loyalty to the
King, which they do really intend to preserve inviolable, must as clearly
explain and define what they understand that spiritual to be, which may
otherwise be extended as far as the former intend the temporal and spiritual
shall extend; nor in truth can they be secure of their own innocence, of which
they think themselves in possession, until they fully know from those who
entangle them with distinctions, what that spiritual power is, and what
submission they are bound to pay to it, which seeming to be some obligation
upon their Conscience, it is fit they may be sure it cannot involve them in
actions contrary to their duties, which they can hardly be secure of, and less
satisfy others, till they absolutely disclaim any power to be in him at all
with reference to England, as they will upon a full enquiry discover, that he
has no other in any Catholic Kingdom, but what is granted to him by the
Sovereign power, and the municipal Laws of the Kingdom, which makes it differ
so much in all the Catholic Nations of Europe, and to be little or nothing out
of it.

IV. Whether Catholic Subjects in England are not bound to give as good
security to the King for their fidelity, and peaceable behavior, as all his
other subjects do, and without which they cannot wonder that they may be made
subject to such Laws, and restraints, as may disable them from being dangerous,
when they profess to owe obedience to a foreign Prince, who does as much
profess not to be a friend to their Country, and will not declare what that
obedience is?

V. Whether his Majesty may not justly, and ought not prudently to require the
same, or as full satisfaction and security for their allegiance, as Catholic
Subjects give for their fidelity to Catholic Kings; if so, how can the English
Catholics under pretense of Religion refuse to declare, that it is in no
Earthly power to absolve them from their fidelity to the King, when no French
Roman Catholic dares refuse the same, it being a Catholic resolution in
France, and renewed upon the occasion of a seditious Book by a Declaration of
the Sorbone concerning the Kings Independency, in the Year 1663. Quod subditi
fidem, and obedientiam Regi Christianissimo ita debent, ut ab iis nullo
praetextu dispensari possint; and whether any Catholic in France, or Spain,
can refuse to profess that he does not believe that the Pope can depose the
King, if the King thinks to require it?

VI. Whether since the Pope so lately caused his Majesty's Catholic Subjects
in Ireland to rebel, and when out of the conscience of their sin they
submitted to the King, and subscribed, and swore to the observation of the
Articles agreed upon; The Pope absolved them from the performance of their
Oaths, and took upon himself to be their General in the Person of his Nuntio,
and assumed the exercise of the Regal power both at Land and Sea, and
imprisoned those Catholics, and threatened to take their Lives who had promoted
the peace, and desired to return to the King's Subjection; And when since the
Kings happy Restoration, the Nobility, and Catholic Clergy of Ireland thought
it necessary to present some Testimony of their future Allegiance to the King,
in which they declared that the Pope had no power to dispense with their
fidelity to his Majesty, or to absolve them from any Oaths they should take to
that purpose, which Declaration was attested, and subscribed by many of the
principal Catholic Nobility, and others of the best quality, and interest, as
likewise by some of their Titular Catholic Bishops, and many of their Secular,
and Regular Clergy; But complaint, and notice hereof being sent to Rome, the
Pope was so offended at it, that he caused his Nuntio in Flanders to command
some of the Clergy who had subscribed that Paper to attend him, and threatened
to excommunicate them, and Cardinal Barbaryne at the same time, writ a Letter
to the Bishops, and Clergy of Ireland, in which he signified how much the Pope
was displeased that such a subscription, and declaration had been made, and
commanded them to discountenance, and suppress the same, and take care that it
should proceed no farther, and the Cardinal added, That they should remember
what they well knew, that the Kingdom remained still under Excommunication?

This being the case, it cannot but be very necessary that his Majesty should
know what opinion his Catholic Subjects have of this Foreign power, which will
observe no limits, but of his own prescription, and will concern all Roman
English Subjects to explain their sense of it, that they may not be thought to
desire only the protection of those Laws, which gives them equal title to
whatever all other Subjects enjoy, and to be willing to be dispensed with for
performance of all those obligations which other Subjects are under; and in
consideration whereof the other benefits are granted to them.

VII. Whether the English Catholic Subjects are not bound in Conscience to
submit to the Laws of the Land, in all things which are not against the Law of
God, and who is to be judge whether they are against the Law of God or no, and
if Men are forbid to keep Company, or to have conversation with dissolute, and
profane Persons, how they can justify the living in continual company with,
and in constant profession of friendship to those, who they conceive, and
believe to be out of a possibility of Salvation; and for which (if in truth
they do believe it) the saying, they may believe as well as hope that they will
repent, and become Catholic before they dye, when, whatever they may hope,
they do not in truth believe that they will ever change their Religion, so that
it is more reasonable to believe from the learning, reason, and judgment of
many Catholics, that they do not believe it, whatever they are obliged to say,
or rather whatever others say to them, and whether Protestants who do think
that the Papists do really believe they must be damned, are not very excusable,
if they avoid, and decline any commerce, or conversation with them, even to the
abstaining from buying or selling with them, or from entertaining any Servant
of that Religion, since it cannot reasonably be presumed that a Servant can
love a Master, which it is his duty to do, who he does believe will infallibly
be damned?

VIII. How Mr. Cressy, and the rest who have received Orders in the Church of
England, can justify, or excuse their being re-ordained after they change
their Religion, since so many Councils have declared against it, and no one for
it, and since the succession of Bishops is as plainly manifest in one Church as
in the other, and in truth may be more doubted upon their own grounds in the
Roman, from the number of Schisms, and the continuance of them, in which so
many excommunicated Persons have been consecrated Bishops, and they again
ordained Priests under the same condemnation, which may be supposed to have
made a great confusion, by many Men's having conferred Orders, who (by their
Rules, I say) were Laymen themselves; However, what difference can there be
assigned, why such of the Greek Church who come to them, are not reordained,
but those of the Church of England are compelled to be?

IX. Whether St. Peter exercised any jurisdiction, or assumed any superiority
over the rest of the Apostles, during the Seven Years he remained at Antioch,
as he ought to have done, if the Supremacy was annexed to his Person, or in the
Four and twenty Years he reigned in Rome, and whether the contrary be not
manifest by St. Paul's Epistle to the Galathians, not so much by the Contest
that was between him, and St. Peter about Circumcision even at Antioch, in St.
Peter's own Diocese, where St. Paul withstood him to his face, because he was
to be blamed, which is poorly answered by those who say, it was in the warmth
of disputation, when all men contradict each other, without distinction of
quality or degree; But I say I do not urge the equality so much by that
contradiction (though it be not answered) as by the matter, occasion, and
substance of that Epistle, which seems to be written principally upon that
Subject: St. Paul had converted that People, the Galathians from Paganism, to
the Faith of Christ, and he was no sooner gone from them to another place, but
some other Christians (for there was no attempt to reduce again to Paganism)
were inclined to amuse with Scruples, that they were not thoroughly informed of
the whole faith that was necessary, nor by one who had ever seen our Savior,
and so was not like to be himself informed as well as they, especially when St.
Peter preached contrary to what the other taught, so that the weight of what
was objected by those, whoever they were, was the incompetency of the Person
who had taught them, in comparison of the other, and particularly of St. Peter;
So that St. Paul could not at this time have been ignorant of that Supremacy,
if there had been any, this Epistle being written above Seventeen Years after
his conversion, nor could he have avoided the mentioning of it upon this
argument, if he had known it, especially since he writ that Letter from Rome,
where Peter at the same time was, nor could he more clearly have confuted that
Opinion than he has done, except he had believed St. Peter himself to have
affected it, which he had no reason to do, since he knew who they were who had
infused those suggestions; He gives them a short account of his own
Apostleship, and how he had spent his time since, of his first Journey to
Jerusalem, yet that he went not thither till three Years after his conversion,
and till after he performed many acts of his Apostleship, in which he received
no direction from any; Of his Second Journey afterward to Jerusalem in which
he takes care that they might not think that he had any Superior there, To
whom we gave place by subjection, no not for an hour; He proceeds then in the
same jealousy to make a comparison with St. Peter; He that wrought effectually
in Peter, to the Apostleship of the Circumcision, the same was mighty in me
toward the Gentiles; effectually in Peter, mighty in Paul, a word of an equal
energy: and lest all this might be looked upon as speaking behind his back,
after he had mentioned the respect he had received from the other Apostles,
from James, and Cephas, and John, he tells them, that when Peter came to him,
he withstood him to the face because he was to be blamed, and the manner of his
expostulation with him seems very rough, as with a man that stood upon the same
level with him, not as with the sole Vicar of Christ; If thou being a Jew
live after the manner of the Gentiles, and not as do the Jews, why compellest
thou the Gentiles to live as do the Jews? Whosoever seriously reflects upon the
tampering that had been with the Galathians to lessen their confidence in Paul,
and the gradations by which he endeavored to reconfirm them in the same faith
he had formerly taught them, cannot but believe that the Apostle had therein a
purpose to root out any such Opinion of priority out of their hearts,
especially when in no other place after this there appears the least mention
of, or appeal to St. Peter, in the many errors and mis-interpretations of the
words and actions of our Savior, and of them in the Life of the Apostles, from
whence many troubles, and great disorders sprung and grew up amongst Christians
of that Age.

He shall do well to consider, whether it be probable that St. Peter himself,
or any of his Successors did pretend a Precedence, or Superiority over Saint
John the Evangelist, who lived Twenty Years after Saint Peter, and to let us
know when the first Pope discovered his Supremacy over other Bishops, and then
we know well enough how it was introduced in Temporalities.

If Mr. Cressy and the rest of the enemies of the Church of England, who will
not allow any members of the same to have any hope, without deserting their
Mother, of a place in Heaven, and hardly admit them to be in their wits upon
Earth, would enter upon the disquisition of these particulars, which are warily
declined in all their Writings, or very perfunctorily handled, the foundation,
doctrine and discipline of that Church, would be in a short time utterly
overthrown and demolished, or worthily vindicated and supported in the judgment
of most learned and discerning men; and there can be but two reasons why they
should decline this method, which they should the rather embrace, because all
other have proved ineffectual, and in near two hundred years, the appeal to
Fathers and Councils, or Scripture it self, has not reconciled many persons in
any one controverted particular, but those two reasons, so unwarrantable that
they will never be owned, will never suffer them to admit the method, and
pursue it closely. The first is, that if they should proceed in this ingenuous
and substantial way, they would be cut off from those common places in which
they are only versed, and by which they are supplied to urge all things which
have been thought heretofore material to that matter, and to reply to what is
said of course, but especially they will find themselves restrained from that
multitude of ill words in which they so much delight of calling those they do
not love, and whose arguments they cannot answer, Heretics, who are condemned
already to Hellfire, and from asking the old stale question, that has been as
often answered as asked, Where was your Church before Luther, and from their so
often vain excursions upon the voluptuousness of Henry the Eighth, whom they
would fain persuade the world to be the Founder of the Church of England, and
all the reformation to have been devised by him. Whereas if they would
seriously study these material points, the first whereof would go very far
toward the facilitating the resolution upon the rest, they might easily
discern, that no member of the Church of England, by their own rules can be
comprehended within any of their decrees for an Heretic, which serves their
turn only as an angry word to throw at any man's head, whom they desire to make
odious to all Roman Catholics; and they would be as easily convinced, that we
never had any thing to do with Luther; that in all those quarrels and wars,
which were either occasioned by him, or accompanied his doctrine, there was not
a man of the English Nation that was ever engaged, and that it was long after
his time, and not at all by his model that the Church of England without one
sword drawn, and in as peaceable and grave a manner, as ever that Nation has
concurred in the making of any of those excellent Laws, which distinguishes
them from all the subjects of the world, in the happiness they enjoy, did
reject those superstitions and inconveniences, which they could not sooner free
themselves from with those circumstances of justice and peace, and the
retaining whereof would have been more for the benefit and advantage of the
Court of Rome, than for the Church of England, or the good of that Kingdom; and
as such alterations cannot be supposed to be made with so universal a consent,
but that many of all conditions adhered still to the exercise of their
Religion, with all the circumstances which they had been before accustomed
unto, and for which no body suffered in many years, nor till by their
treasonable acts and conspiracies they appeared dangerous to the State: For
King Henry the Eighth he had some personal contests with Clement the Seventh,
who was then Pope, from whom he received such personal indignities, as in the
opinion of most of the Princes of that Age, who had all out-grown the wardship
of the Pope, he could not but resent and vindicate himself from* nor did he do
it any other way, than his most glorious Catholic Predecessors had always done
upon far less injuries or provocations, as Edward the First and Edward the
Third, and others whose Religion was never suspected, often restrained him from
exercising any authority or jurisdiction in England, to which they well knew he
had no other authority or right, but what the Crown had granted him, and forbid
any of their Subjects to repair to Rome, or to receive any Orders from thence,
which was upon the matter all that Henry the Eighth did, and was no more than
Lewis the Twelfth of France had done very few years before, but was so far from
being inclined or favoring to any reformation or alteration in Religion, that
he proceeded as long as he lived with the utmost severity against all who were
but suspected to be averse from the Catholic Religion, and caused many of them
to be burned as Heretics very few days before, having made new Laws for the
discovery of them stricter than had been ever before. And there is no reason to
believe that he did not die as much a Catholic as he was when he writ against
Luther; nor did any Catholic Prince forbear to enter into the strictest
alliance with him, notwithstanding the Popes Bulls of Excommunication,
Deprivation, and Interdiction; nor was there one Mass the less said for it in
England; and after his death his obsequies were with all possible solemnity
observed (as has been said before) in Paris at Nostre Dame, by Francis the
First, notwithstanding all those Bulls from Rome, in all which nothing can be
more observable, than that the great Emperor Charles the Fifth, who had
threatened and compelled that weak humorous Pope into all those acts of folly
and presumption against the King, had no sooner made him commit that insolence,
but himself entered into a straiter friendship and confederacy with the
Excommunicated King, than had ever before been between them.

The other reason why they will very unwillingly expose their interest to this
manner of debate is, That it would divide their party, which if they were
solicitous only for truth would not prevail with them. Other Catholic Kingdoms
and Nations which differ from one another, as well in the profession as the
exercise of the Roman Religion, as the French hold a Council to be above the
Pope, and the Spaniards the Pope to be above a Council, and many other
particulars; when they come to know that the Crown and Church of England have
established only amongst themselves such an exercise of Christian Religion,
that in all the substantial and essential points is the same which they
profess, without censuring them, or what they find fit to do in their
Countries,. and have only made such alterations as by the constitution of that
Kingdom they may lawfully do, and which they find more agreeable to the manners
of the Nation, and for the peace and happiness of the people. They will not
think themselves concerned in the policy of other Kingdoms, nor the Popes
authority so much of the Essence of Catholic Religion, that they are bound to
support all his pretenses which are different in all those Countries which are
most devoted to him, and therefore cannot flow from any determination of our
Savior, which would have made it the same in all places; besides, they too
well know, that in all the particulars proposed, the Catholic Doctors are not
of one mind, who are now kept united to them by not knowing the constitution of
the Church of England, nor that the Roman Catholics in that Kingdom refuse to
give that security for their duty to the King, and for their peaceable and good
behavior, as all other their fellow subjects cheerfully give, and as are
required of all by the Laws of the Kingdom; and if they would perform that
common duty, it is very probable that there appearing no more danger to
threaten the State, from them, than from other men, those Laws which the
iniquity of their forefathers brought upon them by their conspiracies and
treasons may be suspended toward their innocent Children, until such time as
their peaceable demeanor and good carriage shall make it appear just to be
abolished. This expedient for the reasons aforesaid, will be obstructed by the
Religious and regular Clergy, who have so absolute a dependence upon the Pope,
that they are in truth subjects to no other Prince; and probably some few of
the secular Clergy may concur with them, though more of them, if they can
discern any security to themselves in disclaiming the Popes authority, which
few of them look upon, as of the Essence of their Religion, and have in their
hearts as well as in their professions as sincere purposes toward the King and
his People. However I know not why all the Lay Catholics of his Majesty's
Dominions should bind up their interest, with those who have different
obligations from them, nor how they can excuse themselves from not thoroughly
examining every one of the particular heads proposed, by which they will
receive this benefit and information, that they will clearly discern what is
necessary for them to retain and insist upon, without which in their conscience
(as thus informed) they cannot continue members of the Catholic Church, and
what is so much of the policy of the State, that is warrantable or
unwarrantable, only as it is established by the Sovereign authority, and by
this means they will know how to give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's, and
to render unto God that which belongs unto God; the just distribution whereof
is of an equal concernment to all Christians, being equally enjoined by our
Savior Christ.

THE END.
A Brief Catalogue of Books newly Printed and Reprinted for R. Royston
Bookseller to his Most Sacred Majesty.
THe Works of the Reverend and Learned Henry Hammond, D. D. containing a
Collection of Discourses chiefly Practical, with many Additions and Corrections
from the Author's own hand, together with the Life of the Author, enlarged by
the Reverend Dr. Fell Dean of Christ- Church in Oxford. in large Folio.

Nova and Vetera: Or, a Collection of Polemical Discourses addressed against
the Enemies of the Church of England, both Papists and Fanatics, in large
Folio, by Jeremiah Tailor, Chaplain in Ordinary to King Charles the First of
Blessed Memory, and late Lord Bishop of Down and Conner.

Reflections upon the Devotions of the Roman Church. With the Prayers, Hymns and
Lessons themselves, taken out of their Authentic Authors. In Three Parts, In
Octavo, New.

The Christian Sacrifice, and the Devout Christian, and Advice to a Friend
these last three Books written by the Reverend S. P. D. D. in 12.


