A SERMON PREACHED at the KIRK OF AULDHAMSTOCKS, September the 28, 1690.

On the occasion of the Intimation of a Sentence of Deposition, Passed upon Mr
JOHN GIBSON, late Incumbent there.

According to the Order of the Brethren of the Presbyteries of Dumbar and
Haddingtoun.

By Mr J. C. one of the Brethren of that Bounds.

Ecclesiast. 3. 1, 2, 3. To every thing there is a Season, and a time to every
Purpose under the Heaven; -- A time to plant, and a time to pluck up that which
is planted. -- A time to break down, and a time to build up.

Deuteron. 5. 32. Ye shall observe to do therefore, as the Lord your God has
commanded you, you shall not turn aside to the right hand or to the left.

-- Medio tutissimus ibis. EDINBURGH, Printed by John Reid, Anno DOM. 1690.

The Text, Ezra 9. 9. For we were bondmen, yet our God has not forsaken us in
our bondage, but has extended mercy unto us, in the sight of the Kings of
Persia, to give us a reviving to set up the House of our God, and to repair the
desolations thereof, and to give us a wall in Judah and in Jerusalem.
WE think it not needful to resume what the Author of this Sermon delivered in
way of Introduction to his Text, it being so obvious to any that art acquainted
with Scripture story, that at this time, when Ezra appeared so Active and
concerned for the public Interest of his Nation, the People of God were now
under a begun Deliverance from the Babylonish Captivity, and in thoughts of
improving the present Season for Restoring and repairing the Desolations in
Judah and Jerusalem. Therefore passing any farther Preface, we come now to
enter upon the Text, as he Divided, Explained and Prosecuted it.

1, WE have in this Text, a Reflection on the past Calamitous condition of the
People of God. We were Bondmen.

2, We have a grateful acknowledgement, of their present more comfortable
Condition. which is amplified in two or three Considerations. 1, The Lord has
not forsaken us in our bondage. 2, But has extended mercy to us in the sight
of the Kings of Persia. 3, Has given us a reviving. 4, Has given us a wall in
Judah and Jerusalem.
3, We have also in the Text, the End why God gave them a Reviving, or the
Improvement pointed at, that they should make of the opportunity of a breathing
Time put in their Hand. 1, To set up the House of God. 2, To repair the
Desolations thereof.


Has extended mercy unto us in the sight of the Kings of Persia] i. e. Our God
who has the Hearts of Kings, and of all Men in his Hand, to turn and sway them
as he pleases, has so influenced and inclined even the Heathen Kings, to Act
and Do in favors of his Church, that herein lies a great deal of the Wonder
and Mystery of this Mercy, that God has employed such Tools and Instruments,
to accomplish his Great and Gracious Purposes.

By the reviving in their bondage] Here we may understand, either Spiritual
Inspirations of the Almighty, whereby they were quickened from a backsliden
Languide Disposition of Spirit, to set about the Work of the Lord in
Earnestness and Zeal, hence chap. 1. v. 5. We read that God raised the Spirits
of the chief of the Fathers, and the Priests and the Levites to build the House
of the Lord; or rather we may understand the Lord's giving them Freedom and
Deliverance from the Thraldom and Tyranny of their cruel Enemies, who had long
kept them in hard Bondage and Captivity, which was to them as a Resurrection
from the Bands of Death.

To set up] i. e. To raise out of the Rubbish, and restore to a fair and more
splendid Condition; but more afterward for the explication of this Clause.

The House of God] i. e. The material Temple at Jerusalem, where God used to
Dwell in the Symbols and Manifestations of his presence. Hagg. 1. 8. 2. 7. Go
up to the mountain and bring wood, and build the House, and I will fill it with
Glory. And give us a wall] Some understand thereby the Favor of the Kings of
Persia, whose Edicts so especially concerning them, were under God, their
Bulwark and Security against the Efforts of their malicious Enemies, who
essayed by all means to impede their Settlement and Welfare: Others rather
understand, the protection of the Watchful and propitious Providence of God,
who is said to be A wall of fire round about Jerusalem. Zech. 2. 4, 5.
Doctrine. When God in his merciful Providence, gives a Reviving and Breathing
Time, or a fair Opportunity, we should put to our Hands to set up, and repair
the House of God. To this piece of Wisdom and Duty Mordecai exhorted Esther
chap. 4. v. 31, 14. And says the Apostle, Gal. 6. 10. As we have therefore
opportunity, let us do good. --

In prosecution of this Doctrinal Observation, we will give some Reasons of the
Doctrine, which may be improven as so many Arguments and Incentives to ply the
Duty pointed at in our Text, and then we will come to some Use and practical
Application of the Point.

Reasons why we should improve an Opportunity to set up and repair the House of
God.

1 Reason, We may come to incurr the Character of Foolish and Unwise toward
God, if we slipp an Opportune offer of Providence to advance the House of God.
A great deal of Wisdom lies in knowing and discerning a fit Season for Action,
and no less Prudence and Discretion in the active improvement of a seasonable
Juncture; But he is a very Fool, says the Wiseman, who has a price in his
Hand to get Wisdom, yet has no Heart to it. Prove. 17. 16.

2 Reason, Opportunity is precious, but passing, of great value but variable
like the Wind, we know not how soon it may change; therefore will all wise and
considering Men, strike in with Time and Tide, that neither by Power or Policy
can be gained to await our Leisure or Pleasure; But moreover as Opportunity is
in a moment variable, so for ever irrecoverable, therefore says the wise Cato
lib. 2. distich. 26.

Rem tibi quam noscis aptam, dimittere nolis,
Front capillata, sed post occasio calva.
And the Apostle Paul seems to mind us of the same thing, when he advises Romans
12. 11. to be not sloathful in Business, fervent in Spirit serving the Lord,
where, for (...) many Greek Impressions have (...); i. e. Improving the present
season of Service.

3 Reason, If we neglect an Opportunity of setting up the House of our God in
this our day, our Posterity may come to pay dear for our Error, and will Curse
and Abhor our memory; our Bowels should be stirred in thoughts of these that
come of our Bowels, that we entail not upon them Spiritual Plagues and
Punishments, that ordinarily follow the want of Gospel Ordinances, it were
better we left them unprovided of Estates and Fortunes for their Temporal
happiness, then endanger them of wanting the helps and means of atchieving
their Souls eternal Felicity, O let us dread bringing forth a seed to the
Murderer.

4 R, The Laws of the God of Heaven are express that we should set up the
House of the God of Heaven, and should not his Charge and Authority have weight
with us, to Sway and Persuade us to our Work? Ezr: 7: 23. Hag: 1: 8.

5 R, The Lord severely Challenges and Threatnes the Negligent herein; God is
hudgly Offended when a People either in disrespect of him, or overrespect to
their own Interests and Projects, are carless of his concerns; O! unworthy of
the Privilege of admission into the House of God, who so far contemn the God
of their Privileges, as to carry Indifferent in his Work and Affairs, it is
surely the greatest Privilege the Creature can be capable of to be
Instrumental for the Honor and service of the Creator; yet behold as if there
were not a God or God had no Work for Men in the World, the People of the World
mind so much their own things, that the things of God has small share of their
cares. Phil. 2: 31. At which kind of People we may be assured, God is very
angry, as may be gathered from his way of upbraiding such, Hag: 1: 4, 5: Is it
time for you, O ye, to dwell in your ciled houses, and this house lie waste?
and v: 9: He plaugeth them, because of mine House that is wast, and ye run
every Man unto his own House.

6 Reason, To obviate Dicouragments, and Encourage the faint and fearful, God
has graciously Promised his presence and Assistance; and who would not be
Workers together with God, or who needs to fear the misgiveing of a Work, at
which is the Hand of the Almighty Hagg: 1: 13. 2. 4. 5. 9. 10. etc. Chron: 22.
11: 17. 19.

7 Reason, We will be Brought to an account of our Neglected, slighted
Opportunities; every good Talent of God, is a treasure committed to our Trust,
with our Mal and Misimprovments whereof we will undoubtedly be charged in the
great day of Count and Reckoning Math: 29. 19* After a long time the Lord of
those servants comes and rekoneth with them.

Now as we proposed, we come to some practical Improvement of this Doctrine.

Use. 1. of Information, what, Setting up the House of God does Imply 1: In
order to setting up, there must be a carrying away the rubbish that is ready to
Impede the Work, or a Purging of the House of God; ye know this is very Usual
and Obvious to your daily Observations, that when an old Ruinous House is about
to be repaired, the first Piece of Work is to remove the heaps of Redd and
Rubish that so there may be fair Ground to go upon for Leying the Foundation
and rearing up the Superstructure, and therefore 2. Chron: 29: 5. We read of
Carrying forth the filthiness out of the holy place, and also 2 Chronicles: 34. 3:
8. Josiah purged Judah and Jerusal^m from the high Places, and Purged the Land
and the House, and then Repaired the House of the Lord his God. To our purpose
we may also apply a passage Nehem: 4: 10. The strength of the Bearers of
Burdens is decayed, and there is mucb Rubbish, so that we are not able to Build
the Wall; Now my Friends with an alas, I desire to make a Reflection on this
Scripture, applaying it to our selves at this time, I say alas for we have few
Bearers of Burdens; and these that are seem either to want strength, or to want
skill, or to want will which is worst of all; I grant there is need both of
much Grace, and of much Wit, how to Manage this hard Piece of Work of Purging
the House of God, there are so many obvious Dangers, and Insuperable like
Difficulties on all hands, hinc illae Lachrymae! but heroic Zeal will say fiat
Justitia, ruat Coelum; floreat Religio, ruat Mundus, let all go to all, let
Gods Honor still be minded, let Gods way still be followed, this is our
Providence, this is our Wisdom, this is our undoubted Interest, he that walks
uprightly, walks surely. I would also have you to advert to what the Lord
says, Ezekiel. 20. 37, 30. That when he brings his People into the bond of the
Covenant, he will purge out from among them the Rebels; and who may justly be
reputed Rebels, by Declaring, Swearing, and Railing against God, and Religion
in the power of it? etc. Verbum sapienti fas est. 2 Setting up does imply a
preparing of Materials for the Work, and to work by. 1 Chronicles. 22. Throughout.
3. Setting up does plainly imply, a falling closs to work, every Man doing
something in his Place and Station, for rearing up and repairing the House of
God, as we use to say, in communi periculo, omnis homo miles, so, in opere
communi, omnis homo opifex. This is both a Shame and a Sin, when there is so
much work to be done, and that of so common and great concern, that yet any
should be found to stand all the day idle; though I wish that on the contrare
extreme, some may not be found to be too too busy, endeavoring to cast down
as fast as is built; But, to return again, that every Body should contribute
their share of service, to their Ability, within their proper Sphere, I hope
all serious Godly Persons will easily grant, for God is calling aloud at this
day, to Zerubbabel, to Joshua, and to all the People of the Land to work, and
build the House of the Lord, Hagg. 1. 8. 2. 4. And this leads us to another use.

2. Use of Exhortation, To two or three sorts of Folk, to put to their Hands to
set up the House of God. And first, be exhorted O ye Magistrates, whom God has
advanced to a Sphere of Activity above others, to set up the House of God; it is
no disparagement to you, were ye higher then the highest upon Earth, to stoup
if it were so low as to remove the filthiness of the Sanctuary, in that way
that is proper and competent for you, the greatest of Men, the best of Men have
been thus honorably Employed, as David, Solomon, Hezekiah, Josiah, Nehemiah,
Zerubbabel, all Kings and principal Rulers, eminent in their day both for
Power, Wisdom, and Piety; O Magistrates, I say appear and Act, foreward in this
Work. 1. Because your example will mightily work upon the Vulgar, and may sway
others to do as ye do; If a Prince, or Royal Person venture himself in the
Front of a Battle, how does it animate the Inferior Soldiery, and put Spirits
in the dullest Souls to r^n sharers of his Dangers; if the Magistrates of a
City stand brisk and resolute for the Ancient Pridiledges of it, what backing
does there presently appear of the concerned Citizens, ready to venture their
All for the same cause; I say again the Influence of the Magistrates example is
most Forcible and Operative. Regis ad exemplum totus componitur Orbis.

2. Because they are most able to perfect great things to purpose, when Power
and Piety make a happy Concurrance together, O what mighty Feats will they
atchieve, when Piety without Power will avail very little (I mean with respect
to those, who want a solid Principle of Grace to work by) for the Sword of
Steell will do more then the Sword of the Spirit with the most part of Men, the
Word of God, and Ecclesiastic Discipline being much in contempt with this
perverse Generation, and I will not say, but some Reason of this may be,
because the Sword of the Spirit, has to do with Rebels, but the Sword of steell
with Subjects, at least who fain subjection for fear of Hazard; Now, O ye
Magistrates, seeing God has put Power in your Hand, ye should not bear the
Sword in vain, but employ it in a suitable way to your calling, to help
foreward the work of the Lord. 3. Because God has deputed you for this effect
to act as his Vicegerents and Representives, so that as ye cannot but know,
that God is concerned to have his House set up and Repaired for the glory of
his great Name, after the same manner should ye account it your Concern to do
in his Name and Authority, what is Incumbent one you for the same Purpose. And
on this occasion O ye Inferior Magistrates, I tell you, there lies an
undeniably great part of the Encouradgment to move in this Work, Seeing God has
given us a King in his mercy, so happily disposed, as to see to the Settlment
and Consult the welfare of Gods Church in the Land, which is one of the
greatest Blessings that Gracious Bountiful Providence has conferred on this
Unworthy Unthankful Generation; And to be sure all that think themselves
concerned in the Peace and Prosperity of Zion, in their Daily addresses to the
Throne of Grace, do seriously Pray, GOD Save King WILLIAM and Queen MARY, and
overthrow all their Enemies* Secondly, Be exhorted. O Ministers to set up the
House of God. You specially stand interessed in this Work, by your peculiar
Charge and Character, ye may remember how Zealous was Jehojeda, how active was
Ezra, and how concerned was Joshua the High Priest; For Churchmen, not to be
concerned for the Church, were a strange thing, for Builders not to help in the
building, what a Crime and Infamy were it, deserving to be extruded the House
of God for ever; And first, O ye Ministers, a part of your work is, to tell who
are Enemies of the Work, and what are the Stopes and Impediments of it. Isa.
58. 1. Hos. 5. 1. to 7 verse. 2 Timothy 4. 14, 15. Another part of your Work is,
To pray for God's Blessing on the Work, that the Laborers may come good speed
and prosper; with Zeal and Wrestling should ye Pray over this Prayer: Psalm.
122. 6, 7, 8, 9. Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, even that Peace may be within
her Walls, and Prosperity within her Palaces, and seek the Good of the House of
the Lord our God forever. 3. Encourage the People with the most Proper and
pressing Arguments ye can Invent, that you may Excite and Stir them up to
Zeal, Courage and Activity; O what an Incredible back-sett may the work of the
Lord sustain from dashes and discouragements at the Hands of Ministers, who
should lift up the Hands that hang down and confirm the feeble Knees, Hag: 2:
4: 4ly: Ministers should not only say to others, do thus, and thus, but
themselves should Do as they say, they must also Work, and Work more
abundantly. In the last room, People of all Ranks and Degrees should assist
in Setting up the House of God, that which concerns all, all should be
concerned in, not only Magistrates and Ministers share of the Privileges of the
House of God, but all the People of the Lord. Ezr: 1: 5.

3. Use of Caution, Having exhorted to set up the House of God, I would have
you cautioned against two or three sorts of Folk, who I fear may prove unluckie
and unmeet Tools for this work, if not Opposites; you may see Ezra 4 What was
the Temptation of the Builders of the House of God at that time, and how they
behaved toward their crafty disembling Adversaries. They came to Zerubbabel,
and to the chief of the Fathers, and said unto them, let us Build with you for
we seek your God as ye do, you see here their fair plausible Pretensions, but
their underhand design was, to weaken the Hands of the People of Judah, and to
trouble them in Building, and frustrate their purpose, but the People of God
being aware of their ill designs, return them this Answer, You have nothing to
do with us, to build an house unto our GOD, but we our selves together will
build unto the Lord; v: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. From whence we may learn that we cannot
be cautious enough; Therefore, I, have a care of these that had an active hand
in casting down the house of GOD; such are not to be trusted, except we see
some eminent appearances of their serious Repentance, and grief for their
former ill Deeds. It Is true, Paul preached the Faith that once he destroyed,
and persecuted, Gal. 1. 23. But it is as true, he had a sound through
Repentance for the Havoc he made of the Church of God, and gives this
satisfying Demonstration of his seriousness and candor therein, that to his own
shame he leaves on public record, in futuram rei memoriam, a particular
Confession of his Impieties and Scandals. 1 Cor. 15. 9. I am not meet to be
called an Apostle, because I persecuted the Church of God; and 1 Timothy 1. 13. I
was before a Blasphemer, a Persecuter, and Injurious; And it is also true that
Acts 9. 26. When Saul essayed to join himself unto the Disciples, they were all
afraid of him, and believed not that he was a Disciple; they were not too
credulous, neither would they trust before they tried. 2. Have a care of
Gallios and Neutralists, who have laid it down as a Principle of their
Religion, to be keen for no Religion; O but these of this stamp be Odious and
Useless, unworthy to live in God's World, they are unprofitable burdens of the
Earth. Such readily in all the Stirrs and Revolutions that are about Religion,
carry with a piece of Carelessness and Indifferency, whither Religion sink or
swime; Would you know Gallios Motto, this is it, Floreat Religio, nil mihi
curae; Ruat Religio, nec mihi curae; mea est Religio, curare meipsum; ye need
not much care for such carless ones, for they care not whether ye care for
them, or not, neither does the care of the Churches any thing toutch their
Spirit, and Gallio cared for none of those things Acts 18: 17. 3. Have a care
of the greedy mammonist, whose heart and Soul seems to be set upon Gold, not
upon God, or upon Gold for his God, never expect that Man will give Gold to
Build the Sanctuary, who makes Gold his Sanctuary trusting in uncertain Riches;
a gripping Worldling will not quite a gripp of any thing to Build the House of
God, for he is a Man much concerned, to add Field to Field, and House to House,
so That could he get a claught of the House of God it self, he would
Sacrilegiouslie add it to his Inheritance; they are deceived who look for a
good turn in the work of GOD, from an avaricious, gripping worldling. 4. Have a
care of the crafty politician, he is too politic to be pious; he has his own
house and family to build, though it were upon the ruins of the house of GOD;
Interest, Interest is the great Diana of such Ephesians; The Politician may
pretend fair for Religion, but expect it no longer than Religion has fair
weather; he will seem to build the house of GOD, but only, when the foundation
is the Princes favor to the Work; dies his King? his Religion dies with him,
and he turns Sceptick in the interreigne, till he see what Religion the next
King professes, and of that Religion will he be, be it good or bad, for this is
the Politicians maxim he goes by, to be still of the Religion that is upmost,
and obtaines in the Chapel Royal.

5ly, Have a care of debauched Profanists, whose life and conversation is
checkered with Vices and Immoralities, such will be so far from setting up the
work, that if there were no more but their guilt and sins connived at, it is
enough to procure GODS displeasure against the Builders, and eat the stones of
the wall, and consume the timber of the house; Men that have been notoriously
debauched, and have given no satisfying appearances of Repentance, should not
be entrusted, or honored with such a piece of service. A very Heathen could
say, procul, hinc, procul esto profani. Now to come to a close of this subject
in the last place I offer to the consideration of those that are concerned to
set up the house of GOD, some few Directions as to the manner and way of
managing their work.

1. Direction, Set up the house of GOD unanimouslie, with that concord, good
agreement, and oneness in mind and Measures that is desirable and necessary,
Unity, is the Bond of Society, and keeps all the several parts conjoined iu one
firm compact Body; many Hands makes light work, if they draw all one way, but
if they draw contrare ways one to another, they will either pull the Rope in
pieces, or pull one another down to the Ground; Many Shoulders with their
united strength may carry a great Burden, the which may come to break the Back
of but one or two Bearers; O how good a thing it is, to see Brethren build a
House together in Peace, and also to see them dwell together in Peace in the
House which they have Built; as Unity is the Cement of Society, so Division is
the Destructon of it, a House divided against it self cannot stand, so Builders
divided among themselves shall never bring a Structure to the Copestone, it was
the division of Tongues that putt a stopp to the Building of Babel; Let us fear
the Errors of others who have Marred their Work with their Jarrs and Janglings,
therefore to this Purpose is that Text, 1 Kings 6: 7. there was neither Hammer,
nor Ax, nor any Tool of Iron heard in the House while it was in Building, upon
which take Mr Pool's Exposition, this says he is of Mystical signification,
that it is the duty of the Builders of the Church, as far as in them lies, to
take care that no noise of contention, or division, or violence be heard in
that Sacred Building, Ezra 3: 1. Tells us when the People were to meet about
Building the Temple, they gathered themselves together as one Man to Jerusalem;
Mind also what the Historian says, Concordia, res parvae crescunt, Discordia
maxima dilabuntur.

2. Direction, Set up the House of God Prudently and Discretly, Prudence
forsees evil things, and evites them, and secures against them, she also
industriously provides good things, and carefully preserves them; Prudence
freely passes from Punctilios, least there be a loss, or prejudice in things
of Weight and Consequence; Prudence leisurely Deliberats, and quickly
Dispatcheth Business, Prudence rather suffers Injuries, then injuriously
persecutes Offenders, in all cases Prudence is as a Moderatrix, to Consult,
Guide, and Direct how to use the best means, to attain the best Ends and
Purposes; what should I say more, I find its Imprudence in me, to essay the
Commendation of Prudence, I can say so little to purpose, being defective in
Experience. But alas after all that can be said, here lies a great difficulty,
to judge and discern What is true Prudence; with the most part Carnal Policy
passes for Prudence, and that wisdom of the World, that advances worldly
Interests, that Masterpiece of truest Prudence is too much neglected, he that
walks uprightly walks surely; Godly Simplicity is nicknamed Silliness, and
Fraud and Flattery pass for Prudentials.

3. Direction, Set up the House of God Zealously, and with a fervent mind; Zeal
is an active Principle that prompts to forwardness in action; Zeal transcends
all Difficulties, and briskly carries through Troops of Discouragements; Zeal
makes a Man mind the things of God, with the hazard of neglecting his own;
Zeal! Alas Zeal where is it? It seems to be cooled and gone; yea Zeal is
fl^uted at all Hands, and a strick Godly Zealot stigmatized with the most
Odious Characters; Zeal is buried under the Moold and Earth of Carnal Prudence,
and this so Deified in our Day, that Zeal must be sacrificed to her Devotion,
and for her pleasure this Heavenly Fire extinguished; However we see that a
Spirit of Zeal has been wont to be at work in the days of Old, esp^cially in
turning times. Exodus 35. 21, 22. 36, 5, 6. Ezra 2. 68. Nehem. 4. 6. And says
the Apostle, Gal. 4. 18. It is good to be Zealously affected always in a good
thing, And what better thing can we be Zealous in, then the setting up and
repairing the House of God?

5. Direct. Set up the house of GOD dependingly, looking unto GOD for Counsel,
Direction, and Assistance; it is GOD who gives the workmen, He sends forth
Laborers; it is GOD who gives to will and to work of his good pleasure; He
works all our works in us, and for us; and to be sure if we depend not on him
in all our Essays in his work, our work is but labor in vain, Psalm. 127. 1.
Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it.

6. Direct. Set up the house of GOD Prayerfully, ordinatly a building time with
the People of GOD is also a Praying and Wrestling time, upon the first
Intentions that Nehemiah had of Repairing the D^solations of Jerusalem, he
makes his Prayer to GOD to prosper his Project and Enterprise, chap. 1. 11.
compared with chap. 2 v. 3, 4, 5. and chap. 4. 8, 9. when the Enemies conspired
to hinder the work, we made our Prayer unto Our GOD, says Nehemiah.

7. Direct. Set up the house of GOD univeariedly, going on with the work till
it come to a happy Period; look Nehem. 4 21, 23. and 1 Cor. 15. 58.

Now my Friends, having thus at large Discoursed of Setting up and Repairing
the house of GOD, I leave you with David's pithy Prayer, and excellent
exhortation to his son Solomon. Psalm. 51. 18* and 1. Chron 22. 16. O Lord do
good in thy good pleasure unto Zion, build thou the walls of Jerusalem: Arise
therefore and be doing, and the Lord be with thee. Amen.

FINIS.

