Imprimatur,

Liber cui Titulus, Several Captious Queries, etc. Guil. Needham.
May 10. 1688.
Several Captious QUERIES Concerning the English Reformation, First Proposed By
Dean Manby (an Irish Convert) in Latin, And afterward by T.W. in English;
Briefly and Fully ANSWERED

By the late Reverend and Learned Dr. CLAGETT, Preacher to the Honorable
Society of Gray's Inn, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON, Printed by H. Clark, for James Adamson, at the Angel and Crown in St.
Paul's Churchyard, MDCLXXXVIII.

AN ANSWER TO T.W's. QUERIES,
Quer. THe Church of England is either the whole Catholic Church, or a Member
thereof; If a Member only, Name me that Church or Congregation, under the Sun,
whose Sacraments and Liturgy she embraces, unless she have cut her self off
form the rest of the Body.

Answ. If the Church of Rome were spread over the Face of the whole Earth,
excepting here in England, and nothing would serve, but we or they must be the
Catholic Church, Reason would require that the Church of England should be so,
which is the better, and not the Church of Rome, which would be but the bigger
Church. But we pretend not to be the Catholic Church, because we neither need,
nor ought to boast beyond Truth. The Sacraments we embrace are received by All
Christian Churches in the World, and no Church ought to receive any more. We
embrace the Liturgies of the other Reformed Churches, and use our own, as they
use their own, and embrace ours. We embrace all that honest Chistians can
embrace in the Liturgies of the Unreformed, and we reject the rest. We have not
cut our selves off from the rest of the Body, but the Church of Rome has done
so, because she is resolved to be All or Nothing.

Quer. Does she allow the Sacraments of Lutherans or Calvinists?

Answ. She allows and administers the same Sacraments, that Lutherans and
Calvinists do, not because they are Sacraments celebrated by them, or by any
others; but because they are Sacraments instituted by Christ.

Quer. From whence was Cranmer, that first Patriarch, or Reformer of the Church
of England sent? Who gave him Authority to preach his Reformed Gospel? Was it
just or honest for him to rise up against the Church of Rome by virtue of a
Commission from her received? And if so, I pray inform me, whether a Bishop or
Minister fallen from the Church of England, may not also take upon him to
Preach against the Church of England, by pretense of the Orders received from
her hands?

Answ. Cranmer was immediately sent by the Bishops that Ordained and
Consecrated him, Originally by Christ, who left that Power in the Church, by
which they did so: So far therefore as he was the First Reformer of the Church
of England, he did what became his Mission, better than if he had gone on to
maintain False Doctrins, as the Patriarch of Rome did. That he was the First
Reformer was not his fault, but theirs, who went before him in that great
Station, and should have done the same thing, but did it not. The Gospel which
he preached, was not the Gospel of Man, and therefore not his own, but the
Gospel of Christ. Nor was it properly a Reformed Gospel which he preached,
since the Gospel of Christ is in all Ages one and the same. But if because he
reformed the Profession of the Church in some things, which were no part of the
Gospel, though they were pretended to be so, he must be said to have preached a
Reformed Gospel; neither was he to blame for that, whose Duty it was to cast
Errors out of the Church, but they only were to blame, who had been so careless
and treacherous, as to let them in. He did rise up against the Church of Rome,
when he arose against the Corruptions of that Church, which had obtained in
England; unless the Church of Rome cannot subsist without such notorious
Errors, as he rose up against. He was not her Enemy, unless he became so by
telling her the Truth. Nor is it true that he received his Commission from
Rome, though he received it by the hands of Bishops, that were in servitude to
that See: For his Commission had been every whit as good, if they had not been
subject to the Roman Bishop, as they ought not to have been. But since his
Obligation to Christ, from whom he received his Commission by their hands, was
infinitely greater than to them, it was just and honest in him to rise up
against those Unchristian Doctrins and Practices which they maintained; and no
less justifiable then to have risen up against the Arian Heresy, if he had
received his Orders from Arian Bishops. And if ever the Church of England
should fall into the like Corruptions again, (which God forbid) those Bishops
and Ministers that have received Orders from her hands, and who in discharge
thereof take upon them to preach (not against the Church of England, but)
against the wicked Doctrines and Practices of the Church; those Bishops, etc. I
say, will do not only what they may, but what they ought to do, and for the
doing of which, they shall be rewarded at the last day by the Great Bishop and
Shepherd of Souls, by whose Authority and Command they so did.

Quer. Whether want of Mission be not an Error in the Foundation of any Church?
It being Theft and Robbery (as our Savior has taught us) not to enter by the
Door into the Sheepfold.

Answ. That Cranmer did, or that our Pastors now do want Mission, is Falsehood
insinuated by this Query: Their Mission has been more Canonical than that of
many of your Popes has been. But for once to Answer directly to an Impertinent
Question. The want of such Mission does not destroy the Being, or as you call
it, the Foundation of a Church. Nor is that the Door of which our Savior spoke
in Joh. X. since in the needs of the Church Good Shepherd may come into the
Fold without Canonical Mission, and it has on the other side too often
happened, that Thieves and Robbers have come into the Fold by it, who came not
but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy.

Quer. Whether Cranmer entered by the Parliament Door, or by the Gate of the
Scriptures? But this latter is the Old Song of Heretics and Sectaries,
perpetually boasting of Scripture. I demand therefore, Does not the Bible admit
of various Interpretations? Whence of necessity some Judge is to be assigned to
determine which is the true Interpretation, unless your Inclinations be to
wrangle to all Eternity.

Answ. To the first of these profound Interrogations, I Answer thus; That if
Cranmer entered by the Parliament Door, it is a Door at which you, whoever you
are, would be glad to enter too, provided you could get in, without first
passing the Gate of the Scriptures, which you shut up against men, for ye
neither go in yourselves, neither suffer ye them that are entering to go in. For
your saying, That Scripture is the old Song of Heretics and Secretaries, etc.
I know not whether it betrays more ignorance or profaneness. The Scriptures (if
they must be so called) were the Old Song of the Good Old Fathers of the
Church; and the Old Song of the Old Heretics and Sectaries was Tradition,
Tradition, unwritten Tradition, the taking up of which Song, is that that gives
you some Title to Antiquity.

To your Second Interrogatiory, I Answer, That if by admitting various
Interpretations, you mean, that the words of the Bible are not so plain as to
exclude all possibility of various Interpretations, and perveting them to a
wrong sense, it is then a very idle Demand, Whether the Bible does not admit of
various Interpretations? For I defy your Judge whom you speak of presently
after, be he Man or Men, to put words so together, that it shall be impossible
to pervert them to a wrong meaning. But if you mean, that upon a fair
Construction of the Words of the Bible, they admit various Interpretations: I
Answer, That in some places they do, and in others they do not admit more than
one, which is therefore undoubtedly the true one. But for you consequence, that
of necessity some Judge is to be assigned, etc. I beg your pardon that I do not
see it, unless of necessity Men must be either so wanton and quarrelsom as to
wrangle to all eternity about the meaning of words which may be diversely
expounded without any harm done; or so perverse, as to cavil at a Text which
has but one plain meaning. If you find yourselves given this way, you indeed
ought to have a Judge assigned for you, and more than One. You should have one
Judge assigned whose constant business it should be to determine the true
Interpretation of all other Scriptures, but those that speak of him, to keep
you from wrangling about them: And you would need another Extraordinary Judge
to assign the Ordinary Judge, from those Texts that mention him, and a Third to
assign the Second; and so on, till you come to a Judge for whose Credit you
must take his own Word, that ye may not wrangle about a Judge to all Eternity.

Quer. To these Queries I have often desired an Answer, but never yet met with
any.

Answ. Why, that was hard indeed; but I must tell you, that these Queries, though
they were Printed, yet went abroad so privately, as if they were more afraid,
than desirous to meet with an Answer. Whether you ever met with an Answer, I
cannot say; perhaps you have not, and, it may be, you will never own that you
have. But let us go on.

Quer. If you pretend (as many do) that Cranmer and his Associates derived
their Holy Orders from Christ and his Apostles by the Hands of Roman Catholic
Bishops, it follows inevitably that Roman Catholic Bishops did also receive
their Orders from Christ and his Apostles, and consequently are therefore to be
heard. By this Answer, the Protestants seem to me to destroy their own Cause.

Answ. If they destroy their own Cause, you are to give them thanks; for it is
more than their Enemies can do. But I do not see how this Answer destroys it;
for if those whom you call Roman Catholic Bishops can give good Orders, then
were the Orders of Cranmer and his Associates good. It is enough for us, that
they had their Orders from Bishops: And as we contend that their Orders were
never the better, so we willingly grant that they were never the worse for
being conferred by those whom you must needs style Roman Catholic Bishops.
Well; but you say, If we pretend to derive our Holy Orders from Christ and his
Apostles, by the hands of Roman Catholic Bishops, it follows inevitably that
these also did receive their Orders from Christ and his Apostles. So that
though our Orders are never the worse from coming through their hands, yet the
Roman Catholic Bishops themselves are in a better case for our granting it;
since their Orders must therefore by our Confession be from Christ and his
Apostles. Very well; and if your Doctrine be true, it will, I think, be found
that Judas received his Orders from Christ too, when Christ said to him and to
the rest, Hoc Facite. Perhaps you will say, that those were not Bishops Orders.
To go on with you therefore; What follows from Roman Catholic Bishops, having
received their Orders from Christ? Why therefore they are true Bishops, and to
be heard. Undoubtedly; But what then? Therefore Protestants seem to destroy
their own Cause. This is so much out of the Common Rode of Reasoning, that
surely you have some Logic by yourself, which the World yet never saw; and
therefore you would do very well to let us have it, if ever it should come into
your head to Query again. Not to have heard you, had been unreasonable, I
confess, and this, whether your Bishops were True or not. But we have heard
them over and over, and this, although they have said the same thing, over and
over again. You may also perceive that I have read (which may serve instead of
hearing) yourself too, whom I fancy to be no Bishop; and this I assure you not
without some trial of my own Patience, to read such rambling and unedifying
things as you have here brought together.

Quer. But you will say perhaps, that Roman Catholic Bishops did receive their
Orders, not their Doctrine, from Christ and his Apostles. Very good: I would
fain know then, by whose Authority the First Reformers rose up against the
Doctrine of the Church of Rome; Unty this Knot, or Confess that Cranmer,
Luther, Calvin, Socinis, etc. made themselves Judges, Witnesses, and Accusers.

Answ. Here again we are at a loss for want of your private Logic; for why
Judges, Witnesses and Accusers should come in here, no Man alive, it may be,
knows but yourself, and perhaps not you neither. To so much as I understand, I
am content to Answer. True Bishops then may Preach False Doctrine, and against
your Bishops we have terrible Evidence; that those Doctrins of theirs which we
reject, are so far from being received from Christ, that many of them are
contrary to what we have received from him. Now every Christian not only may,
but ought to reject such Doctrins, and that by the same Authority which
requires every one to prove all things, and to hold fast that which is good.
And much more may Bishops, and other Spiritual Guids, rise up against them.
Nay, by their Orders and Station in the Church, they have not only Authority so
to do, but it will be severely required of them if they do it not. I know not
what ayl'd you to tie an invisible Knot, and then to bid us unty it. As for
Socinus, we are no more bound to Answer for his (or any other Man's) Errors,
because he holds many Truths with us against you, than we are bound to answer
for yours, because we hold some Truths with you against him.

Quer. But more Common Answer is, That every National Church may Reform itself.
Be it so: Then it follows, Scotland may Reform itself to Calvinism, Saxony to
Lutheranism, etc.

Answ. And so you leave us to gather the rest in this manner, but Scotland
ought not to reform to Calvinism, Saxony to Lutheranism, and therefore a
National Church may not reform itself. Which is as much as to say, That because
the National Churches which reformed themselves, did not all of them agree in
every Point of Doctrine and Discipline with one another, therefore they ought
not to have reformed the most manifest Abuses notorious Errors, in the taking a
way of which they all agreed. If you intended to insinuate that we Confess some
defects in this or that National Church, since they reformed, your Argument is
just such another as this, Because the National Churches in reforming
themselves, did not do every good thing which they might, therefore they ought
not to have done the Good which they did. You may, Sir, observe if you please,
that the Authority of any National Church to reform itself, does not imply it
to be an Indifferent thing, how she proceeds in doing it. Nor does it follow,
that because it is possible for a National Church to use Authority in this
Matter, better or worse, therefore she has no Authority at all in it. If you
are Ignorant of these things, you do well to make Queries upon them, but it
should have been done modestly, and without pretending to dispute of things in
which you are so very unskilful.

Quer. Moreover it is false, that the Change of Religion was made here in
England, by Vote of the National Church or Clergy of England. No, no, but by
the giddiness of a Few, during the Minority of Edward VI. being then a Child of
Ten years old. Read the Annals of those Times (even Fox himself) where it is
evident that almost all the English Bishops ( Cranmer and two or three more
excepted) were utterly against the pretended Reformation.

Answ. If the Reformation were not a Pretended only, but a Real Reformation,
and if all the English Bishops almost were against it, the more to blame they,
but the Reformation was not the less necessary. Truth is to be followed with a
Few, if they are but Few that follow it; but thou shall not follow a Multitude
to do evil. It is better to be in the right with a Young King, though he be but
a Child, than to be in the wrong with an Old Pope. But for what you say, That
the Change of Religion in England was made by the Giddiness of a Few, it is
notoriously False, for they were but few in Comparison that opposed it; and it
was so generally received that Fire and Faggot in the next Reign was not able
to destroy it.

Quer. Yet let us suppose, but not grant Religion to have been Reformed here,
by the major part of the English Clergy: I understand not how it may be lawful
for the Church of England, being in Actual Communion with the Catholic Church,
to separate itself from the rest of the Body.

Answ. She has not separated herself from the rest of the Body, though she has
not now for some time been in Actual Conjunction with one part of it, and that
the most corrupted part of all the Rest; the true Reason whereof is, that you
will have no Communion with us, but we must pay for it at the price of our
Souls. If to reform our selves, be to separate from your Church, look you to
that, who have it seems made both these things to be in effect the same thing,
by your hating to be Reformed. We for our parts are amazed, that Men who talk
so much for Unity of Communion, will not do that for the sake of Unity, which
ought to be done, though Discord and Separation would certainly follow upon it.

Quer. If you say, this was not done by Fault of the English Church, but of the
Church of Rome, obtruding on the World her Errors and Corruptions: I answer in
short, That all Heretics (themselves being Judges) will escape Condemnation.
And father, let the Reader take notice, that all Presbyterians are wont to urge
this very Instance in their own defense against the Church England, to wit,
that they have left only the Errors and Corruption of the English Church.

Answ. If you say, this was not done by Fault of the Roman Church, but of the
Church of England, refusing to submit to the Supreme Pastor, and rejecting the
Catholic Faith: I answer in short, That All Usurpers and Deceivers (themselves
being Judges) will escape Condemnation. And farther, let the Reader take
notice, that though this Plea of forsaking the Errors of a Church, lies in the
middle to be taken up by every one that separates from a Church, yet one may
take it up with very good reason against one Church, while another lays hold on
it, without any just cause for so doing against another Church. Nor ought it to
be esteemed any prejudice against using such a Plea, when there is Cause for
it, that others may using when there is none. For otherwise it is impossible
that the Innocent should ever make a good Plea for themselves, since they that
are guilty may, if they can but speak, take the same Words into their Mouths.
When the two Apostles said to the Council, Whether it be right in the sight of
God to hearken anto you more than unto God, judge ye, they might have been
told, that this was no more than what every Deceiver might say. And yet I
suppose you will not deny, but the Plea in their Mouths, was a very just and
sufficient Plea.

Quer. Whether the true Service of God had been corrupted throughout the whole
World before Cranmer's Rise; If not, tell me in what Province of the Earth did
exist? Whether among the Waldenses? But I am ignorant from whence Peter Waldo,
the Merchant of Lions received his Mission. Nor do I know whether his
Sacraments are approved by the Church of England.

Answ. The whole World is a very wide place, and the Query is a very
Impertinent Query; For whether the true Service of God bad been corrupted
throughout the whole World before Cramner's Rise, or not; one thing we are sure
of, that it was most vilely corrupted here, and therefore that there was crying
need to have it Reformed. But if you long to have a more positive Answer to the
Question, first go and learn that every Corruption in the Service of God does
not destroy the Truth, though it lessens the Purity of it, and that every
Defect does not deserve to be called a Corruption; that as to this Matter some
Churches were better, and others worse, none I doubt perfect, but that there
was one worst of all, so very bad that Peter Waldo needed not anny Mission to
declare against the Corruptions of it. Learn these things as you ought to do,
against the next time, and, if you intend to go on in this way, then you shall
hear farther from me. Concerning the Sacraments which the Church of England
appears, I have told you my mind once already.

Quer. Whether at this day there be no Pure and Apostolical Service of God in
the World, except that established by Law in England and Irealnd? Whether it be
lawful for the People of England to invent a Church to themselves, divided from
all the rest of the Christian World? By what Authority do they censure the
Sacraments and Rites of the Roman Church?

Answ. For an Answer to the first part of the Query, I send you back but to the
last Query of all, where you may find it. As to the second, I say it is not
lawful for the people of England, or for any other People to invent a Church,
by which you mean, I should think, to invent a New Religion, New Doctrins,
Worships and Governments. But what came into your Head to ask this Question, I
am not able to imagine, since our people have Invented no New Church, but only
retrieved the Old: Whilst you all people have been the best at this Invention,
and by Inventing a New Creed, and New Objects of Worship, and New Sacraments,
and a New Head of the Catholic Church, have effectually divided yourselves
from all the rest of the Christian World, that stick to the Old Religion, and
will have none of your Inventions. 2. I must acquaint you, that the two former
Branches of this Query seem to me to make up a kind of Nonsense between them,
for in the first you suppose that we pretend to have a pure Apostolical Service
amongst: us, and in the second, that we must needs grant our Church to be one
of our own Invention. Now we might take it ill to have Questions put upon us,
as if we were such Ninnies, as to pretend to an Apostolical Service, and yet to
grant that we our selves were the Inventors of it. 3. Take all together, and
the most I can make is this, that you lay great weight upon your Presumption,
that by our Service we stand divided from the rest of the Christian World:
which I have already told you is notoriously false. But for your better
Instructions, I shall add, that if indeed we only had a Pure and Apostolical
Service, and yet upon the account of our Service, no other Christians would
Communicate with us; the rest of the Christian World ought to be ashamed of it,
but we not at all. By the run of your Queries, you seem to be ignorant of one
of the plainest things in the World, which therefore I do again commend to your
Consideration, viz. that Truth is the same, and changes not, whether they be
many or few that profess it; and that our Religion stands not in a multitude of
Pretenders, but in a Holy Doctrine, and a Holy Practice, which all ought to
follow, even when the most do not. As for the third Branch of this Query, By
what Authority, etc? it comes in as if you could never ask it often enough: But
if I have not given you a sufficient Answer, pray do you try to give a better,
if you can, to this. By what Authority do you censure the Sacraments and Rites
of the English Church?

Quer. Whether Cranmer was the first Archbishop of the Church of England? The
reason of my doubt is this, because Archbiships of Canterbury, for nine
preceding Ages were all Roman Catholics? If he was the first, he wanted
Episcopal Succession, because being the first of his Sect he succeeded to none.
Then how could he be a lawful Pastor, who had neither Succession, Mission, nor
Miracles to recommend his New Doctrine? I say New, and strange at that time, and
for many Ages before.

Answ. He that affirms there were Roman Catholic Archbishops of Canterbury,
for Nine Ages before Cranmer, and yet makes a doubt whether Cranmer were the
first Archbishop of Canterbury or not, shall doubt on for me. If indeed Cranmer
was the first Archbishop of Canterbury then, as you say, he wanted Episcopal
Succession (in the Sea of Canterbury) that is, he had no Bishops that were his
Predecessors in that See, because he was the first; and I am very glad, that
you don't doubt of that too: And yet I think there is as much reason to doubt
of that, as of the other. But then you are come to an end of the first doubt
presently, for now you do not doubt but Cranmer was the first Archbishop, (though
there were Archbishops for Nine Ages before him) and wanted Episcopal
Succession. I suppose you do not care to stand doubting long upon a Matter; But
in the name of sense how can this be? Why, Because being the first of his Sect
he succeeded none. Notably spoken! and all is now as plain as can be. Because
Cranmer was the First of his Sect in the Sea of Canterbury: Therefore he was
also the First of his Order, for if there were no Archbishop of his Sect before
him, without all doubt there were no Archbishops before him at all: And yet
there were too, therefore I begin to doubt this will prove but a bad business
at last. However, Sir, I give you many thanks for your Argument, such as it is;
for the distinction which it proceeds upon, we have been tugging for this
hundred and fifty years, and you at last have very civilly yielded it to us.
For in plain English you would prove that Cranmer wanted Episcopal Succession,
because he wanted Doctrinal Succession, he was, say you, the First of his Sect,
and therefore he succeeded to none: And again, How could he be a lawful Pastor,
who had neither Succession, etc. to recommend his New Doctrine. Now though I can
by no means grant that want of Doctrinal Succession, implies the want of
Episcopal Succession, nor will you neither, when you have taken something to
clear your Brain; yet I do very thankfully acknowledge that to make a Good
Pastor, there ought not to be an Episcopal Succession only, but a Doctrinal
Succession also. Now Cranmer, we say, received his Orders from the Bishops of
his Age, and his Episcopal Succession from his immediate Predecessor in the Sea
of Canterbury, and so upward. Thus far now we are very well. But then for his
Doctrine, for which you would make him the First of his Sect, he took a far
better course than, as you would have had him, to receive it for good, and all
from his immediate Predecessors, for it was possible, and upon trial he found
it certainly true, that his Predecessors had made a failure in Successon of
Doctrine, and innovated against the Ancient Faith and Worship of the Christian
Church. He therefore went to the Records of the Primitive Church, and to the
Scriptures which are the most Ancient of all, and the only Infallible Rule of
Faith; by which he found, and so may you (if you have Grace to do it) that some
of those Bishops, whom you speak of, that went before him had miserably failed
of carrying on the Succession of True Doctrine. Now I will be content in this
Matter to make you the Judge, that if they are not lawful Pastors, who want
succession of Doctrine, whether the unlawful ones be those who broke the
Succession of it at first, or those that restored it afterward. And because I
will not tie you too severely to your own words, I will abate the word lawful,
and suffer you to put Good Pastors instead of it. For I think that Orders and
Regularity of Episcopal Succession, will suffice to make them lawful Bishops,
who for corrupting the Doctrine of the Church, shall not be allowed to be Good
ones. I have one word more to say, and then you shall speak. You have heard, I
perceive, from some of your Friends, that the Archbishops of Canterbury for
Nine Ages before Cranmer, were Roman Chtholicks. Now their meaning was that all
the Archbishops of Canterbury, even from the time of Gregory the Great, that
sent Austin hither were just such believers as those whom you now call Roman
Catholics: But though you know not these Matters, and, it may be, not they
neither, yet I can assure you, that very many of your Doctrins and Practices
are not only different from, but contrary to what was believed, and done in
Pope Gregory's days; which you shall find made out very clearly to your hands,
in the Vindication of the Answer to some late Paper, p. 72. etc. So that there
has been sad tampering with Christianity since his time, and when first the
Archbishops of Canterbury became your Roman Catholics, they themselves
interrupted the Succession of Primitive and Ancient Doctrine. Take good notice
of the place I refer you to, in that excellent Book now mentioned, and if you
improve by it, as you ought, I may direct you hereafter where to find that the
Corrupt Doctrins of your Church were of a much later date, than for you to talk
as you do of Nine Ages before Cranmer.

Quer. Whether that be a True Church that wants Lawful Pastors? And whether
Pastors not Lawful and True, can be said to have true Sacraments? If not, then
is it not better to Communicate under One Kind with Catholics, than under No
Kind with Reformers?

Answ. But if we have Lawful and True Pastors, as, for any thing that you have
hitherto said, nay that you or any of your Party can say, we are sure that we
have; then this Query comes in too soon: And therefore at present the Question
stands thus; Whether it is not better to Communicate under Both kinds with the
Real Catholics, than under One Kind only, with the Pretended Ones? But if you
think fit to Renew the Query, I would advise you to Mend it a little against
the next time; and not by any means to question the Validity of our Sacraments
so crudely as you do, for you will find that your own Church does not presume
to Baptize those over again, which go from us to you: And it were not amiss if
you would tell us more distinctly, what you mean by Lawful Pastors; whether you
oppose them only to such of the Validity, of whose Orders we have no good
assurance; or who also came into their Cures by Simony, or who are Schismatical
Pastors, and the like, for these can hardly be said to be Lawful Pastors. Make
your Query plain, and I have a plain Answer for you, which perhaps you little
think of.

Quer. Whether the XXXIX Articles of the Church of England be Articles of
Faith, yea or no? If not, then no body is bound to believe them under pain of
Damnation. If they be, then has the Church of England invented New Articles of
Faith besides those XII instituted by Christ and his Apostles.

Answ. In Return to this Query, I shall deal as plainly with you as you could
wish. Many of the Articles of the Church of England, are Doctrins opposed to
the Errors and Innovations, which your Church holds for Articles of Faith. Now,
as to these Doctrins, we do not Esteem them in the same rank with the Articles
of Faith, because they are not at all times necessary to be propounded to all
in order to their Salvation; but they are necessary to be taught the Faithful
in these Parts of Christendom, to secure them from the Contagion of those
Errors you have brought into the Church. For instance, if you had not set up
the Doctrine and Practice of Praying to the Saints, there had been no need at
all of a Determination of this Church against it; nor had it been necessary to
instruct our People, that the Saints are not to be Prayed unto. Had not Your
Church invented the Article of Transubstantiation, Ours had not opposed a
contrary Article to it. Now as to the Doctrine of these and the like Articles
of our Church, we do not say, that it is in itself Necessary, but only
Profitable. But it is necessary for us to Teach it, because, as you have
ordered Matters, to be Ignorant thereof is very Dangerous, the contrary Errors
being Damnable. For you are strangely mistaken, if you think that no Error is
damnable, but the direct denial of some Truth which is always necessary to be
propounded to all, that is of an Article of Faith strictly and properly so
called. And I can assure you, that the best Divines of your own Church are of
another mind. There is therefore no room left for your Second Supposition, That
if they be Articles of Faith, then has the Church of England invented New
Articles of Faith, etc. But I wonder not a little at the boldness of your
Inference, while with no better color for it, you would draw us in to be
suspected of that which yourselves are so notoriously guilty of, i. e. of
making New Articles of Faith. For had not you done so, we should have had no
occasion to Oppose your Inventions so vigorously as we have done, nor you any
color to Insinuate as if we had added to the Creed. I would fain know of you,
that if False Doctrins which do not directly contradict the Articles of the
Creed, should be thrust into the Creed by one part of the Church, whether
another should be afraid to contradict them, for fear of being accused of
adding the contrary Propositions to the Creed too; though it be evident that
they do it not, but only take care to keep the Old Faith pure from New
Doctrines, and the Minds of the Faithful uncorrupted with False Doctrines? If
you should think fit to say so, I must then ask you, Whether Ten Thousand
Foolish and False, nay and Dangerous Opinions, might not by some or others be
tacked to the Ancient Creeds, and yet the rest of the Christian World should
not dare to determine precisely against them. And yet I must tell you, That if
you have not capacity enough to distinguish between rejecting Errors on the one
side, and adding to the Articles of the Creed on the other, I have a Question
to offer you, which will go near to spoil your Query, and this it is. If you
will needs call our Articles, Additions to the Common Articles of the Christian
Faith; whether it be not somewhat worse to add notorious and dangerous Errors
to the Creed, than to add plain and profitable, and as the case may be,
necessary Truths to it?

Quer. Whether the Reformed Religion may not be divided and sub-divided into
Endless Reformations.

Answ. The Turks have taken much notice of the Divisions of Christians. Do you
therefore go and Answer a Turk putting this Query; Whether the Christian
Religion may not be divided and sub-divided into Endless Religions? And then I
will Answer this wise Query of yours, if you be not from that time able to
Answer it yourself. But if you should have but little concern for Christianity,
yet surely you have a great deal for Popery. Therefore I expect your Answer to
this other Query; Whether the Sense of the Council of Trent may not be divided
and sub-divided into endless Expositions and Representations? Tell me this, and
I also will tell you, whether the Reformed Religion, etc.

Quer. Whether in the matter of the Eucharist, the Argument drawn from our
Senses, be not fallible? The Reason of this Question, is, because the Serpents
deceived our first Parents, by persuading them to believe their own Eyes,
rather than the Word of God. As that, they should eat of the Tree of Knowledge,
because it was fair to the Eye. Now if Mankind should be so deceived by their
Sight, Pray whence should their other Senses deserve more Credit?

Answ. And was not the Fruit of that Tree fair to the Eye? How then did their
Sight deceive our First Parents? Would any one that had but read Genesis 3.4, 5.
say that the Serpent deceived our First Parents, by persuading them to believe
their own Eyes? Be so just to yourself, as to believe your own for once, and
read the words, And the Serpent said unto the Woman, Ye shall not surely die,
For God does know, that in the day that ye eat thereof, then your Eyes shall be
opened; and ye shall be as Gods, knowing Good and Evil. Now I take this to be a
persuading them to believe something which they did not see, and not (as you
say) to believe their own Eyes. And their Credulity as to this unseen Effect,
was that which prevailed with them to their ruin. Remember therefore, if you
please, that our First Parents were deceived, by giving an easy assent to a
confident Boaster, and bold Promiser of Supernatural Effects, and from
expecting more from such Assurances, than what they could have been led to by
the most full Information of their Senses: Remember this, I say, and then apply
it to the Eucharist, as you shall see convenient. Read the Text again, and then
tell me why you say that the Serpent deceived them by persuading them to
believe their own Eyes, rather than the Word of God? and why you give this
Instance of it, as if it were his Argument: That they should eat of the tree of
knowledge, Because it was fair to the eye? The truth is, the Serpent set up his
own glorious Promises against the Threatenings of the Almighty; and in this we
know he has been well imitated. And if he had not wrought more upon them by
their Hopes and Credulity, than by Evidence of Sense (for though they saw that
the Fruit was pleasant to the Eyes, we have no reason to think they would have
tasted it, had they not been deluded with the Expectation of being as Gods) his
Attemps of deceiving might have been as vain as yours are in this Query.

Quer. Whether the Church of England be not Changeable, according to the
various Inclinations of English Parliaments.

Answ. Changeable? as how I pray? for this one word Changeable, splits the
Query into I know not how many Queries, unless you had told us as to what the
Church of England may or may not be Changed, according to the Will of English
Parliaments. For Instance, the Church of England, is at present the Church
Established by Law, and if you ask whether the Church of England, with respect
to Legal Establishment, be not Changeable, according to the various
Inclinations of English Parliaments, including, as I hope you do, the Pleasure
of the Sovereign, then without all doubt English Parliaments may Change the
Church of England, but we hope they will not do it. But if by Changing the
Church of England, you mean, that Parliaments can make the Religion professed
by the Church of England, to become a False Religion, when their Inclinations
are once varied from us, then I tell you, that the Church of England is not
Changeable by English Parliaments, nor by all the Powers upon Earth: For this
Matter is fixed to their hands, and can never be unfixed to the end of the
World. And I do willingly acknowledge, that the Religion of the Church of Rome
is in this respect every whit as Unchangeable as Ours; that is to say, that
Part of it which contradicts Ours, is False to day, and all the Parliaments in
the World cannot make it. True to morrow. If this Answer should offend you, I
pray do not blame me, but thank yourself for putting the Query, which no doubt
pleased you very much. But the Answer, let me tell you, is a good one. We of
this Church depend upon King and Parliament for the Legal Establishment of our
Religion, but not for the Truth of it; the former therefore is Changeable,
because Men are so; but the latter is not so, because God Changes not. Thus we
render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that
are Gods. And it were well, if you would do so too.

Quer. Whether the Spirit of Calvin denying, and that of Luther affirming, a
Corporal Presence of Christ in the Sacrament, be the same Spirit? If not, then
both cannot be of God.

Answ. This again is so ambiguous and deceitful, that one would think you had
learned to frame your Queries, after the pattern of the Famous Apollo's
Answers. Here therefore I must fall to Distinguishing as fast as I can, and
Answer as warily, as if some great Matter depended upon it. In the first place
then, I well remember, that this word Spirit sometimes signifies Doctrine, and
if the meaning of the Question be, whether Calvin's Doctrine against, and
Luther's for a Corporal Presence, be the same? I Answer positively and
resolutely, that they are not the same; and finally I grant, that those Two
contrary Doctrins cannot both be of God. Secondly, By this word Spirit, we do
sometimes understand the Disposition and Temper of a Man's Mind; and then if
the meaning of the Query be, whether Calvin and Luther, one of whom denied, and
the other maintained a Corporal Presence of Christ, etc. whether I say both
these Men were for all this endued with the same qualities that make up the
Character of a good Man, whether they had the same Spirit of Sincerity, and
Piety, and Charity, and the like; then according to this Notion, I Answer, That
I verily believe they bad both the same Spirit, notwithstanding that
difference, and consequently, that the Spirit of the one as well as of the
other, was of God. Thirdly and Lastly, This word Spirit is sometimes used to
signify a Persuasion concerning some Doctrine, proceeding from the immediate
Inspiration whether of the Good or the Evil Spirit. And if the Question goes
upon this meaning, it is an Impertinent Question; for Luther and Calvin did not
pretend to teach Doctrine from Immediate Imspiration, but to Prove their
Doctrine by the Scriptures. But if you only meant to make some advantage to
yourself from these two Men's disagreeing in a Matter which we must confess to
be of Moment; I only desire you to turn the Tables, and to Answer these
Queries: Whether the Spirit of the Jesuits, who say that the Pope is above a
General Council, and the Spirit of the Sorbon, utterly denying it, be the same
Spirit? Whether the Spirit of Thomas Aquinas, affirming that the same Honor is
to be given to the Image, that is due to the Person represented by it, or the
Spirit of the Bishop of Meaux, denying it, be the same Spirit? And not to be
tedious, Whether the Spirit of Innocent III. and his Lateran Council, and of I
know not how many more Popes, and of Cardinal Perron, and many more Cardinals,
affirming that Heretical Kings may and ought to be Deposed, and the Spirit of
our English Representer and those for whom he undertakes, who all deny it, be
the same Spirit. If not, then both cannot be of God.

Quer. Was not John Calvin a most impudent Creature, in assuming to himself the
Office of Reforming the World, being but a Young Man of Twenty five or Twenty
six years of Age, and without all pretense of Miracles, a thing which Christ
himself undertook not under Thirty years of Age?

Answ. I think indeed Geneva may pass for the World, by the same Figure that
the Church of Rome goes for the Catholic Church. When the World groans for a
Reformation, I do not see where lies the Impudence of trying, by good Doctrine
and Example, to Reform that Part of it where one lives, unless it lies in being
Impudently and Bravely Good, which is sometimes necessary to give a check to
Impudence in that which is Bad. If he be a Young Man that takes this upon
himself, he is the more to be commended: And if he can fairly carry the
Reformation beyond his own Country, this is still more commendable; and if he
could Reform the whole World, then I say, for that which you call Impudence,
Generations to come ought to rise up to his Name, and call it Blessed. You
ought not, I tell you to despise John Calvin's Youth, as one of your Great Ones
did Luther's Meanness, who hearing the Auspurg Confession read, said to his
Confident, That these things indeed were True, but it was not to be endured
that a pitiful Monk should Reform the World. But if nothing else will satisfy
you, but it must be Impudence in a Young Man to think of Reforming the place
where he lives, yet at least do not represent him as a most impudent Creature;
for, as I take it, there are a long row of Popes from Formosus downwards, who,
if your own Historians are to be credited, shall compare with John Calvin in
this point, not of Reforming the World, but the other, and shall get the better
of him by much. And amongst these, there is one John XI. Son to Sergius III.
one of his Predecessors, who was something less modest than John Calvin, in as,
much as being yet but a Boy, he took upon himself to be Head of the Catholic
Church, which our John, I dare say, would never have accepted any time of his
life. Indeed, the young Pope was thus far to be excused, that he was put into
the Chair by Merocia, who though she was not Sergius's Wife, was yet John's
Mother. For Donna Olympia was not the first of her Quality, that swayed all at
Rome.

Quer. Whether from the Womb of the Reformation have not issued all those
Slaughters, Rapines, Tumults, Plundering of Churches, Schisms and Civil Wars,
which broke out in the year 1641.

Answ. No truly, for since the Reformation, the Church of England has lent
neither Principles, nor Examples, nor Counsels, nor Arms, nor Men, nor Money to
carry on Rebellions or Rapines. The World saw that she stuck by her Royal
Master to to the last; And if you say, that it was her Interest to do so then,
I hope you will grant that she has at other times given Proof of a higher
Principle; Nor can you without rubbing your Forehead question the strictness of
her Loyalty, who begin (some of you) to laugh at her for it. I hope you will
not say that the Irish Rebellion, which broke the ice for all, those
Slaughters, Rapines, etc. which you mention, to come after it; that that issued
too from the womb of the Reformation. I think this Query had better rest, least
when the Mother of that Offspring is agreed upon, we should be tempted to
inquire who was the Father of it.

Quer. Whether Africa produces more variety of Monsters, than Britain does
Fanatics, where every Man may read and interpret the Scriptures according to
his own Judgment of Discretion.

Answ. I know pretty well what Fanatics Britain has produced, but what variety
of Monsters Africa produces, I cannot well say; the surest way to be satisfied,
is to go thither your self, for Authors are not agreed. But if by Fanatics you
mean False pretenders to Inspiration, you may take your comparison nearer home,
where it is as much as a Man's or Woman's life is worth to have the Scriptures to
read. In short, Britain has Fanatics, but the British Church does what she can
to reclaim them, which she thinks ought nor to be tried by setting up an
Inquisition for some of 'em, and cannot be done by making Saints of others of
'em. You understand, I suppose, and therefore go on.

Quer. Whether Queen Elizabeth born of Ann Bolen, Queen Catharine yet living,
can be thought Legitimate?

Answ. Without all Question she can be thought Legitimate; for I find that I
think so, and I know many who say so, that do not use to say one thing and
think another.

Quer. How admirable was the Wisdom of Henry the Eighth by expelling one Pope
of Rome, to raise up infinite Popes of his own Subjects.

Answ. Not very admirable, I confess, if it were so; for we had even too much
of One Pope of Rome before, as the Complaints, and the Laws of our Ancestors
can well witness. But how did he raise up infinite Popes of his own Subjects?
Were there so many Heads of the Catholic Church raised by him in his own
Dominions? Or did every Body think himself Infallible, when once they depended
upon his Holiness no longer? When you design a witty Query, take care, whilst
you live, that there be some Sense, and a little Truth at the bottom, and in
one Word, that it be not like this, which is a mere Bubble, and turns to
nothing.

Quer. By whose Authority did he Divorce his Virtuous Wife Queen Catharine? His
own or a Foreign? If by his own, why may not other Kings also put away their
Wives at their pleasure? If Mary his Daughter by Queen Catharine was Legimate
Heiress of the Kingdom, then Elizabeth was not, because it was not lawful for
King Henry to have two Wives at once.

Answ. I doubt not but Queen Catharine was a Virtuous Wife; but under favor,
since you will needs be meddling with these Matters, you should have put your
Question either with more honesty, or with more skill; and instead of asking,
By whose Authority he divorced his Virtuous Wife, you should have asked by what
Authority he divorced his Brothers Wife. For there lay the point; and here I
must tell you, that after that Question, whether the Pope had Power to dispense
with that Marriage, had been debated and determined in the Negative by the most
famous Universities of Europe; for you an unskilful Querist to ask by what
Authority the King did, as he did, shows that you have spent your time to
little purpose, and are to be admonished to bestow it better for the future. As
for your other difficulty, how Mary and Elizabeth could be both Legitimate: I
Answer, that the Legitimacy of Elizabeth is plain, supposing the Marriage of
Queen Catharine to King Henry to be void; but yet Mary the Child of that
Marriage was not Illegitimate, because the Marriage was made without Fraud. But
if one or other of them must necessarily be Illegitimate, pray look you to the
consequence, who, I suppose, apprehend some great Matter, to depend upon this
Dispute. For my own part, these kind of Queries seem to be very impertinent,
for if Queen Mary was Illegitimate, our Religion is not one jot the truer for
it, and if she was Legitimate, neither is it the worse. But there is a time to
answer Questions that are none of the wisest.

Quer. If that Religion be Sacred that is established by Law, why did Queen
Elizabeth destroy the Catholic Religion Established by so many Acts of
Parliament?

Answ. It seems then that what you call the Catholic Religion may be
destroyed. And yet these Queries are published with Allowance. Your Superiors
surely can instruct you, that to destroy the Legal Establishment of a Religion
is one thing, and to destroy the Religion is another. But they saw that if you
had expressed the former, the Query had looked so ridiculously, that it had
been a shame to let it go. For all the Sacredness that Human Law can give to a
Religion, is a legal Sacredness, and no more, or if you please, a legal
Establishment. And so this is the English of your Quaere. If that Religion has
a legal Establishment, that is established by Law, why did the Queen destroy the
legal Establishment of the Catholic Religion, which was of estalibshed by so
many Laws? In my opinion it had been much better to Query thus like a plain
man; If the Catholic Religion was established by so many Laws, why did Queen
Elizabeth unestablish it by Law again. And now having brought your Query to
this Form: I Answer, that yours is not the Catholic Religion, and it was pity
that it should have that Sacredness which the Law gave it, because it had no
Sacredness of its own to deserve it; and therefore it was a very good Law that
took away the other Sacredness from it. If you think this Answer not to be full
enough, you may pick out somerhing more in Answ. to Sect. 20. whither I refer
you.

Quer. Queen Elizabeth expelled fourteen Catholic Bishops from their Sees, for
refusing the Oath of Supremacy. But how could they swear her to be Head or
Supreme Governor of the Church, when they could not swear she was Head of this
Kingdom?

Answ. I think truly Fourteen Bishops were deprived in the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth's Reign, and that for not taking the Oath of Supremacy. But take this
along with you too, that most of these Bishops, if not All, had taken the very
same Oath before, and some of 'em assisted at the framing of it. So that one
would think, that their refusing to take the same Oath under Elizabeth, was as
much as to deny her to be Head of the Kingdom, as you say; which all modest Men
must grant to have been a sufficient cause for their Deprivation. But yet as
tender as Princes are of their Titles, it is to be remembered to her immortal
Credit, that she did not serve them as her Predecessor did Cranmer, Latimer,
Ridley and Hooper, but used them in all other respects with great gentleness.
What their true reasons were for refusing the Oath of Supremacy, I shall not go
about to Divine. But as for you, who will needs have it to be this, in part at
least; that they could not swear she was Head of the Kingdom: Thus far you are
to be commended, that you have chosen a more modest expression of your Malice,
than that impudent Writer did, who told us the other day, that she was a known
Bastard. But in the Calumny, I perceive, you are both agreed: And hark ye,
Gentlemen, I do in behalf of the dead Queen, and of that Age, which universally
acknowledge her Title, defy you both to make good your teproach, and fix the
Title of Calumniators upon you both, if you neither can justify it, nor will
publicly retract it.

Quer. Did not Cranmer, and his Reforming Associates steal their Liturgy out of
the Roman Missal, Ritual and Breviary.

Answ. Or rather did not you steal this Query from the Dissenters? Sure I am,
that hitherto it has been theirs, saving only the rudeness of the expression,
which you have added to it. Go to them, and they can furnish you with an
abundant Answer to this terrible Objection. But if something must be said here;
our Liturgy, if it must be stolen, looks as if it were stolen not out of your
Roman, but the Old Gallican Missal, which once was ours, and therefore it was
not stolen, but now every Body has his own again. But if we had taken your
Roman Missal, Ritual and Breviary only, and compiled our Liturgy out of them,
yet we took nothing of your peculiar Goods from them, but only what every part
of the Catholic Church has as much right to, as your selves; and as for that
which is peculiarly and properly your own there, we have left it entirely to
you, and much good may it do you.

Quer. Are not Protestants bound by their Dath de Supremacy to obey the King as
Supreme Governor, as well in all spiritual or Ecclesiastical Things or Causes,
as Temporal? What mean they by these words, As well in all Spiritual as
Temporal Things or Causes, etc. But that Protestants are sworn to yield to the
King all manner of Obedience, both Civil and Religious? Are they not obliged
therefore according to the Oath to become Catholics with a Catholic King,
Calvinists with a Calvinist King, Arians with an Arian? I say, according to
this Oath, because the Kings Majesty is the only Supreme Governor, (under
Christ) as well in all Spiritual as Temporal Causes: which words confess in the
King a Spiritual as well as Civil Jurisdiction. But whence does his Spiritual
Jurisdiction appear without the Power of the Keys?

Answ. You have been as often told, what we mean by these words, As well in all
Spiritual as Temporal Things or Causes, as you have asked the Question; but you
would never take notice of the Answer, nor make any exception to it; and yet
it is an even wager, that the next set of Queries, which you intend to astonish
us with, brings this over again. But once more you are desired to take notice
of the meaning of our Church, where it is most plainly expressed, viz. in Artic.
37. Title, Of Civil Magistrates. The Kings Majesty has the chief Power in the
Realm of England, and other his Dominions, unto whom the chief Government of
all Estates of the Realm, whether they be Ecclesiastical or Civil in all Causes
does appertain, and is not, nor ought to be subject to any foreign
Jurisdiction. Where we attribute to the King's Majesty the chief Government, by
which Titles we understand the Minds of some standerous folks to be offended,
we give not to our Princes the ministering either of Gods Word, or of the
Sacraments, the which thing the Injunctions set forth by Elizabeth our Queen,
do most plainly testisie, but that only Prerogative which we see to have been
given always to all Godly Princes in Holy Scripture by God himself, that is,
that they should Rule all Estates and Degrees committed to their charge by God,
whether they be Ecclesiastical or Temporal, and restrain with the Civil Sword
the stubborn and Evil Doers. You see then our Church acknowledges the King to
be Supreme Governor in all Causes, and over all Persons Ecclesiastical, viz.
that no Quality in the Church, nor cause of the Church exempts a Subject from
the Secular Laws, and the Sword of Justice; which may be very true, as it
undoubtedly is, and yet all manner of Obedience in Religious Matters shall not
presently become due to the King. For when Sovereigns require their Subjects to
do things contrary to true Religion, if their Subjects give but one manner of
Obedience to their Laws, which goes with us under the name of Passive
Obedience, it saves at once their acknowledgment of the Sovereigns Supremacy
over them, and Gods Supremacy over All. So that we are not obliged by our Oath
to become Calvinists with a Calvinist King, nor Arians with an Arian King, nor
Roman Catholics with such a King; nor, in a word, to be of the Kings Religion,
but to submit to his Authority, let his Religion be what it will. In short, let
the Persons or the Causes be what they will, out Church acknowledges the King
to be Supreme Governor in his Dominions, he only having the Civil Sword. But
now as for you, that make the Pope the Head of the Catholic Church, and Union
to him necessary to your being a Member of it, who laugh at us for that
dependence which our Ecclesiastics have upon the King, and depend in effect
for all the benefits of Christianity, upon your Ecclesiastical Union to the
Pope, which is something more than the Article recognizes of our Sovereigns;
you, I say, would do well to tell us how you can avoid being Arians with a Pope
Liberius, or Monothelites with a Pope Honorius, or No Image-Worshippers with a
Pope Gregory I. or Image-Worshippers with a Pope Adrian I.

Quer. You will say, the King is to be Obeyed, so far as we may by the Laws of
God, and the Kingdom. Be it so, then it follows, that the King is not Supreme
Governor under Christ, but the Laws of God and the Kingdom.

Answ. To this silly Stuff, I oppose a little plain Sense. That the Laws of the
Kingdom are not to be opposed to the Supremacy of the King, whose Laws they
are. That the King is our Supreme Governor under God, but that we know of no
Supreme Governor that is to be Obeyed absolutely, without any Limitation
whatsoever, but God himself.

Quer. What if Controversies rise between the King and his Subjects about the
True Sense of Scripture, Who shall be Judge? The Private Spirit or not? Hence,
If am not mistaken, came the Rise of our late Civil Wars.

Answ. I dare say you are the first that ever found out the want of a Judge
betwixt King and People, to be the Rise of the late Civil Wars. It Is pity the
Observation should be lost, for it is a notable one, and would mend the History
of those Times not a little. But pray who should that Judge be, to determine
the True Sense of Scripture between the King and his Subjects? The Pope without
doubt. And so we are gotten into the old Circle again. For if they must take
the Judgment of the Pope at a venture, then any Man may be agreed upon to be
the Judge, and he will serve the turn as well as the Pope: But if God has made
the Pope Judge, that indeed is another case. But how shall we know it? By the
Scripture? Who then must be Judge of the True Sense of Scripture, with
reference to the Question? The Pope says it is a plain case on his side. But it
may be, neither the King says it, nor his Subjects. Who therefore must be the
Judge between the King and the Pope, or between his Subjects and the Pope? Not
the private Spirit, for the World, for thence come Wars. So that the Pope must
be Judge, because the Scripture says so, and the Scripture says so, because the
Pope must Judge. Now if instead of Pope you put in Council, you will find the
Circle go as round with one, as the other. Nor do I see how you can avoid it, but
by running out into the long line, of a Judge upon a Judge, without end, which
I gave you some warning of before. To Conclude, When you have tired yourselves
with these frivolous Expedients for the Ending of Controversies, do what you
can, you will find it best to come to that which you disgrace under the Name of
a Private Spirit; the Good use whereof is that which must do the business. Men
must be Honest, and hearken to Instruction, and love Truth, and remember that
the Day of Judgment is coming: This you cannot deny to be the Duty of All. And
if you and every Body else could be brought to it, then about plain Things
there would be no Controversy at all; and those about Points that are indeed
difficult, might do a great deal of Good, but would be sure to do no Hurt at
all, either to the Church, or to the World.

Quer. Why did so many Noble Men under Edward VI. and Queen Elizabeth, so
readily Embrace the Reformation? Was It for Conscience sake, or the Lucre
Church Lands?

Answ. The Noblemen under those Princes, were generally for Wisdom, Fortitude
and Manners, a Glory to their Age and Nation: But now they are dead and gone,
and it will be time enough to know the Secret into which you are inquisitive,
when the Day of Judgment comes; and till then I can be contentedly Ignorant,
whether it be for Conscience sake, or the Lucre of Church Lands, that you wrote
these Queries.

Quer. Why do Englishmen (so desirous of Novelties) hate Popery? Perhaps
because Popery is no Novelty?

Answ. If you are an Englisman, methinks it is no good sign of the Religion you
are of, that it has inspired you with the scorn and hatred of your own
Countrymen to that degree, as to spend a reproach upon them, which all the
World sees there is not the least appearance of Cause for. Friend, you took no
little care to hedge in this Abuse, when you were fain to turn Answerer to your
own Query, to compass it to your mind. But as your Anger had been less, so your
Wit had been more, to have let alone both Question and Answer, for there is
that in them to clear us from your Reproach. You say we hate Popery, because
it is no Novelty: And yet neither we, nor our Fathers, nor our Grandfathers,
have professed or practiced Popery, and therefore in spite of your heart,
Popery must be a Novelty to us; who consequently, if we may be Judged of by
this Instance, are not so desirous of Novelties. But if you had given us leave
to Answer your Question, Why we are not in love with Popery? I should have
Answered to this purpose, That it is not so far a Novelty neither, but though we
are Strangers to the Profession of it, yet we have so true an Idea of the
Doctrines and Practices of your Church, that yourselves are not able to deceive
us into another.

Quer. The Church of England is either Fallible or Infallible; it Fallible (as
is confessed by all) then is she not sounded upon a Rock, because she may deceive
and be deceived.

Answ. After all the exquisite Discourses that have been published upon this
Subject: It is -- (what shall I call it?) to think that such a pitiful Argument
as this, is worth a Thought. Try, if you please, this knotty piece of work upon
your own dear self, for no other Answer you shall have from me. You, Sir, are
either Fallible or Infallible; if Fallible (as I humbly conceive you are) then
you are not founded upon a Rock, because you may deceive and be deceived. But
this Argument thus turned upon yourself, is, now I look upon it again, a
monstrous dull one I confess; and that for proving you not to be built upon a
Rock, because you may be deceived, when it is so notorious, that thou art all
over actually deceived, as thy lamentable Papet shows thee to be. There is
indeed a little life in that other part of the Argument, that you may deceive,
for perhaps that is not very much more than possible; so that I think this
little pains I have taken, might have been spared, for I dare say there are
very few whom You and your Queries will be able to deceive.

Quer. Whether Cardinal Wolsey did wisely by Demolishing Monasteries to Found
Colleges? The reason of this doubt, is, because the Tree of Knowledge was not
the Tree of Life.

Answ. So, so, Monasteries were the Tree of Life, and Colleges are the Tree of
Knowledge. Very neat and witty I promise you: Hence forward we shall not want a
Text to prove that Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion. If Erasmus had not
happened upon something like this, in his Emcomium Moriae, by my consent it
should have been written upon your Tombstone; Here lies the Author of this
Query, Whether Cardinal Wolsey, etc. But what have we to do with Cardinal
Wolsey? Or rather, What have you to do to say any thing against him? Was it a
small matter for you to trample upon the Ashes of Cranmer, that nothing will
now serve you but to pirk over Wolsey's too? I have taken your size, Sir, and
must needs put you in mind, that in you it is want of Manners, almost to Talk of
Archbishops and Cardinals; when you but Think of such Great Men as Wolsey and
Cranmer, the one a Cadinal of the Roman Church, the other an Archbishop of
Canterbury, Men indeed of different Religions, but both of extraordinary
Abilities, as well as high Station: I say, when you but hear them, or such as
they mentioned, you should presently reflect upon your own little self, and not
dare to open your Mouth, till Persons of much meaner Rank come into Discourse.

Quer. Is there not wanting in the Church of England a more Correct Translation
of the Bible?

Answ. I warrant, you expect that I should say I or No to this Query presently.
But in such a case a wise and honest Man must have the putting of the Question.
In few words, I do by no means deny that the English Translation can be more
Correct than it is: After the exactest care, it is likely there will be some
defect in so great a Work. But this we say, that we need not a better
Translation than it is, and in particular, that for the Skill and Fidelity that
is shown in it, we will compare at any time with the Vulgar Latin. And
therefore whereas you add,

Quer. That many material Errors are found in our present English Bible,
tending to Schism and Liberty of the Flesh.

Answ. I Answer, That you are very much mistaken to say so, which I will first
show against your Instances, and then leave the Reader to say what other Name
your importunity in this place deserves.

The First Instance you refer to, is Gal. 5.17. For the Flesh lusts against
the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh, and these are contrary one to the
other, so that ye cannot do the things that ye would. Now I suppose the
material Error in this Translation, lies in these words, so that ye cannot do,
which you would say ought to have been, so that ye do not. (...).
To this I Answer, That the words will bear both Versions, though I confess the
latter seems to me to be more Grammatical. The Reason, I conceive, why our
Translators chose the former, was, that the following Verse seems to imply that
in this Verse the Apostle speaks of those that are led by the Flesh; who in
that state cannot do the things which their Conscience prompts them to. Now
this I say is so far from being a material Error, tending to Liberty of the
Flesh, that it is no Error at all; unless St. Paul was mistaken when he said,
The carnal mind is enmity against God, for it is not subject to the Law of God,
neither indeed can be. So then they that are in the Flesh, cannot please God,
Romans 8.7, 8.

The next is, Dan. 4.24. where the Prophet speaks thus to King Nebuchadnezzar;
Quamobrem Rex consilium meum placeat tibi, and peccata tua Elecmosynis redime
and Iniquitates tuas misericordiis Pauperum. Which Text the present English
Translation thus renders vitiously enough; Wherefore, O King, break off thy
Sins by righteousness, and thine Iniquities by showing Mercy to the Poor.
Whereas it ought to have been translated, Redeem thy Sins by Almsdeeds, and
thine Iniquities by showing Mercy to the Poor.

But suppose it should have been translated Redeem, rather than Break off;
Where is the material Error? Where is the tendency to Schism, or liberty of the
Flesh? Surely if Righteousness and Almsdeeds will Redeem Sins, they are not
further from doing it, by Breaking them off. I should rather think that our
Translation, if we consider the difference, presses the necessity of Universal
Reformation something more than the other, because it will not suffer a Man to
fancy that he may keep some of his Sins now he knows how to redeem them, viz.
by Almsdeeds, and showing Mercy to the Poor; but teaches him that he has no
other way to escape, but by breaking off his former sins, and doing all the
good things that are contrary to the evils he has done; which doubtless was the
meaning of Daniel's Exhortation. And now after all, it was pitifully done of
you to Examine our Translation by your Vulgar Latin, the Authority whereof in
these Critical Disputes, you know we deny. And it was done according to your
Wisdom too, for the truth of the Matter is, that our Translation is right, and
yours is wrong: for though the Caldee word signifies to Redeem, when it is
applied to Persons, (...)
as Psalm. 136.4. Thou have redeemed us; yet when Things are spoken of, it
signifies to divide, or to break them off. So it is taken Gen 27.40. Thou shall
break his yoke from of thy neck. and Exodus 32.2, 24. and elsewhere In a Word,
The Vulgar Interpreter was so far from showing his Skill here, that he
blunder'd manifestly; and it must be a very favorable Construction of his
Translation, that can secure it from the Charge of False Doctrine, viz. That a
Man can Redeem himself from the Justice of God.

Again, You say, How are St. Paul's Words to the Corinthians mis-render'd, 1
Cor. 7.9. Quod si non se continent nubant. But if they cannot contain, let them
marry; where this Word ( cannot) not being found in the Greek, was devised in
Favor of the Flesh.

That is to say, in Favor of Marriage. Now this Objection does but show your
want of Skill, and the little honesty of those that helped you to it; for
assure yourself, that although there is not a distinct Word in the Greek for
cannot, yet the force of it is discernible enough to those that understand
these things, (...).
in that one Greek word, of which our Translators made two English ones; and
were obliged so to do, because we have not one that expresses it sufficiently.
It signifies to have the Command or Power over ones self, which your Se
continere.
Latin does better express, than if we had rendered your Latin word for word;
If they do not contain themselves. For, not to contain, does in our Language
and way of speaking, fall short even of the Latin Phrase, and much more of the
Greek, and therefore to make True Translation, it was needful to say cannot
contain. And if the Force of the Word did not lead your Masters to this
Construction, yet at least the scope of the place might have done it. For a
very little consideration had been sufficient to have seen, that the Apostle
did not mean to give this counsel of Marrying to those only that had been
guilty of actual Incontinence, but to those also that could not due their own
desires. And that he speaks here, of a Power, that all have not, is evident
also from verse. 7. For I would that all men were even as I my self; but every
one has his proper Gift of God, one after this manner, and another after that.
The Truth is, if there be a defect in any part of our Translation of these
passages, it is in verse. 5. where the Translators put Incontinency to answer the
Greek word, (...).
for as Dr. Hammond has observed the English there does not reach the Original,
so well as the English [ cannot contain] (which you have learned to Cavil at)
reaches it here. But now, Sir, Why must this word [ cannot] be said to be
devised by us in favor of the Flesh? For neither was it devised; nor, if it
were, does the sense which it gives the Place, provide chiefly for Marriage,
but rather by that for the avoiding of heinous Sin, as any one, I think, might
see, unless he believes Fornication to be more tolerable in sorce people than
Matrimony. The end of St. Paul's counsel in this place, is visibly the same
with that of his advice, verse. 5. for which he gives this Reason, That Satan
tempt you not, (...), which I would thus Paraphrase, By the unruliness of your
desires. Get your Masters to do it better; but mark what I say, if this be
well, as I am reasonably assured it is; it will be in vain any longer to cavil
at the Translation of the place under debate. And now let us go on.

Likewise the words of Christ, Matthew. 19.11. are corrupted in favor of the
Flesh, Non omnes capiunt verbum istud sed quibus datum est. All men ( cannot)
receive this saying, but such to whom it is given. It ought to be; All Men do
not receive this saying.

But notwithstanding your vulgar Latin, our Translation is already, as it ought
to be: For the Greek word (...) Capax sum.
does not only signify to receive, but as frequently to be capable of
receiving. And there is this reason for translating it so in this place,
because in the very next verse our Savior speaking of the same Matter,
expressly says, He that is able to receive it, let him receive it. Now I should
think that this at least implies that some cannot receive it; and yet as
forward a Man as you are, I suppose you will hardly say, our Savior put in the
word [ (...).
Able] in favor of the Flesh.

Also the words of Job, chap. 7. and many other Texts, especially, Exodus 20.4.
in hatred of the Picture of our Savior, Non facies tibi sculptile: which word
sculptile is by the Seventy Interpreters Translated Idol, as indeed it ought to
be, because God did not forbid Images but Idols.

As for Job 7.1. it is rendered without the least liberty of Paraphrase, and
word for word, excepting only the addition of the necessary expletives to
express an Interrogation in English. But what do I trouble my self to find out
some color of a Fault, when you set me to seek one? The place concerns no
manner of Controvssie between us. And I am apt to think that you borrowed it
out of a Book that was false printed, and then had not judgment enough to
correct it.

At last we have, it seems, corrupted, Exodus 20.4. by putting the words Graven
Image, in the Second Commandment, for is not that it you would have? And pray
why should we not do so, since not only the Hebrew, (...)
but even your own Vulgar has the same; which you here confess to be, Non
facies tibi sculptile. For what is a Graven Thing here, but a Graven Image? Oh,
but this word Sculptile is by the Seventy Interpreters translated Idol. Thou
have a lucky Brain: Belike then, the Seventy had the Vurgar Latin before them,
and followed it in this place. To what purpose is it to spend time upon such
stuff as this? Look, Sir, this is the short of the Business, the Septuagints
Translation is Good, and the Vulgar Translation is Good; and that because it
will hold good to the Worlds end, that Graven Images, or any likenesses
whatever, that are worshipped, are Idols, not excepting the Picture of our
Savior, if we had it; which I do not say, in hatred of the Picture of our
Savior, unless I must needs hate every thing which I do not worship. But I
know no necessity of that; for I am far enough from worshipping your own self,
and yet I cannot find in my heart to hate you: But I wish you well, and shall
therefore give you a little good advice.

Do not for the future, as I hinted to you before, meddle with Kings or Queens,
Cardinals, Archbihops, or Noblemen, for they are Persons too high for you; nor
with the Septuagint, or the comparing of Originals and Translations, as I add
now; for these are things too high for you too. And for the same Reason, meddle
no more between Churches, trouble your Head no more about Questions, relating
to Holy Orders, Mission, Succession, and the Power of Reformation; Give not
your self to Controversies, and, above all things, write no more Queries. And
if this distemper be once cured, I Will not despair, but that your Ingenuity may
direct you to an Employment more suitable to your capacity, so that you may be
able to give a tolerable Account of the Time.

Farewell.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 14. line 3. for using, read use^^. P. 15. l.8. f. appears, r. approves.
P. 45. l. 2. f. due, r. sub^^^ P. 47. l. last, f. the, r. your.

Books lately Printed for James Adamson.
I. Mr. Chillingworth's Book, called [ The Religion of Protestants a safe way
to Salvation] made more generally useful by omitting Personal Contests, but
inserting whatsoever concerns the common Cause of Protestants, or defends the
Church of England, with an exact Table of Contents; and an Addition of some
genuine Pieces of Mr. Chillingworth's never before printed, viz. against the
Infallibility of the Roman Church, Transubstantiation, Tradition, etc. And an
Account of what moved the Author to turn Papist, with his Confutation of the
said Morives, Quarto.

II. Two Discourses of Purgatory, and Prayers for the Dead, in Quarto.

III. The Present State of the Controversy, between the Church of England, and
the Church of Rome: Or an Account (...) the Books written on both sides, in a
Letter to a ^^end, in Quarto.

IV. A Treatise of the Celibacy of the Clergy, wherein its Rise and Progress
are Historically considered, in Quarto.

V. Clementis Epistolae duae ad Corinthos. Interpretibus Patricio, J^^lio,
Gothifredo, Vandelino and Joh. Bapt. Cotele^io. Recensuit and notarum
spicilegium adjecil Paulus (...) ^^esius, Bibliothecae Lambethanae curator
Accedit T^^ Brunonici Windsoriensis discertatio de Therapeutis Philonis. His
subnexae sunt Epistolae aliquot singulares, vel nunc primum editae, vel non ita
facile obviae, in Quato.

VI. The Travels of Monsieur de Thevenot into the Levant in Three Parts, viz.
1. Into Turkey, 2. Persia, 3. The East Indies, in Folio.


