

-- Resoluta catenis
Incedit Virgo, pretiumque and causa laboris.
Ovid. Metam* l. 4* A BRIEF VIEW and SURVEY OF THE Dangerous and pernicious
ERRORS TO CHURCH and STATE, In Mr. HOBBES'S BOOK, Entitled LEVIATHAN.

By EDWARD Earl of Clarendon.

The second Impression.



OXON: Printed at the THEATER. 1676.

IMPRIMATUR

S.r. Ed^: Northey Knight ^her Majest^es Attorney General



RAD. BATHVRST Vice-Can. Oxon.
July 1. 1676
TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY
May it please Your Majesty,
IT is one of the false and evil Doctrines which Mr. Hobbes has published in
his Leviathan, (p. 114.) That a banished Subject, during the Banishment, is not
a Subject. And (page 165.) that a banished man is a lawful Enemy of the
Commonwealth that banished him, as being no more a member of the same. I thank
God, from the time that I found my self under the insupportable burden of Your
Majesty's displeasure, and under the in famous brand of Banishment, I have not
thought my self one minute absolved in the least degree from the obligation of
the strictest duty to your Person, and of the highest gratitude that the most
obliged Servant can stand bound in, or from the affection that a true and
faithful Englishman still ow's and must still pay to his Country. And as I have
every day since prayed for the safety of your Person, and he prosperity of your
Affairs, with the same devotion and integrity as for the salvation of my own
Soul; so I have exercised my thoughts in nothing so much, as how to spend my
time in doing somewhat that may prove for Your Majesty's Service and Honor. And
therefore as soon as I had finished (as far as I am able, without the supply of
those Memorials and Records which are fit to be enquired into) a work at least
recommended, if not enjoined, to me by your Blessed Father, and approved, and
in some degree perused by Your Majesty, (which I hope will be to the Honor of
His Majesty's memory, and your own magnanimous Sufferings) I could not think of
any thing in my power to perform of more importance to your Majesty's service,
then to answer Mr. Hobbes's Leviathan, and confute the doctrine therein
contained, so pernicious to the Sovereign Power of Kings, and destructive to
the affection and allegiance of Subjects; notwithstanding which, by the
protection the Author has from the Act of Indemnity, and I know not what other
connivance, it is manifest enough, that many odious Opinions, the seed whereof
was first sowed in that Book, have bin since propagated, to the extreme scandal
of the Government in Church and State. I have often heretofore, when I had
liberty for that presumtion, advertised Your Majesty, of the wickedness of very
many of the Principles upon which that whole Book is supported, and was not
without some hope of prevailing with Your Majesty to give your Self the
leisure, and the trouble, to peruse and examine some parts of it, in confidence
that they would no sooner be read, then detested by you; whereas the frequent
reciting of loose and disjointed Sentences, and bold Inferences, for the
novelty and pleasantness of the Expressions, the reputation of the Gentleman
for parts and Learning, with his confidence in Conversation, and especially the
humor and inclination of the Time to all kind of Paradoxes, have too much
prevailed with many of great Wit and Faculties, without reading the context, or
observation of the consequences, to believe his Propositions to be more
innocent, or less mischievous, then upon a more deliberate perusal they will
find them to be; and the love of his person and company, have rendered the
iniquity of his Principles less discernible. Mr. Hobbes consulted too few
Authors, and made use of too few Books; the benefit of which my present
condition has also deprived me of; although the want which I complain most of, is
of Friends to examine and control, upon the reading any impropriety or
indecency in my Expressions, or defect of vigor in my Ratiocination; toward
the weighing whereof I have had little contribution. However, I presume to
think, that the antidote, how weak spirited soever, is seasonable to be
administered, to expel or allay the poison that is still working very furiously.
And if I know any thing of the constitution of the Government of England, and
of the nature and temper of that faithful Nation, the publishing of his poor
Discourse may be of some use and service to your Majesty; that all the World
may know, how much you abhor all those extravagant and absurd Privileges, which
no Christian Prince ever enjoied or affected. The consideration of this only,
has disposed me to expose my self to the license of the Tongues and Pens of
all those, who will never be without inclinations rather to insult upon my
Fortune, and to reproach my Person, then to pity my Weakness, or rectify my
Understanding. If the prefixing your Majesty's Name before it, as if you would
countenance so disgraced and degraded a Person, or give any Protection to a
Work of which he is the Author, does not find your Majesty's approbation; I
have appointed that presumtion to be declined, being steadfastly resolved, by
Gods Blessing, never to displease You whilst I live, or after I am dead; and
retaining still a hope, with some confidence (which sustains my weak decayed
Spirits) that your Majesty will at some time call to your remembrance, my long
and incorrupted Fidelity to your Person, and your Service: and that tho I am
for the present deprived of that most valued and precious Relation, your
Majesty will not be offended, that I assume the title of being

YOUR MAJESTY'S Most faithful and obedient Subject, and one of the oldest
Servants that is now living, to your Father and your Self, Clarendon.
Moulins, May 10. 1673.
A Survey of Mr. Hobbes his Leviathan.
The INTRODUCTION.
I HAVE always thought it a great excess in those who take upon them to answer
other Men's Writings, to hold themselves obliged to find fault with every thing
that they say, and to answer every Clause, Period, and Proposition which he, to
whom they have made themselves an Adversary, has laid down; by which, besides
the voluminousness that it produces, which in it self is grievous to any
Reader, they cannot but be guilty of many impertinences, and expose themselves
to the just censures of others, and to the advantage of their Antagonists;
since there are few Books which do not contain many things which are true, and
cannot, or need not be contradicted. And considering withal, that those Books
have in all times don most mischief, and scattered abroad the most pernicious
errors, in which the Authors, by the Ornament of their Style, and the
pleasantness of their method, and subtilty of their Wit, have from specious
Premises, drawn their unskilful and unwary Readers into unwarrantable Opinions
and Conclusions, being intoxicated with terms and Allegorical expressions,
which puzzel their understandings, and lead them into perplexities, from whence
they cannot disentangle themselves; I have proposed to my self, to make some
Animad-versions upon such particulars, as may in my judgment produce much
mischief in the World; in a Book of great Name, and which is entertained and
celebrated (at least enough) in the World; a Book which contains in it good
Learning of all kinds, politely extracted, and very wittily and cunningly
disgested, in a very commendable method, and in a vigorous and pleasant Style:
which has prevailed over too many, to swallow many new Tenets as Maxims
without chewing; which manner of diet for the indisgestion Mr. Hobbes himself
does much dislike. The thorough novelty (to which the present Age, if ever any,
is too much inclined) of the work, receives great credit and authority from the
known Name of the Author, a Man of excellent parts, of great wit, some reading,
and somewhat more thinking; One who has spent many years in foreign parts, and
observation; understands the Learned as well as modern Languages, has long had
the reputation of a great Philosopher and Mathematician, and in his Age has
had conversation with very many worthy and extraordinary Men, to which, it may
be, if he had bin more indulgent in the more vigorous part of his life, it
might have had a greater influence upon the temper of his mind, whereas age
seldom submits to those questions, enquiries, and contradictions, which the
Laws and liberty of Conversation require: and it has bin always a lamentation
amongst Mr. Hobbes his Friends, that he spent too much time in thinking, and
too little in ex^^^ising those thoughts in the company of other Men of the
same, or of as good faculties; for want whereof his natural constitution, with
age, contracted such a morosity, that doubting and contradicting Men were never
grateful to him. In a word, Mr. Hobbes is one of the most ancient acquaintance
I have in the World, and of whom I have always had a great esteem, as a Man
who besides his eminent parts of Learning and Knowledge, hah bin always looked
upon as a Man of Probity, and a life free from scandal; and it may be there are
few Men now alive, who have bin longer known to him then I have bin in a fair
and friendly conversation and sociableness; and I had the honor to introduce
those, in whose perfections he seemed to take much delight, and whose memory he
seems most to extol, first into his acquaintance. In all which respects, both
of the Author and the work, it cannot reasonably be imagined, that any vanity
has transported me, who know my self so incompetent for the full disquisition
of this whole work, which contains in it many parts of Knowledge and Learning,
in which I am not conversant; and also the disadvantage, that so many years
have passed since the publication of this Book, without any thing like an
answer to the most mischievous parts of it, as to Civil Government; at least I
had seen none such, till after I had finished this discourse, which was a^
Montpelier in the month of April, One thousand six hundred and seventy, where
I wanted many of those Books which had bin necessary to have bin carefully
consulted and perused, if I had proposed to my self to have answered many of
those Scholastic Points, which seem to me enough exposed to just cen^ure and
reproach, and which I did suppose some University Men would have taken occasion
from, to have vindicated those venerable Nurseries from that vice and
ignorance, his superciliousness has thought fit to asperse them with. I do
confess since that time I have read several Answers and Reflections, made by
Learned Men of both the Universities, in English and in Latin upon his
Leviathan, or his other works published before and after; which several Answers
(though they have very pregnantly discovered many gross errors, and grosser
over-sights in those parts of Science in which Mr. Hobbes would be thought to
excel, which are like to put him more out of countenance then any thing I can
urge against him, by how much he values himself more upon being thought a good
Philosopher, and a good Geometrician, then a modest Man, or a good Christian)
have not so far discouraged me, as to cause me, either to believe what I had
thought of and prepared before, to be the less pertinent to be communicated, or
at all to enlarge, or contract my former conceptions (though probably many
things which I offer are more vigorously urged, and expressed in some of the
other Answers. Notwithstanding all which, his Person is by many received with
respect, and his Books continue still to be esteemed as well abroad as at home:
which might very well have prevail^d, with those before (...) Arguments, to
have (...) pretending to see farther into them then other Men had don, and to
discover a malignity undiscerned that should make them odious. But then how
prevalent soever these motives were with me; when I reflected upon the most
mischievous Principles, and most destructive to the Peace both of Church and
Sta^e, which are scattered though (...) that Book of his Leviathan, (which I
only take upon me to discover) and the unhappy impression they have made in the
minds of too many; I thought my self the more obliged, and not the less
comp^tent for those animadversions, by the part I had acted for many years in
the public Administration of Justice, and in the Policy of the Kingdom. And the
leisure to which God has condemned me, seems an invitation and obligation upon
me, to give a testimony to the World, that my duty and affection for my King
and Country, is not less then it has ever bin, when it was better interpreted,
by giving warning to both, of the danger they are in, by the seditious
Principles of this Books, that they may in time provide for their Security by
their abolishing and extirpating those, and the like excesses. And as it could
not reasonably be expected, that such a Book would be answered in the time when
it was published, which had bin to have disputed with a Man that commanded
thirty Legions, (for Cromwell had bin obliged to have supported him, who
defended his Usurpation;) so afterward men thought it would be too much ill
nature to call men in question for what they had said in ill times, and for
saying which they had a plenary Indulgence and Absolution. And I am still of
opinion, that even of those who have read his Book, and not frequented his
Company, there are many, who being delighted with some new notions, and the
pleasant and clear Style throughout the Book, have not taken notice of those
downright Conclusions, which overthrow or undermine all those Principles of
Government, which have preserved the Peace of this Kingdom through so many
Ages, even from the time of its first Institution; or restored it to Peace,
when it had at some times bin interrupted: and much less of those odious
insinuations, and perverting some Texts of Scripture, which do dishonor, and
would destroy the very Essence of the Religion of Christ. And when I called to
mind the good acquaintance that had bin between us, and what I had said to many
who I knew had informed him of it, and which indeed I had sent to himself upon
the first publishing of his Leviathan, I thought my self eve^ bound to give him
some satisfaction why I had entertained so evil an opinion of his Book.

When the Prince went first to Paris from Iersey, and My Lords Capel and Hopton
stayed in Iersey together with my self, I heard shortly after, that Mr. Hobbes
who was then at Paris, had printed his Book De Cive there. I writ to Dr.
Earls, who was then the Princes Chaplain, and his Tutor, to remember me kindly
to Mr. Hobbes with whom I was well acquainted, and to desire him to send me his
Book De Cive, by the same token that Sid. Godolphin (who had bin killed in the
late War) had left him a Legacy of two hundred pounds. The Book was immediately
sent to me by Mr. Hobbes, with a desire that I would tell him, whether I was
sure that there was such a Legacy, and how he might take notice of it to
receive it. I sent him word that he might depend upon it for a truth, and that
I believed that if he found some way secretly (to the end there might be no
public notice of it in regard of the Parliament) to demand it of his Brother
Francis Godolphin, (who in truth had told me of it) he would pay it. This
information was the ground of the Dedication of this Book to him, whom Mr.
Hobbes had never seen.

When I went some few years after from Holland with the King (after the Murder
of his Father) to Paris, from whence I went shortly his Majesty's Ambassador
into Spain, Mr. Hobbes visited me, and told me that Mr. Godolphin confessed the
Legacy, and had paid him one hundred pounds, and promised to pay the other in a
short time; for all which he thanked me, and said he owed it to me, for he had
never otherwise known of it. When I returned from Spain by Paris he frequently
came to me, and told me his Book (which he would call Leviathan) was then
Printing in England, and that he received every week a Sheet to correct, of
which he showed me one or two Sheets, and thought it would be finished within
little more then a month; and showed me the Epistle to Mr. Godolphin which he
meant to set before it, and read it to me, and concluded, that he knew when I
read his Book I would not like it, and thereupon mentioned some of his
Conclusions; upon which I asked him, why he would publish such doctrine: to
which, after a discourse between jest and earnest upon the Subject, he said,
The truth is, I have a mind to go home.

Within a very short time after I came into Flanders, which was not much more
then a month from the time that Mr. Hobbes had conferred with me, Leviathan
was sent to me from London; which I read with much appetite and impatience. Yet
I had scarce finished it, when Sir Charles Cavendish (the noble Brother of the
Duke of Newcastle who was then at Antwerp, and a Gentleman of all the
accomplishments of mind that he wanted of body, being in all other respects a
wonderful Person) showed me a Letter he had then received from Mr. Hobbes, in
which he desired he would let him know freely what my opinion was of his Book.
Upon which I wished he would tell him, that I could not enough wonder, that a
Man, who had so great a reverence for Civil Government, that he resolved all
Wisdom and Religion it self into a simple obedience and submission to it,
should publish a Book, for which, by the constitution of any Government now
established in Europe, whether Monarchical or Democratical, the Author must be
punished in the highest degree, and with the most severe penalties. With which
answer (which Sir Charles sent to him) he was hot pleased* and found afterward
when I returned to the King to Paris, that I very much censured his Book, which
he had presented, engrossed in ^^llam in a mavelous fair hand, to the King;
and likewise found my judgment so far confirmed, that few days before I came
thither, he was compelled secretly to fly out of Paris, the Justice having
endeavored to apprehend him, and soon after escaped into England, where he
never received any disturbance. After the Kings return he came frequently to
the Court, where he had too many Disciples; and once visited me. I received him
very kindly, and invited him to see me often, but he heard from so many hands
that I had no good opinion of his Book, that he came to me only that one time:
and methinks I am in a degree indebted to him, to let him know some reason, why
I look with so much prejudice upon his Book, which has gotten him so much
credit and estimation with some other men.

I am not without some doubt, that I shall in this discourse, which I am now
engaged in, transgress in a way I do very heartily dislike, and frequently
censure in others, which is sharpness of Language, and too much reproching the
Person against whom I write; which is by no means warrantable, when it can be
possibly avoided without wronging the truth in debate. Yet I hope nothing has
fallen from my Pen, which implies the least undervaluing of Mr. Hobbes his
Person, or his Parts. But if he, to advance his opinion in Policy, too
imperiously reproaches all men who do not consent to his Doctrine, it can hardly
be avoided, to reprehend so great presumtion, and to make his Doctrines appear
as odious as they ought to be esteemed: and when he shakes the Principles of
Christian Religion, by his new and bold Interpretations of Scripture, a man can
hardly avoid saying, He has no Religion, or that he is no good Christian; and
escape endeavoring to manifest and expose the poison that lies hid and
conceled. Yet I have chosen, rather to pass by many of his enormous sayings
with light expressions, to make his Assertions ridiculous, then to make his
Person odious, for infusing such destructive Doctrine into the minds of men,
who are already too licentious in judging the Precepts, or observing the
Practice of Christianity.

The Survey of Mr. Hobbes's Introduction.
IT is no wonder that Mr. Hobbes runs into so many mistakes and errors
throughout his whole discourse of the nature of Government from the nature of
Mankind, when he lays so wrong a foundation in the very entrance and
Introduction of his Book, as to make a judgment of the Passions, and Nature of
all other Men, by his own observations of himself; and believes, (page 2.) that
by looking into himself, and considering what he does when he does think,
opine, reason, hope, fear, etc. and upon what grounds, he shall thereby read,
and know what are the thoughts and passions of all other men upon the like
occasions. And indeed by his distinction in the very subsequent words (page 2.)
between the similitude of passions; and the similitude of the object of the
passions, and his confession, that the constitution individual and particular
education do make so great a difference and disparity, he reduces that general
Proposition to signify so very little, that he leaves very little to be
observed, and very few Persons competent to observe. We have too much cause to
believe, that much the major part of mankind do not think at all, are not
endued with reason enough to opine, or think of what they did last, or what
they are to do next, have no reflection, without which there can be no thinking
to this purpose: and the number is much greater of those who know not how to
comprehend the smilitude of the objects from the passions, nor enough
understand the nature of fear, as it is distinguished from the object that is
feared: so that none of these Persons (which constitute a vast number) are
capable to make that observation, which must produce that knowledge which may
enable them to judge of all the World. And how many there are left, who are fit
from their individual constitutions or particular educations, and
notwithstanding the corruption introduced by dissembling, lying,
counterfeiting, and erroneous Doctrine, to make that judgment, I leave to Mr.
Hobbes to determine. And it is probable, that those very few may conclude, that
what they do when they think, opine, reason, hope, fear, contributes very
little to their knowing what the thoughts and passions of other men are. And
they may the rather be induced to make that conclusion, since there are so very
few who think and opine as Mr. Hobbes does, and whose hopes and fears are like
his, with reference to the objects, or the nature it self of those passions,
and that the dissimilitude is greater between the passions themselves, then
between the objects; and that men are not more unlike each other in their
faces, or in their clothes, then in their thinking, hoping, and fearing. Since
then Mr. Hobbes founds so much of his whole discourse upon the verity and
Evidence of this first Proposition, that we shall very often have occasion to
resort to it as we keep him company; and since the same seems to me to be very
far from being the true Key to open the cipher of other men's thoughts; it will
not be amiss to examine, and insist a little longer on this Conclusion, that we
may discern whether all, or any of us are endued with such an infallible
Faculty, that we can conclude what the thoughts and passions of other men are,
by a strict observation and consideration of our own thoughts and passions;
which would very much enable us to countermine and disappoint each others
thoughts and passions, and would be a high point of wisdom. In the disquisition
whereof, that we may not entangle the passion and the object together, for want
of skill to severe them, it may not be amiss to suppose the same passion to be
in two several men whose passions have the same object, and then consider
whether they are like to discover each others thoughts and passions, their
hopes and their fears, by each man's looking into himself, and considering what
he does when he thinks, hopes, or fears. If Mr. Hobbes, loved, to as great a
height as his passion can rise to, the same object that is likewise loved by
another, he would hardly be able to make any judgment of the others love by his
own; and upon a mutual confession and communication, their passions would not
be found to be the same. If Mr. Hobbes, and some other man were both condemned
to death, (which is the most formidable thing Mr. Hobbes can conceive) the
other could no more by looking into himself know Mr. Hobbe's present thoughts,
and the extent of his fear, then he could, by looking in his face, know what he
has in his Pocket. Not only the several complexions, and constitutions of the
body, the different educations, and climates dispose the affections and
passions of men to different objects, but have a great influence upon the
passions themselves. As the fears, so the hopes of men are as unlike as their
gate, and mien. If a Sang^ine, and a Melancholic man hope the same thing, their
hopes are no more alike each others, then their complexions are; the hope of
the one retaining still somewhat like despair, whilst the hope of the other
looks like fruition: so little similitude there is in the passions themselves
without any relation to their objects. That a man of great courage, and a very
cowardly man have not the same countenance, and presence of mind in an approach
of danger, proceeds not from the ones liking to be killed more then the others,
but rather from the difference of their natural courage. But let us suppose a
man of courage, and a coward equally guilty, or equally innocent (that there
may be no difference from the operation of conscience) to be brought to die
together by a judgment which they cannot avoid, and so to be equally without
hope of life (and death in Mr. Hobbes's judgment is equally terrible to all,
and with equal care to be avoided, or resisted.) How comes it to pass, that one
of these undergo's death with no other concernment, then as if he were going
any other journey, and the other with such confusion and trembling, that he is
even without life before he dies; if it were true that all men fear alike upon
the like occasion? There will be the same uncertainty in concluding what others
do, by observing what we our selves do, when we think, opine, or reason. How
shall that man, who thinks deliberately, opines modestly, and reasons
dispassionately, and by his excellent temper satisfies his own judgment in a
conclusion, in which at the same time he discerns others may differ from him: I
say, how shall such a man by his own way of reasoning judge another man's, who
usually thinks precipitately, opines arrogantly, and reasons superciliously,
and concludes imperiously that man to be mistaken, who determines otherwise
then he does? To conclude, Mr. Hobbes might as naturally have introduced his
unreasonable Doctrine of the Similitude of the Passions, from the wisdom that
he says is acquired by the reading of Men, as from his method of reading ones
self. That saying of Nosce teipsum, in the sense of Solon who prescribed it,
was a sober truth, but was never intended as an expedient to discover the
similitude of the thoughts of other men by what he found in himself, but as the
best means to suppress and destroy that pride and self-conceit, which might
temt him to undervalue other men, and to plant that modesty and humility in
himself, as would preserve him from such presumtion.

The Survey of Chapter 1, 2, 3.
HAving resolved not to enter into the Lists with Mr. Hobbes upon the
Signification of words, or Propriety of expressions, in which he exercises an
absolute Dictatorship; and indeed not to enlarge upon any particular that to me
seems erroneous, except it be an Error of that kind and consequence, as carries
with it, or in it, somewhat that is hurtful to the Peace and Policy of the
Kingdom, or prejudicial to the sincerity of Religion; I should have passed over
the first, second, and third Chapters without any Animadversion, not troubling
my self whether the imagination and memory are but one thing, which for diverse
considerations has diverse names, (p. 5.) if I had not some apprehension, that
by an unnecessary reflection upon the Schools in the close of his second
Chapter, and finding fault with the using some words in the sense they ought
not to be used, he hopes to dispose his Readers to such a prejudice and contemt
toward them, that they may more easily undervalue them in more serious
instances: the principal foundation that he lays for the support of all his
Novelties, being to lessen and vilify all the Principles, and all the Persons,
which he well foresees most like to be applied to the demolishing his new
Structure.

Amongst the many excellent parts and faculties with which Mr. Hobbes is
plentifully endowed, his order and method in Writing, and his clear expressing
his conceptions in weighty, proper, and significant words, are very remarkable
and commendable; and it is some part of his Art to introduce, upon the sudden,
instances and remarques, which are the more grateful, and make the more
impression upon his Reader, by the unexpectedness of meeting them where somewhat
else is talked of: for thereby he prepares and disposes the fancy to be pleased
with them in a more proper and important place. No man would have imagined,
that in a Philosophical Discourse of Dreams, and Fayries, and Ghosts, and
Goblins, Exorcisms, Crosses, and Holy Water, he would have taken occasion to
have reproved Job for saying, that the inspiration of the Almighty gives men
understanding, Job 32. 8. which can be no good expression, if it be incongruity
to say, that good thoughts are inspired into a man by God: and it is pity that
St. Paul did not better weigh his words, when he said, that we are not
sufficient of our selves to think any thing of our selves, but our sufficiency
is of God, 2 Cor. 3. 5. or when he said to the Philippians, that it is God
which works in you both to will, and to do of his good pleasure, Phil. 2. 13.
and that St. John had not bin better advised, when he said, He that commits
sin, is of the Devil, 1 John 3. 8. Upon any of which Texts a man can hardly
enlarge in discourse, without saying, that good thoughts are inspired, or
infused (which he thinks he has made the more ridiculous, by turning into
other words of the like signification) by God, and evil thoughts by the devil,
which in his understanding, are amongst the many words making nothing
understood; whereas there are few expressions in which the sense of the speaker
is better understood, or by which the sense of the Apostles can be made more
clear then by those expressionss But this momical mention of the power and
goodness of God, and of the Devils activity and malignity, in a place so
improper and unnatural for those reflections, will the more incline his
Disciples to undervalue those common notions of the goodness and assistance of
God, and of the malice and vigilance of the Devil; and by making themselves
merry with that proper and devout custom of speaking, and the natural results
from thence, by degrees to undervalue those other conceptions of Religion and
Piety, which would restrain and control the licentious imagination of the
excellency of their own understandings; and prepare them to believe, that all
the discourses of Sanctity, and the obligations of Christianity, and the
essentials of a Church, Faith, and Obedience to the dictates of Gods Spirit,
are but the artifice and invention of Churchmen, to advance their own pomp and
worldly interest, and that Heaven and Hell are but words to flatter or terrify
men; at least, that the places of either are so situated, and have no other
extent or degree of pain and pleasure, then he had thought fit to assign to
them toward the end of his Leviathan.

Nor is his instance of the train of imaginations, in his third Chapter, less
wonderful. And indeed, Mr. Hobbes had the more reason for his opinion of the
similitude of thoughts, and that by looking into himself when he thinks, and
upon what grounds, he can thereby know the thoughts of other men, when he was
with the velocity of a thought, in a moment of time, able to decipher that
impertinent Question, What was the value of a Roman penny; and to discover a
succession of thoughts in the Enquirer, the last of which determined in the
resolution of delivering up the King: which was so rare a faculty, that such a
similitude of thoughts cannot be concluded to be in other men. And since
erroneous Doctrines have so great an influence upon the minds of men, as to
corrupt the natural motives, he knows best whether he had not before this
formed his new Scheme of Loyalty, and digested all those imaginations toward
the dissolution of Allegiance, and eluding the obligation of all Oaths; which
if he had don, he had the Key ready to decipher by, and might easily discover
that which no man in England could discover who had not the same Key.

The Survey of Chapters 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
WE shall with less reflection pass over his fourth Chapter of Speech, which he
says, was the noblest and most profitable Invention of all other, whether
properly or improperly, he shall do well to consider; together with his fifth
and sixth Chapters, which with those which precede, and two or three which
follow, he intends as a Dictionary, for the better understanding and defining
very many terms and words, which he is to make use of throughout the rest of
his Work; and which whoever can carry with him in his memory, as he expects
every man shall do, shall be often more confounded in the understanding many
parts of his Book, then if he forgets them all. In which yet many things are
said very wittily and pleasantly; tho it may be many critical men, whom he has
provoked, may believe many of his Expressions to be incongruous; and his
Definitions not so exact as might have bin expected from so great an Artist;
and that all those Chapters are rather for delight, in the novelty and boldness
of the expression, then for any real information in the substantial part of
knowledge: since few men, upon the most exact reading them over, find themselves
wiser then they were before, but rather think that they better understood
before what Contemt signifies, then by being now told, (page 24.) that it is
nothing else but an immobility or contumacy of the heart, in resisting the
action of certain things, and proceeding from that the heart is already moved
otherwise, by other more potent objects, or from want of experience of them; or
that they do better understand the nature and original of Laughter, by being
informed (page 27.) that sudden glory is the passion which makes some
grimaces called Laughter, and is caused either by some sudden act of their own
that pleases them, or by the apprehension of some deform^d thing in another,
by comparison whereof they suddenly applaud themselves. In which kind of
Illustrations those Chapters, and in truth his whole Book abounds, and
discovers a master faculty in making easy things hard to be understood: and
men will probably with the more impatience and curiosity, tho with the less
reverence, enter upon the third part of his Book, which is to define Christian
Politics, after he has so well defined and described Religion to be Fear of
Power invisible, feigned by the mind, or imagined from tales publicly allowed,
(p. 26.) all which I leave to his Friends of the Universities. Nor shall I
spend more time upon the seventh, eighth, and ninth Chapters, leaving them to
the Schole-men to examine, who are in his debt for much mirth which he has
made out of them, I for my part being very indifferent between them, as
believing that the Schole-men have contributed very little more to the
advancement of any noble or substantial part of Learning, then Mr. Hobbes has
don to the reformation or improvement of Philosophy and Policy. Yet I may
reasonably say so much on their behalf, that if Mr. Hobbes may take upon him to
translate all those terms of Art (the proper signification whereof is
unanimously understood, and agreed between all who use them, and which in truth
are a cipher to which all men of moderate Learning have the Key) into the
vulgar Language by the assistance of Ryders Dictionary, he has found a way to
render and expose the worthiest Professors of any Science, and all Science it
self to the cheap laughter of all illiterate men; which is contrary to Mr.
Hobbes's own rule and determination, (page 17.) where he says, That when a man
upon the hearing any Speech, has those thoughts which the words of that
Speech, and their connection, were ordained and constituted to signify, then he
is said to understand it. And surely the signification of words and terms, is
no less ordained and constituted by custom and acceptance, then by Grammar and
Etymologies. If it were otherwise, Mr. Hobbes himself would be as much exposed
to ignorant Auditors, when he reads a Lecture upon the Optics, or even in his
adored Geometry, if a pleasant Translator should render all his terms as
literally, as he has don the Title of the sixth Chapter of Suarez: for every
Age, as new things happen, finds new words in all Languages to signify them.
The Civilians, who are amongst the best Judges of Latin, can hardly tell how
investitura came into their Books, to signify that which it has ever
signified since the Quarrel begun between the Emperor and the Pope upon that
subject, which is now as well understood in Latin as any word in Tully. And if
Bombarda had no original but from the sound, as Petavius (a very good
Grammarian, besides his other great Learning) says it had not, we have no
reason to be offended with the Schole-men for finding words to discover their
own Conceptions, which equally serveour own turn.

The Survey of Chapters 10, 11, 12.
I Do acknowledge, that in the tenth, eleventh, and twelfth Chapters, many
things are very well said: and tho somethings as ill, with reference to
Religion, and to the Clergy, as if there were a combination between the Priests
of the Gentiles, Aristotle, the Schole-men, and the Clergy of all Professions,
to defame, pervert, and corrupt Religion: yet he resumes that Argument so
frequently, that I shall choose to examine the reason and justice of all his
Allegations rather in another place, then upon either of these three Chapters;
to which I shall only add, that according to his natural delight in Novelties
of all kinds, in Religion as well as Policy, he has supplied the Gentiles with
a new God, which was never before found in any of their Catalogues, The God
Chaos, (page 55.) to which he might as warrantably have made them an additional
present of his own Idol, Confusion. And he will as hardly find a good authority
for the aspersion with which he traduces the Policy of the Roman Commonwealth
in all its greatness and luster, (page 57.) that it made no scruple of
tolerating any Religion whatsoever in the City of Rome it self, unless it had
something in it that could not consist with their Civil Government. Which how
untrue soever, was a very unseasonable intimation of the wisdom of Olivers's
Politics, at that time when he published his Leviathan: whereas in truth, that
great People were not more solicitous in any thing, then in preserving the
unity and integrity of their Religion from any mixtures: and the Institution of
the Office of Pontifex Maximus was principally out of that jealousy, and that
he might carefully watch that no alteration or innovation might be made in
their Religion. And tho they had that general awe for Religion, that they would
not suffer the Gods of their Enemies, whom they did not acknowledge for Gods, to
be rudely treated and violated; and therefore they both punished their Consul
for having robbed the Temple of Proserpine, and caused the full damages to be
restored to the injured Goddess: yet they neither acknowledged her Divinity,
nor suffered her to have a Temple, or to have any Devotion paid to her within
their Dominions; nor indeed any other God or Goddess to be adored, then those
to whom Sacrifices were made by the Authority of the State. Nor will Mr. Hobbes
be able to name one Christian Kingdom in the World, where it is believed, that
the King has not his Authority from Christ, unless a Bishop Crown him; tho all
Christian Kingdoms have had that reverence for Bishops, as to assign the
highest Ecclesiastical Functions to be always performed by them: but they well
know the King to have the same Authority in all respects before he is crowned,
as after. And what extravagant Power soever the Court of Rome has in some evil
Conjunctures heretofore usurped, and would be as glad of the like opportunities
again; yet in those Kingdoms where that Authority is owned and acknowledged,
there want not those who loudly protest against that Doctrine, That a King may
be deposed by a Pope, or that the Clergy and Regulars shall be exemt from the
Jurisdiction of their King. And yet upon these unwarrantable suggestions, he
presumes to declare, That all the changes of Religion may be attributed to one
and the same Cause, and that is, unpleasing Priests; and those not only amongst
Papists, but even in that Church that has presumed most of Reformation, by
which he intends the Church of England, at that time under the most severe and
barbarous Persecution: and therefore it was the more enviously and maliciously,
as well as dishonestly alleged.

The Survey of Chapters 13, 14, 15, 16.
THE thirteenth, fourteenth, fifteenth, and sixteenth Chapters, will require a
little more disquisition, since under the pretense of examining, or rather
(according to his Prerogative) of determining what the natural condition of
mankind is, he takes many things for granted which are not true; as ( page 60.)
that Nature has made all men equal in the faculties of body and mind, and
imputes that to the Nature of Man in general, which is but the infirmity of
some particular man; and by a mist of words, under the notion of explaining
common terms (the meaning whereof is understood by all men, and which his
explanation leaves less intelligible then they were before) he dazles men's eyes
from discerning those Fallacies upon which he raises his Structure, and which
he reserves for his second part. And whosoever looks narrowly to his
preparatory Assertions, shall find such contradictions, as must destroy the
foundation of all his new Doctrine in Government, of which some particulars
shall be mentioned anon. So that if his Maxims of one kind were marshalled
together, collected out of these four Chapters, and applied to his other Maxims
which are to support his whole Leviathan, the one would be a sufficient answer
to the other; and so many inconsistencies and absurdities would appear between
them, that they could never be thought links of one chain; whereas he desires
men should believe all the Propositions in his Book to be a chain of
Consequences, without being in any degree wary to avoid palpable
contradictions, upon the presumtion of his Readers total resignation to his
judgment. If it were not so, would any man imagine that a man of Mr. Hobbes's
sagacity and provoking humor, should in his fourth Page so imperiously reproach
the Schools for absurdity, in saying, That heavy Bodies fall downwar^^ out of
an appetite to rest, thereby ascribing knowledge to things inanimate; and
himself should in his sixty second Page, describing the nature of foul weather,
say, That it lies not in a shower or two of rain, but in an inclination
thereto of many days together; as if foul weather were not as inanimate a
thing as heavy Bodies, and inclination did not imply as much of knowledge as
appetite does? In truth, neither the one or the other word signifies in the
beforementioned instances, more then a natural tendency to motion and
alteration.

When God vouchsafed to make man after his own Image, and in his own Likeness,
and took so much delight in him, as to give him the command and dominion over
all the Inhabitants of the Earth, the Air, and the Sea, it cannot be imagined
but that at the same time he endued him with Reason, and all the other noble
Faculties which were necessary for the administration of the Empire, and the
preservation of the several Species which were to succeed the Creation; and
therefore to uncreate him to such a baseness and villainy in his nature, as to
make man such a Rascal, and more a Beast in his frame and constitution then
those he is appointed to govern, is a power that God never gave to the Devil;
nor has any body assumed it, till Mr. Hobbes took it upon him. Nor can any
thing be said more contrary to the Honor and Dignity of God Almighty, then that
he should leave his master workmanship, Man, in a condition of War of every man
against every man, in such a condition of confusion, (p. 64.) That every man
has a right to every thing, even to one another body; inclined to all the
malice, force and fraud that may promote his profit or his pleasure, and
without any notions of, or instinct toward justice, honor, or good nature,
which only makes mankind superior to the beasts of the Wilderness. Nor had Mr.
Hobbes any other reason to degrade him to this degree of Bestiality, but that
he may be fit to wear those Chains and Fetters which he has provided for him.
He deprives man of the greatest happiness and glory that can be attributed to
him, who divests him of that gentleness and benevolence toward other men, by
which he delights in the good fortune and tranquillity that they enjoy, and
makes him so far prefer himself before all others, as to make the rest a prey
to advance any commodity or convenience of his own; which is a barbarity
superior to what the most savage Beasts are guilty of, -- Quando leoni,
Fortior eripuit vitam leo? quo nemore unquam
Expiravit aper majoris dentibus apri?
Man only, created in the likeness of God himself, is the only creature in the
World, that out of the malignity of his own nature, and the base fear that is
inseparable from it, is obliged for his own benefit, and for the defense of his
own right, to worry and destroy all of his own kind, until they all become
yoaked by a Covenant and Contract that Mr. Hobbes has provided for them, and
which was never yet entered into by any one man, and is in nature impossible to
be entered into.

After such positive and magisterial Assertions against the dignity and probity
of mankind, and the honor and providence of God Almighty, the instances and
arguments given by him are very unweighty and trivial to conclude the nature of
man to be so full of jealousy and malignity, as he would have it believed to
be, from that common practice of circumspection and providence, which custom
and discretion has introduced in human life. For men shut their Chests in
which their money is, as well that their servants or children may not know what
they have, as that it may be preserved from Thieves; and they lock their doors
that their Houses may not be common; and ride armed, and in company, because
they know that there are ill men, who may be inclined to do injuries if they
find an opportunity. Nor is a wariness to prevent the damage and injury that
Thieves and Robbers may do to any man, an argument that mankind is in that man's
opinion inclined and disposed to commit those outrages. If it be known that
there is one Thief in a City, all men have reason to shut their doors and lock
their chests: and if there be two or three Drunkards in a Town, all men have
reason to go armed in the streets, to control the violence or indignity they
might receive from them. Princes are attended by their Guards in progress, and
all their servants armed when they hunt, without any apprehension of being
assaulted; custom having made it so necessary, that many men are not longer
without their Swords then they are without their Doublets, who never were
jealous that any man desired to hurt them. Nor will the instance he gives of
the Inhabitants in America, be more to his purpose then the rest, since as far
as we have any knowledge of them, the savage People there live under a most
entire subjection and slavery to their several Princes; who indeed for the most
part live in hostility toward each other, upon those contentions which engage
all other Princes in War, and which Mr. Hobbes allows to be a just cause of
War, jealousy of each others Power to do them harm. And these are the notable
instances by which Mr. Hobbes has by his painful disquisition and
investigation, in the hidden and deep secrets of Nature, discovered that
unworthy fear and jealousy to be inherent in mankind, ( page 63.) That the
notions of right and wrong have no place, that Force and Fraud are the two
cardinal V^rtues; that there is no propriety, no dominion, no mine or thine
distinct, but that only to be every man's that he can get, and for so long as he
can keep it, and this struggle to continue, till he submits to the servitude to
which he has designed him for his comfort and security.

Mr. Hobbes would do very much honor to Aristotle, and repair much of the
injury he has don to him, if he can persuade men to believe, ( page 59) that
the bringing in his Philosophy and Doctrine, has bin a cause to take away the
reputation of the Clergy, and to incline the People to the reformation of
Religion; and yet he has more authority for that, then for most of his
Opinions, tho it may be he does not know it. For in the year a thousand two
hundred and nine, Aristotle's Metaphysics, which had bin lately brought from
Constantinople, were condemned, and forbidden to be read by a Council in Paris,
upon a supposition or apprehension, that that Book had contributed very much to
the new Heretical opinions of the Albigenses. So far the French Clergy of that
Age concurred in opinion with Mr. Hobbes: but we may much more reasonably
conceive, that it has bin illiterateness, stupid ignorance, and having never
heard of Aristotle, that may at any time have brought contemt upon the Clergy:
and tho men may too unreasonably, it may be, adhere to Aristotle in some
particulars, and so may be reasonably contradicted, yet no man of the Clergy or
Laity was ever contemned for being thought to understand Aristotle. Indeed Mr.
Hobbes may easily refute Aristotle, and all who have writ before or since him,
if he be the Sovereign Magistrate, not only to enact what Laws he pleases, and
to interpret all that were made before according to his pleasure, but to adopt
them to be the Laws of Nature, which he declares ( page 79.) to be immutable
and eternal. And we have great reason to watch him very narrowly, when his
Legislative fit is upon him, least he cast such a net over us, knit by what he
calls the Law of Nature, or by his Definitions, that we be deprived of both the
use of our liberty, and our reason to oppose him. He is very much offended with
Aristotle, for saying in the first Book of his Politics, That by Nature some
are fit to command, and others to serve; which he says, ( page 77.) is not
only against reason, but also against experience, for there are very few so
foolish, that had not rather govern themselves, then be governed by others.
Which Proposition does not contradict any thing said by Aristotle, the Question
being, Whether Nature has made some men worthier, not whether it has made all
others so modest as to confess it; and would have required a more serious
Disquisition, since it is no more then is imputed to Horses, and other Beasts,
whereof men find by experience, that some by nature are fitter for nobler uses,
and others for vile, and to be only Beasts of burden. But indeed, he had the
less need of reason to refute him, when he had a Law at hand to control him,
which he says, is the Law of Nature, ( page 77.) That every man must
acknowledge every other man for his equal by nature; which may be true as to the
essentials of human Nature, and yet there may be inequality enough as to a
capacity of Government. But whatever his opinion is, we have Solomon's judgment
against him, Insipiens erit servus sapientis, Prove. 11. 29. And many Learned
men are of opinion, that the Gibeonites, who by the help of an impudent lie
found the means to save their lives, were a People by nature of low and abject
spirits, fit only to do the low and mean services for which they were prepared.
And some of the Fathers believe, That when the Patriarch Jacob, in his dying
Prophecy of Issachar, declared Issachar is a strong ass, couching down between
two burdens. And he saw that rest was good, and the land that it was pleasant,
and bowed his shoulder to bear, and became a servant unto tribute, Genesis 49. 14.
15. Jacob foresaw that in that Tribe there would be depressio intellectus, and
that they would be only fit to servants. And it is very true, that Aristotle did
believe, that Divine Providence does show and demonstrate who are fit and
proper for low and vile offices, not only by very notable defects in their
understandings, incapable of any cultivation, but by some eminent deformity of
the body (tho that does not always hold) which makes them unfit to bear rule.
And without doubt, the observation of all Ages since that time has contributed
very much to that Conclusion which Mr. Hobbes so much derides, of Inequality by
nature, and that Nature it self has a bounty which she extends to some men in
a much superior degree then she does to others. Which is not contradicted by
seeing many great defects and indigencies of Nature in some men, wonderfully
corrected and repaired by industry, education, and above all, by conversation;
or by seeing some early blossoms in others, which raise a great expectation of
rare perfection, that suddenly decay, and insensibly wither away by not being
cherished and improved by diligence, or rather by being blasted by vice or
supine laziness: those accidents may sometimes happen, do not very often, and
are necessary to awaken men out of the Lethargy of depending wholly upon the
Wealth of Natures store, without administering any supply to it, out of their
industry and observation. And every man's experience will afford him abundance
of examples in the number of his own acquaintance, in which, of those who have
always had equal advantages of Education, Conversation, Industry, and it may
be of virtuous Inclinations, it is easy to observe very different parts and
faculties: some of quick apprehension, and as steady comprehension, wit,
judgment, and such a sagacity as discerns at distance as well as at hand,
concluding from what they see will fall out, what is presently to be don: when
others born, and bred with the same care, wariness, and attention, and with all
the visible advantages and benefits which the other enjoied, remain still of a
heavier and duller alloy, less discerning to contrive and foresee, less
vigorous to execute, and in a word, of a very different Classis to all
purposes; which can proceed from no other cause, but the distinction that
Nature her self made between them, in the distribution of those Faculties to
the one with a more liberal hand then to the other.

Did not all the World at that time, and has it not ever since believed, that
Julius Caesar had from nature a more exalted Spirit and Genius, then any of
those who were overcome by him; tho some of them appeared or were generally
believed to be superior in the conduct of great Affai^s? There is judgment
gotten by experience very necessary, but the first attemt and direction of the
mind, the first daring proceeds purely from Nature and its influence. When we
see a Marius from a common Soldier, baffle the Nobility of Rome, and in
despite of opposition, make himself seven times Consul: or a Dioclesan, from a
mean and low birth, and no other advantage of Education then every other common
Soldier had with him, nor countenance or assistance from any Superior, but what
his own Virtue purchased, to raise himself to the full state and power of the
greatest Emperor, and to govern as great, or a greater part of the World, then
ever Caesar did; and after having enjoied that Empire above eighteen years in
the highest glory, to give it over, and divest himself of it, merely for the
ease and pleasure of retirement to his private House and Garden, and to die in
that repose after he had enjoied it some years; must we believe such a man to
have no advantages by nature, above all other men of the same time? When
Marmurius, or Vecturius (for he went by both names) one of the thirty Tyrants,
from a common Blacksmith who made arms (for the man who killed him, having bin
before his servant, and wrought under him, told him, Hic est gladius quem ipse
fecisti) raised himself, not by a sudden mutiny and insurrection, but by
passing all the degrees of a Soldier, during many years in a regular and
disciplined Army, to be Emperor by a common voice and election, as a Man the
fittest for the Command; is it possible for us to believe, that this Man
received no other talent from Nature, then she afforded to every other
Blackfinith? Besides many particulat Examples of this kind in every particular
Kingdom, in most of which the visible advantages of Friends, Patrons, and other
accidental Concurrences have not at all contributed to the preferment of them
before other men, the World has yielded us an example near our own time (for
it is little more then two hundred years since) of such a prodigious progress
and success in the power of one Man, that there is nothing of Story ancient or
modern that is parallel to it, The great Tamberlane, who (tho not so mean a
Person in his original, as he is vulgarly conceived to have bin) was born a
poor Prince over a contem'd and barbarous Country and People, whose manners he
first cultivated by his own native justice and goodness, and by the strength of
his own Genius, improved his own Faculties and Understanding to a mavelous
Luster and Perfection, toward which neither his Climate nor his conversation
could contribute. Upon this stock he raised and led an Army of his Subjects,
into the better Dominions of their Neighbors who contemned them. With these he
fought, and won many Battles, subdued and conquered many Kingdoms; and after
the total defeat of the greatest Army that was then in the World, he took the
greatest Emperor of the World Prisoner, and for the contemt that he had showed
toward him, treated him as his vilest Slave. And it has bin as notorious,
that after the death of these, and the like such extraordinary Persons, the
Forces by which they wrought those wonders, and the Counselors and Officers
whose administration co-operated with them, suddenly degenerated; and as if
the Soul were departed from the Body, became a Carcass without any use or
beauty. And can we believe, that those stupendous men had no talent by nature
above others? And are we bound to believe, ( page 77.) that by the Law of
Nature every man is bound to acknowledge other for his equal by nature?

But where are those Maxims to be found which Mr. Hobbes declares, and
publishes to be the Laws of Nature, in any other Author before him? That is
only properly called the Law of Nature, that is dictated to the whole Species:
as to defend a man's self from violence, and to repel force by force; not all
that results upon prudential motives unto the mind of such as have bin
cultivated by Learning and Education, which no doubt can compile such a Body of
Laws, as would make all other useless, except such as should provide for the
execution of, and obedience to those. For under what other notion can that
reasonable Conclusion, which is a necessary part of the Law of Nations, be
called the Law of Nature, which is his fifteenth Law, ( page 78.) That all men
that mediate Peace be allowed safe conduct? And of this kind much of the Body
of his Law of Nature is compiled; which I should not dislike, the Style being
in some sense not improper, but that I observe that from some of these
Conclusions which he pronounces to be ( page 57.) immutable, and eternal as the
Laws of Nature, he makes deductions and inferences to control Opinions he
dislikes, and to obtain Concessions which are not right, by amuzing men with
his method, and confounding rather then informing their understandings, by a
chime of words in definitions and pleasant instances, which seem not easy to
be contradicted, and yet infer much more then upon a review can be deduced from
them. And it is an unanswerable evidence of the irresistible force and strength
of Truth and Reason, that whilst men are making war against it with all their
power and stratagems, somewhat does still start up out of the dictates and
confessions of the Adversary that determines the Controversy, and vindicates
the Truth from the malice that would oppress it. How should it else come to
pass, that Mr. Hobbes, whilst he is demolishing the whole frame of Nature for
want of order to support it, and makes it unavoidable necessary for every man
to cut his neighbors throat, to kill him who is weaker then himself, and to
circumvent, and by any fraud destroy him who is stronger, in all which there is
no injustice, because Nature has not otherwise provided for every particular
man's security; I say, how comes it to pass, that at the same time when he is
possessed of this frenzy, he should in the same, and the next Chapter, set down
such a Body of Laws prescribed by Nature it self, as are immutable and eternal?
that there appears, by his own showing, a full remedy against all that
confusion, for avoiding whereof he has devised all that unnatural and
impossible Contract and Covenant? If the Law of the Gospel, Whatsoever you
require that others should do to you, that do ye to them, be the Law of all
men, as he says it is ( page 65.) that is, the Law of Nature, Natura, id est
jure gentium, says Tully, it being nothing else but quod naturalis ratio inter
omnes homines constituit; If it be the Law of Nature that every man strive to
accommodate himself to the rest, as he says it is (page 76.) and that no man
by deed, word, countenance or gesture, declare hatred or contemt of another; If
all men are bound by the Law of Nature, ( page 78.) That they that are at
controversy, submit their right to the judgment of an arbitrator, as he says
they are: If Nature has thus providently provided for the Peace and
Tranquillity of her Children, by Laws immutable and eternal, that are written
in their hearts: how come they to fall into that condition of war, as to be
every one against every one, and to be without any other cardinal Virtues, but
of force and fraud? It is a wonderful thing, that a man should be so
sharp-sighted, as to discern mankind so well enclosed and fortified by the
wisdom of Nature, and so blind as to think him in a more secure estate by his
transferring of right to another man, which yet he confesses is impossible
entirely to transfer; and by Covenants and Contracts of his own devising, and
which he acknowledges to be void in part, and in other parts impossibe to be
performed.

But I say, if in truth Nature has dictated all those excellent Conclusions to
every man, without which they cannot be called the Laws of Nature; and if it
has farther instituted all those duties which are contained in the Second
Table, all which he says were the Laws of Nature: I know not what temtation or
authority he could have, to pronounce mankind to be left by Nature in that
distracted condition of war, except he prefer the authority of Ovids
Metamorphosis, of the sowing of Cadmus's teeth, before any other Scripture,
Divine or Humane: And it is as strange, that by his Covenants and Contracts
which he is so wary in wording (as if he were the Secretary of Nature) that
they may bind that man fast enough whom he pleases to assign to those Bonds;
and as if he were the Ple^potentiary of Nature too, to bind and to loose all he
thinks fit: he has so ill provided for the Peace he would establish, that he
has left a door open for all the Confusion he would avoid, when,
notwithstanding that he has made them divest themselves of the liberty they
have by Nature, and transfer all this into the hands of a single Person, who
thereby is so absolute Sovereign, that he may take their Lives and their
Estates from them without any act of Injustice, yet after all this transferring
and divesting, every man reserves a right (as unalienable) to defend his own
life, even against the sentence of Justice. What greater contradiction can
there be to the Peace, which he would establish upon those unreasonable
conditions, then this Liberty, which he says can never be abandoned, and which
yet may dissolve that peace every day? and yet he says, ( page 70.) This is
granted to be true by all men, in that they lead Criminals to execution and
prison with armed men, notwithstanding such Criminals have consented to the Law
by which they are condemned. Which indeed in an Argument, that men had rather
escape then be hanged, but no more an Argument that they have a right to rescue
themselves, then the fashion of wearing Sword is an argument that men are
afraid of having their throats cu^ by the malice of their neighbors: both
which, are Arguments no man would urge to men, whose understandings he did not
much undervalue. But upon many of these Particulars there is a more proper
occasion hereafter for enlargement. And so we pass through his Prospect of the
Laws of Nature, and many other Definitions and Descriptions, with liberty to
take review of them upon occasion, that we may make have to his Second Part,
for which he thinks he has made a good preparation to impose upon us in this
First; and he will often tell us, when he should prove what he affirms, that he
has evinced that Point, and made it evident in such a Chapter in his First
Part, where in truth he has said very much, and proved very little. I shall
only conclude this, with an observation which the place seems to require, of
the defect in Mr. Hobbes's Logic, which is a great presumtion, that from very
true Propositions he deduces very erroneous and absurd Conclusions. That no man
has power to transfer the right over his own life to the disposal of another
man, is a very true Proposition, from whence he infers, that he has reserved
the power and disposal of it to himself, and therefore that he may defend it by
force even against the judgment of Law and Justice: whereas the natural
consequence of that Proposition is, That therefore such transferring and
covenanting (being void) cannot provide for the peace and security of a
Commonwealth. Without doubt, no man is Dominus vitae suae, and therefore
cannot give that to another, which he has not in himself. God only has
reserved that absolute Dominion and Power of life and death to himself, and by
his putting the Sword into the hand of the Supreme Magistrate, has qualified
and enabled him to execute that justice which is necessary for the peace and
preservation of his People, which may seem in a manner to be provided for by
Mr. Hobbes's Law of Nature, if what he says be true, ( page 68.) That right to
the end contains right to the means. And this sole Proposition, that men
cannot dispose of their own lives, has bin always held as a manifest and
undeniable Argument, that Sovereigns never had, nor can have their Power from
the People.

Second Part.
The Survey of Chapters 17, 18.
MR. Hobbes having taken upon him to imitate God, and created Man after his own
likeness, given him all the passions and affections which he finds in himself,
and no other, he prescribes him to judge of all things and words, according to
the definitions he sets down, with the Authority of a Creator. After he has
delighted himself in a commendable method, and very witty and pleasant
description of the nature and humor of the World, as far as he is acquainted
with it, (upon many particulars whereof, which he calls Definitions, there will
be frequent occasion of reflections in this discourse, without breaking the
thread of it by entering upon impertinent exceptions to matters positively
averred without any apparent reason, when it is no great matter whether it be
true or no,) He comes at last to institute such a Commonwealth as never was in
nature, or ever heard of from the beginning of the World till this structure of
his, and like a bountiful Creator, gives the Man he has made, the Sovereign
command and Government of it, with such an extent of power and authority, as the
Great Turk has not yet appeared to affect. In which it is probable he has
followed his first method, and for the Man after his own likeness has created
a Government, that he would himself like to be trusted with; having determined
Liberty, and Propriety, and Religion to be only emty words, and to have no
other existence then in the Will and Breast of his Sovereign Governor; and all
this in order to make his People happy, and to enjoy the blessing of Peace. And
yet with all this, his Governor would quickly find his power little enough,
that is, of little continuance, if his Government be founded upon no other
security then is provided in his Institution: and the justice he assigns will
be as weak a support to his Governor, as he supposes a Covenant would be to the
peoples benefit; the imagination whereof he conceives to be so ridiculous, that
it can only proceed form want of understanding, that Covenants being but words
and breath, have no force to oblige, contain, constrain, or protect any man,
but what they have from the Public Sword, that is from the untied hands of his
Sovereign Man: as if Justice, which is the support of his Governor when he
breaks and violates all the Elements of Justice, because all men are in justice
bound to observe contracts, were more then a word, or a more valiant word and
stronger breath to constrain, and protect any man, when that Sword is wrested
from his Sovereign Man, or his hand is bound by the many hands which should be
governed by him. But the People need not be offended with him, for giving so
extravagant a Power to a Person they never intended should have such an Empire
over them; if they will have patience till he has finished his Scheme of
Sovereignty, he will infeeble it again for them to that degree, that no
ambitious man would take it up, if he could have it for asking. But to
prosecute the Argument in his own order.

As he has made a worse man by much, by making him too like himself; so he
has made a much worse Commonwealth then ever yet was known in the World, by
making it such as he would have: and nothing can be more wonderful, then that a
man of Mr. Hobbes his sagacity, should raise so many conclusions of a very
pernicious influence upon the Peace and Government of every Kingdom and
Commonwealth in Europe, upon a mere supposition and figment of a Commonwealth
instituted by himself, and without any example. He will not find any one
Government in the World, of what kind soever, so instituted, as he dogmatically
declares all Government to be; nor was mankind in any nation since the Creation
upon such a level, as to institute their Government by such an assembly and
election, and covenant, and consent, as he very unwarrantably more then
supposes. And it was an undertaking of the more impertinence, since by his own
rule, (page 95.) where there is already erected a Sovereign power, which was
then, and still is in every Kingdom and State in Europe, and for ought we know
in the whole world, there can be no other Representative of the same People,
but only to certain particular ends limited by the Sovereign. So that he could
have no other design, but to shake what was erected, and the Government was not
at that time in any suspense but in his own Country, by the effect of an odious
and detestable Rebellion; which yet could not prevail with an effective Army of
above one hundred thousand men, with which the Usurper had subdued three
Nation, to submit to the Usurper in such a new model, and to transfer their
right by such Covenants, as he conceives mankind to be even obliged to do by
the Laws of Nature; and to induce them to do which, I do heartily wish that Mr.
Hobbes could truly vindicate himself from designing, when he published his
Leviathan; upon which disquisition we cannot avoid enlarging hereafter upon
further provocation.

It had bin kindly don of Mr. Hobbes, if according to his laudable custom of
illustrating his definitions by instances, as he often does with great
pregnancy, he had to this his positive determination added one instance of a
Government so instituted. There is no doubt there are in all Governments many
things don by, and with the consent of the People; nay all Government so much
depends upon the consent of the People, that without their consent and
submission it must be dissolved, since where no body will obey, there can be no
command, nor can one man compel a million to to do what they have no mind to
do: but that any Government was originally instituted by an assembly of men
equally free, and that they ever elected the Person, who should have the
Sovereign power over them, is yet to be proved; and till it be proved, must not
be supposed, to raise new doctrines upon, which shake all Government. How
Sovereign power was originally instituted, and how it came to condescend to put
restraints upon it self, and even to strip it self of some parts of its
Sovereignty for its own benefit and advantage, and how far it is bound to
observe the Contracts and Covenants it has submitted to, I shall deliver my
opinion before this Discourse is finished; and shall refer the approbation of
^it to Mr. Hobbes, supposing he will never think all the reason in the world to
be strong enough to prove, that what all men see is* cannot be. But by the way,
he had dealt more like the Magistrate he affects to be, if he had founded his
Government upon his own imperious averment, and left every man to question it
that dares; then to take notice, and foresee an objection, which he says is
the strongest he can make, and make no better an answer to it, then to answer
one question with another. He sees men will ask, (and it is not impossible they
can avoid it) Where, and When such power has by Subjects bin acknowledged?
which he would have us believe is substantially answered by his other Question,
When, or Where has there bin a Kingdom long free from Sedition and Civil War?
which might receive a very full Answer, by assigning many Governments under
which the Subjects have enjoied very long Peace, Quiet, and Plenty, which never
was, nor ever can be enjoied one hour under his (as shall be proved when we
examine it.) But it will serve his turn, if it has once bin disquieted by a
Sedition or Civil War; and so all Government that is known and established,
must be laid aside and overthrown, to erect another that he supposes will cure
all defects. If Mr. Hobbes had thought fit to write problematically, and to
have examined, as many have don, the nature of Government, and the nature of
Mankind that is to be governed, and from the consideration of both, had
modestly proposed such a form, as to his judgment might better provide for the
security, peace, and happiness of a People, (which is the end of Government,)
then any form that is yet practiced and submitted to; he might well have
answered one objection of an inconvenience in his new form, with another of a
greater inconvenience in all other forms. But when he will introduce a
Government of his own devising, as founded and instituted already, and that not
as somewhat new, but submitted to by the Covenants, and Obligations, and
Election our selves have made, and so that we are bound by the rules of Justice
founded upon our own consent, to pretend neither to liberty, or property, other
then our Governor thinks fit to indulge to us; he must be contented not to be
believed, or must vouch-safe to tell us when, and where that consent of ours
was given, and we submitted to those obligations: and it will be no kind of
answer of satisfaction, to say magisterially, that if it be not so, it should
be so for our good, which we clearly find will turn to our irreparable damage
and destruction. And it is a very confident thing, that he should hope to
support his Sovereign right in so unlimited an extent upon the Law of Nature,
because (p. 176.) that forbids the violation of Faith, without being pressed to
tell us when, and where that Faith was given, that is so obligatory, and the
violation whereof must be so penal. But it is more prodigiously bold, to
confess upon the matter, that there has not hitherto bin any Commonwealth,
where those rights have bin acknowledged, or challenged, and to undervalue the
Argument, by making it as ridiculous, as if the Savage People of America should
deny there were any grounds or principles of reason so to build, as their
Architecture is not yet arrived at: So he thinks, that tho his Savage
Countrymen, and Neighbors, have yet only bin accustomed to Governments
imperfect, and apt to relapse into disorders, he has found out principles by
industrious meditation, to make their constitution everlasting. And truly he
has some reason to be confident of his Principles, if tho they cannot be
proved by reason, he be sure they are Principles from authority of Scripture, as
he professes them to be, and which must be examined in its course. In the mean
time he may be thought to be too indulgent to his Sovereign Governor, and very
near to contradict himself, that after he has made the keeping and observation
of promises to be a part of the Law of Nature, which is unalterable and
eternal, and so the ground and foundation of that obedience which the Subject
must render, how tyrannically soever exacted, yet all Covenants entered into by
the Sovereign to be void; and that to imagine that he is or can be bound to
perform any promise or covenant, proceeds only from want of understanding. And
it would be worth his pains to consider, whether the assigning such a power to
his Governor, or the absolving him from all Covenants and promises, be a
rational way to establish such a Peace as is the end of Government: and since
he confesses the justest Government may be overthrown by force, it ought
prudently to be considered, what is like to prevent that force, as well as what
the subject is bound to consent to; and whether the people may not be very
naturally disposed to use that force against him that declares himself to be
absolved from all Oaths, Covenants, and Promises, and whether any obligation of
reason or justice can establish the Government in him, who founds it upon so
unrighteous a determination.

If Mr. Hobbes did not affect to be of the humor of those unreasonable
Gamesters, which he says (page 19.) is intolerable in the society of men, who
will after trump is turned, use for trump, upon every occasion, that suit
whereof they have most in their hand, whom he likens to those men who clamor
and demand right reason for Judge, yet seek no more, but that things should be
determined by no other men's reason then their own; I say, if Mr. Hobbes were
not possessed by his supercilious spirit which he condemns, since this his
Institution of Sovereignty is a mere imagination, he might with as much reason,
if he would have bin pleased to have called it so, because it would have
carried with it more equality, and consequently more security, have supposed a
Covenant to be on the Sovereigns part: which that he may not do, he will not
admit that they who are his Subjects make any Covenant with their Sovereign to
obey him; which if he did, he could as well covenant again with them to govern
righteously, without making them the Judges of his justice, or himself liable
to their control and jurisdiction. So that the Sovereign has no security for
the obedience of his People, but the promise they have made to each other; and
consequently if they rebel against him, he cannot complain of any injustice don
to him, because they have broke no promise they made to him. And truly, by his
own Logic, they may release to one another when they think it convenient:
whereas if the promises be mutual, I do not say conditional, the Sovereign must
not be at the mercy of his Subjects; but as they put themselves under his
power, so he promises them not to use that power wantonly or tyrannically
(which will be a proper and significant word against all his interpretation;)
by which they have as much obligation upon him to be just, as he has upon them
to be obedient, which is no other, then that they swarve from justice, if they
withdraw their obedience from him. This had bin a more natural and equitable
Institution, and more like to have lasted, having in it the true essential form
of contracts, in which it will never be found that one party covenants, and the
other not; which is the reason Mr. Hobbes himself gives, why no Covenant can be
made with God, and that (page 89.) the pretense of Covenant with God, is so
evident a lie, even in the pretenders own consciences, that it is not only ^n
act of an unjust, but also of a vile and unmanly disposition; which assertion
is destructive of our Religion, and against the express sense of Scripture.

The impossibility alleged for such a Covenant, because it could not be don
before he was Sovereign, for that the Subjects who submit to him were not yet
one person, and after he is Sovereign what he does is void, is but a fancy of
words which have no solid signification. Nor is the instance which he gives of
the popular Government, by which he would make the imagination of such a
Covenant ridiculous, of any importance, for he says (page 90.) No man is so
dull as to say, that the People of Rome made a Covenant with the Romans to hold
the Soveraign^y on such or such conditions, which not performed the Romans
might lawfully, depose the Roman People; which is, according to his usual
practice, to put an objection into the mouth of a foolish Adversary to make his
Readers merry. And yet he lays so much weight upon it, that he says it is
only over inclination to a popular Government, that men do not see that there
is the same reason with reference to Monarchy. And so there is, and the reason
good to either. For does not every man know, that knows any thing of the
Government of Rome, that when the Sovereignty was entirely vested in the
Senate, and had long bin so, the People of Rome made a great alteration in the
Sovereignty by making Tribunes (by which Machiavel says their Government was
the more firm and secure) and afterward by introducing other Magistrates into
the Sovereignty? Nor were the Admissions and Covenants the Senate made in those
cases ever declared void, but observed with all punctuality: which is Argument
enough, that the Sovereign power may admit limitations without any danger to it
self or the People, which is all that is contended for.

As there never was any such Person (page 88.) of whose acts a great multitude
by mutual Covenant one with another, have made themselves every one the author,
to the end he may use the strength and means of them all, as he shall think
expedient for their peace, and common defense, which is the definition he gives
of his Commonwealth: So if it can be supposed, that any Nation can concur in
such a designation, and divesting themselves of all their right and liberty, it
could only be in reason obligatory to the present contractors, nor does it
appear to us, that their posterity must be bound by so unthrifty a concession
of their Parents. For tho Adam by his Rebellion against God forfeited all the
privileges which his unborn posterity might have claimed if he had preserved
his innocence, and tho Parents may alienate their Estates from their Children,
and thereby leave them Beggars; yet we have not the draught of any Contract,
nor is that which Mr. Hobbes has put himself to the trouble to prepare, valid
enough to that purpose, by which they have left impositions and penalties upon
the Persons of their posterity: nor is it probable that they would think
themselves bound to submit thereunto. And then the Sovereign would neither find
himself the more powerful, or the more secure, for his cont^^^tors having
covenanted one with another, and made themselves every one the author of all
his actions: and it is to be doubted, that the People would rather look upon
him as the Vizier Basha instituted by their Fathers, then as Gods Lieutenant
appointed to govern them under him.

It is to no purpose to examine the Prerogatives he grants to his Sovereign,
because he founds them all upon a supposition of a Contract and Covenant that
never was in nature, nor ever can reasonably be supposed to be; yet he
confesses it to be the generation (page 87.) of the great Leviathan, and which
falling to the ground all his Prerogatives must likewise fall too; and so much
to the damage of the Sovereign power, (to which most of the Prerogatives are
due) that men will be apt to suppose, that they proceed from a ground which is
not true, and so be the more inclined to dispute them. Whereas those
Prerogatives are indeed vested in the Sovereign by his being Sovereign; but he
does not become Sovereign by virtue of such a Contract and Covenant, but are of
the Essence of his Sovereignty, founded upon a better title then such an
accidental convention, and their designing a Sovereign by their Covenants with
one another, and none with or to him, who is so absolutely to command them. And
here he supposes again, that whatsoever a Sovereign is possessed of, is of his
Sovereignty; and therefore he will by no means admit, that he shall part with
any of his power which he calls essential and inseparable Rights, and that
whatever grant he makes of such power, the same is void: and he does believe
that this Sovereign right was at the time when he published his Book so well
understood (that is, Cromwell liked his Doctrine so well) that it would be
generally acknowledged in England at the next return of peace. Yet he sees
himself deceived: it has pleased God to restore a blessed and a general peace,
and neither King nor People believe his Doctrine to be true, or consistent with
peace. How, and why the most absolute Sovereigns may, as they find occasion,
part with, and deprive themselves of many branches of their power, will be more
at large discovered in another place: yet we may observe in this the very
complaisant humor of Mr. Hobbes, and how great a Courtier he desired to appear
to the Sovereign power that then governed, by how odious and horrible a
usurpation soever, in that he found a way to excuse and justify what they had
already don in the lessening and diminution of their own Sovereign power, which
it concerned them to have believed was very lawfully and securely don. For,
they having, as the most popular and obliging act they could perform, taken
away Wardships and Tenures, he confesses after his enumeration of twelve
Prerogatives, which he says (page 92.) are the rights which make the essence
of the Sovereignty, for these, he says, are incommunicable, and inseparable, I
say, he confesses the power to coin money, to dispose of the estates and persons
of infant heirs, and all other Statute Prerogatives may be transferred by the
Sovereign; whereas he might have bin informed, if he had bin so modest as to
think he had need of any information, that those are no Statute Prerogatives,
but as inherent and inseparable from the Crown, as many of those which he
declares to be of the Essence of the Sovereignty. But both those were already
entered upon, and he was to support all their actions which were past, as well
as to provide for their future proceedings.

If Mr. Hobbes had known any thing of the constitution of the Monarchy of
England, supported by as firm principles of Government as any Monarchy in
Europe, and which enjoied a series of as long prosperity, he could never have
thought that the late troubles there proceeded from an opinion received of the
greatest part of England, that the power was divided between the King, and the
Lords, and the House of Commons, which was an opinion never heard of in England
till the Rebellion was begun, and against which all the Laws of England were
most clear, and known to be most positive. But as he cannot but acknowledge,
that his own Sovereignty is obnoxious to the Lusts, and other irregular
passions of the People; so the late execrable Rebellion proceeded not from the
defect of the Law, nor from the defect of the just and ample power of the King,
but from the power ill men rebelliously possessed themselves of, by which they
suppressed the strength of the Laws, and wrested the power out of the hands of
the King: against which violence his Sovereign is no otherwise secure, then by
declaring that his Subjects proceed unjustly; of which no body doubts but that
all they who took up arms against the King, were guilty in the highest degree.
And there is too much cause to fear, that the unhappy publication of this
doctrine against the Liberty and propriety of the Subject (which others had the
honor to declare before Mr. Hobbes, tho they had not the good fortune to escape
punishment as he has don, I mean Dr. Manwaring, and Dr. Sibthorpe) contributed
too much thereunto. For let him take what pains he will to render those
precious words unvaluable, and of no signification; a better Philosopher then
he, and one who understood the rules of Government better, having lived under
just such a Sovereign as Mr. Hobbes would set up, (I mean Seneca,) will be
believed before him, who pronounces, Errat siquis existimat tutum esse ibi
Regem, ubi nihil a Rege tutum est; Securitas securitate mutua paciscenda est.
And he go's very far himself toward the confessing this truth, when he is
forced to acknowledge, (page 96.) That the riches, power, and honor of a
Monarch, arise only from the riches, strength and reputation of his subjects;
for no King can be rich, nor glorious, nor secure, whose Subjects are either
poor or contemtible: which assertion will never be supported, by saying, that
that condition shall be made good, and preserved to them by the justice and
bounty of the Sovereign. For riches, and strength, and reputation, are not aerie
words, without a real and substantial signification, nor do consist so much in
the present enjoying, especially if it shall depend upon the casual pleasure of
any man, as in the security for the future, that being a man's property, that
cannot be taken from him, but in that manner, and by those Rules, as are
generally looked upon as the fundamentals of Government. And when he is
transported by his passion and his appetite, and for making good his
Institution, to cancel and tread under foot all those known obligations, and
make the precious terms of Property and Liberty absurd and insignificant words,
to be blown away by the least breath of his monstrous Sovereign, without any
violation of justice, or doing injury to those he afflicts; I say, when he is
thus warmed by the flame of his passions, which he confesses (page 96.) always
dazles, never enlightens the understanding, he is so puzzled by his own notions,
that he make himself a way out by distinctions of his own modelling and
devising: and so he is compelled to acknowledge, that tho his illimited
Sovereign, whatsoever he does, can do no injury to his Subjects, nor be by any
of them accused of injustice, yet that he (p. 90.) may commit iniquity, tho not
injustice or injury in the proper signification, which is far more intelligible
then the Beatifical vision, for the obscurity and absurdity whereof he is so
merry with the Scholemen.

As Mr. Hobbes his extraordinary and notorious ignorance in the Laws and
constitution of the Government of England makes him a very incompetent judge or
informer of the cause or original of the late woeful calamities in England, of
which he knows no more the every other man of Malmesbury does, and upon which
there will be other occasion hereafter to enlarge; so his high arrogance and
presumtion that he does understand them, makes him triumph in the observation,
and wonder that so manifest a truth should of late be so little observed, that
in a Monarchy, he that had the Sovereignty from a descent of six hundred years,
was alone called Sovereign, had the title of Majesty from every one of his
Subjects, and was unquestionably taken by them for their King, was
notwithstanding never considered as their Representative, that name without
contradiction, passing for the title of those men, which at his command were
sent up by the People to carry their Petitions, and give him, if he permitted
it, their advice; which he says (page 95.) may serve as an admonition for
those that are the true and absolute Representative of a People (which he has
made his Sovereign to be) to take heed how they admit of any other general
Representative upon any occasion whatsoever: all which is so unskilful and
illiterate a suggestion, as could not fall into the conception of any man who
is moderately versed in the principles of Sovereignty. And if Mr. Hobbes did
not make war against all modesty, he would rather have concluded, that the
title of the Representative of the people was not to be affected by the King,
then that for want of understanding his Majesty should neglect to assume it, or
that his faithful Counsel, and his Learned Judges, who cannot be supposed to be
ignorant of the Regalities of the Crown, should fail to put him in mind of so
advantageous a Plea, when his fundamental rights were so foully assaulted, and
in danger. But tho the King knew too well the original of his own power, to be
contented to be thought the Representative of the People, yet if Mr. Hobbes
were not strangely unconversant with the transactions of those times, he would
have known, which few men do not know, that the King frequently, and upon all
occasions reprehended the two Houses, both for assuming the Style and
appellation of Parliament, which they were not, but in, and by his Majesty's
conjunction with them, and for calling themselves the Representative of the
People, which they neither were, or could be to any other purpose then to
present their Petitions, and humbly to offer their advice, when and in what his
Majesty required it, and this was as generally understood by men of all
conditions in England, as it was that Rebellion was Treason. But they who were
able by false pretenses, and under false protestations to raise an Army, found
it no difficult matter to persuade that Army, and those who concured with them,
that they were not in rebellion.

The Survey of Chapter 19.
I Shall heartily concur with Mr. Hobbes in the preference of Monarchy before
all other kind of Government for the happiness of the people, which is the end
of Government: and surely the people never enjoied (saving the delight they
have in the word Equality, which in truth signifies nothing but keeping on
their hats) Liberty or Property, or received the benefit of speedy and
impartial Justice, but under a Monarch; but I must then advise that Monarch for
his greatness and security, never so far to lessen himself, as to be considered
as the peoples Representative, which would make him a much less man then he is.
His Majesty is inherent in his office, and neither one or other is conferred
upon him by the people. Let those who are indeed the Deputies of the people, in
those occasions upon which the Law allows them to make Deputies, be called
their Representative; which term can have no other legitimate interpretation
then the Law gives it, which must have more authority then any Dictionary that
is, or shall be made by Mr. Hobbes, whose animadversion or admonition will
never prevail with any Prince to change his Sovereign Title, for Representative
of the people; and much the less for the pains which he has taken (page 95.)
to instruct men in the nature of that Office, and how he comes to be their
Representative.

I cannot leave this Chapter without observing Mr. Hobbes his very officious
care that Cromwell should not fall from his greatness, and that his Country
should remain still captive under the Tyranny of his vile Posterity, by his so
solemn Declaration, that he who is in possession of the Sovereignty, tho by
Election (page 98.) is obliged by the Law of nature, to provide, by
establishing his Successor, to keep those that had trusted him with the
Gove^^ment, from relapsing into the miserable condition of Civil War; and
consequently he was, when elected, a Sovereign absolute. And then he declares
positively, contrary to the opinion of all the world, that (page 100.) by the
institution of Monarchy, the disposing of the Successor is always left to the
judgment and the will of the present possessor; and that if he declares
expressly that such a man shall be his heir either by word or writing, then is
that man immediately after the decease of his predecessor invested in the right
of being Monarch. Mr. Hobbes was too modest a man to hope that his Leviathan
would have power to persuade those of Poland to change their form of
Government; and what Denmark has gotten by having don it since, cannot in so
short a time be determined; or that the Emperor would dissolve and cancel the
Golden Bull, and invest his Posterity in the Empire in spite of the Electors;
or that the Papacy should be made Hereditary, since Caesar Borgia was so long
since dead, and he had carried that spirit with him: and therefore I must
appeal to all dispassion'd men what Mr. Hobbes could have in his purpose in the
year One thousand six hundred fifty one, when this Book was printed, but by
this new Doctrine scarcely heard of till then, to induce Cromwell to break all
the Laws of his Country, and to perpetuate their slavery under his Progeny, in
which he followed his advice to the utmost of his power, tho his Doctrine
proved false and most detested. And tho Mr. Hobbes by his presence of mind, and
velocity of thought, which had enabled him to foresee the purpose of
rebelling, and taking the King Prisoner, and delivering him up, from that
question proposed to him, concerning the value of a Roman penny, might at that
time discern so little possibility of his own Sovereigns recovery, that it
might appear to him a kind of absurdity to wish it; yet methinks his own
natural fear of danger, which made him fly out of France, as soon as his
Leviathan was published and brought into that Kingdom, should have terrified
him from invading the right of all Hereditary Monarchies in the World, by
declaring, that by the Law of Nature which is immutable, it is in the power of
the present Sovereign to dispose of the succession, and to appoint who shall
succed him in the Government; and that the word Heir does not of it self imply
the Children or nearest Kindred of a man, but whomsoever a man shall any way
declare he would have succeed him, contrary to the known right and
establishment throughout the World, and which would shake if not dissolve the
Peace of all Kingdoms. Nor is there any danger of the dissolution of a
Commonwealth by the not nominating of a Successor; since it is a known maxim
in all Hereditary Monarchies, That the King never dies, because in the minute
of the exspiration of the present, his Heir succeeds him, and is in the instant
invested in all the dignities, and preheminences of which the other had bin
possessed: and if there were no other error or false doctrine in the Leviathan
(as there are very many of a very pernicious nature) that would be cause enough
to suppress it in all Kingdoms.

The Survey of Chapter 20.
IT is modestly don of Mr. Hobbes at last, after so many Magisterial
determinations of the institution of Sovereignty, and the rights and authority
of it, and what is not it, to confess that all these Discourses (page 105.) are
only what he finds by speculation and deduction of Sovereign Rights from the
nature, need, and designs of man in erecting of Commonwealths, and putting
themselves under Monarchs, etc. and therefore if he finds that all his
speculation is positively contradicted by constant and uncontroverted practice,
he will believe that his speculation is not, nor ought to be of authority enough
to introduce new Laws and Rules of Government into the World. And it is high
time for the Sovereign Power to declare, That it does not approve those
Doctrines, which may lessen the affections and tenderness of Princes toward
their Subjects, and even their reverence to God himself, if they thought that
they could change Religion, and suppress the Scripture it self; and that their
power over their Subjects is so absolute, that they give them all that they do
not take from them; and that Property is but a word of no signification, and
lessens the duty and obedience of Subjects, and makes them less love the
constitution of the Government they live under; which may prove so destructive
to them, if they have temtation from their passions or their appetite to
exercise the authority they justly have. It is fit therefore that all men know,
that these are only his speculations, and not the claim of Sovereign Power.

It had bin to be wished, that Mr. Hobbes had first taken the pains to have
informed himself of the power and authority exercised by Elective Princes over
their Subjects, and their submission rendered to them by their subjects, before
he had so positively determined, that Elective Kings are not Sovereigns, at
least that he had given a better reason for his assertion. He that has supreme
authority over all, and against whom there is no Appeal, may very justly and
lawfully be called a Sovereign. And if he would enquire into the authority of
the Emperor, in the proper Dominion of the Empire, he would find that he has
as Sovereign a power as any Prince in Christendom claims, and yet he is
Elective. And it is a more extravagant speculation to conclude, That because
the Electors have the absolute power to choose the Emperor, that the Sovereignty
is in them before they choose him, and that they may keep it to themselves if
they think good, because none have a right to give that which they have no
right to possess; when it is known to all the World that the Electors have a
right to choose the Emperor, and yet that till they have chosen him, the
Sovereignty is not in them, nor that they can possess it them selves, and choose
whether they will give it to another; and that when they have chosen him, he is
a Sovereign Prince, and superior to all those who have chosen him, by all the
marks of Sovereignty which are known in practice, tho not possibly in
speculation. And he knows well there is another Sovereign Prince greater then
the Emperor, and almost as great as he would have his Sovereign to be in the
extent of his power, who is likewise El^ctive, and that is the Pope, and that
the Conclave cannot retain that Sovereignty to themselves, but having by their
Election conferred ^t upon him, he is thereby become as absolute a Monarch as
Mr. Hobbes can wish. And truly, if he would rectify his speculations, that is,
his conceptions and imaginations, by examining those of other men (a fatal
neglect he has bin guilty of throughout his whole life) he could hardly have
avoided the knowing* that on every Michaelmas day the whole common People of
London choose the Lord Major, and yet the Office is not in them till they do
choose him, tho his Predecessor were dead, nor can they keep it to themselves;
and so they can give that which they cannot possess, which is diametrically
contrary to his speculation, which would likewise have bin controuled by all
Elections of the Kingdom.

He might have saved himself much labor (since he agrees that a Sovereign by
acquisition, which is somewhat we understand, has the same full Sovereignty
with his other by institution) if he had spared all that which is mere
speculation; and I will gratify him, by not insisting upon the P^ternal
Dominion, otherwise then as it must be confessed to be the original of
Monarchy, because we will do the Mother no wrong, who is so meet a help in the
generation. And before I proceed further upon this Argument, to which I will
presently return, I must lament in this place Mr. (...) so positive determining
a point of Justice, in which he could have no experience, and against all the
practice of the Christian World, (page ^04.) that he who has Qu^rter granted
(...) his life given, but deferred till farther deliberation; which Doctrine,
found only as he confesses by speculation, served to confirm that Tyrannical
Power in a Judgment they had given, when three great and noble Persons, who
were Prisoners of War, were contrary to all form and rule condemned to be
murdered; which Sentence was barbarously executed, and afterward reiterated
upon others, the rather probably upon his speculative determination.

And since we are now come to the Chapter of Dominion Paternal and Despotical,
in which he discourses of his Government by acquisition, which he will have by
force; or by institution, which he calls by consent, and confesses, that the
rights* and consequences of Sovereignty are the same in both; it may not (I
conceive) be unseasonable to state, and lay down that Scheme of Government,
which men reasonably believe was originally instituted, and the progress and
alterations which were afterward made, and all those Covenants, Promises, and
Conditions which were annexed to it, and by the observation of which it has
always acquired strength and luster, and bin as much impaired, when endeavors
have bin used to extend it beyond its bounds and just limits, and to make it
more absolute, then is consistent with the Peace and Happiness of the People,
which was, and is the end of its Institution. And in the first place we must
deny, as we have hitherto don, Mr. Hobbes his ground work, upon which, with
many ill consequences even from thence his foundation is supported, aad that
is, that War is founded in Nature, which gives the stronger a right to whatever
the weaker is possessed of, so that there can be no peace, or security from
oppression, till such Covenants are made, as may appoint a Sovereign to have
all that power which is necessary to provide for that peace and security; and
out of, and by this Institution, his Magistrate grows up to the greatness and
size of his Leviathan. But we say, that peace is founded in nature; and that
when the God of nature gave his Creature, Man, the dominion over the rest of
his Creation, he gave him likewise natural strength and power to govern the
World with peace and order: and how much soever he lost by his own integrity,
by falling from his obedience to his Creator, and how severe a punishment
soever he under-went by that his disobedience, it does not appear that his
dominion over Mankind was in any degree lessened or abated. So that we cannot
but look upon him during his life, as the sole Monarch of the World* and that
lasted so long, as we may reasonably compute, that a very considerable part of
the World, that was peopled before the Flood, was peopled in his life, since it
lasted upon the point of two parts of that term; so that his Dominion was over
a very numerous People. And during all that time, we have no reason to imagine
that there was any such Instrument of Government by Covenants and Contracts, as
is contained in this Institution. And yet we do acknowledge, that he was by
nature fully possessed of all that plenitudo potestatis, which does of right
belong to a Magistrate; and we may very reasonably believe, having no color to
think the contrary, that his Son Seth, who was born a hundred and thirty years
after him, and lived above a hundred years after he was dead, governed his
descendants with the same absolute Dominion, which might well be continued
under his Successor to the very time of the Flood* for we may very reasonably
believe that Noah conversed with Seth, since it is evident they lived one
hundred years together in the same Age. Nor have we the least color to believe,
that there was either S^dition or Civil War before the Flood; their rebellion
against God in a universal exercise of Idolatry, which implies a general
conse^^^ amongst themselves, being in the opinion of most Learned men, the
crying Sin that provoked God to drown the World.

After the Flood, we cannot but think that Noah remained the sole, Monarch of
the World during his life, according to that model with which he had bin very
well acquainted for the space of five hundred years; and he lived long enough
after to see a very numerous increase of his Children and Subjects, who after
his death, when the multiplication was very great, came from the East into the
Land of Shinar, the pleasant v^^ly of Shinar, where God, in the beginning, had
placed the Father of mankind, Adam; and Learned men are of opinion, that the
great and principal end of the building of Babel, over and above the high Tower
for their fame and renown to posterity, was, that they intended it for the
Metropolis of an Universal Monarchy; so little doubt there was yet made of an
entire subjection and obedience. Sure we are, that the Generations of Noah,
when mankind was exceedingly increased, did divide the Nations in the Earth;
and Mr. M^ad ass^res us, that the word which we translate divided, signifies
not a scattering, or any thing of confusion, but a most distinct partition. So
that this great division of the Earth being performed in this method and order,
there is no room for the imagination and dream of such an irregular and
confused dispersion, that every man went whither he listed, and settled himself
where he liked best, from whence that Institution of Government might arise
which Mr. Hobbes fancies. Under this Division, we of the Western World have
reason to believe our selves of the posterity of Iapheth, and that our
Progenitors did as well know under what Government they were to live, as what
portion they were to possess: and we have that blessing of Iapheth, that God
would enlarge him into the Tents of Shem, and that Cham should be his servant,
to assure and confirm us, that the Inundation, which almost covered us, of the
Goths and Vandals from Scythia, and other Northern Nations (whose original
habitations we cannot to this day find) were not of the Children of Cham, which
we might otherwise have suspected.

As Mankind increased, and the age of man grew less, so that they did not live
to see so great a Progeny issue out of their own loins as formerly, and their
subjects growing less, their kindred also grew at so great a distance, that the
account of their relations was not so easily or so carefully preserved; hereby
they who had the Sovereign Power, exercised less of the Paternal Affection in
their Government, and looked upon those they governed as their mere Subjects,
not as their Allies: and by degrees, according to the custom of exorbitant
Power, considering only the extent of their own Jurisdiction, and what they
might do, they treated those who were under them not as Subjects, but as
slaves, who having no right to any thing but what they gave them, would allow
them to possess nothing but what they had no mind to have themselves. Estates
they had none that they could call their own, because when their Sovereign
called for them, they were his; their persons were at his command when he had
either occasion or appetite to use them, and their Children inherited nothing
but the subjection of their Parents: so that they were happy or miserable, as
he who had the power and command over them exercised that power with more or
less rigor or indulgence, they submitting to both, acknowledging the dominion
to be naturally absolute, and their subjection and obedience to be as natural.
Kings had not long delighted themselves with this exorbitant exercise of their
power (for tho the power had bin still the same, the exercise of it had bin
very moderate, whilst there remained the tenderness or memory of any relation)
but they begun to discern (according to their faculties of discerning, as their
parts were better or worse) that the great strength they seemed to be possessed
of, must in a short time end in absoulte weakness, and the plenty they seemed
to enjoy, would become exceeding want and beggary; that no man would build a
House that his Children should not inherit, nor cultivate Land with good
husbandry and expense, the fruit and profit whereof might be taken by another
man; that whilst their Subjects did not enjoy the convenience and delight of
life, they could not be sure of the affection and help of them, when they
should enter into a difference with one who is as absolute as themselves, but
they would rather choose to be subject to him, whose Subje^ts lived with more
satisfaction under him: in a word, that whilst they engrossed all power, and
all wealth into their own hands, they should find none who would defend them in
the possession of it; and that there is great difference between the subjection
that love and discretion paies, and that which results only from fear and
force; and that despair puts an end to that duty, which nature, and it may be
Conscience too, would still persuade them to pay, and to continue; and
therefore that it was necessary that the Subjects should find profit and
comfort in obeying, as well as Kings pleasure in commanding. These wise and
wholesome Reflections prevailed with Princes for their own benefit to restrain
themselves, to make their Power less absolute, that it might be more useful; to
give their Subjects a property that should not be invaded but in such cases,
and with such and such circumstances, and a liberty that should not be
restrained, but upon such terms as they could not but think reasonable. And as
they found the benefit to grow from those condescentions in the improvement of
Civility, and those additions of delight which makes Life and Government the
more pleasant, they enlarged the Graces and Concessions to their Subjects,
reserving all in themselves which they did not part with by their voluntary
Grants and Promises. And if we take a view of the several Kingdoms of the
World, we shall see another manner of beauty, glory and luster in those
Governments, where those condescentions, concessions, and contracts have bin
most or best observed, then in those Dominions where the Sovereigns retain to
themselves all the Rights and Prerogatives which are invested in them by the
original nature of Government; upon which we shall enlarge hereafter.

This is the original and pedigree of Government, equally different from that
which the levelling fancy of some men would reduce their Sovereign to, upon an
imagination that Princes have no authority or power but what was originally
given them by the People, and that it cannot be presumed that they would give
them so much as might be applied to their own destruction, and from that which
Mr. Hobbes has instituted, by framing formal Instruments by which an assembly
of mankind (which was never heard of, nor can be conceived practicable) has
devolved from themselves into one man of their own choice, an absolute Power by
their own consent, to exercise it in such a manner as to his pleasure is
agreeable, without the observation of the common rules of Justice or Sobriety;
whereas it cannot be imagined possible in nature, that ever such an assembly of
men of equal authority in themselves, will ever agree to make one Man their
Sovereign with such an absolute Jurisdiction over the rest, as must divest them
of all property as well as power for the future; and whereas in truth all power
was by God and Nature invested into one Man, where still as much of it remains
as he has not parted with, and shared with others, for the good and benefit of
those (and the mutual security of both) for whose benefit it was first
entrusted to him* the rest, which is enough, remains still in him, and may be
applied to the preservation of the whole, against the fancies of those who
think he has nothing but what they have given him; and likewise against those
who believe that so much is given him, that he has power to leave no body else
any thing to enjoy; the last of which are no less enemies to Monarchy then the
former.

I am very unwilling to enter into the lists with Mr. H^bbes upon the
interpretation of Scriptures, which he handles as imperiously as he does a Text
of Aristotle* putting such unnatural interpretation on the words, as has not
before fallen into the thoughts of any other man, and drawing very unnatural
inferences from them; insomuch as no man can think he is really in earnest,
when, to prove that the Kings word is sufficient to take any thing from any
Subject when there is need, and that the King is Judge of that need, he alleges
the example of our Savior, who, he says, as King of the Jews (p. 106)
commanded his Disciples to take the Asses Colt to carry him to Jerusalem, which
he says the owner permitted, and did not ask whether his necessity was a
sufficient title, nor whether he was Judge of that necessity, but did acquiesce
in the will of the Lord: which is a very bold and ungrave wresting of Scripture
to purposes it could not intend; since our Savior did not profess to do one
act as a King of the Jews, but declared that his kingdom was not of this world.
And at the time he told the Messengers who were sent for the Ass, that if they
were asked what they meant by it, they should answer, that the Lord had need of
him, upon which he knew, and he said, that they would let him go, and upon that
he grounded their Commission. If the owner would not permit them to take it,
the Messengers had no authority to have brought it to him. And his inference
from, and the gloss he makes upon the question that God asked of Adam, (p.
106.) Have thou eaten? has as little warrant from that text, as the other
improper instance of our Savior. And sure when Mr. Hobbes thought fit by this
example of our Savior in this place to wrest all property from the Subject, he
did not intend in any other place so far to divest him of any authority, that
men were not bound to believe any thing he said, or to do any thing he
commanded, because he had no Commission which required obedience, his Kingdom
being not yet of this world. So unwary he is in the contradicting himself; as
all men are, who first resolve what they are to prove, before they consider
what it is that is true.

We are not obliged, nor indeed have any reason to believe, that God was
offended with the Children of Israel for desiring a King, which was a
Government himself had instituted over them, and to which they had bin long
accustomed, and had undergon much misery, and confusion whilst there was no
King in Israel; but for their mutinous manner of asking it, and the reason they
gave for it, that they might be like other nations, which God had taken all
possible care that they should not be, and enjoined them to learn nothing of
them. And the description which Samuel made of the exorbitant power of Kings,
which indeed the Kings of the Nations did exercise, by whose example they
desired to be governed, was rather to terrify them from pursuing their foolish
demand, then to constitute such a Prerogative as the King should use whom God
would appoint to go in and out before them; which methinks is very manifest, in
that the worst Kings that ever reigned over them, never challenged or assumed
those Prerogatives. Nor did the people conceive themselves liable to those
impositions; as appears by the application they made to Rehoboam upon the death
of Solomon, that he would abate some of that rigor his Father had exercised
toward them; the rough rejection of which, contrary to the advice of his
wisest Counselors, cost him the greater part of his Dominions: and when
Rehoboam would by Arms have reduced them to obedience, God would not suffer
him, because he had bin in the fault himself.

I am willing to take an occasion in this place to wish, that no better Divines
then Mr. Hobbes had from this place in Samuel, presumed very unwarrantably to
draw inferences, to lessen the Subjects reverence and obedience to Kings, and
to raise a prejudice and disesteem in Kings toward their Subjects, as people
whose affections and good will are of no use to them, since they can present
nothing to them that is their own, nor have any thing to give, but what they
may take from them; which two very different rather then contrary Conclusions*
too many Devines (and some of parts) according to their several inclinations
and appetites, have presumed to wrest from that place of Scripture; the one
party of them, as is said before, endeavoring maliciously to render Monarchy
odious and insupportable, by the unlimited affections, and humors, and
pretenses, and power of a single uncontrollable person; the other believing as
unreasonably, that the dispositions, natures, and hearts of the people, cannot
be applied to the necessary obedience toward their Princes, nor their
reverence and duty be so well fixed and devoted to them, as by thinking that
they have nothing of their own, but whatsoever they enjoy they have only by the
bounty of the King, who can take it from them when he pleases: and to this last
party Mr. Hobbes his speculation has for the present disposed him to adhere,
tho in any other particular opinion he does not concur with any Divine of any
Church in Christendom. For the first, whoever does well consider the wonderful
confused Government that was exercised over the Children of Israel from the
death of Joshua, when the Monarchy was interrupted, under the Judges for the
space of above three hundred years, the barbarous negligence in the
instructions of the people in the knowledge of God, and of their duty to him,
insomuch that the very next generation after the death of Ioshuah had lost, or
was without the whole History of what God had don for them, and of what he
expected from them; so unfaithful a guide, or remembrancer is Tradition, when
the Scripture it self is not to be found: I say, whosoever considers likewise
the quality, and talent, and humor of many of the very Judges who had bin over
them, as the repeted Acts of indiscretion and folly in Sampson, which could not
but make his judgment to be in the less reverence, and the strength of his arms
to be more admired then that of his head; with the present state they were then
in under the sons of Samuel, who were no better then the Sons of Ely had bin,
will not perhaps so very much blame them for desiring a King: and tho the
manner of their asking it might, as has bin said, offend Samuel, and in some
degree displease God, yet he might not be offended absolutely with the thing it
self, since it was no more then God himself had in a manner prescribed to them,
as well as foretold, without any kind of disapprobation. When thou art come
into the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee etc. and shall say, I will set
a King over me, like as all the Nations which are about me, Thou shall in any
wise set him a King over thee, whom the Lord thy God shall choose. Deuteronomy. 17. 14,
15, 16, 17. God was well content that they should have a King, but reserved the
election of him to himself: he would have no transferring of rights, or
covenanting for one another, he would choose his own Representative. Nor amongst
all the customs of the Nations, which he orbad them to follow, did God ever
show the least dislike of their Government by Kings, which had bin instituted
originally by himself, and probably bin continued by them even from the time of
the institution, however their manners were degenerated and the knowledge of him
totally forgotten. And in what degrees of grace and favor that high calling
has bin ever since with him, appears by the mention of them throughout the
whole current of Scripture, by the Prerogatives he has granted to them, and by
his imparting to them even his own appellation.

They who will in the next place, deduce the extent of the absolute and
illimited power of Kings from that declaration by Samuel, which indeed seems to
leave neither Property, or Liberty in their subjects, and could be only
intended by Samuel to terrify them from that mutinous and seditious clamor,
since it has no foundation from any other part of Scripture, nor was ever
practiced or exercised by any good King who succeeded over them, and was
blessed, and approved by God: and therefore when those State Empirics, of what
degree or quality soever, will take upon them to prescribe a new diet and
exercise to Sovereign Princes, and invite them to assume new power and
prerogatives over the people, by the Precepts, Warrants, and Prescriptions of
the Scripture, they should not presume to make the sacred writ subject to their
own private fancies. And if according to the more authentic method of
interpreting doubtful places, they had recourse to that place, where the same
matter is first handled, they would then have found, by resorting to the before
mentioned place in Deuteronomy, another their kind of Scheme for the power, and
government of Kings. There, when God intended that they should be governed by a
King whom he would himself choose, he prescribed what he should not do and what
he should do. He should not multiply Horses to himself, etc. which only
concerned that people, that they might have no temtation to return to Egypt, Ye
shall henceforth no more return that may, etc. Nor shall he multiply Wives,
etc. Tho multiplying of Wives seemed to be permitted, yet he was to have a care
that the number of them did not turn his heart away. Nor should he greatly
multiply unto himself Silver, and Gold, etc. not so affect, and set his heart
upon being rich, to be temted to oppress his Subjects, or to injure his
Neighbors; and so far the negative directed. Then for the affirmative, That he
should write a copy of the Law in a Book, etc. Deuteronomy. 17. 18, 19, 20. that it
should be with him, and he should read therein all the days of his life, that
he might learn to fear the Lord his God, and to keep all the words of the Law,
and these Statutes to do them; that his heart be not lifted up, and that he
turn not aside from the Commandment to the right hand, or to the left; and from
this Text the Rabbis concluded, that he was to write a Book of the Law for
himself, and if he had none before he was King, he was obliged as soon as he was
King to have two, one whereof he was to have always whith him, sive cum vadit
ad praelium, sive cum sedet in judicio, ^ut in mensa, etc, Those were the
injunctions which God prescribed to his King, and were observed by all those
who were blessed and approved by him, for David seems by the words of Nathan to
have some particular allowance for the great number of his Wives; and
multiplying gold, and silver, was for the building of the Temple, and no
private use of his one; and Solomon's excessive greatness, was from the
immediate bounty of God himself; but he no sooner violated those Precepts, and
exceeded that moderation that was prescribed to him toward his Subjects, and
with reference to the multiplying Wives; then his heart turned away from God,
and God turned away from him.

This pleasant suggestion by which he would discountenance that importunate and
impertinent demand of an example of such a Government as he would institute,
that tho in all places of the world men should lay the foundation of their
houses in sand, it could not thence be inferred that so it ought to be, will
never persuade men to change a Government they have bin for many hundred years
happy under (tho with some vicissitudes of fortune) for an imaginary Government
by his Rules of Arithmetic and Geometry, of which no Nation has ever yet had
the experiment: and if there be any Country where is a Sand of that nature,
that has supported the greatest edifices for hundreds of years, against all
the storms of wind and rage of tempests, he shall be much too nice and
scrupulous a person, who will by any Rules of Architecture forbear to build^
his House there, because he will not lay his foundation upon Sand, which by
experience is found to be of equal firmness with a Rock.

The Survey of Chapter 21.
MR. Hobbes is so great an enemy to freedom that he will not allow Man that
which God has given him, the Freedom of his Will, but he shall not entangle me
in that Argument, which he has enough exercised himself in with a more equal
Adversary, who I think has bin much too hard for him at his own weapon,
Reason, the Learned Bishop of Derry, who was afterward Archbishop of Armagh,
and by which he has put him into greater choler then a Philosopher ought to
subject himself to, the terrible strokes whereof I am not willing to undergo,
and therefore shall keep my self close to that freedom and liberty only that is
due to Subjects, and of which, his business in this Chapter, is to deprive them
totally.

A man would have expected from Mr. Hobbes's Inventory of the several rights
and powers of his Sovereign in his eighteenth Chapter, of which one was to
prescribe Rules (page 91.) whereby every man might know what goods he may
enjoy, and what actions he might do without being molested by any of his fellow
Subjects, which he says, Men call Propriety, that some such Rule should be
established as might secure that Porpriety, how little soever: but he has now
better explained himself, and finds, that Liberty and Property are only fences
against the Invasion or force of fellow Subjects, but toward the Sovereign of
no use or signification at all. No man has a Propriety in any thing, that can
restrain the King from taking it from him, and the liberty of a Subject (page
109.) ^eth only in those things, which in regulating their actions, the
Sovereign has pretermitted, such as is the liberty to buy and sell, and
otherwise contract with one another; to choose their own abode, their own diet,
their own trade of life, and to institute their children as they think fit, and
the like. I wonder he did not insert the liberty to wear his Clothes of that
fashion which he likes best, which is as important as most of his other
Concessions. And yet he seems to be jealous, that even this liberty should make
men imagine, that the Sovereign power should be in any degree limited, or that
any thing he can do to a Subject, and upon what pretense soever, may be called
injustice or injury, the contrary whereof he says he has showed already; for
he takes it as granted, that all that he has said he had proved: and if he
has not, he has don it now substantially by the example of Iepthah, in
causing his daughter to be sacrificed (of which he is not sure) and by David's
killing Vriah, which he says, tho it was against equity, yet it was not an
injury to Vriah, because the right was given him by Vriah, which I dare swear
Vriah never knew he had don. And by such unnatural Arguments he would persuade
men to be willing to be undon; very like those which the Stoics as obstinately
maintained, That a wise man could not be injured because he was not capable nor
sensible of it. But I wonder more, that he does not discern what every other
man cannot but discern, that by his so liberal taking away, he has not left
the Subject any thing to enjoy even of those narrow concessions which he has
made to him. For how can any man believe that he has liberty to buy and sell,
when the Sovereign power can presently take away what he has sold, from him
who has bought it, and consequently no man can sell or buy to any purpose? Who
can say that he can choose his own abode, or his own trade of life, or any
thing, when as soon as he has chosen either, he shall be required to go to a
place where he has no mind to go, and to do somewhat he would not choose to do?
for his person is no more at his own disposal then his goods are; so that he
may as graciously retain to himself all that he has granted.

Whether the Sovereign Power, or the Liberty of the Subject receive the greater
injury and prejudice by this brief state and description he makes of the no
liberty, that is, the portion he leaves to the Subject, would be a great
question, if he had not bin pleased himself to determine, that his Subject (for
God forbid that any other Prince should have such a Subject) is not capable of
an injury; by which the whole mischief is like to fall upon the Sovereign. And
what greater mischief and ruin can threaten the greatest Prince, then that
their Subjects should believe, that all the liberty they have, consists only in
those things which the Sovereign has hitherto pretermitted, that is, which he
has not yet taken from them, but when he pleases in regulating their actions
to determine the contrary, they shall then have neither liberty to buy or sell,
nor to contract with each other, to choose their own abode, their own diet,
their own trade of life, or to breed their own children; and to make their
misery complete, and their life as little their own as the rest, that nothing
the Sovereign can do to his Subject, on what pretense soever, as well in order
to the taking away his Life as his Estate, can be called injustice or injury; I
say, what greater insecurity can any Prince be in or under, then to depend upon
such Subjects? And alas! what security to himself or them can the Sword in his
hand be, if no other hand be lift up on his behalf, or the Swords in all other
hands be directed against him, that he may not cut off their heads when he has
a mind to it? and it is not Mr. Hobbes's authority that will make it believed,
that he who desires more liberty, demands an exemtion from all Laws, by which
all other men may be masters of their lives; and that every Subject is author
of every act the Sovereign does, upon the extravagant supposition of a consent
that never was given; and if it were possible to have bin given, must have bin
void at the instant it was given, by Mr. Hobbes's own rules, as shall be made
out in its place. He himself confesses, (page 295.) and says it is evident to
the meanest capacities, that men's actions are derived from the opinion they
have of the good and evil which from those actions redound unto themselves, and
consequently men that are once possessed of an opinion that their obedience to
the Sovereign power will be more hurtful to them then their disobedience, will
disobey the Laws, and thereby overthrow the Commonwealth, and introduce
confusion and civil War, for the avoiding whereof, all civil Government was
ordained. If this be true, (as there is no reason to believe it to be) is it
possible that any man can believe, that the People, for we speak not of
convincing the Philosophers and the Mathematicians, but of the general
affections of the People, which must dispose them to obedience, that they can
be persuaded by a long train of Consesequences, from the nature of man, and the
end of Government, and the institution thereof by Contracts and Covenants, of
which they never heard, to believe that it is best for them to continue in the
same nakedness in which they were created, for fear their clothes may be stolen
from them, and that they have parted with their liberty to save their lives?
There is no question, but of all calamities the calamity of War is greatest,
and the rage and uncharitableness of civil War most formidable of all War.
Indeed foreign War seldom destroies a Nation without domestic Combinations and
Conspiracies, which makes a complication with civil War; and sure nothing can
more inevitably produce that, then an universal opinion in the People, that
their Sovereign can take from them all they have whenever he has a mind to it,
and their lives to, without any injustice, and consequently that their
obedience to him will be more hurtful to them then their disobedience, so well
has he provided for the security of his Sovereign, if his doctrine were
believed.

Mr. Hobbes is too much conversant in both those learned Languages, to wish
that the Western World were deprived of the Greek and Latin Tongues, for any
mischief they have don; and upon my conscience, what ever errors may have bin
brought into Philosophy by the authority of Aristotle, no man ever grew a Rebel
by reading him; and if the greatest Monarch that has ever bin in the World,
except the Monarch of the World, had thought his Tutor Aristotle had bin so
great an enemy to Monarchy (yet he knew he was born and bred in a Republic) and
that his Works contribute so much to sedition, as Mr. Hobbes supposes, he would
not have valued his Person so much, nor read his Works with such diligence as
he did. And if Mr. Hobbes would take a view of the Insurrections, and the civil
Wars which have at any time bin stirred up in the Western parts, he will not
find that they have bin contrived or fomented by men who had spent much time in
the reading Greek and Latin Authors, or that they have bin carried on upon the
Maxims and Principles which they found there. Jack Straw and Wat Tyler, whose
Insurrection, in respect of the numbers and the progress it made, was as
dangerous as has happened in any Age or Climate, had never read Aristotle or
Cicero; and I belive, had Mr. Hobbes bin of this opinion when he taught
Thucydides to speak English, which Book contains more of the Science of Mutiny
and Sedition, and teaches more of that Oratory that contributes thereunto, then
all that Aristotle and Cicero have published in all their Writings, he would
not have communicated such materials to his Countrymen. But if this new
Philosophy, and Doctrine of Policy and Religion should be introduced, taught,
and believed, where Aristotle and Cicero have don no harm, it would undermine
Monarchy more in two months, then those two great men have don since their
deaths; and men would reasonably wish, that the Author of it had never bin born
in the English Climate, nor bin taught to write and read.

It is a very hard matter for an Architect in State and Policy, who does
despise all Precedents, and will not observe any Rules of practice, to make
such a model of Government as will be in any degree pleasant to the Governor,
or governed, or secure for either; which Mr. Hobbes finds; and tho he takes a
liberty to raise his Model upon a supposition of a very formal Contract, that
never was, or ever can be in nature, and has the drawing and preparing his own
form of Contract, is forced to allow such a latitude in obedience to his
Subject, as shakes the very pillars of his Government. And therefore, tho he be
contented that by the words of his Contract, (page 112.) Kill me, and my fellow
if you please, the absolute power of all men's lives shall be submitted to the
disposal of the Governors will and pleasure, without being obliged to observe
any rules of Justice and Equity; yet he will not admit into his Contract the
other words, (page 112.) I will kill my self, or my fellow, and therefore that
he is not bound by the command of his Sovereign to execute any dangerous or
dishonorable office; but in such cases, men are not to resort so much to the
words of the submission, as to the intention: which distinction surely may be
as applicable to all that monstrous authority which he gives the Governor to
take away the Lives and Estates of his Subjects, without any cause or reason,
upon an imaginary Contract, which if never so real, can never be supposed to be
with the intention of the Contractor in such cases. And the subtle Distinctions
he finds out to excuse Subjects from yielding obedience to their Sovereigns,
and the Prerogative he grants to fear, for a whole Army to run away from the
Enemy without the guilt of treachery or injustice, leaves us some hope, that he
will at last allow such a liberty to Subjects, that they may not in an instant
be swallowed up by the prodigious power which he pleases to grant to his
Sovereign. And truly, he degrades him very dishonorably, when he obliges him to
be the Hangman himself, of all those Malefactors, which by the Law are
condemned to die; for he gives every man authority, without the violation of his
duty, or swerving from the rules of Justice, absolutely to refuse to perform
that office. Nor has he provided much better for his security, then he has
for his honor, when he allows it lawful for any number of men, (page 112.) who
have rebelled against the Sovereign, or committed some capital crime, for which
every one of them expects death, then to join together, and defend each other,
because they do but defend their lives, which the guilty man, he says, may do
as well as the innocent. And surely, no man can legally take his life from him
who may lawfully defend it; and then the murderer, or any other person guilty
of a capital Crime, is more innocent, and in a better condition then the
Executioner of Justice, who may be justly murdered in the just execution of his
office. And it is a very childish security that he provides for his Sovereign
against this Rebellion, and defense of themselves against the power of the Law,
(page 113.) that he declares it to be lawful only for the d^fence of their
lives, and that upon the offer of pardon for themselves, that self-defence is
unlawful: as if a body that is lawfully drawn together, with strength enough to
defend their lives against the power of the Law, are like to disband and lay
down their Arms, without other benefit and advantage then only of the saving of
their lives. But tho he be so cruel as to divest his Subjects of all that
liberty, which the best and most peaceable men desire to possess, yet he
liberally and bountifully confers upon them such a liberty as no honest man can
pretend to, and which is utterly inconsistent with the security of Prince and
People; which unreasonable Indulgence of his cannot but be thought to proceed
from an unlawful affection to those, who he saw had power enough to defend the
transcendent wickedness they had committed, tho they were without an Advocate
to make it lawful for them to do so, till he took that office upon him in his
Leviathan, as is evident by the instance he gives in the next Paragraph, that
he thinks it lawful for every man to have as many wives as he pleases, if the
King will break the silence of the Law, and declare that he may do so; which is
a Prerogative he vouchsafes to grant to the Sovereign, to balance that liberty
he gave to the Subject to defend himself and his companion against him, and is
the only power that may enable him to be too hard for the other.

If Mr. Hobbes did not believe that the authority of his Name, and the
pleasantness of his Style, would lull men asleep from enquiring into the Logic
of his Discourse, he could not but very well discern himself, that this very
liberty which he allows the Subject to have, and which he does without scruple
enjoy, to sue the Sovereign, and to demand the hearing of his Cause, and that
Sentence be given according to the Law, results only from that condescension
and contract which the Sovereign has made with his Subject, and which can as
well secure many other Liberties to them, as their power to sue the King; for
there could be no Law precedent to that resignation of themselves and all they
had, at the institution of their supreme Governor; and if there had bin, it had
bin void and invalid, it being not possible that any man who has right to
nothing, and from whom any thing that he has may be taken away, can sue his
Sovereign for a debt which he might take, if it were due from any other man,
but can by no means be due from him to whom all belongs, and who has power to
forbid any Judge to proceed upon that complaint, or any other person to presume
to make that complaint, were it not for the subsequent contract which he calls
a precedent Law, by which the Sovereign promises and obliges himself to appoint
Judges to exercise Justice even where himself is party, and that he will be
sued before those Judges, if he does not pay what he ow's to his Subjects. This
is the Contract which gives that capacity of suing, and which by his own
consent and condescension lessens his Sovereignty, that his Subjects may
require Justice from him. And yet all these promises, and lessenings, he
pronounces as void, and to amount to contradictions, that must dissolve the
whole Sovereign power, and leave the people in confusion and war. Whereas the
truth is, these condescentions, and voluntary abatements of some of that
original power that was in them, have drawn a cheerful submission, and bin
attended by a ready obedience to Sovereignty, from the time that Subjects have
bin at so great a distance from being considered as Children, and that
Sovereigns have bin without those natural tendernesses in the exercise of their
power, and which in the rigor of it could never have bin supported. And where
these obligations are best observed, Sovereignty flourishes with the most
luster, and security; Kings having still all the power remaining in them, that
they have not themselves parted with, and released to their Subjects, and their
Subjects having no pretense to more liberty or power then the King has granted
and given to them: and both their happiness, and security consists in
containing themselves within their own limits, that is, King, not to affect the
recovery of that exorbitant power, which their Ancestors wisely parted with, as
well for their own as the peoples benefit; and Subjects to rejoice in those
liberties which have bin granted to them, and not to wish to lessen the power
of the King, which is not greater then is necessary for their own perservation.
And to such a wholesome division, and communication of power as this is, that
place of Scripture (with which Mr. Hobbes is still too bold) a Kingdom d^vided
in it self cannot stand, cannot be applied.

But that this Supreme Sovereign, whom he has invested with the whole property
and liberty of all his Subjects, and so invested him in it, that he has not
power to part with any of it by promise, or donation, or release, may not be
too much exalted with his own greatness, he has humbled him sufficiently by
giving his Subjects leave to withdraw their obedience from him when he has
most need of their assistance, for the (page 114.) obligation of Subjects to
the Sovereign is understood (he says) to last as long, and no longer, then the
power lasts to protect them. So that as soon as any Town, City, or Province of
any Princes Dominions, is invaded by a Foreign Enemy, or possessed by a
Rebellious Subject, that the Prince for the present cannot suppress the Power
of the one, or the other, the people may lawfully resort to those who are over
them, and for their Protection perform all the Offices and duties of good
Subjects to them, (page 114.) For the right men have by nature to protect
themselves when none else can protect them, can by no covenant be relinquished,
and the end of obedience is protection, which wherever a man sees it either in
his own, or in an others sword, nature applies his obedience to it and his
endeavors to maintain it. And truly it is no wonder if they do so, and that
Subjects take the first opportunity to free themselves from such a Sovereign as
he has given them, and choose a better for themselves. Whereas the duty of
Subjects is, and all good Subjects believe they owe another kind of duty and
obedience to their Sovereign, then to withdraw their subjection because he is
oppressed; and will prefer poverty, and death it self, before they will
renounce their obedience to their natural Prince, or do any thing that may
advance the service of his Enemies. And since Mr. Hobbes gives so ill a
testimony of his Government (which, by the severe conditions he would oblige
mankind to submit to for the support of it, ought to be firm, and not to be
shaken) (page 114.) that it is in its own nature not only subject to violent
death by foreign war, but also from the ignorance and passion of men, that it
has in it from the very institution many seeds of natural mortality by
intestine discord, worse then which he cannot say of any Government, we may
very reasonably prefer the Government we have, and under which we have enjoi'd
much happiness, before his which we do not know, nor any body has had
experience of, and which by his own confession is liable to all the accidents
of mortality which any others have bin; and reject his that promises so ill,
and exercises all the action of War in Peace, and when War comes, is liable to
all the misfortunes which can possibly attend or invade it.

Whether the relation of Subjects be extinguished in all those cases, which Mr.
Hobbes takes upon him to prescribe, as Imprisonment, Banishment, and the like,
I leave to those who can instruct him better in the Law of Nations, by which
they must be judged, notwithstanding all his Appeals to the Law of Nature; and
I presume, if a banished Person (p. 114) during which, he says, he is not
subject, shall join in an action under a Foreign power against his Country,
wherein he shall with others be taken prisoner, the others shall be proceeded
against as Prisoners of War, when he shall be judged as a Traitor and Rebel,
which he could not be, if he were not a Subject: and this not only in the case
of an hostile action, and open attemt, but of the most secret conspiracy that
comes to be discovered. And if this be true, we may conclude it would be very
unsafe to conduct our selves by what Mr. Hobbes (p. 105.) finds by speculation,
and deduction of Sovereign rights from the nature, need* and designs of men.
Surely this woeful desertion, and defection in the cases above mentioned, which
has bin always held criminal by all Law that has bin current in any part of
the World, received so much countenance and justifications by Mr. Hobbes his
Book, and more by his conversation, that Cromwell found the submission to those
principles produced a submission to him, and the imaginary relation between
Protection and Allegiance so positively proclaimed by him, prevailed for many
years to extinguish all visible fidelity to the King, whilst he persuaded many
to take the Engagement as a thing lawful, and to become Subjects to the
Usurper, as to their legitimate Sovereign; of which great service he could not
abstain from bragging in a Pamphlet set forth in that time, that he alone, and
his doctrine had prevailed with many to submit to the Government, who would
otherwise have disturbed the public Peace, that is, to renounce their fidelity
to their true Sovereign, and to be faithful to the Usurper.

It appears at last, why by his institution he would have the power, and
security of his Sovereign, wholly and only to depend upon the Contracts, and
Covenants which the people make one with another, to transfer all their right
to a third person (who shall be Sovereign) without entering into any Covenant
with the Sovereign himself, which would have divested them of that liberty to
disobey him, which they have reserved to themselves; or receiving any Covenant
from him, which might have obliged him to have kept his promise to them; by
which they might have had somewhat left to them which they might have called
their own, which his institution will not bear, all such promises being void.
But if he be so tenderhearted, as to think himself obliged to observe all the
promises, and make good all the Grants he has made, by which he may be
disabled to provide for their safety, which is the ground that has made all
those Grants and Promises to be void, he has granted him Power to remedy all
this, by (P. 114.) directly renouncing, or transferring the Sovereignty to
another: and that he might openly, and in plain terms renounce, or transfer it,
he makes no doubt; and then he says, if a Monarch shall relinquish the
Sovereignty both for himself, and his heirs, his subjects return to the
absolute liberty of nature. Because tho nature may declare who are his sons,
and who are the nearest of his kin, yet it depends on his own will who shall
be his Heir: and if he will have no Heir, There is no Sovereignty, or
Subjection. This seems the hardest condition for the poor Subject that he can
be liable unto, that when he has divested himself of all the right he had,
only for his Sovereigns protection, that he may be redeemed from the state of
War and confusion that nature has left him in, and has paid so dear for that
protection, it is left still in his Sovereigns power to withdraw that
protection from him, to renounce his subjection, and without his consent to
transer the Sovereignty to another, to whom he has no mind to be subject. One
might have imagined that this new trick of transferring, and covenanting, had
bin an universal remedy, that being once applied would for ever prevent the ill
condition and confusion that nature had left us in, and that such a right would
have bin constituted by it, that Sovereignty would never have failed to the
Worlds end: and that when the subject can never retract, or avoid the bargain
he has made, how ill soever he likes it, or improve it by acquiring any better
conditions in it, it shall notwithstanding be in the Sovereigns power without
his consent, and it may be without his privity, in an instant to leave him with
out any protection, without any security, and as a prey to all who are too
strong for him. This indeed is the greatest Prerogative that he has conferred
upon his Sovereign, when he had given him all that belongs to his Subjects,
that when he is weary of Governing, he can destory them, by leaving them to
destory one another. For Kings and Princes to resign and relinquish their Crown
and Sovereignty, is no new transaction, nor, it may be, the better for being
old. Some have left them out of Melancholy, and devotion, and when they have
ceased to be Kings made themselves Monks, and repented the change of their
conditions afterward. Some out of weakness and bodily infirmities, have not
bin able to sustain the fatigue that the well exercising the Government
required, and therefore have desired to see those in the quiet possession of
it, to whom it would of right belong when they were dead; and the more
reasonably, if they foresaw any difficulties like to arise about their
admission in those seasons; as Charles the fifth apprehended with reference to
some of his dominions in Italy, if his Son Philip was not in possession of
them, before his Brother Ferdinando came to be Emperor. Some Princes have bin
so humorous, as upon the frowardness and refractorines^ of their Subjects, and
because they could not govern in that manner they had a mind to do, to abdicate
the Government, and would have bin glad afterward to have resumed it. And
others have bin to wanton, as to relinquish their Crown because they did not
like the Climate in which their Dominions lay, and only that they might live in
a better Air, and enjoy the delights and pleasures of a more happy Situation.
But all these generally never attemted it, or imagined they could do it,
without the approbation and consent of their Subjects, which was allwaies
desired, and yielded to, with great formality. And it is very strange that in
those seasons of Abdication, which supposes a suspension of Sovereignty,
especially in Elective Kingdoms, for in Hereditary the immortality of the King*
who never dies, may make a difference, this invention of Mr. Hobbes, of
transferring one another right, and covenanting with one another, has never
bin heard of; and tho the Sovereignty is invested by election, the People have
very little share in that election.

If Mr. Hobbes would have exercised his Talent in that spacious field, as he
might have don with more innocence, and* it may be, more success, and have
undertaken by his speculation and deduction of Sovereign rights, from the
nature, need, and designs of men, to prove that it is not in the just power of
a Monarch to relinquish and renounce his Sovereignty, with what formality and
consent soever; nor more in the authority and power of the King to abdicate and
relinquish his Sovereignty over his people, then it is in the authority of the
people to withdraw their submission and obedience from him; and that the
practice of such renunciations, tho never very frequent, has bin the original
and introduction of that mischeivous doctrine sowed amongst the people, of
their having a coordinate power with the Sovereign, which will be much
cherished by his new institution, since men are easily persuaded to believe,
that they can mar what they can make, and may lawfully destroy what they
create, that is, the work of their own hands; I say, if he would have laid out
his reason upon that argument, he could have made it shine very plausibly, and
might have made many Proselytes to his opinion; since many Learned men are so
much in their judgment against that right of relinquishing and transferring in
Princes, that they believe it to be the only cause wherein Subjects may
lawfully take up defensive Arms, that they may continue Subjects, and to
preserve their Subjection and Obedience from being alien'd from him to whom it
is due; and that no consent or concurrence can more make such an alienation
lawful, then it can dissolve the bonds of Wedlock, and qualify both parties to
make a new choice for themselves, that may be more grateful to them. But he
thinks it to be more glory, to discover that to be right reason, which all
other men find to be destructive to it, and (page. 91.) that the sudden and
rough bustling in of a new truth, will raise his fame, as it has don that of
many other Heretics before, and which he says, does never break the pe^ce, but
only sometimes awake the War; which, to use his own commendable expression, is
(page 8.) like ^anding of things from one to another, with many words making
nothing understood.

The Survey of Chapter 22.
I Should pass over his two and twentieth Chapter of Systemes, Subject,
Political, and Private, which is a title as difficult to be understood by a
literal translation as most of those to any Chapter in Suarez; as few
Congregations, when they meet in a Church to pay their devotions to God
Almighty, do know that they are an irregular systeme: in which, besides vulgar
notions well worded, every man will discover much of that which he calls signs
of error, and misreckoning, to which, he says, (page. 116.) all mankind is too
prone, and with which that Chapter abounds, and will require no confutation,
but that I find, and wonder to find mention of Laws, and Letters Patents,
Bodies Politic, and Corporations, as necessary Institutions for the carrying
on, and advancement of Trade, which are so many limitations and restraints of
the Sovereign power, and so many entanglements under Covenants and Promises,
which as they are all declared to be void, it is in vain to mention. I did not
think Mr. Hobbes had desired to establish trade, or any industry for the
private accumulation of riches in his Commonwealth. For is it possible to
imagine, that any Merchant will send out Ships to Sea, or make such a discovery
of his Estate, if it may be either seized upon before it go's out, or together
with the benefit of the return when it comes home? If trade be necessary to the
good of a Nation, it must be founded upon the known right of Propriety, not as
against other Subjects only, but against the Sovereign himself; otherwise trade
is but a trap to take the collected wealth of particular men in a heap, and
when it is brought into less room, to have it seized on, and confiscated by the
omnipotent word of the King with less trouble, and more profit. And if any
Laws, Letters Patents, Charters, or any other obligations or promises, can
oblige the Sovereign power in these cases which refer to trade and foreign
adventures, why should they not be equally valid for the securing all the other
parts and relations of Propriety? However, whatsoever rigor Mr. Hobbes thinks
fit to exercise upon the Nobility and Gentry of the Nation, he must give over
all thoughts of trade, if he does not better provide to secure his Merchants
both of their liberty, and propriety.

It is a good observation, and an argument for the preference of Monarchy
before any other form of Government, in that where the Government is popular,
and the depressing the interest and reputation of particular Subjects is an
essential policy of that Government, yet in the managing the affairs of their
Colonies and Provinces at a distance from them, they choose to commit the same
to a single person, as they do the Government and conduct of their Armies,
which are to defend their Government; which is a tacit implication, if not
confession, that in their own judgment they think the Monarchical the best form
of Government. But he might have observed likewise, that in all those
Monarchical Commissions, at what distance soever, there are limits and bounds
set, by referring to instructions for the punctual observation and performance
of what that State or Government has bin bound by promise and contract to
perform; which has the same force to evince, that the performance of promises
and conditions, is very consistent with Monarchical Government: for the hazards
that may arrive from thence may be as dangerous to that Government if it be at
a great distance, as upon any supposition whatsoever, yet is never left to the
discretion of a Governor.

It is a wonderful latitude that Mr. Hobbes leaves to all his Subjects, and
contradictory to all the moral precepts given to the World, and to all the
notions of Justice, that he who has his private interest depending, and to be
debated and judged before any Judicatory, may make as many Friends as he can
amongst those Judges, even by giving them money; as if, tho it be a crime in a
Judge to be corrupt, the person who corrupts him may be innocent, because he
thinks his own cause just, and desires to buy justice for money which cannot be
got without it; and so the grossest and most powerful Bribery shall be
introduced, to work upon the weakness and poverty, and corruption of a Judge,
because the party thinks his cause to be just, and chooses rather to depend upon
the affection of his Judge whom he has corrupted, then upon the integrity of
his cause, and the justice of the Law. But he does not profess to be a strict
Casuist* nor can be a good observer of the Rules of moral honesty, who believes
that he may induce another to commit a great Sin, and remain innocent himself.
Nor is he in truth a competent Judge of the most enormous crimes, when he
reckons (page 56.) Theft, Adultery, Sodomy, and any other vice that may be
taken for an effect of power, or a cause of pleasure, to be of such a Nature,
as amongst men are taken to be against Law, rather then against Honor.

The Survey of Chapter 23.
I Should with as little trouble have passed by his twenty third Chapter of his
Public Ministers, and the fanciful Similies contained therein, not thinking it
of much importance what public or private Ministers he makes for such a
Sovereignty as he has instituted; but that I observe him in this place (as
most luxurious Fancies use to do) demolishing and pulling down, what he had
with great care and vigilance erected and established as undeniable truth
before. And whereas he has in his eighteenth Chapter, (page 91.) pronounced
the right of Iudicatory, of hearing and deciding all Controversies which
concern Law, either Civil or Natural, or concerning Fact, to be inseparably
annexed to the Sovereignty, and incapable of being aliened and transferred by
him; and afterward declares, That the judgments given by Judges qualified, and
commissioned by him to that purpose, are his own proper Judgments, and to be
regarded as such, which is a truth generally confessed; in this Chapter,
against all practice and all reason, he degrades him from at least half that
Power, and fancies a Judge to be such a party, that if the Litigant be not
pleased with the opinion of his Judge in matter of Law, or matter of Fact, he
may therefore (page 125.) (because they are both Subjects to the Sovereign)
appeal from his Judge, and ought to be tried before another: for tho the
Sovereign may hear and determine the Cause himself if he please, yet if he will
appoint another to be Judge, it must be such a one as they shall both agree
upon; for as the Complainant has already made choice of his own Judge, so the
Defendant must be allowed to except against such of his Judges, whose interest
makes him suspect them; which was never heard of before this Institution, and
the consequence of it will best appear by an instance to be very ridiculous.
Let us suppose that an Information were preferred in the Kings Bench (as it may
well be) against Mr. Hobbes, for writing and publishing such a seditious Book
against the established Government of Church and State, as his Leviathan is;
because the Sovereign Judge will not hear and determine this himself, but refers
it those Judges who are appointed and commissioned by him to examine and punish
Crimes of such a nature, would it be reasonable that Mr. Hobbes should except
against his Judges, because by their knowing the Law he may suspect them, and
refuse to be tried before any but those whom he shall agree upon? and (page
125) can those be the properties of just and rational Judicature? He has
forgotten, that before he erected his Sovereignty, when there could be no
Judicature, he says, (page 78.) it is of the Law of Nature, That they who are
at Controversy, submit their right to the judgment of an Arbitrator; there
indeed, for want of Judicature, there was a necessity of a mutual consent,
without which no man could take upon him to be an Arbitrator. If a man has a
Suit upon matter of Title or Interest with a Judge, notwithstanding that he is
sworn to do right, he is so far from being bound to bring his Action before
that Judge, that he may choose whether it shall depend in that Court of which
that Judge is a Member, tho the major part be unconcerned, but may have his
Right tried in another Court: but if he should have any part in the choice of
his own Judge, especially if he be criminal, Justice would be well administered.
Himself acknowledges, that the judgment of such Judges, is the judgment of the
Sovereign; and a greater Person then the Sovereign has given a fair warning to
those Judges; Take heed what ye do, for ye judge not for man, but for the Lord,
who is with you in the judgment, 2 Chronicles. As it is the Kings judgment, he will
punish it severely if it be corrupt; and if he cannot discover it to be
corrupt, for want of complaint, or want of evidence, God will punish it because
it was his judgment: a corrupt Judge, of all guilty persons, can never escape
punishment.

I am very glad that Mr. Hobbes is pleased with any part of the administration
of Justice in his own Country (which he would hardly like if he were exposed to
it:) and he might have observed that great Privilege of the Lords in England,
of being tried in all capital Crimes by their Peers, by Men of their own
quality and condition, to be a greater Privilege then the Nobility of any
Nation in Europe enjoy. The Grandees of Spain, and the Dukes, and Peers, and
Mareschals of France, in those Transgressions undergo the same forms of
Justice, and are tried before the same Judges, as the meanest Peasant is for
the like or the same Crime: and tho he calls it, and says it has bin ever
acknowledged as a Privilege of Favor, yet they look upon it as a Privilege of
Right, of which they cannot be deprived by the Word and Authority of the King.
And it may be he would be hardly able to bring this Privilege under his
original Institution of Government, since probably men being then all equal,
they would never have consented to such a difference, rather then equality, in
the form of Justice that was to be exercis^d toward them: and he values it too
lightly, who thinks it can be taken from them by any Arbitrary Power.

I cannot comprehend what Mr. Hobbes's meaning is, in making an Ambassador sent
from his Prince, to congratulate, or condole, or to assist at a Solemnity, to
be but a private Person, because he says, (page 126.) the business is private,
and belonging to him in his natural capacity: whereas, his being sent
Ambassador, and having in the performance of his Office of congratulating or
condoling, or in his assistance at the Solemnity, the respect showed to him,
and the privilege and precedence of the Person of his Master, he cannot but be
a public Person. Nor can an Ambassador come to be but a private Person any
other way, then by presuming to negotiate some unlawful thing, which he is not
warranted by his Commission to do; and even in that case he expects to be
treated as a public Person, as well by the security that Prince gave him by his
Reception, as by the authority of the Prince who sent him, and expects to be
sent to, and tried before his own Master: which depends much upon the nature
and circumstances of the Transgression. But I wonder how Mr. Hobbes could bring
the Rights and Privileges of Ambassadors under his disquisition, since they
cannot depend upon his Institution: for they neither do nor can proceed from
the Covenant, or Contracts, or teansferring of Rights between private persons;
but he must make a new Institution for Sovereigns, in which he will hardly be
able to preserve them without some Covenants, which he hitherto so much abhors.

The Survey of Chapter 24.
IT is the custom and delight that Mr. Hobbes takes in the frequent repeting,
almost in every Chapter, the lewd principles in his Institution, with some
variety of pleasant expressions and instances, which he would have understood
to add new vigor to his former Arguments, that obliges me by Tautologies to put
the Reader in mind of what I have said before, and to repete the same that has
bin said; and so I must say again upon this Chapter of the nutrition and
procreation of a Commonwealth, that he has proposed a very ungracious method
to himself in forming his Government, by assigning a greater power and authority
to his Sovereign, then any honest Magistrate desires, or will ever exercise, or
can think himself secure in; and such a liberty and property to the Subject, as
they can take no delight in, and consequently can never wish well to that
Government, under which they shall enjoy no more. Nor will they ever believe
themselves to be in possession of liberty or plenty, when it is in the power of
any one man to dispossess them of both, or either, at his good will and
pleasure, without any violation of any Justice that they can resort to, or
complain of. It is a very uncomfortable Propriety that any man can have in his
Lands and Goods, because his Neighbor cannot take them from him, if his Prince
can justly take them from him, and give them to his Neigbor. Princes have their
particular Affections and Inclinations which sway them as much as other men,
and are prevailed upon by the same strong motives and impulsions; and if they
may take away all from those they do not like, and as much as they think fit
from those they like less, to give to those they love, and to such as they like
better, there can be no valuable propriety in any body but the Sovereign alone:
and when it is once found to be in him alone, he will not be long able to
defend his own Propriety, or his own Sovereignty. It is Machiavels exception
against the entertaining of foreign Forces, that they are only mercenary, and
therefore indifferent in their affections which party wins or loses; and no
doubt those Soldiers fight most resolutely, who fight to defend their own. And
surely they who have nothing of their own to lose but their lives, are as apt
to throw those away where they should not, as where they should be exposed* and
it is the usual Artifice in all Seditions, for the Leaders and Promoters of
them, to persuade the People, that the tendency and consequence of such and
such actions don by the Magistrate, extends to the depriving them of all their
propriety, the jealousy of which hurries them into all those acts of rage and
despair, which prove so fatal to Kingdoms. And there was never yet a wise and
fortunate prince, who has not enervated those Machinations, by all the
professions, and all the vindications of that Propriety, which they are so
vigilant to preserve and defend. And therefore it is a wonderful propesterous
foundation to support a Government, to declare that the Subject has no
propriety in any thing that excludes the Sovereign from a right of disposing
it; and it may be easily believed, that there is not one Prince in Europe, I
mean that is civilized (for of the absolute power of the Great Turk, from
whence Mr. Hobbes has borrowed his Model, we shall have occasion to discourse
in another place) would be able to retain his Sovereignty one whole year, after
he should declare, as Mr. Hobbes does, that his Subjects have no propriety in
any thing they possess, but that he may dispose of all they have. For tho they
do too often invade that propriety, and take somewhat from them that is not
their own, they bear it better under the notion of oppression and rapine, and
as they look upon it as the effect of some powerful Subjects evil advice (which
will in time be discovered, and reformed by the justice of the Prince, as has
often fallen out) then they would ever do under a claim of right, that could
justly take away all they have, because it is not the Subjects but their own.
And if Mr. Hobbes had taken the pains, and known where to have bin informed of
the Proceedings and Transactions of W^lliam the Conqueror, he would have found
cause to believe, that that great King did ever dexterously endeavor, from the
time that he was assured that his Possession would not be disturbed, to divest
himself of the Title of a Conqueror, and made his Legal Claim to what he had
got by the Will of Edward the Confessor, whose Name was precious to the Nation,
and who was known to have a great Friendship for that Prince, who had now
recovered what had bin his. And he knew so well the ill consequence which must
attend the very imagination that the Nation had lost its Propriety, that he
made have to grant them an assurance, that they should still enjoy all the
benefits and privileges which were due to them by their own Laws and Customs,
by which they should be still governed; as they were during that Kings whole
Reign, who had enough of the unquestionable Demesnes and Lands belonging to the
Crown, of which he was then possessed without a Rival, and belonging to those
great men who had perished with their Posterity in the Battle with Harold, to
distribute to those who had born such shares, and run such hazards in his
prosperous adventure. And those Laws and Customs which were before the
Conquest, are the same which the Nation and Kingdom have bin since governed by
to this day, with the addition of those Statutes and Acts of Parliament, which
are the Laws of the successive Kings, with which they have gratified their
Subjects, in providing such new security for them, and advantages to the
public, as upon the experience and observation of the Ages and Times when they
were made, contributed to the honor and glory of the King, as well as the
happiness of the People; many of which are but the Copies and Transcripts of
ancient Landmarks, making the Characters more plain the legible of what had
bin practiced and understood in the preceding Ages, and the observation whereof
are of the same profit and convenience to King and People.

Such were the Laws in Tullies time, which Mr. Hobbes wonderfully cites, to
prove that which Tully never heard of, and which indeed is quite contrary to
the end of his Discourse. (Page 127.) Is it possible that Tully could ever have
said, Let the Civil Law be once abandoned, or but negligently guarded (not to
say oppressed) and there is nothing that any man can be sure to receive from
his Ancestor, or to leave to his Children? and again, take away the Civil Law,
and no man knows what is his own, and what another man's? I say, he could never
have mentioned and insisted upon this grand security of mankind, if he had
understood the Law to be nothing but the breath of the Sovereign, who could
grant, and dissolve, or repeal this Law, with the speaking a word that his will
or fancy dictates to him. How can any man receive from his Ancestor, or leave
to his Children, if he ben o^ sure that his Ancestor had, and that his Children
shall have a propriety? It was the importance of, and delight in this
propriety, that produced that happy and beneficial agreement between the
Sovereign power and the naked Subject, which is mentioned before; that
introduced the beauty of Building, and the cultivating the Earth by Art as well
as Industry, by securing men, that they and their Children should dwell in the
Houses they were at the charge to build, and that they should reap the harvest
of those Lands which they had taken the pains to sow. Whatsoever is of Civility
and good Manners, all that is of Art and Beauty, or of real and solid Wealth in
the World, is the product of this paction, and the child of beloved Propriety;
and they who would strangle this Issue, desire to demolish all Buildings,
eradicate all Plantations, to make the Earth barren, and mankind to live again
in Tents, and nurish his Cattle by successive marches into those Fields where
the grass grows. Nothing but the joy in Propriety reduced us from this
barbarity; and nothing but security in the same, can preserve us from returning
into it again. Nor will any man receive so great prejudice and damage by this
return, as the Kings and Princes themselves, who had a very ample recompense
which they still enjoy, by dividing their unprofitable propriety with their
Subjects, having ever since received much more profit from the propriety in the
hands of the Subjects, then they did when it was in their own, or then they do
from that which they reserved to themselves; and they continue to have the
more, or less upon a true account, as this paction is the more or less exactly
observed and compli'd with.

Mr. Hobbes is much mistaken in his Historical conclusions, as for the most
part he uses to be, when he says, ( page 129.) that the Conqueror, and his
Successors, have always laid arbitrary Taxes on all Subjests Lands: except he
calls what has bin don by the free consent of the Subject, which is according
to the paction, to be the arbitrary Tax of the Sovereign, because the Law is
the stamp of his own Royal Authority. And if such arbitrary Taxes have in truth
at any time bin laid upon the Subjects, he might have observed (for sometimes it
has bin don) that the Sovereign has received much more damage then profit by
it, and the Kingdom bin in a worse state of security then it was before. Nor
can any Argument be made from the glory and prosperity of some Crowns, which
have sometimes exercised that arbitrary Power, and reduced the Rules they ought
to govern by, to the standard of their own Will; which yet they have don with
such formality, as implies the consent of their Subjects, tho they dare not but
consent. It has bin too frequently seen too, that the hurt and wounded
patience of the People, has, when it may be it was least apprehended, redeemed
themselves (for l^sa patientia est furor) by as unwarrantable Rebellion from
unwarrantable Oppression, or out of contemt of their own ruin, because they
have so little comfort in their preservation, have obstinately refused to give
any assistance to their Sovereign when he has real need of it, because he has
wantonly extorted it from them when he had no need. And then men pay too dear
for their want of providence, and find too late, that the neglect of Justice is
an infallible underminer, how undiscerned soever, of that security which their
Policy would raise for themselves, in the place of that which Wisdom and
Justice had provided for them. I agree, that it being impossible to foresee
what the expenses which a Sovereign may be put to, will amount to, it is as
impossible by land, or otherwise to set aside such a proportion as is
necessary; but those extraordinary occasions must be supplied by such
extraordinary ways, and with those formalities which the Sovereign obliges
himself to observe; by observing whereof, much less inconvenience shall befall
Him or the Public, then by cancelling those Laws which establish Propriety.

If Mr. Hobbes had not bin a professed Enemy to Greek and Latin Sentences, as
an Argument of indisgestion, when they come up again unchewed and unchanged, he
might have learned from Seneca, who understood, and felt the utmost extent of
an absolute Sovereignty, and had a shrewd foresight what the end of it would
be, how the propriety of the Subject might well consist with the power of the
Prince: Iure civili, says he, omnia Regis sunt, and tamen illa quo^um ad Regem
pertinet universap ss^ssio, in singulos d^minos descripta sunt, and un^quaeque
res habet possessorem suum. Itaque dare Regi, and domum, and mancipium, and
pecuniam possumus, n^c d^nore illi de suo dicimur. Ad Reges enim potestas
omnium pertin t^ad singulos proprietas. And that Prince who thinks his power so
great, that his Subjects have nothing to give him, will be very unhappy if he
has ever need of their hands, or their hearts.

The Survey of Chapter 25.
WHen Mr. Hobbes has erected such a Sovereign, and instituted such a People,
that the one may say and do whatsoever he finds convenient for his purpose, and
the other must neither say or do any thing that may displease him; the
consideration of what, and how counsel should be given under such a Government,
can require very little deliberation. And the truth is, the discourse of this
Chapter, with the differences between Command and Counsel, is more vulgar and
pedantic then he is usually guilty of, and it is easy to be observed, that in
his description of the office of a Counselor, and of the ability of
c^unselling, ( page 134.) that it proceeds from experience and long study, and
that it requires great knowledge of the disposition of mankind; of the rights
of Government, and of the nature of Equity, Law, Justice, and Honor, not to be
attained without study: and of the strengths, commodities, places bo^k of their
own Country and their Neighbors; as also of the inclinations and designs of all
Nations that may any way annoy them, and this, he says, is not attained
without much Experience; he makes so lively a representation of that universal
understanding, which he would be thought to be possessed with, that he could
not be without hope that C^omwell would think him worthy to be a Counselor,
who had given him such an earnest that he would serve him with success, and
without hesitation. Yet I see no reason (if to ask Counsel of another, is to
permit him to give such Counsel as he shall think best; and if it be the Office
of a Counselor, when an Action comes into deliberation, to make manifest the
consequence of it in such a manner, as he that is counseled may be truly and
evidently informed) why he is so very angry with those two words, exhort and
dehort, as to brand those who use either, with the style of corruption, and
being bribed by their own interest; since it is very agreeable to the faith and
integrity of a Counselor, to persuade him that asks his advice to do that
which he thinks best to be don, and to dissuade him from doing that which he
thinks to be mischievous, which is to exhort and dehort; and the examples of
Persons, and the authority of Books, may be pertinently applied to either: since
few accidents fall out in States and Empires, which have not in former times
happened in such conjunctures: and then if the same has bin faithfully
represented to posterity, with all the circumstance and successes, which is the
natural end of all good Histories to transmit; nothing can more properly be
reflected on, or bring clearer light to the present difficulties in debate,
then the memory of what was upon those occasions don fortunatly, or unhappily
left undon, which surely cannot but introduce useful and pertinent Reflections
into the consultation. And it is not easy to comprehend what that great
ability is, which his Counselor is to attain to by long study, and cannot be
attained without, if that study be not to be conversant with Books, and if
neither the examples in, or authority of Books be in any degree to be
considered. Nor are such expressions which may move the affections or passions
of him who asks Counsel, or of those who are to give it, repugnant to the
office of a Counselor, since the end of Counsel is to lead men to choose that
which is good, and avoid that which is worse; and he to whom the Counsel is
given, will best judge whether it tends to others ends rather then his own, and
will value it accordingly. And he is much a better Counselor, who by his
experience and observation of the nature and humor of the People who are to be
governed, and by his knowledge of the Laws and Rules by which they ought to be
governed, gives advice what ought to be don, then he who from his speculative
knowledge of mankind, and of the Rights of Government, and of the nature of
Equity and Honor, attained with much study, would erect an Engine of Government
by the rules of Geometry, more infallible then Experience can ever find out.

I am not willing now, or at any time, to accompany him in his sallies which he
makes into the Scripture, and which he always handles, as if his Sovereign
power had not yet declared it to be the word of God; and to illustrate now his
Distinctions, and the difference between Command and Counsel, he thinks fit to
fetch instances from thence, Have no other Gods but me, Make to thy self no
graven Image, etc. he says, ( page 133.) are commands, because the reason for
which we are to obey them, is drawn from the will of God our King, whom we are
obliged to obey: but these words, Repent, and be baptized in the name of Jesus,
arc Counsel, because the reason why we should do so, tends not to any benefit
of God Almighty, who shall be still King in what manner soever we rebel, but of
our selves, who have no other means of avoiding the punishment hanging over us
for our sins; as if the latter were not drawn from the will of God as much as
the former, or as if the former tended more to the benefit of God then the
latter. An ordinary Grammarian, without any insight in Geometry, would have
thought them equally to be commands: But Mr. Hobbes will have his Readers of
another talent in their understanding, and another subjection to his dictates.

The Survey of Chapter 26.
HOwever Mr. Hobbes enjoins other Judges to etract the judgments they have
given when contrary to reason, upon what authority or president soever they have
pronounced them, yet he holds himself obliged still tue^i opus, to justify all
he has said; therefore we have reason to expect, that to support his own
notions of Liberty and Propriety, contrary to the notions of all other men, he
must introduce a notion of Law, contrary to what the world has ever yet had of
it. And it would be answer enough, and it may be the fittest that can be given
to this Chapter, to say, that he has ere ed a Law, contrary and destructive to
all the Law, that is acknowledged and established in any Monarchy or Republic
that is Christian; and in this he hopes to secure himse^f by his accustomed
method of definition, and d^fi^es, that Civil Law (which is a term we do not
dislike) is to every Subject those Rules which the Common wealth has commanded
him by word, writing, or other sufficient sign of the W^^l to make use of for
the distinction of right* in which he says there is nothing that is not at
first sight evident, that is to say of what is contrary, and what is no^
contrary to the Rule. From which definition his first deduction is* that the
Sovereign is the sole Legislator, and that himself is not subject to Laws,
because he can make, and repeal them: which in truth is no necessary deduction
from his own definition; for it does not follow from thence, tho he makes them
Rules only for Subjects, that the Sovereign has the sole power to repeal them;
but the true definition of a Law is, that it is to every Subject the rule which
the Commonwealth has commanded him by word, writing, or other sufficient sign
of the Will made, and published in that form and manner, as is accustomed in
that Commonwealth to make use of for the distinction of right, that is to say;
of what is contrary, and what is not to the Rule? and from this definition, no
such deduction can be made, since the form of making and repealing Laws is
stated, and agreed upon in all Commonwealths.

The opinions and judgments which are found in the Books of eminent Lawyers,
cannot be answered, and controuled by Mr. Hobbes his wonder, since the men who
know least are apt to wonder most; and men will with more justice wonder,
whence he comes by the Prerogative to control the Laws and Government
established in this, and that Kingdom, without so much as considering what is
Law here or there, but by the general notions he has of Law; and what it is by
his long study, and much cogitation. And it is a strange definition of Law, to
make it like his propriety, to be of concernment only between Subject and
Subject, without any relation of security as to the Sovereign, whom he exemts
from any observation of them, and invests with authority by repealing those
which trouble him, when he thinks fit, to free himself from the observation
thereof, and by making new: and consequently he says, he was free before, for
he is free that can be free when he will. The instance he gives for his wonder,
and displeasure against the Books of the Eminent Lawyers, is, that they say,
that the Common Law has no controuler but the Parliament, that is, that the
Common Law cannot be changed or altered but by Act of Parliament, which is the
Municipal Law of the Kingdom. Now methinks if that be the judgment of Eminent
Lawyers, Mr. Hobbes should be so modest as to believe it to be true, till he
hears others as Eminent Lawyers declare the contrary: for by his instance, he
has brought it now only to relate to the Law of England, and then methinks he
should be easily persuaded, that the Eminent Lawyers of England do know best
whether the Law be so, or no. I do not wish that Mr. Hobbes should be convinced
by a judgment of that Law upon himself, which would be very severe, if he
should be accused for declaring, that the King alone has power to alter the
descents and inheritances of the Kingdom; and whereas the Common Law says the
Eldest shall inherit, the King by his own Edict may declare, and order, that
the younger Son shall inherit: or for averring, and publishing, that the King
by his own authority can repeal and dissolve all Laws, and justly take away all
they have from his Subjects; I say, if the judgment of Law was pronounced upon
him for this Seditious discourse, he would hardly persuade the World, that he
understood what the Law of England is, better then the Judges who condemned
him, or that he was wary enough to set up a jus vagum and incognitum of his
own, to control the established Government of his own Country. He says the
Sovereign is the only Legislator: and I will not contradict him in that. It is
the Sovereign stamp, and Royal consent, and that alone, that gives life, and
being, and title of Laws, to that which was before but counsel and advice: and
no such constitution of his can be repealed and made void, but in the same
manner, and with his consent. But we say, that he may prescribe or consent to
such a method in the form, and making these Laws, that being once made by him,
he cannot but in the same form repeal, or alter them; and he is obliged by the
Law of Justice to observe and perform this contract, and he cannot break it, or
absolve himself from the observation of it, without violation of justice: and
any farther obligation upon him then of justice, I discourse not of. For the
better clearing of this to that kind of reason by which Mr. Hobbes is swai'd,
let us suppose this Sovereignty to reside, and be fixed in an assembly of men;
in which kind of Government it is possible to find more marks and footsteps of
such a deputing, and assigning of interests, as Mr. Hobbes is full of, then we
can possibly imagine in the original institution of Monarchy. If the Sovereign
power be deputed into the hands of fifteen, and any vacant place to be supplied
by the same Authority that made choice of the first fifteen, may there not at
that time of the election certain Rules be prescribed (I do not say conditions)
for the better exercise of that Sovereign power? and by the accepting the power
thus explained, does not the Sovereign, tho there should be no Oath administered
for the observation thereof, which is a circumstance admitted by most Monarchs,
tacitly covenant that he will observe those Rules? and if he does wilfully
decline those Rules, does he not break the trust reposed in him? I do not say
forfeit the trust, as if the Sovereignty were at an end, but break that trust,
violate that justice he should observe? If the Sovereign power of fifteen,
should raise an imposition for the defense of the Commonwealth, if they should
appoint this whole imposition to be paid only by those whose names are Thomas
(when Thomas was before in no more prejudice with the Commonwealth, then any
other appellation in Baptism) may not this inequality be called a violation of
Justice, and a breach of trust, since it cannot be supposed that such an
irregular authority was ever committed to any man, or men by any deputation? Of
the Prerogative of necessity to swerve from Rules prescribed, or to violate
Laws tho sworn to, shall be spoken to in its due time.

It needs not be supposed, but must be confessed, that the Laws of every
Country, contain more in them concerning the rights of the Sovereign, and the
common administration of Justice to the people, then can be known to, and
understood by the person of the Sovereign, and he can as well fight all his
Battles with his own hand and sword, as determine all causes of right by his
own tongue and understanding. The consequence of any confusion which Mr. Hobbes
can suppose, would not be more pernicious, then that which would follow the
blowing away all these maxims of the Law, if the Kings breath were strong
enough to do it. It is a maxim in the Law (as is said before) that the eldest
Son shall inherit, and that if three or four Females are heirs, the inheritance
shall be equally divided between them. Does Mr. Hobbes believe that the word of
the King has power to change this course, and to appoint that all the Sons
shall divide the Estate, and the Eldest Daughter inherit alone? and must not
all the confusion imaginable attend such a mutation? All Governments subsist
and are established by firmness and constancy, by every man's knowing what is
his right to enjoy, and what is his duty to do: and it is a wonderful method to
make this Government more perfect, and more durable, by introducing such an
incertainty, that no man shall know what he is to do, nor what he is to suffer,
but that he who is Sovereign to morrow, may cancel, and dissolve all that was
don or consented to by the Sovereign who was yesterday, or by himself as often
as he changes his mind. It is the Kings Office to cause his Laws to be
executed, and to compel his Subjects to yield obedience to them, and in order
thereunto, to make choice of Learned Judges to interpret those Laws, and to
declare the intention of them, who (page 140) by an artificial perfection of
reason gotten by long study, and experience in the Law, must be understood to
be more competent for that determination, then Mr. Hobbes can be for the
alteration of Law and Government, by the artificial reason he has attained to
by long study of Arithmetic and Geometry.

No Eminent Lawyer has ever said that the two Arms of a Commonwealth are
Force and Justice, the first whereof is in the King, the other deposited in the
hands of the Parliament; but all Lawyers know, that they are equally deposited
in the hands of the King, and that all justice is administered by him, and in
his name; and all men acknowledge that all the Laws are his Laws; his consent
and authority only giving the power and name of a Law, what concurrence, or
formality soever has contributed toward it: the question only is, whether he
can repeal, or vacate such a Law, without the same concurrence and formality.
And methinks the instance he makes of a Princes ( page 139.) subduing another
people, and consenting that they shall live, and be governed according to those
Laws under which they were born, and by which they were formerly governed,
should manifest to him the contrary. For tho it be confessed, that those old
Laws become new by this consent of his, the Laws of the Legislator, that is of
that Sovereign who indulges the use of them; yet he cannot say that he can by
his word vacate and repeal those Laws, and his own concession, without
dissolving all the ligaments of Government, and without the violation of faith,
which himself confesses to be against the Law of Nature.

Notwithstanding that the Law is reason, and (page 139.) not the letter, but
that which is according to the intention of the Legislator (that is of the
Sovereign) is the Law, yet when there is any difficulty in the understanding
the Law, the interpretation thereof may reasonably belong to Learned Judges,
who by their education, and the testimony of their known abilities before they
are made Judges, and by their Oaths to judge according to Right, are the most
competent to explain those difficulties, which no Sovereign as Sovereign can be
presumed to understand or comprehend. And the judgments and decisions those
Judges make, are the judgments of the Sovereigns, who have qualified them to be
Judges, and who are to pronounce their sentence according to the reason of the
Law, not the reason of the Sovereign. And therefore Mr. Hobbes would make a
very ignorant Judge, when he would not have him versed in the study of the Laws,
but only a man of good natural reason, and of a right understanding of the Law
of Nature; and yet he says, (page 154.) that no man will pretend to the
knowledge of right and wrong without much study. And if that power of
interpretation of Law be vested in the Person of the Sovereign, he may in a
moment overthrow all the Law; which is evident enough by his own instances, if,
to use his own expressions, his understanding were not dazzled by the flame of
his passions. For to what purpose is all the distinction and division of Laws
into human and divine, into natural and moral, into distributive and penal,
when they may be all vacated, and made null by the word, or perverted by the
interpretation of the Sovereign? to what purpose is a penalty of five shillings
put upon such an action, if the Sovereign may make him who does that action, by
his interpretation, or omnipotence, to pay five hundred pounds? Nor by his
rule, is his adored Law of Nature of any force, which he says, (page 144) is
the Law of God immutable and eternal, nay Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but
not one title of the Law of Nature shall pass, for it is the eternal Law of
God; He, I say, has as much subjected that to the arbitrary power and
discretion of his Sovereign, as he has don the Liberty and property of the
Subject; for he says, (page 138.) the Law of Nature is a part of the Civil Law
in all Commonwealths in the World, and that tho it be naturally reasonable,
yet it is by the Sovereign power that it is Law, and he says likewise, that
all Laws written, and unwritten, and the Law of Nature it se^f, have need of
interpretation: and then he makes his supreme Sovereign the only legitimate
interpreter. So that he has the Law of Nature as much in his power, and under
his jurisdiction, as any other part of the Civil Law: and yet he confesses his
subject is not bound to pay obedience to any thing that his Sovereign enjoins
against the Law of nature. In such Labyrinths men entangle themselves, who
obstinately engage in opinions relating to a science they do not understand;
nor was it possible for him to extend the Prerogative of his Sovereign to such
an illimited greatness, without making some invasion upon the Prerogative of
God himself. I believe every man who reads Mr. Hobbes, observes that when he
entangles himself in the Laws of England, and affects to be more learned in
them then the Chief Justice Cook, the natural sharpness and vigor of his reason
is more flat and insipid then upon other Arguments, and he makes deductions
which have no coherence, involves himself in the terms without comprehending
the matter, concludes the Law says that which it does not say, and that the
Law has made no provision in cases which are amply provided for, and in a word
loses himself in a mist of words that render him less intelligible then at
other times. Nor has he better luck, when out of Justinians Institutions, he
would make a parallel between the Imperial Laws and the Laws of England, and
resolves that the Decrees of the Common People, which were put to the question
by the Tribune, and had the force of Laws, were like the Orders of the House of
Commons in England; whereas no Orders made by a House of Commons in England,
are of any validity or force, or receive any submission longer then that House
of Commons continues: and if any order made by them be against any Law or
Statute, it is void when it is made, and receives no obedience. Indeed when Mr.
Hobbes published his Leviathan, he might have said that it had the authority and
power of the Emperor, or of the whole People of Rome, and which would have
lasted till this time, if he had bin believed, and his doctrine could have bin
supported by him, or them for whom it was provided.

Probably Mr. Mobbes did take delight in being thought to confute a great
Lawyer in the Common Law of England it is certain he has bin transported to
slight usage of him, by that delight or some like passion, more then by the
defect of reason in that which he would contradict. He says it is against the
Law of Nature to punish the innocent; that he is innocent that acquits himself
judicially, and is acknowledged for innocent by the Judge: and yet he says,
when a man is accused of a Capital crime, and seeing the power of the Enemy,
and the frequent corruption of Judges, runs away for fear of the effect, yet
being taken and brought to Trial, makes it appear that he was not guilty of
the crime, and is acquitted thereof, however is condemned to lose his goods,
this he says, is a manifest condemnation of the innocent. He confesses
afterward, that the Law may forbid an innocent man to fly, and that he may be
punished for flying; but he thinks it very unreasonable, that flying for fear
of injury, should be taken for presumtion of guilt, whereas it is taken only
for the guilt of flying, when he is declared innocent for the other. And
methinks he confesses, that a man, who must know his own innocence better then
any body else, and knows that he must lose his Goods, if he flies his trial,
has no reason to complain, if after he be cleared from the crime, he be
condemned to lose his goods, which he knew he must lose when he fled; and
therefore tho he be judicially acquitted for the crime, he is not innocent, but
as judicially condemned to lose his goods for his guilt in flying, the Law and
penalty of flying being known to him, whether written, or not written, as well
as the Law against the crime was. To his other dictates of the Office of a
Judge, that he needs not be learned in the Laws, because he shall be told by the
Sovereign what judgment he shall give; and of the Laws of England, that the
Jury is Judge of the Law, as well as of the fact, there needs no more be said,
then that he is not informed, nor understands what he delivers; and whether his
notions of the divine positive Law be more agreeable to truth, will be examined
hereafter.

The Survey of Chapter 27.
(Page 151.) THat to be delighted in the imagination of being possessed of
another man's Wife, or Goods, is no breach of the Law that says, Thou shall not
covet: That the pleasure a man may have in imagining the death of him from
whose life he expects nothing but damage and displeasure, is no sin: That to
be pleased in the fiction of that which would please a man if it were real, is
a passion so adherent to the nature of man, and every other living creature, as
to make it a sin, were to make a sin of being a man, is a Body of Mr. Hobbes's
Divinity, so contrary to that of our Savior and his Apostles, that I shall
without any enlargement leave it to all men to consider, which of them they
think most fit to believe and follow. Yet methinks he gives some encouragement
to those who might expect Justice against him, by his own judgment (page 152.)
upon the man that comes from the Indies hither, and persuades men here to
receive a new Religion, or teach them any thing that tends to disobedience to
the Laws of this Country: tho he be never so well persuaded of the truth of
what he teaches, he commits a crime, and may be justly punished, not only
because his Doctrine is false, but because he does that which he would not
approve in another, that coming from hence should endeavor to alter Religion
there. And how far this Declaration of his own judgment, may operate to his own
condemnation, and to the condemnation of most of his Doctrines in his
Leviathan, which are so contrary to all the Laws established in his Country, he
should have don well to have considered before he committed the transgression;
for he does acknowledge, that in a Commonwealth, where by the negligence or
unskilfulness of Governors and Teachers, false Doctrines are by time generally
received, the contrary truths may be generally offensive; and prudent men are
seldom guilty of doing any thing, at least when it is in their own election to
do it or not to do it, which they foresee will be offensive to the Government,
or Governors whom they are subject to and must live under; especially when he
confesses, (page 91.) that tho the most sudden and rough bustling in of a new
truth that can be, does never break the peace, yet it does sometimes wake the
war: and if the secure and sound sleep of Peace be once broken, and that fierce
and brutish Tiger War is awakened, when, or how he will be lulled into a new
sleep, the wisest Magistrate cannot foretell, and therefore will with the more
vigilance discountenance and suppress such bustlers, who impudently make their
way with their elbows into modest company, to dispose them to suspect, and then
to censure the wisdom of their Forefathers, for having bin swaied by their own
illiterate experience, so as to prefer it before the clear reason of thinking
and Learned Men, who by cogitation have found a surer way for their security:
and there cannot be a more certain Expedient found out for the dissolving the
Peace of any Nation, how firmly soever established, then by giving leave, or
permitting men of parts and unrestrained fancy, to examine the constitution of
the Government both Ecclesiastical and Civil, and to vent and publish what
their wit and inventions may suggest to them, upon or against the same, which
would expose the gravity and wisdom of all Government, the infallibility of
Scripture, and the Omnipotence of God himself, by their light and scurrilous
questions and instances, to the mirth and contemt of all men, who are without
an awful veneration for either; of which there needs not be a more convincing
evidence, then the presumtion of Mr. Hobbes throughout his Leviathan; of which
it will not be possible not to give some in the progress we shall make.

He is over subtle in his Distinction, that every crime is a sin, but not every
sin a crime; that from the relation of sin to the Law, and of crime to the
Civil Law, may be inferred, that where the Law cease, sin cease, that the
Civil Law ceasing, crimes cease; and yet that violation of Covenants,
Ingratitude, Arrogance, can never cease to be sin, yet are no crimes, because
there is no place for accusation, every man being his own Judge, and accused
only by his own conscience, and cleared by the uprightness of his own
intention; and when his intention is right, his fact is no sin; if otherwise,
his fact is sin but no crime: that when the Sovereign power cease, that is,
when the King is so oppressed that he cannot exercise his power, crime also
cease, there being no protection where there is no power, which he is careful
to repete, whether it be to the purpose, or, as sure it is not, very pertinent
in the difference between sin and crime. And to all that huddle of words in
that whole Paragraph, I shall say no more, but that it looks like the Discourse
of some men, which himself says (page 39.) may be numbered amongst the sorts of
madness, namely, when men speak such words, as put together, have in them no
signification at all, by their non-coherence and contradiction.

False Principles of right and wrong cannot but produce many crimes, and the
greater the presumtion of those is who publish them, the confusion that results
thereby must be the greater: and yet notwithstanding this bundle of false
Principles which are contained in this Book, the strength of the Laws, and the
good constitution of the Government, has hitherto, for ought appears, resisted
the operation and malignity of the Institution of his Sovereignty, with how
much confidence soever offered by him, and a true and lawful Sovereign could
never be induced to affect that power which Mr. Hobbes so frankly assigned to
the Sovereign whom he intended to institute. And without doubt that
unreasonable Proposition, That Justice is but a vain word, can never be
established for Reason, so unanswerably as by the establishment of his
Principles, which would make all Laws Cobwebs, to be blown away by the least
breath of the Governor; nor by his ratiocination did Marius, or Sylla, or
Caesar, ever commit any crime, since they were all Sovereigns by acquisition,
and so in his own judgment possessed of all those powers which arise from his
Institution, whereby they might do all those acts which they did, and no man
could complain of injury or injustice, every man being the Author of whatever
damage he sustained or complained of; nor will he be able to lay any crime to
any of their charges (tho he seems to condemn them) and at that same time to
support his Institution of a Commonwealth. But it is the less wonder, since
from his own constitution, according to his first model, and knowing from
whence his own obedience proceeds, he concludes, that of all passions, that
which least inclines men to break the Laws, is fear. He provides such terrible
Laws as no body can love, and must fear too much to be willing to be subject to
them; which want of willingness must make them glad of any alteration, which
can bring no security to the Sovereign. And I cannot enough recommend to Mr.
Hobbes, that he will revolve his own judgment and determination in this
Chapter, (page 158.) That he, whose error proceeds from a peremtory pursuit
of his own Principles and reasonings, is much more faulty then he whose error
proceeds from the authority of a Teacher, or an Interpreter of the Law publicly
autoriz'd; and that he that groundeth his actions on his private judgment,
ought, according to the rectitude or error thereof, to stand or fall. And if
his fear be so predominant in him, as he conceives it to be in most men, it
will dispose him first to enquire what the opinion of the Judges is, who are
the autoriz'd Interpreters of Law, before he publishes his seditious Principles
against Law, least he be obliged to stand or fall according to the rectitude or
error thereof. Tho every Instance he gives of his Sovereigns absolute power,
makes it the more unreasonable, formidable, and odious, yet he gives all the
support to it he can devise. And indeed, when he has made his Sovereigns word,
a full and enacted Law, he has reason to oblige his Subject to do whatsoever
he commands, be it right or wrong, and to provide for his security when he has
don; and therefore he declares, (page 157.) That whosoever does any thing that
is contrary to a former Law by the command of his Sovereign, he is not guilty
of any crime, and so cannot be punished, because when the Sovereign commands
any thing to be don against a former Law, the command as to that particular
Fact is an abrogation of the Law; which would introduce a license to commit
Murder, or any other crime most odious, and against which Laws are chiefly
provided. But he has in another place given his Subject leave to refuse the
Sovereigns command, when he requires him to do an act or office contrary to his
honor: so that tho he will not suffer the Law to restrain him from doing what
the Sovereign unlawfully commands, yea his honor, of which he shall be Judge
himself, may make him refuse that command tho lawf^l: as if the Sovereign
commands him to Prison, as no doubt he lawfully may for a crime that deserves
death, he may in Mr. Hobbes's opinion refuse to obey that command. Whereas
Government and Justice have not a greater security, then that he that executes
a verbal command of the King against a known Law, shall be punished. And the
Case which he puts in the following Paragraph, that the Kings Will being a Law,
if he should not obey that, there would appear two contradictory Laws, which
would totally excuse, is so contrary to the common Rule of Justice, that a man
is obliged to believe, when the King requires any thing to be don contrary to
any Law, that he did not know of that Law, and so to forbear executing his
Command. And if this were otherwise, Kings of all men would be most miserable,
and would reverse their most serious Counsels and Deliberations, by
incogitancy, upon the suggestion and importunity of every presumtuous Intruder.
Kings themselves can never be punished or reprehended publicly (that being a
reproach not consistent with the reverence due to Majesty) for their casual or
wilful errors and mistakes, let the ill consequence of them be what they will;
but if they who maliciously lead, or advise, or obey them in unjust resolutions
and commands, were to have the same indemnity, there must be a dissolution of
all Kingdoms and Governments. But as Kings must be left to God, whose
Vicegerents they are, to judge of their breach of Trust; so they who offend
against the Law, must be left to the punishment the Law has provided for them,
it being in the Kings power to pardon the execution of the Sentence the Law
inflicts, except in those cases where the Offense is greater to others then to
the King; as in the murder of a Husband or a Father, the offense is greater to
the Wife and to the Son for their relation, then to the King for a Subject; and
therefore, upon an Appeal by them, the Transgressor may suffer after the King
has pardoned him.

It is a great prerogative which Mr. Hobbes does in this Chapter indulge to his
fear, his precious bodily fear of corporal hurt, that it shall not only
extenuate an ill action, but totally excuse and annihilate the worst he can
commit, that, if a man by the terror of present death be compelled to do a Fact
against the Law, he is wholly excused, because no Law can oblige a man to
abandon his own preservation: and supposing such a Law were obligatory, yet a
man would reason, (page 157.) If I do it not I die presently, if I do it I die
afterward, therefore by doing it there is time of life gained, Nature
therefore compels him to the Fact: by which a man seems by the Law of Nature to
be compelled, even for a short reprieve, and to live two or three days longer,
to do the most infamous and wicked thing that is imaginable: upon which fertile
soil he does hereafter so much enlarge, according to his natural method, in
which he usually plants a stock, supposes a principle, the malignity whereof is
not presently discernable, in a precedent Chapter, upon which in a subsequent
one he grafts new and worse Doctrine, which he looks should grow and prosper by
such cultivation as he applies to it in Discourse; and therefore I shall defer
my Considerations to the contrary, till I wait upon him in that enlarged
disquisition.

The Survey of Chapter 28.
THe eight and twentieth Chapter being a Discourse of Punishments and Rewards,
it was not possible for him to forget in how weak a condition he had left his
Sovereign, for want of power to punish; since want of power to punish, and want
of authority to cause his punishment to be inflicted, is the same thing;
especially when the guilty person is not only not obliged to submit to the
Sentence, how just soever, but has a right to resist it, and to defend himself
by force against the Magistrate and the Law: and therefore he thinks it of much
importance, to enquire, by what door the right and authority of punishing in any
case came in. He is a very ill Architect, that in building a House, makes not
doors to enter into every office of it; and it is very strange, that he should
make his doors large and big enough in his institution, to let out all the
liberty and propriety of the Subject, and the very end of his Institution being
to make a Magistrate to compel men to their duty (for he confesses, they were
before obliged by the Law of Nature to perform it one toward another, but that
there must be a Sovereign Sword to compel men to do that which they ought to
do) yet that he should forget to leave a door wide enough for this compulsion
to enter in at by punishment, and bringing the Offender to Justice; since the
end of making the Sovereign is disappointed, and he cannot preserve the peace,
if guilty persons have a right to preserve themselves from the punishment he
inflicts for their guilt. It was very improvidently don, when he had the
draught of the whole Contracts and Covenants, that he would not insert one, by
which every man should transfer from himself the right he had to defend himself
against public Justice, tho not against private violence. And surely reason and
Self-preservation, that makes a man transfer all his Estate and Interest into
the hands of the Sovereign, and to be disposed by him, that he may be secure
against the robbery and rapine of his neighbors and companions, will as well
dispose him to leave his life to his discretion, that it may be secure from the
assault of every other man, who has a right to take it from him. But he thinks
life too precious to part with willingly, and therefore cares for no more then
to invest his Sovereign with a just title to punish, how unable soever he
leaves him to execute it. And truly his fancy is very extraordinary in bringing
it to pass. He will not suffer his power to punish to be grounded upon the
concession or gift of the Subjects, from which fountain all his other
extravagant powers flow, which are as unnatural for them to give, but says it
was originally inherent in him by the right of Nature, by which every man might
subdue or kill another man, as he thought best for his own preservation; which
right still remained in him, when all other men transferred all their rights to
him, because he never contracted with them to part with any thing, and so he
comes (page 162.) to a right to punish, which was not given but left to him,
and to him only, as entire as in the condition of mere nature. Is not this mere
fancy without any reason? which he needed not have exercised to so little
purpose, to erect a lawful Power, which any man may lawfully resist and oppose.
Nor is the right much greater that is left him, then what, it seems, is tacitly
reserved to every man, who notwithstanding all transferring, has still right
to resist the Sword of Justice in his own defense, and for ought appears, to
kill him that carries it. So that in truth, his Sovereign is vested in no other
authority, then lawfully to fight so many Duels as the Law has condemned men to
suffer death, since he can command none of his Subjects to execute them, and
they have all lawful power to defend their own lives. How this right and
authority of punishing came into the hands of the Sovereign, we shall not follow
his example in repeting, having before confessed, that it neither is nor can be
grounded on any concession or gift of the Subject, but is indubitably inherent
in the office of being Sovereign, and inseparably annexed to it by God himself.

Corporal, or Capital punishment, Ignominy, Imprisonment, or Exile, are not
better understood then they were before his Definitions and Descriptions which
he makes of them, and in which he does not so much consider the nature of a
Definition, as that he may insert somewhat into it, to which he may resort to
prove somewhat, which men do not think of when they read those Definitions: and
assuming to himself to declare what will serve his turn to be the Law of
Nature, or the Law of Nations, he makes such Inferences and Consequences, as he
thinks necessary to prove his desperate Conclusions. There cannot be a more
pernicious Doctrine, and more destructive to Peace and Justice, then that all
men who are not Subjects are enemies; and that against enemies, whom the
Commonwealth judges capable to do them hurt, it is lawful by the original
right of Nature to make War; which would keep up a continual War between all
Princes, since they are few who are not capable to do hurt to their Neighbors.
Nor can this mischief be prevented by any Treaty or League; for whilst they
are capable of doing hurt, the lawfulness still remains, and being the original
right of Nature, cannot be extinguished. But the wisest and most Learned who
have wrote of the Law of Nature and of Nations, abominate this Proposition; and
the incomparable Grotius says, (De Iure B. and P. lib. 2. cap. 1. part. 17.)
Illud minime ferendum est, quod quidam tradiderunt, jure gentium arma recte
sumi ad imminuendam potentiam crescentem, quae nimium aucta nocere potest. It
may be a motive when there is other just cause in prudence toward the War, but
that it gives a title in Justice, ab omni aequitatis ratione abhorret. And he
says in another place (cap. 22. part. 5.) that it must constare, non tantum de
potentia, sed and de animo; and quidem ita constare, ut certum id sit ea
certudine quae in morali materia locum habet. And yet from this erroneous
Proposition, and because in (page 165.) War the Sword judges not, nor does the
victor make distinction of nocent and innocent, nor has other respect of
mercy, then as it conduces to the good of his own People, he makes no scruple
to tell Cromwell, That as to those who deliberately deny his Authority (for the
Authority of the Commonwealth established, could have no other signification)
the vengeance is lawfully extended, not only to the Fathers, but also to the
third and fourth generations, not yet in being, and consequently innocent of
the fact for which they are afflicted, because they that so offend suffer not
as Subjects but as Enemies, toward whom the Victor may proceed as he thinks
fit and best for himself. After the giving which advice, it was a mavelous
confidence that introduced him into the Kings presence, and encouraged him
still to expect, that his Doctrine should be allowed to be industriously taught
and believed.

If Mr. Hobbes were condemned to depart out of the dominion of the
Commonwealth, as many men believe he might with great Justice be, and so
become an exiled person, he would be a more competent Judge to determine whether
Banishment be a punishment, or rather an escape, or a public command to avoid
punishment by flight; and he would probably then be of opinion, that the mere
change of air is a very great punishment. And if he remembers his own
Definition, (page 108.) That a free man is he, that in those things which by
his strength and wit he is able to do, is not hindered to do what he has a will
to, he would believe that the taking that freedom from him, and the restraining
that liberty, is a very severe punishment, whether justly or unjustly
inflicted, and is in no degree mitigated by his declaring, (page 165.) that a
banished man is a lawful enemy of the Common wealth that banished him, as being
no more a member of the same, and then he may be lawfully prosecuted as well
in, and after he has undergon the punishment of Banishment, as he was before;
but the duty that a banished Person still ow's to his Country, and to the
Sovereign of it, is set down before. But the truth is, he has very powerfully
extinguished all those differences and privileges, which all Writers of the
Ius gentium have carefully preserved between a just and unj^st War, between
lawful Enemies and the worst Rebels and Traitors, and has put the last into a
better condition then the former, by making them liable only to those pains and
forfeiture which the Law has literally provided for them, and which in some
cases preserves their Estates for their Families; whereas the lawful Enemy,
even after quarter given, remains at the mercy of the Victor, who may take his
life, and inflict any other punishment upon him arbitrarily, and according to
his own discretion. In the last place, he has very much obliged his Sovereign,
in telling him so plainly why he has compared him to Leviathan, because he
has raised him to the same greatness, and given him the same power which
Leviathan is described to have in the 41 Chapter of Job, There is nothing on
Earth to be compared with him, he is made so as not to be afraid, be sees
every high thing to be below him, and is King of all the children of pride,
Job. 41. 33, 34. And if he had provided as well to secure his high station, as
he has for the abatement of the pride of the Subject, whom he has
sufficiently humbled, he might more glory in his work: but the truth is, he
has left him in so weak a posture to defend himself, that he has reason to be
afraid of every man; and the remedies he prescribes afterward to keep his
prodigious power from dissolution, are as false and irrational as any other
advice in his Institution, as will appear hereafter.

The Survey of Chapter 29.
MR. Hobbes takes so much delight in reiterating the many ill things he has
said, for fear they do not make impression deep enough in the minds of men,
that I may be pardoned if I repete again sometimes what has bin formerly said;
as this Chapter consisting most of the same pernicious doctrines which he
declared before, tho in an other dress, obliges me to make new, or other
reflections upon what was I think sufficiently answered before, and it may be
repete what I have said before. He is so jealous that the strength of a better
composition of Sovereignty may be superior, and be preferred before that of his
institution, that be devises all the way he can to render it more obnoxious to
dissolution, and like a Mountebank Physician accuses it of diseases which it
has not, that he may apply Remedies which would be sure to bring those or
worse diseases, and would weaken the strongest parts, and support of it, under
pretense of curing its defects. So in the first place he finds fault (page
167.) that a man to obtain a Kingdom is sometimes content with l^ss power, then
to the peace and defense of the Commonwealth is necessarily required, that is,
that he will observe the Laws and Customs of the Kingdom, which by long
experience have bin found necessary for the Peace and defense of it. And to
this he imputes the insolence of Thomas Beckett Archbishop of Canterbury (page
168.) who was supported against Harry the Second by the Pope, the Subjection of
Ecclesiastics to the Commonwealth having, he says, bin dispensed with by
William the Conqueror at his reception, when he took an Oath, not to infringe
the liberty of the Church. And this extravagant power of the Pope he imputes to
the Universities and the doctrine taught by them; which reproach to the
Universities being in a Paragraph of his next Chapter, I choose to join in the
answer with the case of Thomas Beckett and Henry the Second.

Mr. Hobbes has so great a prejudice to the reading Histories (as if they were
all enemies to his Government) that he will not take the pains carefully to
peruse those, from which he expects to draw some advantage to himself;
presuming that men will not believe, that a man, who so warily weighs all he
says in the balance of reason, will ever venture to alledg any matter of fact
that he is not very sure of. But if he had vouchsafed to look over the Records
of his own Country before the time of King Henry the Eight, he would have found
the Universities always opposed the power of the Pope, and would have no
dependence upon him, and that the Kings alone introduced his authority, and made
it to be submitted to by their Laws. Nor did the Church of England owe their
large privileges to any donation of the Popes, whose jurisdiction they would
never admit, but to the extreme devotion and superstition of the People, and
the piety and bounty of the Kings, which gave greater donatives and exemtions
to the Church and Clergy, then any other Kingdom enjoied, or then the Pope gave
any where. Christianity in the infancy of it wrought such prodigious effects in
this Island upon the barbarous affections of the Princes and People who then
were the inhabitants of it, that as soon as they gave any belief to the History
of our Savior, they thought they could not do too much to the Persons of those
who preached him, and knew best what would be most acceptable to him. From
hence they built Churches, and endowed them liberally, submitted so entirely to
the Clergy, whom they looked upon as Sacred persons, that they judged all
differences, and he was not looked upon as a good Christian who did not
entirely resign himself to their disposal: they gave great exemtion to the
Church and Church men, and annexed such Privileges to both, as testified the
veneration they had for the Persons, as well as for the Faith. And when they
suspected that the Licentiousness of succeeding ages might not pay the same
devotion to both, they did the best they could to establish it, by making Laws
to that purpose, and obliging the several Princes to maintain and defend the
rights and privileges of the Church; rights and privileges which themselves
had granted, and of which the Pope knew nothing, nor indeed at that time did
enjoy the like himself. It is true, that by this means the Clergy was grown to
a wonderful power over the People, who looked upon them as more then mortal
men, and had surely a greater authority then any Clergy in Christendom assumed
in those ages, and yet it was generally greater then in other Kingdoms, then it
has ever bin since. Nor could it be otherwise during the Heptarchy, when those
little Sovereigns maintained their power by the authority their Clergy had with
their people, when they had little dependence upon the Prince. But when by the
courage and success of two or three courageous Princes, and the distraction
that had bin brought upon them by strangers, the Government of the whole Island
was reduced under one Sovereign, the Clergy, which had bin always much better
united then the Civil state had bin, were not willing to part with any authority
they had enjoied, nor to be thought of less value then they had bin formerly
esteemed, and so grew troublesome to the Sovereign power, sometimes by
interrupting the progress of their Councils by delays, and sometimes by direct
and positive contradictions. The Princes had not the confidence then to resort
to Mr. Hobbes's original institution of their right; the manners of the Nation
still remained fierce and barbarous, and whatsoever was pliant in them, was
from the result of Religion, which was governed by the Clergy. They knew
nothing yet of that primitive contract that introduced Sovereignty, nor of that
Faith that introduced subjection: they thought* it would not be safe for them
to oppose the power of the Sacred Clergy, with a mere secular, profane force,
and therefore thought how they might lessen and divide their own troublesome
Clergy, by a conjunction with some religious and Ecclesiastical combination.
The Bishops of Rome of that age had a very great name and authority in France,
where there being many Sovereign Princes then reigning together, he exercised a
notable Jurisdiction under the Style of Vicar of Christ. The Kings in England
by degrees unwarily applied themselves to this spiritual Magistrate; and that
he might assist them to suppress a power that was inconvenient to them at home,
they suffered him to exercise an authority that proved afterward very
mischievous to themselves, and for which they had never made pretense before,
and which was then heartily opposed by the Universities, and by the whole
Clergy, till it was imposed upon them by the King. So that it was not the
Universities, and Clergy, that introduced the Popes authority to sh^ke and
weaken that of the King, but it was the King who introduced that power to
strengthen, as he thought, his own, howsoever it fell out. And if the precedent
Kings had not called upon the Pope, and given him authority to assist them
against some of their own Bishops, Alexander the Third could never have
pretended to exercise so wild a jurisdiction over Henry the Second, nor he ever
have submitted to so infamous a subordination; nor could the Pope have
undertaken to assist Beckett against the King, if the King had not first
appealed to him for help against Beckett.

For the better manifestation of that point, which Mr. Hobbes his speculation
and Geometry has not yet made an enquiry into, it will not be amiss to take a
short Survey of the Precedent times, by which it will be evident how little
influence the Popes authority had upon the Crown, or Clergy, or Universities of
England; and how little ground he has for that fancy, from whence soever he
took it, (page 168.) that William the Conqueror at his reception had dispensed
with the subjection of the Ecclesiastics, by the Oa^h he took not to infringe
the liberty of the Church: whereas they who know any thing of that time, know
that the Oath he took was the same, and without any alteration, that all the
former Kings, since the Crown rested upon a single head, had taken, which was
at his Coronation, after the Bishops and the Barons had taken their Oath to be
his true and faithful Subjects. The Archbishop, who crowned him, presented
that Oath to him, which he was to take himself, which he willingly did, to
defend the Holy Church of God, and the Rectors of the same, To govern the
universal people subject to him, justly, To establish equal Laws, and to see
them justly executed. Nor was he more wary in any thing, then (as has bin said
before) that the people might imagine, that he pretended any other title to the
Government, then by the Confessor: tho it is true, that he did by degrees
introduce many of the Norman Customs which were found very useful, or
convenient, and agreeable enough, if not the same, with what had bin formerly
practiced. And the common reproach, of the Laws being from time to time put into
French, carries no weight with it: for there was before that time so rude a
collection of the Laws, and in Languages as foreign to that of the Nation,
British, Saxon, Danish, and Latin, almost as unintelligible as either of the
other, that if they had bin all digested into the English that was then spoken,
we should very little better have understood it, then we do the French, in
which the Laws were afterward rendered; and it is no wonder, since a reduction
into Order was necessary, that the King who was to look to the execution, took
care to have them in that Language which himself best understood, and from
whence issued no inconvenience, the former remaining still in the Language in
which they had bin written.

Before the time of William the First, there was no pretense of jurisdiction
from Rome over the Clergy, and the Church of England; tho the infant
Christianity of some of the Kings and Princes had made some journies thither,
upon the fame of the Sanctity of many of the Bishops who had bin the most
eminent Martyrs for the Christian Faith, and when it may be they could with
more ease and security make a journey thither, then they could have don to any
other Bishop of great notoriety out of their own Country; for Christianity was
not in those times come much nearer England then Dauphine, Provence, and
Languedoc in France, and those Provinces had left their bountiful testimonies
of their devotion, which grew afterward to be exercised with the same piety in
Pilgrimages first, and then expeditions to the Holy Land, without any other
purpose of transferring a Superiority over the English Nation, to Rome, then to
Jerusalem. And after the arrival of Austin the Monk and his Companions, who
were sent by Pope Gregory, and who never enjoyed any thing in England but by
the donation of the Kings, the British Clergy grew so jealous of their
pretenses, that tho the Nation was exceedingly corrupted by the person and the
doctrine of Pel^gius, which had bin spread full two hundred years before Austin
came, the reformation and suppression of that Heresy was much retarded by those
men's extolling or mentioning the Popes authority, which the British Bishops
were so far from acknowledging, that they would neither meet with them, nor
submit to any thing that was proposed by them, and declared very much against
the pride and insolence of Austin, for assuming any authority, and because when
any of them came to him, he would not so much as rise to receive them. I can
hardly contain my self from enlarging upon this subject at this time, but that
it will ^eem to many to be foreign to the argument now in debate, and Mr.
Hobbes has little resignation to the authority of matter of fact, by which when
he is pressed, he has an answer ready, that if it were so, or not so, it
should have bin otherwise, I shall therefore only restrain my discourse to the
time of William the Conqueror, and when I have better informed him of the State
of the Clergy, and Universities of that time, I shall give him the best
satisfaction I can to the instance of Thomas of Beckett, in which both the
Clergy, and the Universities will be easily absolved from the guilt of adhering
to the Pope.

When William found himself in possession of England, whatever application he
had formerly made to the Pope (who was then in France) and as some say had
received from him a consecrated Banner with some other relic, beside one
single hair of St Peter, for the better success of his expedition, he was so
far from discovering any notable respect toward him, that he expressly forbad
all his Subjects from acknowledging any man to be Pope, but him whom he
declared to be so. And there was a President of such a nature in his Reign by
Lanfranke the Arch^B. of Canterbury, who had the greatest credit and authority
with him, as cannot be paralleled by the like don, or permitted in any State,
and impossible to be don, or permitted in any State that was in any degree
subject to the Pope, which was the Canonization of a Saint. There being at that
time very great fame of Aldelmus, who first brought in the composition of
Latin verse into England, and besides his eminent Piety, had so great a
faculty in singing, that by the music of his voice he wrought wonderful effects
upon the barbarous and savage humor of that People, insomuch as when they were
in great multitudes engaged in a rude or licentious action, he would put him
self in their way and sing, which made them all stand still to listen; and he
so captivated them by the melody, that he diverted them from their purpose, and
by degrees got so much credit with them, that he reduced them to more civility,
and instructed them in the duties of Religion, into which, tho they had bin
baptized, they had made little enquiry. He lived a little before the time of
Edward the Confessor, and the general testimony of the Sanctity of his Life,
and some miracles wrought by him (which it may be were principally the effects
of his Music) being reported, and believed by Lanfrank, Edicto sancivit, ut per
totam deinde Angliam Adelmus inter eos, qui civibus coelestibus ascripti erant,
honoraretur and coleretur, as by the authors nearest that time is remembered,
and at large related by Harps-Field in his Ecclesiastical History of England
without any disapprobation. Nor is it probable, that Lanfrank who was an
Italian, born and bred in Lombardly, and of great reputation for learning and
piety, would have assumed that authority, if he had believed that he had
entrenched upon the Province of the Bishop of Rome. The truth is, Canonizations
in that age were not the chargeable commodities they have since grown to be,
since the Pope has engrossed the disposal of them to himself; and it is very
probable, that the Primitive Saints, whose memories are preserved in the
Martyrologies very erroneously, were by the joint acknowledgment of the upon
the notorious sanctity of their lives, and of their deaths, not by any solemn
declaration of any particular authority of Rome; otherwise we should find the
Records of old Canonizations there, as well as we do of so many new. But of so
many of this Nation, who suffered in the ten first persecutions under the Roman
Governors more then of any other, especially if St. Vrsula, and her Eleven
thousand Virgins be reckoned into the number, there is no other Record but of
the days assigned for their Festivities. And in their whole Bullarium, which
for these latter hundred years so much abounds in Canonizations, the first that
is extant is of Vldricke Bishop of Ausburg, by John the Fifteenth, Anno Nine
hundred ninety three, in a very different form, and much different
circumstances from those which are now used. Finally, if the Popes inhibition
or interposition could have bin of any moment in that time of William the
Conqueror, he would have bin sure to have heard of it, when he seized upon the
Plate and Jewels of all the Monasteries, and laid other great impositions upon
the Clergy, which they had not bin accustomed to, and of which they would have
complained, if they had known whither to have addressed their complaints.

The two next Kings who succeeded him, and reigned long (for Henry the First
reigned no less then five and thirty years) wore not their Crowns so fast on
their heads, in respect of the juster title in their Brother Robert, as
prudently to provoke more enemies then they had; and therefore they kept very
fair quarter with Paschal, who was Pope likewise many years, and were content
to look on unconcerned in the fierce quarrels between the Emperor and him, for
he was very powerful in France tho not in Italy. And Anselme the Archbishop of
Canterbury had great contests with them both upon the privileges of the
Clergy, and had fled to Paschal to engage him in his quarrel; yet the Pope
pretended to no jurisdiction in the point, but courteously interceded so far
with Henry the First on the behalf of Anselme, that he made his peace with the
King: but when he afterward desired to send a Legate into England, the King by
the advice of the Bishops, and Nobles, positively refused to admit him. And
whosoever takes a view of the constitution of Christendom, as far as had
reference to Europe at that time, how far the greatest Kingdoms and
Principalities, which do now control and regulate that ambition, were from any
degree of strength and power; that Italy was then crumbled into more distinct
Governments, then it is at present; that France, that is now entire, was then
under the command of very many Sovereign Princes, and the Crown it self so far
from any notable superiority, that the King himself was sometimes excommunicated
by his own Bishops and Clergy, without, and against the Popes direction, and
sometimes excommunicated, and the Kingdom interdicted by the Pope, even whilst
he resided in France, and in Councils assembled by them there, as in the
Council of Clermont; that Spain, that is now under one Monarch, was then
divided into the several Kingdoms of Castile, Arragon, Valentia, Catalonia,
Navarr, and Leon, when the Moors were possessed of a greater part of the whole,
then all the other Christian Kings, the whole Kingdom of Granada with the
greatest part of Andoluzia, and Estremadura, and a great part of Portugal being
then under the Dominion of those Infidels; that Genmany was under as many
Sovereign Princes as it had names of Cities and Provinces; and that England,
which has now Scotland and Ireland annexed to it, was then, besides the
unsettlement of the English Provinces upon the contests in the Norman Family,
without any pretense to the Dominion of Wales, at least without any advantage
by it: I say, whosoever considers this, will not wonder at the starts made by
many Popes in that Age, into a kind of power and authority in many Kingdoms,
that they had not before, and which was then still interrupted and
contradicted; and that when Alexander the Third came to be Pope, who reigned
about twenty years, he proceeded so imperiously with our Henry the Second upon
the death of Thomas Beckett, even in a time when there was so great a Schism in
the Church, that Victor the Fifth was chosen by a contrary party, and by a
Council called at Pavia by the Emperor there owned, and declared to be
Canonically chosen, and Alexander to be no Pope, who thereupon fled into
France: so that if our King Henry the Second had not found such a condescension
to be very suitable to his affairs both in England, and in France, it is
probable he would have declined so unjust and unreasonable an imposition.

I am afraid of giving Mr. Hobbes an occasion to reproach me with impertinency
in this digression, tho he has given me a just provocation to it: and since
the Roman Writers are so solicitous in the collecting and publishing the
Records of that odious Process, and strangers are easily induced to believe,
that the exercise of so extravagant a jurisdiction in the Reign of so Heroical
a Prince, who had extended his Dominions farther by much then any of his
Progenitors had don, must be grounded upon some fixed and confessed right over
the Nation, and not from an original Usurpation entered upon in that time, and
when the Usurper was not acknowledged by so considerable a part of Christendom;
it may not prove ungrateful to many men, to make a short view of that very
time, that we may see what unheard of motives could prevail with that high
spirited King to submit to so unheard of Tyranny. That it was not from the
constitution of the Kingdom, or any preadmitted power of the Pope formerly
incorporated into the Laws and Customs of the Kingdom, is very evident, by the
like having bin before attemted. For tho the Clergy enjoied those great
privileges and immunities which are mentioned before, whereby they had so
great an influence upon the hearts of the people, that the Conqueror himself
had bin glad to make use of them, and William the Second, Henry the First, and
King Stephen had more need of them to uphold their Usurpation; yet those
privileges how great soever, depended not at all upon the Bishop of Rome, nor
was any rank of men more solicitous then the Clergy to keep the Pope from a
pretense of power in the Kingdom. And the Bishops themselves had in the
beginning of that Archbishops contumacious and rebellious contests with the
King, don all they could to discountenance and oppose him, and had given their
consent in Parliament, that for his disobedience all his goods and movables
should be at the Kings mercy; and it was also enacted with their consent (after
the Archbishop had fled out of the Kingdom, and was known to make some
application to the Pope) that if any were found carrying a Letter or Mandate
from the Pope or the Archbishop, containing any interdiction of Christianity
in England; he should be taken, and without delay executed as a Traitor both to
the King and Kingdom; that whatsoever Bishop, Priest, or Monk should have, and
retain any such Letters, should forfeit all their Possessions, Goods, and
Chattels to the King, and be presently banished the Realm with their kin; that
none should appeal to the Pope; and many other particulars, which enough
declare the temper of that Catholic time, and their aversion to have any
dependence upon a foreign jurisdiction. And after the death of Beckett, and
that infamous submission of the King to the Popes Sentence thereupon (which yet
was not so scandalous as it is vulgarly reported, as if it had bin made and
undergon by the King in Person) when the same King desired to assist the
Successor of that Pope, Lucius the Third, who was driven out of Rome, and to
that purpose endeavored to raise a collection from the Clergy, which the Popes
Nuntio appeared in, and hoped to advance, the Clergy was so jealous of having
to do with the Pope, or his Ministers, that they declared, and advised the
King, that his Majesty would supply the Pope in such a proportion as he thought
fit, and that whatever they gave might be to the King himself, and not to the
Popes Nuntio, which might be drawn into example to the detriment of the King.

The King himself first showed the way to Thomas a Beckett to apply himself to
the Pope, till when the Archbishop insisted only upon his own Ecclesiastical
rights and power, in which he found not the concurrence of the other Bishops or
Clergy, and the King not being able to bear the insolence of the man, and
finding that he could well enough govern his other Bishops, if they were not
subjected to the authority and power of that perverse Arch bishop, was willing
to give the Pope authority to assist him, and did all he could to persuade him
to make the Archbishop of York his Legate, meaning thereby to divest the
other. Archbishop of that Superiority over the Clergy that was so troublesome
to him, and which he exercised in his own right as Metropolitan. But the Pope
durst not gratify the King therein, knowing the spirit of Beckett, and that he
would contemn the Legate, and knew well the Ecclesiastical superiority in that
Kingdom to reside in his person as Archbishop of Canterbury, who, had bin
reputed tanquam alterius Orbis Papa, yet he sent to him to advise him to submit
to the King; whereupon the haughty Prelate then fled out of the Kingdom, and
was too hard for the King with the Pope, who was persuaded by him to make use
of this opportunity to enlarge his own power, and to curb and subdue that
Clergy that was indevoted to him; and so by his Bull he suspended the
Archbishop of York, and the other Bishops who adhered to the King in the
execution of his commands; which so much incensed the King, that he let fall
those words in his passion, that encouraged those rash Gentlemen to commit that
assassination, that produced so much trouble. It must also be remembered, that
the King, when he bore all this from the Pope, was indeed but half a King,
having caused his son Henry to be crowned King with him, who thereupon gave him
much trouble, and joined with the French King against him: and that he had so
large and great Territories in France, that as the Popes power was very great
there, so his friendship was the more behovefull and necessary to the King.
Lastly, and which it may be is of more weight then any thing that has bin said
in this disquisition, it may seem a very natural judgment of God Almighty, that
the Pope should exercise that unreasonable power over a King, who had given him
an absurd and unlawful power over himself, and for an unjust end, when he
obtained from our Countryman Pope Adrian, who immediately preceded Alexander, a
Dispensation not to perform the Oath which he had taken, that his Brother
Geoffery should enjoy the County of Anjoy according to the Will and desire of
his Father, and by virtue of that Dispensation, which the Pope had no power to
grant, defrauded his Brother of his inheritance, and broke his Oath to God
Almighty, and so was afterward forced himself to yield to the next Pope, when
he assumed a power over him in a case he had nothing to do with, and where he
had no mind to obey. And this unadvised address of many other Princes to the
Pope, for Dispensations of this kind to do what the Law of God did not permit
them to do has bin a principal inlet of his Supremacy, to make them accept of
other Dispensations from him, of which they stand not in need, and to admit
other his encroachments from him, which have proved very mischievous to them.
Of the condition of King John we need not speak, whose Usurpation, Murders, and
absence of all Virtue, made him fit to undergo all the reproaches and censures
which Pope Innocent the Third exercised him with, when he usurped upon France
with equal Tyranny.

The succeeding Kings no sooner found it necessary to expel, or restrain that
power which the Popes had so inconveniently bin admitted to, and which they had
so mischievously improved, but the Universities not only submitted to, but
advanced those Acts which tended thereunto; as appears by the Writings of
Occam, and other Learned men in the University of Oxford, in the Reigns of
those Kings both Edward the First and Edward the Third, in which times as much
was don against the power of the Pope, as was afterward don by Henry the
Eighth himself. And the Gallican Church would not at this time have preserved
their liberties and privileges to that degree, as to contemn the power of the
universal Bishop, if the University of the Sorbone had not bin more vigilant
against those encroachments then the Crown it self. So far have the
Universities bin from being the Authors, or promoters of those false doctrines,
which he unjustly lays to their charge. And I presume they will be as vigilant
and resolute, to preserve the Civil Authority from being invaded and endangered,
by their receiving and subscribing to his pernicious and destructive
principles, which his modesty is induced to believe may be planted in the minds
of men, because whole Nations have bin brought to acquiesce in the great
mysteries of Christian Religion which are above reason, and millions of men
have bin made to believe, that the same body may be in innumerable places at
one and the same time, which is against reason: and therefore he would have the
Sovereign power to make his Doctrine, so consonant to reason, to be taught and
preached. But his Doctrine is fit only to be taught by his own Apostles, who
ought to be looked upon as Seducers, and false Prophets; and God forbid that
the Sovereign powers should contribute to the making those principles believed,
which would be in great danger to be destroyed, if it were but suspected that
they affected to have that power, which he would have to belong to them. And
such Princes who have bin willi^g to believe they have it, have bin always
most jealous that it should be known, or thought, that they do believe so;
since they know there would be a quick determination of their power, if all
their Subjects knew, that they believed, that all they have does in truth
belong to them, and that they may dispose of it as they please.

(Page 168.) He says a Commonwealth has many diseases, which proceed from
the poison of Seditious doctrines, whereof one is, That every private man is
Judge of good and evil actions, which is a doctrine never allowed in any
Commonwealth, the Law being the measure of all good or evil actions under
every Government; and where that Law permits a liberty to the Subject to
dispute the commands of the Sovereign, no inconvenience can arise thereby: but
if the Sovereign by his own authority shall vacate and cancel all Laws, the
Commonwealth must need be distracted, or much weakened.

Mr. Hobbes will have too great an advantage against any adversary, if he will
not have his Government tried by any Law, nor his Religion by any Scripture:
and he could never think, that the believing, that (page 168.) whatsoever a man
does against his conscience is sin, is a Doctrine to civil Society repugnant,
if he thought any of the Apostles good Judges of Conscience, who all, upon all
occasions and in all actions, commend themselves to every man's conscience, 2.
Cor. 4. 2. as also, Our rejoicing is this, the Testimony of our conscience 2
Cor. 1 12. and throughout the whole New Testament the conscience is made the
Judge of all we do. And if Mr. Hobbes had not so often excepted against Divines
for being good Judges in Religion, I could tell him of very good ones, who are
of opinion, that it is a sin to do any thing against an erroneous conscience,
which is his own best excuse, that he will not depart from his own judgment,
which is his conscience, how erroneous soever it is. But this liberty of
Conscience is restrained only to those Cases where the Law has prescribed no
rule; for where the Law enjoins the duty, no private conscience can deny
obedience. In case of misperswasion, it looks upon the action as sinful in him,
and so chooses to submit to the penalty, which is still obedience, or removes
into another Climate as more agreeable to his constitution.

If Mr. Hobbes proposes to himself to answer all extravagant discourses or
private opinions of seditious men, which have no countenance from public
Authority, he will be sure to choose such as he can easily confute. All sober men
agree, that tho Faith and Sanctity are not to be attained only by study and
reading, yet that study and reading are means to procure that grace from God
Almighty that is necessary thereunto. And himself confesses, that with all his
education, discipline, correction, and other natural ways, it is God that
works that Faith and Sanctity in those he thinks fit. So that if he did not
think men the more unlearned for being Divines, it is probable that there is
very little difference between what those unlearned Divines, and himself say
upon this point, saving that they may use inspiring and infusing, which are
words he cannot endure as insignificant speech, tho few men are deceived in the
meaning of them.

If all Sovereigns are subject to the Laws of Nature (as he says they are)
because such Laws are divine, and cannot by any man or Commonwealth be
abrogated, they then are obliged to observe and perform those Laws which
themselves have made, and promised to observe, for violation of faith is
against the Law of Nature by his own confession. Nor does this obligation set
any Judge over the Sovereign, nor does any civil Law pretend that there is any
power to punish him; it is enough, that in justice he ought to do it, and that
there is a Sovereign in Heaven above him, tho not on Earth.

The next indeed is a Doctrine that troubles him, and tends, as he says, (page
169.) to the dissolution of a Commonwealth, That every private man has an
absolute propriety in his goods, such as excludes the right of the Sovereign,
which if true, he says, (p. 170.) he cannot perform the Office they have put
him into, which is to defend them both from Foreign Enemies, and from the
injuries of one another, and consequently there is no longer a Common wealth.
And I say, if it be not true, there is nothing worth the defending from Foreign
Enemies, or from one another, and consequently it is no matter what becomes of
the Commonwealth. Can he defend them any other way, then by their own help,
with their own hands? and it is a mavelous thing that any man can believe,
that he can be as vigorously assisted by people who have nothing to lose, as by
men who defending him defend their own Goods and Estates, which if they do not
believe their own, they will never care into what hands they fall. Nor is the
Sovereign power divided by the Sovereigns consenting that he will not exercise
such a part of it, but in such and such a manner, and with such circumstances;
for he has not parted with any of his Sovereignty, since no other man can
exercise that which he forbears to exercise himself; which could be don, if he
had divided it. And it is much a greater crime in those who are totally
ignorant of the laws, to endeavor by their wit and presumtion to undermine
them, then that they who are learned in the study and profession of the Law, do
all they can to support that, which only supports the Government. Much less is
the Sovereign power divided by the Sovereigns own communicating part of it to
be executed in his name, to those who, by their education and experience, are
qualified to do it much better then he himself can be presumed to be able to
do* as to appoint Judges to administer Justice to his people, upon all the
pretenses of right which may arise between themselves, or between him and them*
according to the Rules of the Law, which are manifest to them, and must be
unknown to him; who yet keeps the Sovereign power in his hands to punish those
Deputies, if they swerve from their duty.

To the mischiefs which have proceeded from the reading the Histories of the
ancient Greeks and Romans, I shall say no more in this place, then that if Mr.
Hobbes has bin always of this opinion, he was very much to blame to take the
pains to translate Thucyd^des into English, in which there is so much of the
Policy of the Greeks discovered, and much more of that Oratory that disposes
Men to Sedition, then in all Tullies, or Aristotle's works. But I suppose he had
then, and might still have more reason to believe, that very few who have taken
delight in reading the Books of Policy and Histories of the ancient Greeks and
Romans, have ever fallen into Rebellion; and there is much more fear, that the
reading this and other Books writ by him, and the glosses he makes upon them in
his conversation, may introduce thoughts of Rebellion into young men, by
weakening, and laughing at all obligations of conscience, which only can dispose
men to obedience: and by persuading Princes, that they may safely and justly
follow the extent of their own inclinations and appetites in the Government of
their Subjects, which must tire and wear out all Subjection, at least the
cheerfulness, which is the strength of it, by lessening the reverence to God
Almighty, which is the foundation of reverence to the King; and undervaluing
all Religion, as no otherwise known, and no otherwise coustituted then by the
arbitriment of the Sovereign Prince, whom he makes a God of Heaven, as well as
upon the Earth, since he is upon the matter, the only author of the Scripture
it self; the swallowing of all which opinions, must be the destruction of all
Government, and the ruin of all obedience.

Tho most of his reflections are reproaches upon the Government of his own
Country, which he thinks is imperfectly instituted; yet he cannot impute the
doctrine of killing Kings, whether Regicide or Tyrannicide, to that Government,
nor the unreasonable distinction of Spiritual and Temporal jurisdiction, to rob
the Sovereign of any part of his Supremacy, and divide one part of his Subjects
from a dependence upon his justice and authority. God be thanked the Laws of
that Kingdom admit none of that doctrine, or such distinctions to that
pernicious purpose. Nor do the Bishops, or Clergy of that Kingdom (however they
are fallen from Mr. Hobbes his grace) use any style or title, but what is given
or permitted to them by the Sovereign power. And therefore this Controversy
must be defended by those (who justly lie under the reproach) of the Church of
Rome, who, it may be, consider him the less, because, tho they know him not to
be of theirs, they think him not to be of any Religion.

The power of levying Money, which depending upon any general assembly, he
says, (page 172.) endangereth the Commonwealth, for want of such nurishment,
as is necessary to life and motion, shall be more properly enlarged upon in the
next Chapter, when, I doubt not, very wholesome remedies will be found for all
those diseases which he will suppose may proceed from thence; but it is to be
hoped none will choose his desperate prescriptions, which will cure the di^ease
by killing the Patient.

He concludes this Chapter, after all his bountiful donatives to his Sovereign,
with his old wicked doctrine, that would indeed irreparably destroy and
dissolve all Commonwealths, That when by a powerful invasion from a foreign
Enemy, or a prosperous Rebellion by Subjects, his Sovereign is so far oppressed
that he can keep the field no longer, his Subjects owe him no farther
assistance, and may lawfully put themselves under the Conqueror, of what
condition soever; for tho, he says, (page 174.) The right of the Sovereign is
not extinguished, yet the obligation of the members is, and so the Sovereign is
left to look to himself. There are few Empires of the World, which at some time
have not bin reduced, by the strength and power of an outrageous Enemy, to that
extremity, that their forces have not bin able to keep the field any longer,
which Mr. Hobbes makes the period of their Subjects Loyalty, and the
dissolution of the Common wealth; yet of these at last many Princes have
recovered, and redeemed themselves from that period, and arrived again at their
full height and glory by the constancy and virtue of their Subjects, and their
firmly believing, that their obligations could not be extinguished as long as
the right of their Sovereign Monarch was not. So that there is great reason to
believe, that the old Rules which Sovereignty allwaies prescribed to it self,
are much better, and more like to preserve it, then the new ones which he would
plant in their stead; because it is very evident, that the old subjection is
much more faithful and necessary to the support and defense of the Sovereignty,
then that new one which he is contented with, and prescribes; which he will not
only have determined as to any assistance of his natural Sovereign, tho he
confesses (page 174.) his right remains still in him; but that he is obliged,
(so strictly obliged, that no pret^nce of having submitted h^mself out of fear,
can absolve him) to protect, and assist the Usurper as long as he is able. So
that the entire loss of one Battle, according to his judgment of subjection,
and the duty of Subjects, shall, or may put an end to the Sovereignty of any
Prince in Europe. And this is one of the grounds and principles, which he
concludes to be against the express duty of Princes, to let the People be
ignorant of.

If Mr. Hobbes had a Conscience made and instructed like other men's, and had
not carefully provided, that whilst his judgment is fixed under Philosophical
and Metaphysical notions, his Conscience shall never be disturbed by Religious
speculations and apprehensions; it might possibly smite him with the
remembrance, that these excellent principles were industriously insinuated,
divulged and published within less then two years after Cromwels Usurpation of
the Government of the three Nations, upon the Murder of his Sovereign; and that
he then declared in this Book (page 165.) that against such Subjects who
deliberately deny the authority of the Common wealth, then, and so established,
(which, God be thanked, much the major part of the three Nations then did) the
vengeance might lawfully be extended not only to the Fathers, but also to the
third and fourth generation not yet in being, and consequently innocent of the
fact for which they are afflicted; because the nature of this offense, consists
in renouncing of subjection, which is a relapse into the condition of War,
commonly called Rebellion, and they that so offend, suffer not as Subjects, but
as Enemies. And truly he may very reasonably believe, surely more then many
things which he does believe, that the veneme of this Book wrought upon the
hearts of men, to retard the return of their Allegiance for so many years, and
was the cause of so many cruel and bloody persecutions against those, who still
retained their duty and Allegiance for the King. And methinks no man should be
an Enemy to the renewing war in such cases, but he who thinks all kind of war,
upon what occasion soever, to be unlawful; which Mr. Hobbes is so far from
thinking, that he is very well contented, and believes it very lawful for his
Sovereign, in this Paragraph of cruelty, to make war against any whom he judges
capable to do him hurt.

The Survey of Chapter 30.
MR. Hobbes having invested his Sovereign with so absolute Power and
Omnipotence, we have reason to expect that in this Chapter of his Office, he
will enjoin him to use all the authority he has given him; and he gives him
fai^ warning, that if any of the essential Rights of Sovereignty, specified in
his eighteenth Chapter (which, in a word, is to do any thing he has a mind to
do, and take any thing he likes from any of his Subjects) be taken away, the
Commonwealth is dissolved: and therefore that it is his office to preserve
those Rights entire, and against his duty to transfer any of them from himself.
And least he should forget the Rights and Power he has bestowed upon him, he
recollects them all in three or four lines, amongst which he puts him in mind,
that he has power to leavy money, when, and as much as in his own conscience he
shall judge necessary: and then tells him, that it is against his duty to let the
People be ignorant, or misinformed of the grounds and reasons of those his
essential Rights, that is, that he is obliged to make his Leviathan Canonical
Scripture, there being no other Book ever yet printed, that can inform them of
those rights, and the grounds and reason of them. And how worthy they are to
receive that countenance and authority, will best appear by a farther
examination of the Particulars; and yet a man might have reasonably expected
from the first Paragraph of this Chapter another kind of tenderness, indeed as
great as he can wish, of the good and welfare of the Subject, when he declares,
( page 175.) That the office of the Monarch consists in the end for which he
was trusted with the Sovereign power, namely, the procuration of the safety of
the People, to which he is obliged by the Law of Nature, and to render an
account thereof to God the Author of that Law. But by safety, he says, is not
mea^^ a bare preservation, but also all other contentments of life, which every
man by lawful industry, without danger or hurt to the Commonwealth, can
acquire to h^mself. Who can expect a more blessed condition? Who can desire a
more gracious Sovereign? No man would have thought this specious Building
should have its Foundation, after the manner of the foolish Indians, upon sand,
that, as soon as you come to rest upon it, molders away to nothing; that this
safety, safety improved with all the other contentments of life, should consist
in nothing else, but in a man's being instructed and prepared to know, that he
has nothing of his own, and that when he has by his lawful industry acquired
to himself all the contentments of life which he can set his heart upon, one
touch of his Sovereigns hand, one breath of his mouth, can take all this from
him without doing him any injury. This is the Doctrine to be propagated, and
which he is confident will easily be received and consented to, since if it
were not according the principles of Reason, he is sure it is a principle from
authority of Scripture, and will be so acknowledged, if the Peoples minds be not
tainted with dependence upon the Potent, or scribled over with the opinions of
their Doctors.

One of the reasons which he gives, why his grounds of the rights of his
Sovereign should be diligently and truly taught, is a very good reason to
believe, that the grounds are not good, because he confesses, ( page 175.) that
they cannot be maintained by any Civil Law, or terror of legal punishment. And
as few men agree with Mr. Hobbes in the essential Rights of Sovereignty, so
none allows, nor does he agree with himself, that all resistance to the rights
of the Sovereignty, be they never so essential, is Rebellion. He allows it to
be a privilege of the Subject that he may sue the King, so there is no doubt
but that the Sovereign may sue the Subject, who may as lawfully defend as sue,
and every such defense is a resistance to the Sovereign right of demanding, and
yet I suppose Mr. Hobbes will not say it is Rebellion. He that does positively
refuse to pay money to the King, which he does justly owe to him, and which he
shall be compelled to pay, does resist an essential Right of the King, yet is
not guilty of Rebellion, which is constituted in having a force to support his
resistance, and a purpose to apply it that way. And as the Law of Nature is not
so easily taught, because not so easily understood as the Civil Law, so I
cannot comprehend, why Mr. Hobbes should imagine the Sovereign power to be more
secure by the Law of Nature, then by the Civil Law, when he confesses, That the
Law of Nature is made Law, only by being made part of the Civil Law: and if the
Civil Law did not provide a restraint from the violation of Faith, by the
terror of the punishment that must attend it, the obligation from the Law of
Nature wonld be a very faint security to Princes for the obedience of their
Subjects. But he chooses to appeal only to the Law of Nature, which is a Text so
few men have read and understand, to support an imaginary Faith that was never
given, upon which Sovereignty was founded. For which he has another reason
likewise; for his Law of Nature is always at hand to serve him, when no other
Law will. For when you tell him that the Law of Nature forbids the violation
of Faith, and therefore that Kings and Princes are obliged to observe the
Promises they make, and the Oaths they take; he answers you with great
confidence, and great cleerness, that that rule is only obligatory to Subjects,
for that by the Law of Nature, such Promises and Oaths taken by Princes, are
ipso facto void, invalid, an^ bind not at all. So that by this omnipotent Law
of Nature, which is indispensable and eternal, the Sacred Word of a King, which
ought to be as fixed and unmovable as the center of the Earth, is made as
changeable as the Moon; and the breach of Faith, which is so odious to God and
man, is made lawful for Kings, who are the only Persons in the World who cannot
be perjured, because the indispensable Law of Nature will not permit them to
perform what they promise. And now we see the reason why the Law of Nature must
only be able to support that Government, which no Civil Law will be able to do:
it remains, that tho there may be a very innocent and lawful resistance of some
essential Rights of the Sovereign, for recovery whereof he may be put to sue at
Law, as has bin said before, his Sovereign by his right of Interpreting Law,
may, as his Institutor here has don, interpret such resistance to be Treason,
and so confi^cate the Estate of the greatest Subject he has, who has an
Estate that he has a mind to have.

He would be glad to find some answer to the want of President, which he sees
will always lie in his way, that there has not bin hitherto any Commonwealth
where those Rights have bin acknowledged or challenged: but he has always the
ill luck to leave the Objection as strong as he found it; and if he could find
no Artificers to assist in the erecting such a Building as may last as long as
the Materials, notwithstanding his skill in Architecture from the principles of
Reason, his long study of the nature of Materials, and the diverse effects of
Figure and Proportion, men would rather choose to dwell in the Houses they have,
then to pull them down, and exspect till he set up better in the place. He must
give a better evidence then his non-reason, that his Government will be
everlasting, before men believe it; and when his Principles from authority of
Scripture come to be examined, they will be found to have no more solidity,
then those which he has produced from his long study and observation. In the
mean time he shall do well to get his Doctrine planted in those Countries, and
among that People who are made believe, that the same Body may be in
innumerable places at one and the same time, where possibly things equally
unreasonably may be believed. And since men are to be taught, that they ought
not to be in love with any Form of Government more then with their own, nor to
desire change, which he says, ( page 177.) is like the breach of the first of
Gods Commandments, he has himself raised one unanswerable Argument against the
reception and doctrine of his L^viathan. His unskilful reproaches upon the
Universities are sufficiently refuted in the last Chapter.

A man would hardly believe, that the same Person should think it to be of the
office of the Sovereign to take care for the making of good Laws, and should so
frankly declare, That no Law can be conceived to be good, tho it be for the
benefit of the Sovereign, if it be not necessary for the People, for the good
of the Sovereign and the People cannot be separated; and yet at the same time
determine, that all Laws which establish any Propriety to and in the People,
are invalid and void, and that it is an essential and inseparable Right in the
Sovereign, to levy as much money at any time, as he in his own conscience shall
judge necessary. And therefore, tho I think I have in several places of this
Discourse sufficiently evinced the unreasonableness of this Proposition, and
the inconsistency of the good and security of the Sovereign with such a Power,
I shall here enlarge upon the Disquisition thereof, and of the reasons which
induce him to believe, that any kind of restraint of his power of raising money,
by what consent of his own soever, is no less then the dissolution of the
Commonwealth: for this power of taking every man's money from him, and his goods
that will yield money, is his principal contention throughout his Book, besides
his liberty to lay asleep, alter, and repeal all Laws according to his will and
pleasure. The expense and charge of the preservation and maintenance of the
Government being uncertain and contingent, and so not to be provided for by any
constant provision or revenue, if by any emergent occasion, upon a sudden
Rebellion or foreign Invasion, the Sovereign has not power to raise what money
he thinks necessary to suppress the one and resist the other, the Kingdom must
be lost; and if he may do it in either of those cases, he may do it to prevent
either; and it ought to be supposed that he will not take more, tho he may take
all, then is absolutely necessary for the occasion: and this is the strongest
case (and yet is not so strong in relation to an Island, as it is in relation
to an Inland Kingdom) he has, or can suppose, for the support of this power,
to every part of which this answer may be applied.

As there is no Sovereign in Europe who pretends to this right of Sovereignty,
so there was never any Kingdom, or considerable Country lost by want of it, or
preserved by the actual exercise of it: and the Laws themselves permit, and
allow many things to be don, when the mischief and necessity are in view, which
may not warrantably be don upon the pretense of preventing it. The Law of
necessity is pleadable in any Court, and has not only its pardon but
justification; as when, not only a Magistrate, but a private man pulls down a
house or more, which are next to that house which is on fire, to prevent the
farther mischief, the Law justifies him, because the necessity and benefit is
as visible as the fire; yet it would not be justice in the Sovereign himself,
to cause a man's house to be pulled down that is seven miles distant, upon a
foresight that the fire may come thither. I am not averse from Mr. Hobbes's
opinion, that a man who is upon the point of starving, and is not able to buy
meat, may take as much of the meat he first sees, as will serve for that meal;
and this not only by the Law of Nature, but for ought I know, without
punishment by any Municipal Law, which seldom cancels the unquestionable Law of
Nature: but this necessity will not justify him in the stealing or taking by
force an Ox from any man to prevent starving for a month together, how poor
soever the man is, or to rob a Poulterers shop, that he may have a second
course. Necessity is not a word unknown, or unconsider'd by the Law. No
Subject, who will obey the Law, and submit to that power and authority which he
conf^sses to be unquestionable in the King, can run into Rebellion; and if he
does, all other Subjects are bound by the Laws to assist, to suppress it in
that manner, and with that force, and under such conduct and command as the
Sovereign directs. If this Rebellion prospers, let the Sovereigns right be what
Mr. Hobbes assigns him, to levy money, he will never be able to levy it in the
Rebels Quarters; and if they extend their Quarters far, they share the
Sovereignty with him; for he appoints those who live in those Quarters, and
enjoy protection, to assist and defend their Protectors. The case is the same
in an actual Invasion, where the Invaders right grows at least as fast as the
Rebels; and the power of the Sovereign, be it never so cheerfully submitted to,
can levy money only where he is obeyed, and upon those whose hands must fight
for him, or give him other assistance; and then the question is, Whether he be
not like to be stronger by accepting what they are willing to give, then by
letting them know that they have nothing to give, because all they have is his.
And yet in both these cases of an actual Rebellion, or actual Invasion, if the
King takes any man's money that he finds (and if he cannot find it, his right to
take it will do him little good) not as his own, but as that man's, to be laid
out for his own and public defense, and to be repaid by the public, which ought
not to be defended at the charge of any private man, there will be little
complaint of the violation of the Law, and the right of Property will be still
unshaken. But all these mischiefs are to be prevented by the Sovereigns
sagacity and foresight; and if he may not levy what money he pleases, and
thinks requisite to make preparations to disappoint all such designs of both
kinds, it will be too late indeed to do it after, and the Commonwealth cannot
but suffer by the defect of power.

If the mischief be only in apprehension, there is time to raise money in that
way which is provided, and agreed upon for those extraordinary occasions, by
asking their consent, who can without any complaint or murmur that can prove
inconvenient, give present directions for the payment thereof. But what if they
refuse to give; must the Commonwealth perish, and every man in it, whose
defense the Sovereign has undertaken, and is bound to? If the Sovereign has
taken all they have before, as he may when he will, they may have nothing left
to be taken in those necessary seasons, and then what will his obligation to
defend them do good? and how are they like to assist him, when they have
nothing to defend but his power to make them miserable? It is not good to
suspect, that Princes will extend their power, how absolute soever it is, to
undo their Subjects wantonly and unnecessarily; nor is it reasonable to
imagine, that Subjects who enjoy Peace and Plenty, will obstinately refuse to
contribute toward their own preservation, when both are in danger. But since
it is necessary to suppose a case that never yet fell out, to introduce a
Government that was never before thought of, let us admit that it is possible,
that such an obstinate Spirit may rule in that Assembly which have the power to
raise money, that they may peremtorily refuse to give any, and by the want
thereof the Commonwealth is really like to be dissolved; I say, admit this,
(tho the same kind of obstinacy, that is, an obstinacy as natural as this, to
perform no function they ought to do, will, and must dissolve the Sovereignty
of his own institution) the question shall be, Whether this very disease be
worthy of such a cure? whether the confessed possibility of such a danger be
fit to be secured and prevented by such a remedy? and I think most wise and
dispassioned men will believe, that the perpetual inquietude and vexation, that
must attend men who are in daily fear to have all they have taken from them,
and believe that they have nothing their own to leave to their Children and
Family, is too disproportioned a provision to prevent a mischief that is
possible to fall out; and that the hazard of that is more reasonably to be
submitted to, then the danger of a more probable revolution from the other
distemper. And when he has heightened the danger his Sovereignty may be in, by
all the desperate imaginations his melancholy or fancy can suggest to him, he
will find, that no defect of power can ever make a Prince so weak, so impotent,
and so completely miserable, as his being Sovereign over such Subjects as have
nothing to give, because they have nothing that is their own; nor will the
conscience of their Sovereign, that he will not do all he may, bring any
substantial Cordial to them: but as he says, that his Sovereign may command
any thing to be don against Law, because his command amounts to a repeal of
that Law, for he that can make himself free, is free; so they will think, that
he that can be undon at the pleasure of another man, is undon already, and that
every day is but the Eve of his destruction, and therefore will think of all
ways to prevent it; and he knows the effect of fear too well, to think that a
man who is in a continual fright can be fixed in a firm obedience.

His Commentary upon the ten Commandments, which in his judgment comprehends
and exacts all his Injunctions contained in his Leviathan, and his other
Theological Speculations, I refer to the consideration and examination of his
Friends the Divines, who no doubt will be well pleased to find him a better
Casuist, now he comes to revolve the tenth Commandment in this his thirtieth
Chapter, then he was in his twenty seventh Chapter, in his gloss upon the same
Text; for there he determines clearly, (page 151.) that to be delighted in the
imagination only of being possessed of an other man's goods, or wife, without
intention to take them from him by force or fraud, is no breach of this Law,
Thou shall not covet: nor the pleasure a man has in imagining the death of a
man, from whose life he expects nothing but damage and displeasure, any sin.
The business he then had, was to find excuses and extenuation for sins; but now
having occasion better to consider that Commandment, of which he stood in need,
he finds, that the very intention to do an unjust act, tho hindered, is
injustice, which consists in the pravity of the Will, as well as in the
irregularity of the act; as if in the former case, all that delight in the
imagination of being possessed of another man's Wife, or the pleasure one has in
thinking of the death of a man he does not love, could be without any pravity
of the Will. It Is true, a purpose and intendment may be more criminal then mere
complacency; but we know more or less do not change the Species of things. And
for the best way of inculcating all his useful Doctrines, and setting aside
certain days to infuse (which upon so good an occasion will not offend his
severe ear) the same into the hearts of the People, which he conceives to be a
duty enjoined by the fourth Commandment, I shall defer my opinion till the end
of the next Chapter, when upon the view of all his Doctrines by retail, we may
better consult upon the method of spreading them abroad. In the mean time he
must not take it ill, that I observe his extreme malignity to the Nobility, by
whose bread he has bin always sustained, who must not expect any part, at
least any precedence in his Institution; that in this his deep meditation upon
the ten Commandments, and in a conjuncture when the Levellers were at highest,
and the reduction of all degrees to one and the same was resolved upon, and
begun, and exercised toward the whole Nobility with all the instances of
contemt and scorn, he chose to publish his judgment; as if the safety of the
People required an equality of Person, and that (page 180.) the honor of great
Persons is to be valued for their beneficence, and the aids they give to men of
inferior rank, or not at all; and that the consequence of partiality toward
the great* raised hatred, and an endeavor in the People to pull down all
oppressing and contumelious greatness; language lent to, or borrowed from the
Agitators of that time.

He seems to think the making of good Laws to be incumbent on the Sovereign as
his duty, and of much importance to his Government; but he says then, (page
181.) that by a good Law, he does not mean a just Law, for that no Law can be
unjust, because it is made by the Sovereign Power. And in truth, if the use of
Laws is not to restrain men from doing amiss, and to instruct and dispose them
to do well, and to secure them when they do so, they are of no use at all, and
it is no matter if there be any Laws or no. For, to make use of his own
illustration, (page 182.) Hedges are set to stop Travelers, and to keep them
in the way that is allowed and prescribed, and for hindering them to choose a
way for themselves, tho a better and nearer way; and Laws are made to guide,
and govern, and punish men who presume to decline that rule, and to choose
another to walk by, that is more agreeable to their own appetite or
convenience. He renews his trouble to find fit Counselors for his Sovereign,
which he has so much considered before, and finds the office to be as hard as
the Etymology (of which let the Grammarians and he agree) and says plainly,
(page 184.) that the Politics is a harder study then the study of Geometry: and
probably he believes that he can set down as firm Rules in the one, as there
are in the other. (page 184.) Good counsel, he says, comes not by lot or
inheritance, and therefore there is no more reason to expect good advice from
the rich, or the noble, in the matters of state, then in delineating the
dimensions of a Fortress; and is very solicitous, like a faithful Leveller,
that no man may have privileges of that kind by his birth or descent, or have
farther honor then adhereth naturally to his abilities; whereas in all well
instituted Governments, as well among the Ancient as the Modern, the Heirs and
Descendants from worthy and eminent Parents, if they do not degenerate from
their virtue, have bin always allowed a preference, and kind of title to
emploiments and offices of honor and trust, which he thinks (page 184.)
inconsistent with the Sovereign power, tho they must be conferred by him: and
the Pedigree of those pretenses from the Germans, is one of those dreams which
he falls into, when he invades the quarters of History to make good his
assertions.

Lastly, since he reckons the sending out Colonies, and erecting Plantations,
the encouraging all manner of Arts, as Navigation, Agriculture, Fishing, and
all manner of Manufactures, to be of the Policy and Office of a Sovereign, it
will not be in his power to deny, that his Sovereign is obliged to perform all
those promises, and to make good all those concessions and privileges which he
has made and granted, to those who have bin thereby induced* to expose their
Fortunes and their Industry to those Adventures, as has bin formerly enlarged
upon in the case of Merchants and Corporations, and which is directly contrary
to his Conclusions and Determinations. And I cannot but here observe the great
vigilance and caution, which Mr. Hobbes (who has an excellent faculty of
employing very soft words, for the bringing the most hard and cruel things to
pass) uses out of his abstracted love of Justice, toward the regulating and
well ordering his poor and strong people, whom he transplants into other
Countries for the ease of his own; whom he will by no means suffer to
exterminate those they find there, but only to constrain them to inhabit closer
together, and not to range a great deal of ground; that is in more significant
words, which the tenderness of his nature would not give him leave to ^tter, to
take from them the abundance they pos^^ss, and reduce them to such an
assignation, that they may be compelled, if they will not be persuaded, (page
181.) to court each little plot with art and labor to give them their
sustenance in d^e season. And if all this good H^sbandry will not serve the
turn, but that they are still over-charg'd with Inhabitants, he has out of his
deep meditation prescribed them a sure remedy for that too, (page 181.) War,
which he says will provid^ for every man by victory, or death; that is, they
must cut the throats of all men who are troublesome to them, which without doubt
must be the natural and final period of all his Prescriptions in Policy and
Government.

The Survey of Chapter 31.
AFTER he has formed such a Kingdom for man, as is agreeable to his good will
and pleasure, he concludes this second part of his Discourse, by assigning the
one and thirtieth Chapter to the consideration of the Kingdom of God by nature;
concerning which, he enlarges himself with less reservation in the third part
of his Discourse, which immediately follows, and therefore I shall make no
reflections upon what he says concerning it, till we come thither: nor upon his
Worship and Attributes which he assigns to God, or rather what are not
Attributes to him; in which, under pretense of explaining or defining, he makes
many things harder then they were before. As all men who know what the meaning
of knowledge and understanding is, know it less after they are told, that i^ is
(page 190.) nothing else but a tumult in the mind, raised by external things,
that press the organical parts of man's body. And I must confess, he has
throughout this whole Chapter with wonderful art, by making use of very many
easy, proper, and very significant words, made a shift to compound the whole
so involved and intricate, that there is scarce a Chapter in his Book, the
sense whereof the Reader can with more difficulty carry about him, and observe
the several fallacies and contradictions in it. Of which kind of obscurity Mr.
Hobbes makes as much use, as of his brightest elucidations, and having the
Sovereign power over all definitions: which he uses not (as is don in Geometry,
which he says, is the only science it has pleased God hith^rto to bestow upon
mankind) as preliminaries or postulata, by which men may know the settled
signification of words, but reserves the prerogative to himself, to give new
Definitions as often as he has occasion to use the same terms, that when it
conduces to his purpose, he may inform his Reader, or else perplex him. And
therefore he does not think himself safe in the former plain Definition which
he gives of understanding, ( page 17.) that it is nothing else but conception
caused by speech; by which, speech being peculiar to man, understanding must be
peculiar to him also: but now being in his one and thirtieth Chapter, and to
deprive God of understanding, that Definition will not serve his turn, since it
cannot be doubted but that God does hear all we say; and therefore we are to be
amuzed by being told, ( page 190.) that understanding is nothing else but a
tumult of the mind, raised by external things, that press the organical parts
of man's body: So that there being no such thing in God, and it depending on
natural causes, cannot be attributed to him. And now he is as safe as ever he
was, and let him that finds no tumult in his mind, that presses the organical
parts of his body, get knowledge and understanding as he can.

I am not willing, under pretense of adjourning some reflections, which would be
natural enough upon this Chapter, to a more seasonable occasion, for
enlargement upon the third part of his Discourse, to be thought purposely to
pretermit some of his Expressions in this Chapter, which seem to have somewhat
of Piety and of Godliness in them, and to raise hope that his purposes are yet
better then they appeared to be. After all that illimited power he has granted
to his Sovereign, and all that unrestrained obedience which he exacts from his
Subject, he does in the first Paragraph of this Chapter frankly acknowledge, (
page 186.) that the Subjects owe simple obedience to their Sovereign, only in
those things wherein their obedience is not repugnant to the Law of God, and is
very solicitous so to instruct his Subject, that for want of entire knowledge of
his duty to both Laws, he may neither by too much civil obedience offend the
Divine Majesty, or through fear of offending God, transgress the Commandments
of the Commonwealth; a circumspection worthy the best Christian, and is enough
to destroy many of the Prerogatives which he has given to his Sovereign, and
to cancel many of the Obligations he has imposed upon his Subject. But if the
Reader will suspend his judgment till he has read a few leaves more, he will
find, that Mr. Hobbes has bin wary enough to do himself no harm by his
specious Divinity, but has a salvo to set all straight again; for he make^ no
scruple of determining, (page 199.) That the Books of the holy Scripture, which
only contain the Laws of God, are only Canonical, when they are established for
such by the Sovereign power. So that when he has suspended obedience to the
Sovereign in those things wherein their obedience is repugnant to the Law of
God, it is meant only till the Sovereign declares that it is not repugnant to
the Law of God; with other excellent Doctrine, the examination whereof we must
not anticipate before its time; and shall only wonder at his devout provision,
(page 191.) that Prayers and Thanksgiving to God, be the best and most
significant of honor. And whereas most pious men are of opinion, that rhose
Devotions being the most sincere, and addressed to none but to God himself, who
at the same time sees the integrity of the heart, ought to be without the least
affectation of Word, or elegance of Expression; he will have them ( page 192.)
made in words and phrases, not sudden and plebeian, but beautiful and well
composed, for else we do not God so much honor as we may: and therefore he
says, Tho the Heathen did ^^surdly to worship Images for Gods, yet their doing
it in verse and with music, both of voice and instrument, was reasonable.

I cannot omit the observation of his very con^ident avoiding that place in the
Scripture, ( page 193.) It is better to obey God then man, which he could not
but find did press him very hard, and was worthy of a better answer, then that
it has place in the Kingdom of God by pact, and not by nature; which if it be
an answer, has not that perspicuity in it, which good Geometricians require;
and the answer stands much more in need of a Commentary, then the Text, which
he will supply us with in the next Edition. However, let it be as it will, he
has, he says, ( page 193.) recovered some hope, that at one time or other
this writing of his may fall into the hands of a Sovereign who will consider it
himself, (he acknowledged at that time no Sovereign but Cromwell) and without
the help of any interessed or envious Interpreter, and by the exercise of
entire Sovereignty in protecting the public teaching it, convert the truth of
speculation into the utility of practice.

It is one of the unhappy effects, which a too gracious and merciful Indulgence
ever produces in corrupt and proud natures, that they believe, that whatsoever
is tolerated in them is justified and commended; and because Mr. Hobbes has
not received any such brand which the Authors of such Doctrine have bin usually
marked with, nor has seen his Book burned by the hand of the Hangman, as many
Books more innocent have bin, he is exalted to a hope, that the supreme
Magistrate will at some time so far exercise his Sovereignty, as to protect the
public teaching his Principles, and convert the truth of his Speculation into
the utility of practice. But he might remember, and all those who are
scandalized, that such monstrous and seditious Discourses have so long escaped
a judicial Examination and Punishment, must know, that Mr. Hobbes his Leviathan
was printed and published in the highest time of Cromwell's wicked Usurpation,
for the vindication and perpetuating whereof, it was contrived and designed,
and when all Legal power was suppressed; and upon his Majesty's blessed return,
that merciful and wholesome Act of Oblivion, which pardoned all Treasons and
Murders, Sacriledg, Robbery, Heresies and Blasphemies, as well with re^erence
to their Writings as their Persons, and other Actions, did likewise wipe out
the memory of the Enormities of Mr. Hobbes and his Leviathan. And this has bin
the only reason, why the last has bin no more enquired into then the former,
it having bin thought best, that the impious Doctrines of what kind soever,
which the license of those times produced, should rather expire by neglect, and
the repentance of the Authors, then that they should be brought upon the Stage
again by a solemn and public condemnation, which might kindle some parts of the
old Spirit with the vanity of contradiction, which would otherwise, in a short
time, be extinguished: and it is only in Mr. Hobbes his own power to reverse
the security that Act has given him, by repeting his former Errors, by making
what was his Offspring in Tyrannical Times, when there was no King in Israel,
his more deliberate and legitimate Issue and Productions, in a time when a
lawful Government flourishes, which cannot connive at such bold Transgressors
and Transgressions; and he will then find, that it has fallen into the hands
of a Sovereign that has considered it very well, not by allowing the public
teaching it, but by a declared detestation and final snppression of it, and
enjoining the Author a public recantation.

We shall conclude here our disquisition of his Policy and Government of his
Commonwealth, with the recollecting and stating the excellent Maxims and
Principles upon which his Government is founded and supported, that when they
appear naked, and uninvolv'd in his magisterial Discourses, men may judge of the
liberty and security they should enjoy, if Mr. Hobbes Doctrine were inculcated
into the minds of men by their Education, and the Industry of those Masters
under whom they are to be bred, as he thinks it necessary it should be; which
Principles are in these very terms declared by him.

1. That the Kings word is sufficient to take any thing from any Subject when
there is need, and that the King is Judge of that need. page 106. cap. 20. part.
2.

2. The Liberty of a subject lies only in those things, which in regulating
their actions, the Sovereign has pretermitted, such as is the liberty to buy
and sell, and otherwise to contract with one another; to choose their own abode,
their own diet, their own trade of life, and institute their children as they
themselves think fit, and the like. page 109. cap. 21. par. 2.

3. Nothing the Sovereign can do to a subject, on what pretense soever, can
properly be called injustice or injury. page 109.

4. When a Sovereign Prince puts to death an innocent subject, tho the
action be against the Law of Nature, as being contrary to Equity, yet it is not
an injury to the subject, but to God. page 109.

5. No man has liberty to resist the word of the Sovereign; but in case a
great many men together, have already resisted the Sovereign power unjustly, or
committed some capital crime, for which every one of them expects death, they
have liberty to join together, and to assist and defend one another. page 112.

6. If a Sovereign demand, or take any thing by pretense of his power, there
lies in that case no action at Law. page 112.

7. If a subject be taken prisoner in War, or his person, or his means of life
be within the guards of the Enemy, and has his life and corporal liberty given
him, on condition to be subject to the Victor, he has liberty to accept the
condition, and having accepted it, is the subject of him that took him. page
114.

8. If the Sovereign banish the subject, during the banishment he is no
subject. page 114.

6. The obligation of subjects to the Sovereign, is as long, and no longer then
the power lasts, by which he is able to protect them. page 124.

10. Whatever Promises or Covenants the Sovereign makes, are void. page 89.

11. He whose private interest is to be judged in an assembly, may make as many
friends as he can; and tho he hires such friends with money, yet it is not
injustice. page 122. cap. 22. part. 2.

12. The propriety which a subject has in his Lands, consists in a right to
exclude all other subjects from the use of them, and not to exclude their
Sovereign. page 128. cap. 24. part. 2.

13. When the Sovereign commands a man to do that which is against Law, the
doing of it is totally excused; when the Sovereign commands any thing to be
don against Law, the command as to that particular fact is an abrogation of the
Law. page 157. cap. 27. part. 2.

14. Tho the right of a Sovereign Monarch cannot be extinguished by the act of
another, yet the obligation of the members may; for he that wants protection,
may seek it any where; and when he has it, is obliged (without fraudulent
pretense of having submitted himself out of fear) to protect his Protector as
long as he is able. page 174. cap. 29. part. 2.

If upon the short reflections we have made upon these several Doctrines, as
they lie scattered over his Book, and involved in other Discourses, which with
the novelty administers some pleasure to the unwary Reader, the contagion
thereof be not enough discovered, and the ill consequence and ruin that must
attend Kings and Princes who affect such a Government, as well as the misery
insupportable to Subjects who are compelled to submit to it; it may be, the
view of the naked Propositions by themselves, without any other clothing or
disguise of words, may better serve to make them oqious to King and People; and
that the first will easily discern, to how high a pinnacle of power soever he
would carry him, he leaves him upon such a Precipice, from whence the least
blast of Invasion from a Neighbor, or from Rebellion by his Subjects, may throw
him headlong to irrecoverable ruin: and the other will as much abhor an
Allegiance of that temper, that by any misfortune of their Prince they may be
absolved from, and cease to be Subjects, when their Sovereign has most need of
their obedience. And surely if these Articles of Mr. Hobbes's Creed be the
product of right Reason, and the effects of Christian Obligations, the great
Turk may be looked upon as the best Philosopher, and all his Subjects as the
best Christians.

The Third Part.
The Survey of Chapters 32, 33, 34.
AS we had no reason to expect a rational discourse of civil Government and
Policy, when the opinion and judgment of all Lawyers were excluded, and all
established Laws contradicted, so we may well look for a worse of Christian
Politics, when the advice of all Divines is positively protested against, and
new notions of Divinity introduced, as rules to restrain our conceptions, and
to regulate our understandings. And as he has not deceived us in the former,
he will as little disappoint us in the latter. But having taken a brief survey
of the dangerous opinions, and determinations in Mr. Hobbes his two first parts
of his Leviathan, concerning the constitution, nature, and right of Sovereigns,
and concerning the duty of Subjects, which he confesses contains doctrine very
different from the practice of the greatest part of the world, and therefore
ought to be watched with the more jealousy for the novelty of it; I shall not
now accompany him through his remaining two parts in the same method, by taking
a view of his presumtion in the interpretation of several places of Scripture,
and making very unnatural deductions from thence to the lessening the dignity
of Scripture, and to the reproach of the highest actions don by the greatest
Persons by the immediate command of God himself. For if those marks, and
conditions which he makes necessary to a true Prophet, and without which he
ought not to be believed, were necessary, Moses was no true Prophet, nor had
the Children of Israel any reason to believe, and follow him, when he would
carry them out of Egypt; for he concludes from the thirteenth Chapter of
Deu^eronomy, and the five first verses thereof, (page 197.) that God will not
have Miracles alone serve for Argument to prove the Prophets calling; for the
works of the Egyptian Sorcerers, tho not so great as those of Moses, yet were
great Miracles; and that how great soever the Miracles are, yet if the intent
be to stir up revolt against the King, or him that governs by the Kings
Authority, he that does such Miracles is not to be considered otherwise, then as
sent to make trial of their Allegiance, for he says, those words in the text
revolt from the Lord your God, are in this place equivalent to revolt from the
King; for they had made God their King by pact at the foot of Mount Sina^:
whereas Moses had no other credit with the People, but by the Miracles which he
wrought in their presence, and in their sight; and that which he did persuade
them to, was to revolt and withdraw themselves from the obedience of Pharaoh,
who was, during their abode in Egypt, the only King they knew and acknowledged.
So that in Mr. Hobbes's judgment the People might very well have refused to
believe him; and all those Prophets afterward who prophesied against several
of the Kings, ought to have bin put to death; and the Argumentation against the
Prophet Jeremy was very well founded, when the Princes said unto the King, Ier.
38. 4. We beseech thee let this man be put to death, for thus he weakeneth the
hands of the men of war, when he declared that the City should surely be given
into the hands of the King of Babylon. But Mr. Hobbes is much concerned to
weaken the credit of Prophets, and of all who succeed in their places; and he
makes great use of that Prophets being deceived by the old Prophet in the first
of Kings, when he was seduced to eat and drink with him. Whereas he might have
known, that that Prophet was not so much deceived by an other, as by his own
willfulness, in closing with the temtation of refreshing himself by eating and
drinking; choosing rather to believe any man of what quality soever, against the
express command that he had received from God himself.

What his design was to make so unnecessary an enquiry into the Authors of the
several parts of Scripture, and the time when they were written, and his more
unnecessary inference, that Moses was not the Author of the five Books which
the Christian World generally believe to be written by him, tho the time of his
death might be added afterward very warrantably, and the like presumtion upon
the other Books, he best knows; but he cannot wonder that many men, who observe
the novelty and positiveness of his assertions, do suspect, that he found it
necessary to his purpose, first to lessen the reverence that was accustomed to
be paid to the Scriptures themselves, and the authority thereof, before he could
hope to have his interpretation of them hearkened unto, and received; and in
order to that, to allow them no other authority, but what they receive from the
Declaration of the King; so that in every Kingdom there may be several, and
contrary Books of Scripture; which their Subjects must not look upon as
Scripture, but as the Sovereign power declares it to be so; which is to shake
or rather overthrow all the reverence and submission which we pay unto it, as
the undoubted word of God, and to put it in the same scale with the Alcoran,
which has as much authority by the stamp which the Grand Signior puts upon it
in all his Dominion; and all the differences and Controversies, which have
grown between the several Sects of Mahometans, which are no fewer in number,
nor prosecuted with less animosity between them, then the disputes between
Christians in matter of Religion, have all proceeded from the several glosses
upon, and readings of the Alcoran, which are prescribed or tolerated by the
several Princes in their respective Dominions, they all paying the same
submission and reverence to Mahomet, but differing much in what he has said
and directed; and by this means the Grand Signior, and the Persian, and the
petty Princes under them, have run into those Schisms, which have given
Christianity much ease and quiet. This is a degree of impiety Mr. Hobbes was
not arrived at when he first published his Book de Cive, where tho he allowed
his Sovereign power to give what Religion it thought fit to its Subjects, he
thought it necessary to provide it should be Christia^^ which was a caution too
modest for his Leviathan. Nor can it be preserved, when the Scriptures, from
whence Christianity can only be proved and taught to the people, are to depend
only for the validity (...), upon the will, understanding, and authority of the
Prince, which (with all possible submission, reverence, and resignation to that
Earthly power, and which I do with all my heart acknowledge to be instituted by
God himself, for the good of mankind) has much greater dignity in it self, and
more reverence due to it, then it can receive from the united Testimony and
Declaration of all the Kings and Princes of the World. With this bold Prologue
of the uncertain Canon of Scripture, he takes upon him as the foundation of his
true ratiocination (page 207.) to determine out of the Bible the meaning of
such words, as by their ambiguity may (he says) render what he is to infer
upon them obscure and disputable. And with this license he presumes to give
such unnatural explanations, descriptions, and definitions to several words and
terms, which in themselves have no difficulty, as disturbs the whole Analogy of
Scripture, and exposes those expressions, which are dictated by the spirit of
God, in his light and comical interpretations, to the mirth of those who are
too much inclined to be merry with the Scripture, and to the scandal of all men
who are piously affected, and look upon the Sacred Writings with that devotion
that becomes them. And upon these foundations, with much more confidence then
any of the Primitive Fathers of the Church assumed to themselves, he proceeds
to the interpretation of several Texts of Scripture, in a diferent sense from
what those Fathers, and all other men but himself, have understood them to
signify.

I shall not therefore, as I said, wait upon him in the particular Survey of
his glosses upon, and interpretations of the several Texts of Scripture, with
which he is bold, not only for my own incompetency in those high Mysteries, but
because I am not sure that it is a work fit for the most accomplished person in
the knowledge of Tongues, and the most difficult points of Divinity, to
undertake, and to argue and contend with him upon, and to answer his vain and
light conceptions; lest the sobriety and gravity of Scripture be too much
exposed to the critical License of Grammarians, or the greater licentiousness
of petulant and profane Persons, who choose the Scripture for both the matter,
and the language for the argument of their common and loosest discourses; which
exorbitancy is much propagated since the publication of Mr. Hobbes his
Writings. And therefore it may be fitter for a general disapprobation and
discountenance by the Sovereign power, or Ecclesiastical authority, as a
discourse which introduces a corruption of manners in the minds of men, and
exposes Religion to the irreverent examination of dissolute persons, and
prostitutes the sacred mysteries of our Faith, the Incarnation of our blessed
Lord and Savior, the Trinity, the Sacraments, the precious pledges of our
Salvation, to a Philosophical and Mathematical inquisition; and under the
notion of translating proper and significant words and terms, in the
understanding whereof all Learned men have agreed, into vulgar and common
Language, which no terms of any Art ever admitted, has in truth traduced the
whole Scheme of Christianity into Burlesque, and raised conceptions of it, very
much inferior to the sublime importance of that profession which must carry us
to Heaven. It will hardly be believed that Mr. Hobbes intended to advance the
estimation and resignation that is due from mankind to the everlasting word of
God, when he took such impertinent pains to enquire (Cha. 36.) and examine,
what the word of God is, and to exercise his fancy in many inferences,
deductions, and distinctions upon several texts of Scripture, where that
expression (the word of God) is used, and in the understanding whereof there
was never before any difficulty conceived to be. And there could no benefit
accrue to the People, by communicating a criticism to them, whereby they must
believe (page 223.) that God spoke these words and said, are less Gods words
then I am the Lord thy God, as if the last could have a due efficacy and
regard, if they all are not understood to be spoken by him. In which kind of
unnecessary Learning and curiosity he seems to recreate himself upon all the
Texts of Scripture, which he thinks fit to apply to his use, and in which he
takes much pains to mend many expressions in Scripture, for the impropriety of
Speech, without accusing the translation; as these words of Eliah to God, 1
Kings 18. 36. I have don all these thy words, which he says are instead of
(which, I suppose he means, would be better) (page 223.) I have don all these
things at thy word, and the like upon many other sayings of the Prophets.

Since after all his learned examination, and careful ratiocination, and too
light a mention of the several parts of Scripture, and the Authors thereof, he
is at last compelled to confess, that (p. 204.) he sees not any reason to
doubt, but that the old and new Testament, as we have them now, are the true
Registers of those things which were don and said by the Prophets and Apostles;
(p. 205.) and that it is believed on all hands, that the first, and original
Author of them is God; it is to be wished that he had chosen rather to have
acquiesc'd under the modest and prudent resolution of his third Paragraph of
this Chapter, that when any thing is written in the Scripture too hard for our
examination, we are bidden to captivate our understanding to the words, and not
to labor in sifting out a Philosophical truth by Logic of such mysteries as
are not comprehensible, nor fall under any rule of natural Science; because he
says very well, (p. 195.) that it is with the mysteries of our Religion, as
with wholesome pills for the sick, which swallowed whole have the virtue to
cure, but ^hewed, are for the most part cast up again without effect: I say, it
is great pity that he had not rather rested under that sober consideration,
then embarked himself, in the two next Chapters, in a Sea of new and
extravagant interpretations of several texts of Scripture, without any other
authority then of his own ungoverned fancy, which can only amuse men with the
novelty into impertinent enquiries, or dispose them to believe, that he has
not that reverence to the Scripture, or adoration of the Author of it, that
would become him to have.

The Survey of Chapters 35, 36.
WHEN he had exercised his unruly fancy and imagination, upon making it as
doubtful what is Scripture, and the sense and meaning thereof as difficult, as
he was able to do, he proceeds in the two next Chapters (the thirty fifth and
thirty sixth) to the examination of the true signification of many words,
terms, and expressions used in all Theological discourses, what the meaning of
Kingdom of God, of Holy, and Sacred, of the Word of God, and of Prophets is,
upon the interpretation of which there has never yet bin any doubt made, or
controversy amongst Christians. And after the whole foundation of Christian
Religion is laid upon the Word of God, and so often mention throughout the
Scripture* of several particular words spoken by God, and with such declaratory
circumstances, that he is said to have spoken face to face, and as a man speaks
to his friend, as he did to Moses, Mr. Hobbes takes great pains to make it
believed, that he never spoke at all, and then we can have none of his words;
in which, whatever other intention he has, he declines his own rule, which he
had prescribed in the foregoing Chapters, to captivate his understanding to the
words, and not to labor in sifting out a Philosophical truth by Logic of such
mysteries as are not comprehensible, nor fall under any Rules of natural
Science. Nor is it probable that he had a purpose to raise more veneration
toward the holy Prophets recorded in the sacred story, when he took such pains
to examine the Etymology of their title and appellation, which he says, (page
224.) sometimes signifies a foreteller of things to come, and sometimes one
that speaks incoherently, as men that are distracted, and thence goes to
their commission, and qualification, how they came to know the will and
pleasure of God. And when he has brought their title as low as he thinks fit,
and their qualifications as mean, he is contented that the name of a Prophet
(page 225.) may be given not improperly to them, that in Christian Churches
have a calling to say public Prayers for the Congregation. But that they may
not be too much exalted with the vocation, he allows prophecy to signify that
which Women may do in the Church: and at last is content that the Heathen Poets
shall likewise be called Prophets: all which he concludes from several texts of
Scripture, which he chooses to make use of. What man of a sincere and pious
heart, could in order to contradict the literal sense of that expression and
Argument of the Prophet David, and which may well be understood literally,
Shall he that made the eye, not see? and he that made the ear, not hear?
control it by such an instance as would be little less then Blasphemy to
repete? and to which I shall only apply a sage saying of his own (page 34.)
that an Anatomist, or a Physician may speak or write his judgment of unclean
things, because it is not to please but profit; but for another man to write
his extravagant and pleasant fancies of the same, is, as if a man from being
tumbled in the dirt, should come and present himself before good company; an
animadversion he will do well to remember upon many occasions wherein he
transgresses it.

What his design was by torturing so many Texts of Scripture, to make it
believed, that the extraordinary Prophets in the old Testament took no other
notice of the word of God, nor had any other knowledge of it then from
apparitions, and dreams, that is to say, (page 227.) from the imagination which
they had in their sleep or in an ecstasy, may well be suspected, when he
contributes so little to advance the reverence that is due to Gods Word, or the
honor that is due to the memory of those Saints, the Prophets; neither the
one, or the other being in any degree improved, to say no worse of it, by the
whole discourse of that his first Chapter: in which he thinks he has said
enough to persuade his disciples, from so many Texts of Scripture, and his
commentaries upon them, that the Sovereign power is the Sovereign Prophet, who
has under God the Authority to govern the People, and that they are bound to
observe for a rule (page 232.) that Doctrine which he has commanded to be
taught, and thereby to examine, and try the truths of those Doctrines which
pretended Prophets with miracle, or without, shall at any time advance. And it
is the more observable, that he gave this Sovereign power to Cromwell, and
annexed to it this Sovereign Prophesy, that he might establish his Throne for
ever. Nor could he have in all this any intention so opposite to his purposes,
as when he had subjected all Laws to his Sword without any violation of
justice, to subdue the Gospel too, to the same arbitriment, that he might
reform the one, as he had don the other. And the rather, because, tho the Law
was quiet, whilst his Sovereign power proceeded according to his own
institution without any control, yet the Gospel was troublesome to him by the
noise of his own Clergy, who had interpreted the Scripture according to his own
spirit, and purposes, whilst the contest was with the King; but now found that
all his own designs, and assuming the Sovereignty himself, was expressly against
the word of God: and they found so much credit with the people, that they had
so long deluded, that he foresaw a storm coming against him that he could
hardly ride out. And therefore Mr. Hobbes brought him a very seasonable relief,
in making a doubt, when novelties were so much in request, and the minds of the
People so well prepared to hearken to what they had never before heard of,
whether there were any such thing as the word of God, at least that that was
not it which they took to be so; and that if the ten Commandments were
agreeable to his sense, yet that they were not words spoken by him: and then in
bringing the authority, and qualifications of the Prophets themselves so low,
that there was room enough left to doubt, whether they were always in the
right. From whence he might easily expose his Enemies, who succeed them in the
office of informing and instructing them in the Laws, and good pleasures of
God, as men without a lawful mission, and authority to pronounce those things
they do. And upon those weighty reasons, he takes upon him to advise the
People, to be very circumspective, (page 230.) and wary in obeying the voice of
man, that pretending himself to be a Prophet requires us to obey God in that
way, which he in Gods name tells us is the way to happiness, For he in that
pretends to govern them, that is to say, to rule, and reign over them, which is
a thing that all men naturally desire, and is therefore worthy to be suspected
of Ambition, and imposture, and consequently ought to be examined, and tried by
every man, before he yields them obedience. And having thus depraved the rule,
the Word of God, by which they were to walk, and vilified the Preachers, who
are to instruct them how they may observe that Rule, he has enough amuz'd
them, to refer them for a complete and perfect information, and satisfaction to
his Sovereign power, who is his Sovereign Prophet, that is Cromwell himself, to
be told by him what they are to believe, and what they are to do, and to
conform themselves thereunto, and, in his absence, to what they shall be
directed by those who are autoriz'd by him to inform them, it being reasonably
to be presumed, that they are (p. 232.) men, to whom God has given a part of
the Spirit of their Sovereign.

I wish with all my heart that it were within my comprehension, how Mr. Hobbes
can be absolved from this naughty and impious discourse, since he could not
hope thereby to render himself gracious to any other Sovereign upon Earth;
since they all detest the power he would invest them with, as a means to
extirpate Christian Religion out of their Dominions, which depends solely upon
the universal veneration to the Scripture; upon which, if secular, and politic
interests did not fan a small Fire (that would easily be extinguished) into a
flame, there are not in sixteen hundred years, many such differences grown in
the interpretation thereof, as must exclude any pious believer from Heaven, if
in his life he carefully observes those Precepts, in the understanding whereof
every man of all parties agrees. Nor has he therein gratified the Pope
himself, who is willing to embrace all encroachments by which he may be a
gainer, and uses his faculty of interpreting, to purposes monstrous enough, yet
he pretends not to make what he pleases Canonical Scripture. If the Clergy,
whose learning is approved, and whose manners are blameless, are not fit to
instruct the People, whither shall they repair for information? There may be
some ignorant men amongst them, who themselves need to be instructed; and yet
there is a Classis of men, who may learn much even from them, if they are
honest men. And there may be some seditious amongst them, who maliciously
pervert the Scripture, and corrupt those who should be taught by them: but as
there are Laws very strict for the punishment of such, so none are more glad to
see those punishments inflicted, or forwarded to promote it, then the venerable
part of their own order, whose known abilities ought not to be prejudiced, nor
their integrity suspected for the infamy of the other. God was never well
served, nor the King religiously obeyed, when, and where the Clergy was
despised, or undervalued.

Mr. Hobbes is so much delighted with his institution by Covenant, that he will
not suffer God himself to have a Dominion over the Children of Israel (page
217.) but under an institution by pact, which he says, is an addition to his
ordinary title to all Nations. Indeed that their obligations to his Divine
Majesty were increased by his communication of himself, and his gracious
promises to them above other Nations, is very true: but that he should thereby
have a greater dominion over them then he had over the whole Earth besides, is
not easy to be understood; tho he makes that assumtion the groundwork of the
greatest part of his discourse and ratiocination, contained throughout this his
Third part. Only whereas the security of his Sovereign consists only in the
Covenants between the people to one another, without any obligation from the
Sovereign to them; this Sovereignty which he has provided for God Almighty, is
more perfect, and depends upon the Covenant which God himself first entered
into; and then the Contract entered into on their part, like the sealing the
Counter-part, which he draws up as formally between them, as he did the
transferring and assigning each others right in the former establishment: and
all this Transaction he makes good by the express words of Scripture. No man
can now blame him for wishing for such a Sovereign, who would take the Bible
from every other body, and put it into his hand, with a Commission to interpret
it. But till he had gotten that delegation, he should have forborne making such
a story out of the 17 of Genesis, 7. 8. (page 216.) of a Covenant on Gods part,
and I know not what contract and promise on Abraham's part, that must constitute
a nearer relation, and give God a greater power over them then he had before;
whereas there was nothing like a promise from God to Abraham of the Land of
Canaan for an everlasting possession, in the 17 of Genesis, which he had not
made to him many years before. He might have found the Original promise in the
12 Chapter, when God commanded him to go out of his Country, and from his
Kindred, and then premised to make of him a great Nation, to bless them that
blessed him, and to curse them that cursed him, and (which was greater then all
the rest) that in him should all the Families of the Earth be blessed. Abraham
makes no reply, but upon the command left his Country, and departed from Haran,
when he was seventy five years old, and took his journey toward the Land of
Canaan, and passed through the Land unto the place of Sichem, unto the plain of
Moreh; and the Canaanite was then in the Land. Which expression so natural to
the relation, and History, he thinks ground enough for him to deny that Moses
was author of the Book of Genesis, because that expression (he says,) (page
200.) must be the words of one that wrote when the Canaanite was not in the
Land; which is an inference without shadow of reason. When he was in the Land
of Canaan God appeared to him again, and said, Unto thy Seed will I give this
Land. And he was then by a famine driven into Egypt: and so much time passed,
that when he returned toward Bethel from whence he went into Egypt, his riches
were so much increased, that Lot and he were compelled to part, that they might
have more room to live in. And then God appeared again to Abraham, and said,
Lift up thine eyes, and look from the place where thou art, etc. For all the
Land which thou see, to thee will I give it, and to thy Seed for ever, when
he had yet no seed. After his Sacrifice he appeared to him again, and it is
said made a Covenant with Abraham, saying no more upon the matter then he had
promised before, only describing the extent of the Land that he would give to
his Seed, from the river of Egypt, to the great river, the river Euphrates.
What did God promise more to Abraham, and what farther Covenant was entered into
between them, in this 17. Chap. when Mr. Hobbes dates the Covenant, when
Abraham was ninety nine years old, then he had don four and twenty years
before, and what did Abraham do more then he had don before, toward any
contract on his part? It is true that God enjoined him, that every man-child
amongst them should be circumcised, which is his (page 217.) old Covenant. And
it is true, Abraham, and his Seed did so punctually observe that injunction,
that the omission thereof was never imputed to them, and so could not be the
cause of any of the calamities they sustained afterward for four hundred years
in Egypt, or after their deliverance, when their miseries at worst little
exceeded, what they may be thought to have suffered there. Where he found that
Dialogue between God and Abraham that makes the Covenant mutual, other men know
not.

There is no inconvenience, nor would it be incongruous to suppose, that
Abraham upon such an immense benefit, and honor promised to him by God, and so
often repeted to him, did make some humble acknowledgment, and promise of duty,
and obedience on his part. And it appears he did whatsoever he was commanded,
and as soon as he was commanded: he left his Country, to live amongst strangers;
enjoined circumcision, and observed all that he was commanded, to obtain a
great reward that his Posterity was to receive five hundred years after: but
for any man to digest this obedience into a style and method of words, to no
other end, but to establish a new extravagant fancy of his own, and that he may
thereby create a peculiar Kingdom for God, more then his illimited power over
the universe had entitled him to, and put a new interpretation upon the Kingdom
of God, so often used in Scripture, as if thereby is properly, and only meant
the Commonwealth of the Jews (page 218) instituted by the consent of those who
were to be Subject thereunto for their civil Government, and regulating their
behavior toward God their King, whom they rejected and deposed when they
demanded a King from Samuel; and to confirm this by so many glosses upon
several Texts of Scripture, is worthy only of the confidence of the Author of
the Leviathan. But he will make all this good when he comes to Mount Sinai,
where, he says, this Covenant was renewed. There indeed, after all their
murmurings for Bread, and for Flesh, and for Water, that they might not imagine
that all the Promises which God had made to their Forefathers, gave them a
Title to the continuance of their Protection and Blessing, in spite of all
their backsliding and Rebellion, and as a Preface to his Ten Commandments, and
the Law which he then published to them, God commanded Moses to put them in
mind of the great Deliverances he had wrought for them, and to tell them, that
if they would obey his voice indeed, and keep his Covenant, then they should be
a peculiar Treasure unto him above all people, and they should be unto him a
Kingdom of Priests, an holy Nation; the natural signification whereof,
according to all Interpreters, is, that he would in a more peculiar manner make
himself known to them, by giving them Laws whereby they might know how to
please him, and assigning them a Priesthood, to offer such Sacrifices for them
to him, as would be acceptable. And their answering together, All that the Lord
has spoken we will do, and what they said afterward to Moses in the fright
and consternation they were in upon the Thunder and Lightning from the Mount,
Speak thou to us and we will hear, but let not God speak with us least we die,
contained no more upon the matter, then the same professions which they had
often made before upon their recollection after their several loud
transgression. God was not from that time more gracious to them, or reckoned
them more his own chosen people, then before, when he fed them with Manna and
Quails, nor did they think that they had entered into a new and stricter
obligation to him: as appears by their making the Golden calf, and worshipping
it so soon after, even before God had finished his speaking to them. So that
the Contract on their behalf, whereby God himself was more their King then he
had bin formerly, or they more the Kingdom of God then they were before, is
drawn up only by Mr. Hobbes above three thousand years after the transaction.

The Survey of Chapter 37.
I should make no reflection upon the thirty seventh Chapter of Miracles, and
their use (tho it may be some men may imagine, that he has a mind to lessen
the faith of the greatest Miracles which have bin wrought) if, to express the
humility of his resignation to his Sovereign, he did not make him the sole Judge
of all Miracles which shall be wrought within his Dominions: and in this
ecstasy of his Allegiance, in spite of all the Demonstrations he has made in
his Kingdom of Darkness, the fourth part of his Instit^tes, of the absurdity,
contradiction, and impossibility in the Roman Doctrine of the Sacrament, he
very frankly bestows upon the King the sole power of determining the Point of
Transubstantiation; which if he concludes in the Affirmative, no Subject must
presume to contradict it. By which he has made the Pope, and the Roman Church
amends for the many merry reproaches he has cast upon them, in allowing it to
be good Divinity in all those Dominions where the Sovereign is Popish, and of
which no private reason or conscience, but the public reason, the reason of the
King is Judge. And tho he preserves to himself, and other private men, the
prerogative of believing or not believing in his heart, because thought is
free, yet that must not be discovered, because he makes it the obligation of
Subjects, not only to do, but to say all that their Sovereign commands them to
say or do; by which he introduces such a license of dissimulation and
hypocrisy, as is odious in the civil actions of our life, but most detestable
in the eyes and judgment of God and Man, in all acts which concern Religion,
and the Worship of his Divine Majesty. And it is very reasonably to be doubted,
that this loose determination in matters of Faith, by a man who is thought to
have dug very deep in all the Mines of Natural Reason, has contributed very
much to that uncontrollable spirit, which by the extravagance of fancy,
invention and imagination, has made such confusion both in the speculation and
practice of Religion in this distracted Kingdom; and by his making that which
God has manifestly commanded, liable to be controlled, or to receive authority
from the pleasure of the King, that both God and the King are less reverenced,
and their Precepts less regarded, then they have used to be in this Nation.

That he may the better draw himself out of those intricacies into which he is
involved by this unnecessary discourse of Miracles, he resorts to his Sovereign
power in his definitions; and tho he had before confessed, ( page 197.) That
the works of the Egyptian Sorcerers, tho no^ so great as those of Moses, were
yet great Miracles; now he defines a Miracle, ( page 235.) to be the work of
God (besides his operation by the way of Nature ordained in the Creation) don
for the making manifest to his Elect, the mission of an extraordinary Minister
for their salvation: which definition of his own, and his own alone, is all his
proof he makes ( page 235.) that the Devil, or an Angel, or other created
spirit, cannot do a Miracle: which as the Sovereign of Logic too, he makes good
by as strange an Argument: It must be by virtue of some natural Science, or by
Incantation; if it be by their own power independent, there is some power that
proceeds not from God, which all men deny. and if they do it by power given
them, then is the work not from the immediate hand of God, but natural, and
consequently no Miracle, which is agreeable to his Definition. But if it be by
the permission of God, why is it natural, and therefore no Miracle? Has not
God frequently permitted the Devil to do Miracles? and if his Providence did
not restrain him, he would work Miracles enough to do more mischief. And if the
Devil turned himself into the Serpent, or taught the Serpent so to speak like
an Orator, for the seduction and cozenage of poor Eve, neither was natural, and
cannot be looked upon as less then a Miracle; which has furnished a Modern
fanciful Divine with an excuse for Eves being deluded, that not imagining a
Serpent could speak, and having never heard of the Devil, she concluded it to
be an Angel, whom she knew God had created. And now he finds, contrary to his
former confession, (page 236.) That the Magicians of Egypt were Impostors, and
did no great matter, for that when the rod seemed a Serpent, or the waters
Blood, because it was not to the edification of Gods people, which his
definition requires, nor the rod, nor the water was enchanted, but the
Spectator: so that the Miracle consisted only in this, that the Enchanter had
deceived a man, which is no Miracle. And so Pharaoh, and his whole Court, who
were the Spectators, and are thought to have understood as much of Natural
Causes, as any who have succeeded them, and from that excess of understanding,
believed God the less, as they still do who look too much into Natural Causes,
and those learned Egyptians must be all deluded and cheated by the deception of
their o^n eyes. Methinks the Text cited by himself, If a Prophet rise among
you, etc. and shall pretend ^he d^ing of a miracle, and the miracle come to
pass, thou shall not hearken unto him, etc. Deuteronomy. 13. is a sufficient evidence,
that such Miracles may be don, contrary to Mr. Hobbes's Assertion. Nor is it
easy to imagine how he will answer or avoid that Text, For they are the spirits
of devils, working Miracles, etc. Revel. 16. 14. which shall suffice for answer
to his magisterial definition of Miracles, and argumentation thereupon.

Mr. Hobbes had don well to have communicated the reason or authority, if he
has any besides his own definition, that induced him to determine, ( page 235)
that the end of all the mir^cles of Moses, of the Prophets, of our Savior, and
of his Apost^es, was to ad^ men to the Church, not all me^, b^t such as should
be sa^ed, that is to say, such as God had elected And upon that assumtion he
takes upon him to declare, that t^^ reason why our Savior could not, or would
not work any Miracles in his own Country, was ( page 235) because our Savior
being sent from his Fa^he^, he could not use his Power in the conversion of
those whom his Father h^d rejected; which is a new Doctrine, and besides the
barb^r^ty of it, is irrational to think, that all the People of Nazareth, where
our Savior had vouchsafed to live, and conver^e above thirty years of his
life, should be reprobated by God to everlasting damnation. Besides that his
Greek Criticism, which he dislikes, that puts, he would not, for, he could not,
it is evident enough that our Savior did work Miracles even there, for he laid
his hands upon sick folks, and healed them, Mark 6. 5. which was amongst his
greatest Miracles; and it may very probably be believed, that some of his
Disciples, if not of his very Apostles, were of his own Country. Surely the
making it incapable of receiving any benefit by the ransom he paid, seems to be
against the literal and declared end of his Sufferings, and the Promise of his
Father.

The Survey of Chapter 38.
WHEN the Wisdom of God himself has erected two Pillars for the support of
Religion, and the propagation thereof, and to defend it from being invaded by
Profaneness and Atheism, the one of Heaven, for the reward of those who serve
him with devotion and integrity; and the other of Hell, for the punishment and
terror of those who neglect his commands, and contemn his menaces: and when all
the Prophets in the Old, and the Evangelists and Apostles in the New Testament,
have even contended to make the joies of the one as great and everlasting, and
the pains of the other as insupportable and eternal, as their sacred faculties
could enable them to do, that men might be allured to choose that which is so
pleasant, and to tremble at that which is so terrible: and that most of the
Fathers of the Church, and all the Doctors and Preachers of Christianity (of
how different Opinions soever in other Points of Faith) have still prosecuted
the same method, as the best Argument to dispose men to virtue, and the love of
God, and to restrain them from vice, as the way that leads to the Devil: it may
appear very wonderful, and no less scandalous to dis-passioned men, that after
sixteen hundred years Mr. Hobbes should arise a new Evangelist, to make the
joies of Heaven more indifferent, and the pains of Hell less formidable, then
ever any Christian has before attemted to do, by impertinent inquiries where
the place of either of them is to be, as if he would be well content that they
should be no where, and to determine by Philosophical mediums, that there can
be no eternity of pain in the one, how lasting soever the joies may be in the
other. I do not complain of his bringing down Heaven to the Earth, nor his
raising and placing Hell upon the same level, in which some Learned Men seem
not to differ much from him, tho it seems to me to be contradicted by the very
words and expression of the Creation. For if God divided the waters that were
above the firmament, from the waters that were under the firmament, and the
waters under the firmament became dry Land, and was Earth, and the firmament
was called Heaven, Genesis 1. it is not conceivable, that the Heaven and the Earth
can be upon one and the same level. Which seems likewise to be opposed by that
Text, But those that seek my soul to destroy it, shall go into the lower parts
of the Earth, Psalm. 63. 9. which implies somewhat that is deeper then the grave,
and at least, that Hell is either under the Earth, or that it cannot be
understood that it is upon the same level with Heaven, if it could descend to
keep Court upon the Earth; which yet methinks received a greater confirmation
by St. Paul, Now that he ascended, what is it, but that he also descended first
into the lower parts of the Earth? Ephesians. 4. 9.

Let the place be where it will, we know Gods habitation and residence in the
one, must make it as glorious as any body has conceived it to be; and his
absence, and hot displeasure, must make the other as painful. Nor am I
concerned in his assigning Christ's Reign to be upon the Earth; which as it was
an opinion that had many partisans in the first Ages of Christianity, so it
seems to get much ground in the minds of many Learned Men in the present; tho
he makes his Reign longer upon Earth then ever the Millenarians imagined it to
be, and indeed confines him to it for ever. But that Mr. Hobbes should persuade
men to believe, ( page 240.) that the Kingdom of Heaven is nothing else, but
the Kingdom of the King that dwells in Heaven, by which he is himself already
as much in Heaven as he desires to be; and ( page 243.) that all that is said
in the Scripture concerning hellfire, is spoken metaphorically, and that a
proper sense should be enquired after (since all Metaphors may be expressed in
proper words) both of the place of hell, and the nature of the torments and
tormentors, methinks it should be thought a matter of that consequence, as is
more fit to be confuted by censure and chastisement, then by refelling the
Arguments of his presumtion. In the mean time, as he professes to find nothing
in Scripture that makes it apparent to him, that the soul is immortal, and a
living creature independent upon the body; so he seems much pleased with the
mortality of the whole human Nature, which Job complains of, There is hope of a
tree, but man dies, and wastes away, yea man gives up the ghost, and where
is he? Man lies down, and rise^h not till the heavens be no more. Job. 14. 7,
12. From whence he seems to conclude (if his very wo^ds do not make it plain)
that the soul as well as the bod^ is buried in the grave, at least till the
resurrection. This monstrous liberty and license in forming a new Faith for
himself, without any Sovereign advice or approbation, a Faith never before
owned or avowed by any Christian, may make men wonder why he is so severe
against Atheists, whom he will not allow ( page 186.) to be Subjects in the
Kingdom of God; nor they that believe not that God has any care of the actions
of man kind, because they acknowledge no word for his, nor have hope of his
rewards, or fear of his threatening. They (he says) that believe there is a God
that governs the World, and has given precepts, and propounded rewards and
punishments to mankind, are Gods Subjects; all the rest are to be understood
as enemies: whereas in truth, there is very little difference between a man
that understands no Precepts of his, and him who believes those to be his
Precepts or his Permissions, which are contrary to his Commandments; or between
those who have no hope of his reward, or fear of his threatenings, and those who
believe, and persuade others to believe, that the rewards which he has
propounded are of much less value then they are esteemed to be, and the
punishment which he threatens, to be less terrible, and of shorter duration
then they are understood; and take upon them to suspend the inflicting of any
punishment at all upon the greatest sinner until the end of the World, by the
mortality of the Soul, equal to that of the Body, and so to undergo no farther
trouble till they are again united in the Resurrection; and even then not to be
in so ill a condition, as most men apprehend, which is a consolation wicked men
stand not in need of, and which no Christian Casuist, before Mr. Hobbes, ever
presumed to administer. And he may find, for the support of his Atheists, who
should not be so churlishly abandoned by him, as many pregnant Arguments
against Christianity, and as rationally pressed, and as many Texts of
Scripture, as well of the New as the Old Testament, as appositely urged to
maintain their Doctrine, as any which are made use of by him for the
propagation of his Opinions little less dangerous.

He is the first man (since Virgil accompanied Aeneas thither) that has taken
pains so accuratly to rescue and vindicate Hell from the prejudice that men
might have to it, from some expressions they find in Scripture relating to it;
which he endeavors, by his Interpretations, to make not altogether so severe as
they are generally understood to be. And least any apprehension of the
bottomless pit should too much amuse men, he does assure them, from his Art in
which he would be thought to excel, ( page 243.) That in the Globe of the
Earth, which is not only finite, but also (compared to the height of the
stars) of no considerable magnitude, a pit without a bottom, that is, a hole of
infinite depth, is a thing the proportion of Earth to Heaven cannot bear: which
perfection of Science enabled him to discover, that if Adam had not eaten of
the Apple, he had bin immortal; and had he never died (of which he makes not
the least question) he should not then continually have procreated his kind,
(page 239.) for if immortals should have generated as mankind does now, the
Earth in a small time would not have bin able to afford them place to stand on.
Besides, there being other places of Scripture which he cites, to imply, that
the place of Hell is under water; so, besides the comfort that is in the
uncertainty, they need the less fear the bottomless pit; and he does at last
free them from the waters too, and the company that makes the waters the more
unpleasant. St. John thought he had terrified some Classes of sinners to the
purpose, when he declared, That they should have their part in the lake that
burns with fire and brimstone. Apoc. 21. 8. But for their comfort Mr. Hobbes
assures them, ( page 243.) that all that is but a Metaphorical expression, and
signifies not any certain kind or place of torment; and gives them another Text
to raise their spirits, That death and hell were cast into the lake of fire,
(page 243.) that is, he says, abolished and destroyed; as if after the day of
Judgment there shall be no more dying, nor no more going into Hell, which must
be very comfortable Doctrine to those whom he had before secured till that
time, by the not existence and nothingness of the Soul after its dissolution
from the Body. So that he had don well, that there might some fear still have
remained in them, to have told them, That it is the opinion of very Learned
Men, that the day of Judgment it self is to last one thousand years. That the
darkness which St. Matthew attributes to it, and which makes the most beautiful
place the less pleasant, may not make them think Hell a worse place then in
truth it is, he tells them, that tho the Translation has rendered it into
utter darkness, the Original will not bear it, (page 243.) and does not
signify how great, but where that darkness is to be, namely, without the
habitation of Gods elect.

In the careful Inquisitions which he makes into the torments of Hell, and into
the Tormentors, he finds the Devil has wrong don him, by not having his names
of Satan, Devil, and Abaddon, translated into English, by which he
conscientiously doubts, that men imagining them to be proper names of Demons,
may be seduced to believe the Doctrine of Devils, which was the Religion of the
Gentiles; whereas those hard words are not proper Names, but Appellations,
which only set out the office and quality, as Satan only signifies the Enemy,
Devil accuser, Abaddon the Destroier. So that Heaven being to be after the
Resurrection upon the Earth (which he says he has showed by Scripture that it
is like to be) (page 244.) Hell must likewise be upon the Earth too; and so by
Satan, is meant any earthly Enemy of the Church; and that the torments of Hell,
which are expressed in Scripture by weeping, and gnashing of teeth, by the worm
of conscience, fire, where the worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched, and
by shame and everlasting contemt, do but metaphorically signify (p. 244.) a
grief and discontent of mind, from the sight of the eternal felicity of others;
and that they are to suffer such bodily pains and calamities as are incident to
those, who not only live under evil and cruel Governors, but have also for
Enemy, God Almighty. But as to the duration of the bodily pains, tho the
Scripture is clear for an universal Resurrection, ( page 244.) yet there is no
promise to any reprobate of an eternal life, without which he can never undergo
an eternal punishment. Nor can a second death be ever applied to those that can
die but once, he says, ( page 245.) tho the fire prepared for the wicked, is
an everlasting fire, and the fire shall be unquenchable, and the torments
everlasting; it cannot therefore be inferred, that he who shall be cast into
that fire, or be tormented with those torments, shall endure, and resist them
so as to be eternally burned and tortured, and yet never be destroyed nor d^e.
And tho there be many places that affirm everlasting ^ire and torments (into
which men may be cast successively one after another for ever) yet he finds
none that affirms there shall be any eternal life therein, of any individual
Person; but to the contrary, an everlasting death, which is the second death.
And then he cites the Text in the Revelations, whereby he says, (page 245.) it
is evident, that there is to be a second death of every one that shall be
condemned at the day of Judgment, after which he shall die no more.

It cannot be denied, but that he has taken extraordinary pains on the behalf
of Hell, and it may be presumed, effectually, in making it believed, (page
243.) that the fire thereof is neither everlasting nor unquencheable; and that
the terribleness thereof has proceeded chiefly from the hard words it has bin
described by, valley of Hinnon, Ge^enna, Tophet, which have puzzled and
perplexed men's imaginations, for want of comprehension what those terms could
imply, and which seemed the more formidable in that they had not found, and so
might be thought incapable of any translation; and therefore he has don them
the favor to inform them of the worst that they can signify, and above all,
for their comfort, has brought the place and situation of it to be upon the
Earth, which is so well known to them, that they need have no other
apprehensions of it then they find reason for. And for the manifestation of
that important truth, he does not so much depend upon the Texts of Scripture
which he has cited to that purpose, as that, he says, he has already proved
out of diverse evident places of Scripture, in his thirty fifth Chapter (page
219.) That the Kingdom of God is a civil Commonwealth, where God himself is
Sovereign, by virtue first of the old, and since of the new Covenant, which he
says does sufficiently prove, that after the coming again of our Savior in
his Majesty and Glory, to reign actually and eternally, the Kingdom of God is
to be on Earth; all which refers to that Institution by pact, which by his
Covenant with Abraham, and the renewing thereof afterward by Moses at Mount
Sinai, invested God by their choosing him to be their King, with a more peculiar
Dominion then he had over any other Nation, because it was by their own consent
and Covenant; which he says, (page 217.) is an addition to his ordinary title
to all Nations: and that this continued, till by their demanding a King, when
Saul was given to them, they rejected God, that he should not reign over them.
I must rely upon the Readers memory, or his refl^xion, to judge whether what
has bin said in answer upon that Chapter, and before, does not weigh down the
imagination both of the original and subsequent Covenant and Contract. And for
their rejection of God Almighty from being their King, upon the election of
Saul, besides Gods own particu^ar choice of his Successor, Fill thine horn with
oil, and go, I will send thee to Jesse the Bethlehemite, for I have provided me
a King among his Sons, 1 Samuel 16. 1. his grace, and favor, and concernment for
that People, was equally eminent and notorious from that time, as it had bin
from the time of Abraham to that of Saul; nor were their rebellions and
murmurings greater after, then they had bin before: and then those two
Imaginations of his having place only in his own brain, most of his Discourse
in this his third part falls to the ground with them, and is of no
signification.

When he has made Hell much more easy, at least in a pleasanter Region, and
the pains thereof less durable to all those who will choose to go thither, he is
as solicitous to undeceive men in the high estimate they have made of the joies
of Heaven, and tells them, (page 245.) that to be saved, which is salvation, is
to be secured either respectively against special evils, or absolutely against
all evil, comprehending want, sickness, and death it self. And least we should
think that this salvation contains some wonderful delight, which we cannot
comprehend, because we know not the scene upon which it shall be showed; he is
fully of opinion, (page 246.) that this salvation must be on Earth: for by
salvation is set forth unto as, a glorious reign of our King by conquest, not a
safety by escape; and therefore there where we look for salvation, we must look
also for triumph; and before triumph, for victory; and before victory for
battle, which cannot well be supposed to be in Heaven. However, tho the reason
seems very good to him, he is so modest that he will not trust to it, without
very evident places of Scripture; and thereupon, how positive soever he is
against the literal understanding such places in Scripture, which seem to imply
an ascending into Heaven, and condemns them all to be Metaphorical Expressions;
now, that he may humble our salvation down to the earth, he will have all those
places of the Prophets which he chooses, to be understood literally; by which he
says it is evident, (page 246.) that Salvation shall be on Earth, then when
God shall reign (at the coming again of Christ) in Jerusalem, and from
Jerusalem shall proceed the salvation of the Gentiles that shall be received
into Gods Kingdom. And then, with equal confidence, he mentions other Texts out
of the New Testament, which he says are clear (page 247.) that salvation, and
the Kingdom of God (after the day of Judgment) must be upon Earth: whereas he
says, He cannot find any Text that can probably be drawn to prove any
ascension of the Saints into Heaven, which he seems to think would be a
presumtion, and that since Gods own Throne is in Heaven, and the Earth is but
his footstool, it would not seem suitable to the dignity of so great a King,
that his Subjects should have any place as high as his Throne, or higher then
his footstool. And so making the last effort to lessen the value of our
Redemtion, by making a Grammatical enquiry into the signification of the word,
and low inferences thereupon, he concludes, ( page 245.) That the joies of life
eternal, comprehended all in Scripture under the name of Salvation, or being
saved, is to be secured either respectively, against special evils, or
absolutely against all evils, comprehending want, sickness, and death it self;
that is, when we are once in Heaven we shall never want, nor be sick, nor die
again, which is a very vile expression of the joies of life eternal.

I will not deprive him of that Testimony his rare modesty deserves, but
acknowledge, (page 241.) that he does declare, because his Doctrine (tho proved
out of places of Scripture, not few nor obscure) will appear to most a novelty,
he did but propound it, maintaining nothing in this, or any other Paradox in
Religion, but attending the end of that dispute of the Sword concerning the
authority (not yet amongst his Countrymen decided) by which all sorts of
Doctrine are to be approved or rejected, and whose commands both in speech and
writing (whatsoever be the opinions of private men) must by all men, that mean
to be protected by the Laws, be obeyed. This was in the time when his fidelity
and allegiance was by his own rule extinguished by choice, for he was not then
in the Enemies Quarters, and no Sword drawn but that in Cromwells hand, and in
theirs who were under his command; so that it was his single approbation and
determination, that he waited, for the promulgation of the Doctrine which he
had so well proved out of Scripture, and to him he sent this blank, for the
disposal of himself, body and soul, according to his good will and pleasure.
But I know not how to excuse him since the Kings return, and the resurrect^on
of his Loialty (which is grown and improved to that height, that he will deny
his Savior upon his Command) for not retracting and renouncing all those
odious opinions, when he very well knows, that the Church of which the King is
Sovereign, does detest all those his Doctrines, and not concur in his
interpretation of any of his Texts in Scripture; and his not doing that which
in Conscience he is obliged to do, is a shrewd evidence that he considers not,
nor will be subject to any other Sovereignty, then that of his own capricious
brain, and haughty understanding.

I have so much kindness for Mr. Hobbes, that I heartily wish he would himself,
or that some of his Disciples would for him, inform the World what good end he
did, or could propose to himself in writing this his eight and thirtieth
Chapter; or whether he could imagine that Christianity, or any Christian
knowledge could be advanced by it. It seems to me to be the greatest charity he
can expect, to be believed to be a man that believes nothing of the immortality
of the Soul, of the eternal Life, Hell, Salvation, the World to come, and
Redemtion, which all other Christians do believe, and believe all to be evident
out of Scripture. Since it is a less fault not to believe them, how destructive
soever, then to imagine that he takes all that pains, and uses all that
raillery upon the Scripture, to show how liable the Word of God it self is to
be ill handled, and perversely interpreted by a great and bold Wit. And truly,
he has not bin disappointed in the propagation of this desperate Art, which
has enabled his most devoted Proselytes to apply Texts of Scripture to all
their profane, impious, and unclean purposes; and which, probably before they
leave this World, will give them a sad presage and prospect of the next; the
which can give them no reputation or credit, except with persons pro^^igate,
and abandoned to all kinds of vice and iniquity. Plain it is, that he has not
endeavored to advance the practice of any one Christian Virtue, or to improve
the exercise of any one Moral Duty, to the end that the lives of men may be
more innocent, and thereby their hopes more reasonable of eternal Life; as if
he were not willing to persuade men, by the strength of his master Reason, to
be better then they have a mind to be, or to dis-countenance the practice of
those sins which unavoidably must carry them to Hell, let the situation of it
be where it will, (page 56.) as Adultery, Sodomy, and any vice that may be
taken for an effect of power, or a cause of pleasure; all which vices amongst
men, he says, are taken to be against Law, rather then against honor: which
since he has discovered, he might for those wretches sake, very naturally have
interposed some powerful Animadversions in this Chapter of Eternal Life, Hell,
and Salvation.

The Survey of Chapter 39.
I have Charity enough to hope, that Mr. Hobbes may have no worse design in
this thirty ninth Chapter, then can be made manifest out of his words, which
being plain, and yielding naturally a good interpretation, I will not endeavor
to pervert them to a bad, but wish he had farther enlarged upon the Subject, to
show with what absurdity the word Church is applied to destroy Religion, as if
Christ had instituted one, and but one Church that should have Authority to
control all the Christians in the World. Which is a fancy (how successful
soever) so extravagant and senseless, so far from countenance from Scripture,
or Antiquity, so in it self impossible, that nothing is more wonderful, then
that so unreasonable a pretense should gain so much credit, as to impose upon
so great a part of the World so long: and which, tho it was not brought in by,
could never have bin brought in or grown but under that barbarous Tyranny and
inundation, which by the incursion of the Goths, and Vandalls, and Hunns, and
Lombards, who successively broke in from the North, covered so great a part of
Christendom for so many hundred years. And it cannot be denied, but that tho
Spiritual, and temporal are proper distinctions in the Government, when the
Sovereign, who is equal Sovereign over both, will apply them to several
functions in the Government, and to that exercise of different parts, yet
indeed they have bin made use of in the World, ( page 248.) to make men see
double, and to mistake their lawful Sovereign. And they are not sharp-sighted
enough, who think their Government securely established under that distinction,
whilst any Subject professes to owe a Spiritual, or any other kind of
Subjection or Obedience to any Foreign Power and Jurisdiction. I would have bin
very glad, he would have enlarged upon both these Subjects, so proper for his
excellent way of reasoning; and I cannot avoid saying, that it is great pity
that the most faultless Chapter in the Book, for ought is evident, should be
the shortest.

The Survey of Chapter 40.
WE are not bound to believe, and Mr. Hobbes would find it a hard task to
prove, that all Christian Princes have the same power and authority over their
Subjects, that Abraham had over his Family, which we do not find to exceed the
number of three hundred and eighteen men; and that all Subjects are bound to
obey the dictates of their Sovereigns with the same resignation and submission
as the Children of Israel were obliged to submit to the commands of Moses:
however, it seems to have no Logical consequence in it, that because God spoke
only to Abraham, and not to his Family, therefore his Family was to receive
Gods commands only from him. Yet Mr. Hobbes might have remembered that God did
appear likewise to Hagar, one of Abraham's Family, even after he had exposed her
to the unjust severity of his Wife; and communicated his pleasure to her, and
informed her of many particulars which he imparted not to Abraham; however, I
say, the instance of Abraham is no Argument, that all Subjects, who have no
supernatural Revelation to the contrary* ought to obey the orders of their own
Sovereigns in the external acts and profession of Religion, except it were as
evident that God has spoken to those Sovereigns, as it is confessed that he
spoke to Abraham. And there was in those days no other way for men to know the
immediate pleasure of God, what they were, or were not to do, but by his
Communication to some person who had credit to be believed. Whereas from the
time that God has manifested his pleasure to all men in his Scripture, what
will please and displease him, and entrusted Princes to advance his Service,
and provide for his Worship according to the rules which he has likewise
prescribed to them, he has discontinued that immediate Communication. Nor does
any Prince pretend to that conversation with God, as Abraham and Moses had, who
did not interpret, but relate, and report what God would, or would not have don
from himself. And the Salvo which he provide s^or the Implicit Faith which he
prescribes by a mental reservation, is so destructive to common honesty, that
it is not only unworthy of a Christian, but of a moral man, who desires to live
with any credit amongst men; which we shall be obliged to enlarge upon in
another place, where he more confidently calls for it, and therefore shall
decline it here. And God be thanked, no Christian Prince does himself believe,
or wishes that his Subjects should believe, that he is in Abraham's place, to be
the sole Interpreter of what God has spoken.

Mr. Hobbes is so much addicted to the sole obligation of Contracts and
Covenants, that he will hardly allow God himself to have a title to our
obedience, but by virtue of some Contract on his part, and Covenant on ours;
which that he may the better make good, he assumes a Jurisdiction to himself to
give what signification and interpretation he pleases to words, whether they
have bin generally understood to signify so, or no; without which he would not
have determined, that ( page 250.) Moses had no authority to command the
children of Israel, nor they any obligation to obey him, until in the terror of
the thundering and lightning, and the noise of the Trumpet, and the smoking of
the mountain, they said unto Moses, Exodus 20. 28. Speak thou with us, and we
will hear, but let not God speak* with us least we die; by which he says, (
page 251.) they obliged themselves to obey whatsoever he should deliver unto
them for the commandment of God: whereas the most that can be drawn from that
engagement is, that they would hear, and receive what he should say.
Notwithstanding which, it does not appear that they paid more obedience to
Moses, after this profession of theirs, then they had don before; nor can it be
imagined, that the promise to Moses was more binding, then all former
obligations to God. And surely he who assumes this license of Interpreting, is
much to blame if he does not make many places in Scripture to signify what
conduces to his purpose; and he may from Moses having leave to go up into the
Mount, declare, not only that the Scriptures are the Mount, and therefore that
the Sovereign only may interpret them, but that they may not be looked into;
which would increase the Prerogative, and is as near the signification and
intention of the Text, as what he gives to it. But then how Mr. Hobbes will
excuse himself for violating his own Doctrine, which concludes, that ( page
252.) no man ought in the inte^pretation of Scripture, to proceed farther then
the bounds which are set by his Sovereign, I cannot imagine, except he has
refuge to Cromwell, whom he did then acknowledge to be his Sovereign. And
indeed it was of no small advantage to him, that all Persons under him (by what
Oaths or Obligations soever they were bound to administer Justice to the
people, according to the known Rules of Law and equity) should understand
themselves to be in the same capacity that the Seventy were to Moses, to whom
God took of the Spirit that was upon Moses, Number. 11. 25. and gave it to them;
the sense of which place, he says, is no other, (page 252.) (as he has
formerly declared, that spirit signifies mind,) then that God endued them with
a mind conformable* and subordinate to that of Moses, that they might prophesy,
and speak to the people in Gods name, in such manner, as to set forward such
doctrine as was agreeable to Moses' s doctrine. And in truth so absolute an
authority in all spiritual matters, as high as it is, is not more then is
absolutely necessary to support his other power in the temporal.

He administers occasion enough in this Chapter to induce me to repete what
has already bin said upon the Covenant made by Abraham, which is a principal
corner stone upon which he still persists to erect his building, which I shall
forbear to do, persuming the Reader will not forget it; only I must observe the
activity and restlessness of Mr. Hobbes his fancy, and that, as the first
mention of the Covenant and Contract as to the end for which he formed it, was
a pure dream of his own, so he adds to it, and makes it larger, as new matter
occurs to him that requires such a supply. As in the beginning of this Chapter,
that he might make the Sovereignty of Abraham to appear the more
unquestionable, he says, that (page 249.) by his Covenant he obliged himself,
and his seed after him, to acknowledge, and obey the Commands of God, not only
such as he could take notice of (as moral Laws) by the Laws of Nature, but
also such as God should in special manner deliver to him by dreams, and
visions, of which before he makes no mention, tho he mentioned more then he had
authority for; for he says, (page 249.) that no contract could add to, or
strengthen the obligation, by which both they, and all men else were bound
naturally to obey God Almighty, and therefore the Covenant that Abraham made
with God, was to take for the commandment of God, that which in the name of God
was commanded him in a dream, or vision, and to deliver it to his Family, and
cause them to observe the same. Yet notwithstanding this great addition, tho
Abraham and all the Sovereigns who succeeded him, were qualified to govern, and
prescribe to their Subjects what Religion they should be of, and to tell them
what is the word of God, and to punish all those who should countenance any
doctrine which he should forbid, from which he concludes that (page 250) as
none but Abraham in his family, so none but the Sovereign in a Christian
Commonwealth, can take notice what is, or what is not the word of God; Yet, I
say, neither that, nor the renewing the same Covenant with Isaac, and
afterward with Jacob, he says now, did make that people the peculiar People
of God, but dates that Privilege, which before he dated from the Covenant with
Abraham, to begin only from the renewing it by Moses at the mount Sinai; by
which he corrects his former fancy by a new one as extravagant, upon the
peoples contract in those words, which he had mentioned before without that
observation and gloss that he makes upon it, nor did God at that time promise
more to them by Moses, then he had before as expressly promised to Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob.

This shall suffice to what he has so often urged, or shall hereafter infer
from the Covenant with Abraham, and by Moses, and of the peculiar dominion over
that People by virtue of that Contract. Nor will I hereafter enlarge any more
upon their pretended rejection of God, when they desired a King, which he now
confirm's by a new piece of History, or a new Commentary upon the Text by his
Sovereign power of interpreting; for he says (page 254.) that when they said
to Samuel, make us a King to judge us like all the Nations, they signified, that
they would no more be governed by the commands that should be laid upon them by
the Priest in the name of God; and consequently in deposing the High Priest of
Roial authority, they deposed that peculiar Government of God. (page 255.) And
yet he confesses in the very next page, that when they had demanded a King
after the manner of the Nations, they had no design to depart from the worship
of God their King, but despairing of the justice of the Sons of Samuel, they
would have a King to Judge them in civil actions, but not that they would allow
their King to change the Religion which was recommended to them by Moses. By
which he has again cancelled and demolish't all that power and jurisdiction,
which he would derive to all Sovereigns, from that submission and contract,
which he says they made at Mount Sinai: for he confesses that they had no
intention, that the King should have authority to alter their Religion, and then
it passed not by that contract. And thus when his unruly invention suggests to
him an addition to the Text, or an unwarrantable interpretation of it, it
always involves him in new perplexities, and leaves him as far from attaining
his end, as when he began. It is upon his usual presumtion, that from the 17.
Chapter of Numbers, he concludes, that after Moses his death, the supreme power
of making war and peace, and the Supreme power of judicature belonged also to
the High Priest; and thus Ioshuah was only General of the Army: whereas no more
was said in that place to Eleazar, then had bin before said to Aaron his
Father, to perform the Priestly Office; nor does it ever appear that Eleazar
offered to assume the Sovereignty in either of the cases, but was as much under
Ioshuah, as Aaron had ever bin under Moses. God appeared unto Ioshuah upon the
decease of Moses, and deputed him to exercise the same charge that Moses had
don. As I was with Moses, so will I be with thee. This Book of the Law shall
not depart out of thy mouth, that thou may observe to do all that is written
therein. Then Ioshuah commanded the Officers of the People. Josh. 1, 2. 5, 8,
10. The people made another covenant with Ioshuah. All that thou command us
we will do, and whither soever thou sendest us, we will go. As we hearkened unto
Moses in all things, so will we hearken unto thee. Whosoever does rebel against
thy Commandment, and will not hearken to thy words in all that thou command
him, shall be put to death. ver. 16, 17, 18. And the Lord said unto Joshuah,
this day will I magnify thee in the sight of all Israel; as I was with Moses,
so will I be with thee. And thou shall command the Priests etc. Josh. 3. 7, 8.
All the orders and commands to the Priests were given by Ioshuah. Joshua built
an Altar to the Lord God of Israel in Mount Ebal. He wrote upon the stones a
copy of the Law. He read all the Law, the cursings, and the blessings, etc.
Josh. 8. 30, 32, 34. Ioshuah divided the Land, and when any doubtful cause did
arise, they repaired to him for judgment. And when the two Tribes, and the
half, returned to the other side of Jordan, where Moses had assigned their
portions, it was Ioshuah who blessed them, and sent them away. There is no
mention of any Sovereignty of Eleazar. What the jurisdiction of the High Priest
was, and whether the Office was limited, or any way suspended during the time
of the Judges, is not otherwise pertinent to this discourse, then as it
contradicts Mr. Hobbes, in which where it is not necessary I take no delight,
and therefore shall not enlarge upon those particulars.

The Survey of Chapter 41.
MR. Hobbes has committed so many errors in the institution and view which he
has made of all Offices hitherto, that there was reason to believe, he would
have the same presumtion, if he came to handle the Office of our Savior
himself; and I think he has made it good, when he allows no other authority or
power to our Savior, even when he comes in the glory of his Father, with his
Angels, to reward every man according to his works* Mat^h. 16. 27. then (page
260.) as Vicegerent of God his Father, in the same manner that Moses was in
the Wilderness, and as the High Priests were before the Reign of Saul, and as
the Kings were after it: which is degrading him below the model of Socinus, and
in no degree equal to the description of his Power in Scripture; yet large
enough, if the end of his coming was no other then he assigns, and the Office
he is to manage, no greater then he seems to describe, (p. 264.) the giving
immortality in the Kingdom of the Son of man, which is to be exercised by our
Savior upon Earth, in his human nature; which seems to be much inferior to
that inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, that fades not away, which St.
Peter assures us is reserved in Heaven for us, 1 Pet. 1. 4. And how his
immortality upon Earth will be secured, if the Earth be to be destroyed by
Fire, as many Learned Men do be^ieve is clearly foretold in Scripture, is
worthy of his care to enquire and consider. But these extravagancies, and the
greater in the next Chapter, in his description and definition of the Trinity,
I shall leave to Divines to refute, and to the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, to
convince him by information, or to reform him by chastisements; without making
any observation, that how little power or jurisdiction soever he allows to
other Officers and Ministers, he reserves to himself authority to determine the
highest Points. And whereas our Savior himself professes, that he has laid
down his life, and bin sacrificed for the sins of the whole world, he takes
upon him to contract the number who are to receive any benefit thereby, only to
that of the Elect. And he is less to be understood, when he positively
declares, ( page 263.) the end of Christ's coming to be, that he might restore
unto God by a new Covenant, the Kingdom which had bin cut off by the rebellion
of the Israelites in the election of Saul: which dream still possesses him to
that degree, that he seems to think the conversion of the Gentiles to be merely
accidental, the restoring that peculiar Kingdom to his Father by a new
Covenant, being the great end of his coming; and in case that Nation should
generally refuse him, then to call to his obedience such as should believe in
him of the Gentiles: whereas his coming was equally for the one as for the
other, and in truth, was promised to the other, before the Jews became the
chosen People of God, if the Promise made to Adam after his fall had any
prospect toward our Savior, of which few men make doubt.

I cannot but observe some ingenuity (if it had bin perfect ingenuity, it would
have amounted to a clear retractation) in his declaring so freely, and by so
many instances, that as our Savior himself declared, That his Kingdom is not
of this World, so that he never exercised any Sovereign Jurisdiction in it,
contrary to what he more magisterially published in his twentieth Chapter; when
his business being to prove the absolute and illimited power of Kings over
their Subjects, and all that they have, he quotes several Texts out of the Old
and New Testament, in which the simple obedience of Subjects to their Sovereign
is enjoined: and then concludes with an instance of our Saviors judgment in
the point, ( page 108.) That the Kings word is sufficient to take away any
thing from any Subject when there is need, and that the King is judge of that
need; for saying that our Savior himself, as King of the Jews, commanded his
Disciples to take the Ass* and Asses Colt, to carry him into Jerusalem, saying,
Go into the Village, etc. Matthew 21 2, 3. he adds, as if they had bin the ^ords
of our Savior, They will not ask, whether his necessity be a sufficient title,
nor whether he be judge of that necessity, but acquiesce in the will of the
Lord. If Mr. Hobbes had bin a conscientious vindicator of Truth, and intended
by his reason and authority only to have mended the understanding of men, when
he had reformed his own in a matter of great importance, and of which he had
made so ill use, he would have given some satisfaction to those he may have
seduced: and since he now discovers, ( page 262, 263.) that the Kingdom of
Christ is not to begin till the general Resurrection; and that Christ, whilst
he was on Earth, had no Kingdom in this World, this forty first Chapter ought
in con^cience to have bin a retractation of what he had said in the twenty
precedent; and therefore he may forgive those, who too reasonably suspect, that
his design is rather to perplex and disturb, and seduce men, then to enlighten
and inform them; and that he assigns the errors in every Chapter to do as much
mischief as they can, and retracts none of them, least the confessing himself
to be once deceived, may lessen his power to deceive any more.

The Survey of Chapter 42.
HAving then left his Discourse of the Trinity to be censured by those who are
more competent considerers of those high Mysteries, with the matter of his
former Chapter, and of which it had more properly bin a part; (for after the
having degraded our Savior to those low and insignificant Offices, the
barefaced denying the Trinity might naturally have followed, which he makes to
be no Mystery at all, and to contain as many Persons as any body will assign to
it, rather then those, which an Article of the Christian Faith makes necessary
to be believed, and which he denies with more affectation then was don by
Arius, or Macedonius, or any of those Heresies which succeeded, and were the
spawn of their poison. And no doubt, he has gratified the Pope abundantly,
whom he has otherwise endeavored to provoke, in procuring such a Book, that
denies a vital part of Christianity, to be printed and dispersed in a
Protestant Kingdom, which it could not have bin, if the Governors and
Overseers of the Church had ever perused or taken notice of it; the defect
whereof has permitted it to receive too much countenance in Popish Countries
likewise;) We proceed to take a view of his Ecclesiastical Power, in which he
declares his judgment and opinion, not only of Church Jurisdiction, but upon
the matter of all things which concern Religion in the Church; that is, the
Profession of the Christian Faith. I do first observe, that he confesses, (
page 267.) that the Ecclesiastical power was left by our Savior in the hands
of the Apostles, and that it remained in them, and in those who were ordained
by them, those hundreds of years before there were any Christian Sovereigns:
and I will confess with him, that our Savior left no external, ordinary,
coercive power to them, or with them, but only a power to proclaim the Kingdom
of Christ, and to persuade men to submit themselves thereunto, and by Precepts
and good Counsel, and the terrors of the Lord, to teach them that have
submitted, what they are to do that they may be received into the Kingdom of
God, and by the censures of the Church chastise and discipline offenders: all
which cannot be don, but by publishing and explaining the Scriptures. And
therefore except Mr. Hobb^s will take from them that which himself acknowledges
that Christ gave and left to them, or prove that Christ took it from them, and
assigned it to other persons, they must still have a power to publish the
Scripture, and to interpret it, and are obliged to declare and teach the
Doctrine of Christ before the Doctrine of the King, which office he has
thought fit only to commit to them, and trust them with, not remembering how
much more he had assigned to them in the beginning of his last Chapter, where
he says, ( page 261.) that our Savior, when he was upon the earth, partly
wrought our conversion, and partly w^rketh n^w by his Ministers, and will
continue to work till his coming again. And it is very ill Logic to say, that
because they cannot mis-interpret and pervert Scripture, nor preach Rebellion
against their natural Sovereign, since Christ has commanded subjection and
obedience to them, they have therefore no authority to preach at all, or
interpret the Scripture, but must publish whatsoever the King bids them, in the
Name, and as the Commands of God: yet even that, and all he has or can say,
may be true, if the cases of Conscience which he has taken upon him to
determine, have any dependence upon, or affinity with the Christian Faith, or
common honesty.

What if the office of Christ's Ministers in this World, is to make men believe
and have Faith in Christ, and that they have no power by that title to punish
men for not believing, or for contradicting what they say: does that defect of
power of compulsion, abolish that power which he has given them of instructing
and preaching, and using the Keys? As Christ has trusted them to do, and
qualified them with peculiar circumstances to perform those Offices; so he has
trusted Sovereign Princes to assist them, whilst they perform their office
with integrity, or to punish them if they do not, with their power of
compulsion, that their labors may be effectual. And Princes are no less obliged
to give them that assistance, then they are to perform the office of the
Apostles and Disciples; nor can any Prince think his Sovereignty impaired, by
being obliged to take care that the Laws and Precepts of God his Sovereign be
punctually submitted to, and that they, to whom in special manner the
publication thereof is committed, be not only protected, but obeyed and
reverenced, whilst they do their duty; or ^urmise that the Word of God stands
in need of, or can receive any dignity or authority, by any thing he can add to
it by his Sovereign power. God has left, and required them to be Nursing
Fathers to his Church, and from the time of their being Christians, has
communicated his Scripture to them, which they have received, and which they
are equally bound to obey as their meanest Subject; and if they are not good
and faithful Nurses, the miscarriage of the Children shall be imputed to them.
There is no cause of jealousy from the Sovereign toward his Subjects, which
Mr. Hobbes out of his constant good will desires to kindle: for there is
neither Bishop nor Priest who pretends to any Power or Jurisdiction,
inconsistent with the Kings Supremacy, in Ecclesiastical as well as Temporal
matters. No man can be made a Bishop, but by his appointment and grant. No man
can be ordained a Priest, but by him whom he has nominated to be a Bishop. And
if either Bishop or Priest mis-behave themselves to that degree, they shall by
his authority be degraded, and deprived, and suffer as Laymen are to do, he
being no less Sovereign over the Ecclesiastical Persons and Laws, then over the
Temporal; and whoever so become liable, are to blame, and for ought I know,
have to answer for something besides the departing from their dignity. In a
word, Prelates assume no title of Honor, nor pretend to any Jurisdiction that
they have not received from him, and therefore deserve to be countenanced and
supported by him, amongst his best and most useful Subjects.

He is not concerned, if the King forbids him to believe in Christ: it is a
command of no effect, because belief and understanding never follow men's
commands; but if the King commands him to say, that he believes not in Christ,
he is very ready to obey him. ( page 271.) Profession with the tongue, is but
an external thing, wherein a Christian holding firmly in his heart the Faith of
Christ, has the same liberty which the Prophet Elisha allowed to Naaman the
Syrian. He would be very much disappointed in the support of his monstrous
Impiety, if that Text ought to be rendered out of the Original, as Dr Lightfoot,
a man eminently learned in the Hebrew, positively says at ought to be: For
this thing the Lord pardon thy servant, for that when my Master has gone into
the house of Rimmon to worship there, and he has leaned upon my hand, that I
have also bowed my self in the house of Rimmon; for my worshipping in the house
of Rimmon, the Lord pardon thy servant for t^is thing. 2 Kings 5. 18. So that
he craved pardon for Idolatry past, and not begged leave to be Idolatrous for
the time to come. But admitting the Text to be according to the common
Translation, it can do Mr. Hobbes no good, except he procures the same leave
from another who has as much authority as Elisha had. Who does not know, that
none of those Examples which were either enjoined or permitted to be don by the
Divine Authority, for some extraordinary end of Providence, are for our
imitation, when they are opposite to the truth, and justice, and integrity of
Gods Precepts? He may as well justify the breach of Faith, and downright
Theft and Robbery in his Neighbors, by the example of the Israelites borrowing
the Jewels, and other Goods of the Egyptians, or the assassination of an Enemy,
by the example of Ehuds stabbing of Eglon, and many other unwarrantable
actions, by the example of good men directed by the Spirit of God in the
Scripture, as maintain his own impiety, by the example or permission, if there
were any, of Naaman. But if Mr. Hobbes be gratified by not urging the impiety,
nor the denunciation which St. John pronounced upon him, He is Antichrist,
that denies the Father and the Son, 1 John 2. 22. How will he justify the
prevarication and falseness, in saying, he does not believe that, which in his
heart he does believe? Ye shall not deal falsely, neither lie one to another,
was a part of the Levitical Law, and by Mr. Hobbes rules, a part of the Law of
Nature, and so must not be violated, nor can be controlled by God himself. He
knows very well who is the Father of lies, tho it may be he does not enough
consider what portion is allotted for his children. And if they who said they
were Jews, and were not, but did lie, were pronounced by St. John to be of the
Synagogue of Satan, Rev. 3. 9. There is very great danger, that he who is a
Christian in his heart, and upon any Kings commands shall profess with his
Tongue that he does not believe in Christ, will not be admitted by our Savior
to be of his Church. In vain has the whole current of Scripture endeavored to
raise such an awful reverence for truth, that it has scarce pronounced more
severe Judgments against any Species of sins, then against lying. He that
tells lies, shall not stay in my sight, says the Spirit of God by the
Psalmist, Psalm. 101. 7. He that speaks lies shall perish, says the same
Spirit in the Proverbs, Prove. 19. 9. Let him believe what he will, he shall
perish for speaking lies. And if he will believe St. Paul, he will not find the
heart to be the seat that comprehends all Christian Religion, but that the
tongue has a very necessary part assigned to it, to perform: If thou shall
confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thy heart that God
has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved, Romans 10. ^. Salvation would
be gotten at too cheap a rate, if believing would serve the turn, and men might
speak, and do what they find most convenient. Words are actions in his own
judgment, and to be punished with the same severity. Our Savior had provided
very ill for the propagation of his Faith, if he had left a latitude for men to
deny him in their words, so they confessed him in their hearts. How many
Converts would that secret, and reserved belief and confession have produced?
Confession with mouth, as it is the more generous, so it is the more avowed and
declared way of doing God service. He cannot confess him with his mouth, that
does not believe him in his heart; and he does believe him in his heart to no
purpose, that will not confess him with his mouth. A man cannot be a true
Christian without both. There may be some men who may be possessed with as much
fear as Mr. Hobbes, and as good Courtiers as he, in submitting to the commands
of their Sovereign, of what kind soever; but I have not heard that any man does
so frankly own it as he does; and the expedient that he has found might have
saved many hundred thousand lives of the Christians in the primitive
persecution, when the greatest part of them were not required with their mouth
to deny Jesus Christ, but to acknowledge Jupiter, or Venus, or Apollo (according
to the Religion of the Climate) to be Gods, and to worship them, which after
they were Christians they could not do: so that their Martyrdom was, that they
chose to lose their lives with the most terrible circumstances of Torment,
rather then they would lie, and say, that they believed them to be Gods, when
they knew they were not so: and the Church has never doubted of their being
Martyrs, very precious in the eyes of God. But we shall have occasion to resume
this argument of Martyrs again very shortly.

But it is not reasonable to believe or expect that those, or any other Texts
of Scripture, can make any impression upon Mr. Hobbes, when he is able to save
himself harmless from that determination and declaration of our Savior, Who so
d^nieth me before men, I will deny him before my Father which is in Heaven, by
saying roundly, that whatsoever a Subject is compelled to do in obedience to
his Sovereign, and does it not in order to his own mind, that action is not his
but his Sovereigns, nor is it he that in this case denies Christ before men,
but his Governor: so that he is well content to shift of his own damnation to
his Sovereign. But that this distinction will not serve his turn, is evident to
all, but the Casuists of his own faith; and twill concern him to find a better
way to defend himself for committing Adultery, Theft, Murder, or any other
wickedness God has forbidden, if his Sovereign commands him, then he has
taught any other men who believe his doctrine, and who deserve more
satisfaction from him, for depending upon his reason. I know no difficulty in
resolving his case of conscience concerning his Mohammedan in a Christian
Commonwealth, nor can doubt, but that he which is a true Mohammedan, and
believes that Mahomet will not permit him to be present at the divine Service
in a Christian Church, which I do not think the Mahometans restrained from out
of their own Country, no more then the Jews, who make no scruple to be present
at Common Prayer, or Mass, if it be attended with any convenience, looking upon
themselves only as being present in the company, not at the devotion: Yet I
say, if he believes it, he does well not to obey his Sovereigns commands, and
is much the honester men in avoiding the doing against conscience, however
erroneous it may be. Nor will any part of that tragical inference follow, that
then any private man may disobey their Princes in maintenance of any Religion
true, or false, there being other trials for the punishment of those, then the
bare word, and command of the Prince.

There are two conclusions which reasonably result from Mr. Hobbes his Axiom,
and which may prove beneficial to him; the first is, that we may believe that
he does not himself believe one word in his Book that we find fault with: for
writing is at least as external a thing as speaking, and therefore keeping his
heart right, he might have the same liberty the Prophet gave to Naaman, and
write what his Sovereign Cromwell commanded him, or what he discerned would be
so acceptable to him, that it would procure him his protection, which ought to
have the same force with him as his command. The other is, that when ever he
shall be commanded by the King, or required by any Court of Law, which is the
voice of the King, to retract, and recant whatever is condemned in this Book,
he will cheerfully, and with a better conscience renounce them all, and write
an other Book more reasonably in the confutation of his errors in this. But
then he is upon an other disadvantage, which is very grievous to an honest man,
that when he makes that recantation, no man will believe that it is the
thoughts of his heart, but only his profession with the tongue, which being but
an external thing, he does signify his obedience to that authority to which he
is Subject, without any remorse for the wickedness of his former writing. The
truth is, this license which he avows, how odious and impious soever, has in
it self likewise so much of levity and extreme weakness, that a man may depart
a little from his gravity in answering it, and wonder why he did not make use
of a Text of Euripides englisht in Hudibras, who is much a graver writer, and
far better Casuist, as an authority to support his doctrine, Oaths are but
words, and words but wind,
Too feeble instruments to bind. etc.
He knows well that in the custom of speaking, worse cannot be said of any man,
then that he is ready to say any thing he is bid, and the natural judgment upon
him, is, that no man believes any thing he says.

Error is naturally pregnant, and the more desperate it is, the more fruitful.
Mr. Hobbes well foresaw that the latitude he assumed to himself, could not
consist with the courage of the blessed Martyrs of the Christian Faith, who had
laid down their lives rather then they would with their tongue (which would
have saved their lives) deny their Savior, or say they did not believe in him,
upon the command of what Emperor of Sovereign soever. Nor could it reasonably
be expected, that a man who is so declared an Enemy to Martyrdom, should
entertain a great reverence or esteem for the persons of Martyrs; and therefore
it cannot be wondered at, that he very resolutly charge that glorious company
(whose memory every Christian Church celebrates with extraordinary devotion)
with want of Wit and understanding, and with loss of their labor, and boldly
determines by his Prerogative of interpreting words according to his
definitions and Etymologies, whatever the constant, and general acceptance
has bin, that because Martyr signifies a witness, (page 272.) and a witness
must have seen what he testifies, and the fundamental Article of Christian
Religion being that Jesus was the Christ, therefore that none can properly be
called Martyrs of Christ, but those that conversed with him, and saw him before
and after his Resurrection, and that whosoever did not so, can witness no more
then what others said, and are therefore but witnesses of other men's testimony,
and are but second Martyrs, or Martyrs of Christ's witnesses. And yet for fear
that they might yet have too much honor, he does as imperiously declare, that
(page 273.) none can be a Martyr of the first, or second degree, who have not a
warrant to preach Christ come in the flesh, and who are not sent to the
conversion of Infidels; for that no man is a witness to him that already
believes, and therefore needs no witness, but to them that deny, or doubt, or
have not heard it. And even to those, that there is one only Article, which to
die for, meriteth so honorable a name, and that Article is, that (page 272.)
Jesus is the Christ. But a man maintaining every Doctrine, which he himself
draws out of the History of our Saviors life, or out of the Acts or Epistles
of the Apostles, is very far from being a Martyr of Christ, or a Martyr of his
Martyrs: whereas whoever has laid down his life for the testimony of any
Christian verity, or rather then he would deny any such, has always bin
inserted in the number of the Martyrs, by the judgment of the universal Church.

If Mr. Hobbes had bin conversant in the determination of matters upon the
testimony of witnesses, he would have known, that in cases of the greatest
importance, it is not always necessary that the witness must have bin present,
and have seen what he testifies, or else his testimony is not good. They are
very comp^^ent witnesses who declare what they have heard from others; the
question being only, whether what they say be true; which often appears to be
more unquestionable by the testimony of what others saw, and declared, then
what they saw or heard themselves: and the truth of all matters of fact would
be quickly lost, or dangerously suspected, if the death of half a dozen
persons, who were present, could render the truth without evidence. So that he
could not in this assertion, have any purpose to discountenance any other sort
of witnesses but only Martyrs. And I must complain of his extreme undervaluing
his Readers, in endeavoring to persuade them, from St. Peter's proposing, or
enjoining after the death of Judas, that the rest of the Apostles should ordain
one to be a Martyr, (a witness with them of Christ's Resurrection) of those men
who had accompanied with them all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out
amongst them, beginning from the baptism of John, etc. (which he says, makes
it manifest, (page 272.) that he which is to be a witness of the truth of the
Resurrection of Christ, must be some Disciple that conversed with him, and saw
him before, and after his Resurrection* and consequently, must be one of his
original Disciples,) that none else could be a Martyr. He would have too just
reason to upbraid the breeding in the Universities, if there be any Novice in
Logic there, who can be imposed upon by such Argumentations. They who are
deluded by him, have not passed through that course Education. It is true, that
the method in which our Savior chose to work the conversion of men, was by
matters of fact, which he submitted to the examination of the senses, and which
was don in the sight of the Sun, that there might be no want of witnesses. His
greatest miracles were don in the greatest company, whom he had made Judges as
well as witnesses of what they saw. When he changed the Water into Wine, it was
at a Wedding, which in that time, and in that Country, was always celebrated
in the presence of a great multitude, and with notable Festivity. These people
saw the Water poured out, and in the drinking found it to be excellent Wine,
better then the Wine that was first brought into the room: and the evidence of
so many witnesses, could not but make the miracle believed, which he expected
not should be believed upon a less testimony. When he raised the dead to life,
it was always in the presence of them who had seen them living, and dead: the
same eyes which saw them die, and sometimes buried, saw them likewise rise from
the dead, and eat, and drink, and perform all the functions of life as other
men. The whole people saw his Passion, and were witnesses of all the
circumstances of it: and all his Disciples, and many other were witnesses of,
and conversed with him after his Resurrection. And to supply all possible
defects, after his Ascension (which was in the view likewise of many witnesses)
he sent the Holy Ghost upon them who taught, and them who believed; and which
was a miracle little inferior to the rest, he gave many of his witnesses so
long a life to publish what they had seen, and known, that it is made a
question whether Christianity be farther spread at present, then it was before
the death of all the Apostles. And then they all (for we may say St. John
suffered death, tho he outlived it) sealed with their blood the truth of what
they had preached and published. And afterward, the Scripture being likewise
published and abundantly attested, there needed no more Martyrs of the History,
but only for the doctrine: and they are no less Martyrs who suffer death rather
then they will commit a Sin, against which our Savior has pronounced
damnation, then they who assert his Passion, and Resurrection. And, as has bin
said before, the greatest number of the Primitive Martyrs, were never
questioned about the History of our Savior, of which the Persecutors had never
particularly heard, but were condemned for renouncing their Religion in which
they had bin bred, and denying those to be Gods, who were worshipped as such by
that Country; for which Mr. Hobbes has obliged himself to have no reverence:
and however they are challenged, and made to be Martys for that Religion, which
now assumes the Sovereignty over all Religion, there was not one amongst them
who ever heard of any of those opinions which are since grown up between
Christians, nor suffered for any thing, but what all the Christians at present
in the world do believe. And the Martyrdom of all who have since suffered death
for the maintenance of any particular opinion, has consisted only in that they
would not deny what in truth they believed, or pretend to believe what they
thought apparent to be false: which is not therefore to be condemned, because
Mr. Hobbes is resolved to decline it.

In this Rapsody of extravagant notions he proceeds to the dissecting the
Commission granted by our Savior to the Apostles, and with the license of a
Grammarian translates the terms of their Commission, to make their office of as
little authority as he wishes it to be. He says Preaching signifies nothing,
(page 273.) but what a Crier, or Herald, or other Officer uses to do publicly,
in proclaiming a King; and a Crier, he says, has not right to command any
man: that teaching is the same thing with Preaching, but to teach that Jesus
was Christ, and risen from the dead, is not to say, that men are bound after
they believe it, to obey those that tell them so against the commands of their
Sovereign, but that they shall do wisely to expect the coming of Christ
hereafter, in patience, and faith, with obedience to their present magistrate.
All which signifies nothing, if it does not signify, that where ever Idolatry
is the Religion of the Sovereign, what ever they do believe themselves, they
are to practice Idolatry still, and to perform all the Rites of Infidells, till
the coming of Christ himself to justify their conversion. And this no question
is his meaning: to which I shall apply no other answer then the stating his
proposition. And if there could remain any doubt, since that meaning is so very
bad, that it could not be his, he will quickly remove that doubt in the Survey
he takes of Baptism, and the obligation thereof. He says that (page 274.)
Baptism in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, is
dipping in their names, (you shall rarely find him call them three Persons, for
the incongruity it would introduce in Philosophy.) The meaning of which words
of Baptism is this, He that is baptized is dipped or washed as a sign of
becoming a new man, and a Loyal Subject to that God that was represented by
Moses, and to Jesus Christ his Son God and man, that has redeemed us, and
shall in his human nature represent his Fathers Person in his eternal Kingdom
after the Resurrection; and to acknowledge the doctrine of the Apostles, who
being assisted by the spirit of the Father and the Son (he tells us often that
Spirit signifies nothing but mind) were left for guides to bring us to that
Kingdom, to be the only and assured way thereunto. And so that you may not
suspect him to be a better Christian then he is, he has taken the pains to let
you know again the little esteem he has of the Trinity. This being our promise
in Baptism, and the authority of Earthly Sovereigns being not to be put down (1.
Cor. 25. 22, 23, 24.) till the day of judgment, for that he sai^s, is ( p.
274.) expressly affirmed by St. Paul, it is manifest that we do not in Baptism
constitute an other a^tority over us, by which our external actions are to be
governed in this life, but promise to take the doctrine of the Apostles for our
direction in the way to life eternal. So that the greater moiety of the world
being (according to the computation made by the Learned men) mere Heathen men,
and Pagans, and much the greater part of the other moiety being Mahometans (no
account being taken of the Jews) neither the one, or the other, however they
may in their hearts believe the doctrine of the Apostles, are bound to make
profession outwardly of the Christian Religion, before the second coming of our
Savior to judgment, except their own Sovereigns command them so to do. And in
all these ravings he has Texts of Scripture at hand, which he perverts, and
interprets to his own ends, contrary to the genuine sense, and indeed to the
whole Analogy of Faith and Scripture, (as any man must conclude who examines
them) and the interpretation which has bin always made of them before Mr.
Hobbes.

A man would imagine that he had bin contented, that the Apostles and their
Successors should enjoy some dignity and prerogative* when he confesses that
(page 274.) the end of Baptism is remission of Sins, and to baptize, is to
declare the reception of men into Gods Kingdom, and to refuse to baptize, is to
declare their exclusion; and that the power to declare them cast out, or
retained in it, was given to the Apostles, and their Substitutes and
Successors. But he quickly humbles them from this exaltation, and since no man
can judge the secret thoughts of the heart, he says, (page 275.) the Apostles,
and their Successors were to follow the outward marks of repentance, which
appearing, they had no authority to deny absolution. Besides they always were,
and are but ministerial, they have nothing to do to judge of ( page 275.) the
truth of repentance; that belongs to the assembly of the faithful, the
judgment belonging to them, and only the publication of it to the Apostle, or
Pastor of the Church as Prolocutor, after the Assembly had first heard the
cause, and determined it. So that it seems St. Peter was a little too
presumtious, in undertaking to know the heart of An^nias, and Saphira, and in
pronouncing so severe a judgment upon them without so much as asking the advice
of the Assembly. I shall not accompany him in his disquisition upon
Excommunication, the use and effects of it, upon whom it is to be exercised,
and for what faults, or the conditions which are requisite to make men liable
to it, and whether the Teacher of Christian doctrine may as a master in any
Science, abandon his Disciples that obstinately continue in an unchristian
life: but he cannot say the excommunicate have wrong; because they are not
obliged to obey; in all which he mingles great errors, with some truth well
expressed, and the errors being of a less magnitude then those he is usually
guilty of, I shall not particularly insist upon them. But I cannot but observe
his close design, to make the foolishness of Preaching of no effect, by his
absolving their Auditory from any kind of obligation to believe them; which he
would not attemt to do, if he had less authority then from the Apostles
themselves. ( Acts 17. 3. 3.) For from Saint Paul's behavior in the Synagogue
in Thessalonica (page 280.) when some of them believed, and others did not
believe, he finds the reason was, that St. Paul came to them without any legal
Commission, came only to persuade them, and reasoned with them out of the
Scriptures, which were well known to the Jews, and believed by them to be the
word of God. And the reason why, when they all believed the Scripture, they did
not all alike believe him, was, that some approved, and others disapproved the
Interpretation which St. Paul shad made, and every one interpreted them to
himself; for whoever persuades by reasoning from Principles written, makes him
to whom he speaks judge both of the meaning of those Principles, and also of the
force of his inferences upon them. If St. Paul had bin to be Judge himself of
what he said, what needed he to have quoted any places of Scripture to prove
his doctrine? It had bin enough to have said, I find it so in Scripture, that
is to say in your laws, of which I am interpreter, as sent from Christ.
Therefore the Jews of Thessalonica, were the sole Judges of what St. Paul
alleged out of Scripture; and every man might believe, or not believe,
according as the allegations seemed to himself, to be agreeable to the meaning
of the places alleged. And generally, he says, in all cases of the world, he
that pretends any proof, makes him Judge of his proof to whom he addresseth
his speech. Which clearly absolves the Jews for not believing our Savior
himself when he alleged Texts of Scripture to inform and convince them, and
absolves all private men from yielding obedience, or believing the
interpretation of Judges in point of Law, If their own sense pleases them
better; which introduces as wild a confusion in Church and State, as himself
can wish; and he, and his Disciples would become the only confident
Interpreters of the Law and the Gospel.

It is a very painful thing to read this two and fortieth Chapter of Mr.
Hobbes, in which all the loose and licentious reflections upon piety, and
religion, the undervaluing and perverting the Scripture, and the utter contemt
of the Church, which are a little more warily scattered throughout his book,
(that is, by being scattered, not so easily discerned) are collected, and
gathered more closely together into such a Mass of impiety, that the very
repeting all the particulars, without which they cannot be replied to, must be
more grievous and offensive to most devout Persons, then the most unclean
discourse can appear to the chastest ears. And the argument being of power
Ecclesiastical, he has made all Ecclesiastical power to be of no
signification, and the most useless thing upon the earth. Our Savior himself
(who is the Fountain from whence all Ecclesiastical power must flow) he has
discovered to have so little authority when he was here, that he could delegate
little to his Apostles. And since men were not bound to believe him, nor
committed any fault if they did not believe him, he could not leave his
Apostles in a state of more reverence and esteem: and their greatest privilege
was, to leave the conversation of those, who did not care for their company.
And that he might with great method and order make all this appear, is the
business of this very long Chapter, toward which the most innocent Paragraph
in it contributes somewhat, as appears by those which we have already examined;
and therefore we can take little delight, or administer it to others, in the
Survey of the rest. It cannot but be wondered at, that Mr. Hobbes, who
evidently has taken pains in reading the Scripture, to what ill purposes, and
with what evil intentions soever, could have the confidence to affirm, (page
281.) that the Apostles preached nothing, but that Jesus was the Christ, etc.
that he was not dead but risen again from the dead, and gone up into Heaven, and
should come again to judge the world, etc. All which are indeed the Elements of
the Christian faith, but he says, none of them preached, that himself, or any
other Apostle was such an interpreter of the Scripture, as all that became
Christians, ought to take their interpretations for Law. The foundation must
be, that it might be believed, that Christ the Messiah was come; for till that
was believed, what he said, or what he did, was of little moment. Yet their
great business too was to make them know, that the simple believing that, would
not serve their turn; that Christian Religion did not consist more, (it may be
not so much) in believing, as in doing. In all Christ's Sermons upon the Mount,
there is very little of opinion taught, or prescribed, only the practice^ of
Christian duties was vigorously urged: wherefore by their fruits you shall know
them; whosoever hears these sayings of mine, and does them, Mat. 7. 24. A
great part of his redemtion was, that he qualified us to receive redemtion; and
tho he paid the price of his blood for our ransom, yet he left something to be
don still by us, in following his example, and observing his Precepts. The
informing and convincing the world of this, was the office of the Apostles; and
all they said, and all they wrote, were interpretations, and commentaries upon
what our Savior himself had said, and don, and together contained so perfect a
body of Christianity, that we are not obliged to any thing under the penalty of
damnation, but what is contained therein, or evidently deduced from thence. The
office of the Apostles was to point out, and demonstrate the way to that
Salvation, which was so dearly purchased for us; and efficaciously to prove,
that the declining that way, and walking in a contrary path, must lead us to
eternal perdition; and confidently to declare, and pronounce the reward and the
punishment to both, that men may choose for themselves. This they were to do,
and this they did; and after all this, are we now to believe that they had no
authority for what they did, and that we have no obligation upon us, nor the
Jew, nor the Gentile before us, to believe what they said, or to do what they
enjoined?

Mr. Hobbes is the first Commentator upon the Evangelists, who upon that advice
of our Saviors, Search the Scriptures, John 5. 39. observes and concludes, (
page 281.) that if our Savior himself had not meant that the Jews should
interpret the Scriptures, he would not have hidden them to search them, and
take from thence the proof of his being the Christ, but he would either have
interpreted them himself, or referred them to the interpretation of the
Priests; that is, because as he vouchsafed to expose his Miracles to the test
and examination of their grossest senses, so now by condescending to quote
Scripture for his own manifestation, he intended to make themselves the Judges,
whether he spoke to the purpose or no, and at liberty to believe him or not,
without forfeiture of their innocence. Did he not interpret the Scriptures
himself, when by the several Texts, which he cited out of several of the
Prophets, he made it evident to them, that those Prophesies were of his Person,
and could refer to none else? And since they all confessed that they were the
word of God, he advised them to search the Scriptures, because they are they
that testify of him. The Apostles observe the same method, demonstrate out of
the Prophets, whom they all professed to believe, what Christ must do when he
came, and what must be don to him, and that all that was don and suffered by
him which was fore told. His admirable Life and Doctrine was well known to them
all, they had bin present at his trial, and at his death, and had with their
eyes seen the terrible circumstances of it; they had seen him buried, and the
Jews had providently appointed a guard of Soldier, who had without remorse
beheld his Passion, to watch his Tomb: and yet after all this vigilance, the
Body was not found, but as he had promised himself, and what had bin by the
Prophets foretold of him, the third day he was risen; of which there were so
many eie-witnesses, who had seen, and conferred with him for many days, and
had at last beheld with their bodily eyes, his Body ascend in the air toward
Heaven. And besides that the greatest part of all this was seen and known by
all the People, the Preachers and Declarers of it appeared to be very
extraordinary men, by the daily M^racles they wrought, by which such multitudes
were compelled, and could not re^ist believing all they said, and promised to
observe the Precepts they enjoined. But all this is nothing: others, and much
greater numbers did, and lawfully might refuse to do either; for Mr. Hobbes
says positively, ( page 281.) that the people had liberty to interpret the
Scriptures to themselves, till such time as there should be Pastors that could
autorize an Interpreter, whose interpretation should be gene^ally stood to, but
that could not be till Kings were Pastors, or Pastors Kings. So that what the
Apostles, or our Savior himself had said, laid no obligation upon those who
heard them.

We have now the reason why he was concerned so much to extend those plain
words of the Children of Israel, in their fright, to Moses, Speak thou to us,
and we will hear th^e, to such an absolute obligation of their obedience, since
without it, he says, ( page 283.) they had not bin obliged to have received
the ten Commandments, since they were forbid to approach the mountain, by which
they might have heard what God said to Moses: but that obligation that they
would hear Moses, made all sure again, and so they came to receive them. Yet he
confesses, ( page 282.) that they could not but acknowledge the second Table for
Gods Laws, because they were all the Laws of Nature: but for those of the first
Table that were peculiar to the Israelites, (which gives him occasion to
enlarge his Commentary upon the third Commandment, in which he says, the
meaning of those words, They shall not take the name of God in vain, is, that
they should not speak rashly of their King, nor d^spute his r^ght, nor the
Commissions of Moles and Aaron his Lieutenants) it was their own obligation
(Speak thou to us, and we will hear, etc.) by which they were to receive them
as Laws, and ( page 283.) the Judicial Law, which Godprescrib'd to the
Magistrates of Israel* for the rule of the administration of Justice, and the
Levitical Law, the rule prescribed touching the rites and ceremonies of the
Priests and Levi^es, because Laws, he says, only by virtue of the same promise
of ob^dience to Moses. And so he proceeds to a new enqui^y into the
authenticalness of the Old and New Testament (in which chase I am weary of
following him) and concludes, ( page 284.) that whoever offers us any other
rules, which the Sovereign rule has not pr^scr^b'd they are but counsel and
advice, which whether good or bad, he that is counseled may without injustice
refuse to observe. And ( page 285.) that the Scripture of the New Testament is
there only Law, where the lawful Civil Power has made it so.

Since the reception of the New Testament as a Law (that is, within the Canon
of Scripture) depends wholly upon the word of the Sovereign, and by that word
is received and acknowledged to be the word of God, and from thence is obeyed
as such: it must likewise, by his rule, still subsist by the sole authority of
the Sovereign, for he can by his word to morrow abrogate that which this day he
made a Law. So that if a Christian Sovereign be succeeded by a Sovereign who is
a Jew, or an evil Christian, he may abrogate that Law by which the New
Testament was declared to be within the Canon of Scripture, and then the
Subjects must neither ( page 285.) in their actions or discourse observe the
same, and can only privately wish* that they had liberty to practice them; by
which the confessed word of God must be made void, and controlled by the
commandments of man. And he has the confidence to aver, that the very Council
held by the Apostles, in which they use this style, It seemed good to the Holy
Ghost, and to us, etc. has no authority to oblige any body, ( page 286.) since
the Apostles could have no other power then that of our Savior, who could only
persuade, not command; for they who have no Kingdom can make no Laws. And so I
hope Leviathan has now laid about him, and performed his full function, which
makes him worthy to receive a more reasonable answer then is in the power of
any private Person, or of the Universities to give him, and is very fit for the
State it self to reward him for, to the full extent of his desert.

Mr. Hobbes has invested the Sovereign with his absolute independent power, by
the example of Moses, and David, and Solomon, both in Church and State; and
being obliged to confess, that for some hundred of years after the preaching of
the Gospel^, there was no Civil Sovereign to meddle with it, but that the
direction of all Ecclesiastical Affairs appertained to the Apostles and their
successors, and those who were ordained by them; he finds a way to invest his
Christian Monarch with that Jurisdiction and Supremacy, by the right all
Heathen Sovereigns had, who had the name of Pastors of the People, because
there was no Subject that could lawfully teach the People, but by their
permission and authority; and that no body can think, that the right of Heathen
Kings is taken away by their conversion to the Faith of Christ, who never
ordained, that Kings for believing in him should be deposed* that is, subjected
to any but himself. And therefore Christian Princes are still the supreme
Pastors of their People, and have power to ordain what Pastors they please to
teach the Church. But to make their title the more unquestionable, he resorts
to the title he found out for his Sovereign by institution, that from the part
and covenant which the people made to, and with each other, he becomes the
Representative of the people, which he confesses, that he that makes himself
Sovereign, by his irresistible Power, without any election, pact or covenant,
likewise is the Representative of the people, and so has the same power and
authority, as if he were by their election. He finds now, that the Christian
Sovereign, as soon as he is Christian, becomes the Representative of the Church,
and so the Teachers he elects are elected by the Church, which was all the
title they had from the time of the Apostles, to the time of the Sovereigns
becoming Christian, from which time he is the true Representative of the Church
as well as of the State, ( page 299.) and from this consolidation of the right
Politic and Ecclesiastic in Christian Sovereigns, he says, it is evident, that
they have all manner of power over their Subjects that can be given to man, and
may make such Laws, as themselves shall judge fittest for the government of
their own Subjects, both as they are the Commonwealth, and as they are the
Church. But as his Civil Sovereign rejects his Institution, and knows he has
much a better title to his power, then he could have by pretending to be the
Representative of the People; so his Christian Sovereign will as much reject
the being Representative of the Church, knowing that he has a better title by
being Sovereign, to govern his Clery, and all Ecclesiastical persons in his own
Dominions, and for suppressing all seditious and erroneous Doctrines, which may
disturb the Peace, or discredit the Integrity of the Church, then such a
Representation would give him. And they are little beholding to him for
deriving their Supremacy Ecclesiastical from the Heathen Princes, since few
Heathen Sovereigns ever pretended to have the supreme, or indeed any power or
authority in what concerned the service and worship of their God, the direction
and government whereof appertained to Magistrates, and Ministers assigned for
that Sacred Province: as the Great Turk himself (as has bin said before) does
not give Laws, but receives advice, and the interpretation of the Mufty, in
whatsoever Mahomet has enjoined to be don.

But let the title be what it will, he will be sure that his Sovereign shall
have a power as unlimitted in all Ecclesiastical affairs, as in Civil; and not
only to give what Religion he thinks fit, and to allow what Book he pleases for
Scripture to his Subjects, but that he may himself if he pleases, perform all
the Functions himself in Religion (page 287.) as to baptize, administer the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, consecrate Temples and Pastors to Gods service.
And he says, the reason is evident why they do it not; which is no other, but
that they have somewhat else to do. However he is sure they may be literal
Pastors of their own Subjects in their own persons, and have authority to
Preach, to Baptize, to administer the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and to
consecrate both Temples and Persons to Gods service: which he does not grant,
out of the high qualifications which he believes to be inherent in the power
and person of a King, but from the low esteem he has of those Offices and
Mysteries of Religion. For foreseeing the objection that those administrations
(by the testimony of all Antiquity) require the imposition of such men's hands,
as by the like imposition successively from the time of the Apostles have bin
ordained to the like Ministry; he removes that difficulty, by offering a
prospect of the original and use of the Imposition of Hands, and instructs us
from the perpetual custom and usage in all Nations, of Imposition of Hands as
well in Civil as in Sacred occasions, as well in inflicting punishment, as in
conferring Honors and Dignities; as in the condemnation of him who blasphemes
the Lord, all that heard him, shall lay their hands upon his head, and that all
the Congregation should stone him. And when Iairus his daughter was sick, he
did not desire our Savior to heal her, but to lay his hands upon her, that she
might be healed. And they brought little Children up to him, that he might lay
his hands upon them, etc. And the reason is, he says, (page 298.) as in the
case of the Blasphemer, where the witnesses laid their hands upon the guilty
persons, rather then a Priest or Levite, or other Minister of Justice, because
none else were able to design or demonstrate to the eyes of the Congregation,
who it was that had blasphemed, and ought to die, so in other things, it is
natural to design any individual thing, rather by the hand to assure the eyes,
then by words to inform the ear in matters of Gods public service. All which,
and many other Texts, of which he never finds want to any purpose, must
signify, if they signify any thing, that the Imposition of hands, that
venerable circumstance that has bin from the beginning of Christianity, and
where ever it is professed, applied to all Ecclesiastical Functions, is to no
other purpose but to point out the person, that all the people may know who is
the person that is ordained: but the person of every Sovereign Prince, is too
notorious and perspicuous to need any such demonstration, and therefore he may
Baptize, Preach and Consecrate, and do all other Offices without it. To all
which, I shall suspend any farther answer, until he can prevail with one
Christian Prince to assume and exercise the power he so frankly confers upon
him; or one Christian Subject willing to receive those Honors and Graces from
their Royal Hands.

I have waited upon Mr. Hobbes into Cardinal Bellarmine's Quarters, and I will
not interpose and disturb him there in the Controversy he has with him, which
takes up the remainder of his forty second Chapter, more then to say, that he
takes upon him to answer that Book of Bellarmine, which of all that ever he
writ is most easy to be answered having less of Reason and Learning in it, and
having few Assertors, and being generally condemned among the Papists
themselves, and particularly by the College of Sorbone, the fairest
Representers of the Doctrine of the Church of Rome: and in answering of which,
he has said nothing new, nor so substantially as many others have don, as he
must confess, if he reads William Berkeley, the Father of John. He contends
with ^ellarmine ^or some Texts of Scripture, which, he says, conclude for his
Sovereign, upon which the other would establish the supreme authority of the
Pope; and which in truth, cannot be applied with any color to either of them.
And he cannot take it ill, that I have, and shall take the same method in
answering many of his Arguments, which he himself thought fit to do, before he
would enter upon any particular disquisition of those of the Cardinals, by
laying open the consequences of his Doctrine, (page 314.) that Princes, and
States, that have the Civil Sovereignty in their several Commonwealths, may
bethink themselves, whether it be convenient for them, and conducing to the
good of their Subjects, of whom they are to give an account at the day of
Judgment, to admit the same: which way of exposing his whole Book, is without
doubt the best way of answering it.

I shall only add, that as it was unreasonably undertaken by Bellarmine, to
establish a title that depends upon matter of Fact by arguments from Reason,
which proves, that it ought to be so; so Mr. Hobbes, who when History controuls
him, thinks it a sufficient answer to say, If it was not so, it should be so,
as unreasonably follows the same method, and would, by the ill consequences
which would flow from such a right, divest the Pope of an authority, which he
confidently says was granted to him immediately by our Savior, and has bin
enjoied by his Predecessors from that time to this. Which if true, all the
arguments from Reason may fortify, but can never shake a Right so founded upon
a clear and plain Grant, from one who had an Original power to grant, and
wherewith the possession has gone ever since. He therefore who will pertinently
answer and control these pretenses (which Mr. Hobbes can well do, if it would
not cross some other of his Doctrines) must do it by positively denying any
such grant, which never was, nor ever can be produced in such plain and
significant terms, as are necessary to the grant of the most inferior Office in
any Church or State. He would make it manifestly appear, that for many hundreds
of Years no Bishop of Rome made the least pretense to any such Sovereignty; and
when they began to make it, with what a torrent of contradiction it was
rejected. He would make it evident, that all that power which that See assumed,
was granted to them by Kings and Princes, and restored to them again when they
were oppressed by their own Factions and Schisms, and by more powerful Enemies.
He would point out the very Article of time, when by the Incursions of the
Goths and Vandals into Italy, and the foul arts practiced by the Popes, their
authority by degrees increased to a great height, by the bounty of Charlemain,
in making them great Temporal Princes; against the inconvenience whereof he
thought he had sufficiently provided, when he reserved to himself, and
succeeding Emperors, to make all the Popes. He would show them many wonderful
accidents, by which the power of the Emperor grew to decay, and the weakness of
all neighbor Kings and Princes, by the Rebellions in their several Kingdoms,
and their unreasonable bloody Wars amongst themselves; and then the artifices
still practiced by the Popes to foment those Divisions, and to contribute to
their own Greatness and Usurpation; notwithstanding all which, that there has
not bin one Century of Years from St. Peter to this time, that there has not
bin some notorious opposition and contradiction to that Supremacy, which was
argument enough, that it was never looked upon as a Catholic verity. All this
he would prove to be true, as likewise, that no Prince of the Roman communion,
who at present is most indulgent to it, (as all of them are in such a degree as
is most advantageous to their own affairs) look upon it as such, and that a
submission to the Popes authority, except it be commanded or allowed by the
King, and the Law, is not taken for a part of Religion in any Kingdom but that
of England. This is the method that must be taken toward the enervating those
high pretenses; and if it were vigorously pursued by one well versed in the
Pontifical Histories, in which he needs no other witness then their own
Records, I mean Popish Writers, all the World would be convinced, except only
such Princes who are very well paid for the communication of part of their
Sovereignty to him, that the Pope has not out of his own Dominions, so much as
the power of the Metropolitan Schole-master, which Mr. Hobbes seems willing to
confer upon him.

The Survey of Chapter 43.
HE who has taken so ill a Survey of Heaven if self, is not like to be a good
guide for the way thither (which is the business of his forty third Chapter)
and which, into how little room soever he brings all that is necessary to
Salvation, would be very difficult to find, if it were not for his old
expedient, his Sovereigns commands; since the most prescribed and known way,
which has bin thought to lead thither, (is quite damm'd up by him) the
Scriptures. (page 323.) That which made the Patriarchs, and the Prophets of old
to believe, was God himself, who spoke unto them supernaturally, and the person
whom the Apostles, and Disciples that conversed with Christ believed was our
Savior himself. But of us, to whom neither God the Father, nor our Savior
ever spoke, he says, it cannot be said that the person whom we believe, is
God. So that the Faith of Christians ever since our Saviors time, has had no
other foundation, then the reputation of their Pastors, and the Old, and New
Testament, which their Sovereign Princes have made the rule of their Faith;
which Princes are the only persons whom Christians now hear speak from God, and
to whom consequently they are beholding for their Salvation. Admit that single
contracted Article Jesus is Christ, comprehends all that is necessary to
Salvation, for he confesses, that he who holds that foundation, Jesus is the
Christ, holds expressly all that he sees rightly deduced from it, and
implicitly all that is consequent thereunto, tho he have not skill enough to
discern the consequence; I demand still, how they shall believe this Article
whom their Sovereigns forbid to look upon the New Testament as Scripture, which
is all the evidence they can have for it: and yet he says, ( page 327.) for
the belief of this Article, we are to reject the authority of an Angel from
Heaven, much more of any mortal man if he teach the contrary; I know well he
reconciles this contradiction by believing in the heart, and denying with the
tongue, having the example of Naaman. But how shall he believe in his heart if
he be deprived of the New Testament? and if he does come to believe in his
heart as he ought to do, what affection and duty can he have for that Sovereign
who will not be saved himself, and requires him to renounce his Savior? He
must be content with a mere verbal affection without any influence upon the
heart, which is much less duty then he requires toward his Sovereign whom he
is so entirely to obey, that he must say all he bids him say, and do all he
bids him do: so much more duty he requires for his Earthly then for his
Heavenly Sovereign. I wish with all my heart that Mr. Hobbes did remember, or
believe his own good rule in the end of this Chapter, which would have
preserved him from many presumtions, which administer great trouble and grief
to his Readers for his sake, ( page 331.) It is not the bare words but the
scope of the Writer that gives the true light by which any writing is to be
interpreted, and they that insist upon single Texts, without considering the
main design, can derive n^thing from them clearly, but rather by casting atoms
of Scripture, as dust before men's eyes, make every thing more obscure then it
is; an ordinary artifice, he says, of those that seek not the truth but their
own advantage. Alas! that it should be an advantage to Mr. Hobbes, to persuade
men to believe that Our Savior has not given us new Laws, but Counsel to
observe those we are subject to; and that in his Sermon upon the Mount, (which
is the compendium of Christianity) ^e did not make any new Law to the Jews, but
only expound the Law of Moses, to which they were subject before. Since all
those plain, and lively precepts of charity and humility, and a virtuous and
pious life, were more then an exposition of the Law of Moses; sure his
declaration, That whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her, etc. was more
then an interpretation of that Commandment, Thou sha^t not commit Adultery. If
his determination, That whosoever should put away his Wife, saving for the
cause of Adultery, etc. be not a new Law, it cannot be a Commentary upon that
of Moses, Let him give her a writing of Divorcement. Was the utter suppression
of circumcision, was the total abolishing of all their Sacrifices, making no
new Law to the Jews, but only expounding the Law of Moses? And yet he came not
to destroy the Law, or the Prophets, but to fulfill: and when he had fulfilled
what was there foretold of him, the Law became felo-de-se, and ceased to be
useful any longer. When our Savior bid the Pharisees learn what that Text in
the Prophet Hosea means, I will have mercy, and not Sacrifice, did he intend
they should repair to the Law of Moses for instruction, because they were
subject to it? I do with some passion desire Mr. Hobbes to consider sadly (for
there will at some time or other, before he struggles out of this world, be
sadness to him in the consideration) whether it be probable, or possible, that
our Savior should give such a charge to his Apostles, that when in any House
or City, they who were in it refused to receive them, or hear their words, that
they should shake off the dust of their feet, with so terrible a Declaration by
our Savior himself, Verily I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for the
Land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of Judgment, then for that City, Mat.
10. 15. I say, can any man imagine, that Christ should there have made so
fierce a denunciation, if he had intended the Precepts which himself, and his
Apostles gave, should be looked upon only as good Counsel, which men might as
innocently disbelieve as believe; and that they which should believe, might
securely suspend yielding any obedience to what he directed, till his second
coming to Judgment? Indeed the day of Judgment would be so far from being a day
of terror, that it would be as festival a day, as Mr. Hobbes himself can wish
it, if none be to be punished there for not observing the advice, or not
obeying the precepts which our Savior, and his Apostles gave to them. But of
this I have said enough before, which I think I need not to repete or enlarge
upon, and am willing to get out, and wish Mr. Hobbes will likewise, from this
maze and labyrinth of confusion, and be advised by himself, to give over the
casting atoms of Scripture as dust before men's eyes, to make every thing more
obscure then it is.

I cannot omit the observation of the three several definitions which he makes
of Heresy in three several places, as they were suitable to his occasions;
which himself declares to proceed from ignorance, when ( page 50.) men give
different names to one and the same thing, from the difference of their own
passions. In his eleventh Chapter, whilst he affected to be plain and
perspicuous in his expressions, and explanation of words, he says, Heresy
signifies no more then private opinion, but has only a tincture of greater
choler; but in his forty Second Chapter of the power Ecclesiastical, in which
it concerned him to be wary what punishment he permitted to be inflicted on it,
he declares, that ( page 277.) an Heretic is he, that being a member of the
Church, teaches nevertheless some private opinion which the Church has
forbidden. Which knowing to be his own case, he was very well contented to
resort to St. Paul, and to grant him authority in this case to make rules as
well as to give advice, and finds his direction to Titus to be such as pleases
him, A man that is an Heretic after the first and second admonition reject,
Tit. 3. 10. but to reject in this place he says is not to excommunicate the
man, but to give over admonishing him, to let him alone, to set by disputing
with him as one that is to be convinced only by himself; and then he doubts not
to shift for himself. But now when he has better thought of it in his contest
with Bellarmine, he has reason to be sorry that he has left so much authority
in the Church, as to reject in his own sense, least the Cardinal procures that
power for the Pope, whom he has allowed to be the Master Schole-Master, and
then he may find another signification of reject, then letting him alone. And
therefore he now pronounces ( page 317.) that Heresy is nothing else but a
private opinion obstinately maintained, contrary to the opinion which the
public person (that is to say the Representant of the Commonwealth) has
commanded to be taught: by which he says, it is manifest (he has made it
manifest by his definition) that an opinion publicly appointed to be taught
cannot be heresy, nor the Sovereign Princes that autorize them, Heretics. And
yet he may remember, that the doctrine of Arius, after it was condemned by the
Gatholic Church, was not thought to be the less Heresy for the countenance it
received from two or three Emperors, or for being allowed in the dominions of
several Princes, and tho the Pope himself (Liberius) to redeem himself from
Banishment, which was inflicted upon him, for refusing to condemn Athanasius,
became likewise an Arian: so that Mr. Hobbes was not the first inventor of that
expedient, by believing in the heart and denying with the mouth. But still he
is in an ill case: for his own Sovereign has already condemned him in the
declaratory Law, that whosoever contradicts any thing that is determined by, or
in the four first General Councils, is an Heretic, and to be proceeded against,
and censured as such: which form will not be satisfied by rejecting him, and
leaving him to himself. So that there is but one way to save him harmless,
which is his not being obstinate; and that, whosoever knows him, or believes
him, will undertake he shall never make use of.

The Fourth Part.
The Survey of Chapter 44.
WE are now to enter upon his fourth part of the Kingdom of darkness, whereof
the first Chapter, which is the forty fourth in number, will take us little
time: the greatest part being against the doctrine, or the practice of the
Church of Rome, I shall not enlarge, but leave them to agree as they can. In
the other part he does but repete what he has formerly, and in other places
said of Eternal Life, and Everlasting Death (being a professed adversary to
Eternity) and of the Immortality of the Soul (which by no means he allows;) to
all which somewhat has likewise bin said before. And I shall add no more, then
what himself says of some Popes, applying some places of Scripture to prove
their authority over Kings and Princes, that it was not arguing from Scripture,
but a wanton insulting over Princes: so in truth, he does not so much argue
from, as insult upon the Scripture, by perverting, and applying it to unnatural
significations, which never occurred to any man but himself, and will be best
answered by that authority, which ought to control such presumtuous
undertakers. For why should any particular man enter into dispute with him, on
the behalf of the Immortality of the Soul, of the Eternity of the joies of
Heaven, and the Everlastingness of the pains of Hell, as if they were points in
Controversy, when no Christian Church in the world, makes, or admits the least
doubt to be made of either. Nor can any man imagine, why he leads us into this
his Kingdom of Darkness, but that he may resume again all those arguments which
lie scattered through the several Chapters of his Book, and which can never
prevail, whilst there is any light to direct the understanding by. He renews
his particular dream of (page 335.) Gods peculiar Kingdom over the Jews only,
which ceased, and was determined by, and in the election of Saul, which he
says, he has proved at large in the thirty fifth chapter, as he believes he
had don every thing that he has once affirmed, (how weakly or erroneously
soever) and from the not understanding this, or not comprehending, that from
that time of Saul, God has bin without a Kingdom, and we are not under any
other Kings by pact, but our civil Soveraigns^ men, he says, are fallen in the
error, that the present Church is Christ's Kingdom. But what argumentation can a
man hold with him, who from the not understanding, or believing that
dissolution of Gods Kingdom in the election of Saul (which no body ever heard
of but from him) deduces the Popes challenging to be vicar general of Christ in
the present Church, the introduction of Purgatory, and Transubstantiation, and
all other errors in the Church of Rome, which he takes great pains to confute,
and would persuade us to believe, that the imagination of the Immortality of
the Soul is the only ground and foundation of the general error of Eternal
Life, and Everlasting Death; which makes him so solemnly endeavor to prove the
nullity of either by so many Texts of Scripture: which can never be difficult
for him to do in this, and any other particular that occurs to him to prove,
whilst he may take upon him to pervert the current sense and interpretation of
some Texts in Scripture to his own purpose, and to wrest and torture words to
comply with his extravagant Wi^ and Logic: and when he cannot decline the
taking notice of other Texts, which manifestly control his unnatural glosses,
he may acquiesce in a confession, that they are very hardly to be reconciled
with the doctrine received: (page 347.) nor, he says, is it any shame to
confess the profoundness of the Scripture to be too great to be sounded by the
shortness of human understanding: which being prudently, and modestly
considered in the beginning of this Chapter, or rather in the beginning of his
Book, might have saved the labor, and the reproach of most of the Texts of
Scripture, which he has unwarily or absurdly quoted from the beginning, and
which presumtion and method he continues to the end of his Book. And as I have
formerly said, if a diligent peruser of the whole does mark what himself says
in one place, that will fully answer what he affirms in another, his Book would
need no other refutation. As to that part of his most material argument against
the Everlastingness of Hell fire in this Chapter, that (page 345.) it seems
very hard to say, that God who is the Father of mercies, that does in Heaven
and Earth all that he will, that has the hearts of all men in his disposal,
that works in men both to do and to will, and without whose free gift, a man
has neither an inclination to good, nor repentance of evil, should punishments
transgressions without any end of time, and with all the extremity of torture,
that men can imagine, or more. All which will not require, nor can receive a
fuller answer then he himself prescribes, when he will establish the utmost
extent of arbitrary power in his instituted Sovereign. He says, (page 153.) it
is reason, that he which does injury without other limitation then that of his
own will, should suffer punishment, without other limitation then that of his
will whose Law is thereby violated. And so I shall keep him no longer company
in his Kingdom of Darkness.

The Survey of Chapter 45.
I Should not presume to except against so many of Mr. Hobbes his definitions,
but that pretending to so much plainness and perspicuity, and having declared
the necessary use of definition to be for the settling the signification of
words, without which he says, (page 15.) a man that seeks precise truth will
find himself entangled in words as a bird in lime twiggs, the more he struggles
the more belimed; and observing that rule for the most part throughout the
first parts of his Book, except where he found it necessary for his own
purpose, sometimes to perplex and belime his Readers: yet in the two last
parts, supposing that he has enough captivated them to believe any thing he
says, he takes more care to fit his definitions for the support of his
assertions, then that his assertions may naturally result from the integrity of
the definitions. Especially since he has gotten into his Kingdom of Darkness,
he takes less care to illustrate the instances and similies he thinks fit to
use; and so good Philosophers may comprehend what he means, he is content to
leave his less knowing Readers involved and puzzled amongst hard words, with
which they have not used to keep company. As he begins this Chapter, with the
definition of Sight, which will not make any man see the farther or the better,
(page 352.) That sight is an imagination made by the impression on the Organs
of sight by lucid bodies, either in one direct line, or in many lines reflected
from Opaque, or refracted in the passage through Diaphanous ^o^ies, which
produces in living creatures, in whom God has placed such Organs, an
imagination of the object from whence the impression proceeds. It may be
doubted that many of his friends, who have given too much credit to all he
says, may have found themselves in this definition entangled in words as a
bird in Lime twiggs. And if it were necessary in this place to tell them what
Sight is, they would have understood him better, if he had said, that sight is
a faculty that God has given to living creatures who keep their eyes open.
However whether it be clear or no it serves his turn, by his skill in Optics,
and the unskilfulness he concludes most other men have in that science, to
examine that part of the Religion of the Gentiles, which was called Demonology.
And by the credit that kind of learning had got among the Jews, he finds a way
to control the literal sense of the Scripture in the most important places,
and to undermine the miracles which were wrought by our Savior himself. Rather
then he will have his Geography and Geometry contradicted, and because there
(page 354) is not any Mountain high enough, he says, to show him one whole
Hemisphere, he will have the Devil's carrying our Savior unto a high Mountain,
and all that relates thereunto, to be nothing else but a vision, or dream, then
which no Jew could more undervalue it, or Christ be more dishonored, then to
have his conflict with the enemy of mankind, to be looked on only, and
considered as a dream.

And that his Philosophy may be preserved unhurt, which assures him, that no
corporeal Spirit may be in a body of Flesh and Bone, full already of vital and
animal Spirits, he will not believe that our Savior ever cast the Devil out of
any man, only (page 354.) that he cured those persons of madness or Lunacy,
which cures have bin wrought by many other Persons, and so would be unworthy to
be reckoned amongst the Miracles of Christ. Nor will he admit that Satan
otherwise entered into Judas, then that he had a traitorous intention of selling
his Master. I wonder he does not impute his hanging himself afterward, or
hanging in the air, to nothing but a fit of Melancholy.

Under pretense of informing, and reforming the Church of Rome in their
worshipping of Images, which he says (and it may be reasonably) is a relic
of Gentilism, and rather left then brought into the Church, he could not avoid
persecuting it to Idolatry, which he does not think well enough defined, nor
well enough defended by Christian Divines. And remembering how he preserved
himself from renouncing our Savior, when he denied that he believed in him (by
believing in him in his heart at the same time that he denied him,) upon his
Sovereigns command; he will not deprive his Sovereign of that prerogative, nor
be without the benefit of his own fear in the liberty to commit Idolatry. And
therefore that he may not be thought to do any thing out of ignorance (of
wickedness he is not so tender) he declares frankly, that (page 360.) to pray
to the King for fair wea^her, or for any thing which God only can do for us, is
divine worship, and Idolatry; on the other side, if the King compel a man to it
by the terror of death, or other great corporal punishment, it is not Idolatry;
for the worship which the Sovereign commands to be don unto himself by the
terror of his Law, is not a sign that he that obeieth him, does inwardly honor
him as a God, but that he is desirous to save himself from death, or from a
miserable life; and that which is not a s^gn of internal honor, is no worship,
and therefore no Idolatry. The sum is, that there is no wickedness (for there
can be no greater wickedness then Idolatry) which a man may not commit to save
his life, or to avoid pain: which is a Thesis in Mr. Hobbes's Religion,
suitable to the rest of his policy and piety, and might properly have bin
controuled by his own love of Justice, of which he would be thought to be an
Idolater, for he says (page 74) that which gives to human action the relish of
Justice, is a certain nobleness and gallantness of courage rarely found, by
which a man scorns to be beholding for the contentment of his life, to fraud or
breach of promise. And sure he has as great obligations to preserve him from
Idolatry; and therefore I wish, that to the great bulk of scorn of which he is
possessed, he had that scorn likewise added, to be beholding to such an
expedient for the preservation of his life.

That this Doctrine of Mr. Hobbes is very pernicious, and destructive to the
very essence of Religion, cannot be doubted by Pious and Religious men. But
what kind of arguments to apply toward the information or conversion of him,
is very difficult to find. That which is got by reasoning from the authority of
Books, will work nothing upon him, (page 367.) because it is not knowledge, but
faith. So that the example of Socrates, who scorned to redeem his life by the
least trespass against truth or ingenuity; or the Precepts and Judgments of
Seneca, will be of no force with him, tho both great, and confessed
Philosophers. What would Seneca have thought or said of any corrupt way for the
prolongation of life, if he had known any thing of the obligations of
Christianity, when only upon the strength of natural reason, he could so much
undervalue it. Non est vita tanti ut sudem, ut aestu^m. O quam contemta res est
homo, nisi supra humana se erexerit? What shall we say, when a Heathen
Philosopher valued life only as it was a way to somewhat more precious, tho he
could not comprehend it; and when a Christian Philosopher, who pretends to have
a full prospect of all that is most precious, will redeem his life at the price
of disclaiming, to have any share in it? when Philosophy dissuaded men from an
over affectation of death, that there might not be ad m^riendum inconsulta
animi inclinatio, but that they should patiently attend Natures pleasure, and
Christianity shall be persuaded, that it may prolong life, by the basest
submissions, and by the most unworthy and unrighteous condescentions? Mr.
Hobbes is of the Venetian Curats mind, of whom Cardinal I^yeuse makes mention
in his Letters. When Paul the Fifth had issued out his Interdict against the
Republic, whereby any Priest who should say Mass, or perform any other part of
his Function, stood excommunicated; and the Republic had published an Edict,
that the Magistrates upon any Priests refusal to say Mass, or to do any thing
else that his duty obliged him to do, should cause every such Priest to be
hanged: a Magistrate demanded of his Neighbor Curate, whether he would say
Mass; and he making some pause, the Magistrate told him, that if he refused, he
must presently hang him. The Curate replied with more resolution, that he had
rather be excommunicated thirty years, then hanged a quarter of an hour, and
that Princes did at last make an end of all quarrels by Treaties of Peace, and
then their Subjects on both sides had the benefit of the Articles, only he had
heard that they who were hanged had never the benefit of any Articles,
therefore for his part he would say Mass. Yet it is probable, the authority of
the Republic would not have bin so absolute, if their injunction had bin to
have committed Idolatry. Mr. Hobbes is not of Seneca's mind, who consulted
nature as much as he, Citius mori an tardius ad rem non pertinet, been mori an
male ad rem pe^tinet; been autem mori est effugere male vivendi per^culum. But
he is too much a Philosopher to be swaied by the dictates of other
Philosophers. Let us therefore resort to the Scriptures, and put him in mind of
the example of those three in Daniel, who chose to be thrown into the hot fiery
furnace, rather then to fall down before the Image which Nebuchadnezzar had set
up; or of Daniel himself, who would not only not pray to the King, but would
not defer praying to God only for thirty days, nor would be contented to pray
to him in his heart, or in a private corner, which he might securely have don,
but would be found upon his knees, when he knew the penalty was to be thrown
into the Lions den, as he was. And Mr. Hobbes will tell you that tho they did
well, they might have don otherwise. Yet methinks he should not so easily evade
all the denunciations made by the Prophets, of Gods judgments against Israel
and Judah for their Idolatry, when they were only guilty of it, under the
power, and by the command of their Idolatrous Kings. And yet that was no excuse
for them: the judgments were pronounced against the People, and they underwent
the punishment. But he will say it was, because they had forsaken God in their
hearts, and were as great Idolaters as their Kings. Yet still the fault was
his, who took not care that they should be instructed in the true knowledge of
God. But no objection out of the Scripture can weigh with him. Let us therefore
resort to himself, and to his own reason, to convert or confute him. And he
seems not so fully satisfied in this latitude which he has given himself, as
in other his bold assertions, but is more perplexed then he uses to be: To
(page 360.) worship God, not as inanimating or present in the place or image,
but to the end to be put in mind of him, or of some works of his, if that
place, or image be dedicated, or set up by private authority, he says it is
Idolatry, but if by the Sovereigns authority, it is not. As if the authority of
setting it up, could make that which in it self is Idolatry, to cease to be
Idolatry. He does acknowledge (page 361.) that a scandalous worship of Images,
tho it is but a seeming worship, and may sometimes be joined with an inward and
hearty detestation of the image, and proceed only from the fear of death, or
other grievous punishment, tho it be no Idolatry, is nevertheless a sin; and if
it be a sin, no man ought to commit it for the safety of his life, by all the
precepts which Christ and his Apostles have left to guide us toward the next
world. But that confession keeps him not long in pain, for it is a sin he says
(page 362.) only in men whose actions are looked at by others, as lights to
guide them by, whereas the example of those we regard not, works not upon us at
all. If a Pastor lawfully called to teach and direct others, or any other of
whose knowledge there is a great opinion, do external honor to an Idol for fear,
unless he make his fear and unwillingness to do it, as evident as his worship,
he scandalizeth his brother by seeming to approve Idolatry; for his brother
arguing from the action of his teacher, or of him whose know^edg he esteems
great, concludes it to be lawful in it self. And this scandal, he says, is a
sin, and a scandal given. Yet in the page before he says as positively, that
(page 360.) it cannot be said that he that does it, scandalizeth, or lays any
stumbling block before his brother; because how wise or learned soever he be
that worshippeth in that manner, another man cannot from thence argue that he
approves it, but that he does it for fear, and that it is not his act, but the
act of his Sovereign. So hard a thing is it after such an excess to make any
approach to truth, without involving a man's self in contradictions.

He is very positive, that ( page 362.) in a Pastor who has undertaken to
preach Christ to all Nations, by giveing such a worship to an Image, it were
not only a sinful scandal, but a perfidious forsaking his charge. And truly,
this obligation upon the Pastor to suffer in such a case, is I think the only
privilege he grants him above other men: for we shall find hereafter, that he
thinks himself qualified to preach as well as he. And that he may not be
thought too indifferent in the matter it self, he does confess, that (page
362.) for an unlearned man, that is in the power of an Idolatrous King, or
State, if commanded upon pain of death to worship before an Idol, he detesteth
the Idol in his heart, he does well, tho if he had the fortitude to suffer
death rather then worship it, he should do better. And it is observable, that
tho he makes such a kind of worshipper the more or the less scandalous by his
example, he does not presume (tho he would be understood to do so) to absolve
him from sin. For tho the notoriety and example, may be an aggravation of the
sin, yet it cannot make that a sin, that was in it self no sin; nor can the
secrecy of committing it, make that which in it self is sin, become no sin. And
therefore whether it amount to Idolatry or no, no terror of death ought to
prevail over any Christian to commit that sin. Whether his Pedigree of Idolatry
be well derived from the Gentiles, is not worth the inquiry, since he takes so
little care for the shutting it out of the Christian Church. For the Canonizing
of Saints, and the Popes assuming the title of Pontifex Maximus, (the
remembrance of which office in the Roman State, might have put him in mind to
have retracted what he said before, of the admitting the exercise of all
Religions in that Republic) and the abridging his Universal Jurisdiction, tho
he gives him more then ever Constantine is suggested to have granted to him,
and for the Procession of Images, and the original of Wax-candles, and Torches
lighted, and the information he gives us of Holy Water, and some Processions, I
shall refer him to some of his friends of the Roman Church, who in truth are in
too great an arrear to him; for which they make no excuse that I have heard,
but that they never think themselves concerned to write against a Mohammedan.

The Survey of Chapter 46.
UPon his Forty sixth Chapter I shall not enlarge, but heartily wish that he
himself had enlarged more upon it, as an argument which he understands more then
most that he has handled: and yet I think he knows more of the Learning, then
of the places where it is professed, otherwise he could not so much mistake the
Universities, as to believe, that Philosophy has no other place here, then as
a Handmaid to the Roman Religion. And whatever opinion he had when he wrote
his Leviathan, I presume he finds by this time, that his beloved and justly
esteemed Geometry, is studied and taught there by men who have convinced him of
many Errors, and of not being enough conversant in that Science; insomuch as
the Learned and Reverend Dr. Ward, the present Lord Bishop of Salisbury, and
Dr. Wallis, the Worthy Professor of Geometry in Oxford, have both produced a
Person to him, whom he thought in the beginning of his Leviathan impossible to
find, ( page 21.) who is so stupid, as both to mistake in Geometry, and also to
persist in it, when another detects his error to him. And for the Universities
in general being the Handmaids to the Roman Religion, over and above what has
bin truly said of our own Famous Universities, that they have bin in all times
eminent Opposers of the Papal Power, and are at present the greatest Bullwarks
Christendom has against that Tyranny, and the propagation of the Roman
Doctrine; I may justly say, that the other famous Universities of Europe, tho
in Popish Countries, as the Sorbone, Lovain, and even Salamanca it self, have
bin so far from advancing the most pernicious point of Popery, (I call it most
pernicious, because it is most destructive to the peace of Christendom) the
most Supreme and Universal Jurisdiction of the Pope, (which if rejected as it
ought to be, there would quickly be as much unity of opinion amongst
Christians, as Christianity it self requires) that they all contradicted it as
long as their Civil Sovereign would permit. And as the Sorbone still continues
its vigor, as enjoying a freer air; so the other two have not deserved, by any
demonstration they have made, to be suspected to have degenerated from the
spirit that possessed them in the Council of Trent, when the Pope was more
afraid of their Bishops, then of the Cardinal of Lorrain himself, or of the two
Crowns of France and Spain. And truly, it might be wished, that in this
Chapter, he had either forborne to have asked that question, ( page 373.) to
what purpose such subtlety was in a discourse of that nature, where he pretends
to nothing but what is necessary to the doctrine of Government and obedience;
or that he had given a clearer and more satisfactory answer, then by saying,
that it is to that purpose, that men may no longer suffer themselves to be
abused by them, that by the doctrine of separated Essences, built on the vain
Philosophy of Aristotle, would fright them from obeying the Laws of their
Countries, as men fright Birds from the corn with an emty doublet, a hat, and a
crooked stick. It is not possible that Mr. Hobbes can believe that many of
those who are most guilty of disobeying the Laws, or have openly and
rebelliously opposed the Sovereign power in his own Country, or in Foreign
Kingdoms, have ever bin led into it by the doctrine of separated Essences,
which very terms few of them have ever heard of. And if the Immortality of the
Soul, which he thinks so great an absurdity, has some dependence upon the
opinion of separated Essences, it will still as little concern that Classis of
Men, against whom he intends to inveigh, who rather believe they have no Souls
at all, then that they are immortal, (the belief of which, would make them more
consider what is like to become of them by their wicked and rebellious lives)
to which they are most like to be induced by Mr. Hobbes's Doctrine, that the
Soul and Body die together, which would secure them from a world of troublesome
apprehensions. He knew too well the Lord Say, Mr. Pim, and Mr. Hambden, who
first promoted the Rebellion, and the Earl of Essex who conducted it, to
suspect that they were corrupted to it by the Doctrine of separated Essences.
And if Cromwell, and Vane, and Ireton, who carried it much farther then the
others intended to do, and made it incapable of reconciliation, grew better
informed of the mischiefs of that Doctrine, it was after the publication of the
Leviathan; and yet they continued more of the opinion then most other men, in
the literal sense, that Faith, and Wisdom, and other Virtues, were sometimes
poured into them, and sometimes blown into them from Heaven, and yet were not
more Rebels from that opinion then they were before: with which words Mr.
Hobbes renews his mirth, more then he has cause for, except it be for their
sakes.

If he were constant to his own assertions, and did not think himself obliged
to defend every new Definition he thinks fit to give (as in the beginning of
this Chapter, he makes a very new Definition of Philosophy, never heard of
before, nor applicable to any Philosophy but his own) a man might wonder that
he should so categorically pronounce, that, ( page 367.) that Original
Knowledge, called Experience, in which consists Prudence, is no part of
Philosophy, because it is not attained by reasoning, but found as well in brute
beasts as in man, and is but a memory of successions of events in times past,
wherein the omission of every little circumstance, altering the effect,
frustrateth the expectation of the most prudent, whereas nothing is produced by
reasoning aright, but general, eternal, and immutable truth. How is this
consistent with the Definition he formerly gave ( page 79) that Moral
Philosophy is nothing else, but the science of what is good and evil, in the
conversation and society of mankind? for now he excludes all this from being
any part of Philosophy. Which may make some men apt to believe, that he does
not reason aright in words he understands; for he says ( page 367.) that he
who reasons aright in words he understands, can never conclude an error. So
that if we have discovered any error throughout his Book (and we are
monstrously in the fault, if we have not in such abundant choice) we may
without presumtion conclude by his own rule, that either he has not reasoned
aright, or that he has don it in words that he does not understand. And he
would have don well to have informed us, what those brute Beasts are in whom
that original knowledge, called Experience, in which consists Prudence, is
found, as well as in man. I shall not labor to reconcile him to the Schole-men,
with whose Learning I am not much in love, nor do believe that they have made
any necessary or useful knowledge much more clear, or easy by their Definitions
or Distinctions; and do often wish, that very many of them had bin bred
Artificers, and Handy-craft-men, in which they would have don the world much
more good, and Learning much less hurt. And as Canon and Gunpowder were first
the Invention of a Monk, or a Friar, so I believe some of the Schole-men would
have bin excellent Lock-smiths, or Ship-carpenters, and would have enriched the
World with many useful Discoveries and Inventions. And more I shall not say to
their Language, or to the errors of Tradition, or the other enormities of the
Roman Church, which he takes always in his way, let the subject of his
Discourse be what it will; and I wish they would be provoked by him to consider
and amend their faults.

Nor will I take any pains to dissuade Mr. Hobbes from taking upon him to
preach, but shall only put him in mind that if he does, he thereby becomes a
Pastor, by which he will deprive himself of the liberty, by his own Doctrine,
to deny our Savior, or to worship an Image, upon what authority or command
soever. And if he finds himself among the Idolaters of America, he will I
doubt, as good a Christian as he is, forbear to preach Jesus Christ, when he
remembers that he is without a Commission, and what judgment he has pronounced
against the poor Indian that shall come into England to change the Religion
that is here establishde. But above all, whatever latitude his Civil Sovereign,
at that time when his Levia^han was published, permitted for the performing
those Functions, God be thanked, his present Civil Sovereign will not give him
that liberty, until he receives orders from the Bishops; and it is probable
they will not be forward to point him out by their hands, that he may be known
to be qualified for that Office and Emploiment.

The Survey of Chapter 47.
IF Mr. Hobbes has in this his last Chapter discovered the true causes of that
darkness, which has hitherto hindered this new devouring light of his from
breaking in upon us, we have more obligations to the Papists and Presbyterians,
then I knew we had: however, I shall not gratify him, by undertaking to
vindicate either of them from the reproaches he charges them with; nor will I
take upon me to reply to his sly and bitter Insinuations against the Clergy in
all kinds, Protestants as well as Papists, in a thread that runs through his
Book from one end to the other. They are of age, let them speak for themselves.
Only I cannot but observe, and I should be unexcusable if I should not, that
after all his bitter and uncharitable Invectives against the Bishops and Clergy
of the Church of England, and of which he would still be thought a member, he
has not in this his last Chapter of Cui bono, bin able to fasten the least
reproach upon them, of being swaied by any other motives then the most
abstracted considerations of Conscience, Duty, Gratitude, and Generosity,
constantly and steadfastly to adhere to the King: since they had in their view,
before the Civil War was begun, all the prejudice to their persons, and all the
destruction to their Interest that fell out afterward; and had their election,
whether they would, besides keeping what they were possessed of, receive
greater additions and graces from those who opposed the King, or by continuing
faithful to Him, be dispossessed of all they had, be cast into Prisons (and new
Prisons made for them in old Ships and Barques upon the Water) and with such
circumstances of inhumanity, that put a short end to the lives of many
thousands of them, their Wives and Children. And they chose the latter, and to
be exposed to all the misery and contemt imaginable, rather then to dissemble
or concele that Fidelity and Allegiance they owed to their King, in the highest
of his Afflictions and Persecution: and from the moment of his execrable
Murder, continued the same Affection and Loialty to his Son, their present
Sovereign, when the triumphant and victorious Faction made it penal to
acknowledge Him, or to give Him the Title of King. And therefore it was below
the education of Mr. Hobbes, and a very ungenerous and vile thing, to publish
his Leviathan with so much malice and acrimony against the Church of England,
when it was scarce struggling in its own ruins; and against all the Bishops and
Clergy of the same, when many of them were weltering in their own blood upon
Scaffolds, and the rest reduced to all the miseries human nature can be exposed
to, without any suggestion of a Crime, but of Fidelity to the King. When the
Reverend Bishops who were left alive, and out of Prison, being stripped of all
that was their own, preserved themselves from Famine, by stooping to the lowest
Offices of teaching Schole, and officiating in private Families for their
Bread; which, together with the alms of those charitable persons who were
themselves undon, was all the portion that the poor Bishops, and all the
faithful Clergy of the Church of England, had to preserve themselves in the low
condition to which they were reduced. And it is but justice to the memory of
those Persons, and for the everlasting glory of that Church, to say, that the
whole Orthodox Clergy were joint sufferers with, and for the Crown; and that
very few can be named, who were ever reputed or looked upon as Sons of the
Church of England, that adhered to, or concurred with the Rebels. Some few
impious Apostates in the beginning of the Rebellion became perjured, to
satisfy their ambition by the countenance of the great Incendiaries, who paid
them well for their labor. Afterward, they made and ordained their own Clergy,
and then undertook and performed the Function themselves, their own Creatures
finding them too wicked to be complied with, whilst the true Clergy sometimes
lost their lives upon Scaffolds, sometimes on Gibbets for the greater disgrace,
to give testimony of their fast and unshaken Loialty to the King; and others
died in Prisons, or lurked in obscure, but safe and charitable corners.

These were the men who propagated Loialty and Allegiance with the utmost
hazard of their lives, when it was near extirpation; countermined the
stratagems which were every day set on foot, to corrupt the affections of those
who had paid dear for being good Subjects, and to make them weary of being so
great losers for conscience sake; when Mr. Hobbes his Leviathan absolved all
men from their Allegiance, and industriously persuaded all sorts of men, that
Cromwell was their true and lawful Sovereign, and that it was folly and guilt,
and inevitable deserved ruin, not to adhere to him, and assist him against any
opposition soever. These are the men who as diligently administered Antidotes
against his Poison, prevented the operation of it in many, and the application
of it to more; watched the tares which he, and others of his party scattered
abroad, and pulled them up before they got strength to grow to do the mischief
he intended; and, tho they were all banished the Universities, and durst not be
seen there, that his vile Principles, or as bad, might take root and flourish
there; yet found means to preserve and purify those Nurseries, and keep those
Fountains clean, and so to cultivate Learning and good Manners there; that
whilst the chief Governors were placed there as Olivers Sentinels, to keep the
Protestant Religion from entering into his Disciples, to instruct those who were
under his charge to be good Subjects to him, that seed brought up very little
fruit; but the Elements of Duty and Allegiance to their absent, banished,
lawful Sovereign, were sucked in greedily by them, and flourished accordingly.
In a word, these were the men, who were looked upon with esteem and reverence
by all the Nobility and Gentry of the Kingdom, who retained their affection and
duty toward the King entirely in their hearts, and thereby the opportunity to
perform many notable Services to the King, and to give him useful
Advertisements; and having unquestioned credit in a treacherous and perfidious
season, when Children betrayed their Fathers, Servants their Masters, and
Friends one another, were trusted by all men; and so having no farther care for
themselves, then to live very meanly, they became Treasurers and Almoners for
all indigent Gentlemen who had served the King, or desired so to do; and
relieved very many of that kind, that they might be ready upon a good
opportunity to serve his Majesty, and not be forced to go to him, who had not
wherewith to relieve them. They discharged the expense of many expresses, which
were frequently sent to the King, and from him, which amounted to a great
charge; and contributed much to the maintenance of those of the Clergy who
faithfully attended his Majesty's Person, and often transmitted such sums of
money to his Majesty himself, as were very seasonable supplies to him in great
distresses. I can have no end, and have no temtation to say all this, but hold
my self obliged to Justice and truth to give this testimony, since all the
particulars are well known to me, having at that time the honor to be in some
trust with his Majesty, and thereby the full knowledge of what then passed, of
which there are not now many other witnesses amongst the living. And therefore
I could not omit this proper season in the close of Mr. H^bbes his Book,
throughout which he has made so violent a War upon them without any color of
reason, to say, that he ows them many acknowledgments, but more to God alm^ghty
for the scandal he has brought upon Religion, upon the best constituted Church
of the World, and upon the most Learned Clergy of any Church, and the most
irreconcilable to any thing that is erroneous, or offensive in the Roman
Religion, which therefore looks upon them as the only considerable and
formidable Enemy they have to encounter.

I shall not need to take any pains to remove him from the good opinion he had
of Independency when he published his Book, because (page 385.) it left every
man to do what liked him best in Religion, as he says, but in truth because
Cromwell was then thought to be of that faction. But I dare say he did with his
heart, as well as by his tongue, quit that party the very day that the King was
proclaimed, as he is ready to quit all his other Opinions true or false, as soon
as the Sovereign power shall please to require him; which makes whatever he
says, the less to need answering. And I shall be less solicitous to deprive
the Pope of his new Kingdom of Fairies, with the title to which Mr. Hobbes has
gratified him, to allay that fear, and apprehension which he had endeavored so
much before to infuse into the minds of all Princes, of his dangerous greatness
and power: if at last prove no more then the King of Fairies has, it is less
terrible then he represented it to be. But since he has not thought fit to
retain that modesty which he professed to have, (page 241.) that tho he had
proved his Doctrine out of places of Scripture not few nor obscure, yet because
it will appear to most men a novelty, he did but propound it, maintaining
nothing in this, or any other Paradox of Religion, but attending the end of
that dispute of the sword, concerning the authority (not yet amongst his
Countrymen decided) by which all sorts of Doctrine are to be approved, or
rejected, and whose commands both in speech and writing (whatsoever be the
opinions of private men) must by all men, who mean to be protected by their
Laws be obeyed; notwithstanding which reservation, and after he has seen that
dispute of the Sword concerning the authority amongst his Country men decided,
after he has seen that Prodigy of Mankind, whom he acknowledged to be his
Sovereign, instituted and adored by him, exposed upon the Gallows, and his
Carcass placed upon the stage that is reserved for the most infamous Traitors
and Rebels, and all his actions condemned and detested by the whole Nation (all
which were governed and steered exactly by Mr. Hobbes his own Institution, and
sufficiently show how insecure they will prove to any man that observes them)
and after he has seen his true and lawful Sovereign, his disavowed and
renounced Sovereign, and whose Subjects he had absolved from his obedience,
restored and established with the universal and unexpressible joy of his three
Kingdoms, and thereby his whole Doctrine with reference to the Ecclesiastical
as well as Civil Government, disavowed and condemned, and not exemplarily
punished only by his Majesty's gracious observation of the Act of Indemnity, of
which few Subjects have more need: it is too malicious an obstinacy and
perverseness in him, still to adhere to his odious Paradoxes, both in his
Conversation and by private Transcripts, which he labors to get printed, and
was never more solicitous to have his most destructive Doctrines to be
published and confirmed by authority, (the ill consequence whereof to himself,
he despises the learning of the Law too much to understand.) And as he would
allow no other right to the Subject in his Liberty or Propriety, but what the
Sovereigns silence has permitted in not taking it from him, as to dwell where
he pleases, and educate his Children as he thinks fit, and the like: so he
interprets the present silence of the Law, as an approbation of those his
monstrous Principles, which it knows not how to contradict, not considering the
while that this silence of the Law cannot be broken, but in the loud inflicting
those severe punishments upon him, as without the shelter of that Sovereigns
mercy whom he so much despised and provoked, would at once in his ruin
discredit all his vain Philosophy, and more pernicious Theology; and he would
find the Successors of Sr. Edward Cook, with whose great ignorance he makes
himself so merry, learned enough to instruct him in the duty, and reverence,
that is due from all Subjects to the Law, and Government.

And for the better manifestation of the premises, having now walked to the end
of his fourth part, before we take a view of his Review and Conclusion, we will
observe the same method we did at the end of his two first parts, and according
to the advice himself gives in his examination of Bellarmines Doctrine, lay
open his conclusions, and Principles in Religion, which lie scattered through
those other two parts, that men may take a view of the consequences, and
bethink themselves, whether Christianity be advanced, and consequently whether
the peace and happiness of mankind be provided for, and secured by such
Doctrines.

1. Those Books of Scripture only are Canonical, and ought to be looked upon as
the word of God in every Nation, which are established for such by the
Sovereign authority of each Nation. page 199.

2. None can know that the Scriptures are Gods word (tho all true Christians
believe it) but they to whom God himself ^ath revealed it supernaturally. page
205.

3. Men ought to consider, who has next under God the authority of governing
Christian men, and to observe for a rule, that Doctrine which he commands to
be taught; that is, all Subjects ought to profess that Religion which the
Sovereign enjoines, whether he be Christian or Heathen. page 232.

4. By the Kingdom of Heaven, is meant the Kingdom of the King that dwells in
Heaven, and that the Kingdom of God is to be on Earth. page 240, 241.

5. The immortal life begins not in man till the Resurrection and day of
Judgment, and has for cause, not his specifical nature and generation, but
promise. page 241.

6. Gods Enemies, and their torments after Judgment, appear by the Scripture to
have their places upon Earth. page 242. The fire shall be unquenchable, and the
torments everlasting after the Resurrection. But it cannot therefore be
inferred, that he who shall be cast into that fire, or be tormented with those
torments, shall endure and resist them so, as to be eternally burned and
tortured, and yet never be destroyed, or die. page 245.

7. There shall be a second death of every one that shall be condemned at the
day of judgment, after which he shall die no more. The Scriptures affirm not,
that there shall be an eternal life therein of any individual person, but to
the contrary, an everlasting Death. page 245.

8. The Salvation we are to look for, is to be upon the Earth. For since Gods
Throne is in Heaven, and the Earth is his Footstool, it is not for the dignity
of so great a King, that his Subjects should have any place so high as his
Throne, or higher then his Footstool. page 247.

9. If we be commanded by our lawful Prince to say we do not believe in Christ,
we may obey such his command. page 271.

10. None can be Martyrs for Christ, but they that conversed with him on Earth,
and saw him after he was risen; for a witness must have seen what he
testifies, or else his testimony is not good. page 272.

11. None can be a Martyr who has not a warrant to preach Christ come in the
Flesh, and none but such who are sent to the conversion of Infidels. page 273.

12. To teach out of the old Testament that Jesus was Christ, and risen from
the Dead, is not to say, that men are bound after they believe it, to obey
those who tell them so against the Laws and commands of their Sovereigns, but
they do wisely to expect the coming of Christ hereafter in patience, and faith,
with obedience to their present Magistrates, page 274.

13. The authority of Earthly Sovereigns being not to be put down till the day
of Judgment, it is manifest we do not in Baptism constitute over us another
authority, by which our external actions are to be governed in this life. page
274.

14. They who received not the Doctrine of Christ did not sin therein. page 286.

15. Christian Kings have power to Baptize, to Preach, to administer the Lords
Supper, and to Consecrate both Temples and Persons to Gods service, etc. 297.

16. No man shall live in torments everlastingly. page 345.

17. To pray voluntarily to the King for fair weather, or for any thing that
God only can do for us, is divine worship, and Idolatry; but if a King compel a
man to it by the terror of death, or other great corporal punishment, it is not
Idolatry. page 360.

17. If one being no Pastor, or of eminent reputation for knowledge in Christian
Doctrine, do external honor to an Idol for fear, and an other follow him, this
is no scandal given, for he had no cause to follow such example. page 362.

And now I hope he has made an ample Paraphrase upon Religion, according to
the definition he g^ve of it in the first entrance of his Leviathan, when he
defines (page 26.) Religion, to be f^ar of power invisible, feigned by the
mind, or imagined from tales publicly told; and when the seed he sows for
Religion to grow from, or to consist in, are opinion of ghosts, ignorance of
second causes, devotion toward what men fear, and taking things casual for
Prognostics.

These, amongst others, are the Doctrines of Mr. Hobbes in his two last parts;
which, I believe, in the judgment of most Christians, are as soon renounced as
pronounced, and which indeed need little other confutation then the reciting
them; yet I doubt not, many men will say, how scandalous soever the assertions
seem to be, (since he appeals to the Scripture, and cites several Texts out of
the same, for the making good the worst of his Opinions) it is pity that his
ignorance, or perverseness in those Interpretations had not bin made appear, by
manifesting that those places of Scripture could not admit that Interpretation,
and what the genuine sense thereof is. Which consideration had bin more
reasonable and necessary, if these Errors had bin published, and those Glosses
made and owned by any National Church, or any Body of Learned men; but it may
be thought too great a presumtion for a private man, a stranger to Divinity, to
take upon him to put unnatural Interpretations upon several Texts of Scripture,
the better to apply them, and make them subservient to his own corrupt purposes
and opinions, contrary to the whole current of Scripture, and to the Doctrine
thereof, and without the least authority or shadow, that the like Interpretation
was ever made before by any other man: I say, such a person cannot reasonably
expect, that any body should too seriously examine all his frivolous and light
suggestions, and endeavor to vindicate those Texts from such impossible
Interpretations. Yet if any man thinks it worth his pains, I am well content
that he receive that honor, and will still hope that Mr. Hobbes may be so well
instructed in the true sense and end of the Scripture, that he may better
discern the eternity of the reward and punishment in the next World. And so we
conclude our discourse upon his Book, and examine what he says in his
Conclusion.

The Review and Conclusion, is only an abridgment and contracting the most
contagious poison that runs through the Book, into a less vessel or volume,
least they, who will not take the pains to read the Book, or reading it may by
inadvertency and incogitancy not be hurt enough by it, may here in less room,
and more nakedly, swallow his choicest Doctrine at one morsel: and is in truth,
a sly address to Cromwell, that being then out of the Kingdom, and so being
neither conquered nor his Subject, he might by his return submit to his
Government, and be bound to obey; it which, being uncompelled by any necessity
or want, but having as much to sustain him abroad as he had to live upon at
home, could not proceed from a sincere heart and uncorrupted. This Review and
Conclusion he made short enough, to hope the Cromwell himself might read it;
where he should not only receive the pawn of his new Subjects Allegiance, by
his declaring his own obligation and obedience, but by publishing such
Doctrine, as being diligently infused by such a Master in the mystery of
Government, might secure the People of the Kingdom (over whom he had no right
to command) to acquiesce and submit to his Brutal Power. And in order to that,
he takes upon him very positively to declare (which no man had ever presumed to
do before) the precise time when Subjects become obliged to submit to the
Conqueror; and says, (page 390.) that time is, as to an ordinary Subject, when
the means of his life is within the guards and garrisons of the enemy; and for
him who has nearer obligations, he has liberty to submit to his new Master,
when his old one can give him protection no longer. And he is very careful that
it may be the more taken notice of, to insert in another Letter his Maxim,
(page 390.) that every man is bound by nature, as much as in him lies, to
protect in War the authority by which he is himself protected in time of Peace.
All which he says, appears by consequence from those Laws which he has
mentioned throughout his Book, (page 390.) yet that the times require to have
it inculcated and remembered; which shall not oblige me to recapitulate what
has bin said before upon the Propositions. And he is so fearful that Cromwell
was not solicitous enough for his own security, that he tells him in his Review
(which he had not before said in his Book (page 392.) that Conquerors must
require not only a submission of men's actions to them for the future, but also
an approbation of all their actions past. Which advice he followed as far as he
could, till he found it too unreasonable to impose, even upon those who had
concurred with him in most of the mischief that he had don. And least he should
be too scrupulous and modest in using the power he had, and too apt to be
amused with reproaches, he says, (page 392.) the toleration of a professed
hatred of Tyranny, is a toleration of hatred to Commonwealth in general; to the
extravagancy of which Assertion, enough has bin said before. These are the
choice Flowers he has bound up together in his Review, least the odor of them
might lose some of its fragrancy in the bigness of the Book. And having with
great tenderness provided, that no man should think it lawful to kill him; and
insinuated as much, and with as much virulency as he could, a prejudice to the
Roial party; he gives his own testimony of his whole Doctrine, and says, (page
394.) the Principles of it are true, and proper, and the ratiocination solid;
and therefore concludes, that it might be profitably printed, and more
profitably taught in the Universities, etc. and other License then his own it
never had to be printed.

But Mr. Hobbes knows well, that a man's testimony in his own behalf, is not
valid; and if mine could carry any authority with it, I would make no scruple to
declare, that I never read any Book that contains in it so much Sedition,
Treason, and Impiety as this Leviathan; and therefore that it is very unfit to
be read, taught, or sold, as dissolving all the ligaments of Government, and
undermining all principles of Religion. I do not with that the Author should be
ordered to recant, because he would be too ready to do it upon his declared
Salvo: nor do I wish he should undergo any other punishment, then by knowing
that his Book is condemned by the Sovereign Authority, to be publicly burned,
which by his own judgment will restrain him from publishing his pernicious
Doctrine in his Discourses, which have don more mischief then his Book. And I
would be very willing to preserve the just testimony which he gives to the
memory of Sidny Godolphin, who deserved all the Eulogy that he gives him, and
whose untimely loss in the beginning of the War, was too lively an instance of
the inequality of the contention, when such inestimable Treasure was ventured
against dirty people of no name, and whose irreparable loss was lamented by all
men living who pretended to Virtue, how much divided soever in the prosecution
of that quarrel. But I find my self temted to add, that of all men living,
there were no two more unlike then Mr. Godo^phin and Mr. Hobbes, in the modesty
of nature, or integrity of manners; and therefore it will be too reasonably
suspected, that the freshness of the Legacy rather put him in mind of that
Noble Gentleman, to mention him in the fag-end of his Book very unproperly, and
in a huddle of many unjustifiable and wicked particulars, when he had more
seasonable occasion to have remembered him in many parts of his Book. However, I
cannot forbear to put him in mind, that I gave him, for an expiation of my own
defects, and any trespasses which I may have since committed against him, the
Friendship of that great Person; and first informed him of that Legacy, which
had not otherwise bin paid before the printing his Review. And for my own part,
I shall conclude as I begun, with the profession of so much esteem of his
parts, and reverence for his very vigorous age, (which in, and for it self is
venerable) that in order to his conversion to be a good Subject, and a good
Christian, I could be well content, that as he seems to wish in his Commentary
upon the Fourth Commandment, (page 178.) as the Jews had every seventh day, in
which the Law was read and expounded; so he thinks it necessary that some such
times be determined, wherein the people may assemble together, and (after
Prayers and Praises given to God the Sovereign of Sovereigns) hear those their
duties told them, which are prescribed in this his Leviathan; and the positive
Laws, such as generally concern them all, read and expounded, and be put in
mind of the authority that makes them Laws: so I say, I should not be
displeased, if himself were allowed to make choice of his own Sabbaths, to read
his Lectures in both Universities, and if he desired it afterward, in the
City, upon those Theses, which for his ease are faithfully collected in this
answer out of his Book. And if this exercise does not cure him, I could wish
that the same application and remedy might be tried, by which the Emperor
Alexander Severus cured the censoriousness and ambition of Ovinius Camillus,
who was as old, and loved his ease as well as Mr. Hobbes; yet being not
satisfied with the present conduct of affairs (and from thence became very
popular) he had a purpose to make himself Emperor. Of which Severus being
informed, and having received and examined the full truth of it, he sent for
him, and gave him thanks, as Aelius Spartianus tells us, Quod curam Reipub.
quae recusantibus bonis imponeretur, sponte reciperet: and thereupon took him
full of fear, and terrified with the Conscience of his own guilt, with him to
the Senate, participem Imperii appellavit, in Palatium recepit, and Ornament is
Imperialibus, and melioribus quam ipse utebatur, affecit. Afterward, when
there was occasion of an Expedition against the Barbarians, he offered him, vel
ipsum si vellet ire, vel ut secum proficisceretur; which he choosing, and
Severus himself walking still on foot with his Colleague, who had accompanied
him for many days with intolerable fatigue, the Emperor caused a horse to be
brought to him, upon which having rode some days, as much tired as before,
carpento imposuit. The conclusion was, he was so weary and ready to die under
the command, that abdicavit Imperium; and Severus after he had commended him to
the Soldiers, tutum ad villas suas ire praecepit, in quibus diu vixit. I should
be very glad that Mr. Hobbes might have a place in Parliament, and sit in
Counsel, and be present in Courts of Justice, and other Tribunals; whereby it
is probable he would find, that his solitary cogitation, how deep soever, and
his too peremtory adhering to some Philosophical Notions, and even Rules of
Geometry, had misled him in the investigation of Policy, and would rather
retire to his quiet quarter in the Peak, without envy of those whom he left in
emploiment, then keep them longer company in so toilsom, uneasy, and
ungrateful Transactions. And possibly this might, and I doubt only could,
prevail upon him, to make such recollection and acknowledgment of all the
falsehood, profaneness, impiety and blasphemy in his Book, as may remove all
those rubs and disturbances, which he may justly apprehend, as well in the way
to his last Journey, as at the end of it, if he be not terrified with that
disinal Pronunciation, If we sin wilfully, after that we have received the
knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins, but a
certain fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation, which shall
devour the adversaries.

FINIS.

