Warning for SERVANTS: And a CAUTION to PROTESTANTS. Or, the CASE of Margret
Clark, Lately Executed for FIRING her Masters HOUSE in SOVTHWARK.

Faithfully Relating The manner (as she affirmed to the last moment of her
life) how she was drawn in to that wicked act; set forth under her own hand
after Condemnation.

Her Penitent Behavior in PRISON.

Her Christian Advice to Visiters, Discourses with several Ministers, and last
words at Execution.

Impartially published, with the Attestations of persons of Worth, and many
substantial Eye and Ear witnesses, whose Names are inserted in this Narrative.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and three Crowns in Cheapside
near Mercers Chapel; and are to be sold by Joseph Collier at the Bible on
London-bridg, under the Gate. 1680.

To the READER.
THE Ends of publishing this Relation are no other than truly to state matter
of fact concerning this poor Maid, whose unhappy Tragedy has occasioned so many
various reports both in City and Country; To caution all others, and
particularly those of her condition, as servants, etc. to beware of harkening
to any the like destructive insinuations, suggested either immediately by
Satan, or mediately by any of his Popish Imps; but still more especially to
promote the glory of God, in recording how he was graciously pleased both to
blast or frustrate by signal Providence the mischievous design she was engaged
in; and also to turn the same by his infinite wisdom, into the greatest and
most unspeakable good for her soul, as in the judgment of charity from her
words and deportment we are bound to hope.

Needs must he be a stranger in our Israel, nay indeed a Rebel to Reason, and
Renegado from common sense, that is not sensible of the restless accursed
endeavors of Papists to ruin these Nations, and especially this famous City
and all its Suburbs; their Fireworks in Sixty-six we hope will never be
forgot; nor yet their practices afterward, when so great a part of the Borough
of Southwark, after several defeated attempts, was at last laid in Ashes by the
Hellish industry of Grove and his Irish Ruffians, How often have they since
carried on the like practices in several parts of the Town? How frequently
endeavored to debauch servants, and with promises of large sums of money tempt
them to set fire to their Masters houses, or give their Instruments opportunity
to do it; especially in such places where by reason of the old close buildings,
or variety of combustible matter, the greatest mischief was like to ensue?
Whence so many attempts have been made on Smithfield, the backside of St.
Clements, this very place of Pepper-Alley, etc.

We mention this to show that it is nothing new nor infrequent, for these
Enginiers of mischief to be concerned in such practices and temptations; yet so
subtle and politic they are for the most part to make use of others to execute
the Villainies of this kind which they themselves contrive, to the end that if
it be discovered, whilst the immediate Agents are enquired after, and under
examination, they that set them on may have better opportunities to escape; or
if apprehended, yet the Transactions being private, Confidence shall outface
Truth; and for want of proof, not guilt, they may avoid the stroke of Justice:
For our merciful English Laws (far different from the Tyranny of a Popish
Inquisiton) allow of no Racks nor Tortures to extort Confessions. Nor will our
Protestant Courts of Justice condemn any upon surmise, without legal evidence
of the Fact.

Whether there were any such Temptations used to this Maid, as she alleged, we
shall not undertake to determine, having nothing to justify it but her
Asseverations, which have only this confirmation, That as they were constant,
so they were pronounced with her last breath, and sealed with her death. And
certainly those people who are so importunate with us to believe dying men's
words against evident proof, will allow us not altogether to contemn those of a
dying woman, in a matter doubtful at least, if we may not say attended with
some suspicious probabilities. And indeed so much was she the rather to be
credited than they, because she pretended to no cause that might improve a lie
into merit; was furnished with no Absolution or Dispensation that might lay
Conscience to sleep, nor had any hopes to scour off the falsehood by any slight
purging Flames in the other world. And as it cannot well be imagined, That she
who durst not tell a Lie to respite punishment, or to save her own Life, should
yet without any hopes of advantage persist in a false Accusation of another
whom she could have no malice against; so it is wonderful to conceive, if she
continued guilty of such wickedness, how she should be so joyfully supported
with Courage against the terrors of death, and pray and discourse so heartily
and affectionately as she was observed to do.

As for the truth of what is herein related, both touching her Behavior and
Expressions, the same is attested and confirmed by a great number of persons of
Credit beyond any exception. The Original of her Confession or Protestation
here set forth, remains under her own hand in the custody of that honorable
and worthy Gentleman Sir Robert Hatton, Knight, High Sheriff of the County of
Surrey; and indeed, all that multitude that either visited her in prison, or
was present at her death, can in a great measure bear witness to the reality of
this Narrative.

This poor Creature has paid her debts to Justice in this world, and is now
gone before an All-seeing Judge, who in due time will reward every one according
to his Works.

We have entitled the Relation, A Warning for Servants, as hoping this her sad
Example may caution all those of that condition who shall read or hear it, to
abominate and avoid, as they love their lives, such wicked practices, and not
to be inveigled by any fair words or great promises to be aiding or abetting
thereunto.

This detestable offense of malicious clandestine House-burning, contains in it
self a complication of several most heinous Crimes, being contrary to all Laws
divine and humane, against common Faith and Honesty, and destructive of Humane
Society; Injustice, Treachery, Fraud, Violence, Cruelty, and Robbery, all join
in it, and Murder of the Innocent oftentimes attend it, by surprise, accidents,
or grievous frights. Nor can the mischiefs (especially in populous places) be
so particularly limited, but that it may prove general: for when the destroying
Element is once prevailing, who knows where it may stop? But above all, these
Hellish Conspirators who lie in wait to cause or promote Calamities without any
provocation, and make it their business to do all the mischiefs they are able,
and depopulate whole Cities if they can, thinking it merit and a part of
Religion to ruin by any means those they call Heretics, that so they may
advance their own designs, and establish their Romish Idolatry and Tyranny,
These of all other Incendiaries are the most pernicious and dangerous, the most
diligently to be watched and enquired into, and the most severely to be punished.

May the God of our Salvation, who has hither to defended us with an
outstreched Arm, discover all such Treacherous Sons of Belial* and ever
preserve the Protestant Religion and its sincere professors, from the Cruel
Machinations of Jesuitical Traitors and all their Instruments and /Abettors.
Amen.

THE PENITENT INCENDIARY: OR, An Impartial and Exact NARRATIVE of the Crime,
Confession, and Behavior of Margaret Clark, etc.
MARGARET CLARK (the unhappy subject of this Narrative) was born (as we are
credibly informed) at Croydon in the County of Surrey, of honest though but
mean Parentage. Somewhat above a Quarter of a year before this mischievous
Contrivance she had become a Servant to Mr. Delanoy, a worthy substantial
Person in Southwark, by Profession a Dyer, where she behaved her self so
fairly, that they had no suspicion of her, but very much entrusted her in their
House, whereupon she might have had sufficient opportunities to have done them
considerable Damage in that kind, without taking the desperate course of
Firing their House, which must in all probability have occasioned a general
ruin to most of the Neighborhood: She seemed to be a Wench of a competent
understanding, rather above than below what could be expected from her
Education and Circumstances, of a free familiar humor; which possibly might
give some occasion to that Temptation, which (as she steadfastly alleged) was
put upon her.

But because we would render this Narrative as plain and perspicuous as may be,
and yet affirm nothing but what is certainly and notoriously true, as to matter
of Fact; and for that the Relation of the Intrigue, and means used to draw her
into this Business, depends chiefly on the account given by her self, which can
challenge no further Credit than what it may derive from Probabilities, violent
Presumptions, and her constant and dying Asseverations; we shall first state
the matter as it happened.

The before mentioned Mr. Delanoy having a Countryhouse at Lee in Kent, was
wont frequently to retire thither; with the greatest part of his Family; and
particularly was gone thither (whereof most probably the original Contrivers
might have obtained some notice before they attempted the Maid) when this
horrid attempt was made, which was on Sunday the first day of February, there
being none left then at home in Southwark, belonging to him, but this Maid and
one young Man. Now so it was, That on the said Lord's Day at Night, about Eleven
of the Clock, some of the Neighbors perceiving an extraordinary smell of fire,
and being there at much affrighted, mischiefs of that kind having for diverse
years past been so over-frequent, and particularly the best part of that
eminent Borough having not long since been reduced to Ashes, and that by
treacherous Contrivance of the Jesuits and Papists, as has been satisfactorily
proved; They thereupon began to look out, to observe whence this terrible smell
proceeded, and finding it to come from Mr. Delanoy's House, and knowing the
Master and Mistress, etc. to be out of Town, one John Parret knocked at the
Door, and Margaret Clark let him in the House was found to be on fire in three
distinct and several places; That is to say, first just by the Pump (which it is
rationally supposed was purposely done by the subtle Contrivers, to hinder
getting of water to quench it) next in two several places in the Buttery, (near
which was some hundreds of Faggots,) which was much furnished with wooden
Conveniences, and things easily combustible, and also in the Garret, where
there was great a quantity of wood and old Lumber laid together and set on
fire; all which confirming them in an Opinion that it must be done purposely
and by design, and observing this Margaret Clark come and let them in, having
set her own Box in the Parlour, which at first she told them was her Masters,
pretending she was endeavoring to preserve it; but providentially a Smith
being present, who but the day before had mended it for her, knew it to be her
own, and so had greater reason to believe she had some hand in the Treachery;
they thereupon entertained a strong suspicion of her; but good store of help
coming in, and the several fires not yet being grown to a masterless head, they
with little pains and the blessing of God on their Endeavors, made shift to
subdue and extinguish them all, without any great difficulty or damage. The
danger being pretty well over, upon consideration of the Circumstances
before-recited, as also the strange confused behavior of the Maid, they
thought fit to take her into Custody, and examination. At first she endeavored
resolutely to deny any privity or knowledge how or by what means this disaster
happened, yet her very Looks, amazed Countenance, faltering Speech, and strange
Behavior, seemed to give the Lie to her words, and show that her Tongue did
but in vain strive to falsify the dictates of her heart. At last, after some
Conflict between Confidence and Conscience, the latter prevailed, so that
before two or three a Clock on the Monday morning she ingenuously confessed her
self to be Accestory in promoting this wicked Design and that she had been
seduced and hired to consent unto it for a great sum of money promised to be
paid her for this hellish service: Being Examined who it was that had put her
upon it, she declared she could not tell his name, but only that it was a
Gentleman, of whose Person, Stature, Complexion, Habit, etc. she gave a very
particular description, withal declaring the manner of his addressing himself
to her, and the several importunities and inducements he used to prevail with
her, just in the same Method and Order as herein after is set forth, (for we
will not clog this brief Narrative with needless repetition.) And most
observable it is, That from this her first Confession she did not afterward,
either in Prison before her Trial, nor after her Condemnation to the minute of
her death, in the least make any variation. But as she first set it forth upon
Oath before Justice Reading and Justice Freeman, so she persisted with her last
breath to attest the Truth thereof.

This Declaration as she delivered with the greatest seriousness and assurance
that could be; so after she had made it, though directly tending to her own
destruction, as to this World, by acknowledging her self Guilty of a Crime, for
which, by the Law, she must certainly suffer Death; her Spirit seemed more
composed, and less troubled, as having disburthen'd her Conscience, whose
secret Torments appeared more terrible and insupportable to her than Death it
self.

This frank ingenuous Confession, did not a little prevail with most that heard
her, to believe that there was much of Truth in what she delivered; the rather
for that it could not easily be imagined, what other motive besides that of the
Temptation of a Bribe, or reward from some ill disposed Persons, should induce
her to the Act; for if she had a design to Rob her Master (of which there did
not appear any convincing Arguments) she might, however, having such an
opportunity of access to all the Rooms in the House, more easily have done it,
without this Aggravation of adding the detestable Crime of Firing, to that of a
simple Felony; and that she might be so tempted, was more probable, as well
because it is too apparent that the Jesuits (those grand Incendiaries in all
senses) do carry on such mischievous designs, and have Actually made use of
Persons of her Condition, for that purpose; witness, their engaging Elizabeth
Oxley, by the means of Mr. Stubbs, to fire the house of her Master, Mr. Birdan,
Attorney in Fetter-Lane April 10th. 1679. Confessed both by her and the said
Stubbs; for which upon a Candid discovery of Gifford, the Priest, Molrayn, and
others, that put them upon it (and who fled for the same) they obtained their
Pardon: As also for that there was no place about the whole Town, where a Fire
could probably do more mischief: Mr. Delanoys House being situate near Pepper
Alley, on the backside of the Bear-Tavern, amongst abundance of old wooden,
close Buildings, whence the devouring Flames (had they once got head,
especially the House being fired in so many places) would easily have dispersed
themselves round about, and not only the Contiguous Alleys, and Courts, but St.
Mary Overies stately Church, and the Houses on the Bridge, etc. would soon in
all probability have been sacrificed in a general Devastation.

These and the like were Arguments, at least to caution the Neighboring
Inhabitants to a most diligent inquisition and vigilance to find out, if they
could possibly, the Person or Persons that might instigate this Maid herein;
and accordingly, several suspicious people were taken, and brought to her, whom
she not knowing, honestly acquitted; but about nine, or ten of the Clock on the
next day (being Monday) in the Fore-noon, a Gentleman came in all alone into
the Bear-Tavern, at the Bridge foot, and called for a Pint of Port, where
sitting by himself, the people of the House observed him to be much in
disorder, and Confusion of mind, as they apprehended; he seeming to matter
something to himself, and tearing into small pieces certain papers that he had
about him. But especially (having it is probable) heard what kind of man
Margaret Clark had described the Person to be, that had so Corrupted her, they
fancyed that the same agreed (as indeed it did in a great measure) with this
Gentleman, and therefore upon all these presumptions, resolved to apprehend him
upon suspicion, that he might give an account of himself before a Magistrate
which was done accordingly: And as she had presently discharged others that had
been taken and brought to her, and they particularly asked, Is this be, or, is
this he, still she replying, no; whereupon they were set at Liberty: So on the
contrary, as soon as ever this Person entered the Room, and she had cast her Eye
upon him, in a seeming extasre, or transport mixed with rage, and joy, she Cried
out, O'Lard, that is the Man, that is the man, this is the man: repeating those
words several times with the greatest earnestness in the world, lifting up her
hands toward Heaven; whereupon the Justices demanded -- Are you sure this is
the man? may you not be mistaken? To which she answered, I am sure this is He,
and I am not mistaken. Then was he taken into Examination, who ('it is said, with
many Oaths, and Execrations) denied that he had ever seen her in his Life
before (thought it is credibly reported some Persons since affirmed they would
prove that he had been seen with her, nay to go into Mr. Delanoy's House, some
few days before.) And being questioned what he was, and where he lived; he
gave the Justices an account, that his name was John Satterwait, and that he
belonged to his Royal Highness the Duke of Yorks Guard, under the Command of
the Earl of Feversham, and that his Lodging was near St. Giles: The Justices
proceeding to enquire, where he was, and how he spent the Sunday, and where he
was all Sunday-Night. He answered, he was in Bed all day; but upon their
insisting on an account, where he was in the Evening, and how he spent all the
Night; he then trembled, and began to falter in his speech, saying, I am
surpised, and distracted, and know not what to say, (which appeared a very odd
behavior to the Justices, that a Gentleman of his Education, and Profession,
should be so astonished that he could not remember, or set forth where he was
but the very Night before; but his witnesses at his Try at had much better
memories, and gave a punctual account thereof) upon the Justices examining him,
what business brought him that morning to the Bear-Tavern at the Bridge-foot
where he was apprehended, He said, that he came to meet one Mrs. Hummerston,
who lodged next door to him, upon which the Justices ordered some persons to
attend at the Bear and observe if any Person enquired for Mr. Satterwaits; and
soon after a Gentlewoman did come thither and ask, for him, who being carried
before the Justices, and examined apart, did declare her name to be Hummerston,
and that she came at Mr. Satterwaits Invitation so far to eat a Barrel of
Oysters; and there being nothing that seemed to affect her further in this
business, she was discharged: But Margaret Clark persisted in her Accusation of
Mr. Satterwait, and charged him upon her Oath, to be the very Person that (with
her privity and consent) did Fire her masters House in all the three several
places, as aforesaid; setting forth how he first came to her, as she was
standing at her Masters door, on that day was Se'nnight viz. the 26th of
January last, and asked her if she lived in that House, who answering
Affirmatively, he then inquired if her Master and Mistress were within, and she
replying no, they were in the Country, he desired to speak with her about
business that might be of great advantage to her; but being wholly a stranger
she slighted his discourse and they proceeded no further that day, but soon
after he came to her again, inveigled her to go drink, which she did at a
certain Alehouse in an Alley (the Sign or name of which she could not tell,
but declared she was confident she could find and know it again, if she might
have had the Liberty to go to look it out;) that there with two other Persons,
they drank four Tankards of Ale, who made an agreement with her, to give her
two thousand Pounds if she would assist in firing her Masters house; that they
had resolved not to fire it till Monday Night Febr. 2. But she understanding
her Master and Mistress would then be returned out of the Country, and seeing
(as she said) this Mr. Satterwait again on the Saturday, they concluded Sunday
night more convenient; that she let him in about four a Clock in the Afternoon
on Sunday, hid him in the Dye-house, persuaded the young man of the House to go
to bed by eight of the Clock, and then having all things in readiness, about
ten a Clock, he kindled the Fires, etc. As herein after in her Narrative, given
under her hand, after her Condemnation; is more particularly, and fully set
forth.

In fine, after a large, and diligent Examination upon her Confession against
her self, and charge upon Oath against Mr. Satterwait; they were both Committed
to the Marshalsea, with strict charge that they should be kept apart: As Mr.
Satterwait was carrying to Prison, there being a vast Tumult, or Crowd of
people; the Justices gave a particular charge that no Violence should be
offered, or hurt done to his Person, yet the Multitude being filled with
Indignation against that insufferable, and destructive Crime, whereof they then
imagined him to be guilty, could not forbear expressing their detestation
against such practices -- Crying out, hang him, knock him on the head, stoning
is too good for him, etc. At which Mr. Satterwait seemed much concerned and
apprehensive that they would have done him some present harm, though indeed
none did meddle with him further than in words, and in this Consternation and
affirightment he was often heard by those that conducted him, to cry out by way
of Prayer, or sudden Ejaculation, Sancta Maria! Jesu Maria and sometimes Jesu,
Maria, repeating those words very frequently, and with much earnestness, and
then reflecting upon the Crowd, and the harsh Sentences they were pleased to
bestow upon him, he would say, Sancta Maria! are these Christians? Sancta
Maria! are these Christians and Protestants? Pagans, Pagans, etc. His using
these words confirmed many in their Opinion that he was a Papist, (but he
denies it, and sure a man may be allowed to know or choose his own Religion)
insomuch that for satisfaction in the point, a Reverend Divine going to visit
him in Prison, amongst other Discourses happening to ask him, how he came so
vehemently to call upon the Virgin Mary, adding further, that he believed that
blessed Saint did not hear him: Mr. Satterwait to this only answered, he
remembered not that he used such words, but if he did, he did not know the
meaning of them: To which the Divine replied, That that was something unlikely,
considering his Parents had given him such liberal Education.

As to the Deportment of Margaret Clark, it is well known to all that visited
her, and all the Officers and Keepers belonging to the Goal, That she carried
her self all along during the whole time of her Confinement, which was seven
weeks, very civilly and penitently, every day weeping abundantly, often sending
for Ministers to come to her, to whom she would most freely and affectionately
express her self, much bewailing her sins, especially her great wickedness in
complying with such temptations, and consenting to the wicked act for which she
was committed.

On the 13th of March 1679/80, both the said Margaret Clark and Mr. Satterwait
were brought to their Trial at Kingston upon Thames, where the Assizes for the
County of Surrey were then held: They were both Arraigned upon one and the same
Indictment, for the wicked and fellonious entering into and setting on fire the
House and Dyehouse of the said Mr. Peter Delanoy: Against the Maid there were
Witnesses that proved the Fire, and her own Confession that she was privy and
consenting to it, which (though she pleaded Not Guilty for Form's sake, yet)
she did not deny at Bar but only alleged that she was so put upon it by her
Fellow Prisoner but being charged in the same Indictment all she said was
insignificant and not to be regarded in Law as any Evidence against him. And
for other proof the same was likewise altogether insufficient: One Woman swore
she had often seen him in Southwark, and particularly on Thursday before the
Fire broke out, but could not say she either saw him in Delanoy's House, or in
Company with his Maid: The other deposed that she saw a man in a Red Coat go
into Mr. Delanoy's House on the Sunday, but would not swear that the Prisoner
was the person. On the other side, Mr. Satterwait had several Witnesses, as his
Mother and Uncle, to prove he was educated in the Protestant Religion, a
Certificate that he had received the Sacrament, and taken the Oaths of
Allegiance, Supremacy, and Test; Four or five of the Guard to prove that he was
at whitehall on Thursday, Jan. 29. and at 3 a Clock went with them to the One
Tun Tavern in St. Martins Lane where he staid till three of the Clock on Friday
morning, January the 30th. And from thence never out of their Company till two
of the Clock in the Afternoon: At which time he came to a House in Vine-Street,
where he slept 'till Eight a Clock, and then came to his Mother's, and went to
Bed, not rising 'till Nine of the Clock on Saturday Morning, Jan. 31. and then
went to the Guard till Three a Clock in the Afternoon, then was at the Cock and
Bottle in Covent Garden till Nine at night, lay at the Swan Inn in (...)
street, Saturday night, and rose not out of (...) till Sunday Afternoon, nor
stirred out all day till Ten at night: Then his Mother and her Lodger (...) he
came to her House about half an hour past Ten on Sunday Night and lay there
till Nine Monday morning, There Mrs. Hu^^^erston to prove that she sent a Maid
to let him know she was going into Southwark, and received Answer from him,
that he would presently meet her at the Both at the Bridge Foot, etc. In fine
upon the whole (...) the Jury brought in the said Margaret Clark Guilty (...)
the (...), and Mr. Satterwait Not Guilty. These par;ticulars attested by the
said Mr. Satterwait's Friends on his behalf we have taken out of a printed
Sheet, said (...) Title (...) written with his own hand, wherein the (...) is
very ^^^^^^ly set forth, as it is like it was drawn up, that he might the better
call them in order: In which Sheet there yet seems to be at least one very
great and unhappy mistake, for, p. 2. Mr. Satterwait says positively of
himself, That he was CONVICTED: And many people do also think that another
mistake, p. 3. where he says, that the Maid at her Trial denied impudently what
she had before confessed, as to her self, but stood firmly to her first
principles as to his particular. For besides, that they could not observe any
such Denial, (unless it be meant in the formality of pleading not guilty) they
cannot comprehend how she would stand to her first Principles of charging him,
but at the same time, she must needs own her self concerned in it.

And indeed, she seemed so far from any Impudence that there appeared a very
great awe, and Reverence upon her Spirit, not willingly to Commit any Sin;
whereof she gave a very Signal Example, of which several of us were Eye and
Ear-witnesses, viz. After Mr. Satterwait was acquitted, and the Convicted, the
several Prisoners that were Cast, being called to the Bar, and asked what they
had to allege why sentence of Death, and Execution should not pass upon them
according to the Law: Amongst them, there was a Woman that was Convicted of
Wilful Murder, who pleading she was with Child, saved her Life till the next
Assizes: But Margaret Clark, though she saw this Example before her Eyes, and
was persuaded by many persons to Plead the same thing, she knowing her
condition not to be truly such, refused it with Detestation, saying, Oh! Shall
I add another sin to my great wickedness? how shall I then expect a Pardon from
God? I would not do it for all the World, I dare not tell a Lie to save my
Life; And so with great submission received the terrible sentence of death, on
Tuesday the 16th of March.

Some Observations of her Carriage, and Godly discourses after Condemnation,
ON wednesday, a Minister gave her a Visit, and found her in a very gracious
frame of Spirit, blessing and praising God, that he had been so good to her
Soul, in affording her so long a time for Repentance, but especially that he
had given her the Grace of Repentance; then there came in a great company of
young people to see her, to whom she addressed her self in this manner. Oh!
have a care, you that are Young, and are Servants, take warning by me; I hope
you do not come here only to look upon me as a sight, but pray make a good use
of my downfall; Oh take warning by my sad Example; pray get some good to your
selves by my Sin, and shameful Death. One of the Company saying, I am sorry to
see you in this Condition. (She Replied,) You may be sorry for my Body, and I
thank you; but my Condition, I hope, is very good; you have no cause to be
sorrowful for me; because God has turned it to my great good: Though I am
sorrowful, and much troubled for my Sin; yet, now I rejoice in God, even in my
Lord Jesus Christ. Then one told her, that he hoped she would have a Pardon;
for the Sheriff was much affected at her penitent Condition, and pitied her.
She Answered, I have no hope of that, neither indeed do I desire it, I am in so
good hopes, that God has pardoned my Sins; I am quite weaned from the World*
Nay, I am sure I am carried forth at some times, even beyond my own strength:
God has heard, and answered me, blessed be his Name. I Love the Lord, because
he has heard the Voice of my Supplication; he has redeemed me from the lowest
Hell: His praise now, while I am here this little time, shall continually be in
my Mouth, Oh how I hope I shall be thus full of Comfort, when I come to the
place of Execution! To which, one Answered, The Lord continue it. One asked her,
if the sight of the Rope, the Gallows, and Executioner, would not be terrible
to her, when the Cart stands still, and the Sheriffs men should be all about
her, with a great number of spectators beholding her shameful Death. She
answered I have considered all this, and I think it will not fright me, It will
not trouble me, I rejoice in what Christ has suffered, and I hope to be saved
by him, and him alone, his free Grace, and that promise, Come unto me all ye
that are weary, and heavy laden, and I will give you rest; is a great Comfort
to my Soul. Upon which, a Friend asked her, Are you burdened with sin, are you
heavy Laden? She Answered, Yes, I am, and am one of those that Jesus Christ
calls to come unto him: And then she lifted up her Hands, and Eyes, and said,
Lord! Refuse not to give mercy to a poor Sinner, I wholly rest upon the Lord
Jesus Christ, I am resolved to lie at his Feet. I will go in to the King: if I
Perish, I will perish there.

One said to her, what a great mercy God has vouchsafed you, in giving you so
long a Time of Repentance, and that he did not Cut you off in the Act. She
replied -- Oh! it is a great mercy indeed! I am sensible of it* I bless the
Lord for it, and hope God will enable me to spend these few hours I have to
live to his Glory, and my Everlasting good, through this Affliction God has
brought me back, when I was Running Astray. I acknowledge my self unworthy, I
am the most unworthy of all Gods Creatures.

At another time one said -- Oh it is pity that this man should escape, that
brought you to this: To which she answered Though he has brought me to this, I
wish him no more hurt than my own Soul. I did indeed desire to speak with him,
Since he has been acquitted, before he went to London; but he would not speak
with me; whereupon one said, why, what would you have said to him? She
answered, Truly, nothing but Love to his Soul, I would have warned him not to
undo any more, as he has undone me: For I believe I am not the first, and am
afraid I shall not be the last. I am afraid he had a hand in tempting those
other Maids in London.

One telling her That he had heard many strange Reports of her, and how that
Mr. Satterwait had hinted in his Paper, that she had been unjust to several of
her late Masters. She replied. As to those Reports that go of me, many of them
which I hear of are false, but I have not time, neither do I think it fit to
vindicate my self from them, for I have a great work to do, and have but a very
little time to do it in.

A day or two before her Execution, she being desired to give a sincere and
punctual Account, how she came first engaged in this matter, and of all
Transactions between them she delivered her self as follows, her words being
taken from her Mouth in short hand, and when written out, read unto her, who
then likewise affirmed the same to be True, and in Testimony thereof did Sign
the same with her own hand, in the presence of diverse witnesses: a true Copy,
whereof we have here inserted.

A True Copy of a Paper signed by Margret Clark after her Condemnation: The
Original whereof remains in the Custody of the Right Worshipful Sir Robert
Hatton, High Sheriff of the County of Surrey.
I Margret Clark being shortly to suffer Death for that which I have deserved,
and am much humbled for, and desire to lie low before God under the sense of my
own Guilt, do give the World an Account of the truth of my Case, for I would
not be guilty of a Lie now I am to appear before my Judge within a few minutes.
Therefore I do say, and shall declare the Truth of the matter, as I shall
answer it before my Lord and Judge.

Upon the 26th of January, John Satterthwait came to me as I was going out of
my Masters Gate, and did desire me to tell him whether my Master and Mistress
were at home? And I answered him, no; and he told me that he hoped he should
have an opportunity to speak with me, for he had something to say, And I
answered him, if he had any thing to say, I should be so civil to give him the
hearing when I had time (for then I was in haste). Then he came on the next day
with the same Request, and I returned the same Answer. Then he Third time;
being Wednesday, he came again, and used great, Importunity, and expressed some
kindnesses, as if he had been a Suitor, and prevailed with me to go into the
Borrough with him to an Alehouse, where were two Men more of his company; and
after some little time of discourse, he propounded to me this wicked and horrid
Design which I was to have been engaged in with them, that is, to let them into
my Masters House to set it on Fire; and for a Reward, they promised me Two
thousand pounds, which Sum I was to receive at the Fleece, Tavern in Holborn,
inquiring for a Rom in the said Tavern, called the Figure Nine. Then coming out
of the Alehouse, they would f^n have had me away with them, saying, Come let us
take Coach, and go into Fleetstreet, for, said they, there we have a Priest of
ours, who Lodges at a Grocers, that shall Confess you, and give you the
Sacrament; I told him I could not possibly go then. So this John Satterthwait
went homewards with mealmost to my Masters Oate; and as we went along, he
charged me that I should not divulge it to any person in the world living; for
if I did, I should certainly dye for it (and that quickly) in this world, and
be damned in other.

Then he came on the next day, and gave me the same charge to keep it secret.

And then on Saturday he came and inquired of me the best time that he might
come to do this most horrid and devilish Action, saying, Would not four or
five of the clock be a good time? And I said Yes.

Accordingly he came, and conveyed himself into the Dye-house, or thereabouts,
while Nine or Ten of the Clock that Evening, about which time the Fire was
discovered.

Whereupon with the fear and dread he had put upon me, I did deny it to the
company that came in to quench it; but after that, he was there, whom I saw
amongst the rest of the company; but I had much horror upon my Conscience; and
after some short time I confessed the whole Crime for which I now dye. And my
Examination before Justice Reading, and Justice Freeman, was all true.

And this I affirm, and do desire all Protestants to believe, that John
Satterthwait kindled those three Fires in my Masters House. First in the
Dye-house by the Pump; secondly in the Buttery; and thirdly in the Garret,
which last Fire he kindled whilst the People were putting out the other.

And I do declare in the words of a dying Maid, that I was under great trouble
of Conscience, and was many times about discovering it, but could not; Satan's
Temptations, and the wickedness of my own heart did so much prevail with me.

Oh that covetous design of gaining the Moneys, was that which I desire all who
read these Lines which I have writ, to beware of; I saw him among the People in
the House very busy, and I made signs at him, to discover him; but the people
being in a great hurry, did not mind the things I then said to them.

I do also think in my conscience, that if my Master had examined me, I should
have declared the whole matter, for I gave out often suspicious words of my
fear of Fire; and on the Friday before this happened, I went out to a friends
house, and there I was so afflicted and troubled in my mind, that they took
notice of it; and one that went with me thither was importunate with me to know
the reason of my trouble; but the Devil had so subtly engaged my wicked
heart, that I could not tell him.

But to pass by my Conviction and Imprisonment, which you have all heard of,
and to come to this one thing which fell out in the time of my Confinement in
Prison (which I bless God for, rather than that my most Loving and Honored
Master, with I know not how many others, should have suffered by my wicked
compliance with that Man).

That which I speak of is this: When I had been about three weeks in Prison, I
was then walking in the Yard, having that liberty granted me by the Jailer,
there John Satterthwait looked out of a Window, and said to me, Are you there?
I wish I could come to you, I would spoil your telling of Tales; but I gave him
no answer; neither do I desire his hurt or death, but beg of God while I am
here in this world, Repentance for him; and oh that God would give him a sense
of these his great Sins, both in tempting me, and his designing the ruin of
many Thousands of Families; I can say before the Lord, I desire not his Death;
it would have been but a poor relief for me to have had him dyed with me: But
this I must and will declare before I go hence, and am no more seen, That John
Satterthwait, though he was cleared by the Jury, was Guilty, as I said before,
that is, of making those three Fires, and I only did consent, and let him in.

Now I would not have you to think that I have written this to lessen or excuse
my own fault; I deserve Death, nay a worser Death for consenting to so horrid a
wickedness, even eternal Death. But now I hope, that through the Merits of
Jesus Christ alone, not trusting to my own Works or Pardons from Men (as I fear
the Papists do depend upon) to be saved from Eternal Fire; and that I shall be
justified freely by his Grace, through the Redemption which he has purchased
with his own blood.

Whereas there is a Report that is gone commonly about, that I had stolen many
of my Masters things, as Plate, etc. I think it fit now I am to dye, to give
the World an Account of what I then took; the things which I had then put into
my Box, was a little Tape, Lace, and other frivolous things, which now makes me
wonder why I then put them up; for I might have put up Jewels and Plate, which
was under my Charge, to the value of some Hundreds of pounds; but as to the
carrying out of a Box which I was met with, it is a most false report, for I
was so full of horror and trouble of Conscience, that I did not then think of
my Box.

And now I desire all that read these Lines, would consider, and have a great
care how they break the Lords Day; for my neglecting thereof, was the first
step to my downfall; and I desire this downfall of mine may be a warning to all
young Men and Maids; Oh! let them be content with the places that God by his
Providence places them in, and not covet after great things (as I have done)
and so err from the Rule; and have a care of Pride and a worldly mind; for this
I say, Pride and Sabbath-breaking has been my downfall; and I earnestly beg of
you for the Lords sake, and for your Souls sake, to let these Lines, and my bad
Example be a warning to you. Alas, I did once enjoy the means of Grace, and
have lived in good Families; yea, he against whom I committed this great
offense, is a very Worthy good Man; Oh! I did once frequent the Worship of God,
and took delight in it, and thought I understood something of the Excellency of
Christ, and the worth of my own Soul; but a little before I fell into this Sin,
I neglected the Worship of God; and those precious hours upon the Lords day
which formerly I had spent well.

And thus I have fallen foully, and have offended God and Man; and my horrible
Sin has made me a public spectacle to the world. I pray all whom I have
offended in it, for Gods sake to forgive me; and I forgive all men that have
offended me, especially I desire to forgive this John Satterthwait, that has
brought me to this untimely and shameful Death, which, I hope, is brought upon
me for my good; for surely I have obtained Mercy, and am joyful to think of my
going hence; I long to be dissolved, and to be with Christ; even so come Lord
Jesus, and receive me an unworthy Soul.

On the Evening of the Sabbath before she was Executed, Justice Freeman (who
was of those that took her first Examination as aforesaid) came with many other
worthy persons, and did again strictly examine her concerning the truth of what
she had charged upon Mr. Satterthwait: To whom she answered; Sir, It is all
true that I said concerning him, when I was before your Worship upon my first
Examination, and what I have said all along, and which I cannot but testify to
the last.

The Morning before Execution, a Minister very seriously discoursed with her
about the same business, urging and charging her ingeniously and fully to
disburthen her Conscience, and if she had been guilty of wronging him by a
false Accusation, to confess it, and beg pardon of God, and not mock the
All-seeing Majesty, before whose dreadful presence she must so suddenly appear:
To which she replied; Alas! what will it avail me to accuse any one falsely? for
as I am condemned, so I certainly expect to suffer the Law, and what Revenge
can I take upon him, or hurt do him, for he is acquitted by Law; I do freely
forgive him for whatsoever he has done against me, and desire of the Lord to
forgive him, and that the Lord would turn his heart; For if God does not turn
it, I am afraid he will be an Instrument of further Mischief.

Minist. I hope you are not of the same Opinion that the Papists are; It is
said of them, that when they have Confessed to a Priest, and taken the
Sacrament, they can call the great God to witness, that they are as clear as
the Child unborn, and this even when they are most truly and notoriously
Guilty.


Then she answered: O Sir, I tremble to think, that people can call the God of
Truth to witness to a Lie, as that Person has done, God forgive him: (speaking
in reference to Mr. S's printed Vindication, wherein he solemnly protests his
being Innocent of what she accused him, and that he never saw her in his life,
till after he was apprehended.

Min. It is reported that you are of a pilfering humor, and it is supposed,
that your design to Burn your Masters House, was, that you might have the
fairer opportunity of Robbing him, and that you thereby might be the less
suspected.


Margaret. I cannot help what malicious people throw upon me; For this is
nothing but the malice of them against me; I never was guilty of such a thing,
neither will my Master De la Noy say it. Sir, I do assure you, that what I
speak is true, for I am e're long to go into Eternity, and must appear before
the great God, who will judge me for my words and Actions, therefore I dare not
tell a Lie; And Sir, if I had had a design to have Robbed my Master, I had many
Opportunities of doing it, and as likely a way to escape as this: For my Master
trusted me with his Plate, and my Mistresses Jewels, all which I might have
come at, and made away with them, had I been so disposed, when they were out of
Town.


Note, That Mr. De la Noy being since spoken unto about this matter, did
declare, that he believed what she said was true: And as to some Tape-lace, and
a small Silver Spoon that was found in her Box, the same were of no
considerable value; and that it was his opinion, she had taken them rather by
Accident, or for present use, than with any design to steal or make advantage
by selling them, since she might have taken as easily things of far greater
worth, which she had not moved nor meddled with.

Though all the time of her Imprisonment, she was very penitently and
frequently bewailing her sins, yet did not enjoy (as far as could be perceived)
any comfort in her soul, or fense of Pardon and Reconciliation with God through
Christ, till after she was Condemned; and then she seemed full of consolation,
and neither to be desirous of longer Life, nor fearful of Death, spending her
time in Prayer and Praises, or godly Discourses and Admonitions to such as
Visited her.

Margaret Clerks Behavior and Words at her Execution.
FIrst, As she was going into the Cart, she said, This is the Blessedest day to
me, God has turned my great evil to my good: Oh! this is my Wedding Day, I
shall surely be married to my Savior; Oh Lord, that ever I should offend so
good and gracious a God as Thou art; Oh the Joys! I long to be at the The
Place.

As soon as the Cart stood still under the Gallows, she looked up and said, I
am going now to the glory, to the glory which God has prepared for me; for I
believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, I cast my Soul in his Arms, Lord, I come unto
Thee.

A Gentleman interrupted her, and said, Margaret, What did induce you to This?
speak the Truth now, and have a great care of speaking a Lie. She answered and
said, John Satterthwait he is the Man, he is the Man. And it it is all true, what
I said of him all along. All that I said of John Satterthwait is all True. No
Man but John Satterthwait kindled Those Fires: the Lord Forgive him, he is the
man that brought me to This; I do forgive him from my heart. A Gentleman said,
How long were you acquainted with him? She said, He came to me every day from
Monday to Sabbath day, and promised me two Thousand pounds to let him in, to do
that wicked Act in my Masters House. Whereupon one said, Did you think he would
Pay you That Money? She answered, He bad me come to the Fleece Tavern; And ask
for the Number Nine; God forbid I should be guilty of a Lie, now I am going to
Eternity, I desire all here present to take warning, and let my downfall here
in This World be Their Rising to Glory. I wholly Resign, and Rest upon the Lord
Jesus Christ. I desire all of you not to spend the Lords Day idly and wickedly,
as I have done, for it was Sabbathbreaking that was my first step to this
Wickedness: I once more beg of you All, not to spend your time vainly, nor
give way to wicked and profane Thoughts: I freely forgive All the World, and
all my enemies. I earnestly beg of you all to spend your Time to the Honor and
Glory of God. O Lord Receive my poor Soul.

Thus she continued sometimes speaking to the People, and sometimes speaking to
God, in such kind of Ejaculations.

After the Ordnary had discharged his duty and gone out of the Cart, she
inquired of the Sheriff, whether Dr. Martin Minister of St. Savior was among
the Company; whereupon he was called, and a Lane being made through the Great
Crowd of Horses, he came unto her: And she desiring him to pray with her, he
after some short disconrse, applied himself in manner following; To which she
returned the Answers here truly recited and annexed; as will be attested both
by the said Doctor, and many others that were Ear-witnesses of what passed, and
took special observation of her words.

Dr. Martin said, Margaret! be wary, consider well what you say; there may be
somewhat of reputation in continuing your charge against Mr. Satterthwait. You
having charged him, I perceive you are resolved to dye in the charge that the
world may not accuse you of a Lie. But believe me, it would be much for your
advantage in a few Moments, to tell truth now, and acquit the Gentleman if he
be innocent, and go not to the Judgment seat of Christ with a lie in your mouth.

Margaret. It is no lie I tell; Jesus Christ is my Witness, that will be my
Judge, John Satterthwait Tempted me to this fact for which I am to dye.


Dr. Martin. Margeret! Do you believe what you say, that Jesus Christ will be
your Judge?


Margaret. I do believe it, and know I shall shortly appear before him.


Dr. Martin. And dare you say again to me what you said but now, that Mr. John
Satterthwait was the man that tempted you to this horrid fact; and you believe
you shall appear at the Judgment seat of Christ, and give an account of what
you have affirmed of him?


Margaret. I know I shall his day appear before Christ, and I am accountable
for no sin in charging him, for my charge against him is true, as I am a dying
Woman.


Dr. Martin. But may you not mistake the man? Do you speak this to the best of
your knowledge only, or positively and certainly without mistake.


Margaret. Sir, I saw John Satterthwait every day of the Week before. I saw him
on Monday, on Tuesday, he persuaded me to consent, on Wednesday came to me, as
also Thursday and Friday, to confirm me in it, and on Saturday he was with me,
and then resolved upon the firing my honored Masters House on Sunday; and
accordingly on Sunday in the Afternoon toward Evening I let him into my
Masters House: Oh! why should I accuse a person that is not guilty? I must now
forthwith appear before God; Oh my sins! I desire my worthy Master to forgive
me.


Doctor. I do assure you Margaret, your Master and Mistress have forgiven you;
and Margaret, here is Arthur Adams, which was one of the witnesses against you.


Margaret. I freely forgive him and all men, and desire him and all men to
forgive me, for God has forgiven me.


Dr. Martin. What assurance have thou of Gods forgiveness?


Margaret. I know in whom I have believed, I have had great Joys from the Lord,
since Sentence passed upon me; blessed be God that ever I came into a Prison.


Doctor Martin speaking to the Two Men that suffered with her, said; Gentlemen,
you that suffer with this poor Maid; I wish I could see that concernedness and
affection; I would be glad to hear you express your selves something after this
manner: Pray let us know whether it be well with you.

They answered, Sir, It is well, we have no doubt.

Doctor. Mart. Margaret, ask that Man at your right hand how it is with him,
whether he feels any of those Comforts and Joys you speak of.


Margaret turning to Mr. Selby, said, How is it with you? look up to Jesus
Christ. He answered, It is well.

Doctor Martin, I wish you may say so an hour hence.


Margaret. O Lord Jesus, receive my poor Soul, into thy Arms I commend my
Spirit; Oh! the Transcendent Joys; I am not able to express the Joys I have had
since I have been condemned.


Then Dr. Martin prayed with them most excellently and affectionately; after
which she continued crying out; Oh the Glory! Oh the Glory! till the
Executioner was going to pin the Hood down over her Face, she said, I, come as
soon as you will, I care not how soon; but he not presently doing it, she spoke
again to the people, and said, I humbly thank all the peoples of God, all good
people for their prayers to God for me; and said she, I have given an account
in a Writing, which I hope will satisfy the World; for I take God to witness,
that all that I have written in that Paper is all true; O Lord thou know I
would not lie, I am coming to thee! Upon which, the under Sheriff and Officers
made Inquiry for it, which was quickly carried down to the High Sheriff, who
was so affected, that his Worship was pleased earnestly to desire a Copy
thereof before the same was Printed. But the Original is delivered into his
Worships hands, as aforesaid, and a true Copy thereof is here before Printed:
The Minister who is Ordnary being present, did justify to the Sheriff, Sir
Robert Hatton Knight, and many other worthy Persons there present; that he had
read it before in Prison, when she desired him to subscribe it, that it might
not be questioned whether it was hers after her Death or no.

When the Executioner was pulling down her Hood, to do his last Office; she put
it up her self again, and said, Gentlemen, I have one thing more to say, I have
seen a Paper that John Satterthwait has put out in his vindication.

Dr. Martin. Ah! Margaret, have you read that vindication.


Margaret. Yes Sir, Mr. Cole read it to me.


Dr. Martin. Mr. Cole, did you read it to her?


Mr. Cole. Yes Sir, I did read it to her.


Dr. Martin. Well, what say you to it Margaret?


Margaret. It is false, it is false, he has added another sin to his great
wickedness: I wish I may be the last that he may ruin in this World. I testify
before you all, now I am going to Eternity; that he is the very Man, and that
that Paper is a wicked and false Paper.


And so her Hood being put down again, just as the Cart was Drawing away, the
last words she was heard to pronounce were, Come, Lord Jesus, receive me.

Thus have we given the World a faithful account of this poor Wretches Crime
and Behavior, and what she declared and persisted in to the last; with the
great Remorse she expressed for all sin, and the mighty work of God upon her
Soul, in the refreshing Comforts which she declared she had given in to her
from the time of Condemnation, till the last moment of her Life. All which we
leave to each Readers consideration and reflection, to Credit or Disbelieve her
Asseverations, and make such judgment thereof as he shall think fit. This
Publication not being intended to cast any Reflection or Scandal on the
Gentleman, whom the Law has Acquitted, much less upon the Honorable Court, or
honest Jury, before and by whom he was Tried, De non apparentibus and non
existentibus eadem est ratio; secret things belong to the Omniscient Judge, his
dreadful Tribunal will clear all perplexing difficulties, and make it appear
which of their Protestations (horrible of necessity on one flde) were grounded
upon Truth: But Earthly Magistrates cannot penetrate the heart, but must
proceed according to what overtly appears, and Legal Evidence.

However, we cannot but take notice, that since this poor Maid was Executed,
there has been a false and malicious story published concerning her, in one of
Nath. Thompsons scandalous Libels, falsely called THE TRUE DOMESTIC
INTELLIGENCE. He having in that of Tuesday the 30th of March, this passage.
Kingstone, March the 21. There was omitted in the Protestant Domestic
Intelligence, in relating the last Words and Confession of Mary Clark (for so
he falsty calls her) who was Executed for Fireing the House of Mr. De la Noy
Dyer in Southwark; viz. That at her Execuion, there was a Fellow, who designed
to Marry her under the Gallows (according to the ancient Laudable Custom) but
she being (...) seemed unwilling, but when the Rope was about (...), she cried,
she was willing, and then the Fellows friends dissuaded him from Marrying her;
and so she lost her Husband and her Life together.

Which lying story is both a Barbarous scandal to the dead, and an abuse to the
living, there being nothing of it true: Nor the least ground or color for such
a suggestion, for as we know of no such Custom allowed by Law, that any Man's
offering at a Place of Execution to Marry a Woman Condemned, shall save her; so
there was no such offer or intention that ever was heard of in this Case, and
so far was she from being in hopes of a Reprieve, that she neither expected nor
desired it. But by the subtle wording of this loud lie, it may be thought this
Intelligencer from some of his great Acquaintance may have learnt a Jesuitical
Equivocation, and allege, that he does not relate it as Truth that really
happened; but only says, that such a thing was left out of the Relation;
because indeed there was no such matter, and therefore had no reason to be put
in. But notwithstanding that Evasion, all honest and good Men must detest such
base practices of promoting lies and scandals; and especially this News-monger
might the rather forbear to do it on a person Executed, since he knows not how
soon it may be his own turn, being at this instant in Custody charged with
being privy to a Treasonable Conspiracy, as appears by his own showing in that
very Paper wherein this story is inserted.

As for the Truth of the said Margaret Clarks Behavior and Speeches before set
forth in this Narrative, we can appeal (as to a great part thereof) to Justice
Reading, and Justice Freeman, as also to Dr. Martin, and several other
Ministers who visited her; particularly, as to her Deportment, and Speeches at
Execution; the same are Attested by a great number of persons of good worth and
credit, some of whose Names are as follow;

Nathaniel Gardener (...). Robert Beal, William Symms, John Pierce, John Cole,
Samuel Adderley, Edmund Farringdon, William Nettlefield, Mrs. Hill, Rose
Littleton, Henry Gloucester, Francis Grainger.


With many more which might be added.

FINIS.

