IMPRIMATVR.

Car. Alston,
Maii 10. 1686.
A DISCOURSE Concerning the Worship OF THE Blessed Uirgin AND THE SAINTS; WITH
An Account of the Beginnings and Rise of it amongst CHRISTIANS, in Answer to M.
de Meaux's Appeal to the Fourth Age, in his Exposition and Pastoral Letter.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Bassett at the George in Fleetstreet, and Tho.
Newborough at the Star in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1686.

OF The Worship of the B. Virgin AND The SAINTS.
. 1.
THE Gentlemen of the Church of Rome have been pleased lately to send Books
amongst us of a very different strain: On the one side Popery Misrepresented
and Represented, but especially Monsieur de Ms. Exposition of the Roman
Doctrine: On the other side our Ladies Rosary, and the Contemplation of her
Life and Glory, etc. which go up and down, though not so openly as the other.
And we believe they have Books in readiness, to explain over again their
Meaning in the other Articles (treated of in the Exposition) at the same rate,
that their Books of particular Devotion to our Lady, do explain the Articles of
Religious Worship, and Invocation of Saints.

In the mean time they seem to believe, that there are no Articles will bear a
Representation in their true Colors, sooner or better than these. And the
truth is, as Mankind has in all Ages been very prone to Superstition, so to no
kind of it more than to that of Worshipping Dead Men and Women; which being the
Practice they would reconcile us to, in the first place, we are concerned the
more thoroughly to examine, what they now think fit to say for it.

But let no man think, that in this Cause, we are engaged against the Saints
departed, because we contend with their Worshippers. Let no Man take our
Refusal to honor them, as their Worshippers honor them, for an argument that we
do not honor them at all. We are content to be tried by that known Rule of St.
Austin, that they are to be honored for Imitation, not to be adored for
Religion. We believe, that the highest honor we can do them, is to follow their
Examples. We love their Memories, we celebrate Anniversary Commemorations of
their Piety and Virtues, especially of their Sufferings for Righteousness sake;
we congratulate their Victories over the World; we rejoice in their Glory and
Happiness; we propound their Examples to the Imitation of the Faithful,
exciting them to live as the Saints once lived, that they at length may inherit
those Promises, which by their Faith and Patience in this World, the Saints now
inherit in the other; we praise God for them, as often as we meet together at
the Holy Table of our Lord: And when we meet to interr our Christian Brethren,
we pray to God to hasten his Kingdom, that we with all those that are departed
in the true Faith of his Holy Name, may have our perfect Consummation and
Bliss, both in Body and Soul, in his everlasting Glory.

Thus we honor the departed Saints, remembering all along, that though they are
highly exalted above us, who are here below imprisoned in earthly Bodies, and
struggling in a sinful World with Infirmities and Temptations; we yet belong to
the same Body, of which they are Members, and that they are still our
Fellow Servants. We are persuaded, they have not less but rather more Charity
for us, than they had for the Church, when they lived upon the Earth; but
whether they know us in particular or not, or in what instances they express
their Charity toward us, God having made no Revelations of these things; we
can define nothing about them; and therefore we dare not give them those
Honors, which suppose such an Assurance of these things, as God has thought
fit to deny us.

As to the Virgin Mary in particular, we do with Men and Angels acknowledge,
that she was Blessed amongst Women, since she brought forth the Savior of
Mankind, and the Lord of Heaven and Earth; since she was not the Mother only,
but the Virgin Mother also of our Lord, and conceived him by the Power of the
Holy Ghost. Which Confession so honorable to her being inseparable from a
right Belief concerning our Lord Jesus, we do not only set it forth upon the
Anniversary of the Annuntiation, but frequently also in our Sermons, and daily
in the Creed Moreover, we take these singular Graces of God toward her, in
Conjunction with other things of a more common quality: We doubt not, but she
was an excellently Pious and Virtuous Person. Luke 1.
We see by her Behavior, when the Angel Gabriel came to her, that she was not
apt to be imposed upon by counterfeit Visions and Revelations; nor forward to
believe great things of her self; nor lifted up with Pride, because she was so
highly Favored; but that upon this extraordinary occasion, she wholly resigned
her Self to the disposal of God, with a Wisdom and Humility, that could not but
be habitual. But if nothing at all had been said of her personal Qualities in
the Scriptures (as indeed there is but very little;) we might have presumed
without Rashness, that because God (who has no less regard to a holy Mind then
to a pure Body) would have the Mother of our Lord to retain the Purity of a
Virgin, he would also choose a most holy Virgin to be his Mother; and since he
was pleased to send us so Heavenly a Treasure in an Earthen Vessel, he would
choose one of the greatest Honor. For which reason likewise, we might have
concluded without other Testimony, that she became afterward a faithful
Disciple of her Son. For when one in admiration of him cried out, Blessed is
the Womb that bare thee, and the Paps that gave thee Suck. Yea rather, said he,
Blessed are they that hear the word of God, and keep it: without which
Blessedness she that bore him in her Womb, and nourished him at her Breasts,
would have been justly esteemed by all generations, the most unhappy and
miserable Creature in the World. Finally, from all this we cannot but conclude,
that she is very happy and glorious in the Kingdom of Heaven. For though we
have no particular Revelations concerning this, to warrant any Comparisons of
her state, with that of Angels and Archangels; yet upon general Reasons we may
say, with sufficient assurance, That her Rewards and Glories in Heaven are
exceeding great, and such as hold proportion, not only with her Faith and
Patience (for as some think she suffered Martyrdom;) but likewise with that
Honor, which God was pleased to confer upon her in this World.

Now if any thing remains, whereby to express the Tenderness we have for the
honor of the B. Virgin, it is this, That we should do what we can to redeem her
Name, from that dishonorable Imputation of affecting Glories, that cannot
belong to the most Excellent Creature, that is but a Creature. For they who by
most solemn Rites of Religious Service address to her, as to the Queen of
Heaven and Earth, would make us believe, and pretend to believe themselves,
that she is pleased with that Worship, which they offer to her. But if, as we
say, they yield to her those Services, which no Creature is to receive; they do
by consequence represent her as a Lady, that aspires to the Glory of the Most
High; which is by no means for the Glory of the B. Virgin. And if their
Saint-Worship be liable to the same charge, thus also they represent the other
Saints. Now tho in opposing their Doctrine and Practice, we are principally
moved, by that Concern we ought to have for the Glory of our Creator and
Savior; yet it is some inducement to us so to do, that we shall thereby
vindicate the B. Virgin also, and all the glorified Saints. For if she knows
what passes amongst Mortals, she cannot but be displeased at those Services,
that have been and still are paid to her, by some of her Son's Disciples; and
if she said any thing at all to 'em, she would say to her Votaries, but with
greater indignation, what the Angel said to St. John falling at his feet to
worship him, Rev. 19.10.
See thou do it not: I am thy Fellow Servants: Worship God.

The same I say of the Angels, the Apostles, the Martyrs and all the Saints,
whom they honor with the same kind of Worship, that they give to the B. Virgin.
Only the Degree of her Worship, and the Frequency of their Addresses to her,
and the strength of their Confidence in her is so much greater, that they have
thought fit to invent a word of Art to express it by. Hyperdulia they call it;
a word which our people cannot understand better, then by knowing the Practice
which it is a name for.

It is so vast a proportion of Religious Service which they render to her, it
consists of so many Parts and Diversities, that it were a Labor to recount
them, as particularly as the Case would bear. It shall suffice to mention some
of the principal Heads. They worship her with Religious Prayers and Vows. They
erect Churches and Oratories for her Service; where they worship her very
Images and Pictures, and pretended Relics. They make Rosaries, and compose
Hours, Psalters, and other Forms of Devotion to her. They ask things of her,
that are proper to be asked of God only. They burn Incense to her Images, and
offer their very Sacrifice of the Mass in her Honor.

Now as to this, and all the rest, we cannot but stand amazed, that this
Service of the B. Virgin should grow to be one of the principal parts of their
Religion; when the H. Scriptures have not given us the least intimation of Rule
or Example for it, or of any Doctrine or Practice that leads to it. That it
should be a main design of their Catechismes, to instruct Youth in the Worship
of the B. Virgin; of their Sermons to excite the People to put Confidence in
her, and to call upon her for the present occasion; of their Books of Devotion
to direct them how to pray to her, and magnify her in Formal Invocations; of
their Confessors to enjoin Penitents to say so many Ave Mary's, in satisfaction
for their sins and to make at least as frequent Applications to Mary as to
Jesus himself, for deliverance from Sins and Dangers: When not one word, not
one Intimation of any thing, like to any thing of all this, is left upon record
in the Writings of the Evangelists and Apostles; from whom those men pretend to
derive their Religion; whose Books are large enough for this so famous a
Service, to have been at least mentioned somewhere or other; and who, without
all doubt, would have more then mentioned it, if it had been the Religion of
those Times. This is that we must always wonder at, and so much the more,
because the constant Tenor of the Holy Scriptures, bears against such Practices
as these, agreeably to that Precept of both Testaments, Thou shall worship the
Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

And indeed our Reasons, to keep at a distance from this worship of the B.
Virgin and the Saints, are so obvious and commonly known, that I shall not make
it a Business by it self to represent them. But these two things I shall
consider, as well as I can;

1. The plausible Expositions and Colors, by which they have tried of late to
^ustify themselves in these things.

2. What were the B ginnings of this kind of Worship amongst Christians, and by
what steps it is grown to that height, in which we now see it. I shall consider
the former in a narrow compass, because much has been said to it already. The
latter is what I chiefly design.

. 2.
IN pursuance of the first thing propounded, I shall particularly observe how
Monsieur de Meaux has expounded these Matters, under the heads of Religious
Worship, of Invocation of Saints, and giving honor to Images and Relics. But
I shall begin with the two latter, because he expounds these particularly; and
then I shall consider the general Defense he makes, for all the Religious
Worship they give to the B. Virgin, and to the Saints.

The Worship of Invocation, is the Foundation of a great many other things done
in her Service. For instance, It is this that has brought forth the Rosary,
the Psalters, the Hours, and all other Offices of Devotion to her. It is this
that has raised her Shrines, and built Oratories and Chapels for her especial
Service. And indeed, if she as well as God is to be worshipped with Prayers and
Hymns, it is but reasonable, that she should have her holy Places for such
Services, as well as God. And yet St. Cont. Maxim. Arian. lib. 1. c. 11.
Austin thought the erecting of Temples to be so proper an act of Divine
Worship that if we should do it to the most excellent Angel, we should be
anathematized from the Church of God. Whereas therefore our Churches are known
from one another in Cities and populous Towns, by the names of several Saints;
yet we profess that, however for distinction sake they are so called, they are
God's Houses and Oratories, and not theirs; and it is most manifest, that they
are used by us for his Worship, and not for theirs, in whole or in part.

The Invocation of the B. Virgin and the Saints, has run out into some
Excesses, from which they might have separated it; and therefore to these
Excesses I shall say but little, especially because they defend them very
faintly, and with great appearances of self-Condemnation.

It was too much in all reason, that the Council of Trent Sess. 25. de Invoc.
S. Bellar. de sanct. Beatit. lib. 1. c. 20.
allowed of Mental, as well as Vocal, Prayers to be made to the Saints; for
this ascribes to them the Knowledge of the Secrets of Hearts. And it is a very
faint Plea for this which Monsieur de Meaux Exp. p. 8.
makes in saying, that God did not disdain to discover future things to the
Prophets, tho they appear much more particularly reserved to his own knowledge.
For this does not clear Mental Praying to the Saints, from the consequence we
charge it with, unless they were sure, that as God discovered some future
things to the Prophets, so he does also perpetually reveal the Prayers of our
mind to the Saints. The Instance shows what is needless, that God can do it if
he please; it does not show that he does it, and that only would have been to
the purpose.

Besides, whatever Opinion they have of the Lawfulness and Profitableness of
praying to Saints, they should have been very much afraid, to affirm them to be
Mediators of Intercession; when without any distinction, the Scripture does not
only give to Christ the Quality of a Mediator, as M. de Meaux Exp. p. 6.
grants; but likewise the Quality of our Only Mediator, as he should have
granted. For as there is one God, so 1 Timothy 2.5.
there is one Mediator between God and Men, the Man Christ Jesus. Much less
should Men have been encouraged to make immediate Applications to the Saints,
more frequently than to God, or to Christ, as if the Saints were more easily
prevailed with by our Prayers, than our God and Savior. These Excesses were
too notorious to be denied, but withal they were too Scandalous to be
confessed; but in all reason they ought to have been severely reproved. M. de
Meaux would have us to observe, that the Council teaches, It is good and
profitable to pray to the Saints. And we do observe, that tho the Fathers were
not insensible of the extravagant Practices and Doctrines in this matter, that
were current amongst them, yet they would not vouchsafe to note them with the
least Censure; but were content to let them go on, as they had done before.

Moreover, they pray to the B. Virgin, to protect them from the Enemy, to
receive them at the hour of Death, to be propitious to them, to spare them, to
give them strength, to give them grace, to open the gate of Everlasting life to
them; and for all that a good Christian can ask of God. Such like Prayers do
they also offer to the other Saints. But neither shall I stay upon this;
because they do not go about to justify it amongst us, otherwise then by
pretending, that they say what they do not mean: and that the Intention of the
Church and of her Faithful, Exp. p. 6.
reduces these Prayers always to this Form, that the Saints would pray for us.
Now when they confess, p. 9.
that the outward Veneration is established to testify the inward sentiments
of the Mind, we desire no greater evidence of self-Condemnation in this Case,
then to hear them say quite backward, that the intention of the Church and her
Faithful, is established to explain the meaning of so considerable a part of
their outward Worship. But in the mean time God help the common People, if they
are to be judged after their own Intentions and Understandings, and not the
Intentions and Expositions of some few Guides of their Church.

To name no more of these Enormities; their dividing to the Saints their
several Offices in their Prayers to them, is a most unaccountable Superstition,
i. e. That one Saint is applied to for the cure of one Disease, and another for
another, and some peculiar things desired of almost every one. For how can they
persuade us, that they desire nothing of the Saints, but the help of their
Prayers, when they attribute to each Saint his particular Virtue and Power;
unless they think that St. Apollonia's Intercession is not as effectual against
the Gout, as the Toothache?

. 3.
But setting aside these Excesses, which several moderate Men of their own
Church have complained of, but all to no purpose; let us hear what they say in
behalf of Praying to the B. Virgin, and to the Saints at all, supposing it be
for nothing, but to pray for them, as one Creature may do for another, and that
they speak to her and them, in Hymns and Strains, which as to the matter
therein contained, do not exalt them above the condition of Creatures: In one
word, why they address to her, and the rest of the Saints, with any sort of
formal Invocation.

We dare not do this, because we believe Prayer to be an Essential Part of Gods
Worship, inasmuch as it is sometimes put for the whole. How shall they call upon
him, in whom they have not believed? i. e. How shall they serve and Worship
him? It Is so incommunicable a Worship, that God himself described his own House
by it. My house shall be called an house of Prayer. And surely when God named
his house, by some part, of that Service that was performed there, he would
choose such a part as was peculiar to himself. This and much more we say for our
selves.

But to all that we can say, they give this plausible Answer, What have they to
say to this Prayer? Pray for us. I^ it not word for word St. Paul's? Is it more
injurious to the Creator, because in the same Spirit we address to the Saints
that live with him. Past. Let. p. 16.
That it makes no more against their practice, in desiring the Prayers of their
Brethren in Heaven, then against theirs and ours, in desiring the Prayers of
our Brethren upon Earth; and, as Monsieur de M. says, that it is profitable to
pray to the Saints, in the same Spirit of Charity, and according to the same
order of Fraternal Society, which moves us to demand assistance of our Brethren
living upon Earth. Exp. p. 6.


Now this is a very popular way to save themselves from blame, but by no means
sufficient. For there is a Concurrence of other Reasons to make it profitable
to desire the Prayers of our Brethren upon Earth, besides these two, that they
are our Brethren, and that we love one another. God has manifestly approved it
in the Holy Scriptures; that is one Reason: Besides, we are also sure, that
when we desire our Brethren upon Earth to pray for us, that they hear us; that
is another reason. But neither of these Reasons can be justly produced, to show
the Profitableness of Praying to the Saints departed.

But because this is the most common and colorable Defense they make; I shall
further show, what may and ought to be replied to it, by the People of our
Communion. They say, we may as lawfully desire those in Heaven to Pray for us,
as those on Earth. But let us then tell them, that when we ask of one another
things proper to be asked, these Requests are by no means that which we
understand by Prayer, or Religious Invocation: and that themselves do not so
account them. Monsieur de M. clearly gives them another name, p. 6.7.
he calls it beseeching or demanding the assistance of our Brethren. But men of
all Religions do agree, this to be a quite different thing, from that part of
Religion which we call Prayer.

And to make this matter so plain, that it can neither be misunderstood nor
denied: Suppose a Man visited with the Pestilence, or any other dangerous
Distemper, to desire his Physician to apply his best Skill to recover him: Is
this Prayer or Religious Invocation? No; they will not say it is. But if the
same Person desires the B. Virgin, or St. Roche, or St. Sebastian to restore
him to health. This they will confess to be Prayer. And the reason of the
Difference is not, that the Physician is desired to help the Patient, by his
skill in natural Remedies; and the Saints by their Intercession with God. For
suppose that the Patient sends for the Priest, and desires him to pray for him,
they will not say that this Desire is a Prayer to the Priest, or a Religious
Invocation of him: They will tell you, that the Sick Man desires or demands the
assistance of the Priests Prayers. But still if he calls upon the B. Virgin, or
any of the Saints departed, to help him by their Prayers; this is properly, and
in the account of Religion, praying to them. What then is the reason of the
Difference; for here is a Request made to the Priest and to the Saint, and the
same Request too: why is one Prayer, and the other not? Now though we should
not perfectly agree with our Adversaries, about the reason of the Difference;
yet so long as it is and must be acknowledged, that the honest Requests, we
make to one another upon Earth, are not that part of Religion which we call
Prayer; but that the Requests, which we make to the departed Saints, are
Prayer; so long, I say, as this is granted it is plain, That this their common
Argument, It is lawful and profitable, to desire the assistance of our
Brethrens Prayers here upon Earth, and therefore it is lawful and profitable,
to call upon those in Heaven to assist us with their Prayers; is very
deceitful. For this is as much as to say: Those Requests which are not Prayer,
may be lawfully made to Creatures; and therefore those which are Prayer, may be
made to Creatures, as lawfully as those that are not.

Now if you desire to know, what it is in this case that makes the difference:
I think the Answer is very plain. For the difference is not to be taken. 1.
From the Matter of the Request, for that is the same: Nor 2. from the Persons
themselves to whom the request is made; for if the Saint departed were here,
why would my requesting of the same thing, be Prayer to him, and not to the
Priest? And therefore 3. It must necessarily lie in the different Circumstances
of the Priest, and the Saint; that the former is with me, and the latter is
absent from me. Requests made to the Faithful, are made to those that are
within the compass of civil Conversation: But the same Requests made to the B.
Virgin and the Saints, are made to those that are departed out of the compass
of civil Conversation. And this is that which makes them not to be Prayer in
the former case, and to be Prayer in the latter.

But if it be further inquired, why it is Prayer to ask the same things of
those that are distant from civil Conversation, which to ask of those that are
within the compass of it, is not Prayer? The Reason seems plainly to be this,
That when I address my self to one that is within the compass of civil
Conversation, in which Men use to hear or to understand one another; my
Assurance that he hears me, does no way ascribe to him a Knowledge or a
Presence, which is above the Condition of a Creature. But if I invoke the
Saints every where with Assurance that they hear me; I have no other reasonable
ground of such Assurance, then that they are every where present at the same
time: For if I acknowledge, that there is a certain limited Compass, within
which they can hear and know; let this Limit be never so wide, how can I be
assured, that they are not out of that Compass when I speak to them? But the
Romanists pray every where to every Saint, believing that they are heard. It is
certain, says one of them, Bellar. de sanct. Beat. l. 1. c. 20.
that the Saints know what we bring forth by the Affection of the Heart only.
Pesant. 1: Thom. qu. 12. Art. 10. disput. 7.
It is of Faith, says another, that the Blessed know our Prayers which we pour
out to them, else it were in vain to make them. Now a Request does undoubtedly
become Prayer, or Religious Invocation, when the making of it attributes any
Divine Prerogative or Perfection, to the Being that is called upon; and
therefore, because Immensity of Presence is an incommunicable Perfection of
God; and because also Requests made to those, that are out of all lines of
civil Communication, being made in Faith, do ascribe that Power to them which
is proper to God only: Therefore such Requests are properly Prayer, or
Religious Invocation.

It is indeed very possible, that he that prays to the B. Virgin, and to the
Saints, may not believe that they are Omni-present; but if he prays, as they
pretend to do in the R. Church, with Assurance, that they hear him, his Prayer
implies it, and himself by Construction of the Fact ascribes it to them. For
let him, if he can, produce any other reasonable ground of Assurance that they
hear him wheresoever and whenever he addresses to them. But instead of that
M. de Meaux tells us, That the Church contents her self to teach with All
Antiquity (not all Antiquity I am sure) those Prayers to be very profitable to
such who make them, whether it be the Saints know them, by the Ministry and
Communication of Angels, who according to the Testimony of the Scripture, know
what passes amongst us, Exp. p. 8.
etc. whether it be, that God himself makes known to them our Desires by a
particular Revelation: or lastly, whether it be that he discovers the Secret to
them in his Divine Essence, in which all Truth is comprised. Now if his Church
could have taught us, upon what grounds they are assured, that the Saints do
hear them either, this way or that way; or that God has in general revealed to
us, that they hear or know the Prayers we make to them, one way or other, and
therefore, that it is profitable to pray to them; she had not been content to
teach, that the Saints do know them some way or other, though she knows not how
or why. For what foundation that they hear us, can be gathered from such
uncertain and loose Conjectures, as these are? Can any Man convince me that a
thing is done, by telling me that it might be done by some way or other, for
any thing he knows to the contrary? And is this kind of Arguing, a sufficient
Ground to establish so solemn a part of Religion, as the Invocation of Saints?
I know it is possible for God to reveal to my Friend in the East Indies, what I
say here in England: But am I sure, that if I say to him an Ora pro nobis at
this distance, it reaches him forthwith? It were no difficult matter, if it
were needful, to find them trouble enough to clear these very Conjectures from
Absurdity; but as long as they are only Conjectures; they can be no Foundation
of a certain Persuasion. Whereas therefore, M. de Meaux says, It is manifest,
that to say a Creature may have the knowledge of these Prayers, by a Light
communicated to him by God, is not so elevate a Creature above his Condition. I
say, it is as manifest, that this is no ground of Certainty, that the Saints
hear our Prayers at all; and if this be all they have to say, and yet will
pretend to pray to them with Faith; there is but one ground left for that
Faith, viz. That the Saints are every where present, and are therefore elevated
above the Condition of Creatures: Which though some of themselves do not
believe, yet their Assurance to be heard, being altogether unreasonable without
that belief; their Prayers do give the Omni-presence of God to Creatures, which
is indeed the great reason, why their Addresses to the Saints are properly
Prayers.

This therefore I lay down, and let them remove it if they can; that to
invocate any Creature, who is out of the compass of civil Conversation, i.e.
with whom I cannot converse, as we do with one another, by speaking within the
known distances of Hearing, or by Writing, or Messages or the like, is in it
self a vain and foolish thing, because he is out of distance. But if I pretend,
that it is profitable to invoke the Saints, and this upon Assurance that they
hear me, tho I can neither tell which way in particular, nor can show in
general, that they do certainly hear me some way, that does not infer their
Omni-presence; there is no remedy, but my Invocation of them must by
consequence confess, that they are Omnipresent.

Let therefore those of our Communion say, that by calling upon God, they do
acknowledge his Omni-presence, as well as his other Infinite Perfections: and
that they are such Acknowledgments, which make their Invocation of God,
R^ligious Invocation, or that which is Prayer in the account of Religion: And
therefore, that they dare not call upon the Saints departed; because they being
without the compass of civil Conversation, or of such means of Communication,
as we have with one another in this World; we cannot be reasonably assured,
that they hear us, unless we will suppose them to be omni-present; which as we
do not believe, so we dare not do any thing that looks as if we did believe it.

Thus have I shown, what in our Judgment makes the difference, between asking
fit things of our Brethren upon Earth, and asking the same things of our
Brethren in Heaven; why one is not Prayer, and the other is; viz. Because the
Living are within our compass, and the Dead are out of it. But whatever it is
that makes the difference; since the honest Requests, we make to one another in
this World, are not Prayer, and the Requests we make to the Saints in Heaven
are Prayer; it does not follow, that we may request the same things of These,
as we may of Those: For if the Argument be put into proper Expressions, nothing
can be more apparently inconsequent; for then it would run thus: Because I make
my Requests known to those, to whom I do not offer the Religious Worship of
Prayer in so doing, therefore I may represent my Desires to those too whom I
cannot call upon, but my desires become the Worship of Prayer, or Religious
Invocation.

And from hence it appears, that though this Act of Religious Worship, be given
by those of the R. Church to the the meanest Saint; yet after the most
plausible Defense they make of their practice in so doing, it is not to be
given to the most excellent Creature, and therefore not to the B. Virgin her
self. And by this we may judge, what a Cause they have to maintain, who call
upon the Saints, and especially upon the B. Virgin, in strains so unsuitable to
the condition of Creatures; as they are whom they invoke: when because they are
but Creatures, they ought not to invoke them at all, since they are out of that
compass of Conversation, in which only we could speak to them as to Creatures,
with Faith that they hear us.

. 4.
To come to the next particular; when they kneel to the Images of the B. Virgin
and the Saints, and prostrate, and humble themselves and Pray before them; we
are given to understand, there is no harm in all this; bethey attribute no
other virtue to the Images, p. 9.
but that of exciting the remembrances of those they represent; and their
intention is not so much to honor the Image, p. 10.
as to honor the Apostle or the Martyr in the presence of the Image. As if the
Image were present, to see and observe the Honor that is done the Apostle or
Martyr: For it is no great honor that any body gets, by being honored in the
presence of mere Wood or Stone, that can neither see nor hear. This was an odd
expression of M. de Meaux, this of honoring the Martyr in the presence of the
Image, no way suitable to the design of his Exposition; but fitted only to the
Superstition of such People, who have been made to believe, by the weeping and
smiling of Images, and by the rolling of their Eyes, and by the shaking of
their Heads and Bodies, etc. that they are a kind of animated things. But to
let this pass; what though M. de. Meaux attributes no other virtues to Images,
but that of exciting Remembrance? What tho he takes a very commendable Care in
his Diocese, to make the People stop there? Does he not know by experience, do
not all wise Men know it, and many honest Men in the Communion of that Church
confess it, that in those Images which the people are taught to present
themselves before, with all the Ceremonies of Respect and Veneration; there is
another fatal Virtue, and that is to excite devotion toward themselves, even to
the demanding of Favors from them and putting Trust in them? Is it not as
notorious, that the wretched People are guilty of worshipping the Images of the
Saints, no otherwise than they do the Saints themselves, as that they Worship
the Saints no otherwise then they Worship God himself; ^ain. in Civit. D. Lib.
8. c. 27.
as Ludov. Vives complained. If it be said that these Abuses may be provided
against, and Images may be still Honored (for Honor is the Word, though
Religious worship is the Thing) I would know, why men should make Provisions in
this case, as if they were wiser than God, who to prevent these mischiefs has
forbidden Image Worship altogether. If there were any such Advantages to be
made of it, in comparison to which the Danger of it were nothing at all, how
comes it to be so severely Prohibited? But when we consider, for whose sake
chiefly they pretend the Profitableness of Image Worship; we see how true it
is, that the Wisdom of Man is but Foolishness, when it would mend the
provisions of God. For Images are by all means to be retained and honored,
because they are the Books and Remembrances of the Common People; and Helps to
their Piety and Devotions; who therefore cannot be without them: Trid. sess.
25. De. Invoc. S.
But M. de Meaux, knows that these are most apt to be led into the worst
Superstitions by Images, and that it is one of the hardest things in the World
to prevent it.

M. de Meaux tells us, their Intention is not so much to honor the Image, as
the Apostle or Martyr. He will say too, that it is the Intention of the Church,
that none of the People should intend more then this comes to. But let him tell
me, how or where the Church has expressed her self, with the least degree of that
Zeal, which the redressing of such horrible abuses in this matter, as are every
where known, does still require. The Superstition of the vulgar in their
Communion is notorious, and which is still worse, the Doctrines leading to the
most Superstitious Opinions and Practices in this kind, were and are notorious;
for instance; That the same worship is due to the Image, which is due to the
Prototype: And are not these things uncensured by the Church of Rome to this
day? If indeed we could once see that Church bestir her self, against the gross
Excess of Image Worship, as she does against those that do not worship Images
at all, we might allow something to this Exposition of their Intentions. But as
far as we can see, they that worship the very Images themselves, and put
confidence in them, go for very good Catholics; while we that dare not worship
them at all, because God has forbidden it, are for our forbearance used, as
they use Heretics.

But setting all this aside, what signifies the Intention of the Church, if it
ran through all the Members of it, against an express Prohibition in the
Scriptures? It is not lawful to do that with a Distinction, which is forbidden
without a distinction. God has said, Thou shall not bow down to Images, nor
worship them. If indeed he had elsewhere made an Exception to this Rule, it had
been lawful for us to have made use of his permission, it had been necessary
for us to have observed his command in the excepted Case. But where God has
not excepted or distinguished, we ought not to do so: unless we will open a
door, to evacuate all divine Laws whatsoever, by arbitrary Distinctions and
Reservations.

In short, that Worship which they pretend to give to the Saints by their
Images, has these two terrible Prejudices against it.

1. That the Honor, which they give to the Saints by their Images, supposing
none of it to be lost by the way, is not to be given to the Saints themselves;
as we have shown already.

2. That the Worship of Images, let it be explicated with all the Fineness and
Arts of Disguise they are Masters of, is after all to be utterly excluded out
of Religion. This being a Worship, which God will by no means endure should be
given to himself, having universally prohibited it. Thou shall not make to thy
self any graven Image, nor the likeness of any thing that is etc. which is to
my understanding, as plain a Prohibition of all Image Worship whatsoever, as
these words would have been an Injunction of it, viz. Thou shall make to thy
self such or such Images and Pictures, and shall bow down before them and
worship them, if this had been said instead of the contrary. Now indeed if this
had been said, it had been extremely necessary to distinguish, between Relative
Worship and Absolute Worship, between Worship terminated upon the Image, and
Intended to the person represented by the Image; between taking it for a God or
a Saint, and taking it only for some Representation of the one or the other.
But as in that case such distinctions had been very necessary, so as the case
stands they are vain and impertinent. For if Image Worship had been commanded
or permitted, still we had been to worship Images, but as Images: But it being
forbidden, we are not to worship them at all. I say if it had been allowed, we
must indeed have worshipped them with a Distinction; but as it is forbidden, we
must not worship them tho with a distinction, because it is forbidden without
any distinction, and as universally as words can express any thing.

M. de Meaux says, that after the same manner, we ought to understand the Honor
which they pay to Relics after the Example of the Primitive Church. The
Example of the Primitive Church, shall be considered in its place. In the mean
time, If the Worship of Images, and the Worship of Relics, are to stand or
fall together, we have already seen, what will become of this; having shown how
unsuccesfully they plead for the other. But if M. de Meaux, pleads for the
Practice of the people, or even the Doctrine of his Church in this Point; he
must pardon us, if we do not think fit, to take general Apologies, for a
reasonable Inducement, to do those things, which he was not willing to name in
particular. We may say in general, says M. de Meaux; That if Protestants would
but consider, how the Affection which we bear to any one propagates it self,
without being divided, to his Children, to his Friends; and after that, by
several degrees to the Representation of him, to any Remains of him, and to any
thing which renews in us his Remembrance. If they did but conceive, that Honor
has the like Progression, seeing Honor is nothing else, but Love mixed with
Respect and Fear: In fine, if they would but consider, that all the exterior
Worship of the Catholic Church, has its Source in God himself, and returns
back again to him: They would never believe, that this Worship, which he
himself alone animates, could excite his Jealousy. M. de Meaux, considered
very well, that it was much better, to put us off with this general Account,
than to mention the Particulars he goes about to Justify. It seems, the
Worship of Relics, is intended for the Honor of the Martyrs, and the Worship
of the Martyrs, for the Honor of God. But what kind of Superstition might not
be defended by such Apologies as these; if men's Blood, Bones, Teeth, Hairs,
Coats, Girdles, Shoes, and such like little things, may be incensed; if they
may be exposed, with a Venite ad adorandum, to receive the Prostrations of the
people, Catech. R. de Cultu sanct.
in the presence of Christ himself, whom they suppose to be bodily present upon
the Altar: if they may be sought unto for great Graces, and for miraculous
Cures; if they may be carried about, to preserve a man from Fire, from Storms,
from Pestilence, from the Danger of Battle, and from ghostly, as well as
bodily, Enemies: If all this, I say, be but the Effect of a Progression of
Honor, and may be brought off with a Protestation, that the Worship is animated
by God alone, and is performed for his sake.

M. de Meaux says, That if God, as jealous as he is of the Love of men, does
not look upon us, as dividing our selves betwixt him and his Creatures, when we
Love our Neighbor, for the Love of him; the same God, though jealous of the
Honor which his Faithful pay him, cannot look upon them, as dividing that
Worship, which is due to him alone, when out of Respect to him, they honor
those whom he has honored. But as there may be an inordinate Love of our
Neighbor, whom yet God has commanded us to love; so there may be an
inordinate Honor, given by us, even to those whom God has honored: And if we
go beyond the Bounds that God has set us, in loving the one, and honoring the
other; if we love our Neighbor, as we should love God only; if we honor the
Martyrs and the Saints, as God only ought to be honored; it will I presume, be
no sufficient Excuse to say, that it was done out of Respect to God. The thing
which M. de Meaux should have spoken to, but has not, is this, That the Honor
they pay to Relics, is not part of that Worship, which is due to none but
God. Without this it is in vain, to flourish out a general Notion which no man
denies, viz. That we may so Love the Fathful, and Honor the Martyrs, and the
very Relics of Martyrs, as not to divide between them and God, the Love and
Worship which is due to him alone. The truth is, M. de Meaux had a very hard
Task in the Exposition of the Veneration, which they give to Relics. For,
whereas he had some Color to insist upon the moderation of his Church, in the
Business of Images, since the Council of Trent declares, that there is no
Virtue in them, for which they ought to be reverenced, or trusted in; yet he
wanted such a Declaration as this, as to the business of Relics, and could
not say, that either the Council, or the Catechism declares against believing
any Virtue in Relics; since notwithstanding, the Caution they have used in
the manner of Expression, both the one, and the other teach the contrary. So
that the Superstition of Relics in the R. C. is greater than that of Images.
And therefore, M. de M. had nothing to do, but to set off the whole Matter by
general Apologies, because it would not bear a Defense of the Particulars. But
of this, I shall say no more, because the Exposition he makes of their Doctrine
and Practice, as to this matter, is very like to that which he makes of the
general difference, between that Worship which they give to God alone, and that
which they give to the B. V. and the Saints. Which is the next thing I am to
consider.

. 5.
They teach, That the Adoration which is due to God alone, consists principally
in believing he is the Creator and Lord of all things; and in adhering to him,
with all the Powers of our Soul, by Faith, Hope and Charity, as to him alone,
who can render us happy, by the Communication of an Infinite Good, which is
himself. This interior Adoration, Exp. p. 4.
has its exterior Marks; of which the principal is Sacrifice, which cannot be
offered to any, but to God; because a Sacrifice is established to make a
public Acknowledgement, and a solemn Protestation of God's Sovereignty, and
our absolute Dependence. Thus the Worship they give to God only is described.
Concerning the Worship they give to the B. Virgin, and the Saints, thus M. de
Meaux speaks: The Church teaches us, that all Religious Worship ought to
terminate in God, as its necessary End; and that if the Honor which she renders
to the B. p. 5.
Virgin, and to the Saints, may in some sense be called Religious, it is for
its necessary Relation to God.

We shall now be better able to examine the Difference, which he puts in
general between the Adoration which is due to God alone, and that Honor which
they render to the B. Virgin and the Saints, because we have seen in great
part, in what this Honor consists,

What M. de M. has said concerning the inward Adoraration of God, is
exceedingly well said. But if we go on, and take altogether, we cannot but
discern, That this great Man had labored his Thoughts into such words, as
should provide with great appearance of Piety for the Honor of God, that We
might not be offended; while yet he was to save some of it for the B. Virgin
and the Saints, that he might not seem to desert the Cause of his Church.

For whereas he distinguishes between the inward and outward Worship, which is
due to God only, he avoids that Distinction, in speaking of the Honor which
they render to the B. Virgin and the Saints; for it had been a dangerous way of
exposing the Doctrine of the pretended Catholics, to tell us what inward or
mental Worship is to be given them.

Whereas the Title of the Section is, Sect. 3.
That Religious Worship is terminated in God alone; when he was to speak of the
Honor they render to the B. Virgin and to the Saints; he qualifies it with this
Supposition, If it may in some sense be called religious. Now to say, If it be
Religious; nay if it may be called R^ligious, and that but in some sense too,
are very new and surprising ways of expression; and would make one suspect that
all of them are not fully satisfied in giving a Worship to the B. Virgin and to
the Saints, which without all Question is, and therefore ought to be called,
Religious Worship; as those that have gone before them in this Cause, have
without scruple called it.

He gives this Reason, why Sacrifice is to be offered to God only: Because a
sacrifice is established to make a public acknowledgment and a solemn
profession of Gods Sovereignty and our absolute dependence. But when he should
give a proportionable Reason, why his Church renders to the B. Virgin and to
the Saints, the Honor of Praying to them, which is one instance he presently
names; he slips it over and pretends no more, then that all Religious Worship
ought to terminate in God, as its necessary end, and if it may be called
Religious it is because of its necessary Relation to him. Now he should have
said, Prayer is established to make a public Acknowledgment, and solemn
Protestation, as well of the Power and Excellency of the B. Virgin and the
Saints, as of the perfection of God. But though the nature of his discourse
required some such reason, yet the nature of his Design would not bear it,
which was to remove the frightful Ideas of his Religion, which we have
entertained, and to represent it in a more agreeable and pleasing Form, than we
have yet known it by.

Other Observations of this kind might be made, to make it probable, that it
cost even M. de. M. some little trouble to contrive his discourse into this
plausible Appearance, and to show that it is no easy matter, at the same time
to make a smooth Representation of their Religion and not to change it. But I
shall now offer my Reasons, to show the Unsatisfactoriness of his Exposition in
this cause, as he has formed it.

1. Setting aside their Profession of one God, which is supposed in the
Question concerning his particular Worship: I find no outward Mark, of the
Adoration that is due to God only, mentioned, but that of Sacrifice, which
indeed M. de M. says is the principal But in a point of this consequence, I
wish he had been pleased to name he rest But I think I may appeal to the
Sincerity of M de Meaux, whether by Sacrifice he means any thing more than the
Sacrifice of the Mass, in which they pretend to offer up offer up Jesus Christ,
the Son of God his natural Body Soul and Divinity, as a Propitiation for the
Quick and the Dead: For my part I cannot find, but they give all other outward
marks of Adoration to the B. Virgin but this; so that the Worship given to God,
and that to her are distinguished I fear but by one mark. And what a rare
Account is this of Gods incommunicable Worship if that mark too should prove to
be one of their own Inventions; if such a sacrifice as that, was not appointed
by God; if indeed it be repugnant to the plain Authority of the Scripture; as
the exposition of our Doctrine has irrefragably shown in a very little
Compass! This is my first Ex^eption, That all the outward marks of Religious
Worship, which God has established, they make common to God and the Saints;
and that which they give to God only, they have made themselves.

2. Even this very Sacrifice of the Mass, is offered up by them, in honor of
the B. Virgin and the Saints. For thus the Oblation runs in their Missals.
Accept, O Holy Trinity, this Oblation which we offer to thee, in honor of the
most glorious Virgin, the Mother of God, etc. Now surely they would not offer
God himself in Sacrifice to a Creature. But it comes something near it, to
offer up such a Sacrifice in honor of a Creature. For while this is done, how
can it be said, that Sacrifice is reserved to be a Protestation of that Honor,
which is due to God only.

3. They burn Incense to the B. Virgin and the Saints, which being done as a
Religious Rite in their Honor, will hardly avoid being a Sacrifice. For though
this Rite of burning Incense, was no part of the Religion that Jesus or his
Apostles taught, nor used at all in the Ancient Church; yet it should seem to
be no less a Sacrifice now, then it was among the Jews, or then it would have
been, if it had been transferred from the Synagogue into the Church. I suppose,
if the Church of Rome had thought fit, to introduce the Oblations of Beasts and
Birds into her Religious Worship; she could not deny, but such Oblations had
been properly Sacrifices, and were to be made to God only: And that though it
were Judaism to offer them at all; it were yet Idolatry to offer them to any
but to God. But what should make any such difference, between Slaying of
Victims, and burning of Incense; that the former should belong to God only, and
not the latter, I cannot comprehend. For the Altar of incense was most holy
unto the Lord; it was overlaid with Gold, which the Altar of Burnt Offerings
was not; and it was more holy then the Altar of burnt-Offerings, as standing in
the more Holy place; and none but the Seed of Aaron was to come near to offer
incense before the Lord. No wonder therefore, that Hezekiah brake in pieces the
Brazen Serpent, when they burned Incense to it; for this was no less than
offering Sacrifice to it. To conclude, the Idolatry which the Heathens sought
to bring the Christians to, was no other then to take a little Incense in their
hands, and throw it into the Fire of their Altars. But yet they burn Incense to
the Images and Relics of the B. Virgin and the Saints: And then how can they
pretend to sacrifice to God only? But,

4. Setting all this aside, let us consider, that they grant Sacrifice is to be
offered to God only, because it is established to make a public
Acknowledgment, and a Solemn Protestation of Gods Sovereignty, and of our
absolute Dependence. Now if this be true, then whatsoever is established for
the same purpose, is holy to the Lord also. And therefore Religious Invocation
by Prayers for good things, by Confessions of Sin, by vows of Repentance and
Duty, and by Thanksgivings for benefits received, is to be offered to God only.
For in truth, these are acknowledgments and Protestations of Gods Sovereignty,
and of our absolute Dependence. Nay in truth, they are more noble and excellent
Sacrifices, than those Victims and other more sensible Oblations, which God
required under the Law, or before it, and which he does not require now. But
that which I lay the greatest stress upon is this, That those material
Sacrifices, were so many Rites and Ceremonies of Invocation, diversified
according to the several ends of Invocation, either for confessing of Sin, or
obtaining a benefit, or returning Praises for Benefits received. Hence it is,
that Prayer and Sacrifice are put one for the other in the Holy Scriptures as
when it is said; The Sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord, Pro.
but the Prayer of the upright is his delight: By which words it is plain, that
the Sacrifice of the Wicked, is his Prayer, and the Prayer of the upright is
his Sacrifice. Now Prayer, and Sacrifice strictly so called, were both Acts of
Worship; but Prayer more excellent than Sacrifice, because Sacrifice was the
Rite of Prayer, and a Rite which God required no longer, than till that most
precious Sacrifice of the Son of God was offered for us; the Merit of which
alone it is, that made the Prayers of good men in all ages acceptable to God.

And by the way, it would be considered by the Gentlemen of the Church of Rome,
That when those (...) perfect Sacrifices, which prefigured the oblation of
(...) once for all, were offered under the Law; the (...) Gods People were then
made only to God. (...) now that the Prayers of the Church are sanctified, by
the accomplishment of the Sacrifice of the Son of God, to offer any of them to
a Creature, is rather a greater Dishonor to God than, it would have been
before. For if the Patriarchs and the Jews were to pray to him only, to whom
alone they offered Sacrifice, i. e. to God; much more shall the Sacrifice of
the Son of God, which has been actually offered for us, infer our Obligation
to make all our Prayers and Religious Invocations to God only, to whom we have
Access by the merit of that Sacrifice.

But this I insist upon, That if we compare the legal Sacrifices, with the
Prayers of Gods People under the Law, these were no less Protestations of Gods
Sovereignty and man's absolute dependence then those were; and that the House
of God, was no less denominated by a Service peculiar to him, in being called
an House of Prayer, then if it had been called an House of Sacrifice, as it was
an House of Sacrifice too. A House of Sacrifice to the Jews, and a House of
Prayer to all Nations.

Now, if these more Spriritual and reasonable Sacrifices of a Penitent and
broken Heart, a believing and humble Heart, a devout and thankful Heart offered
in Religious Invocation, are such Acknowledgments as M. de M. speaks of; then
are they not to be offered to the B. Virgin and the Saints, but to God only.
And what now is it that M. de M. means, by terminating the Honor they render
to the B. V. upon God? Is it this, That the Honor done to her, by Invocating
her with Prayers, Hymns, Confessions of Sin, Vows, and Devoting themselves to
her Service, is all intended by the Church for the Honor of God? I would then
know, why any Sacrifice may not also be offered directly to the Virgin, the
Church intending, that the Honor of it should terminate upon God, and believing
that he has all the Honor of it at last. No, say they, Sacrifice is established
to make a public acknowledgement of Gods Sovereignty. But then I add, that
Religious Invocation is established to make such an Acknowledgment too. So that
if Terminating Religious Worship upon God, will warrant giving it to the B.
Virgin, and the Saints, their Church may give to them that Worship of the more
sensible Sacrifices, which yet they pretend to deny. And if no Worship is to be
given to the Saints, which is established to make a Solemn Acknowledgment of
Gods Sovereignty, and our dependence, they must deny to the B. V. and to the
Saints, that more Spiritual Worship of Prayers, Hymns, and Vows, which they
give. Nor will they ever be able to avoid these difficulties, but by coming out
of the Clouds, and confessing according to the plainness and the simplicity of
the Scriptures, That all Religious Worship is due to God, and to him only,
inasmuch as Religious Worship is established to make an Acknowledgment of Gods
Sovereignty, and our absolute Dependence: And public Acts of Religious
Worship, to make public and solemn Acknowledgments thereof.

. 6.
Thus I have considered the Defense, that M. de M. has made of the Worship of
the B. V. and the Saints, as it is practiced in the Church of Rome; and I
promise my self, that whoever shall seriously consider what has been said,
willnot be encouraged, by the Exposition of this Practice, to venture upon it.
I know that many of the R. Church, fortify themselves, against all our
Arguments upon these Points, by this Persuasion: That so long as they do not
make Gods of the Saints, but believe and profess, that there is but one God,
infinite in all Perfections; all the Honors they give to the B. Virgin and the
Saints, are to be interp reted by this Protestation: That they have no other
God, but the Creator of the World, nor Lord, but the Savior of mankind. But if
they in this manner assure themselves, and would encourage others: I beseech
them to consider, and would to God, they would all consider but this one thing:
That if the Sin of Idolatry could not take place, where there is such a
Profession, and such a Faith in one God (though I more than fear the contrary;)
yet the Saint-Worship of the Roman Church, does approach so very near it, and
is so very like it, that even this, (if no more were to be said) should be a
sufficient Reason to deter us from It. A Woman that is faithful to her Husband,
will not only forbear doing the utmost Injury to him, by giving his Bed to
another; but she will avoid all those Familiarities and Caresses with any other
man, which are scandalous, which lead to the last Treachery, and which would
provoke her Husband's Jealousy. Now God has described his peoples Relation to
him, by the Relation of a Wife to her Husband, not only in the Old Testament,
but in the New; from whence it is, that the Worship of other Gods is called
Fornication, Whoredom and Adultery. Thus God charged the Jews, for inflaming
themselves with Idols, Isa. 57.5.7.
under every green Tree, and setting up their Beds upon every lofty and high
Mountain, and enlarging their Bed, because they had many Idols. Thus it was
said of Israel, Jerem. 3.6.9.
that she had through the Lightness of her Whoredoms, defiled the Land, and
committed Adultery with Stocks and Stones. This is the Language of the whole
16th. Chap. of Ezekiel. where God threatened to judge the Jews, as Women that
break Wedlock are judged, and would give them their Reward in Fury.

Now supposing, that there were no other Idolatry in the Nature of the thing,
no other spiritual Whoredom and Fornication, but Worshipping that for God,
which is not God; and that if we do but make this difference, between the
Worship that we give to God, and that which we give to his Courtiers and
Favorites, that still we Acknowledge them to be Creatures, and not Gods,
Servants, and not Lords; and so do not give them that last and distinguishing
Honor, which to give would, by the Confession of all, be spiritual Adultery in
the highest degree: Supposing this, I say; yet let us in the Name of God
consider, that to give Religious Worship to Creatures, as well as to God; to
fall down to Images, as well as to God; and to give almost quite throughout the
same outward Expressions of Honor, of Faith, of Love, of Religious Expectation
and Dependence to the B. V. and to Saints and Angels, which we give to God; if
it be not downright whoredom, is yet a whorish Behavior, and more than
sufficient to provoke the Lord to Jealousy. I cannot but speak in the Language
of the Scripture, upon an Argument that the Scriptures so largely treat of in
this Language.

It is worthy of much Observation, that God gives this very Reason, why he
prohibited the Worshipping of Images: For I the Lord thy God, am a jealous God.
And that we might not think it a light matter, to provoke his Jealousy; he
adds, and I visit the Sins of the Fathers, upon the Children to the third and
fourth Generation of them that hate me. I know who they are, that would fain
believe the Worship of no other Images, but those of the Gods of the Gentiles,
to be forbidden in the second Commandment. But I must needs say, upon this
Occasion, that if that had been the only design of that Commandment; it is
very strange, that God should note the Worshipping of the Heathen Gods, with no
other penalty, than that which his Jealousy would inflict: For to have any
other Gods besides him, is without all question, spiritual Whoredom; and had
been threatened with Divorce, if the Prohibition of so great a Crime, had needed
the of Sanction of any express Threatening. But when he threatens the Worship of
Images, with the Effects of his Jealousy: it seems plain, that he means such
Image Worship, as is consistent with acknowledging him to be our Only God. And
yet this is the least of all those Reasons, by which it appears to me, that he
forbids in this Commandment, the Worship of all Images whatsoever. I deny not
therefore, but a man may kneel, may kiss, may incense, may prostrate himself,
and pray before an Image; and all this while ascribe no Divinity to it, nor
take it to be his God. So likewise he may Pray, and make Vows, and offer Thanks
and Praises to the Saints, and to the B. Virgin, and not take them neither for
his Gods. But because God is the peerless Majesty of Heaven and Earth, he will
be served with a peerless Worship; he will therefore have no such things as
these done in Religion, nor Creatures to have Respect shown them, that look so
like to the Worship which he requires himself. Why do I say, so like? That
which they give to the B.V. and to the Saints, is almost the very same. But if
we do such things as these, it will not serve our turn, to plead, That we still
keep the inward Adoration of Spirit and Truth entirely for him, though we thus
honor his Creatures with Religious Rites, and Services; any more than it would
excuse a Woman, that had given all the Favors and Liberty to another Man, that
could provoke her Husband's Jealousy, to say, (though she could say it with
Truth;) that she remembered all the while who was her Husband, and whatever
Liberties besides she used, that she had still kept his Bed undefiled.

This Consideration I could not forbear to use; and that in Compassion to
those, whose Prejudices will not let them feel the Sense of those Reasonings,
by which we prove the Roman Church to be guilty of downright Idolatry. For if
the fear of God's Jealousy, would keep them from giving those Honors to the
Saints, which look so like Divine Honors, if they are not so; we should gain
our end upon them, though not by the force of the best arguing the Case will
bear: And this is our End, That God may not be any more dishonored, and their
Salvation hindered, by the unchristian Doctrines and Practices of this sort. I
have therefore now proceeded upon this Supposition, that they are not guilty of
perfect Idolatry, in t^ose things which we complain of, and yet shown what
urgent Cause there is upon another Account, for a Reformation of them. But I
conclude this, with professing, That I have supposed them not guilty of that
fearful Crime, only to make way for another Argument, since all Arguments are
to be used in so important a Matter, that have a Foundation of Truth; but not
in distrust of those Arguments, which prove them guilty of it.

. 7.
The second thing I propounded was, to show the beginnings of this strange
Worship amongst Christians, which they offer in the Church of Rome to the B.
Virgin, and to the Saints. For I must not forget, that M. de Meaux pretends,
that his Church in these things teaches as the Primitive Church taught, and
that she does what she teaches with all Antiquity.

But what if nothing of all this, was either Taught or done in the Church for
360 years after Christ? M. de M. says, that those of the Pretended Reformation
(obliged by the strength of Truth) begin to acknowledge, that the custom of
Praying to Saints, and honoring their Relics, was Established even in the
fourth Age of the Church. This he takes all occasions to insinuate; and with
these colors he serves himself to represent the Reformation as odiously as he
can devise. Thus he tells us in his Pastoral Letter; But above all what horror
are they worthy of, Past. l. p. 29.
who cast the Accusation [of Idolatry] upon the whole Church, and also on the
Church of the first Ages? Where he takes it for granted, that the Honor and
Innocence of the first Ages must stand or fall with the Cause of the Roman
Church; and so takes occasion to accuse us of a great and fearful Crime, viz.
That we cast the accusation of Idolatry upon the whole Church, even the Church
of the first Ages: He had observed but just before, that those who bear false
and scandalous Witness against an Innocent Person, are Condemned to the same
punishment which the Crime of which they bear Witness, did deserve, had it been
found true. And therefore we deserve before men, the Horror which is due to
Idolatry, and shall receive the just punishment thereof in the sight of God. If
this Rule be true, and we must incur the Penalties of Idolatry, if we falsely
accuse others of it; M. de Meaux ought to reflect upon himself; who having
accused us of falsely accusing the First Ages in this matter, supports his
Accusation by taking these two things for granted: First, that we acknowledge
the Illustrious Fourth Age to have requested the Prayers of Martyrs, and
honored Relics; Ibid.
as the pretended Catholics have done since: Secondly, that the Fourth Age
being granted them, the first Three must be theirs in course. If M. de Meaux be
safe upon these Grounds; we have no great cause to apprehend the Horrors and
Punishments of false Accusation. And if this be all he has to say, it is but a
very slender ground for an Appeal to the Primitive Church, and to all
Antiquity. For neither have the. Reformed acknowledged heretofore, Id. p. 8.
nor do they now begin to acknowledge, that the Customs of the Roman Church in
these points, were established in the Fourth Age of the Church. Nor if they did
acknowledge it, would this Acacknowledgment give away the Primitive Church, and
all Antiquity in favor of Praying to Saints, and worshipping of Images and
Relics; unless the first three Ages were less Ancient and Primitive, than
those that followed.

That which we acknowledge, is not that Saint-Worship was Established in the
Fourth Age; but this, that toward the latter end of the Fourth Age, some
unhappy occasions were given, for the Establishing of that Worship in after
Ages; which we could wish had never been given, and which the Great Men of
those Days (we have reason to believe) would have prevented, if they had been
Prophets, as well as holy Men, and foreseen the Mischiess, into which they were
ripened, by the Superstition of aftertimes.

I shall therefore demonstrate, that it is a vain thing for the pretended
Catholics to presume, that they have the Authority of the three First Ages,
for the worship of Saints Images and Relics, upon supposition that the
Doctors, toward the close of the Fourth Age, were theirs in these Points. And
then I shall not fear, to give the truest Account I can, of those Practices at
that time, which grew afterward into the Superstitions we now complain of.

Monsieur de Meaux says, It will not appear very likely that M. Daille should
understand the sentiments of the Fathers of the three first Ages, better than
those who gathered, as I may say, the Succession of their Doctrine after their
deaths. These Gentlemen, I perceive, will content themselves with any pretense,
to shift off the Trial of their Doctrines and Practices, by the Authority of
the three First Ages. For whether that be likely, or not which M. de Meaux here
puts; yet I hope we may look into the Writings of the most Primitive Fathers,
to see how things went in their times. And it is very likely that M. Daille
might understand the sentiments of the Fathers of the Three first Ages, as well
as he understood the Sentiments of those of the Fourth. And so long as we can
have recourse to the undoubted Writings of the three first Ages, we may get the
Doctrine of those Fathers this way, with a little more Assurance, then by
guessing what their Sentiments were, from the Books of their Successors: Which
every reasonable Man must acknowledge, unless it be reasonable to suppose that
the Fathers of the Three first Ages, did not understoud their own Sentiments,
so well as the Fathers of the Fourth understood them.

Now in the first place, the profound Silence of the three First Ages, and the
better half of the Fourth, as to the Worship of the B. Virgin and the Saints,
and their Images and Relics, should be enough to determine the first Point in
question. And this Silence is not only directly confessed by some of our
Adversaries, but as effectually confessed by the rest, that labor to find some
hints of these Practices in these primitive Fathers; but by such
Interpretations and Consequences, that it is almost as great a shame to consute,
as to make them. Now the Silence of these Fathers ought not to be rejected, as
an incompetent Proof, because it is but a Negative. For since we pretend, that
these Practices are Innovations and were never heard of in the Ancient Church:
It is not reasonable to demand a better Proof of it, than that in their Books,
some of which give large and particular Accounts of their Worship, and of their
Doctrines concerning Worship, we can no where meet with the least Intimation or
Footstep of them. Would our Adversaries have us bring express Testimonies out
of the Fathers against these things, as if they wrote and disputed by the
Spirit of Prophecy, against those Corruptions that should arise, several Ages
after they were dead? We have, as I shall show, other ways of discovering their
Sentiments, besides this, that they make not the least mention of these
Services. But to demand more than their perpetual Silence in these Cases, is
unreasonable; because no satisfactory Account can be given of it, but this,
That the Worship we speak of, was indeed no part of their Religion. Had it been
some indifferent Rite or Ceremony, that we contend about; this Argument from
the Silence of the Fathers, against its Antiquity, might with some Color be
rejected; because it were unreasonable to expect, that they should take notice
in their Writings, of every Custom of how little moment soever. And yet we
find, that in matters even of this slight nature in comparison, they have not
been wanting, to give us very much Information. But it is altogether
incredible, that so notable and famous a Part of the the Worship of Christians,
as that which is now given to the B. Virgin, and to the Saints, should not be
mentioned by any one of them, if it had been the Custom of those times. Justin
Martyr, Athenagoras, Tertullian, Minutius Felix, all the Apologists, or at
least one of them, would have taken some notice of it; especially, since this
part of their Religion, would have needed Exposition and Defense, more than all
the rest; for it would have made them obnoxious to the Recriminations of the
Heathens; and brought all their own Arguments upon themselves, which they had
used against the Heathens, in Defense of their own Worshipping the one God, and
him only.

But perhaps they all agreed toconceal this Saint-Worship from the Heathens,
for the same Reason why Salmeron thinks, the Apostles and Evangelists concealed
it at first from both Jews and Gentiles, because, forsooth, it had been hard to
require it of the Jews (who had been taught to pray to God only, Salmer. in 1
Tun. 2. Disp. 8.
and to Worship none but him) and by publishing it, Occasion had been given to
the Gentiles to think, that many Gods were now offered them, instead of that
multitude of Gods which they had forsaken. A very likely Reason, thus far; That
if this had been the Doctrine of the Church, it was highly necessary to keep it
secret, till Heathen Idolatry were extinguished; and none should be left to
upbraid the Christians, with removing the old Gods of the Heathens, to make way
for new ones of their own. And without all doubt, those that were prevailed
upon in every Persecution, by Force and Flattery, to revolt from Christianity;
though they had been false to the rest of their Religion, yet were true to this
Secret of it; and never discovered to the Heathens, that (whatever the Church
pretended,) they had been taught to say Ave Mary's to the B. Virgin, and to
Worship her, and the dead Saints and Martyrs, with Prayers and Hymns, etc. I
thank this Jesuit however, for confessing so manifest a Truth, that this
Adoration of Saints was not fit to be exposed to the Gentiles. But if Matters
were carried thus, I think they were not carried with great Sincerity. This
might be like the Policy of Jesuits; but it did not by any means become the
Simplicity of Christians. And yet I think, a Jesuit would hardly have carried a
Secret in his Sleeve, so dangerous to be discovered; and so impossible to be
concealed. For that the Church should have the good Fortune, to conceal it for
above 300 Years, from the Idolatrous Philosophers, and Priests of the Gentiles,
was of all other things, that passed in that long time, the most miraculous;
and requires such a Faith to believe it, as believes a thing the more, the more
incredible it is. But though this, in the Opinion of all indifferent persons,
will be a sufficient Prejudice against supposing, that the Church kept her
Doctrine and Practice from the Knowledge of her Enemies; Yet I believe it will
be a stronger Prejudice against it, amongst those (of which number I profess my
self to be one) that honor the Memories of the Ancient Martyrs, and love them
for their Constancy to the Death, in adhering to our dear Lord and Master
Jesus; that this crafty Design, is no way reconcilable to that Spirit of
Integrity, which the Gospel frames us to, if we are True Christians; and of
which they, if any, were undeniable Examples. One would think therefore, that
if the Heathens knew no such Doctrines and Practices amongst the Christians,
that the Christians had none such to be known. And in the Opinion of Salmeron
himself; had those known any such thing, these had not failed to have heard of
it. Why then did they not charge the Christians with Worshipping the B. Virgin,
when nothing would have been more pertinent and apposite? I will give one
Instance of this Question, so clear and full, that it shall render all others
needless. There was nothing that Celsus insisted upon, against the Christians
Worshipping Jesus Christ, with more Spite and Triumph, then that Jesus was, as
he called him, a most vile Person; Taken, Beaten and Cruce^ied. Orig. contra
cells. lib. 2.3.
It was for this he scorned the Christians, that they should count him the Son
of God; and Worship him now dead, who lived and died ignominiously. It must be
uneasy to a Christian, Ibid. lib. 7.8.
to write or to read his Blasphemies upon this Occasion. But there is one place
that I must not forbear; and that is, Where the foresaid Wretch, brings in a
Jew, and with the Jew, does himself upbraid Jesus, That he was Born in a little
Town of Judaea, and that of a wandering Woman, miserably poor, that span for her
living; who was also for Adultery thrown out of doors, Orig. lib. 1. Cont. Cel.
by the Carpenter her Husband; and being thus driven away by him, and wandering
up and down in a base fashion, brought forth Jesus in a Corner. Thus did that
accursed Villain, blaspheme the Blessed Virgin, in despite to Jesus her most
Holy Son; I say in despite to him, because he was worshipped by the Christians.
By bringing forth the Execrable Stories of the Jews concerning the Mother, the
Impious Infidel designed to make the Church of God ashamed of Worshipping her
Son; whom he sought to disparage this way, as well as by objecting the Poverty
of his Life, and the Ignominy of his Death. But suppose, I beseech you, that
the Church in those days had honored the Mother of Jesus, little less than
Jesus himself; that she had been called the Queen of Heaven; that the Story of
her Assumption had been then invented; that she had been Worstipped as the Lady
of the World, and served with Prayers, and Vows, and Incense, and with all, or
with any of those Religious Rites, that she is now served with: would that
spiteful Wretch, have failed to reproach the enemies of his Gods with so plain
a matter of Reproach? Did he think they had reason, to be ashamed of making so
helpless and so unfortunate a man, as the Pagans took Jesus to be, Ibid. Lib. 8.
the object of a most excellent Worship; and would he not have thought it a
greater shame, if they had given a superexcellent worship, to so helpless and
so scandalous a woman, as the false Miscreant reckoned the Mother to be? Did
they insult over the Christians for making a God of the Son of such a Mother?
What would they have said, if the Church had given then the least occasion to
suspect, that it had made a Goddess of the Mother her self? But of this not one
word is to be met with, in all the Reproaches of the Infidal; no nor of Trypho
or Coecilius, or any of the most bitter enemies of the Christian names, for the
three first Ages; where it lay as fair to be taken up, as Argument and Occasion
could make it. What Account then is to be given of this Omission? It was no
Omission of theirs at all; The Church had not yet given them this Handle
against it self: No such things as these were known amongst Christians, and
therefore, their Enemies did not lay them to their Charge: Their Enemies, I
say, who falsely accused them, as to other matters, upon the most slight and
frivolous Occasions. They accused them of Worshipping an Asse's Head; of
killing a Child at their Solemn Assemblies; and of Adultery and Incest, as you
may see in Minutius Felix, and elsewhere; and all this upon the most ridiculous
Grounds imaginable. But it seems the Christians paid Religious Worship to the
Virgin, and to dead Men and Women; and their watchful Enemies were content to
say never a word of it. Alas! these wise Men did not know, that the Christians
derided them, for such things as these; perhaps they were always deaf, when it
was told them, that the Christians did the same things themselves; or they had
quite forgotten it, when it was most proper to remember it; or were so silly,
as not to discern the Advantage they were to make of it; or so imprudent, as to
accuse them of other things which could be easily disproved, rather than to
accuse them of those things which could not be denied. The Children of this
World, were now grown Fools in their Generation. He that can believe these
things, let him believe them!

I shall add this only, Cyril. contra Julian l. 6. See Mr. Mede's Apostasy of
the later times.
that when the least Occasions were once given, to suspect that the Martyrs
were worshipped by the Church, the Heathens immediately laid hold on the
Pretense, especially Julian and Eunapius, who urged the Accusation with all the
stings of Malice; as their Predecessors in this Cause against Christ, would
certainly have done, had there been the least Color for it.

But to return to the Virgin Mary: We have seen that in these latter Ages, the
Doctrine of her Worship is grown to be no mean part of the Body of Divinity,
with the Doctors of the Roman Church. There is no end of writing Books in her
Honor, and to excite and direct Devotion to her. A Sermon cannot be preached,
but she must be addressed to with an Ave Mary: Nor a large Volume Written, but
it is odds, that it is concluded with Praise to God, and to the Virgin Mother
Mary. One would therefore expect, to find all things full of Veneration and
Address to the B. Virgin, in the Writings of the Primitive Fathers, that is, to
meet with it at every turn in their Expositions of the Faith, in their
Exhortations to Devotion and Piety, and in all their Homilies to the people.
But if you look for any such thing, I will be bold to say, you will lose your
labor; unless it were some Satisfaction to find, that the World is very much
altered from what it was, and the State of Religion not a little changed.

But the worst is, that what these Fathers say of her, is but very little in
Comparison; and that not of set purpose, but incidentally and occasionally, as
they were led to it by other things. I know not how the Fathers can be excused,
but that the Scriptures speak, as sparingly of her, as they.

It were something however, if their occasional Passages concerning her,
intimated a greater Regard to her Service in their Practice, than they have
shown in their Writings; or if they discovered but some obscure Prints and
Footsteps of such a Devotion to her, as we seek for. Let us therefore see,
after what manner they speak of the B. Virgin.

I observe, that the highest Strains in her Praise, Justin Dial. came Tryph. p.
327. Paris.
run upon a Comparison between her and Eve. Thus Justin Martyr, who says very
little else of her tells us, that Eve being a Virgin conceived by the Word of
the Serpent, p. 290.
and brought forth Death: But the Virgin Mary receiving the Message of the
Angel, conceived in Faith, therefore that which was born of her was Holy, viz.
the Son of God. He proves also against Trypho, that Christ was to be born of a
Virgin, according to the Prophets.

After Justin comes Irenoeus, and with greater circumstance pursues the
forementioned Comparison, against these stupid Heretics, that denied God to be
the Creator of all things, and that he used his own Works. For against these
Irenoeus amongst other Arguments, produced this, That Christ took Flesh of
Mary. And then he proceeds to show, how convenient it was, that he should be
Born of a Virgin. First he opposes the disobedience in the case of the
Forbidden Tree, (...) ab. 5. c. 18.19.
by which Sin came into the World, to that obedience which was performed upon a
Tree, by him that brought Life to the World. He opposes also the Cheat that was
put upon Eve, to the Truth that was told Mary. He opposes the Virgin Eve, now
designed to be a Wife, to the Virgin Mary who was also espoused; and the Virgin
Eve deceived by an evil Angel, to the Virgin Mary believing a good Angel. The
Word which I translate Comforter, is in Latin Advocata, from whence Bellarmin
and Fevardentius conclude very absurdly in behalf of Invocation of Saints, tho
Irenaeus had meant, what we usually understand by Advocate. But by the fidelity
of the Latin-Translator in keeping to the Ecclesiastical use of words, it seems
evident, that the Greek word in Irenaeus was (...), which how it is to be
Translated see M. Daille, who has largely treated this matter, and I doubt not
to ^ay, has made an end of it. De Relig. Cultus Object. p. 41. etc.
And, says he, as Eve was seduced and forsook God, so Mary was induced to obey
God, that the Virgin Mary might be a Comforter of the Virgin Eve: and that as
Mankind was through a Virgin bound over to Death, so they should be released
through a Virgin. One thing being thus rightly balanced against another, the
disobedience of a Virgin, by the the Obedience of a Virgin. The sum of all is
this, That there appeared a notable Congruity in diverse respects, that as Eve a
Virgin led the first man Adam into transgression, in whom all Mankind fell; so
the Virgin Mary brought forth him into the World, the second Adam, the Lord
from Heaven, who was to redeem all Mankind. No honest Man will go about to make
less of these Passages, but he must be a very subtle man, that can make more of
them.

And yet Fevardentius triumphs in this Testimony, as if he had found here the
Primitive Church, and all Antiquity, for the Invocation of the B. Virgin. And
no less satisfied he was, with a like strain of Irenoeus against those
Heretics, in another place, Adv. Haer. lib. 3. c. 32.33.
who said, That Christ took nothing from the Virgin Mary, and by consequence
that she was not really his Mother, nor he really, but only seemingly, a Man.
Now amongst other things Irenoeus argues the contrary, from the congruity of
our Saviors being born of a Virgin, that a Virgin might bring as much good to
the World, as a Virgin had done mischief; whereby it became plain, that God
defea^ed the Devil in a congruous way, who by the Virgin Eve had seduced Adam,
and brought death upon his Posterity. But why did not Irenoeus complain, that
this Heresy overthrew the very Foundation, upon which the Church gave a
super-excellent Worship to Mary, viz. because she was the Mother of God? nay,
why did not he silence this wild Conceit, by alleging the Worship which she
every where received upon this account? Fevardentius elsewhere makes a mighty
matter of Irenoeus his pressing Heretics with Catholic Tradition. Why
therefore was not so obvious and convincing an Argument, as the Catholic
Tradition and practice of worshipping the Virgin Mary, brought fourth upon this
occasion? Even because there was no such Tradition or Practice to be alleged,
as any man that is not overruled with prejudice must confess. It Is a sign that
ancient Testimonies run very low with them, when they are fain to make much of
these.

But if Irenoeus forgot this Argument, it is something strange that Tertullian
after him should forget it too. For writing against the same stupid opinions,
he uses just the Argument that Irenoeus had done before him. The Image and
Similitude of God, says he being captivated by the Devil, God recovered it by
aemula operatione. Tert. de carne Christi. c. 27. Adv. Praxeam c. 27.
a Work that defeated the Devil in his own way. For the word that was a
Foundation of Death had crept into Eve, being yet a Virgin, and agreeably by
the word that should restore life, was to be received by a Virgin; that Mankind
who by means of that Sex fell into Perdition, might through the same Sex be
recovered to Salvation. Eve had believed the Serpent, Mary has believed
Gabriel. The Offense which the former has committed in believing, the latter
has blotted out by believing. And what he means by blotting out Eve's Offense,
is plain from what follows, that Mary brought forth him who was to save even
his Murderers, and that Christ was to come of her for the Salvation of Man.
What Tertullian says of her beside, is very little and by the bye; as that she
was a Virgin, because Christ was said to be made of a Woman: And that being
born of her, he was therefore of the House of David; and the like.

Clemens Alexandrinus, to illustrate a Moral Lesson, tells us, That Mary was a
perfect Virgin after the Birth of her Son, and mentions a particular proof of
it, which some affirmed. S^rom. lib. 7.
And farther he says not, that I can remember.

His Scholar Origin acknowledged also the perpetual Virginity of Mary: And in
his Homilies upon the first Chapter of St. Luke, where he could not avoid
speaking of her, he has these passages. In Luc. Hom. 7.
Some body, says he, I know not who, has run into such a madness as to affirm
that Mary was renounced by our Savior, inasmuch as after his Birth, she was
joined to Joseph. Conte^. pl. of Life, etc.
Now if the Church had then believed the Story of her Assumption (which has
been so poetically described to us of late:) If the Church had then, for an
hundred and fifty years together served her as the Queen of Heaven, with solemn
Rites of Worship: That man who ventured to disparage the B. Virgin in this
fashion, was foolish to Admiration. But if Origin knew, that the Church had
given her these Honors from the beginning; he wise was enough to have stopped
this Madman's mouth with that Argument. or rather to have said nothing of him;
since no body could need any instruction to hold him for a ridiculous Fellow.
But he thought fit to instruct the people, how they should answer this man; and
that in this manner: If Mary was pronounced Blessed in those hymns that were
uttered by the instinct of the holy Spirit; How can any man say, that our
Savior denied her.

Origin speaks very honorably of the B. Virgin; but yet he represents her as an
instance of humane Frailty, and one that needed Forgiveness of sins, as well as
the Apostles: and that because she was offended, as he (it seems) was persuaded
at the Passion of Christ. What, says he, do we think that when the Apostles
were scandalized, that the Mother of our Lord was free from it? And so he
interprets those words, A Sword shall pierce through thy own Soul also, by this
paraphrase, The Sword of unbelief shall pierce thy own Soul, and thou shall be
smitten with the edge of Doubtfulness. I doubt it will not be convenient, to
enquire of Origin any further.

As for Athenagoras, Minutius Felix, St. Cyprian, Arnobius Lactantius; they
have left us nothing at all concerning her; unless St. Cyprian says somewhere
that Christ was conceived in the Womb of a Virgin, etc. But if that be all, I
am sure he neglected some very inviting occasions of putting his People in mind
of a great deal more; which he ought not to have neglected, if the Doctrine of
the Primitive Church concerning the B. Virgin, had been the same with that of
the pretended Catholic Church at this day.

And so we are gotten out of the three first Ages. But perhaps Athanasius makes
amends for all that were before him, in the Sermon upon the Annuntiation of the
Blessed Virgin. That Sermon I confess is a very surprising thing to any man,
that considers there was not the least preparation for the Doctrine it would
pretend to establish, in the foregoing Ages. But then this (as well as many
other things, that go under the name of Athanasius) is none of his; as
Bellarmin, and others of his party (obliged by the Strength of Truth) have
actually confessed. And in all probability, it was written no less than 348
Years after his Death. In his genuine Works, there is more frequent mention of
the Virgin, then in the Fathers before him; especially in his Orations against
the Arrians, which he wrote about the Year 360. But we must go further down, to
find where her Worship began, for as yet there is no Appearance of it.

Hilary, who wrote about the same time, says nothing new in this Matter. Hilar.
Pictav. Com. in Matthew. p. 497.
He does Industriously assert the Virginity of Mary, which, and the like
things, were done by some of those that went before him. But of her Worship not
a word.

To conclude, the Fathers do generally speak of her, without the Addition of
any Title of Honor. For the most part they call her Mary: sometimes the Virgin;
the Mother of our Lord rarely, and the mother of God never, I think, till the
Church was obliged to guard the belief of the Divine Nature of Christ, by all
kind of proper Expressions. And even then, this honorable Appellation, was
used not for her sake, but to secure the right Faith of our Lord's Divinity,
especially against the Nestorian Heresy. In short, the Protestants do
customarily mention the Virgin Mother, with honorable Additions, beyond what
the Fathers of the Three First Ages did. But we Worship her just as they did,
that is, Rev. 19.10.
not at all. For my own part, when I consider that she had the Glorious
Privilege to be the Mother of God, I should have much ado to forbear
regretting the little Regard wherewith some of the Fathers speak of her
sometimes, but that I find our Savior himself, in those Luke 2.49. Chapter 11.27,
28. Joh. 2.4.
three Sayings concerning her, which are reported in the Gospels, not to
Magnify her over greatly. And the Truth is, I should have wondered at that too,
had not the excess of later Devotion to her put me in mind, that the H. Writers
were guided by a Spirit of Prophecy, and have therefore recorded nothing that
Christ said to his most H. Mother, but what might be of use in such times as
these.

. 8.
Let us now see whether the Religion of Praying to Martyrs and Saints, and
Worshipping their Images and Relics, has the Authority of the Primitive
Church and all Antiquity. It may very well be presumed, that it has not, unless
we think that the Fathers preferred the other Saints before the B. Virgin. But
to say the Truth; tho hitherto the Virgin and the rest of the Saints were
equal, as to any Religious Worship, neither she nor they being yet thought of
for that purpose; yet when Superstition at length began to creep into the
Church, the Martyrs got the start of the Virgin. In process of time her Worship
overtopped theirs; but theirs began before her turn came. The most holy
Religion of the Gospel was delivered all at once; and, which is most
considerable, it is the Religion which God has sealed, and so it was, and is
all of a piece. But the Corruption of that Religion coming on by degrees, as
contingent Occasions gave Birth and Growth to it, could not be regularly
contrived, but would need a great deal of patching and mending, to bring it to
a Face of Uniformity.

As for Praying to Saints; I know not how any Man can imagine, that the
Primitive Fathers taught or used it, who considers in what Terms they taught
that God only was to be Invocated: That they counted the Worship of Invocation,
a better Sacrifice than those which had been offered to God, as the Law of
Moses required, and which all acknowledge were to be offered to God only; and
that they argued the Divinity of Christ, from hence that Prayers were to be
offered to him.

Irenoeus tells us, that the Church did nothing by Invocations of Angels, or
Incantations to them, or any other evil Curiosity. Fevardentius pretends, that
this excludes evil Spirits only from being invoked. But let any unprejudiced
Man judge by what follows. Iren. lib. 2. c. 57.
But says he, she directs her Prayers chastely, purely, and manifestly to the
Lord that made all things. Now according to Fevardentius he should have added,
and to good Spirits also. For it is a vain thing to say, that he intended to
oppose those only that Worshipped malicious Spirits; since if this had been his
Intention, the plain laws of Discourse had obliged him rather to omit the
Worship of God in this opposition, than the Worship of good Spirits. And
doubtless upon this supposition, he would have said, that we do not use Prayers
and Hymns to evil, but to good Spirits.

I cannot but set down here the words of the Church of Smyrna in their Golden
Epistle, concerning the Martyrdom of Polycarp. It seems the Jews had suggested,
that if the Christians could gain his Body, they would perhaps forsake Christ,
and Worship him, (their Love and Reverence of that holy Man, their Bishop, was
so well known:) Against which suggestion the Smyrnians thus declare themselves.
These men know not that we can neither forsake Christ, who suffered for the
Salvation of all that are saved, the Innocent for the Guilty; nor Worship any
other. Him truly being the Son of God, we adore: But the Martyrs and Disciples
and Followers of the Lord, we justly love, for that extraordinary good mind,
which they have expressed toward their King and Master; of whose happiness God
grant, that we may partake, and that we may learn by their Examples. This
Testimony of the Church of Smyrna I rather produce in this place; because in
two Ancient Manuscripts cited by the most learned Arch. B. Usher, the Latin
Translation of their Protestation runs thus. See Act. Usser. Polic. or Answ. to
the Jesuita Challenge? Praying to Saints.
We Christians can never forsake Christ, who vouchsafed to suffer so great
things for our sins, nor give away the Worship of Prayer to any other.

Clemens Alexandr. defines Prayer by its Relation to God, in which (as (...).
Bellarmin acknowledges) he was followed by diverse Fathers in the Fourth
Century. But nothing can be more plain, than this Passage of his. Since there
is but one good God, both We and Angels pray to him (...). Strom. l. 7. p. 721.
alone; that those good things may be given us, which we want, and those
continued which we have. If half so plain a Testimony could have been produced
out of the genuine Writings of these Fathers, for praying to others besides
God, as these are for praying to God alone; I fear we should have been counted
very impudent, in our Appeals to the Primitive Church, and the best Antiquity.
The same Person had said not long before, We do justly honor God by Prayer, and
with Righteousness we send up this best and most Holy Sacrifice.

And I find this to have been another general Notion of the Worship of Prayer
amongst the Ancients, that it was a Sacrifice much better, than those more
sensible Sacrifices, that were either offered by the Gentiles, or required by
the Law of Moses; and more pleasing to God. Thus says Tertullian; We sacrifice
for the Health and Safety of the Emperor, but we do it to our God, and his God;
and we do it, as God has commanded, with Pura prece.
pure Prayer, or purely with Prayer: for so he is to be understood, in as much
as he opposes the Purity of Prayer, to the Odoris aut sanguinis. Yert. ad
Scap. c. 2.
Sacrifices of Intense and Victims. And therefore, says he, We pray rather for
the Health of the Emperor, desiring it of him who can give it. This smart
Writer, did in his way, very plainly represent our Doctrine in the
forementioned Saying. We Sacrifice, says he, but to our God, and his God.
There he represents Sacrifice, as due to God only: But we do it, as God has
commanded, with pure Prayer. There he represents Prayer as a Sacrifice more
Excellent, than that of Odors and Blood, which the Gentiles offered. And can
any thing be more evident, than that he appropriates this Sacrifice so to God,
that it ought not to be given to any else? Thus also he proves against the
Jews, That we must now sacrifice to God, not earthly, but spiritual Sacrifices;
for it is written, A contrite Heart, and an humble Heart, Ad. Jud. c. 5.
is a Sacrifice to God; and elsewhere Offer the Sacrifice of Praise, and pay
thy Vows to the most High. And therefore, a little after he affirms Christ to
be the High Priest of eternal Sacrifices, in Opposition to those that are
abolished. Nay, he says that the pure Offering, Simplex oration Adv. Marei. c. 1.
foretold in Malachy, which all Nations should bring, is the Simplicity of
Prayer from the pure Conscience, which he elsewhere describes by Blessing, and
Praise, and Hymns; and so is the same with Pure Prayer mentioned before. This
is enough to show, that in his days, the Church would no more have offered
Invocations of Prayer or Praise to any but to God; then they would have offered
Victims to any but to him, if they had been continued in the Service of the
Church.

And by this we may see, in what sort we are to understand that Offering for
the Martyrs, which we read of in Tertullian and St. De Corona. c. 3. De Exhort.
c. 13. Demen.
Cyprian. Says Tertullian, We make Oblations for them that are departed, in
Memory of their Birth-days, i. e. of the Days wherein they were crowned with
Martyrdom. And thus St. Cyprian writing to the Church of Carthge, concerning
Celerinus, and making mention of his Uncles Laurentinus and Ignatius says,
Cypr. Epist. 34. Rig.
We offer Sacrifice for them, you may remember, as often as we celebrate the
Days upon which the Martyrs suffered, with an Anniversary Commemoration. And
thus he writes to the Clergy of Carthage, concerning the Confessors, that
should dye in Prison. Note down the days of their death, Id. Epist. 37.
that we may Celebrate their Commemorations amongst the Memories of the
Martyrs, etc. The meaning of which is, that they gave Thanks, and offered
Praises to God for those holy Persons by name, who had constantly suffered
Death, for the Faith of Christ. These were the Sacrifices they offered for the
Martyrs, the Sacrifices of Praise; not excluding, what by other Authorities is
evident enough, the Sacrifice of Prayers for them too, and for all the departed
Saints, that they might at length obtain the promised Resurrection. I do not
say, that the Worship of Christians consisted only of these Sacrifices. See Mr.
Mede upon Mincha purum.
They had the Oblation of Bread and Wine besides, before the Eucharist; and the
Representative Sacrifice of our Lord's Body and Blood in the Eucharist. It is
enough, that the Religious Invocations of the Church, were held to be the
Worship of Sacrifice, and that of Sacrificiorum officia potiora Adv. Mass.
a more excellent Kind, then the earthly Sacrifices of Jews and Gentiles, as
Tertallian calls them. And let the pretended Catholics tell us, to whom the
Worship of Sacrifice should be offered but to God. They have, I confess, kept
the Style of the Ancient Church; and pretend to Sacrifice to God, and to him
only. But the Change which they have made in the Doctrine and Practice of the
Church, has obliged them to apply that Style, otherwise than the Ancient
Church did. Exp.. 3.4.
When they speak of offering Sacrifice, as Monsieur de Meaux does in his
Exposition, we are according to the use of that Phrase in their Writers, to
understand nothing but the pretended Sacrifice of the Mass. But why must not
the people be taught, that the Worship of Prayers and Hymns is a Sacrifice too?
For this was the current Doctrine of the Primitive Church. There is a good
Reason for it; because they do not pay this Worship to God alone, as the
Primitive Church did.

And now as for those passages, concerning Oblations and Sacrifices already
produced, See Constit. Apostol. lib. 7. c. 3.
and many more to the like purpose, that might be produced out of the Fathers;
I do not know how far a willing mind might go, to apply them to the Sacrifice
of the Mass. And when that is done, it is but a little straining more, and they
will interpret Gregory Nazianzen to their own mind too; who in his Funeral
oration upon St. Basil, thus speaks of him. And now he is in Heaven, (...).
as I think he offers Sacrifices for us and Prayers for the People. But I am
confident Nazianzen, did not so much as think that Basil said mass in Heaven
for him and the People.

To proceed, Origin is as express to this purpose as his Master Clemens Alex.
He says we must pray to him (...). Orig. contr. Cells. lib. 8.
alone that is God over all, and we must pray to the word of God his only
begotten, and the firstborn of every Creature; and we must humbly beseech him,
as our high Priest, to present our prayer (for it is known to him) to his
Father and the Father of them that live according to the word of God.

This is enough for one man to say, in so plain a case. And yet I will add,
what he says about this matter, from another common Argument, viz. that the
Divinity of Christ is clearly gathered from our making prayers to him. For upon
those words of the Apostle. With all that call upon the Name of the Lord Jesus,
he says, Orig. in Decim. ad Romans lib. 8.
that the Apostle pronounces Jesus Christ to be God, in that his name is called
upon; and that to call upon the name of the Lord, and to adore God, is one and
the same thing. The Reason of this which I have ventured to offer is, That
Prayer does ascribe, Omnipresence, as well as other divine Perfections, to the
Being to which it is made. And this is that reason which Tertullian, as I
think, Yert. de Orat: cap. 1.
has expressed in these words: That Faith offers its Religion to him only, of
whom it is confident that he sees and hears every where. For by Religion he
meant Prayer, which is the Subject of that discourse to which these words
belong. Thus Novatian also: Nov. de Trin. c. 14.
If Christ be only a man, how is he every where present to those that call upon
him; since this is not the nature of Man but of God to be present in all
places! And in the same place, If Christ be only a Man, why is a Man invoked as
a Mediator in prayers; since the Invocation of Man, must be judged ineffectual
for the procuring of Salvation? And to name no more, Athanasius frequently uses
this kind of Argument. For speaking of prayers, made to the Son of God, he
says, Athan. Orat. contra Arrian. 2.4.
the Saints do not think it just, to invoke him to be their Helper and Refuge,
who was made or created. And no man would pray to receive any thing from the
Fathers and the Angels, or from any of the other Creatures: from whence he
concludes that because the Apostle in 1 Thessalonians 3.11. does not only pray to God
the Father, but also to our Lord Jesus Christ, that therefore Christ is God. It
seems it was not then the way of Christians to join God, and St. Michael, God
and the Virgin, God and all the Saints, in Invocations of prayers. There were
then no such things known, as Confession to God and to St. Michael, and to the
Blessed Virgin, and to the Saints; as giving Glory to the Holy Trinity and to
the Virgin; as saying Jesus Mary help. etc. had any thing of this Nature been
done in those times. I doubt here had been a good Argument lost, by which the
Fathers proved Christ to be God. Nor would Athanasius have been so mere a
Child, as to attaque the Arrians with an Argument, to which the Doctrine and
Practice of the Church, had afforded so obvious and effectual an Answer.

To all which I shall add but that Canon of the Laodicean Synod, Synod. Laod.
cap. 35.
that Christians ought not to forsake the Church of God, and depart aside and
Invocate Angels Therefore if any man be found using this secret Idolatry, let
him be accursed, because he has forsaken our Lord Jesus Christ. I make no
question, but if there had been occasion Saints had been put into the Canon as
well as Angels. But then what word could they have thought of, instead of
Saints, to answer Corners [Angulos] which Crab thrust into the old Latin
Translation instead of Angels [Angelos] is not very easy to imagine. Concerning
which pleasant Forgery, see Bp Vshers Answer to the Jesuits Challenge. p. 469.
etc.

And now if we consider, the Doctrine of these primitive Fathers concerning
Prayer, I suppose we shall not wonder, that in those places where we might well
have expected some instance of praying to Saints, or some Recommendation of it
(if any such Practice had been amongst them) that I say there is nothing at
all, Cypr. de Laps. p. 177.
no not the least intimation of it. Not where St. Cyprian so vehemently
admonished those, that were fallen in persecution, to pray to God for
themselves, and to entreat the Brethren to do so too: Tert. de Panitentia. c. 9.
Not where Tertullian describes the Humiliations and Prostrations of the
Penitents; in both which places one would have expected, that the Intercession
of the Saints and Martyrs, should have been implored: Not where Justin Martyr
describes the Service of the Church in her Religious Assemblies; nor in any of
the ancient Apologies, nor in any ancient account of the Religious Worship of
Christians; Apost. Constit. lib. 7, 8.
no not in the Apostolical Constitutions (though a later work then it pretends
to be) where the order of the Churches Service is very particularly described:
We are not to wonder at it. I say for the declared Doctrine of the Church was
against it.

8.
As for the Worshipping, or as M. de Meaux calls it, the Honoring of Images,
we might spare the pains of inquiring what the sense of the Ancient Church was
concerning it; it is so hard to believe that they should worship the Images of
the Saints, who did not so much as pray, or give any Religious Worship to the
Saints themselves. But this practice is so far from having the Countenance of
the Primitive Church, and All Antiquity; that in the best Ages, there were men
of great name in the Church, that did not believe so much as the Art of Imagery
and Picture lawful to be practiced by a Christian. Says Clemens Alex.
Protrept. ad Gentes.
We are plainly forbidden to meddle with that cheating Art: For the Prophet
[Moses] says, Thou shall not make the likeness of any thing either in Heaven
or in Earth. Tertullian has a great deal to this purpose in his Discourse of
Idolatry. But those words are, to my thinking, very remarkable. Well did the
same God require the likeness of a Serpent to be made by an extraordinary
Command, Tert. de Idol. c. 5, 6.
who by his Law forbad the making of any likeness. If thou observest the same
God, thou have his Law: Make no likeness. If also thou look to the Precept
of making an Image afterward, do thou also imitate Moses: Make no Image
whatsoever against the Law, unless God also command thee in particular so to
do. Which words are so plain and full, that they leave no room for that
frivolous pretense, that these Fathers intended no other Images, but those of
the Heathen Gods. And that instance of the Brazen Serpent, which was no Idol,
till the Jews made it one, clearly shows the contrary.

But if it be said that the Authority of these men is to go for nothing,
because they were mistaken in condemning Image-Work so universally as they did;
I grant, that their zeal against Image Worship transported them beyond the
bounds of Reason; especially Tertullian, who in the foresaid Book tells us,
Ibid. c. 2.
that Artificers of Statues and Images, and all carved or engraven works of
this kind, were brought into the World by the Devil. But this I say, that if
Images had in those days been used in Christian Churches, so much as to excite
the Devotion of the Faithful, much more to receive their Adoration; neither
would these Fathers have condemned the making of Images; nor, if they had,
would the Church have born with so great an Outrage upon their Doctrine and
Practice. Some one at least would have appeared in behalf of the Catholic
Church, as Melchior Canus has done in behalf of the Roman Church against the
Eliberine Council in this matter; who sticks not to say, that Their Law for
taking away Images, Canus, loc. Theol. l. 5. c. 4.
was not only imprudently, but impiously established. The Censure which he so
long after passed upon that Council, had been fastened upon these men presently,
by more than one, as good as Canus, if Image Worship had but been allowed then,
as it is now established in the Roman Communion. They were not so tame as to
suffer their Worship to be affronted by their own Members, without taking
notice of it. But the truth is, Eus^h. Hist. lib. 7. c. 18. Iren. l. 1. c. 24.
the Monuments of the Ancient Church affords us no accounts of Images any
where, but either in Libraries, or Concerning the Image of the Syrophenician
Woman, etc. see Dr. Still. against T. G. p. 253.
at a House-door, or in the Holes of Heretics, or in the Temples of false
Gods. We read indeed of one Picture of Christ, or some Saint, which Epiphanius
found in a Curtain of the Church of Anablatha; but he took it down and tore it
in pieces. Such accounts as this are not for the credit of Image Worship; which
indeed came into the Church at the tail of other Corruptions. And the Fathers
are so unanimous and positive against it, that I will shut up this matter with
the testimony of a great many Fathers in one testimony, viz. that of the
Eliberine Council held about the beginning of the fourth Age. It is our
pleasure, Council. Elib. Can. 36.
that Pictures ought not to be in the Church, lest that which is worshipped or
adored, should be painted upon Walls.

As for the Relics of Saints and Martyrs, we hear of none for the three first
Ages, but their Bodies; nor any thing concerning them, but that they were
interred with all possible Respect that could be expected from Men, and which
is more, from Christians. The honor which by the custom of the World we learn
is proper to the Bodies of the Dead, is to give them a decent Interment. This
was maintained and cherished by the ancient Christians, Orig. contra Cells. lib.
5. Tertul. de Anima.
not only because reasonable Souls once lived in those Bodies which they
committed to the ground, which was an Inducement common to men; but because
also those Bodies and Souls were to be once again joined at the Resurrection,
which was an Inducement proper to Christians. It was the same kind of honor
which they showed to the Bodies of Martyrs, though heightened with the
expressions of a more than ordinary love. Thus, after the Martyrdom of St.
Stephen, Devout men (...). Acts 8.2.
carried him out to be buried, and made great lamentation over him.

The like account did the Smyrnians give of their disposing the Bones of
Polycarp, which they reckoned more valuable than precious Stones, more precious
than Gold. M. de Meaux sure would not desire a farther progression of Love and
Honor. But with this degree they contented themselves: for say they, (...).
Sm. Epist. supr.
We committed them to burial where it was usual.

And thus Pius the first of that name, Bishop of Rome. Take care, says he, of
the Bodies of the Holy Martyrs, as of Gods Members, Cura, quemadmodum
curaverunt. Curare here, is the same with (...). Pius. Epist. 2. Tom. 1. Con.
See Cypr. Ep. 37. Cypr. Epist. 2.
after that manner that the Apostles took care of Stephen 's.

Thus the Clergy of Rome in their Epistle to the Clergy of Carthage, when St.
Cyprian was absent: To speak of a matter of very great consequence. If the
Bodies of Martyrs or others be not buried, it is a very dangerous fault in
those that are to look after this business. So that in those days, it should
seem to be a Charge entrusted to select Persons, that the Bodies of Martyrs and
other Christians, should be buried; and this not only at Carthage, but at Rome
too.

But why should I multiply Testimonies in so plain a case? Had the Relics of
Martyrs and Saints been worshipped in those best times, as they were afterward,
how come it to pass that in all the Monuments of those times, no mention of any
such thing is to be found? When the Trade of Relics began in the Church,
there was noise enough made of it, and the best Authors acquaint us with the
News. But it had been no News, if the Trade had been begun before. Why was no
such thing objected to the Christians, by their watchful Enemies, for three
hundred years together? For we no sooner come to hear of Stories of Relics in
the Church, but we find the Pagans at the heels of this Innovation, and
upbraiding the Christians with the superstition of it. Why meet we not with
some intimation of laying up Relics in Churches under the Altar? There was
room enough for so considerable and necessary a circumstance, (and the Church
of Rome makes more than a circumstance of it) in that particular description of
the fashion and Ornaments of the Church built by Paulinus Bishop of Tire.
Eusebius. Hist. lib. 20. c. 4.
Why meet we with no Translations of Bodies from one place to another, for
their greater honor? Perhaps we shall be told of the men from the East, that
came to Rome, and challenged the Bodies of St. Peter and St. Paul, as of right
belonging to them; and of their carrying them two Miles out of Town to a place
called Catacumboe, and all the other Adventures that Gregory tells upon this
business. But then there will arise a great question, Greg. lib. 3. Ep. 30.
Baron. A. D. 221. N. 4.
whether we are to believe with Gregory that they were Eastern Believers, or
with Baronius, that they were Thievish Greeks? or rather it will be no
question, that the whole Relation is fabulous from one end to the other.

In short, why have we all this time no account of Miracles wrought by
Relics, of carrying them about in Processions, of exposing them to receive
the Adorations of the People, of wearing them as a special security against
Spiritual and Temporal Evils, or of any instance of this kind of Religion? I
answer, It is a fond thing to imagine, that the Religion of Worshipping the
Relics of the Saints, should be in use amongst them, who gave no Religious
Worship to the Saints themselves.

But it is not to be wondered at, that they who pray to the Souls of the Saints
and Martyrs, who are so far absent from us, that they hear us not, should be
guilty of another weakness, and Worship their Bones and other Relics, which
neither hear nor see, though they are present.

This account of the Sentiments of the Three first Ages, and indeed of the
better half of the Fourth we gather from the Writings of the Fathers, and from
the undoubted Monuments of those Times. Monsieur de Meaux knew that these
things had been diligently expounded by those of the Reformation, and
particularly by M. Daille. And what does he oppose to this, to save his
pretenses to All Antiquity harmless? Says he, Exp. p. 5.
Without any farther examination what might be the Sentiments of the Fathers of
the Three first Ages, I will content my self with what M. Daille is pleased to
grant, who allows us so many great men who taught the Church in the Fourth Age.
Now M. Daille neither made any such allowance, nor had he any reason to make
it. But suppose he had, must all that he had written concerning the sense of
the Three first Ages, about the Object of Worship, go for nothing? If this
example of Writing is sit to be followed, I know not why I should give my self
any farther trouble, and not rather conclude thus: Reresius de Tradition. par.
3. etc.
That without any farther examination what may be the Sentiments of the Fathers
of the following Age, I shall content my self with what some great men of the
Roman Church are pleased to grant, and which is evidently proved against all
the rest that deny it, viz. That the Fathers of the Three first Ages must be
allowed to us. And so leave it to the World to judge who has most reason to be
content.

9.
But having undertaken to give some account of the beginnings of the present
Superstitions of the Church of Rome, in the matter of Saint-Worship, and the
Adoration of the Images and Relics of the Saints: And because it is
impossible to do this, without going beyond the first Ages, till we come to the
Reign of Julian; I must venture beyond him, and consider the state of the
Church toward the latter end of the Fourth Century, with respect to these
questions. Some of the Romanists pretend that Antiquity to be on their side,
which I have shown is with us. But as far as I can perceive, they all pretend
to be very confident they shall carry it thus high at least; and Monsieur de
Meaux takes it for granted, that we begin to allow them those later Fathers. I
shall endeavor to represent the case as impartially as if I were yet to choose
my Opinion; and I am very much mistaken if it will not appear in conclusion
(though there is a little more color for their challenging the latter end of
the Fourth Age, in favor of their Doctrine and Practices in these things, than
for appealing to higher Antiquity) that upon a true consideration of the
grounds upon which they challenge these later Fathers as their own, it had been
more advisable for them to have come down much lower to find Presidents whereby
to justify themselves. It had been a very Ancient custom of the Church for
Christians to meet at the Coemiteries or Burying-places of the Martyrs and the
rest of the Faithful, there to celebrate Anniversary Commemorations of the
Martyrs. Ep. Smyr. ubi supra.
Thus the Church of Smyrna having intimated that they had buried the Body of
St. Polycarp in the usual place, they added, that in that place, God willing,
they should assemble together to celebrate the Birthday of his Martyrdom with
all the joy they could express: And the reason of this Custom they express in
this manner: Both to Commemorate those who had already undergone the trial of
Martyrdom, and to exercise and to prepare those that were to follow, for the
like Conflicts. But they did not meet here to celebrate the Memories of the
Martyrs only, but at other times also for the celebration of Divine Service.
Eus^b. Hist. lib. 7. c. 11.
For we find that Valerian and Gallien forbad the Christians to celebrate
Assemblies, or to meet at those places which they called Coemiteries, which
passages and the like imply that it was ordinary for them to Assemble there:
And it is not improbable that they used those places for more privacy, when
there was danger of persecution; and that the prohibition of Assemblies in
those Coemiteries, was the utmost strictness of prohibiting their Assemblies:
For it is plain that they had their Churches besides in Cities, which they
built and repaired according to their ability. Id. lib. 8. c. 1.
And so in that favorable time between Gallien and Dioclesian, we find that
they added new Churches in every City, to those which they had before. But
whether they were wont to meet at the Coemiteries (at other times besides the
Anniversary days of the Martyrs) for privacy, or perhaps for the Commodiousness
of those places, when they did not consult privacy, as some think, or whether
it was out of special respect to the Memories of those Martyrs, I shall not
need to dispute; for it is a clear case that they servently loved those
excellent men and women, and honored their Memories, who had laid down their
lives for the Testimony of Jesus. This was one reason of celebrating their
Anniversary Commemorations, in which they did what highly became them, and
carefully kept themselves within this Compass, that Religious Worship was to be
given to God only.

But when under Constantine the Great the profession of Christianity was not
only safe, but the way to Honor and Greatness, the Memories of the Martyrs
were more frequented than they had formerly been, and stately Churches were
built over their Sepulchers; and the Emperor, the Clergy, and the People,
seemed to vie with one another who should express the greatest zeal in carrying
on so pious a work; which extraordinary fervor, considering the time, was not
to be wondered at; for the Church was but now delivered not only out of a
raging Persecution, but from the apprehension of any more, and therefore could
not but reflect upon the Martyrs with all tenderness of affection. And since
they were not now alive, to partake in the prosperous and triumphant state of
the Church, it was natural to give their Names and Memories all that share in
it which was possible to be given; especially since the present peace and glory
of the Church, was under God, so deeply owing to the noble examples of their
Fortitude and Patience. The Commemorations of the Martyrs had forformerly a
double end, to do honor and express a dear affection to them; and withal to
prepare and to excite the Virtue of those that were to suffer afterward, which
latter end without all doubt was the most necessary; but there being now so
little occasion for that, the piety of these prosperous times ran out more
plentifully in doing honors to those Champions of Christ, that had born the
heat of the day, and left this Age to enjoy that victory and sweet peace
wherewith God had now crowned his persecuted Church.

And as this Zeal was no more than what might be expected from Humane
Affection, raised by Christian Piety; so if men could have told where to stop,
it had been as much for the honor of Christianity, as the excesses to which it
grew afterward were a disgrace to it.

From Constantine's coming to the Empire, to the Reign of Julian, there passed
above fifty years; and in this time the Reverence of the Martyrs was grown to
some excess, beyond Primitive Examples. For it was not only thought reasonable
to build Churches over their Sepulchers, but it should seem there were many
that thought their Prayers would speed the better for being made over the Tombs
of the Martyrs; and not content with this, they began at length to search for
their Bones; and it grew to be the Piety of this Age, to disturb the Ashes of
the Dead, which it was the Piety of the former Ages to leave in their Graves
without disturbance. But as yet their Prayers were directed to God only; we
have yet no examples of calling upon the Saints and Martyrs. Julian himself who
aggravated the respect shown to the Martyrs to the utmost, could not charge
them with this, and he very well understood their practice. Apud Cyrill. l. 10.
contra Julian. p. 335.
But, says he, Since Jesus has said that Sepulchers are full of uncleanness,
why do you call upon God over Sepulchers? It Is true, he also charged them with
Worshipping the Martyrs, and upbraided them, that having forsaken the Religious
Rites of the Gentiles, they had gone over to the Jews, and yet had not kept to
their Religion neither, which had been something. For, then, says he, Id. lib.
6. p. 201.
you would have worshipped one God instead of many, and not one man [Jesus] or
rather many miserable men: meaning the Martyrs. But this was only a spiteful
construction of the custom of Christians in paying their Devotions to God over
the Sepulchers of the Martyrs.

Not long after Julian, comes Eunapius, a most bitter wretch; by whose Censures
we may easily observe, that the Devotion of Christians toward the Martyrs was
still growing to a greater height. I perceive he is cited both by Protestants
and Papists; by Protestants, to show the beginnings of that Superstition we
complain of; by Papists, to show that the Invocation of Saints, and the Worship
of Relics, was at least so Ancient. This Infidel speaking of Monks (a sort of
men which this Age first brought forth) says, that they heaped together Bones
and Sculls of men that had been punished for many Crimes, Eunapius in vita
Aedessi.
holding them for Gods; and prostrating themselves before such as had been
chastized by order of the Courts of Justice; and believing the better of
themselves for being polluted at their Sepulchers. So that they who were but
mere slaves, and those none of the best, but soundly lasht, and carrying still
the scars and marks of their villainy in their very Ghosts, are now called
Martyrs, and made the Ministers and Messengers of Prayer to the Gods. Thus did
the base Villain reproach the blessed Martyrs of Jesus, in contempt of the
Monks, and indeed of all the Christians in those times. For though it should
seem that the Trade of Relics was chiefly driven by the Monks, yet it is
evident that great account was made of Relics in almost all places; which
together with the daily resort of devout Christians to the Memories of the
Martyrs, gave occasion to this Infidel thus to upbraid them. For no man will
believe all to be true which he here charges even the Monks with. A malicious
Enemy always says the worst that he has any color or pretense to say. And if
such occasions and pretenses had been afforded by the Ancient Christians, as by
these, we should certainly have heard the same objections from Lucian or
Celsus, or some one Pagan Writer of those times, who were as able, as spiteful
and vigilant Adversaries as Julian and Eunapius.

But whereas Eunapius pretended, that these Monks called the Martyrs, Ministers
and Messengers of their Prayers; he might possibly have no other reason for it,
but the common observation that Christians went to the Sepulchers of the
Saints, there to make their Prayers. For although they directly applied
themselves to none but God when they were there; yet the choosing of those
places for their Devotions, especially with a profession of hoping to speed the
better for so doing, was occasion enough to Eunapius to say, that they made the
Martyrs, the Ministers and Messengers of their Prayers. But for ought any man
can tell, Eunapius might come to understand that these Monks did, what I
question not was the custom of some Christians toward the latter end of this
Age; that is, that they called to the Martyrs at their Memories, as if they
were present there, of which I shall give a farther account in its proper
place. It is certain, that many Miracles were said to be done upon Prayers made
where the Relics of the Martyrs were, that is, at their Memories.

And some thereupon believed that they were done at their Intercession, and,
joining their own Prayers with the Prayers of the Christian that came thither.
In which they were more confirmed by some confident Reports of Visions and
Apparitions of the Martyrs to those that had obtained their suits. Aug. de Cura
pro Mortis, c. 16.
Now of those who believed the Martyrs were within hearing, it is very likely
that some called to them with an Ora pro nobis; and then no wonder that
Eunapius charged the Monks with raking for dead men's Bones, and making dead men
the Messengers of their Prayers.

As for the Miracles said to be done in those times, they are urged by the
Romanists as an invincible argument of Gods approving the honor that was given
to the Saints and their Relics in that Age of the Church. But I wish they
would attend to what St. Augustine says, who after a pretty large account of
Miracles that were wrought in his time, and some too at the Memories of
Martyrs, plainly says, that whether they were wrought by the Ministry of
Martyrs or Angels (for that he knew not) they were wrought to give Testimony to
that Faith for which the Martyrs died, Aug. de Civ. Dei, lib. 22. c. 9.
and particularly to the Resurrection of Christ, and to our Resurrection at the
last day. There is no reason to suppose that every circumstance of the Devotion
of Christians that received miraculous relief, must be attested by those
Miracles which God wrought in farther confirmation of the truth of
Christianity. God has made use even of wicked men for the working of Miracles;
and I cannot understand why a Miracle may not be wrought in behalf of a sincere
man, without approving his weakness, any more than the others wickedness is
approved by Gods making use of him to testify the truth. But I would be
content to let them use this Argument from Miracles, without contradiction, if
they would extend it no farther than in favor of that use of Relics which we
yet meet with: In the fourth Age they ransacked all places for them, and when,
as they thought, they got 'em, they put them in fine Linen, or in curious
Boxes and Repositories, and laid them up in the Church. But whatever good they
expected from these Treasures, they did not yet worship them; they did not
Incense them, and expose them to receive the Adorations of the People.
Vigilantius, it seems, had asked, with some derision, Why do thou kiss and
adore a little Dust put up in fine Linen? Hieron. Adv. Vigil. Tom. 2. p. 158.
Colon.
To which St. Hierom, that went as high as any in the Age for honoring
Relics, answered, Who, O thou giddy-brain'd man, ever adored the Martyrs? Who
has taken a man for God? Indeed St. Hierom thought that holy Relics made the
Devils roar for very pain; but yet he did not think that they were to be
adored, Ibid.
no not the Martyrs themselves, but God only. We could wish that all
Superstition were banished from amongst Christians; but if the Church of Rome
would be content with such things as St. Hierom blames in some silly men and
religious women, that had a Zeal, but not according to knowledge; Ibid.
viz. burning Wax-Candles by daylight in honor of the Martyrs, we would be
content too: for these are tolerable faults, and such as should not break the
Peace, though they were better mended. I would say to any contentious man, what
St. Ibid.
Hierom said to Vigilantius, What do thou lose by it, if others are a little
foolish?

I confess, I should beg of these Gentlemen, for the honor of our Religion,
and of the testimony of Miracles, not to pretend the Miracles of the fourth and
fifth Ages, as a testimony to every Punctilio of Honor done in those times to
the Relics of the Saints, and to the opinion which some conceived of them.
And as I said before, it would be more discreetly done to let those Miracles
go, as St. Austin did, for a notable confirmation of the Truth of that Religion
for which those Martyrs died, by whose dead Bodies God was pleased to do some
wonderful things. But it is by no means advisable to stretch them in favor of
some other things; whereof the lighting of Candles for the Martyrs may go for
one; and the unwillingness of some of 'em to build Churches, unless they could
get Relics to lay there, for another; and the scattering of Relics in
little pieces up and down, may pass for a third; and stealing them, for a
fourth; which I know not how came to be excused at least, as an effect of great
and religious Zeal, by some men of no mean note. I do not think such things as
these are very easy to be defended; and therefore it were much better that
Miracles were not brought in to justify them. But least of all should they be
urged in favor of that kind of Worship which the Church of Rome now gives
them; and not only to the Bodies, Bones, or Ashes, but to the Girdles,
Slippers, and little Vtensils of the Saints and Martyrs; which kind of things
anciently were not thought of. God wrought Miracles by the hands of St. Paul,
and the rest of the Apostles, when they were alive. Now if we had their Bones,
or some pieces of them, and God should be pleased to work Miracles by them
still; there would be, I am confident, no more reason upon this account to give
their Relics any Religious Worship, now the Apostles are dead, than there was
to worship the Apostles themselves upon the same account, when they were alive.
Moreover, God wrought Miracles by the Brazen Serpent, and yet when the People
had fallen to burn Incense to it, it was broken to pieces, to his great honor,
who opposed a Zeal with knowledge, to the blind Zeal of the People.

But to deal freely, I am not fully satisfied that these Miracles by the Bodies
of Saints and Martyrs, were half so frequent as the noise that was made of them
in this Age, or in the next, would make us believe. I more than fear that those
times were too credulous, or that the Writings of those Fathers have met with
more foul play, than has been yet discovered, though no small discoveries of
that kind have been made since the Reformation. It is some prejudice against
the credibility of those relations, that in the three first Ages, we hear
nothing of Miracles wrought by Relics; which we are not to wonder at, because
they lay quiet in their Graves: and the Ancient Church was so little concerned
in this Religion of Relics, that the Bodies of Martyrs that suffered under
Dioclesian and Licinius, that is, Ambros. de Exhort. ad Virg. Sozom. lib. 9. c.
2.
at the end of the third, and the beginning of the fourth Age, lay
undiscovered, till Chance or pretended Revelations brought them to light; which
is a manifest Argument, that the Ancient Church knew nothing of these matters,
and that they had their beginning in the declension of the fourth Age. Again,
If the Bodies of Martyrs ordinarily discovered themselves by a gift of
Miracles, I wonder how it came to be so ordinary a thing to counterfeit
Relics, as it was. For who would dare to put off the Bones of a Malefactor
for the Bones of a Martyr, if it was known that true Relics would distinguish
themselves from false, by true Miracles? And yet St. Austin himself complains
of a multitude of Cheating Fellows in his time, that were scattered up and down
in the habit of Monks, Aug. de Opere. Monach. c. 28.
wandering about from Province to Province, sent no whither, fixed no where,
staying no where; some of which professed the Trade of selling the Bones of
Martyrs, if you will believe they were Martyrs Bones. It would require a Volume
to show the boldness that was taken in aftertimes. God has given to a man but
one Head, and one pair of Hands; but the Religion of Relics has found more
than one a piece for many of the Saints and Martyrs: And when they all work
Miracles, I must needs believe that some of 'em are counterfeit Miracles; and
if I can yet discern no difference, I would know why they should not all go for
counterfeit. For when God works Miracles, they are too plain for the most part
to be denied, even by those whose interest it is to deny them.

But when I consider St. Chrysostom's Judgment in the case, I must confess my
self to be under a mighty prejudice against the credibility of most Relations
of this sort that went in that Age. I well remember that he somewhere gives
express caution against listening after Miracles. But in one place, never to be
forgotten, very pertinently to the occasion of his discourse, he argues in this
manner: Chrysostom. Hom. 6. in 1 Cor. 2.
Because NOW there are no Miracles wrought, do not thou take this for an
Argument, that none were wrought THEN [in the Apostles days:] For then it was
profitable that they should be wrought, but now it is profitable they should
not be wrought. But how, says he, does it come to pass, that Signs should be
profitable Then, and not so Now? Then he shows, that the continuance of
Miracles would lessen the Rewardableness of Faith: and for this reason, says
he, they are not now wrought. And that this is the Truth, you may see by what
our Lord said to Thomas: Blessed are they who have not seen, and yet believed.
By how much therefore a more convincing Miracle is shown, by so much is the
praise and reward of Faith lessened; wherefore, if now also Miracles were done,
the same inconvenience would follow. But for a farther Answer, he adds, that
although they had now no Miracles, yet several Predictions had been
accomplished, which was a continued confirmation of the truth of Christianity;
and moreover, that the good Lives and Examples of Christians, were now more
necessary for the conviction of Unbelievers, than Miracles: For says he, It Is
the want of Primitive Sanctity, rather than of Miracles, which makes men still
remain in their unbelief.

Which Testimony of so Judicious a man, is a plain Argument that Miracles were
at least very rare in his time; and that every Martyrs Bones did not do the
same Wonders that Babylas his Bones were said to have done in Julian's time.

I may therefore be well excused, if I impute that noise of Miracles which was
so loud in this and the next Age, in great part to the credulity of the Age,
and to the difficulty of standing against that Torrent of Zeal for the honor
of the Martyrs, which had carried most men already beyond the bounds of
Antiquity.

What shall a man make of that Story which St. Hierom tells of Hilarion's
Relics? How Hesychius a holy man ventured his life to steal the Body of
Hilarion the Monk out of the Garden of Cyprus where he was buried, to carry it
to Palestine; and how Constantia took it so to heart, that she died upon it.
For this Religious Woman was wont, it seems, to watch whole days and nights at
his Sepulcher, and for the helping of her Prayers, to talk with him as if he
was present. Hieron. de vita Hilarionis. Tom. 1. p. 98. Colon.
I should think it is not much for the Credit of Religion, to represent a holy
man plundering a Grave, and a holy woman breaking her heart for the loss of the
Body: But if we must believe the Story, Miracles followed the stolen Body, and
yet they tarried in the place from whence it was stolen: So that Hesychius
indeed, and they of Palestine, were considerable gainers; but Constantia was
not so great a loser as she thought. For thus the Relation goes on: We see to
this day a wonderful Contention between those of Palestine and those of Cyprus,
one pretending to his Body, the other to his Spirit. And yet in both places
there are great Miracles done every day, but more in the Garden of Cyprus, and
that perhaps because he loved that place best.

If Miracles were done in both places, I am pretty well satisfied that God did
not thereby intend to demonstrate either the clearness of Hesychius, or the
discretion of Constantia in this business, nor the violent passion of either of
them for Relics. I do not deny but they might both of them be holy Persons,
but it was not for such things as these; and if this part of their Story had
been omitted, their reputation for Sanctity had lost nothing by it. What
therefore was it that God testified by these Miracles? I answer with all
submission, that he testified the truth of that Religion in which Hilarion
died; of that Religion for which the Martyrs died, the most holy Religion which
was first taught by Jesus, then by the Apostles, then by the Primitive Ages of
Christianity after the Apostles; not of any Sentiments or Practices which
neither the Holy Jesus taught, nor his Apostles; and which the Primitive Church
was a stranger to. This I am sure I have learned from St. Austin in the place
beforementioned, Aug. de Unit. Eccles. c. 16.
who makes the testimony of those Miracles that were wrought at the Memories of
the Martyrs, to aim at nothing but the confirmation of the Faith for which they
suffered. And if I should say, that they who can be content with the old
Religion, may and ought to be content also with the old Miracles, I should say
no other thing than what I could justify by his Authority. And which is
something more, that we are now to try Doctrines not by new Miracles, but by
the Scriptures, which we are sure deliver to us the Will of God testified by
Miracles. But if God is pleased to add new Miracles out of his abundant
goodness, I do not doubt but such Miracles are a Confirmation of the old
Religion, as St. De Civit. De lib. 22. c. 9.
Austin tells us those were which God wrought by the Memories of the Martyrs.
But those Miracles did by no means Canonize the weakness of any holy Person in
the matter of Martyrs or Saints, and Relics; not the indiscretion of
Hesychius or Constantia; nor did they give any Authority at all to such
Examples.

I suppose the Gentlemen of the Church of Rome will grant this, without any
trouble; but I question whether they may not be displeased at the producing of
this Story, which without any more ado, looks so like a Satyr upon the great
Author from whom I had it. But what a hard case is ours! Monsieur de Meaux and
the pretended Catholics, think to bear us down (who honor the Relics of the
Saints no otherwise than the truly Primitive Church did) by the Authority of
the later Fathers that lived toward the end of the fourth Age. It has been
often shown, that the Judgment and Practice of that Age in the matter of
Relics, is very different from what we now see in the Church of Rome. But the
Argument is still urged upon us, as if nothing had been said to it. What have
we therefore to do, but to show that so far as there is any Agreement between
the Church of Rome, and that Age of the Church in the use of Relics, they
should urge it very modestly, and without boasting. We do profess a Reverence
for those excellent men, as M. de Meaux grants; Exp. p.
we acknowledge their Sanctity and Learning, and we praise God for the Benefits
which the Church has received by their means. But we do not think their
Authority equal to that of the Apostles, or of the Fathers of the three first
Ages. And we are very sorry that the importunity of our Adversaries puts us
upon a necessity of confessing that these Great Men (as M. de Meaux deservedly
calls them) did in the heat of their concern for Relics, sometimes say and do
such little things, as plainly showed they were but Men. We had been very glad
if our English Romanists would not have done this part of the Controversy into
English, nor obliged us to take off that Vail a little wherewith we have
covered the least commendable Characters of these excellent men. Nay we have
that Reverence for their Sanctity and Learning, that we are still very willing
to believe their Writings to have been corrupted in those places which afford
this kind of Stories. And though St. Hierom affirms that he wrote the Life of
Hilarion, yet I must confess this is so weak a part of it which I have
mentioned, that I am sometimes almost persuaded that some body has been making
bold to mend him. I am sure there appears such a Spirit of Superstition and
Credulity in these passages at the end of St. Hilarion's Life; of Superstition
in the Persons spoken of, and of Credulity in the Relator; that St. Hierom is a
great deal more beholden to them that cannot be satisfied they are his than to
those that can.

But to proceed: I have already observed, that the Affection of this Age to the
Martyrs, was expressed by a frequent and continual resort to their Tombs or
Memories. And that when Christians obtained the deliverance or relief which
they sought, it was believed to be in great part the effect of the Martyrs
favor with God; which in many Persons grew into a Persuasion that the Martyrs
were present at their Memories. Aug. de Cura pro Mortuis, c. 16.
And in this persuasion they were confirmed by Apparitions, which were at least
believed to be seen there, since it gave occasion to some questions then, and
to a great controversy afterward, whether they were the Souls of the Martyrs,
or whether they were Angels that appeared.

But the great question is, whether in those applications to the Memories of
the Martyrs, they called upon God only, or the Martyrs also. For here it is
that the pretended Catholics must find color of thus much Antiquity, if any
where. For their appeals to the Apostrophes of some of the Fathers in their
Panegyrical Orations upon the Martyrs, deserve no consideration. If indeed the
Faithful were wont to call upon the Martyrs at their Memories; this has some
appearance of an Argument for the pretended Catholics.

I shall therefore first lay down the Fact, remembering all along, that it is
the duty of an honest man to deliver things as they appear to him, and not to
attempt the defense even of Truth, but only with such Arguments as he is well
satisfied of the Truth of, himself. But when the Fact is stated, I shall not
envy the best advantages that our Adversaries can make of it.

That account which St. Ad viginti Martyrs oravit.
Austin gives of the Tailor that had lost his Cloak, and went to the Twenty
Martyrs to pray for another, has been often produced as a sufficient
demonstration that the practice of that Age, was to call upon the Martyrs
themselves. But to this it is answered on the other side, Visum est ut iret ad
memoriam S. Stephani, and illis quantum posset oravet, ut Deus illi daret. De
Civ. Dei. l. 22. c. 8.
that no more can be certainly concluded from hence, than that the Tailor went
to the Memory of the Twenty Martyrs, and there prayed to God: As it is said of
others, that they went to the Memory of St. Stephen, and there prayed that God
would give them what they wanted, which is a defensible interpretation of such
passages. For the Application that was made to the Martyrs by going to their
Memories or Churches, and the hope of prevailing by their Intercessions, did
not necessarily imply any Invocation of the Martyrs: But the suppliant
believing them to be present at their Memories, and to observe the Prayers that
were made to God there, might hope for the benefit of their Intercession
without speaking to them. As for St. Austin himself, what his Opinion was
concerning the presence of the Martyrs, I shall show in another place.

But some of St. Chrysostom's Homilies are produced with no little assurance,
to show not only that the Saints were invocated at their Memories, but that he
approved it too. And indeed St. Chrysostom's Authority in a doubtful matter,
would bear a little boasting. That Age did not afford a man superior to him in
true Judgment, perhaps not his equal. But then it is but a fair request, that
those Homilies be not obtruded upon us for his, of which it is very doubtful
whether they be or not; those for instance to the People of Antioch, the Greek
Copies whereof could not be found in any Ancient Library. I interpose this, not
for the service of a Cause, but for the honor of St. Chrysostom, than whom, no
man abounds more with exhortations to pray to God, upon such considerations as
these. Chrysostom. in 4. Psalm.
Thou may always and incessantly call upon God, and shall meet with no
difficulty; for there is no need of Door-keepers to introduce thee, of Stewards
or Procurators, of Guards or Friends; but when thou come by thy self, then
will he most of all hear thee, even when thou beseechest none else. We do not
so effectually incline him when we entreat by others, as when we do it by our
selves. How this can be reconciled with two or three passages, (which, if they
be his, do manifestly imply his approbation of calling upon the Martyrs at
their Memories) I cannot for my part understand; especially that in the
Conclusion of the Homily upon Bernix, etc. which I shall examine by and by. For
to avoid contention about a matter not necessary to the Cause in hand, I will
proceed upon that Testimony, as if it were St. Chrysostom's. But whatever St.
Chrysostom's Opinion was concerning the thing it sel^, I think it cannot
reasonably be denied, that we have his Testimony that it was done: For
describing the magnificence of the Monuments of the Saints, Chrysostom. in 2. Epist.
ad Corinth. verse. fin.
which were more splendid than the Palaces of Kings, not only for the
greatness and beauty of their building, but which was more, for the great
resort of devout people thither; he goes on thus: For thither even he that is
clothed with Purple, goes to embrace their Monuments, and laying by his
stateliness, he stands entreating the Saints, that they would intercede with
God for him; and he that wears a Crown desires the Patronage of a Tent-Maker,
and a Fisherman who died long since. I cannot approve Chamier's rendering of
this place, who supposes the Emperor is here brought in (...).
not entreating, but only needing the intercession of the Saints. His
Criticism is too subtle, and does not well accord with the place. But be that
as it will; I must confess a sew intimations of the Fact will serve to make me
conclude, that very many devout people did, besides their Prayers to God, which
they made at the Memories of the Martyrs, entreat also of the Martyrs
themselves the benefit of their Intercessions to God for them; and that because
it was generally believed that they were present at their Memories.

For if such an Opinion should prevail amongst any considerable number of
Christians any where, that the Souls of Martyrs or other Saints, were to be
conversed with in any certain place where the People could come within their
hearing; it is hardly to be imagined that all, or indeed the most, should
restrain themselves from going thither to desire their Prayers. And their
Guides, who themselves believed the presence of the Martyrs, would in all
likelihood be more forward to commend them to reprove them for it, unless they
should be well aware of the ill consequences it might produce. And therefore I
do not wonder that this new conceit of the presence of the Martyrs at their
Memories, should carry the Christians of those times thither very frequently,
and many of them to desire the Martyrs to pray for them. This persuasion helped
forward the Devotion of the Age, and was apparently countenanced by some of the
Fathers, and it should seem was winked at by all, only St. Austin seemed to
doubt of it, as we shall see presently.

But St. Basil made no question of it, and therefore manifestly approved the
practice that was grounded upon it. For thus he speaks concerning the Memory of
the Forty Martyrs. Basil. in 40. Martyr.
Here, says he, a Religious woman is found praying for her Children, and
desiring a safe return for her Husband, that is abroad, and recovery for her
sick Husband. And then he adds, Let your Prayers be made with the Martyrs. I
know this passage enforces no more, than that the Prayers made in those places
to God would excite the Martyrs to join their Intercessions with those of the
devout Christian. And perhaps St. Basil seems to approve this way, more than
calling upon the Martyrs themselves, because he says, Let your Prayers be made
with (not to) the Martyrs. But that some Christians did speak to the Martyrs
too, and were not reproved for it, is, I think, very plain from what St. Basil
says in his Oration upon Mamas the Martyr: You remember the Martyr, says he, as
many of you as have enjoyed him in Dreams; as many of you as coming to this
place, have had his help toward your Prayer; as many of you as having called
to him (...). Basil. Homil. 26. de S. Mam.
by name, have found him present by his works; as many Travelers as he has
brought home again, etc. For here I cannot but think that Mamas his being
called by name, signifies more than a bare wish that he would pray for those
that are spoken of: Especially considering how very natural it was for a belief
of the presence of the Martyrs in some places, to breed the custom of
addressing to them, as a man would do to his Friend that is within the compass
of hearing. So that I will not go about to put any other construction upon
these words, than this plain one, that some of St. Basils Auditors had called
to Mamas by name to pray for them, and to assist them in the procuring of that
which they had desired of God, or were about to desire of him.

And here (to use the words of the excellent Bishop Usher) a man may easily
discern the breeding of a Disease, Answer to Jesuits Challenge, p. 444.
and as it were the grudgings of that Ague, that brake out afterward into a
pestilential Fever.

I am not insensible what colors this plain and honest dealing may afford to
those of the Roman Communion, who do not seek for Truth, nor are willing that
others should find it. What will they now say, but that we begin to confess the
establishment of the Invocation of Saints in the Fourth Age? Monsieur de Meaux
has said it already upon less occasion given. But we cannot help it if our
Consciences be misrepresented by the Artifices of some of 'em, and
superficially looked upon by the rest. For my own part, I had rather another
man should make a disingenuous advantage of my dealing truly in defense of the
Truth, than go about to take away from him the occasion of using a pious Fraud,
by being guilty of a pious Fraud my self.

But I will now be bold to say, that there is so vast a difference between the
practice of some Christians in the Fourth Age, who reconciled themselves to the
Prayers of the Martyrs; and between the Invocation of Saints, which is now
practiced and contended for in the Church of Rome; that the allowance of the
former will by no means infer the latter: The forementioned great man has
shown the difference in several particulars well worth every honest and prudent
man's consideration, that desires to inform himself in this matter. Ibid. from
p. 445. to p. 457.
And to him I shall the rather refer the inquisitive Reader for them; because I
will here add two other differences which may of themselves be sufficient to
show that Monsieur de Meaux who says we begin to acknowledge that the
Invocation of Saints was established in the Fourth Age, would be very much
beholden to us, if we should make such an Acknowledgment. For when the Truth
comes to be understood, it amounts to this, and no more: That there were but
some beginnings and steps made toward this practice, at the latter end of the
Fourth Age; and that these beginnings were not then established neither.

For first, The instances produced to show that devout people were wont to
recommend themselves to the Prayers of the Martyrs, do generally show that they
did it at the respective Memories of those Martyrs, where the Martyrs were
believed to be within hearing; which, as I shall presently show, makes a great
difference in the case. In the mean time, I do not assert that it was
universally believed that the Souls of the Martyrs were present at their
Memories; Aug. de Cura pro Mortuis, c. 16.
for St. Austin himself durst not affirm it; and though he thought men fared
the better for the Prayers of the Martyrs, yet whether they heard those who
called to them at their Memories, or wherever else they were thought to have
appeared, he professed that it passed the strength of his Understanding; and
this although he allowed greater privileges to the Martyrs than to other
Saints. St. Austin could not digest an Opinion, that St. Hierom indeed made no
difficulty to admit, that a Martyr could at the same time be in places very
distant from one another. Hieron. Adv. Vigilant. Tom. 2. p. 158.
He that will consult St. Hierom about his reason, may sind it in a little
compass; and when he has done, he will be satisfied that I do not forbear the
mentioning of it for any disadvantage it would bring to our Cause. But that
which I at present assert, is this: That where we find the Faithful desiring
any relief by the Prayers of the Martyrs (whether they prayed to the Martyrs
themselves, or not) we still find them at the proper Memories of those Martyrs.
Thus St. Basil, just now quoted: You that coming to THIS PLACE have found him
an helper to your Prayer. Thus St. Hierom also represents Constantia at the
Tomb of Hilarion in the relation already mentioned. And thus St. De Civ. D.
lib. 22. c. 8.
Austin in that famous Chapter of Miracles done by the Memories of Martyrs,
where that relief which was supposed to be obtained by the Twenty Martyrs, was
asked at their Memory, and not at St. Stephen's; as St. Stephen was supposed to
help those that prayed at his Memory. In like manner St. Chrysostom, who brings
in the Emperor doing that honor to the Apostles St. Peter and St. Paul, as to
stand entreating their Prayers; St. Chrysostom, I say, introduces him to their
Monuments, or Memories, where it was that this honor was done to them. And so
in the Oration upon Bernix, Prosdoce and Domnina, we find this exhortation:
Chrysostom. Tom. 5. Hom. 65.
Let us not only upon this [Anniversary] Festival, but upon other days also
stick close to them, and entreat them that we may obtain their Patronage. The
same observation holds, if you go to the Oration upon the Egyptian Martyrs,
Id. Tom. 5.
and to that upon Ignatius; and indeed it holds so generally that it should in
reason interpret any place that mentions Invocation of the Martyrs, where it is
not evidently expressed that it was done at their Memories; Aug. de Cura ubi
supra.
I mean as I said before, their respective Memories: Unless some other place be
distinctly mentioned, as in that place of St. Austin now referred to, where the
presence of the Martyr out of his Memory was supposed to be witnessed by his
appearing, or by his works. But this was very extraordinary. The usual way of
soliciting the Prayers of a Martyr, was to go to his Memory.

The hardest passage of all to be accounted for by this Rule, is that of St.
Ambrose, where he tells the Widows that the Angels are to be entreated as well
as the Martyrs. Ambros. De Viduis Tom. 4 Col. 505, 506.
For though later times have found Relics of Angels, yet they had none then.
The whole place is something obscure, yet I will try to give the best account
of it that I can. His business was to persuade Widows to continue unmarried;
and he tells them, that by good works and devotion, they would gain the
assistance of the Prayers of the Apostles and Martyrs, who would now help those
that were not akin to them, as effectually as they helped their kindred by
their Prayers, when they were upon Earth. And then he has these words: I would
to God that there was somebody who could so readily pray for us; or indeed that
very Peter who prayed for his Wives Mother, and Andrew his Brother; for then
they were able to obtain for their kindred, now they can obtain for us and for
all. I can make nothing of this, but that St. Ambrose was not sure St. Peter
and St. Andrew were near enough to have their Prayers desired, or to be spoken
to; though the best way to engage their Prayers, and to have them near us, was
to abound in Alms and Devotion. But then he adds: The Angels are to be
entreated, who are given to us to be our Guardians: The Martyrs are to be
entreated, whose Patronage we seem to challenge after a sort, by having the
Pledge of their Bodies. They can pray against our sins who have washed away
their own sins, if they had any, by their own Blood. So that the conclusion
seems to be this: that although the best way of engaging all the Apostles and
Martyrs, was to abound in Alms and Prayers, yet it would be very good also for
every one to entreat his Guardian- Angel to pray for him, and to desire the
same of those Martyrs whose Relics were a Pledge of their nearness and
presence. If this be not the meaning of St. Ambrose, (for I do not love to be
confident about the meaning of a place that is not very clear) I shall be glad
to be better instructed. If it be, this is a farther confirmation of what I
have observed, that the calling upon Martyrs in those days, went by their
Relics and Memories. And by the way, this single instance of advising to
entreat the Angels too, seems to proceed upon the common reason, viz. a
supposition of the presence of those Angels, that God had given for our Guard.
And it was a current Opinion amongst some of the Greek Fathers, (whom St.
Ambrose studied and imitated very industriously) that every good man had his
Angel; though I am not satisfied that any but St. Ambrose carried the Opinion
to this conclusion, that men should entreat their Angels to pray for them.

So that notwithstanding the singularity of St. Ambrose in advising to call
upon Angels, I see little reason why he should be thought to speak in this
fashion, merely because he was in comparison but a Novice in Christianity, when
he wrote this Book. Toward the end of his life he seemed to be as fond as ever
he had been of the Relics of Martyrs, and very desirous to make his Prayers
over them, Paulinus in vita Ambros. Paris. Amb.
if Paulinus may be believed; who observed, that if the Holy Priest went to
pray in a place at which he had never been seen to pray before, this was a
token that he knew by Revelation the Body of some Martyr to lie hid
thereabouts. So that although the Bodies he then speaks of were soon translated
into the Church of the Apostles, yet St. Ambrose would loose no time, but went
forthwith to say his Prayers to God at the places where they lay buried, and
probably enough to speak to them too; believing that they were there near
enough to observe and hear him, and that they would assist him with their
Prayers.

Thus Sozomen tells us, that Theodosius going out of Constantinople in his
Expedition against Eugenius, and coming to the seventh mile, there (...).
prayed to God, and likewise (...) Sozom. lib. 7. c. 24.
called to John the Baptist to help him. I shall not need to insist upon the
difference of Expression, praying to God, and calling to the Saint, though
several instances might be produced in favor of such an observation. For here
also we find that the place where the Emperor prayed to God, Ibid. c. 21.
and withal called upon the Baptist, was no other than that Church which he had
built for a Memory of St. John Baptist. For it seems, certain Monks of the
Macedonian Heresy were said to have found the Head of the Baptist at
Jerusalem; which after several removes, was at last brought by Theodosius to
Constantinople, in the Suburbs whereof he buried it, and erected a stately
Church over it. So that here the Relics of the Martyr were a Pledge of his
Presence and Patronage; and here it was that Theodosius did not only pray to
God, but called to the Saint for his Assistance too. Ruffin. Hist. lib. 2. c.
33.
Ruffinus indeed tells us, that he sought help by the intercession of other
Saints; but where was it? Not here at St. John Baptist's Memory; but where the
Relics of the Apostles and Martyrs were kept, that is in other Memories. But
when the Emperor was come into Italy, and had the Enemy before him in the
Field; though we find that he prayed, yet there is not the least intimation of
calling upon the Baptist, or upon any other Saint there. It is only said,
Sozom. lib. 7. c. 24.
that prostituting himself upon the ground, he prayed with tears, and God
presently heard his Prayers. But though the Victory was without all question to
be ascribed to God, yet Sozomen relates a strange story, which he had taken, as
it seems, upon common report, how the Devil ascribed it to John the Bapist. For
the same day that the Battle was fought, a man possessed being in the Church of
St. John Baptist, was heaved up very high from the ground, and the Devil that
was in him, Ibid.
railed at the Baptist, and reproached him for having lost his head; but yet
could not forbear confessing to him in this manner: Thou overcomest me, and
defeatest my Army. I confess I am apt to suspect foul play in this prank of the
Devil, if it were true; and do believe, that God ought to have had the Glory,
not a whit the less for the Devils giving it to the Saint. But such kind of
reports were made use of to confirm People in an opinion of the presence of the
Martyrs at their Memories, (for the Devil's speaking to John the Baptist here,
was his acknowledgment of it) and in the practice of making addresses to them
there upon that account.

Nothing yet appears to the contrary, but that they who thought the Martyrs
heard when they were spoken to, believed their presence to be limited to some
certain places, in the compass of which they were within hearing. But I am not
so vain as to undertake that there were none in those days who called upon the
Martyrs in all places indifferently: For while the Great men of that Age seemed
to give a full scope to that strain of zeal toward the Martyrs which was now
going forward, it is to be feared rather, (though no such thing appears) that
some of the people made no difference between calling upon their Martyrs at
their Memories, or any where else. And so it certainly was when one of those
Sermons was written that are safely attributed to St. Sermon. de Fest. Nazarii
and Celsi. Tom 4.
Ambrose.

But it is enough for my present purpose, that the custom of calling upon the
Martyrs at their respective Memories, was as yet very notorious. And this
indeed was the ground of that Scoff of Vigilantius, for which St. Hierom. Adv.
Vigil. ubi supra.
Hierom chastises him so severely: What, says he, are the Souls of the Martyrs
therefore so fond of their own Ashes? do they hover about them, and are always
present with them, lest perhaps if any one comes to pray, they should be
absent, and incapable of hearing him? To the matter of which Question, St.
Hierom was almost silent; but he lashes him for abusing and laughing at the
Relics of the Martyrs. The truth is, Vigilantius had hit that Popular
Opinion, that the Martyrs were very much present with their Relics, and
consequently, that the best way to be sure of them, was to go to the Churches
where their Relics were, unless (which happened very seldom) they should
discover a particular affection to some other place, as St. Hilarion did to the
Garden of Cyprus, after his Relics were stolen out of it.

Now therefore as the first Addresses that were made to the Martyrs had not the
nature of Prayer or Religious Invocation in any other respect, so neither in
this, that they ascribed Omnipresence to the Saints or Martyrs. For not only
the Belief of that Age, but the Practice of it too, in seeking the Intercession
of the Saints, limited their presence to some determinate places, and generally
to their respective Memories. They that called upon the Saints at all, did not
indifferently call upon them in any place, but (if we may gather the general
practice from such particular instances as we have) they invocated them in some
certain place only, where they were thought to be within hearing. Nor can I
find that they thought it reasonable to speak so much as to one Saint, at the
Memory of another; but rather to every Saint a^ his own.

Which makes the Addresses of those times to the Martyrs, very different from
the Invocation of Saints in the Church of Rome, which has let her Children
loose to call upon every Saint in every place, as occasion requires; and has
furnished them with Litanies of Supplication to all the Saints, to be used in
all places of the World.

He that cannot see a wide difference between these two things, can see
nothing. The first practice of all, setting aside the ill consequences of it,
was to say the worst of it, but a harmless Superstition; that is, when as yet
the Relics of the Martyrs were entire, and there was but one Memory to one.
The next step indeed was something dangerous, which began also in this Age, and
that was allowing some of them several Memories in distant places, at every one
of which, I believe they were spoken to by some or other; though it was yet
pretty well, that they confined them all within some bounds. But the last
Practice is an intolerable Affront to the Divine Majesty, because it does in
effect ascribe Omnipresence to a Creature. The progress of the mischief from so
small a beginning, to so strange a conclusion, was plainly this: By dispersing
the Relics of the same Martyrs into two or more, and at length into many
places, their Memories were by degrees strangely multiplied; and that to speak
the Truth, Theod. de Cur. Graec. Affl. l. 8. de Mart.
not inconsiderably in the next Age, as appears by Theodoret; and so by degrees
they were allowed a greater; and by the help of new Relics (when the old ones
would bear dividing no longer) still a greater compass of presence; till at
last Superstition and worldly Policy together, would not allow any bounds at
all to be set to their presence, but would have them called upon no less than
God in all places whatsoever.

This account of the latter Practices of the fourth Age in this matter, and of
the grounds of their Practice, may perhaps deserve to be added to a great many
others, whereby the difference of the Addresses to the Martyrs in that Age,
from the Roman Invocation of Saints, has been shown. I shall say no more of it,
than that it may appear fair and reasonable to any man that shall take the
pains to compare one thing with another. At least, it deserves some
consideration, because if the Addresses that were made in that Age to the
Martyrs, were limited to some certain places; it will destroy an Appeal to that
Age for an Invocation which is unlimited, and ascribes Omnipresence to the
Saints. And therefore if in assigning this difference, I have proceeded upon a
mistake of the Practice of that Age, the Gentlemen of the Church of Rome are
concerned to show it. And when they do, it will be my part to show that I am
not fond of a Notion, but can with more ease reject it, when it appears to be
false, than I entertained it while it seemed to be true.

But then 2. As the Addresses of the Fourth Age to the Saints were not properly
Religious Invocations, so neither were they established in the Church. There
was no public Rule or Order for them, but they were wholly the effects of a
private and voluntary Zeal, encouraged by some of the Guides of the Church, and
perhaps connived at by all. They were, I say, the actions of so many single
Christians in behalf of themselves or their near Relations, but no part of the
established Service of the Church. The Liturgies were every where still the
same, and none but God was called upon in the Service performed at the
Religious Assemblies of the Church. If the pretended Catholics could show a
Change in the Service of the Church about this time, favoring the Invocation
of Saints, that indeed were something. But then they must not refer us to the
shameful Interpolations of St. Chrysostom's, and other ancient Liturgies. It
were an easy matter to be very large upon this Head, but for a reason I shall
mention presently, we will for the present go no farther than to St. Austin.
For if his Authority be of any weight with them, they will see that whatever
was done in the way of private Worship by single Persons, there was no change
of the Service of the Church in this respect, but that God only was invocated
in the stated Assemblies of the Faithful. Let us therefore hear what St. Austin
says, The Gentiles, says he, have built Temples, raised Altars, and ordained
Priests, De Civit. Dei lib. 22. c. 10.
and offered Sacrifices to their Gods. But we do not erect Temples to our
Martyrs, as if they were Gods, but Memories as to dead men, whose Spirits live
with God. Nor do we erect Altars upon which to sacrifice to Martyrs, but to one
God only do we offer, the God of Martyrs, and our God; at which Sacrifice, as
men of God who in confessing him have overcome the World, they are named in
their place and order, but they are not invocated by the Priest who sacrifices.

St. Austin plainly speaks of the public Service of the Church at the
Assemblies of the Faithful, in which, if we will take his word, no Addresses
were made, but to God only. And he expressly says that the Priest who
administered the Service, did not invocate the Martyrs, but named them in order,
as men that had overcome the World, that is, gave Thanks and Prayers to God for
them. And here I am much mistaken, or else there is an observable difference
intimated between the voluntary Addresses of single Persons to the Martyrs at
their Memories, and between the mention that was made of the Martyrs when the
Faithful assembled for the ordinary Service of God at the same Memories: For
when in voluntary and private Devotion, the Saints were spoken to, it was still
at their respective Memories; but in the Assemblies of the Church for Divine
Service, they were indifferently mentioned in their place and order, at all the
Memories of the Martyrs, but not invocated. But that which I chiefly observe,
is this: That neither was the Martyr, whose Memory was the place of God's
public Service, invocated in the Prayers of the Church; so that even the
Addresses of that Age to a Martyr at his own Memory, were not established by
the Order and Service of the Church, but left to the voluntary Zeal of single
Persons.

And therefore those Passages of this Father referred to by M. de Meaux, make
nothing for Invocation of Saints. St. Austin, it seems, (though it was a
singular Opinion of his) thought it an De Verb. Apost. Sermon. 17.
injury to a Martyr to pray for him, by whose Prayers we our selves are to be
commended; and therefore the Martyrs were not mentioned in that place of the
Service, where other dead Persons were commemorated, viz. those for whom Prayer
was made. And says he, Tractat. in Joh. 84.
At the Holy Table we do not so commemorate them as we do others that rest in
peace, viz. as those for whom we pray; but rather as those that pray for us,
that we may tread in their steps. Now though St. Austin was one of those that
doubted whether the Petitions of the Faithful arrived to the knowledge of the
Martyrs, yet he doubted not that the Martyrs prayed for the Faithful, which is
all that can be proved from these places. But what is this to the Invocation of
them, which St. Austin also expressly denies, in saying that they are not
invocated by the Priest who Sacrifices?

And here we ^^^st remember what the Ancient Fathers meant by the Christian
Sacrifice. Not only the Oblation of Bread and Wine brought by all the People,
and presented at the Holy Table, with the Prayers of the Priest, nor only the
Consecration of those Elements afterward to be the Memorials of Christ's Body
and Blood, which they first laid before God, and then distributed to the
Faithful; I say, we must remember that they did not only mean these visible
Sacrifices, but likewise all the Prayers, Praises, and Thanksgivings of the
Church, which were Vocal Sacrifices, together with Contrition of Heart, and all
pious Affections answerable to the Outward Sacrifices; by which the Faithful
offered up Aug. de Civ. lib. 10. c. 6.
themselves a Sacrifice to God. This was that Reasonable Service, and unbloudy
Sacrifice, which the Priest in behalf of all the People, solemnly offered up to
God. So that St. Austin's meaning is this: That the Faithful being assembled at
the Memories of the Martyrs for Divine Service, the Martyrs are not Invocated
by the Priest in any part of the Administration. And therefore the distinction
of Sacrificial and Extrasacrisicial Prayers will not avoid this Testimony,
since the Prayers of the Faithful at their Religious Assemblies, were all
Sacrificial Prayers, as being part of the Christian Sacrifice.

And St. Austin, whose Testimony this is, did in this notion of Sacrifice,
clearly follow the Doctrine of the more Ancient Fathers: Let us observe, says
he, Ibid. c. 5
that where God said he would not have Sacrifice, there it is shown that he
will have Sacrifice. He wills not the Sacrifice of a slain Beast, but he will
have the Sacrifice of a contrite Heart. And afterward he adds these
instances, as the Ancients had done before him. The Psalmist says, Offer unto
God the sacrifice of praise, and pay thy vows to the Most High, and call upon
me in the day of tribulation, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall gl^^^fie
me.

It Is true, that he sometimes distinguishes the visible Oblations of the
Church, from Prayers and Praises; as where he argues, Ibid. c. 19.
that the visible Sacrifices are to be offered up to God only; whose visible
Sacrifice we our selves are in our hearts; as in vocal Prayer and Praise we
pray to God, and praise him only, to whom we offer the devotion of the Heart.
But though in that place he does not call Prayers and Praises, Sacrifices, as
he does elsewhere very frequently; yet even there he takes it for granted,
that when the Faithful were assembled for praying to God and praising him, they
addressed themselves to none but to Him.

It is so plain even from this Father, that the Invocation of Martyrs and
Saints, was no part of the Service of the Church, that I have thought sit to
insist only upon his Testimony; especially since Monsieur de Meaux has been
pleased to bring in the words of the Council of Trent, explaining their
practice in Invocating the Saints: Because, says he, the Council does almost
make use of the very words of this Holy Bishop. Let us first hear the words of
the Council: The Church does not offer Sacrifices to the Saints, but to God
alone, who has Crowned them: The Priest also does not address himself to St.
Peter and St. Paul, saying, I offer up to you this Sacrifice; but rendering
thanks to God for their Victories, he demands THEIR ASSISTANCE, to the end that
those whose Memory me celebrate upon Earth, would vouchsafe to pray for us in
Heaven. Now let us hear the words of St. Austin, in that place to which
Monsieur de Meaux refers. But we do not appoint Temples, Priesthoods, Holy
Rites, and Sacrifices to the Martyrs, because not They, but their God is our
God. Indeed, we honor the Memories of the Martyrs as of holy men, etc. But who
of the Faithful ever heard the Priest, standing at the Altar, Ibid. lib. 8. c.
27.
though erected for the Honor and Worship of God, over the holy Body of a
Martyr, to say in the Prayers, I offer Sacrifice to thee, O Peter, or Paul, or
Cyprian; when at their Memories it is offered to God, who made them both Men and
Martyrs, and associated them to the Angels in heavenly glory; that by this
solemnity we may give thanks to the True God for their Victories, and that we
by renewing in our selves the remembrance of them, may be excited by imitating
them to strive for such Crowns and Palms as they have obtained Eodem invocato
in Auxilium.
THE SAME True God BEING INVOCATED FOR OUR ASSISTANCE. It seems there is almost
no difference made by putting the Saints instead of God. Let Monsieur de Meaux
lay his hand upon his Heart, and tell us honestly for once, whether Eodem
invocato in Auxilium, do not refer to the True God spoken of before, and not to
the Saints? And if so, what there is in this passage of the Holy Bishop, that
makes for the Invocation of Saints?

And now Monsieur de Meaux may go on as long as he thinks fit to make Triumphs,
Pastoral Letter, p. 29.
upon our Acknowledgement, that during the Fourth Century, the Church desired
the Prayers of Martyrs, and honored Relics. For he goes on in this strain,
in his late Pastoral Letter, where he declaims so Tragically against those that
(if you will believe him) charge Idolatry upon the Illustrious Fourth Age; yea
that very Age wherein the Prophecies of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ were
accomplished more manifestly than ever; when the Kings of the Earth till then
Persecutors of the Name of Jesus, became according to the Ancient Oracles, his
Adorers. My Lord the Bishop of Meaux knew when it was convenient to use the
style of a perfect Gentleman. p. 30.
But since he wrote his Exposition, the Case of some of his Contrymen is
something altered, though the Cause be the same. Now the Blasphemies of the
Protestants put him into sits of Amazement, p. 2^.
and he cannot tell what Horror they are worthy of. But to do him right, he
keeps true to one old principle, that will I believe be dear to him as long as
he lives: p. 16.
Once more, my Brethren, let us not dispute, let us not run into Controversy.
No, by no means; for it is much easier to declaim, than to dispute, to take
things for granted, than to prove them; and to make general slourishes, than to
enter into examination of particulars. What can be more easy than to exclaim
in this manner? The Ambroses, the Augustines, the Hieroms, p. 30.
the Gregory's of Nazianzene, the Basilius 's, and the Chrysostomes, whom all
Christians have respected even till now as the Doctors of Truth! But hold a
little; if great Names will do the business, let us see what we can do in this
kind: Can you endure, my Brethren, those who have forsaken the Ireneus's, the
Justin-Martyrs, the Clemens's of Alexandria, the Tertullians, the Origens, the
Cyprians, the Athanasius's, whom all Christians do pretend even now to respect
as Doctors of Truth? Those, my Brethren, that were more Ancient than the
Ambroses, etc. and most of whom laid down their lives in a Glorious Martyrdom,
which none of the other did? It is true, Brethren, p. 29.
that some part of the Prophecies was fulfilled, when, the Empire took the
Church into its protection; but we do not find it was foretold also, that the
Christians of that Age would be wiser or better than their Forefathers. p. ^
Does not Monsieur de Meaux tell us, that Antichrist must come according to the
Predictions of the Apostles. But when that happens, the times are not to be
much the better for it. It was the admirable goodness of God, to Crown the
Church at last with Peace and Glory. But do not think the Authority of that Age
is to be regarded the more, because it was Illustrious for the Wealth and
Splendour of this World, least by the same reason you should undervalue the
Authority of the more Ancient Ages, which were Illustrious for nothing but
Truth, and Godliness, and Martyrdom; which if you should do, my Brethren, might
we not well cry out, Oh prodigy, unheard of amongst Christians! that we should
begin to think it a better mark of a pure Church, to have it in its power to
persecute others, than to endure persecution her self after the example of
Christ and his Apostles.

It is an easy matter to requite a Declamation. But would not the Bishop of
Meaux say to this, that the Ireneus's, etc. do not condemn what is now
practiced in the Church of Rome? So do we say that we are far from charging the
Ambroses, etc. with Idolatry; and that the Doctrines and Practices of that Age,
with respect to the points that we are upon, are so vastly different from what
we now see in the Church of Rome, that if the Church of Rome be Idolatrous, it
does by no means follow, that the Fourth Age was so. So that we must come to
disputing at last, whether we will or not, if we talk of these questions to any
purpose.

I have shown the first steps that were made toward the Invocation of Saints,
which I confess is an Innovation maintained by the Church of Rome, that of all
the rest bids the fairest for Antiquity: Because there was a certain Address to
Martyrs used by many Christians, and commended by some of the Fathers toward
the latter end of the Fourth Age, which looks something like it, till you come
near to examine the matter thoroughly. But then you may discern so considerable
a difference, that it is a vain thing to pretend that the Invocation of Saints,
as now practiced in the Church of Rome, was as Ancient as the Conclusion of the
Fourth Age. All that we need to grant, is this: That those beginnings are so
Ancient, which first did give occasion to it, and which with the help of
Ignorance and Superstition did at length bring it into the Church.

10.
Hitherto the Honor done to the Martyrs was that of Founding Churches upon
their Relics, and frequenting them both for the public Service of God, and
for private Devotions, in which the Martyrs themselves were sometimes called
upon, as if they were present at their Memories. But this was done before their
Images came to be set up in the Church, so much as for Ornament, and long
before they were thought of for Worship. We have already noted the Act of
Epiphanius, in tearing the Picture of Christ, or some other Saint, (for he knew
not well what it was) which he found upon a Veil: An act of Indignation so much
the more remarkable, because the Church where it was done was in the Diocese of
John Bishop of Jerusalem, Hieron. Tom. 2. Ep. 60. v. fin.
to whom therefore Epiphanius thought fit to give an account of it in that
Epistle which is to be seen in St. Hierom's Works: And the reason he gives for
what he did, is as remarkable as the Action was. When I saw this in a Church of
Christ, that the Picture of a man should be hanged up there, against the
Authority of the Scriptures, I tare it, etc. And again, I entreat thee to
command the Presbyters of that place to provide for the future, that such Veils
being contrary to what our Religion allows, may not be hanged up in the Church
of Christ.

But as for the Images of Martyrs and Saints, why should I go about to prove
that they were not yet brought into Churches, when the pretended Catholics are
fain to give reasons why they were hardly to be met with amongst Christians
even out of Churches. Petavius excuses the matter thus: The Images of Christ
and the Saints were not used, lest they should be taken by the rude and
unskilful people, for Idols, to which they shad been accustomed. And afterward:
Petav. Dogm. Theol. Tom. 4. part. 2. c. 13. p. 582, 583.
Images are not evil of themselves, nor forbidden by any Law of God;
nevertheless, that no shadow of Superstition and Idolatry, might give offense
to the tender, and, as I may say, the unsettled minds of Christians, and that
the Gentiles might not object to those of our Religion who abhorred Idols, and
dissuaded men from them, that themselves also had certain Images of their own;
is likely they were but sparingly used for about the first Four Ages, all which
time the abominable Worship of Devils in Idols, together with a most cruel
vexation of the Christian name, went on. At length the Fifth Age being come,
after that the Church had gained her freedom, and began boldly to stretch forth
her arms, Images began to appear in most places, and were shown in Temples and
Oratories; whereas hitherto though they had been in some use, yet they were not
to be seen so promiscuously and frequently. In good time! But if such a man as
Petavius could have shown any use of Images all this while that any Art could
draw to his purpose, he had not served the Cause with this miserable account of
the late setting up of Images. With the like to which Salmeron satisfied
himself, as to the silence of the Scriptures about the Worship of Saints, as we
have already seen. Now to make this appear likely, he insists upon it, that the
Ancients disputed against the Temples and Altars of the Heathens, though when
peace and liberty was given to the Church, the Christians had magnificent
Churches and Altars of their own. But nothing can be more vain, for from the
first the Church had its Altars or holy Tables, and its holy Places too, such
as the times would permit. And therefore this Instance does not reach to the
Case of Images which they had not. But where the state of the Controversy lay
between the Christians and the Heathens about Temples and Altars, and what was
the difference between the one and the other, is too long to insert here; and
therefore I refer the Reader to Mr. Mede's Discourse concerning Churches, Par.
1. Book 2. where it is handled with exquisite diligence.

But if Petavius his reason has any probability, why were not Images brought
in presently upon Constantine's coming to the Empire, at least after the death
of Julian? For then the Church enjoyed Peace and Power; unless it were to be
said, that by stepping boldly into that practice (as soon as they had gained
power) which they had utterly condemned in their distress they knew that they
should bring the reproach of insincerity upon their Profession, and that
therefore it was more advisable to step into it by degrees. But he that can
believe this of the Ancient Church, must not pretend any great Reverence for it.

But whereas Petavius thought this to be the likely reason, why we hear not of
Images so long together, viz. that it would furnish the Heathens with
objections. I shall not fear to oppose this Conjecture with another, and to
say, that it is more likely and credible, that if the Ancient Fathers had
thought it lawful to bow down to Images, and to Worship them, they would have
brought this practice in with one consent; and that because the Gentiles had
been accustomed to the worshipping of Images: For it is incomparably more easy
to bring men from worshipping some Images to worship others, (as the Jesuits
knew by experience) than from worshipping Images, to worship none at all. Nay,
it is yet more likely that Images were brought into several Churches in the
fifth Age, in compliance with the inclinations of many of the Gentiles; who,
now the Church shined with the Glory of the World, thronged into it, before
they had worn off their Superstition and fondness of Images; and that the
reason why it was done no sooner, was this: that the Zeal of the Ancient Church
against Images being yet fresh in the minds of men, must needs hinder their
coming into any use immediately, and leave it to be a work of some time. And it
is not unlikely that Petavius himself was well aware of these things, for
otherwise he was not likely to confess, that in this Controversy about Images,
we are not to have regard to the Examples and Orders of the more ancient
Church, but rather of latter times; which is in more civil terms to confess it
was an Innovation: for surely this learned Jesuit knew better, than to say that
in a Controversy about the Antiquity of worshipping Images, we ought rather to
regard latter times than the Ancient Church.

But they that will find Church Authority for Image Worship, must go down yet
lower, even beyond the fifth, sixth, and seventh Ages of the Church. Pictures
were in the fifth Age brought into diverse Churches, for Ornament and
Instruction. The Histories of the Old and New Testament, and at length the
Passions of Martyrs, and stories of Saints, were to be seen upon the Walls of
Churches. Indeed when the seventh Age was now coming in, we find the People of
Marseilles began to worship Images; which Serenus Greg. lib. 9. Ep. 9. ad
Serenum.
their Bishop discerning, broke 'em down. Which breaking of them, Gregory the
Great disallowed, because he thought Images were instead of Books to them that
could not read; but the worshipping of them he disallowed as much as Serenus.
It is likely enough that some unwarrantable regard to Images, began about the
same time to obtain in other places. For in the seventh Age there were warm
Controversies about it, which grew to such a heat in the Reign of Leo Isaurus,
that he commanded the Images to be broken down. But Superstition had gotten
such an head, that this would not do; but his Son Constantine was forced to
call together a Council, (which consisted of 338 Bishops) to put an end to
those Troubles, if it might be done. And they did their parts effectually: for
they did not only decree against the worshipping of Images, but the retaining
of them. Now thirty years after this, toward the end of the Eighth Age,
another Council was assembled at Nice, by the promotion of the Empress Irene;
in which Image Worship was stoutly maintained, but with such kind of Arguments,
that if I were for the Worship of Images, I should be very well content to lose
the advantage of the Councils Authority, provided I might never be reproached
with their Reasoning. The Cause was upheld by Adrian I. then Bishop of Rome,
who sent the Acts of this second Nicene Council to Charles the Great. Charles
calls a Council of Italian, German, and French Bishops at Frankford, in which
it was determined against the Constantinopolitan Council, that Images might be
retained; and smartly concluded against these Nicene Fathers, that without
impiety they could not be worshipped. It was unlucky that the late beginning of
Antiquity for the Worship of Images, should be discredited by such an
Authority, and robbed of all pretense to Universality. And therefore Petavius,
as others had done, comforts himself with that vain pretense that the Council
of Frankford Petav. Dog. Th. Tom 5. Par. 2. Lib. 15.
understood not the sense of the Nicene Bishops. It is a vain pretense, because
the Acts of the Nicene Council lay before the Fathers of Frankford. But the
Nicene Doctrine was condemned about 32 years after this at Paris, and was
indeed generally opposed in the Western Churches. So that it seems there is
some reason why Image-Worshippers should not regard the Examples and
Constitutions of the Ancient, but rather of the latter times of the Church.

But when began the Worship of the Blessed Virgin? And why have we forgotten
her all this while? Even because the Fathers forgot her first. It Is true, we
find in Gregory Nazianzen's Greg. Naz. Orat. 18. T. 1.
Oration upon St. Cyprian, the story of Justina the Virgin, calling upon the
Virgin Mary to defend her against the unchaste designs of Cyprian, who, if we
may believe the Tale, was once a Conjurer at Antioch, etc. But by St. Cyprian's
Life, written by Pontius his Deacon, it is evident that this story is void of
all circumstance of Truth. Bar. A. D. 250. N. 5. See Daille de Object. Cultur.
p. 51, etc.
Baronius himself confesses as much: And by the endeavors that have been used
to mend the Tale for the credit of G. Nazianzen, it is plain that there is no
remedy, but it must go for an inexcusable business. And therefore if ever there
was cause from the matter of a Writing imputed to a man of great Name and
Authority to conclude it is none of his; this equity is to be shown to Gregory
Nazianzen; it being incredible that a man of his Worth and Abilities, should
either invent such a Lie, or be made to believe it. I confess it is hard on the
one hand to believe that this story should be so dexterously shuffled into
Nazianzen's Oration, that the Impostor was never discovered; yet on the other
hand, it is harder to believe that such a man as he should lend his Belief and
his Breath to so absurd a Fable.

Epiphanius also tells us of some Arabian Women that worshipped the Virgin
Mary, Epiph. Haeres. 79. lib. 3. Tom. 2. Adv. Collyrid.
by laying a Cake before her for some days, and offering it up to her, and then
eating it amongst themselves. But that which he says upon this occasion, is by
no means for the comfort of her Worshippers. Let us, says he, put on the
Spirits of men, and beat down the madness of these Women. I know it will be
said, that this reproof of those that sacrificed to the B. Virgin, reaches not
those that do not sacrifice to her, but worship her without sacrifice. But I am
sure Epiphanius makes no such distinction. For, says he, who of the Prophets
ever allowed that a Man should be worshipped, much less a Woman? If it was the
Doctrine of those times, that the B. Virgin was more glorious than the Cherubim
and Seraphim; Epiphanius did strangely forget himself, and the Person he was
speaking of, when he supposed a Man might rather be made an Object of Religious
Worship than a Woman, though the B. Virgin.

For thus he goes on: Though the Virgin be a chosen Vessel, she is yet but a
Woman. -- The old Error shall not reign amongst us to leave the living God, and
to worship things that he has made: For if he will not suffer the Angels to be
adored, how much less the Daughter of Joachim and Anne, who was born to them as
other Mortals are born, etc. of a Father and a Mother. If the Virgin had then
been invocated with Prayers and Hymns, is it to be thought that Epiphanius,
Haer. 78. Adv. Antidicom.
who in the foregoing discourse raised the honor of the Virgin as high as
Truth would suffer him, would not have said it there, or distinguished it from
Sacrifice here? He says indeed, Let Mary be honored; but let the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost be adored. But if it had been then as it is now, Epiphanius
could not have avoided saying, Let Mary be worshipped with Religious Invocation
indeed, but let God only be worshipped with Sacrifice. But does he intimate
any thing of this nature? Nay, he does as plainly exclude all Religious Worship
of her, as it was possible to exclude a thing which had not then obtained in
the Church. For says he, God did not commit the Power of Baptizing to Mary, or
of Blessing his Disciples, or any Authority upon Earth. This only he
vouchsafed to her, to be a Sanctified Creature, and worthy to enter into his
Kingdom. But if she had been then adored in any sort, and Epiphanius had
approved it, he was strangely forgetful of the duty of a good Writer, not to
mention it in this place at least, where the plain Rules of Discourse obliged
him, and would have led him to it. All which, makes it evident that we are to
take Worship or Adoration here in the proper sense of the word, and not for
visible Sacrifices only. And the whole place is the more unlucky to the
Worshippers of the B. Virgin, because no comfort is to be had from that
expression of (...).
honoring her, which Epiphanius requires we should do. For that by this he did
not mean any Religious Worship, is I think reasonably plain, from what he says
concerning Eve, in this very Discourse: Let our Mother Eve (...).
be honored, as being formed by God. I do not know that Prayers are said to
Eve in the Roman Church: But I am confident Epiphanius was a stranger to any
such thing in his time. So that if we examine these words of worshipping and
honoring, as they stand in Epiphanius, never so long, they will confess this
and no more, that we must think and speak very honorably of Mary, as being a
most holy woman, and the Virgin Mother of Jesus; but that we must at no hand
adore her with any sort of Invocation or Religious Rites whatsoever. And so I
shall conclude this plain business with the words of Epiphanius: Although Mary
be excellently good and holy, and to be honored, she is not yet to be honored
so as to be worshipped. By which we may judge of the modesty or understanding
of him, whoever he was, that clapped the name of St. Epiphanius to that fulsome
De Laudib. Virg. Mar. Tom. 2. Epiph.
Oration concerning the B. Virgin; where the Angels, Cherubim and Seraphim are
brought in adoring her, etc.

As for what we have concerning the B. Virgin in the Liturgy said to be St.
Chrysostom's, and pretended to be translated by Erasmus, it is all manifest
Interpolation, being directly contrary to St. Chrysostom's Doctrine in his
undoubted Writings. Could he that affirms, that if Christ were not by (...).
(...) in Hebr, c. 1. Hom. 2.
nature the Son of God, he had been inseriour to the Angels, affirm also that
the Blessed Virgin (who is naturally no Goddess) is incomparably more glorious
than the Cherubim and Seraphim? Or that she was unspotted, whom he plainly
notes for (...) Joan. c 2. Hom. 20.
Ambition and Desire of Worldly Glory, and supposes to be checked by Jesus for
it? Concerning the Blessed Virgin, and the privilege she had by being the
Mother of Jesus, they spoke in those days, as we of the Reformation now do. St.
Chrysostom be witness for this, in the place last cited. When thou hear that
Woman saying, Blessed is the Womb that bare thee, and the Paps that give thee
suck; and then himself answering, Yea, rather blessed are they that hear the
Word of God and keep it. Do not think that these words argued contempt of his
Mother, but that he would show how little it would profit her that she was his
Mother, if she were not exceedingly good and faithful. But if it profited Mary
nothing at all, that Christ was born of her, unless she had the virtue of the
Soul, much less good will it do us, to have an excellent Father, Brother, or
Child, whilst we have none of their Virtue -- For we are to place our hope of
salvation in nothing, next to the Grace of God, but only in our proper good
Actions and Qualities. For if that Relation which Mary had to Christ, were a
thing of it self profitable, the Jews had found it so in some degree. For
Christ was akin to them after the Flesh; and so had the City in which he was
born, and so had his Brethren. But whilst his Brethren did just what pleased
themselves, the honor they had to be of kin to him, profited them not at all,
but they were condemned with the rest of the World. A great deal more to this
purpose you may find in this excellent Father, and that in the place by me
cited; by which you may see what the strain of that Age was, as to the Blessed
Virgin, and how very unlike to that which was taken up in following times; some
instances of which, we have in Homilies falsely attributed to De uno
Legislatore. In Samaritanam, etc. Tom. 6.
St. Chrysostom.

In short, if we set aside spurious Writings, such as the Sermon concerning the
Assumption of the Blessed Virgin, published in St. Hierom's Works, and
attributed by some to Sophronius, but was most certainly written long after
they were both dead; and the two Prayers (attributed to Tom. 4.
St. Ambrose) Preparatory to Mass; in the second of which, God is desired
(according to the Genius of after times) to inspire the Blessed Virgin first,
and then the Apostles, and then the Martyrs and Confessors, with the thought of
praying to God for the Priest: But the best learned amongst the Papists have
been ashamed to produce these Prayers as St. Ambrose's, they are so evidently
suppositions. If we set aside also the Book of Meditations which the Latin
Rhymes that are in it convince of Novelty; and the Treatise of the Assumption,
attributed to St. Austin, and the Sermons under his name upon the Feast of the
Annuntiation, which could be none of his, because that Feast was not then in
being: And in one word, all those Writings which Learned men of the Roman
Communion have themselves confessed to be at least doubtful, though they had
for some time gone under the names of Fathers of the Fourth Age. Setting these
aside, I say, we find but moderate things spoken of the Blessed Virgin.

After all the pains that have been taken to make some of her Festivals
Ancient, it is more than probable that as yet she had none; and that the
Fathers of the Fourth Age, who are cited for one or two of them, have been,
without their consent, made to speak the sense of after-Ages, that were loath
to be destitute of all pretense from Antiquity, for making the honor of the
Blessed Virgin outshine all that was done to others Martyrs and Saints. For
the Constit. Apost. l. 8. c. 33.
Constitutions do not so much as mention one of her Festivals, where one would
think they should have omitted none.

The Salutation of Ave Maria has now for some time run through the Religion of
the Church of Rome, in public and private Devotions; but in this Age no
Example or Recommendation of any such thing is to be met withal.

No, nor one Prayer to her, do we yet hear of; which plainly shows, that
(whatever the superstition of some one private Person or other might be, of
which we cannot affirm or deny any thing) her Worship was no part of the
Religion of the Age. If you would know the first bold man, after the
Collyridians, that brought her into the Church to be invocated; Nicephorus will
tell you it was Niceph. Hist. l. 15. c. 28.
one Peter Fullo, a Bishop indeed, but an Eutychian, who found out four very
profitable things, if you will believe Nicephorus; one whereof, was, that the
holy Name of the Virgin should be called upon in every Prayer. How the
invention of this man was entertained, I cannot say: He lived near the sixth
Age. But neither is thus much Antiquity to be boasted of, nor was it for the
credit of the Innovation, to have an Heretic for its Author.

The Church was full of the Memories of the Martyrs; but as yet the Blessed
Virgin had none. What a strange thing was it, that Theodoret, who ran the
honor of the Martyrs to that height, that it requires some Candor (...) bring
him down with safety and honor; that he, I say should make no mention at all
of the Blessed Virgin, and the Solemnities that were due to her: and that in ^
Discourse where he professedly brings in the Martyrs, supplanting those Doemons
which had been so long served by the Pagan World. He could name Theod. de (...)
^ndis Graec. affect. De Martyr ad Fin.
Peter, Paul, Thomas, Sergius, Marcellus, Leontius, Antoninus, and Mauritius.
Do we think the Blessed Virgin had been left to be understood amongst the other
Saints that had their Solemnities also, if she had had even in Theodoret's time
any at all? But why should we talk of her Memories, when as yet her Relics
were not sound, nor in all likelihood sought for? since if they had, it is not
to be doubted, but those Monks, or others like them, that went up and down with
the Bones of Martyrs, if indeed they were Martyrs Bones, would have gratified
the curiosity of devout People, with some of those Relics that Posterity a
long time after was blessed with; viz. some of the Blessed Virgin's Hair, her
Combs, her Hood, her Slipper, her Espousal Ring, nay and some of her Milk too,
with such other things, which came not to light, till some Ages after the zeal
of Relics began in the Church.

But when once Devotion began to turn toward her, no time was lost; and though
it was late first, yet her Service presently overtook, and at last went beyond
the honor that was done to the other Saints and Martyrs. The Thirteenth Age
produced a Relic of the B. Virgin, so famous for the Miracle that brought it
into Europe, and for the Miracles that have been done by it ever since, that
the Relics of the other Saints are nothing to it: And that is her House once
at Nazareth, where she was Born, and visited by the Angel; which House was
carried by Angels out of Palestine, into Dalmatia, and from thence into Italy,
where it now stands, and is our Lady of Loretto's Chapel. By the Forthteenth
Century she had gained no less than seven Festivals in the year, which I
mention to show the growing Devotion of the Roman Church toward the B. Virgin;
not that we make this any great matter of complaint; no, though they were twice
seven, if the Facts upon which they were grounded were true, and the grounds
reasonable, and God only were worshipped in the celebration of such Festivals.

The later Doctors have made too much amends for the modesty of the Ancient
Fathers, who spoke indeed of her very honorably, but within bounds. The World
was something altered in the middle of the Seventh Age, if Pope Martin said
what we find in Collectan. Anast. p. 73.
Anastasius: Whoever does not Honor and Adore the Blessed Virgin the Mother of
God, let him be accursed. Of which Curse, German. in Biblioth. P. Tom. 12. p.
704.
Germanus the Patriarch of Constantinople, was in no danger, if he addressed
himself in this manner to the Blessed Virgin: No body is replenished with the
knowledge of God, but by thee, O most Holy. No body is saved but by thee, O
Mother of God. No body is delivered from danger, but by thee, O thou beloved of
God. Again: Thou having the power of a Mother with God, do beyond measure
gain Pardon for them who sin beyond measure. For it cannot be that thou
should not be heard, because to all purposes and in all things, and through
all things God obeys thee as his true and immaculate Mother. This was pretty
well for the eighth Age; as likewise was that of Damascene, who calls the B.
Virgin, Joh. Damasc. lib. 4. c. 15.
The Lady and Go verness of all Creatures. No wonder therefore that Cardinal
Peter Damian coming long after these, tells her that she comes before the
Altar of Reconciliation, not asking only, but commanding; as a Lady, not as a
Servant. I know not whether he was the Author of those glorious Titles which
have since furnished some of the Hymns that we meet with in the Offices of the
Blessed Virgin? Hom. 46, de Nativ. B Mar. 1. Tom. 2 p. 106.
The Queen of the World, The Window of Heaven, The Gate of Paradise, The
Tabernacle of God, The Star of the Sea, The Heavenly Ladder, by which the
Heavenly King came down to us below, and by which man who grovelled upon the
ground, ascends in exaltation to Heaven. But Anselm that lived in the same Age
with him, speaks more fully: Anselm. Cant. de Excel. Virgin. c. 11.
As God is the Father, and God of all things, by his power creating all things;
so Blessed Mary the Mother of God, restoring all things by her Merits, is the
Mother and Lady of the Universe. Which agrees very well with that reason he had
given before, why her Son went to Heaven before her: Ibid. c. 7.
Perhaps, O Lord, lest thy Court in Heaven should stand in doubt whom it should
rather go out to meet, See Answer to Jesuits Chall. from p. 478. to p. 495.
thee their Lord coming to take possession of thy Kingdom, or her their Lady
ascending to that Kingdom also, which belonged to her by a Mothers right. To
this nothing could be added in so little a time beyond Bonaventure's Psalter,
who taking the Psalms of David, put in Lady instead of Lord, in this manner: O
come let us sing unto our Lady, etc. Let every thing that has breath praise
our Lady. But not content with this, he framed the Psalt. Bonav. p. 111, 112,
Paris.
Athanasian Creed to her Service too, beginning thus: Whosoever will be saved,
before all things it is necessary that he should hold a firm Faith concerning
the Virgin Mary; which Faith except a man keep whole and undefiled, without
doubt he shall perish everlastingly. And now whosoever shall consider the
Litanies of the Blessed Virgin, and her Rosaries, and the Prayers and Hymns of
her Saturday's Office, and her Psalters, and the vast number of Books of
Devotion to her, and the Worship that is accordingly given to her in pretended
Catholic Countries; whosoever shall consider what they say to her in those
Prayers and Hymns, etc. which the Speculum Beatoe Virginis, just now published,
has put together, may perhaps find there are Causes of Horror which Monsieur de
Meaux is not so much concerned at as he ought to be: He may justly fear, that
if the Reformation did not give some little check, neither would these excesses
stop here; though in many places nothing now remains to be done, but without
any farther reservedness, to erect Altars proper to the Blessed Virgin in every
Church, as the Trigautii Exp. ad Sinas. lib. 5. c. 15.20.
Jesuits began to do in China.

O Blessed God, look down in thy mercy upon the miserable estate of
Christianity in so many parts of the Christian World!

When the Blessed Virgin foretold that all Generations should call her Blessed,
did she mean that all Generations would Worship her; would Worship her Images
and Pictures; would make her a Mediatrix between God and man; would ascribe to
her the power not of prevailing with Jesus only for any thing, but of
commanding him too; would offer Jesus himself a Sacrifice in her Honor; should
burn Incense to her, would use Rosaries, Hours, and Psalters for her especial
Invocation and Service; would institute and maintain Fraternities for that
Service; would build Temples and Chapels to her, and Altars, and by most
solemn Invocation everywhere, and by proper Rites of Religious Worship, and by
letting Devotion run out to her more than to our Lord Jesus himself, to agnize
her to be the Lady of Heaven and Earth, the Queen of the World? No, she did not
mean thus, in saying that all Generations should call her Blessed: For thus all
Generations have not served her. Nothing of all this was done to her for
several Generations after Christ; nor any thing of it in comparison till the
dregs of Time, till the decay of Learning and Piety, made way for gross
Superstition.

The first beginnings of these Corruptions were more general, but the
Improvements of them were chiefly owing to the Sea of Rome, which as it grew in
power and greatness, so it protected those Abuses more effectually. A Character
very ill-beseeming a Church that pretends to be the Pillar and Ground of Truth.

The Wit of Man could not devise any thing more serviceable to Error, to make
it spread in the World; and to fix it, than that a powerful See grasping at
Supremacy, and pretending to Infallibility, should take it under her wing.

This See is the Source of all those Oppositions, which they have met with that
demanded a Reformation; it is this See alone which has obstructed a general
Reformation, when Christendom was otherwise well disposed toward it.

Therefore when Reformation by common consent was made Impossible by the Sea of
Rome, what remained but that the National Churches should reform themselves?

Our Reformation was a return to Primitive Antiquity; and that it may prove a
leading example, let us pray without ceasing, That God would bring into the way
of Truth all such as have erred and are deceived.

THE END.
Faults to be Corrected.
PAge 81, seventh line from the bottom, for Consciences read Concessions.

P. 82 l. 3. for Reconciled r. Recommended.

P. 80 l. 6. for them read then.

P. 88 l. 7. for safely r. falsely.

P. 92 l. 3. for Prayers r. Praises.

A Catalogue of some Discourses Sold by T. Basset at the George in Fleetstreet.
1. A Persuasive to an Ingenuous Trial of Opinons in Religion.

2. The Difference of the Case between the Separation of the Protestants from
the Church of Rome, and the Separation of Dissenters from the Church of England.

3. A Discourse about the Charge of Novelty upon the Reformed Church of
England, made by the Papists asking us the Question, Where was our Religion
before Luther?

4. The Protestant Resolution of Faith, being an Answer to Three Questions. I.
How far we must depend on the Authority of the Church for the true Sense of
Scripture. II. Whether a visible Succession from Christ to this day makes a
Church, which has this visible Succession an Infallible Interpreter of
Scripture; and whether no Church which has not this visible Succession, can
teach the true Sense of Scripture. III. Whether the Church of England can make
out such a visible Succession?

5. A Discourse concerning a Guide in matters of Faith; with Respect especially
to the Romish pretense of the Necessity of such a one as is Infallible.

6. A Discourse about Tradition; showing what is meant by it, and what
Tradition is to be Recieved, and what Tradition is to be Rejected.

7. A Discourse concerning the Unity of the Catholic Church, maintained in the
Church of England.

8. A Discourse concerning the Necessity of Reformation, with respect to the
Errors and Corruptions of the Church of Rome. In two Parts.

9. A Discourse concerning the Object of Religious Worship: or, a
Scripture Proof of the Unlawfulness of giving any Religious Worship to any
other Being besides the one Supreme God.

10. A Discourse against Transubstantiation.

11. A Discourse concerning the Adoration of the Host, as it is Taught and
Practiced in the Church of Rome. Wherein an Answer is given to T. G. on that
Subject, and to Monsieur Bocleau's late Book de Adoratione Eucharistioe. Paris,
1685.

12. A Discourse concerning Invocation of Saints.

13. A Discourse concerning the Devotions of the Church of Rome.

14. A Discourse concerning the Celebration of Divine Service in an Unknown
Tongue.

15. A Discourse concerning Auricular Confession, as it is Prescribed by the
Council of Trent, and Practiced in the Church of Rome. With a Postscript on
occasion of a Book lately printed in France, called, Historia Confessionis
Auricularis.

16. A Discourse concerning the Worship of the Blessed Virgin and the Saints;
with an Account of the Beginnings and Rise of it amongst Christians: In Answer
to Monsieur de Meaux's Appeal to the Fourth Age in his Exposition, and his
Pastoral Letter.

A Collection of Cases and other Discourses lately written to recover
Dissenters to the Communion of the Church of England, by some Divines of the
City of London. In two Volumes in Quarto.


