A DEFENSE OF THE Present Government UNDER King William and Queen Mary. SHOWING
The Miseries of England under the Arbitrary Reign OF THE Late KING JAMES II.
THE Reasonableness of the Proceedings against him, and the Happiness that will
certainly follow a peaceable Submission to, and Standing by King William and Q.
Mary.

By a Divine of the Church of England.

LONDON, Printed for R. Baldwin in the Old-Bayly. 1689.

Licensed,

May 16. 1689. J. Phraser.

A DEFENSE OF THE Present Government.
WHat miserable Circumstances we lay under, during the late arbitrary Reign; by
Rapes and Violences committed upon our Religion and Laws, by the impudent
Violation of the most sacred Oaths and Promises, by the Invasion of Property,
and general Corruption of Justice, is a thing so palpable and notorious, that
it is almost incredible any men but Papists should be in Love with it; and yet
by sad Experience we find there is a degenerous Race of Protestants among us,
that seem to be fond of their former Slavery, and, like the Children of Israel,
are hankering after the Flesh pots of Egypt; they are infatuated with the name
of Divine Right of Monarchy, and being carried headlong with that fallacious
Notion, fall into a Frenzy and Madness against the present Lawful Authority.

Almighty God has no where determined in his Word a Model for our Civil
Government, but has left us, as all other Nations, to such a Form as shall be
agreed upon by the People; and where this Agreement is not, it is not properly
Government but Tyranny; for without it the Judicious Mr. Hooker says, Eccl.
Pol. l. 1. c. 10. p. 86.
There is no reason why one man should take upon him to be Judge or Lord over
another; because for the Manifestation of this their Right, and men's more
peaceable Contentment on both sides, the Assent of them who are to be governed
seems necessary. And a little after he says, All public Regiment, of what
kind soever, seems evidently to have risen from deliberate Advice,
Consultation, and Composition between men, judging it convenient and
behoovefull.

And what he says concerning the Power of Government, he applies to the Power
of Making of Laws, whereby to govern, and shows, That the lawful Power of
making Laws to command whole politic Societies, belongs so properly to the
same entire Societies, that for any Prince or Potentate, of what kind soever
upon Earth, to exercise the same of himself, and not either by express
Commission Immediately and Personally received from God; or else by Authority
derived at first by their Consent upon whose Persons they impose Laws, it is no
better than mere Tyranny. And he adds, Laws they are not therefore, which
public Approbation has not made so.

The Judgment of this great Man I could back with very many good Authorities;
but there is no need, he alone being Instar Omnium, Equal to All, whose Five
first Books of Ecclesiastical Polity have been received as Oracles, even by
those very Persons who now differ from him.

When this Author makes for them, as he does abundantly in vindicating Church
Ceremonies, then he is the LEARNED and JUDICIOUS Mr. HOOKER, but when he goes
against their Interest, though not against the Truth, then he is decried, and
branded with being Erroneous. But it is not Mr. Hooker's Fate alone to be thus
dealt with; for they treat all Authors as ill, that are against their Exotic
and new fangled Notions of Sovereignty and Allegiance: For when the Author is
not for them, they resolve to be against the Author, though it should be
against Reason.

The Jewish Theocrasie is no Precedent to the English Monarchy; there God
immediately governed; he gave that Nation all their Laws, Moral, Judiciary, and
Ceremonial; but we can make no pretense to such a Divine Conduct; we must have
recourse to the wholesome Laws and Customs of our Country, for our Direction in
Civil Proceedings.

Neither our Savior, nor his Apostles, intermeddled with Civil Government, but
left that as they found it. Christ's Kingdom was not of this World, and
therefore he and his Apostles meddled no farther with the Kingdoms of the
World, than to teach all their Duties in their respective Stations, the
Magistrates to rule, and the People to obey in the Fear of God. I know not
where they command a Passive Obedience to Illegal Violence; if the Law be for a
Man, it cannot be Rebellion in him to defend himself by it; but if the Law be
against a man, then he has a proper Reason for the exercise of Non-resistence.

The Apostle bids us be subject to the Higher Powers* because the Powers that
be, are ordained of God. Rom.13. 11. But he does not command us this without
restraction, for Rulers must not be Terror to good Works, but to the evil,
being appointed for the punishment of evil Doers, and for the Praise of them
that do well. 1 Pet. 2. 14. This is the End of their Government, and the
reason of our Obedience.

When they govern as according to the Laws of our Country, and discourage Vice
by Punishing it, and encourage Virtue by Rewards; Resistance is then Rebellion
with a Witness; but when Rulers fail in all this, and of Nuysing Fathers (which
they should be) degenerate into bloody Murderers of their Country, (which
they ought not to be,) Resistance is not Rebellion, but a just and lawful
Defense against unjust and unlawful Oppression.

The Standard then of our Civil Government is the Law of the Land, It is
superior to all Orders and Banks of Men, and looks with an equal Aspect upon
the Prince and People. According to this Law we ought to be governed, and when
contrary to this Law we are invaded, (as we were in the late King's time in
every thing that was near and dear to us,) we may justly defend our selves
against such illegal Doings at home, and join with a Stranger that will take
upon him to protect us against the Cruelties of an Arbitrary Power. In such a
Case as this we may take the best means we can for our Safety. Must the Lives
of Innocent Millions be endangered to gratify One Man's Arbitrary Lust? Must
Popery be set up contrary to our Laws and Oaths, as well as Scripture, and the
best Antiquity? Must we deny our Senses and Reason to become Christians? Must
we be forced to embrace a Religion that has not so much Charity in it as
Mahometanism, and much less moral Justice and Honesty? And must we be content
to wear the Chains and Fetters of Ecclesiastical and Civil Slavery, when we may
enjoy a Gospel Service, which is perfect Freedom, and live under the easiest
and best of Governments? Should we consent to all this, as it cannot be avoided
if the late King's Interests must be advanced, Bedlam or Bridewell were the
fittest place for us.

There has nothing been done (saving some enormities of the Mobile) in this
great and wonderful Revolution, but is justifiable before God and the World,
from Scripture, from Reason, and the Constitution and Practice of this Kingdom.
Let us go according to the Apostle's Advice, Stand fast in the Liberty
wherewith Christ has (by his Glorious Instrument) made us free, and be not
entangled again with the Yoke of (the Roman) bondage. Gal. 5. 1.

Let the Scruples of those which refuse to take the Oath of Allegiance to K.
William and Q. Mary weigh nothing with us: For doubtless we are discharged of
our Obligation to the late King James, and among others for these Reasons; his
Arbitrariness, breach of Contract, withdrawing his Protection, selling us for
Slaves to a Foreign Prince and State, and conspiring against us in a hostile
manner.

And the Crown being now K. W's and Q. M's by Right and Fact, being settled
upon them by a Parliament lawfully called, lawfully chosen, and lawfully
proceeding, notwithstanding all the factious and slanderous Pamphlets, The
Dissertion discussed, The History of the Convention, or, New-Christened
Parliament, etc. We are obliged in Conscience to bear Faith and true Allegiance
to their Majesty's, and when required to swear the same.

They are our lawful Governors, We live under their Protection, and therefore
they deserve our Allegiance.

There are some Laymen as well as Divines, that lodge the supreme Power solely
in the Person of the King, and make him anuputheros, unaccountable to any but
God. They farther say, He can do no Wrong, and the whole guilt of
Maladministration lies upon his Ministers, but He is Innocent.

But these are Maxims that were first invented by Court Parasites, and
Flatterers, raised by the Prince's Favor, and live by his Bread, and have ever
since been maintained by a Generation of the same Stamp.

Were our Government an absolute Monarchy, an Exception would not lie; but
being limited, the King is accountable to the Kingdom represented in
Parliament, for all the Outrages and Oppressions committed by his means;
otherwise Laws and Parliaments would be useless, Liberty and Property empty
Names. And whereas, say they, the King can do no Wrong, unless it be
understood with this limitation, He acting by, and according to Law, He may, no
doubt, be altogether as Arbitrary as the Grand Seignior.

These are pernicious Positions, and advance the English Monarchy too high,
because they infer an Inerribility in the King, which is as dangerous to the
State, as Infallibility to the Church.

Let then every true Patriot and Englishman fix here: That the King is
entrusted with the Executive power of the Law for the good of the People, and
the People are to obey and assist him in the Execution of this high Trust; but
if he abuses this Power, as the Disserter did, to the monifest Oppression of
his People, the People represented in Parliament may take that Trust from him,
and give it to another, who will govern them in Justice and Clemency, and
defend them in their Religious and Civil Rights.

And now (methinks) it is strange that any who are called Protestants, should
declare Love for the Reformed Religion, and yet say, they cannot in Conscience
Renounce the late King. The Protestant and Popish Intrest are as contrary as
Fire and Water, and a Popish Head upon a Protestant Body, is like committing a
Flock of harmless Sheep to the Custody of a Ravenous Wolf: They shall be kept,
but it is only for Prey and Destruction.

We cannot have a Popish King without a Popish Religion, either tolerated, or
authorized in this Nation. Tolerated it may be for a time, as 'twas in the late
violent Reign, but that Toleration was purely to get strength enough to it,
till it was able to weather all Opposition, and then to have given it the
Protection of a Law; so that the Adherence to, and Espousing of the late King's
Cause, can signify no less in the natural tendency and construction of it,
than an Affection for Popery, and the miserable consequences thereof, the Loss
of English Liberty and Property; seeing the one cannot be had without the other.

It is now farther made apparent; that His Interest and the French King's are
linked together, their Counsels and Designs the same, Both conspiring in one
great Plot, to extirpate the Protestant Religion in General.

What Friends then his Favorers are to the Reformed Religion, may be seen
plain enough without the help of Spectacles. Whereas we ought to Oppose him as
a public Enemy, even with our Lives and Fortunes; and, as a Branch of our just
Allegiance to their present Majesty's, discover all Treasonable Attempts and
Practices against them, and vigorously support their Crown and Dignity against
the blasphemous Harangues, and seditious Libels, that are too frequently vented
among us.

But (alas!) how soon have some men forgot both the Day, and the glorious
Instrument of our Deliverance? What Murmuring and Discontent, what false Fears
and Jealousies, what unkind Returns and Prejudices, would, if it were possible,
darken the Son of the most Heroic Prince, and pervent the Ends of the most
christianly generous Enterprise in the World? Were we not appointed as Sheep
for the Slaughter? But God sent him to interpose between the Knife and the
Sacrifice. When the great Tree of our Government was in a manner quite cut down
by the Romish Axes, he came and secured it from falling, and made it grow again
even to a Miracle. If ever a Deliverer was worthy of the chief Seat in our
Affections, it must be this Incomparable Prince. Trophies and Statues, and
Panegyrical Orations, are fit for those Ambitious Monarchs who have no Real and
Intrinsic Worth; but the Unparalled Virtues of our Excellent Deliverer, as
they are far above such poor, perishing Pageantry, so his Merits will be get
him a more lasting Monument of Love, Loyalty, and Gratitude in the Hearts of
his People.

In a word, We are, under God, indebted to Him for all that we have, for our
Religion, our Laws, our Lives, our Liberties and Estates. What an Infamy then
will it bring upon us and our Memories to be ungrateful?

I would therefore advise all those who go under the Denomination of
Protestants, and yet appear sticklers for the late King's Interest, to make
timely Retractation, and endeavor to compensate the Disservice they have done
the Protestant Cause, by a cheerful and hearty compliance with the present
Government, and by paying hence forward a conscientious Obedience to their
gracious Majesty's K. William and Q. Mary.

And particularly, let those of the Clergy, whose past Obstinacy has been a
constant Lecture of Rebellion to the, People, change their Text, and let their
future good Example be a Sermon of Obedience. Let them do their Duty as
Divines, and leaving civil Things to the civil Powers, approve themselves the
Ambassadors of Christ, by preaching those Healing Doctrines of Humility,
Peace, and Love, and by speaking all the same thing. And that they may not
frustrate one of the most glorious Ends of his Majesty's Declaration, (Decl. p.
13.) printed at the Hague, October. 8. 1688. the Establishing of a good Agreement
between the Church of England and all Protestant Dissenters; Let them (whether
Fathers or Sons of the Church) be entreated to lay down all Anger and
Dissension about Indifferent Things, and that Spirit of Persecution which by
Estranging our Brethren, and hindering their Union, has formerly too much
weakened our own, and strengthened the Roman Party.

Consider our Savior has recommended to us the Spirit of Love, Meekness, and
Moderation; and the Apostle has commanded us to have no Divisioms, but to keep
the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, and in righteousness of life.

What a monstrous Folly and Madness is it to differ about Indifferent Things,
and not at all necessary to Salvation? To quarrel about the Bark, about the
Shell and Carcass of Religion?

Remember we have strove so long already about Rites and Accidents, that we had
almost lost the very Substance of true Religion. God in his Mercy has delivered
us, let us sin no more, lest we provoke him still to scourge us.

If this passionate but modest Address may prevail to influence those for whom
it is writ, then shall the Hopes and Designs of Rome and France de defeated,
our Fears shall vanish, our Religion and our Laws shall triumph, and the Golden
Age be restored to these Kingdoms.

FINIS.

