VERMICULARS DESTROYED, WITH AN Historical Account OF WORMS: Collected from the
best Authors, As well Ancient as Modern.

AND EXPE^IMENTS ^^OVED By that Admirable Invention of the Microscope; WITH
Directions for the taking those most Famous Medicines, Entitled, Pulvis
Benedictus, etc.

ALSO Diagnostick Signs of WORMS, and Signs of Health in Children, with the
various Causes of Vermiculars.

By R. C. Chemist, Living at the Golden Ball in Devonshire-Street, near the
Square, without Bishopsgate. 1690.

London, Printed by J. Wilkins, for the Author.

TO THE READER.
I Doubt not but this small Treatise may be Acceptable to most, not being built
on Blind and Erroneous Fallaces, its whole matter generally tending to the Good
of all Mankind, as it has been the Care of so many Worthy and Profound Authors
to Record. Yet I do presume it may be ill resented by some, to whose
apprehensions, it may be Misterious, and it is more trouble to Convince one
unbelieving Ignoramous, than a hundred Wise Men: For Ignorance is not only
Obstinate, but proud of its Imperfection, and under that Vmbrage grovels on the
Earth; like Froward Children, who, when they fall, will neither rise
themselves, nor let others help them: Therefore we shall let them remain
Prisoners in their own state of Folly, and desire you to Read, when time will
permit some spare Moments, that you may see what strange and direful Enemies
these Depopulating Virmiculars are, not only to Human Bodies, but all Sublunary
things. This is the Rock I would have you shun; and the way to Destroy them, or
their Corrupt, Gross, Viscid Matter, if not Generated, is to do it before they
are able to engage us, and commence Distempers in us. For as Health is the
Fruition and Treasure of Life, so Sickness is the Dreadful Herald of Death.
And Diseases are like a Fire, which the more it is kindled is the harder to be
quenched, and when they are above the reach of Cure, Medicines are of no more
Use to us, than Wings to a Bird that is caught by the Feet. Therefore
Extinguish these Fatal Principles of Diseases in time, and stand not still a
dull Spectator, while Nature is worsted on unequal Terms.

Yours, R. Clark.

Vermiculars DESTROYED: WITH AN HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF WORMS.
I Shall begin this small Treatise, in which I am Obliged to be as Brief as I
can; Nameing my Author William Ramesey, Physician in Ordinary to His Majesty
Charles the Second; and likewise his Author as he has done, I shall mention. It
would be superfluous to spend any time on the Common WORMS by reason they are
so well known, though they are as Pernicious and Dangerous as the rest: Their
Names are, Lati, Ascarides, Teretes, Cucurbitini, etc.

Rondeletius, Writes of a Woman that Expelled a Worm Two Cubits in length, like
to the Worm called Scolopendra, having no Eyes, or other Part distinct; the
which he says (by reason of its Rarity) he dried and kept a long time.

Zacutus Lucitanius, Tells us of a Patient of his, who voided a Black Dead
Worm, of a pretty length, and thickness, with the Body all over Hairy, a small
Head, and a forked Tail.

Benivenius, Tells us of a Worm one Vomited, with a Red Head, and covered with
Hair like a Caterpiller, having Four Feet, and a Tail like a Half Moon.

Marcellus Donatus, Mentions one that Vomited a Red Worm of the length of a
Man's Hand; having two Crooked Horns, and a Hundred Feet; it is called, Centum
Pedes.

Forestus, Has a Patient affected with a Black Worm in the shape of a Weezle;
his Cranium being opened, and the Worm taken away, which was on the Dura Matter,
he Recovered.

Reverius, Writes of one that Evacuated many Black Worms, of the bigness and
length of a common or ordinary Needle, horned and friable, so that one might
crumble them to Powder between ones Fingers.

Valesius de Taranta, Says, he saw some Worms that came from a Young Man in the
form of Pine-seeds, only bigger. Also the same afore-quoted Forestus, tells us
of one, from the Testimony of Henricus a Bray, who Vomited a Worm like unto a
Palmer Worm.

Widrus, Writes of a Fellow that Voided a Worm Eight Foot long, with a kind of
a Horned Mouth, not unlike the Bill of a Duck.

Jabucinus, Speaks of one that Expelled a Black Worm Five Foot long, Hairy, and
of the thickness of a Reed.

Mortuas, Records one molested with the Cholick, to ject a green Four Footed
Worm, like to a Lizard.

Gesner, tells us of one that Voided by Stool, a Worm like to a Beetle, Black,
long Feet, and Horns.

Johannes Hebenstreit, Tells of a white Worm with a sharp and Horny Nose, found
in a Person.

Forestus, Speaks of a Wench who Vomited two Beetle-like Worms as long as Man's
Finger, with two Horns, each of them on their Heads, and tending to Reddish
Color.

Scolopendra:

Eruca.

Scaraseus.

Centumpedes

Lacertus.

Qainque Pedalis.

Cornu rostrum.

Rostrum Anatis Octopedalis

depictions of worms

Cut by J. Gardener.

But in this kind Examples are Infinite, and the Brevity we design, compells us
to leave the Worthy Ramesey at present, on whom hereafter I shall more enlarge,
and proceed to another Author, who tells us, that Worms are, and may be
generated of some Bigness, and of several Shapes, not only in the Bowels, but
every other part of the Body, which all Authors of Note will not deny, and that
they frequently appear in Agues, Fevers, and all manner of Diseases, by reason
Humors are more Vitiated, and a more Poisonous, Putredinous Disposition, or
Corruption, M.N. Med. Londinensis.
is introduced into Men's Bodies, than was wont to be in former time. He tells
us, in the Year 1662, a new sort of a Quartan Ague reigned about London, and
other parts, which had in it all the Tokens of Malignity; and from most, that
he himself had in Cure, he brought away abundance of Worms, and then they
presently mended.

The like course he took with that continual Fever, which raged in the Country
1661, and procured plentiful excresions of Worms out of the Bodies of Children
to Persons of Seventy Years of Age; and that Year he found Worms that made
their own way into the World, Worms that eat through the Bowels and Sides of
People.
through the Bowels and Sides of the persons that bred them, and this without
Damage, nothing but a little fresh Butter, being used to the Orifice to make
all whole again.

Further, he tells us, let the Disease be what it will, he applied such
Medicines as would carry off the Wormatick Matter, if there should be no Worms
to kill: This he found, though the Matter do not sometimes breed the Animal, yet
as long as the Wormatick Humor, or Matter remains in being, within the Body,
so long the Body Languisheth, and sometimes will have all the Symptoms that
attend Worms actually existent; and no Cure of the main Disease, with which
it is complicated, will go forward, till that Verminious Humor, or Matter be
Extinguished, or Removed.

Hollerius, Writes of a Man he Dissected, and found a multitude of Worms in his
Liver, which were the cause of his unknown Disease. But we have Examples of
Worms, not only in the Principal parts of Man's Body, as the Heart, Liver,
Brain, Lungs, Reins, Spleen, Bladder, Stomach, etc. But in these Channels of
the Blood, the Veins and Arteries; but few do imagine, that we carry about with
us an Offspring of Animals, begotten out of our own Blood and Bowels.

The aforesaid Author, says he has with his An Instrument so made, and fitted
with Glasses at each end, as the smallest thing will be presented by it in so
considerable a bigness that the Frame and Composure of its parts may be
discerned.
MICROSCOPE, examined the Blood of Men Sick of Fevers, which has satisfied him
over and over of the Business; for viewing the Blood an hour or two after
opening of Veins, I have (says he) found it full of Worms, that it made me
almost Astonished; so that we may with Job, I said to Corruption thou art my
Father, and to the Worm, thou art my Mother, and my Sister.

Kircherus, a Famous Man, Living at Rome, Writ a most Learned Piece in the Year
1658. The Subject of which was, That there are a sort of invisible Worms, or
Vermiculars, which were discovered in the last Plague at Naples, and at Rome,
by the help of a Microscope. And he says, these Worms are so fine, that they
insinuate themselves, not only into Cloths, Ropes, and Linen, but into other
Bodies less Porous, as Cork, Wood, Bones; yea, into those which are least
Porous and most Compact, as Metals, Money, etc. This he in another place tells
us, They had daily experience in the Great Plague Time, where no Money was
Received in payment, but was first well soaked and washed in Vinegar, if it
came from an Infected place.

Cardan says, The great Plague that fell out in his time at Millain, which
Unpeopled that City, not only the Air being filled with them, but the very Dust
of the Earth Animated into such kind of Virmiculars.

Georgius Agricola Writes, That in his time, a great Plague came by Eating of
Fruit, so that the Eaters Died in few Days after, which Fruit swarmed with
multitudes of Indiscernable Worms; which were no more than the Animated
Corpuscles, or Particles, flowing from Contagious Carcases, and fastening upon
Trees and Plants, being carried through the Air: But these Indiscernable
V^^niculars had been still hid from our Eyes, had it not been for that Rare
Invention of the Microscope.

We see that the Earth, out of I know not what Putredinous Matter in its own
Bowels, does produce not only Insects of all sorts, but also various Monsters
of Venomous Creatures, as Serpents, Toads, Dragons in Dens and Caves of
Mountains, which have their Original from Moisture, and a various mixture of
Virulent Drags and Slime; and the like are produced out of Ponds, Lakes, and
Marshes, by the Heat of the Ambient Air, working upon a Conflux of the
Terrestial Parts, Yea, Water it Self kept in a close Vessel, and exposed to the
Sun, is quickly animated into Worms, as is seen by daily Experience, both in
Voyages at Sea, and within the Walls of our own private Houses.

At Beverly in Yorkshire on the 28th. of August 1660. there was seen in the
Maketplace, and other places, innumerable company of young Frogs and Toads the
people not knowing from whence they came, but are supposed to come out of the
Air in the night by reason the tops of their Houses were covered with them.
Prodigies, page 41.
Moreover, Water Elevated by Vapor, Air, Hail, Snow, are full of Worms. Pliny,
says so of Snow, in his Book de Divinis Not. Charact. And Cornelius Gemma of
Hail, In Lib. de Art Metallica. As much is said of Air by Georgious Agricola;
and the sudden Generation of Worms, Frogs, and Insects, (which have come down
with Rain upon the Earth) does confirm it. There is also scarce a Stick, or
Fruit, or any other mixed Body, which does not produce some Animal which
disposes that to Destruction which Begat it, according to that of Lecretius.

-- Obnoxia Cuncta putrori
Corpora, putrores Insecta Animata sequuntur.
And that the Reader may more fully behold the admirable Power of Nature, what
has hitherto been said, may be manifested by Irrefragable Experiments, as
follows,

Experiment I. TAke a piece of Flesh, and expose it by Night to the moisture of
the Moon, till early the next morning, then view it diligently with a
Microscope, and you shall find, that all the Putrefaction, contracted by the
Moon, is degenerated into innumerable Vermiculars, differing in bigness; but
when you remove the Microsc^pe, you cannot discern any by the Eye alone, unless
perhaps some few be among them that are grown to a sensible magnitude. You may
try the same in Cheese, Milk, Vinegar, and the like Bodies abounding with
Putrefaction; yet think not it is to be done by any slight Microscope, but one
made by a Skilful Hand.

Experience II. IF you take a Serpent cut into small pieces, and putting it
into Rainwater, expose it for some Days to the Sun, then Bury it in the Earth
for the space of a Day and a Night, and afterward taking out the Parts grown
flaccid with Putrefaction, and examine them with a Microscope, you will see all
that is putrified swarming with little springing Serpents, which Experiment may
be performed in all kind of Serpents; and sometimes in dead Putrified Serpents
you will find some of them discernable by the Eye alone. The Putrefaction of
Serpents will not produce Worms as other dead flesh does, unless they be killed
by Lightning, that purges 'em of their poison, and their corrupt flesh will be
animated into Worms of strange and various shapes.

Experience III. MAtthiolus Euchsius, and many other Herbalists, declare, That
Sage unwasht is very hurtful to such as Eat it: But I have discovered the
Cause, examining more curiously the Constitution of this Plant, by the help of
a Microscope; at length I observed in those Leaves which were more rough than
the rest, that their whole Superficies was covered with somewhat like a
Spider's Web, within which appeared Animals exceeding small, and which were
perpetually at work therein, and certain round things as it were Eggs, were
spread upon the Superficies, which as it is doubtless a certain Breed, or
Spawn, of that sort of petit Animals, so by their Virulent Humor they may do a
Man a deal of mischief; but wipe a Leaf with your Finger, or wash it, and they
will Disappear. From whence I collect the true Cause of the Pernicious Quality
of Sage that is not washed.

Experiment IV. IF with the Microscope you examine the Powder of any Rotten
Wood, you will find a prodigious number of Vermiculars, some armed with Horns,
some set out as it were with Wings, and others not unlike those Worms that have
many Feet; their Eyes also you may discern like black Points, and that they
have a long Snout; so that it appears, Almighty God has manifested his own
wonderful Power, not only in the greatest Bodies in the World, but in the
smallest, even in those Animals which are not to be discerned by the sharpest
sight, having furnished every one of them with such Members, as without which
they could neither move themselves, nor exercise any Vital Actions. What a
little Liver, little Stomach, little Heart, little Nerves, and Gristles, must
there go to the making of such invisible Corpuscles? The least Creature we can
see without the help of Art, is a Mite, it resembling a little white Punctum,
or Point, but view it with a Microscope, and it appears to us a rough hairy
Creature like a Bear.

Experiment V. TAke a Glass-Vial half filled with Water, into which sprinkle
some Dust of the Earth, which will presently sink to the bottom; and so
exposing the Vial to the Sun in Summertime for some Days, let it rest without
shaking until the Water begin to Putrify; then observe the bottom of the Vial,
and there will arise out of the settling of the Water, or injected Dust,
certain little round Bubbles, every one of which, in the following Days, will
be animated into little Worms, which will strangely frisk and sport in the
Water; and being come to maturity, at length they betake themselves to the top
of the Water, and there being in great Numbers transformed into winged Gnats,
they commit themselves to the Air, and become as troublesome to Men and Beasts
in the Summer, especially by Night, as others use to be.

Experiment VI. DR. Hauptman, a German Physician, and Kircherus, gives us an
Account of that terrible Disease the Purples, which frequently befalls Women
within the Month, after Child-Delivery, and examining the matter with a
Microscope, they found those petty Virmiculars spread upon the Superficies in
the rough part of the Skin which is in that Disease, by which means you have
here an infallible Experiment touching the original of that most malignant
Disease the Purples: Which is further confirmed by this, that after the using
all the Bez^adicks, Diaphoreticks, and Cordials commonly so called, without any
success, they betook themselves to the use of such Remedies as have the power
to kill and mortify the putrid Seminaries of Worms, by mingling them with such
Remedies as were proper in the case.

Experiment VII. EVery Living Creature out of its own Putrefaction produces
some kind of Animals agreeable to its own Nature, and differing from all other,
which I have found in several sorts of Herbs, and may be seen by Corn Animated
into winged Animals: The Carcass of an Ox becomes animated into Bees; Horses
generate Wasps and Sca^abees; Man's Rotten Carcass becomes a Seminary of Worms.
Nature is so Solicitous about promoting the Generation of things, that
wheresoever she finds a Disposition, that is, Heat with a due proportion of
Moisture, there she immediately thrusts forth an Animal. I ^ould here produce
innumerable Instances from all sort ^f Living Things; but because these are
enough for the proof of what I intend, I shall no longer insist on them.

I conceive it may not be amiss if now I mention some Worms lately destroyed by
Pulvis Benedictus, etc. In which I shall be very short, omitting many strange
and remarkable Cures.

A Woman at the Weavers-Arms in White-Cross Street, languishing a long time
under a Consumptive State, and being brought to keep her Bed a little before
she died, had a desire to take some of my Powder, the great Composition. The
first Dose brought away the Worm This Worm had multitudes of young ones in
every Joint.
Latus with abundance of Slime and Vermiculous Matter: It was of an Orange
Color, and Twelve Foot in length. After this she mended a little, but her
Vitals being spent and wasted, she was not able to withstand the Conquering Arm
of Death.

A Person of Quality, who had been lately Cured of the French Luec, had a most
intolerable Pain in his Stomach, and a Tumefaction in the Region of his Liver,
for which he could have no Redress, till taking some of Pulvis Benedictus, the
great Composition, he voided multitudes of Worms, small, flat, and shaped like
a Flounder, of a dark Redish Color: You may, if you will observe, often see
Worms just like them in the Liver of a Sheep. The Person has been ever since
free from all Pains, and in good Health.

A Gentleman's Daughter about Four Years of Age, that had a Fever and an Ague
for two or three Months which had brought her to a very low Ebb: Her Father to
obtain her Health, ran all the round of Physicians and Remedies; till being
advised to my Powder, she took the Lesser Composition, the first, second, third
and fourth Dose brought away abundance of Slime, and Wormatick Matter; at the
fifth she voided a little Bag like a Bladder, which was full of Worms of a dark
brown C lour, thick in the middle, and sharp at both ends. The Child
immediately Recovered, and is now very Healthful and Lively.

A Lady whose Son was about two years of Age; the Child was molested with
Asthma, and also a violent Inflammation in his Reins; for which he had taken so
many Medicines, that when my Powder was given him, they could by no means make
him take it. I then applied my Anti-Verminous Oil, and Plaster, and the third
day the Child Evacuated Eight and Twenty Worms; they were flat, white as Snow,
and an Inch in length, havin^ a vent on one side, these Worms when they
pleased, would extend themselves a Foot in length, and transform themselves
into the shape of a Plaice, or Flounder, exposed to the Air they consume in a
trice, but in Water they will keep long; I have some by me now.

Mrs. Dean, Living by the Artichoke in Southwark, near the Bridge, by taking of
my Medicines, voided multitudes of Worms, and of above Twenty several Shapes,
two of the Worms called Latus, each being six or seven Yards in length: The
Worm Teretes, which was as Red as Scarlet; Worms of a darkish Color, having
Fins, like small Fish; a Worm about three Inches long, having six feet on a
side; Worms with Horns like Snails; and others Hairy; a Worm much like a Mussel
when it is boiled, with small feet on each side; a Worm about four Inches long,
with a double forked Tail; She also voided pieces of several strange Worms, and
perfest Claws like the feet of Moles, with stony Wormatick Matter, which, when
broke, were full of small Worms, no thicker than a Hair.

And I hope all Judicious People will weigh the dangerous consequence of these
Destructive Vermin when we see how many Creatures, even by Instinct of Nature,
make to such Remedies as are proper in this case. Deer feed on Serpents to kill
their Worms, by which, it is said they renew their Age.

You may see in Bleeks, a Fish that frisks and plays on the Water, insomuch as
sometimes they leap into Boats, a Worm four times their own length.
Fish, When molested with Vermiculars, make to Carolina, etc. And all sorts of
Wild-Fowl to the Sea.

Fauconers, use the Dung of Sparrows to kill Worms in their Hawks, and Pulvis
Buso to kill 'em in their Feathers.

So Worms on Plants are destroyed by the Fumes of Sulphur, Garlic, Galbanum,
Goats Claws, etc.

Whoever will give themselves the trouble of opening a mad Dog will find him
full of Worms, which is the occasion of his madness, and are bred by eating
corrupted meat, especially in the Dog Days. These Worms take away their
Appetites, Worms the cause of Madness in Dogs.
and makes them fear the water. They wander about, hang down the Tail, bark
hoarsly, foam at the mouth, and look angerly. They are cured by giving them
Horse-Aloes, and Common-Salt mixed with Water, give it in a Drenching-Horn, and
in half an hour you will see the Vermin come up, and the Dog be well.

Thus man finds out Remedies to destroy them in Birds, and on Plants, and shall
he forget himself! This is a narrow and a fruitless Principle, Umbraided by
Neglect and Folly!

Our Liv^s divided into Seven Ages.
Rhodeginus divides our Lives into seven Ages, alluding to the seven Planets;
we may fitly compare our Infancy with the Moon; in which we seem only to live
and grow as Plants; and abounds with Humors.

The second Age to Mercury; wherein we are under Tuition, Taught and Instructed.

The third to Venus; the time of Pleasure, Amorous, Love-sick-Toys, Vanity, etc.

The fourth to the Sun; the Summertime of our Lives, Strong, Beautiful, and
flourishing.

The Fifth to Mars; in which we seek Honor, Victory, and have Ambitious Ends,
designing to accomplish somewhat Praiseworthy, or act what may redown'd to our
Glory.

The Sixth to Jupiter; where we judge of our selves and others, of former
Actions, and take an account of Times, arrive to the perfection of our
Judgments, Understanding, Reason, etc.

The Seventh and Last to Saturn; the Winter of our Days, wherein our Spirits,
Lives and Souls, are obfuscated, overcast and clouded, all fraught with a
multitude of Cares, Sorrows, Fears and Anxieties, a Burden to our selves, a
Trouble to others, overspread with innumerable Aches, Pains, Infirmities and
Weakness, fit for no Society nor Employment; but only to keep our Heirs from
inheriting our Possessions; which by how much the greater they are, by so much
the more is our End and Dissolution hoped and wished for, even by those which
drew Life and Being from us; which is Vanity in the abstract, and a great Evil,
if not the greatest; and this the End of all our Labors under the Sun; and in
all these Ages, we are, or may be Mascerated with Worms. As to the first six,
we have Examples daily, therefore I shall only speak of the last.

Valescus de Taranta attests he often had seen Old People have Worms. And
Gabucinus mentions an ancient Man, The last Age Macerated with Worms.
who evacuated a Monstrous Black Worm.

Brasavorius reports of a Patient of his, a Man of above Fourscore Years of
Age, which voided above Five Hundred Worms. And Doctor Ramesey had a Patient
within Two Months of Fourscore, a Woman, that voided such a company of Worms by
a Medicine he gave her, that they were innumerable, and adjudged to be some
thousands, of diverse sorts and magnitude, especia^ly Teretes and Ascarides.

And I my self have had several Patients of above Threescore, that have voided,
not only the Common Worms, but Vermiculars of strange and various Shapes.

Various Causes of Worms.
SUpernatural causes. Supernatural causes are from God and his Angels The Devil
and his Imps, Magicians, Conjurers, Witches, and Wizards. Universal Natural
Causes. Universal Natural Causes are from Heaven, Stars and Planets, which some
deny, who think the Stars were made only to adorn the Heavens, and Fools to
gaze on. Parents a cause. Air a cause. Meat a cause. Drink a cause. Plethora a
cause, which is a redundancy of fullness of Blood and other Humors in the Body.
Too much sleep a cause. Preturbation a cause. Over-watching a cause. Too much
rest a cause. Imagination a cause. Sorrow a cause. Anger a cause. Fear a cause.
Cachochymia a cause, which is an Excess in either Quality or Quantity of
Natural or Preternatural Excrementitious Humors. A bad Nurse a cause. Natural
and Preternatural Phlegm a cause. Cholar a cause. Melancholy a cause. Serum a
cause, which is a waterish thin Humor proceeding from the other Humors.
Sublata Causa. Tollitur effectus.

I have met with some Opposition as to Supernatural Causes, but whether there
be, or be not, I shall not dispute it here; however Christians ought to believe
it from the Testimony of St. Luke, Acts the 12. and the 23. And immediately the
Angel of the Lord smote him, because he gave not God the Glory* and he was
eaten of Worms, and gave up the Ghost; So Job complains, That his Flesh was
clothed with Worms, Job 7.5.

And Cornelius Gemma gives us an Example of a Wench, who was as if she had been
possessed of the Devil, and at some times would not be held by three Men, (such
were her strong Convulsive Passions) who Evacuated by Vomit, Twenty Four Pounds
of Stuff of all Colors, twice a day for Fourteen days together; and afterward
great Balls of Hair, pieces of Wood, Pigeons Dung, Parchment, Coals, etc. and
after all this, two pound of pure Blood, and then again, Coals and Stones,
strange fits of Laughing, Weeping and Ecstasies, and at length voided a live
Worm by Stool, like unto an Eel, of a Foot and a half long, the which he says,
he not only saw, but felt: and this I suppose sprung from a Supernatural Cause,
which sometimes destroys Life and all; as appears by that most remarkable Story
in Verstegan, and of the Pied Piper, that carried away an Hundred and Sixty
Children from the Town of Hamel in Saxony, on the 22d of July, Anno Dom. 1370.
a Wonderful Permission of God, to the Rage of the Devil.

Nicholaus Monardus, speaks of a Worm that a Lady Evacuated, above a Foot long,
with a double forked Tail.

Fallopius, speaks of a Worm all over hairy, black, having two Heads. It
weighed Nine Ounces.

Dr. Edward May, our Countryman, has written a Book of a very strange Worm,
whitish, about a Span long, and the thickness of a man's Finger, having toward
the Tail two Branches divided into diverse Fibers or Strings, of a fleshy
Color; the Head bloody, and in Shape like unto a Serpent, or Snakes: It was
taken from the Heart of one John Pennant in St. Giles's.

The Four Figures of which is to be seen in the following Page.

Anguilla.

Pedalis Bifurcatus.

Helminthocardia.

Dodroncalis.

depictions of worms

A Patient of mine, 1687, who lived in Shoreditch, a Woman above Sixty, who had
a continual Trembling about her Heart, so that she could not rest Day nor
Night: and withal, was strangely tempted to cut her Husband's Throat, without
any Reason, for she protested she loved him entirely, having been married many
years, during which Time he had always been very respective to her, and never
gave her any occasion to entertain such Diabolical Thoughts, Hearing this, I
advised her to make her Address to a Divine, for such in this case were more
proper than a Physician. The Woman still insisted on my Powder; I gave her a
Paper four or five days after she came for another, affirming she was much
better; but not returning to me again, I sent to see what was become of her,
the Person that went, found her in good Health, and those wicked Fantastic
hellish Temptations, subdued and vanished. Now whether this sudden Change was
caused by the powerful Virtue and Effect of the Medicine, ay, or no, you may
Conjecture as you please; for I never will attest what I am altogether
uncertain of. She voided no Worms visible to the Eye, but abundance of strange
stuff.

Diagnostick Signs of Worms.
Paleness of the Face, itching of the Nose, hollowness of the Eyes, unusual
defluxion of Spittle, grating of the Teeth when asleep; ^ulness, pains and
heaviness in the Head: a dry Cough, an itching in Ano, white and thick Urine; a
universal Trembling over the whole Body, a shining about the Eyes, unquiet
Sleep, often starting, lost Appetite, unreasonable Appetite, dryness of the
Tongue and Lips, Extension and swelling of the Belly, a gnawing and biting
about the Stomach, frightful Dreams, Extreme Thirst, the Body decayed and lean,
Fits in Children, often Vomiting, stinking Breath.

Signs of Health.
The Complexion fresh or clear: Moderate Appetite: Quiet Sleep: The Mind
cheerful: Excrement yellow: Urine well Colored: The Body open? The Flesh firm,
etc.

These are the Signs of Health, of which Temperance is the chief Pillar, and
consists most in Meat, Drink, Sleep, and Exercise; after which all prudent
Parents ought to cast an Eye: But on the contrary, I have seen People force, or
persuade, their Children to eat against Appetite; which, as Rames^y say, is
very pernicious; for if there be little or no Appetite, it is an infallible
Sign, the Meat formerly eaten, or the Crudities thereof, lies yet in the
Stomach, or in the Veins. And to fast too long, is as injurious, for thereby
the Stomach is filled with abundance of Humors, which will not only endanger
Worms, but diverse other Evils; for empty Veins draw deepest, and what they
first receive, good or bad, that they mix with the Blood. Therefore Children,
by reason of their growing, ought to eat often, but not too much at a time, nor
of many Dishes, for many Dishes breed many Diseases; and Distempers, with care,
are easier prevented than cured. Yet we see many, by over-eating, wilfully
murder themselves, dig their own Graves with their Teeth, and all to please
that devouring Gut of theirs, which is a pernicious Sink, and the Fountain of
all Diseases; it subverts and perverts the good Temperature of the Body,
stifles the Senses and Wits, strangles Nature, being not able to digest the
Meat thoroughly: whence ensue Crudities, and the Ground and Seeds of many
Diseases; yet it is impossible to prescribe any exact Rule, as to a Quantity,
for all Ages, Sexes, and Constitutions, when we see by Experience, That one and
the same Man cannot live in Health with the same Food that suffices for
quantity at another time; that what will suffice in Summer, is too little in
Winter: That what will satisfy one, and less than that will surfeit another,
should he eat as much; therefore it is not only an idle Conceit, but a Madness;
Since there is such Variety in men's Bodies, Strength, Constitutions,
Dispositions, and manner of Living; the quantity of Food then, ought to be
proportioned by no other Rule, but the quality and condition of the Stomach;
and that measure is exactly proportioned, we may conclude which the Stomach
has so much Power over, as perfectly to Concoct or Digest in the midst of any
Employment either of Body or Mind; and then the Body will be thereby more
lightsome and refreshed: So that I would have all observe the old Rule, that
is, To rise with an Appetite, considering we have two Guest to entertain, the
Body, and the Soul, and that therefore we have a Care that we destroy not the
Power of the one, nor the Faculties of the other; for tho the Belly have no
Ears, yet it has Intelligence to beg its due, and Wisdom to discern when it
has enough.

The same may be said by too much Wine, that brave Heroic Elevator of the
Spirits, which drags the Soul out of its solitary and inmost Room, adorning it
with vigorous, cheerful and aspiring Thoughts: Yet soon is this great work
unravel'd by the dull sluggish power of drowsy Sleep: And all are
Metamorphosed, our Souls are the same they were, only they had been dressed in
various Figures. And to conclude, Wine's but a delusive Bliss, a shortning to
our days, the introducer of all Quarrels and Mischiefs; the Exhauster of our
Estates, the Trouble and Sorrow of our Friends; all which Temperance prevents,
which is its own Reward, were there no greater.

I Shall now speak of such as cannot hold their Water, or have a Diabetes. In
this Disease, with my Powder I have often brought away Worms by Urine, though
the Medicine never did effect a Cure, which is apparent Worms are not the cause
of that Distemper: Yet by reason it is a Disease that often proves fatal, and
brings Children into Consumptions, and so to the Grave, I have collected and
set down such Remedies as the best of Physicians made use on.

Hoggs Bladder in Powder. Marcellus.
The Claws of a Sow in Powder. Plinius.
The dried Combs of Hens in Powder. Rhases.
The Throats of Hens in Powder, Galenus.
Galen chiefly used this for the Cure of a Diabetes. The Spectacle-Stone,
called in Latin Specularis, being burnt, Al^rovandus.
the Powder is given with great success against flux of Urine, Fistula's and
Hemorrhoids. The Blood of a He-goat in Powder. Dioscordes.
The Bones of a Water-Rat in Powder. Ae^culapis.
A Flea'd-Mouse dried and beat^n into Powder, and given at a time for three
days together.
Any of these aforesaid being prepared in fine Powder may be given in a little
Clarit or Plantane-water, the Quantity according to the Age of the Patient:
give it in the Morning; some take it Night and Morning. If you purge first, it
will be the better: For this Disease is occasioned by the fullness, weakness and
heat of the Kidneys and Reins, which causes such a swift Passage (of that which
is drunk) throw the body, that the Drink is hardly altered.

Worms in the Face.
Worms in the Face are animated of corrupt Humors, lodged between the Skin and
the Flesh, and cannot be destroyed quickly without injuring the Face. But those
who have patience, may destroy them with Oil of Myrrh, mixed with Vinegar of
Squills, and when you use it, let it dry into the Skin.

Freckles taken out.
The said Oil mixed with the Blood of a Vine, will take out Freckles, if not too
deep in the Skin, or mix it with Birch-water, it will effect the same.

Pearl dissolved.
Birch-water Dissolves Pearl, and makes a rare Cosmetick, which is a Secret very
little known: if you find it too sharp for your Skin, mix it with water, or
May-Dew, clarified by the Sun. Some use the waters of Bean-Blossoms,
White-Thorn and Lyllys: But I am convinced, that all waters, drawn by Fire, are
injurious to the Skin, unless extracted with some Balsamic Body, as Hungaria
water is, though the Composition is only Spirit of Wine and Rosemary-Flowers.

Aqua Hungaria.
Four pound of Flowers to three Quarts of Spirits, and after 24 Hours infusion,
draw it off in Balneo, the Head and Receiver being well lu^ed. This is a rich
Cosmetick, and has many other Virtues which I shall omit here, by reason they
are so well known. And now you may think as many pretenders do, that is, having
the Receipt, you can make the Water, which already has blasted its Estimation.
For some make it of Rosemary-tops instead of Flowers; others of Flowers they
know not when gathered, or from whence they came. But if you design to make
this Water, observe and you will find upon Rosemary-Flowers a rich White Gum or
Balsamick-matter; then they are in their prime, gather them on a dry day; for
if they hang long, that Balsamick-matter is exhaled by the influence of the
Sun, and the Flowers good for little but to set Fools to work.

Such as design to make use of Birch-water must tap the Tree in April.

Oil of Myrrh.
Boil Hen-Eggs hard, and cut them long-ways through the middle, take out the
Yolks and fill the Cavities with Powder of Myrrh, join them, and bind 'em
gently with a Thread, put them on a Grate in a cool moist Celler, a Dish under,
and the Oil will drop from them.

This Oil, dropped in Water, is a good Cosmetick, prevents Worms breeding in the
Face, creates a fair, fresh and youthful Complexion; and if used in time, I
believe might prevent the Marks of the Smallpox, by reason it will heal a
Wound without leaving a Scar. Or thus,

So soon as the Smallpox appears, To prevent marking in the Smallpox.
that you are satisfied it is the Disease, with a Feather anoint the Fa^^ with
Oil of Sweet-Almonds, six or seven times over. Let the Oil be new drawn; when
you have done so cover the Face all over with Leaf-gold, the Eyes excepted, be
sure you leave no part uncovered, but rather lay two leafs on, for where there
is a defect of Gold, there will be a scar: Let it remain on till the Scabs
shale off. This is the only thing yet known for this purpose, and if well
applied seldom if ever fails: The sick must lie on their Back while it is done.

That Worms are the occasion of the shedding of Hair, Worms in the Head killed.
is the Opinion of many wise and learned Authors: Being bread in the Roots,
which frequently appears after a Fit of Sickness on the Head, as well as the
Hands and Feet; and to destroy them, rub the Head morning and night, with the
Inside of an Out-Peel of an Orange, for a month or six weeks, and it will not
only kill the Worms, but make the Hair grow thick. I have known it bring Hair
on a Bald-Head.

(...) the (...) killed.
There is another sort of Worms, by some called Teredo: These Vermin are bred in
the Feet and hands, and cause a great itching in those parts. They generally
appear through weakness, after a Fit of Sickness. They are killed by anointing
with Black-Soap and Quicksilver.

Worms very often are the cause of a Red-Face; and the way to destroy them, and
take away the Redness, if there should be no Worms, is as follows.

The Cure of a Red-face.
Take half a pound of distilled Vinegar, two New-laid-Eggs with their Shells;
two spoonfuls of Flower of Sulphur. Let these infuse in the Vinegar three days;
then take out the Eggs, and with a Needle prick them full of holes, but not too
deep; lest any Yolk come out, and let the Whites run into the Vinegar; and
strain all through a fine Cloth, and tie the Sulpur in the Cloth like a little
Ball, and when you use it, dip the Ball in the Liquor, and pat the Place three
or four times a day, and in a short time you will find the Effect. Keep the
Ball in a Box from the Air.

Directions for the taking of Pulvis Benedictus.
I. AN Infant of six Months old, so upwards to a year, may take half a Paper in
the Morning, How taken by Infants.
you may give it in a spoonful of Breast-milk, and let it take it two or three
Mornings together, which with the same Quantity of my Night-powder taken at
night, may effect a Cure not only as to Worms and Vermiculous matter, but in
any other grievance or Disease incident to their Age. Though if you find they
do require more, proceed and give it, only intermit a day; for the Medicine is
so safe, you need not fear any prejudice by it; and an Infant of two or three
Months old may take the same.

From a year to two years.
II. From a year to two years of age, you may begin with half a Paper if that
give not two or three Stools, give the next Morning a whole Paper.

From two years to four or five.
III. From two years of age to four or five, you may begin with a whole Paper.

From five to ten.
IV. From five or six years, and so to ten, you may begin with a Paper and a
half.

V. From ten to fifteen with two Papers. From ten to fifteen. From fifteen to
twenty, etc.


VI. From fifteen to twenty, with two Papers and a half, or three, if your
Constitution be very strong and hard to work on, you may take four, but this is
very rare. The difference in Constitutions, and Dose to keep to.


VII. So great is the difference in Constitutions that it is impossible to
propose any one Dose for all, though of an age; when a Child of five or six
years of age will, and do often take three Papers, and shall have with it no
more Stool than a man that takes the same Quantity, therefore I would advise
you to begin with a low Dose, till you know the strength of your Constitution,
and keep to that Dose as gives only two or three Stools.

VIII. You may take it three Mornings successively, How often taken.
and then intermit a day, and so continue till the Cure be effected, which will
be in a few days. But for Men and Women, they may take it six or seven days
without intermission, if the Wormatick matter be so obstinate and rebellious as
to repair it, and they have strength to go through it.

IX. You may take either the great or lesser Composition in a spoonful or two
of Beer, Ale or Claret, or in the Pulp of an Aple, In what it may be taken.
etc. The more curious may give it in the Distilled water of any of these
Herbs, Centaury the Less, Wormwood, Betony, Carduus, Tansie, these are all
enemies to Worms, and are hot in the second Degree; yet so it be taken it
matters not much in what, for it will do the work for which it is designed.

X. If the Child be Fev^rish you may ^ive it in the Distilled Water, or Syrup
of either Purslain, Plantane, Succory, In what taken if Fevorish.
or Endive, for these are no friends to Worms, and are cold only in the second
Degree.

XI. Some Physicians approve of sweet Vehicles to ^ive their Anti-verminous
Medicines in, as Milk, Honey, Syrup, Of taking it in sweet vehicles.
etc. which are very proper when Worms affect the vital parts, and lie remote
from the Stomach, by reason they tempt them from those parts to the Medicine,
and such who suspect Worms in those parts ought to take their Medicines in
sweet Vehicles.

XII. It must be taken early in the Morning, What taken in the working.
and fast two or three hours after it, then give warm Broth or Water Gruel,
this liberty I give to Children by reason of their often craving for Victuals,
but elder persons must fast till Noon, and if they drink any thing in the
working, let it be warm Purl.

Confinement in taking it.
XIII. Children the morning they take it must keep the house, but if the
weather be fair and warm, after Dinner they may play abroad, or go to School.
Elder persons may go about their occasions provided they go warm, and keep
their feet dry.

To hasten the Operation.
XIV. If the Dose taken work not to answer your expectation, boil a little
Senna in some Ale, and drink the Ale warm, and it will hasten the operation.

Of viewing the Stools.
XV. Besure you view the Child's Stools in the taking of it, and three or four
days after it has done taking, for sometimes Worms come away dead at that
distance of time.

The Virtues of Pulvis Benedictus.
XVI. Pulvis Benedictus, the Great and Lesser Composition, are much alike in
operation, only the greater is more searching and active in his business, and
sooner obtains a victory, and is more powerful in destroying Worms in the
Bladder, of which it never fails.

They are both ^^ Gentle in their operation, that they seldom make the youngest
Child sick, unless the Stomach abounds with Crudities. They Purge and sweeten
the Blood, carry off all gross, corrupt, putrid Humors; Creates a fresh and
healthful Complexion in such as are defective by any Wormatick matter. And so
pernicious are these Vermin, that there is hardly any Age, Sex, or
Constitution, but are subject to them; nor part of us but they do affect.

For there is no Blood or Humors but may putrify one time or other, which
putrid matter retaining a vital principle, having a humid kind of heat apt for
Generation, produces Worms, which if not, Putrefaction has certain Seminals,
or Seeds within it self, that are as pernicious ^s Worms can be, and causes the
same Diseases as Worms actually existent. But this precious Medicine destroys
not only Worms, but all manner of Vermiculous matter; for where no Worms appear
it effects a Cure, if taken any time. And, in a word, is the only Specific yet
known.

It is a great Diuretic cleansing the Reins of Slime, Sand or Gravel.

It expells Wind, and is a Sovereign Medicine in the Cholick and Griping of the
Guts.

It opens all Obstructions of the Stomach, Lungs and Liver.

Causes a good Appetite, and helps Indigestion.

In Rheumatisms, Ptisick, Asthma, or shortness of Breath, it has been found
very successful.

It mightily prevails in the Rickets, and has straitened the Bones, tho the
venom in that Disease is lodged in the Spinal marrow, from whence it is called
Rhachitis.

It is an Antidote against the Plague, Spotted Fever, and all Pestilential
Diseases, (...)

The chief Ingredients in these admirable Powders being parts simple, and parts
Chemical of the Juniper, Orange, and Wallnut-Trees. I do confess it is
something bitter. But a Diadem will not cure the Apoplexy, or a Velvet-slipper
the Gout.

And I hope all ingenious Persons are satisfied, that those Medicines which
work upon such Humors, will almost reach any Distemper, if not too far gone.
Since corruption and putrefaction are the forerunners and introducers of all
Diseases. Therefore no better Physic can be taken, for all Ages, Sexes, and
Constitutions, from the Womb to the Tomb.

The Use and Virtues of my Night-Powder.
I. THis Powder is taken at Night going to Bed in a Spoonful or two of Beer,
Wine or any Liquid thing. Take the same Quantity as you do of the Purging
Powder, as well Children as elder Persons.

II. It has no ill Taste, nor will it Purge, yet it is a powerful enemy to
Worms, and by taking this at Night you give the Vermin no rest. And if it were
taken those Mornings you omit Purging it were the better.

III. It is an admirable Medicine in the Green Sickness, it sweetens the whole
mass of Blood, and may safely be given in any Malignant Fever, being a great
Diminisher of the Preternatural heat, and taken with the Purging-Powder, will
reach most Diseases incident to Youth or Old Age.

IV. And whoever begins the taking of these Powders, I only desire they would
be so wise and kind to themselves as to go through with it, and not leave off
at the taking a Dose or two; do but this, and you will find the effect to
answer your expectation.

The Use and Virtue of the Aromatical Plaster.
I. THis Plaster must be laid to the Stomach hot, the point downwards, and
bound on, let it remain ten or twelve days, unless it be in case of Life and
Death, then you must have a fresh Plaster every two or three days.

II. It is a great enemy to Worms, and Wormatick matter, discharging the
Stomach of cold waterish Humors, and gross corrupt Phlegm, which is apt for the
Generation of Worms.

III. In Consumptions, its effects has been proved to the satisfaction of many,
applying a fresh Plaster once a week, for it revives the Spirits, and
strengthens the Stomach, and all the vital parts, giving them a true natural
heat not at all superfluous.

IV. Some that have layn speechless, by this Plaster have Recovered to the
great wonder of all their Acquaintance; it being a friend to all the Spirits
natural, Vital and Animal, and is without doubt one of the greatest Cordials
yet known, of an outward application.

It retains its virtue forty years, and when left off is a rich perfume to burn
in your House.

My Ointment against Worms.
IT is to be rubbed and chaffed in with your Fingers, by the Fire, on the
Stomach or Belly of the Child, or both, if there be occasion, Night and
Morning, and a piece of Brown Paper bound on.

Of all External Remedies against Worms, this is the chief, and exceeds my
Plaster, but is of no other use.

Pulvis Benedictis the Great and Lesser Composition, Each Paper Two Shillings.
My Night Powder, Two Shillings. My Aromatical Plaster, Two and Sixpence. My
Ointment the Pot, Two and Sixpence.
Each Paper contains Nine Doses, Sealed with a Cheveron, between Three
Crescents, Prepared by R. Clark, Chemist, Living at the Golden-Ball in
Devonshire-Street without Bishopsgate. Where in my absence is a Gentlewoman
will furnish you with any of the aforesaid Preparations.

ADVERTISEMENT.
I Am very sensible many People are averst against Medicines, that are
published by the way of Bills, yet several Ingenious Men, and some
Colledg-Physicians have done, and still do the same by Medicines that have been
successful for many years; though I must confess there are a great many sad
Tools take the same Method, which may well put People in a Consternation. For
since I have published these Powders, which has not been many year^, every one
has a rare Medicine for the Worms.

I am informed there is a Tooth-drawer living in Holborn, that calls himself a
Physician, who has published a Powder for the Worms, and put out Tables with
the Cu^^ of the very same Worms as are in mine; and what he writes relating to
Worms is all taken out of this Book. Now every Man's ignorance ought to be his
greatest Secret; then what can you think of him, that exposes his own weakness
in Print. But Ignorance and Impudence are as inseparable as heat from fire.

With care and pains I have collected from the best Authors what I thought
might be useful as to Worms, in which I design to proceed till I have made this
Book six Sheets, which I hope will be acceptable to all that love themselves
and their Children, as well as a help to the Tooth-drawer.

FINIS.
Latus.

Teretes.

Ascarides.

Cucurbitini.

depictions of worms


