OBEDIENCE TO MAGISTRATES RECOMMENDED, IN A DISCOURSE Upon TITUS 3.1.

Preached September the Ninth, 1683.

Put them in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers, and to obey
Magistrates. By J. C. Rector of W. N.

LONDON, Printed by T. S. for Edward Giles, Bookseller in Norwich, near the
Marketplace. 1683.

TO THE READER.
READER,
CHristian Obedience to Magistrates is a Duty so necessary both to the Public
Peace and Welfare of Church and State, and to the Private Good of particular
Persons and Places, that the Publisher judges he needs not much to apologize
for the sending forth these Papers that persuade thereunto. The Discourse is
short, plain, and intelligible, and so more adapted to the use of those that
may have need of it. There is nothing in it that may exasperate the Spirits of
any, but what may be useful to the Information of every Sincere Christian, who
is willing to know and practice his Duty. The Author is no Court Parasite,
suiting his Principles to worldly Interest, that he may get Preferment by them;
but desiring to go forth Incognito, he covets no other Happiness on Earth, but
to serve God faithfully, that little time he has to live, in an obscure
Country-Town.

Reader, It concerns thee, if thou would approve thy self a sincere
Christian, to consider how far thou art to comply with this Duty, which is one
of the main Commands of the Gospel. Thou can not be Christ's Disciple, if
thou have not respect to all his Commandments. Read, and consider, and the Lord
give thee understanding in all things.

CHRISTIAN OBEDIENCE RECOMMENDED, From TITUS III. 1.
Put them in mind to be subject to Principalities, and Powers, and to obey
Magistrates --
THis Epistle was written by St. Paul to Titus, left by him at Crete for the
settling the Affairs of the Churches there, to direct him in his Office, and
learn him how to behave himself in the Church, which is the House of the Living
God, as the Apostles Phrase is, 1 Timothy 3.15. as that Epistle was sent also to
Timothy at Ephesus upon the same account. In the first Chapter of this Epistle
he gives Directions to Titus about the Ordination of Elders or Presbyters in
the Churches, (called in the French, Prestres, and by us Priests; Names derived
from the Greek Word (...).) He shows what Qualifications they must have, and
orders the stopping the Mouths of False Teachers. In the second Chapter, he
gives Directions what Duties are to be preached to several sorts of Persons, to
aged Men and Women, to young Men and Women, to Servants, etc. In the third
Chapter he directs the teaching of some other Duties, as Subjection and
Obedience to Rulers and Magistrates, and to do all good Works: Put them in mind
to be subject to Principalities and Powers, to obey Magistrates, and to be
ready to every good Work. That which I shall make the Subject of my Discourse
from the Text, is this Doctrinal Proposition:

That Ministers are to mind their People to be subject to Principalities and
Powers, and to obey Magistrates.

This is a Precept not only sitted for that time, but necessary for all Ages,
therefore left here upon Record: Put them in mind, etc.

The two great Apostles, St. Paul and St. Peter, insist much upon it. St. Paul
urges it, Romans 13. more fully, Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers;
for there is no Power but of God, the Powers that be, are ordained of God: and
he urges it by many other Reasons in the following Verses. And St. Peter, 1 Ep.
2.13. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lords sake, whether
to the King as Supreme, or unto Governors sent by him; for so is the will of
God, etc.

For the clearing the Proposition, I shall show, 1. What is meant by
Principalities, Powers, and Magistrates. 2. What Subjection and Obedience is to
be yielded to them. 3. Why Subjection and Obedience is to be given to them. 4.
In what manner it is to be done. 5. Why Ministers should put the People in mind
of it. Then, 6. Apply the Discourse practically.

I. What is meant by Principalities, and Powers, and Magistrates, to whom we
are to be subject, and yield Obedience?
(...) used, as in Peter and Jude, signifying the Dominion and Authority in
Rulers to make Laws, and establish them by their Sanction: Sometimes we have
the Word (...), as in the Text, to show, that Rulers derive their Power from
God originally, and are by him immediately endued therewith: Sometimes they are
called Dignities, (...), or Glories, as in Jude, because God has given them
great Glory among Men; as it is said of Nebuchadnezzar, God gave him a Kingdom,
and Majesty, and great Glory: and there is a lawful Splendor and Pomp they may
bear, for the maintaining their Honor in the Hearts of the People: Sometimes
Powers, (...), because of the great Power and Strength (vis naturalis) God puts
into their Hands, to support their Government, and keep all in Obedience:
Sometimes (...), as in the Text, rendered more properly Authority than Power,
(vis moralis) because they have Authority to make Laws, and govern their
Subjects by them: Sometimes (...), Eminency, height of Place above others, as
1 Timothy 2.2. Pray for Kings, and all that are in Authority, or, as in the
Margin, in Eminency. There are other Words used in Scripture, but I shall not
name all; you may understand by this who are meant by Principalities, Powers,
and Magistrates, viz. Those that are in Supreme Rule and Authority over a
People, together with the Subordinate Magistrates under them; for I shall
include both, as St. Peter teaches me, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. Both the King that is
Supreme, and Governors under him. To such we are, by Divine Command, to be
subject and obedient, if they be our Lawful Rulers, yea, though they should be
Heathens or Persecutors, (as they were at this time when the Scriptures were
written); yet we are to give them Obedience in all things not contrary to the
Laws of God and the Land; and to be subject, so as not to rise up in Rebellion
against them, even when they command contrary thereunto. Which leads me to the
second thing, viz.

II. What Subjection and Obedience is to be yielded to them that be in place of
Government and Authority over us.
Be subject to them, Obey them.

1. Be subject to them, (...): The Word signifies, we should keep our selves in
an orderly subjection to them, in that place and station God has set us, not
leaving our place of subjection, (as Soldiers who are to keep their Ranks and
Files.) It Is opposed to Mutiny, Sedition, Disorder, and Confusion, or whatever
tends to the Dissolution of Government. It implies several things in it. 1. An
inward Reverence of Heart to them; to esteem them highly, because of that
Authority and Honor God has conferred on them, as his Deputies and
Vicegerents, if not for their personal Worth, yet for the Sovereignty God has
committed to them, to give honor to whom honor is due, Romans 13. to bear an
inward Reverence to them, because of God's Image on them, not despising or
contemning them for any thing we judge amiss in them. 2. Respectful Language of
the Tongue toward them, not speaking any reproachful Words of them, tending to
the prejudice of their Government; but to cover their Weaknesses, (as Shem and
Japhet did their Father's Nakedness) considering what strong Temptations their
high Places expose them to. 3. The submitting our whole Man to the obedience of
their legal Commands; to serve them in Peace and War, according as Duty obliges
us; to be ready to every good Work, as the Apostle adds in the end of the Text;
to do all Duties the Law obliges to; yea, submitting our Necks to the Yoke, (as
the Word may signify) tho it seem burdensome to us; not disobeying in any
lawful thing, nor rising up in Rebellion against them, if they should command
any thing either unjust or illegal. 4. And that our Estates be subject to them,
willingly paying Tribute and Custom according to the Laws, Romans 13.7. and as
Christians, paying them spiritual Tribute, offering up prayers and
thanksgivings to God for them, 1 Timothy 2.1. Chrysostom notes, this Word
comprehends all Duties and Services that Subjects owe to their Rulers and
Governors. Thus be subject to them, ready to every good work.

2. The second Word the Text uses is (...), obey them. Critics observe, it
signifies a free and voluntary Obedience to them, without simulation or
coaction; that we perform all the Duties of Subjects in a due manner, not being
false to them, but faithful Subjects; not compelled by fear and terror, but
moved out of Conscience to God's Command, who has ordained Magistracy among
Men, because it is his Ordinance, being subject not for wrath, but for
conscience sake, Romans 13.5.

III. Why must Subjection and Obedience be thus yielded to Rulers and
Magistrates?


1. Because Magistracy is the Ordinance of God, it is of Divine Institution.
This Reason the Apostle uses, Romans 13.1. Let every soul be subject to the
higher Powers, because there is no Power but of God, the Powers that be, are
ordained of God; therefore we must needs be subject for conscience sake: Prove.
8.15. By me Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice; Judges, and all the Rulers
of the Earth, etc. They are God's Deputies and Vicegerents; therefore the Name
of Gods is given them in Scripture, ( I said ye are Gods, but ye shall die like
Men, says the Psalmist.) God has delegated a part of his Power to them, even
in the Church, which is governed by God's Word and Spirit; he is pleased to set
Governors, 1 Cor. 12.28. therefore much more in the State, where there is a
greater necessity of it: So that we must needs be subject to them, and obey
them, because of God's Ordinance. Not to do so, is to fight against God, and
such as resist shall bring damnation to themselves, Romans 13.2.

2. They are ordained of God for the common Good of Mankind, and therefore we
have greatest reason to obey them, Romans 13.4. He is the Minister of God unto
thee for good, speaking of the Supreme Ruler or Magistrate, and bidding us to
obey him on this account. There is a fourfold Good that we receive by
Magistracy, Natural, Moral, Civil, and Spiritual.

1. Natural Good. Through Government our very Lives are preserved in safety, else
homo homini lupus, one Man would be a Wolf and Lion to another: What Violences,
Murders, and Bloodshed would be committed amongst Men!

2. Moral Good. That Vice and Wickedness has any Restraint, and Virtue and
Goodness any Encouragement, is from Laws and Government. How vile would many
Men be that fear not God, if no Laws of Men restrained them? When there was no
King in Israel, every man did what was right in his own eyes, and all
Wickedness abounded. Romans 13.3. the Apostle says, Rulers are a terror to evil
works. In the worst Government there are some Laws to restrain it, therefore
it is a great Mercy to Mankind.

3. Civil Good. That our Possessions and Rights are preserved, we owe to
Government; else the stronger would prey on the weaker, and every place would
be full of Thieves and Robbers; Propriety could not be preserved.

4. Spiritual Good. Religion is preserved in the World hereby, and the Worship
of God maintained. The Magistrate is Keeper of both Tables. Even by the Light
of Nature Aristotle taught, the first Care of Kings should be about Religion:
It Is their Duty to maintain the True Religion, and suppress Idolatry,
Blasphemy, and Contempt of Religion. These Benefits Men reap most evidently,
when they have good Governors; then they enjoy Peace and Prosperity, and
Religion is in a flourishing condition. And if they have bad Governors, it is
God that punishes them for their Sins, and makes them Scourges to Men; and they
should humble themselves for their Sins, and turn to God, and he would send
them relief. However, bad Government is better than none: Tyranny is better
than Anarchy and Confusion. It Is one of the saddest Curses to have no Kings nor
Governors: Hos, 3.4. it is prophesied of Israel in their desolate Estate, they
should have neither King, nor Prince, nor Sacrifice, etc. We read in the story
of the Levite's Concubine, what wickedness was committed in Israel when there
was no King. What a Den of Wild Beasts would the World be without Government!
None could live in peace, every one would prey upon his Neighbor.
Nebuchadnezzar, tho a Tyrannous King, is set forth in Daniel as a great Tree,
under whose Branches the Fowls and Beasts had shelter. Saul, tho a bad King,
clothed the Daughters of Jerusalem in Scarlet. Government is as necessary to
Mankind, says one, as the Sun, Air, Bread, Water, etc. And therefore being for
Common Good, be subject unto them.

3. From that particular Good every one will reap by subjecting himself to
Government, and Evil by resisting it. It is to be observed, That the Fifth
Commandment, Honor thy Father and thy Mother, etc. is called by the Apostle,
Ephesians. 6. the first Commandment with promise. It has the Promise of Length of
Days and Prosperity annexed to it. Now it is to be understood of Political
Parents, as well as Natural; and it implies also a threatening of some outward
Judgment to the Violators of the Command, as shortning their Days; they that
resist them, shall not be long in the Land of the of the Living. It may be
observed, That the most that are recorded in Scripture for resisting of
Government, had untimely Ends; as Corah and his Company, Absalom, Sheba, Joab,
Shimeah, Adonijah, Zimri, Athaliah, etc. according to that, Prove. 17.11. An
evil man seeks Rebellion, therefore a cruel Messenger shall be sent unto him.
But that is most terrible that the Apostle speaks, Romans 13.3. They that resist,
shall receive to themselves damnation; not only temporal punishment, but, if
they repent not, eternal damnation. God will maintain his own Ordinance, and
punish the Violators of it. Such do, Giant-like, fight against God, and
therefore shall meet with Destruction. Thus you see what reason there is to
obey and be subject to Rulers and Magistrates.

IV. But how, and in what manner must we yield Subjection and Obedience to
them? I answer,
1. We must give it to all in Authority, good and bad; as the Apostle speaks of
Masters, 1 Pet. 2.18. Servants must be subject, not only to the good and
gentle, but also to the froward: so must we be subject to all in Authority,
(that be our Lawful Rulers, not Usurpers) not only to the good, but to the
bad. It Is due to the Office primarily, whoever bear it; then to the Persons
placed in it by God. The Apostle in the Text speaks of Principalities and
Powers in the abstract; and when he required Subjection to the Higher Powers,
Romans 13. it was at that time when Caligula, Claudius, or Nero reigned, those
Monsters of Men, and cruel Persecutors; yet, says he, Let every soul be
subject, etc. If God should give us the worst Magistrates, we must not resist
them, but must reverence the Powers, and be subject to them; and this is
thank-worthy, 1 Pet. 2.16.

2. Yet we must obey them only in the Lord. As we must look on them as set in
the place of God, so must we obey them only in all things agreeable to the
Will of God. If they command things contrary to his Will, then we must rather
obey God than Man, as the Apostle teaches, Acts 5.29. The reason of it is,
Because God is the Universal and Supreme Sovereign. If an inferior Officer
command any thing contrary to the Will of the King and his Laws, we must obey
the Will of the King before his: So if a King, contrary to God's Will, commands
us any thing, we are to obey him that is King of Kings. In such a Case the Laws
of Men are null ipso facto, as St. Austin speaks, There can be no Law of what
is not just: And Bernard, What Man commands, if God forbid it, it is repealed
by the Sovereign Lord by whom Kings reign. Things materially evil, cannot be
justly commanded, nor lawfully done.

3. Not for fear of Wrath only, but for Conscience sake, Romans 13.5. The fear
of Man may often restrain from resisting, (especially the fear of God, who
threatens damnation); but Conscience to God's Command should chiefly make us to
obey Magistrates in what they command according to Law: 1 Pet. 2.13. Be subject
(says he) to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake. He has ordained
Magistracy, and commanded Obedience to it.

4. Willingly and heartily, Ephesians. 6.7. With good will doing service as to the
Lord, not to Man: Col. 3.23. Whatever you do, do it heartily, as to the Lord,
not as to Men; and ye shall receive of the Lord the Reward of Inheritance: for
ye serve the Lord Christ. The Apostle speaks of Servants doing their Duties to
their Masters; but it is true also of Subjects doing their Duties to
Magistrates: they are to do it willingly and heartily, as to the Lord.

V. But why should Ministers put their People in mind to be thus subject to
Magistrates, and obey them?


1. Because every Duty is to be pressed by them; they are to make known to them
the whole Will of God, even all things necessary to Salvation, of which this is
one principal Command, a Branch of the Fifth Commandment, Honor thy Political
Father and Mother; and this Honor cannot be shown them without Subjection and
Obedience. Now tho People know this, yet they have need to be put in
remembrance of it, as the Apostle speaks Jude 5. they need to have their pure
minds stirred up by way of remembrance, 2 Pet. 3.1. Known Duties must be
whetted on us again and again. This is one great End of the Ministry, to stir
up People to the Practice of such Duties as they know; their Minds are
forgetful, their Affections dull, and they are backward to the practice of many
Duties, and therefore have need to have them often urged. It Is a foolish Cavil
some have against Ministers preaching the same Duties again sometimes; even the
Spirit of Christ is promised by him, John 14. to bring to our remembrance what
himself had before spoken.

2. The Holy Ghost foresaw, that some Christians, under pretense of Religion,
would cast off Subjection to those in Authority; being made free by Christ,
they would not be Servants to Men, abusing their Liberty. The Scriptures
foretell it would be so with some, Jude 8. They despise Dominion, and speak evil
of Dignities: So 2 Pet. 2.10. Both Places speak of some that would highly
pretend to Religion, and yet be guilty of this Sin; therefore, says he, Put
them in mind to be subject, etc. There Is a Spirit in Men ready to turn the
Grace of God into wantonness, under pretense of Religion to cast off Obedience
to Rulers, as the Anabaptists in Germany, and others, have done. Some observe,
the Cretians were a very seditious People, and needed this Admonition;
therefore the Apostle bids, Put them in mind.

3. Because there sometimes might be strong Temptations to this Sin; as when
evil Governors arise, that rule with an high hand, and oppress their Subjects,
and deal unjustly with them: It Is an hard thing then to be subject to the
froward and cruel, as we are to the gentle and kind; to own the Ordinance of
God, when in the hands or evil Men. This strongly tempts a People to resist, as
the Burdens of Rehoboam made the Ten Tribes to revolt, tho they got nothing by
it; for we read not of one good King in that Kingdom of Israel. To submit to
harsh Governors, and evil Rulers, is against Flesh and Blood; nothing but
Conscience to God's Command can make us willingly submit to such a Yoke;
therefore put them in mind to be subject, etc.

4. Because of the great Scandal that would come to Religion, and the Name of
Christ, by resisting the Powers of the World, and refusing to be subject to
them; therefore put them in mind, etc. It has been an old Cavil against
Religion and Christians, They are seditious, rebellious, and turbulent Persons:
Thus they have been represented in all Ages. We find the Jews thus of old
accused by their Enemies, They would not obey the King's Laws, and Jerusalem
was a rebellious City; and by this means the Rebuilding of the City and Temple
was hindered. Daniel and the Three Children suffered under this Notion: St. Paul
was accused as a turbulent Fellow, and mover of Sedition; nay, Christ himself,
to be no Friend of Caesar, tho he declared, his Kingdom was not of this World,
neither meddled with Temporal Kingdoms, but sought to bring Men to the Kingdom
of Heaven. Tho Christianity of it self does not disturb Government, but uses
the most effectual Means to secure it, by teaching it is God's Ordinance, and
Men must be subject to it for Conscience sake to God's Command, and for fear of
Damnation, etc. yet if Christians, that profess it, should not live quietly,
and in due subjection and obedience to it, they would be a great scandal to it,
and hinder the progress of it in the World; therefore put them in mind to be
subject to Magistrates, and to obey them, that the Name of Christ and his
Gospel may not be blasphemed, but that Christianity may appear aimiable and
winning unto all, by teaching all its Professors to live harmlesly and
peaceably, as the Sons of God without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked
Generation.

I come now to Application.

put you in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers, and to obey
Magistrates; to yield them all due subjection and obedience. This is a great
Christian Duty, enjoined by the Apostle St. Paul, Romans 13.1. and pressed by him
with many Arguments; and also by the Apostle St. Peter, 1 Pet. 2.13. And in my
Text Ministers are enjoined to preach it to their People; Put them in mind,
etc. It was practiced by our Lord and Master Christ himself, when he was upon
Earth, he was subject to the Authority he was under, paid Tribute to Caesar,
and submitted to be Judged by his Officers; tho unjustly used, he resisted not,
when as he could have prayed his Father, and he would have sent him more than
twelve legions of Angels to rescue him; yet he submitted freely, to leave us an
Example. This was practiced also by all his Followers, who made no
Insurrections against the Governments where they lived, (as did some others)
but quietly submitted, either in obeying or suffering, tho daily persecuted,
imprisoned, stoned, beheaded, burnt, etc. even when more than Five thousand
were martyred in the Roman Empire for every Day in the Year, except the First
of January only, (on which Day they accounted it a piece of Religion not to
let any suffer): yet they patiently bore and suffered all, without making any
Resistance against their Rulers.

Nor can it be said, they wanted Power to make resistance, else they would have
done it; for they were multiplied so greatly, that they filled their Cities,
Castles, Camps, Palaces, and Towns; so as Tertullian writes, If the Christians
should depart out, and leave them, they should remain desolate. Remarkable is
the Story of the Thebaean Legion in the days of the Emperor Maximinus,
consisting of Six thousand six hundred and sixty six armed Soldiers, all
Christians, under a Christian Captain, who were in the Savoy, in a strong
Place, where they might have defended themselves; yet being commanded by the
Emperor to sacrifice to his Gods, they refused to obey him therein, but made
no resistance: Whereupon he being angry, sent forth his Messengers to put every
tenth Man to death; which they willingly yielded to, without any resistance,
each striving to have a share in that glorious Death. Then he caused a second
Decimation or Tything of them, they remaining constant in their Faith, which
they suffered patiently: And last he caused his Army to fall upon them, and
destroy them all; which was done, they making not the least resistance, being
willing to exchange this present Life for a more glorious.

If it should be said, They had no Laws then for their Religion, as we now
have, and so may stand up for our Laws and Birthrights, and may oppose all
that invade them: I answer, As we have Laws for our Religion and Liberties, so
we have Laws that forbid our opposing Authority, and rising up against them, on
any Pretense whatsoever; and making it Treason to take up Arms without the
King's Commission; and therefore must be content with the Defense of the Laws,
and make no Resistance or Rebellion.

What Help and Relief then has a People, if Rulers should violate the Laws,
and invade Religion and Liberty, contrary to Law?

Julian, Antiochus, Dioclesian, and our Queen Mary. And when a People be
humbled for their Sins, repent, and seek him with all their Hearts, can restore
Religion in greater luster and glory, as in the Days of Constantine and Queen
Elizabeth. Innumerable Examples are to be found in Histories ancient and
modern, of God's Providence over his Church, in punishing Tyrants, and
Persecutors of the Truth, and relieving his People when oppressed unjustly;
which may encourage sincere Christians to commend their Case to God, without
using unlawful Means to relieve themselves. Therefore, at such a time, a People
ought only to repent, and turn to God, and seek him with their whole Hearts,
and use no other Means.

And in reference to our selves, let it be further considered, 1. That our Laws
have long preserved our Religion, Rights, and Liberties amongst us, and we may
hope they may do so still, unless we provoke God by our Sins to take away his
Gospel, and other Mercies, from us. 2. Other violent Ways and Means are likely
to do more hurt than good, if it were lawful to take up Arms in vindication of
them. It was a truly-Christian Saying of the excellent Fran. Junius, in his
Animadversions on Bellarmine's Books de Translatione Imperii, etc. l. 1. c. 2.
That good Men should rather bear any Injuries from their Magistrates, tho never
so grievous, than inveigh against them in Word, Writing, or Action, to the
disturbance of Order and Public Peace. Let us consider the manifold Evils
likely to ensue on such Resistance. 1. Civil Wars will follow upon it, and the
Consequences of them will be sad: What Rapins, Murders, Plunders, and other
Mischiefs, attend this! Our late sad Experience will inform us sufficiently
herein. 2. Our Government is in danger to be altered, and we cannot expect to
find a better Constitution: It must be the Reformation of Men's Hearts and Lives
must put us into a better Condition, not the Change of Government. 3. Religion
is like to suffer more hereby, than by Persecution. In such horrible Confusions
of Nations, and treading down of Laws, what Sects, Heresies, and Divisions will
arise, to the ruin of Religion! Whereas the Blood of the Martyrs has been the
Seed of the Church, and Sufferings have purified it, and made it more glorious.
4. If such as do rise up for defense of their Religion and Liberties, shall be
conquered by their Oppressors, they are likely to come under far greater
Slavery and Misery, forfeiting their Estates, Lives, Rights, and Privileges,
and perhaps come under Arbitrary Government, and absolute Slavery; and what
worse Condition can be supposed? Now how uncertain are the Events of War! tho
the Miseries attending it are most certain. It Is very seldom such Attempts
prosper, but most commonly they bring Ruin to those who engage therein; as may
be seen at large in the Homily against Rebellion, Part 4. Which Homily deserves
to be wholly read and considered by such as are inclined to use such unlawful
Courses for remedying Evils.

That many Writers, Men of great Name, have pleaded for the Lawfulness of
Resistance in some Cases.

Germany, where it was expressly covenanted in the Constitution of that
Government, That the Princes of the Empire might, in case of his invading their
Rights, defend them against the Emperor by War, sine nota Rebellionis, (as I
remember, the Words are cited out of the Golden Bull) without any Brand of
Rebellion. Which till Luther was satisfied in by the Lawyers, he would not
consent to the Confederation at Smalcald. The like is said concerning the
Netherlands, whose Laws acquitted them from the Spanish Yoke, upon the unjust
and tyrannical Government of that King and his Ministers. But this is nothing
to our Case, whilst our Laws prohibit such taking up Arms, and make it Treason.

Lastly, I add but one thing more; That there must be acknowledged at last a
Supreme Power, subordinate to God alone, and not accountable to Men, nor to be
resisted by them: or else all Confusion and Disorder would be in the World, and
Subversion of all Government, which would make Mankind miserable. Now this had
better be in the Hands of the King, or Chief Ruler, than in the Hands of any
other, either the People in general, or of any Party of them. Rulers have
usually more Understanding in Government than the People, and more Counsel and
Helps; and their Power and Authority is from God, (who is the Original of all
Power, Romans 13.1.) not from the People: As the Power of the Husband over the
Wife is from God; tho her Consent be necessary to make him her Husband at
first, yet she conveys not to him the Authority, but it is from the Ordinance
of God. It is a dangerous Mistake to affirm, That all Power is originally in
the People, and they may entrust it to whom they please, and call their Rulers
to account, and take the Forfeiture, and recall the Trust. This has been
cleared by other Writers, who might have been cited here. Therefore it is the
safest for Christians to sit still and be quiet, to mind their own Duties in
their proper Sphere and Station, to study Peace and Holiness, and not to meddle
with Public Government, but to be subject to lawful Magistrates and Rulers in
all lawful things; and if any thing be amiss, to commit their Case to God, and
commend the Care of Religion and the Church to his Providence, who is King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords.

Well then, Let me put you in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers,
and to obey Magistrates. This is the Word that God has put into our Mouths;
therefore we must warn you of this Duty from him. Those whom God and the Laws
have placed in Superiority over us, and he has put his Power and Authority
into their Hands, as his Deputies and Vicegerents, obey them, and be subject to
them. Let there be a Subjection of the whole Man unto them; of the Heart, to
reverence them, esteem of them, love them, wish well to them, etc. if not for
any Personal Excellency in them, yet for their Office sake, which is of God,
and for the Image of his Sovereignty stamped on them: Of the Tongue, not
speaking of them with reproachful Language, but honoring them as the Fathers
of their Country: Of outward Gestures, by bowing to them, uncovering the Head,
and giving all outward Expressions of Honor befitting their Dignities: Of the
whole Man, by giving all due Obedience to their Laws, if not evidently contrary
to the Laws of God: Of our Estates, by paying Tribute and other Dues to them.

Do this not only to the Good, but also to the Bad, inasmuch as they are the
Vicegerents of God; There Is no Power but of God: The Apostle speaks it when
such as Nero ruled. Do it for Conscience sake to God's Command, and not only
for fear of Wrath: Heartily and willingly, not in simulation and hypocrisy:
yet in the Lord, so far as they cross not God's express Laws and Commandments,
or the known Laws of the Land; and where they do so, yet make not any
rebellious Resistance against them.

And for this end to make us willingly subject, consider, They are ordained of
God, their Office is from him, and their Sovereignty part of his Image: And
they are ordained for good unto us, Natural good, Civil Good, Moral good,
Spiritual good, (as before was showed:) Life, Peace, Liberty, Estate, Religion,
are all fenced by Government. What a Condition would the World be in without
it? It Is better to have the worst Magistrates, than none at all. Besides, the
particular Interest of every Man should move him to this Duty. Long Life and
Prosperity is promised to the keeping this Commandment, to such as honor
Political Fathers and Mothers; but Death and Destruction will overtake such as
disobey them: A cruel Messenger shall be sent to such as seek Rebellion, says
the Wise Man: besides God's immediate Judgments that often befall such, many
Instances whereof are in our Homily of Rebellion, Part 4. and besides all
these, eternal Damnation, unless a speedy and true Repentance prevent the same.
Let all therefore learn this Duty of Obedience and Subjection to Princes, and
to all that be in Authority.

We could in all Civil Matters be subject to them, and obey them as readily as
any; but in Matters of Religion, how can we do so? Our Consciences can admit of
no Ruler or Lawmaker but Christ alone, who has given perfect Direction for the
Worship of God.

Aristotle and Plato show, That the chiefest Care of Magistrates ought to be
about the Worship of God. Darius made a Decree, That Men worship the God of
Daniel only. Cyrus made a Decree for the Building of the Temple. The King of
Niniveh ordained a Fast and solemn Prayers to God, and was accepted. 2. The
good Kings of Israel are commended for their Zeal about the Worship and Service
of God; not only David, but Jehosaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah, and others: and they
ordained several things about the Priests Ministration, and Prayers and Praises
in the Temple. 3. Christian Kings and Emperors have been commended for their
Care of Religion, as Constantine, Theodosius, Justinian, etc. And it is
prophesied, That in Gospel Times Kings should be Nursing-Fathers, and Queens
Nursing-Mothers to the Church. This is a Truth acknowledged by all Christians
generally; and the contrary Opinion of the Donatists, and such like, condemned,
who said, Quid Imperatori cum Ecclesiis? What has the Emperor to do with the
Churches?

We do not affirm, They can make a new Religion, coin new Articles of Faith, or
set up a new Worship for Substance, or ordain any thing contrary to the Word of
God; but they may order many External things about Religion, tending to the
Solemnity, Order, and Decency of it, according to the general Rules laid down
in the Scriptures; and all good Christians should obey them therein.

But many sinful things are now enjoined, or at least doubtful; and how can we
obey them therein?

Acts 5.29. to obey God before Men. We are not to obey any Idolatrous Edicts,
nor embrace any false Doctrine or Worship. But here we must take heed, we call
not good evil, and evil good. It is a rash Charge to say, any such thing is
enjoined us, that is certainly evil, when so many wise and pious Men, both in
our own and other Nations, see no such thing: And there is nothing amongst us,
but has been found in the best and purest Churches ever since the Apostles
days. Little do such, who speak so, understand or consider the State of the
Christian Church throughout the World. A good Christian will be tender to brand
Magistrates with such an Accusation, yea the whole Catholic Church, but rather
suspect his own Judgment.

But at least many things now commanded are doubtful to us, and how can we then
obey them? Whatever is not of Faith, is Sin; if we do any thing doubtingly, we
are condemned, God will not approve of us. This makes some good Men afraid.



1. He must seek out for Satisfaction about his Doubts; he must indifferently
hear, and read, and consider what is said on both sides; lay by all Prejudice
and Partiality, which blind the Mind; mistrust his own Judgment, and take
Advice of such as are more able to judge of such Matters than himself. He ought
to think, that Magistrates have more Counsel and Helps to see what is most
fitting for the general Welfare of the Church, than Private Persons, who may be
led by their particular Interests. And let him remember, that nothing is now
enjoined, that is judged sinful by the greatest part of the Christian Churches,
either in this or former Ages, when Religion flourished far more than it does
in these Times, since these Controversies have been started; therefore great
reason to suspect and try here.

2. Such as upon these Scruples suspend Obedience in some things, which they
suspect to be sinful, should (and will, if they deal uprightly in this Point)
be more forward to obey in all other things that they cannot but see to be
lawful; herein let them show their readiness to obey. Certainly the Practice of
such as make a total Separation from us, is Unchristian, and so has been judged
by all Nonconformists, Independents as well as Presbyterians, and the Brownists
deeply censured by both of them for it. Read the Books of Bradshaw, Ball, and
other Presbyterian Ministers, and the Apologetical Narration of the Five
Independent Ministers, etc.

3. Because there are some things that are so dark and doubtful to the common
sort of Christians, that they can never fully understand them, and so some
Scruples may remain in truly tender and pious Spirits. They are to know, it is
their Duty in such Cases to give up themselves to the Conduct of their Rulers
and Guides, and to follow their Directions, till God give them more Light in
those things; for they are appointed of God to be Guides and Leaders of the
Ignorant and Weak; and tho they are not to follow them blindfold in all things
(where they may be certain they mislead them) yet, in disputable Points, there
is more safety in following them than others, tho possibly in some smaller
Matters they may err with them. In Civil Matters Casuists agree, That Private
Persons ought to obey their Rulers in some things, the Lawfulness whereof they
may scruple: As in Matters of Warfare, they may pay Taxes, or go in Person to
War, tho not fully satisfied of the Lawfulness of such War: Ames. Cas. Consc.
l. 5. c. 33. And in Church matters this is practiced by those that are
Dissenters from us; the soberest of whom, when they have some Scruples about an
Opinion or Practice, yet give themselves up to be guided by, and walk peaceably
with those to whom they associate themselves, alleging for so doing that in
Cant. 1.8. to go by the footsteps of the Flock, and by the Shepherds Tents.
Certainly the sincere Christian may here give in his Plea to God, so as to be
accepted, if he can say, Lord, thou know the sincerity of my Heart; I would
not do any thing I know sinful, upon the greatest temptation in the World: I am
one under Authority, and so obliged to obey it in the Lord. That requires some
things now of me, I have Scruples about, whether they be lawful or not. Did I
know them certainly to be evil, I would not do them, whatever I suffered: But I
cannot conclude that certainly they are sinful. Thou have set them to rule and
guide me; I shall follow their Conduct, till I be sure they mislead me; and
when I perceive they do so, I am resolved to desert them, and to do whatever
thou command me: And in thus doing, show Mercy to me according to the
Integrity of my Heart. Certainly such an one shall not be condemned of the good
and gracious God. This I have spoken, and now written, to promote Subjection
and Obedience to Magistrates, as my Text commands me: Put them in mind to be
subject to Principalities and Powers, and to obey Magistrates.

THE END.

