The TIME of the END:

SHOWING, First, until the three years and an half are come (which are the last
of the 1260 days) the prophecies of the Scripture will not be understood,
concerning the Duration and Period of the FOURTH MONARCHY and Kingdom of the
Beast.

THEN Secondly, When that TIME shall come, before the expiration, the Knowledge
of the End (or that there shall be Time no longer) will be revealed, By the
Rise of a little Horn, The last Apostasy, and the Beast slaying the Witnesses;
contemporizing

The Characters Of which little Horn, the last Apostasy and Beast (as the
Scriptures show them) are here faithfully opened; And the Application left to
the Wise.

By John Can.

Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he reveals his secret unto his
servants the Prophets. Amos 3. 7.

Think not that I come to send peace on earth; I come not to send peace, but a
sword. Mat. 10. 34.

London, Printed for Livewel Chapman, at the Crown in Popes-head-Alley, 1657.

To the Reader.
THat enmity which from the beginning Jehovah Elohim (the Lord God) did put
between the Serpent and the Woman, and between their seed, as always, so now,
does work with marveilous earnestness in all those who in every age from their
proper spirit are engaged by their principals, to maintain the combat to the
time of the end.

The Righteous is an abomination to the wicked, and the wicked is an
abomination to the Righteous, from the beginning to the end of this present
evil world.

For as then (even in Abraham's time) he that was born after the flesh,
persecuted him who was born after the spirit; even so it is now in these last
days, and will be so till the old serpent the Devil and Satan, be cast into
the bottomless pit; and then according to the scope of the Scriptures of Truth,
the bondwoman and her son will be cast out, and the children of the freewoman
shall be the heirs.

And when I say, So it is now in these last days. I desire it may be well
weighed, for assuredly the Serpent and his brood will muster all their forces,
will improve all their policies, will come forth with utmost, enraged malice,
to do the most mischief they can against the true spiritnal ^eed.

The fresh Auxiliaries which are used in this service of the Dragon, that old
Serpent, are the Apostates of the last times; who are such Christians in a form
of Godliness, as the Devil is an Angel of Light, when he is so transformed,
retaining his cursed properties and designs under the pretense of such a
glorious transformation.

Therefore (says the Apostle) it is no great thing, if also his Ministers be
transformed as the Ministers of Righteousness.

Which words are, or may be, to the more cautelous Christians, a great
preservative against the poisonous infection of the present Apostasy; for
multitudes of careless ones have been beguiled by these deceitful (or cheating)
workers, into a compliance with the interest of the Kingdom of the Beast.

But Blessed be the name of our Lord Protector, the Patron of Innocence, Truth,
and Righteousness: that these deceitful workers, resisters of the Truth,
Patrons of the carnal worldly Church, shall not proceed much farther; for their
folly in its appointed season shall be made manifest to all men, as the folly
and madness of other of their brethren before them, have been made manifest in
like manner.

And (which is matter of great rejoicing to the Lords suffering servants) the
Prince of the Apostates himself has bin compelled by the overruling Power of
our Lord Jesus, to defile his own nest, to throw dirt in the face of his own
Brat, to trample upon his own Government, with notable contempt, in the
presence of his cowardly men of war. Oh! what joy of heart is it to us to live
to see, how in that very thing wherein they dealt so proudly, so imperiously,
the Lord is above them, and leaves them to such a degree of folly, as to set at
naught, in such notable language in set Speeches, the works of their own heads
and hands; and that in so short a space of time: verily it cannot be treason
any longer (no not in the sense of the Court it self) to imagine, speak or
write against the Instrument, or instruments which brought forth that monstrous
Government. Ye may all speak treason by authority, (...) ye Inhabitants of
these three Isles of the Sea; for your Lord Protector himself has lately set
you a Pattern to pour contempt upon the whole Fabric, both Foundation and
Superstruction.

It is to be ascribed to the preventing Grace of God himself, and to no other
cause, that some few of us have been preserved from that dangerous communion
and conformity, wherewith many professors, well meaning souls, (like the
followers of Absalom of old) have been unawares surprised and entangled.

That Scripture in 2 Timothy 3. the first five verses (which by the servant of
Christ, the Author of the ensuing Treatise, is opened and compared with two
other famous Prophesies concerning the little Horn, and the
Bottomless-pit-Beast) was made effectual to my spirit and conscience, to
deliver me from those snares wherein the feet of others, not a few, have been
taken: faith the Apostle in the forementioned place (after he had made a
catalogue of Characters, whereby to describe the Apostates and Hypocrites of
the last time) from such turn away. And the first and last of those Characters
lay with most weight upon my spirit: Men shall be lovers of themselves,
covetous, proud, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God, having a form of
Godliness, but denying the power thereof: from such turn away.

And what I spoke publicly in a great Assembly, concerning the little Horn, in
two general Observations, and nine special Characters, whereby to discern it
from the other Horns, amongst whom it came up, is remembered by many then
present; since which, others have likewise given their judgments. But this
Author (by what conduct of providence, time will show) has found cause to make
those two Prophesies concerning Daniels little Horn, and John's
Bottomless-pit-Beast, to synchronise, and to bring in the Apostasy of these
last times, to accompany them in their accomplishments.

It is remarkable what is told Daniel, Chap. 12. v. 10. Mary shall be purified
and made white and ^^yed, but the wicked shall do wickedly, and none of the
wicked shall understand; but the wise shall understand.

Surely the Apostates and Hypocrites of the last times are some of these wicked
ones: these will do wickedly, but they cannot understand. Understanding
dwells not, takes not up her rest in the Assemblies, in the Counsels, of the
last and worst sort of wicked ones. The secret of the Lord is with them that
fear him; the wise shall understand: who is a wise man? he that fears the Lord,
for the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom. He that is become a fool
for Christ's sake, that he may be wise. He who from a principle of says and
love, which is in Christ Jesus, can deny himself, can take up his Cross daily
and follow his prince and his Savior through the fire and through the water,
if need be, and the cause of Christ call for it.

The wicked, instead of understanding these Prophecies, shall do wickedly
against those who watch and pray for the accomplishment of them; shall secretly
wish that the Lord would delay his coming; cannot echo to the voice of the
Spirit and of the B^ide, saying, Come Lord Jesus; shall be found smiting their
fellow servants, conforming themselves to this old evil world, eating and
drinking with the gluttons, and with the drunken; the Kings and the Inhabitants
of the earth, who are made drunk with the wine of the fornication of the mother
of Harlots, etc.

They cannot brook the handwriting of God in the Scriptures concerning the
numbering, weighing and finishing of their Kingdoms and Governments, so well as
that Baby lonish Prince Belshazzar did bear the interpretation of the
handwriting upon the plaster of the wall. But in stead of doing them honor
who forewarn them of their approaching destruction, cannot behold them with a
cheerful aspect from the moment of such their faithful admonitions and
reproofs: but the will of the Lord be done.

I desire moreover it may be understood and remembered by friends and enemies,
that we have not by our Testimony engaged our liberties and lives against the
Genesis and the Apostatizing part of the Army, merely, or indeed principally, upon
the account of the expiration of the time allotted to the little Horn, and the
Beast (as it may be some have done) but upon the account of that good,
righteous, and blessed Cause which He and his Officers seemed formerly to have
loved better then their own lives, though since they have most unworthily
preferred Barabbas before Christ, and so gratified the humors and the lusts of
the children of Belial throughout the Nations, whilst the Lords remnant have
been weeping and mourning in this day of trouble, rebuke, and blasphemy, for
that abominable backsliding, whereof they are guilty before the Lord* Let that
counsel of Solomon and Paul rake place among those who have not yet fallen
before him, because there has been no opportunity of conversing with him; but
yet through the power of credulity and simplicity* are obnoxious to
entanglements: When he speaks fair, believe him not; for there are seven
abominations in his heart. Avoid those who serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but
their own bellies, and by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of
the simple.

All such upright Christians as are not (nor shall be) softened by his tears,
nor intrapped by his spies, have cause to reckon those two deliverances in the
catalogue of their choice mercies from the Lord: the best preservative is, to
keep out of the sight of the one, and out of the reach of the other: far
enough, and safe enough.

What is written in the few following sheets, may be through the Lords
blessing, of great use to caution many precious souls for the time to come, who
(having little experience and acquaintance with the spirits and designs of the
worldly Powers in their managing the mystery of iniquity and the deceivablenes
of unrighteousness) are very apt to plead their cause, and make Apologies on
their behalf, of whom they will find cause to be ashamed, when the hidden
things of darkness and of dishonesty shall be brought into the open light.

The truth is, we err, not knowing the Scriptures; We err, not being well
instructed in the mystery of godliness, and in the mystery of iniquity.
Godliness and ungodliness, righteousness and unrighteousness, are both of them
mysteries; they lie very deep, they are remote from common understanding. We
need the candle of the Lord to find out the depths of God, and the depths of
Satan: for (...) 1 Co^. 2. (...) 2. 24.
each have their deeps, as Paul and John have written; but those who are light
in the Lord, are enabled to descend into the depths of God, and into the
bottomless pit or depth from whence the Beast, who slays the Witnesses
ascends, and into which the Dragon that old Serpent the Devil and Satan shall
be cast, and deceive the Nations no more. Amen.

Although we in our preachings and writings may to the present age seem
audacious men, thus to meddle with these dark prophecies; yet the succeeding
generations shall bless the Lord for raising up some before their times, to
forewarn them to flee from the w^ath that is to come.

The Lord give forth such a measure of the holy unction to his people in
reading these things, that being enabled to distinguish betwixt probabilities
and certainties, they may receive the Truth, and inquire further into that
which is but probable, and so come to make a judgment of things according to
the mind of Jesus Christ. I shall not add any more at this time, save only,
that through the rich administrations of Free Grace, I am still, and hope to
continue to the end,

The servant of Jesus Christ, and of all the Saints for Jesus sake, according
to the measure received, CHR. FEA^E.

AN Epistolary Perambulation:
OR A Word to every one round the World.
IT was a saying of one who read a Comment upon the Patience of Job, That poor
Job was more miserably tormented with his Comment, then with his Condition (of
botches and boyls) and indeed I was the more doubtful of answering my friends
desire, in publishing my poor Epistolary thoughts upon so pregnant a piece, and
profitable as this is, lest he should suffer more by so deficient and indigent
a Comment (as mine) then by the whole matter or subject of this discourse, so
feelingly and faithfully (since his exile and sufferings) presented to the
public judgment: Wherefore I fear to add (to what with so much Evidence and
Demonstration he has produced) lest I should diminish; and do rather wish that
men would proportion Meditation to reading, that they may prove them staple
Truths, and Commodities in their own Souls and Consciences. For they can best
report them, who best relish them, and dispirit them into their own Spirits or
Breasts. When I prepend how perplexable, and out of order, we are in these
times, I the less wonder at those high Distempers and burning Paroxysms of
Opinion, Pride, lust, and Passion among carnal Church Members and worldly
professors, who (like thirsty Travelers) are ready to drink of every puddle,
let the water be wholesome or hurtful; and in their heat will have it, though
they surfeit for it: Such must be purged and better dieted, if ever they do
well. Now I do think as to the venom of the times, contracted by taking in
things untrue and obnoxious to the things and times of the end; these Streams
which run from the Rock (Christ) and glide through the valley of this Book (or
Brook) may be of singular use to expel, through the Savor, Sweetness, Sense,
Simplicity, Evidence, and Wholesomness of them to all Souls: They are slain and
so perhaps not such placentia to the Court-palates, that had rather drink
poison out of their own Golden-cup, Rev. 17. 4. then wholesome liquer, or sound
Doctrine out of an Earthen-cup (such poor desposed vessels as we are: But we
have this Treasure in earthen vessels, that the Excellency of the Power may be
of God, and not of us, 2 Cor. 4. 7, 8. Whiles we are troubled on every side,
etc.) yet indeed, I do think I may say as Eccles. 12. 10, 11. This Preacher
sought to find out acceptable Words; and that which was written (by this
Coheleth, or in Arab. Gamiyo gatheror) is upright, even words of truth; yea, as
goads and nails fixed (...). like Centres for other lines to run unto) after
the masters of Sentences, from one Pastor (Meroyeh Echad) or Shepherd of Souls,
even Christ.

The knowledge of the Times begins now to be a Language better understood in
these days of the Kingdom Gospel (locked up in former ages, because sealed up
for this, or the time of the end, the last) but these that spend their time in
getting the knowledge without the practice, will be but like the Limner of some
fair thing (for he draws it out, but enjoys it not.) Knowledge is the
Commencement, but Obedience the Act; the first prepares, but this perfects our
skill in the times. So, many shall run to and fro (Jeshottetu turn about) and
knowledge shall increase, Dan. 12. 4. that is, an active stirring knowledge,
rather more in Practice then Speculation; for the Grace and truth came
(together) by Jesus Christ, Joh. 1. 17. whereas the Law (or Letter) may come
another way, as Daniel's first knowledge of the times, by Books, Dan. 9. 2. But
his second and special understanding into these times, by a better teaching,
Dan. 9. 22, 23. The first prepared, the last perfected.

This Special Teaching (or more by inspiration and practical judgment) I am
persuaded this aged Brother (and companion in tribulation) has, not only by
his considerations, to ballast us with in the first place; and his clearness in
the time of the end, to fraught us with in the next place; but in his large
sails, good tackling, fair and constant gales, which attend him all the way, as
he glides into the discovery of this (Terra incognita) the little Horn, whose
Characters and Marks are made so plain, as he that runs now may read them,
and avoid them too, if God give grace: though mindless-men will never believe
the plague i^ so, till they see the Tokens, or else Lord have mercy upon us to
be written upon their very doors.

Nor am I without a Witness now from man to the same Truths sealed to me in my
Pathmos-Isles and Palmony-Prisons, and prepared (about two years since) for the
public view (could they have past the presses) upon these very Points,
Principles of Truths, and Characters of the time, with the previous signs of
the End at hand; but to my great affliction they lay defunct and dead, till now
the Lord has raised up another in a more burning and shining Light, much more
grave, able, and acceptable upon this subject; so that I am satisfied for
present, as if I were fully paid both in the Principal and Arrears, because as
Joh. 5. (if I may use my Lords Words, as to what I have received from him
through grace in these things) I have a Greater Witness then that of John; but
if I bear witness of my self, my witness is not true.

Therefore I have more reason then another to think the ensuing matter taught
of God, and to join with this Brother (this old Sufferer and Standard against
the Prelates and Tyrants, old and new) in Wing and Word; seeing without so much
as conference, or any occasional way of communicating our light (in these
matters) each to other; ye, when wholly ignorant (for my p^rt) of his Light
herein. I should hear in public from him (what I received only from the Lord,
and him that has the seven Spirits) in my prisons, and accordingly had
prepared them for the press) the very same things, Florid Truths, Diaphanous
and open Assertions and Marks of the Times, the little Horn, the second Beast,
and the last Apestacy, especially threaded together into one (with so sweet and
easy, clear, and compact an harmony both of time and place, after the
Daniclian and the Apocalyptick accounts conjunct, as I was carried by the
spirit into it before) through the Eye of a Needle, which a Shivell*d thread
could never get through; and wherein I knew not of one man of my Light, Faith,
and Judgment before: So that as I am (by experience) persuaded* he was
awakened of God unto this Work (as the Prophet says) morning by morning, Isai.
50. 4 So I cannot but bless the L rd for this concurrence of light, that out of
(or in) the mouths of two or three witnesses every word may be established,
Mat. 8. and that the nearer the lines are to the Center, the nearer they may
and must be one to another, particularly upon the little Horn; in my
Chronography of the little time (Dan. 7.) I did trace the Truth with the same
foot, and faith* and first travers*d the trajections and enervate the
objections of them that would have it Mahomet, Caesar, the fourth Monarchy or
Antichrist, by strenuous Arguments, ab ortu, tempore, modo, fine, Ratione* and
equilibrio, from the Rise of it so long after the Hydra-headed fourth Beast,
from the time of it, as the last limb of this fourth Beast, and that a loco
too, it being but in one dominion (though consisting and in the place) of three
(Horns) Provinces (says Calvin upon the place, and gives this reason for it,
quia Romani mi^tere solebant in singulas Provincias, quasi Reges, because the
Roman Empiredom was wont to send men like Kings (but not Kings) into their
Provinces, and so they did Constans hither into England for one Province, when
they conquered it) From his manner of coming up to, and continuing in it ^sque
ad consummationem i^ae, till the judgment sit; and says Calvin upon the
Analytical, Cha. 11. 21. he shall come in peaceably and obtain the kingdom by
flatteries (or Beshulovah in a quiet way) that is (applying it to Antiochus
Epipha.) says he obtendet fallaci^er Nomen Tutoris, he fallaciously assume (or
draw over to himself) the name of a Protector or Preserver (so says Mayo on
Nehemiah, he did at the first take the Title of Protector, and afterward of
King) and he must speak great swolling words (Sesquipedalia or decemp^d^li^
verba) against the most High, or for the most High, as our friend here
observes: only with this further note, ^at it is Letzad, which is properly in
breath, whereby he will seem large to take in all that is for God and Christ,
and not to limit; but it is Letzelang (not Tzad) which signifies in length, or
far enough. So that for all that he shall speak large for God, yet he shall
fall short in doing what he says. And it further is proved from the end of his
rise to fill up the measure, Dan. 8. 17, 19, 23. wear out the S^ints, and think
to change Laws and the Times. Now this must be in Novissimis Diebus, in the
last time of the Times, or at the three years and half, and not at the Rise of
the fourth Monarchy or Antichrist in the first Apostasy, but of the Man of sin
and mystery of iniquity that must be revealed by the last Apostasy and
Defection. 2 Thef. 2. 8. Rev. 17. 5.

Hence Justin Martyr in Dial*cum Tryph. p. 336. called the little Horn, (...)
the Man of the Apostasy. Further from Reason, and proportion of things therein,
I proved how unavoidably they are hu^ricanoed into absurdities that assert the
little-horn Government to be the fourth Monarchy, or Pope, or Turk, or the
like: and though it be abundance more arduous to determine in the Positive (who
he is) then in the Negative (who he is not) yet between both, and in the
Argumentative, I may say, many marks to know him by, are now brought to light,
(which before have been hid) as will suddenly pursue the discovery of him into
a hew and cry after him where ere he lurks. But thus I say, the Author does
help us much, and like some excellent Musioian, has a grace above others to
the car by stops! So that according to the Arabic Adage, Gamalon bimaudi^i
Gamalin jarkabo. A Camelin the place of a Camel may bend his knee, and so do^;
to yield all that I could have said upon this Subject to what he has said (and
so energetically cleared) in this book, leaving them to apply that find the
little Horn out by these descriptions.

But a little more particularly, and 1. To the men of these Times, (that serve
the Times and men); it may be they must (of course) be offended with this
Treatise, and think it too plain; but poor Wretches! are they so unsound that
they must not be touched? no! nor at such a distance neither? how then would
they have endured the primitive Spirit? and plain-dealing Saints in those days
then? Must we counterfeit with you? and come to you with Pythanology? must we
either speak in Tropes and Figures? or else in Ropes and Faggots? or
imprisonment at least? (durante bene-placito?) Do you take us by the Throat,
saying, Pay me what you owe me! (yea what we do not owe you) and can you think
to have compassion shown you or yours when the judgment sits? See but Mat. 24.
49. with Mat. 18. 33, 35. Should not thou also have had Compassion? And his
Lord was wroth, and delivered him to the Tormentors! etc. Can you be called a
Christian Government, that so far exceed the very Heathens in this matter? Why
Titus Vespasian when (one spoke scurrilously of him) said, Ego, cum nihil
faciam dignum propter quod contumelia afficiar, nihil cu^o, etc. Well! if I
have done nothing worthy of these Reports! (or to be thus spoken ill of,) I
care not! but if I have! O then! I have more reason to be angry w th my self
the Transgressor, then with him the Relater, for he has told nothing but the
truth then! He sent not out his Pursuivants presently (or Sword men to
apprehend such a Man. Nor did we ever read among the Heathen, that T^c^^^ was
ever blamed or punish d for personating and publishing Tiberius's
dissimulation. Nero's Cruelty, Sej^nus's pride, M^s^alina s Adultery, or
Domitian's Tyranny and bruitish^es^, though he was his very Creature, and
advanced by him: And good Lord! are we worse then Heathen? yea then the Heathen
at this day? (as in China where the Zaul^ and Choli have their liberty to say
any th ng against the evils of their Emperor and his Government and then the
Dragon Government of the Heathen at that day? and yet these men that make us
offenders for words, Isa. 29. 21. yea Words of truth and sobriety too!
imprisoning and persecuting year after year! contrary to the Rule of Reason, N
uure and Religion, would be accounted fain the farrest and best Government of
any before it! but alas for th m! let men say what they will, we see it and
feel it every day to be of the Beast, and more bruit^sh then those that have
gone before; bloody Mary her self abhorring to make it Treason for words as
they have done. Yet for this we bless our (overruling) God, that as to Beasts
of the greatest power is given the least immanity, so to these of the greatest
ferocity the least force, for the cursed Cow has but short horns.

2. To the Academies, Heathen schools, and Secular Clergy of England,
especially, the Heads of Houses and Colleges, Doctors and Learned men, have we
much to say if we might be heard, or admitted to speak our minds freely, 1. For
that they have been such implacable enemies to the purest Truths, and present
testimony in every age, how fierce against the Martyrs in Queen Mary's days?
yea against the Brownists and Puritans in Queen Elizabeth's, and King James's
days? accusing them to the Powers, and calling them (as they do us) absurd,
ridiculous, frezzy fools, illiterate fellows, mad, seditious, and such as would
bring all to ruin in Church and State? sitter to be chastized by the
Magistrate then refuted? (Vid. Defense of the Brownists in King James's da^es,
p. 114, 115, etc.) this has ever been their language against the Saints; as
they called Paul a Babl^r, contradicting and blaspheming the Truth. Act. 17.
and 19. Now it is our mercy to be of them that the Stoics, Peripateticks,
Academicks, and Pythagoreans rage at and revile.

2. Because we are persuaded in our very souls (and know it) that we have the
Truth, the Gospel, the cause of Christ, and the Testimony of Jesus on our side,
(who suffer so by persecutions, imprisonments, and oppressions over our
consciences and faith in these matters)! Now me thinks it is easy for so many
Learned, wise and able Doctors, Triers and Chaplains to handle us if we be in
Error, or out of the Way, and to make it appear by the Word of God, and
convince us of it (in charity!) therefore if they have received the Truth in
the Love thereof, we require it of them, and adjure them to it in the name of
him who shall shortly judge the quick and dead! for the weaker we are, the
easier will their work be to answer us.

3. For that some of your chiefest Heads were once of the same mind with us in
these matters, as appears by their Sermons and former practices, until they
came to leave the Churches and their Pastor-ships for Colledge-places, and
Corner-caps, and so became Vice-Chancellors, Doctors, Proctors, Presidents,
Tryers and such as are in deep Traffic with the Whores merchandise. Did we
ever think the Dragons tail could drag down such Stars as these to the Earth?
to such earthly, yea, Antichristian titles? Orders? Customs, Laws? and Degrees
as they have taken? (the Lord have mercy upon us! with what fear and trembling
do I think of these things?) to forsake the the Churches for Heathens Schools?
the Bride for the Whore? and the Whore harnessed too, in her old, filthy,
adulterous robes too? the very same Popish Statutes up, and unrepealed at thi^
day that were in Q* Mary's days? and in the thick of Popery? (however they
refine them a little outwardly!) yet the same idola ocu^orum or feminine Idols,
and Trumperies, Hoods, Caps, Robes, Rings, Holy Days, Musicks, Commencements,
and Divinity-Acts are yet u^; Conradus Pelican upon his deathbed desired he
might not be buried a Doctor, for he said, he must rise a Disciple and poor
Creature! O Peter! Peter! Peter! (says Mr. Tyndal) thou wast too long a
Fisherman then if this be lawful* for thou were never brought up at the
Arches! nor were thou ever master of the Rolls, Chancellor of England, nor
Vice Chancellor of Oxford, etc.

4. For that ye are (though untruly) called the Schools of the Prophets
(whereas in truth ye are the Schools of the profane, Atheists, and Heathens,
infusing Heathenish principles (by heathenish Authors) into proud, bold,
fantastical, graceless youths) and for this reason have the Saints all along
engaged against them, Wi^kliffe, Huss, Luther, Zuinglius, Tyndal and a 100
more; yea the Brownists at large to King James petitioned that they might no
longer continue Heathen but Christian Schools, and instead of Aristotle and
Plato they might study the Scriptures, Prophets and Apostles, for those that so
do will receive the Truth gladly which we communicate! as 1 These. 1. 6. in much
affliction.

5. Besides, you are accounted the Fountain and Nursery of the Ministry that is
(not of the Church but) Secular Clergy; not of Christ's but Aristotle's and the
States Ministry, that buy what they sell, and then sell what they so have
bought (as Simon Magus) be they ever such stories, trash, Antichristian
Errors, or dreams of Predicaments, Universals, second Intentions, Quiddities,
Hecsi^ies and Correlatives, etc. and what not, to amuse the Countryignoramus's?
Now for as much as all these (with a 1000. more) appertain to the Beast and
false Prophet, it is time to warn them (that are of them) to get from amongst
them as fast as they can, for the time is near when this Beast and his whole
Body (whereof you are a Part) must be given to the Burning Flame, Dan. 7. 11.

3. To the Cities and Corporations that do yet stand by the Beast's Charter, it
is the Time of the End too, and particularly this, where every man is (as we
say Faber suae fortunae) seeking himself, and hammering out his own honor,
(but not at God's Anvil!) buying, selling, building, planting, etc. as in the
days of Noah, but does not regard the Day of the Lord! O London! London! thou
City! and Seat of the second Beast! next to Rome may thou look for the Wrath
upon thee! for thy bowing down unto the Beast! persecuting the Saints! and
height of all manner of Sins sound in thee at this day! Do thou think that
Latimers, Ridleys, Hoopers and the Martyrs blood wilt not be called for? yea
were not thou as Gideons Fleece, dry when the floor round thee for many years
was wet with the blood of the late Wars? and shall not thou be wet when the
floor is dry? besides (retentio exc^emen^orum est parens^ morborum!) thou
retainest what will ruin thee, and stand upon those Popish Charters and
Injurctions that must be rent up by the very Roots, nor will the dead Saints
(the Patrons of your Companies) be able to protect you from that Day when the
(living Saints or) judgment begins to sit.

4. To such as are in Doubts, and Suspense, or Darkness! (either for want of
light, or through too much light upon weak Orga^s) which occasions too much
wavering, unstedfastness, mistakes, and dissimulations at this day! were Paul
alive that reproved his brother Peter so openly, Gal. 2. what a terrible
thundering Oracle would he be at this Day then! which will burn up
doubledealing and deceit like an Oven! and nothing but true faith in the
simplicity of the Gospel will abide by it. Surely Paul's care would be to put
every man upon the proof of's own work and spirit, that he might have a
rejoicing in himself, and not in another, Gal. 6. 4. knowing the subtlety of
the Serpent in this last Apostasy, is to set up Truth against Truth! grace
against grace! ordinances against ordinances! Saints against Saints! Spirit
against Spirit! (and not ^o profane against Professors!) to fight! rend!
shake! tear! distract and divide them with! that are to break his head, and to
catch his kingdom! Wherefore see to your standing! that it be not upon Bogs or
quagmires! or with staggering!

5. To such as are impatient, ho^ and rash; tarry till the Time of the End! it
will be soon enough! and get your spirits well prepared, sea^oned and sweetened
with G^^ce for it will be bitter enough! a ^o^e sliding will break thy ^o^e,
though a backsliding would break thy neck! and if thou ^^^^^st to the
Kingdom-work before the Time and Season, thou will be drawn out! or if thou
g^est out with a wild field spirit, or common anointing! and not with the
^arden flowery spirit, or double anointing of the Kingdom (which is the blessing
of the Firstborn!) thou art more capable of being out down with the grass, then
o^ cutting* down the grass; though all flesh be grass, Ilay 40. and as a
field-flower rising up in its own, single, wild, natural spirit! It is another
stra^agem of Satan to deposite (too) the like for the thing (and so to cheat
thee with a counterfeit!) compounding an anointing like to Gods anointing; a
persume like to his persume! which is death by the Law, Exodus 30. 33. or else
to put that upon the Stranger which belongs to none but the Lord, v. 38. or
else to take the Lord's persume to smell upon, or to please their own senses
and desires with, and so to raise up their own spirit (which then is hard to
get down again, or not to call the Spirit of the Lord)! and with that Christian
name to run out into disoorders and without rule, or else to conclude us in
unbelief as to implicit commands under presence of a per^m^o^y obedience to
explicit, and like Nadab and Abil^^ fall in the fire of our own kindling, or
else instead of the Angels Reed, would measure and model us by another Rule,
and not with the Kings Cubit which was three singers longer then the common,
nor weighed with the Sanctuary shekels (whereon at first was stamped the print
of the Lamb) which were twice as much as the common! But as Noab's A^k was
built with the largest Cubit; So is this Work to be, that will now go forward.

Lastly, if it be the end, then woe, woe, woe to the inhabitants of the Earth!
for the time of the third woe is within reach! woe! to the Lawyers! Soldiers!
Citizens! Merchants! Messengers! Goalers! and all that are involved with the
Beast at this day! from Court to Country! from their Protector to the Beggar!
Rev. 14 10. woe! unto you rich who have laid up treasures for the last days!
for you have your consolation, Jam. 5. 1. yea, woe! unto you Soldier! that
fightest under the Beasts Banner! because the want of a good conscience will
eat out thy valou^! Jer. 50. ^3. woe unto you that seek great things for your
selves! Jer. 45. and make not God the Patron of your preferment; you might as
in the Jewish fields, have plucked and eat what you would, but not have
pocketted up (as ye have done) the Kings, Deans and Chap^e^s lands, or the
accursed thing, etc. yea, woe to you* that have deceived others! for that ye
shall find by your long dissembling, ye have most deceived your selves at last!
Isai. 33. 1. and not to you that have been both the Archer and Ma^k in all your
actions (shooting at your own Praise and Profit) because an Arrow shall come
from the Kings hands, Psalm. 45. which must shoot you through the very heart*
Isai. 1. 31. Woe! woe! to you Liars, Dissemblers, and False witnesses, who
believe your own lies to be true, whiles ye turn the truth into a lie, for the
time will come when few will believe you though you speak true, seeing, you
have set your wits to work (on tenter-hooks) for artificial Evasions from
natural Obligations (besides Army-declarations) and God will frustrate the
tokens of the liars! Isai. 44. 45. yea, woe! to those Foxes who with fire
brands at their ^ayles have set us into a flame! for they shall burn up
themselves in their own mischief! and he that teaches lies is the tail, says
the Prophet! Isai. 9. 15. woe to them that are serving themselves o^ the times
for their own ends! because yet a little while and they will see the Times to
be served upon them for Gods ends! And woe! woe to the Statists! who are now
the Center! wherein all the lines of Intelligence meet from foreign parts,
because the time will come quickly wherein all the lines of most notable
intelligence shall run from you and be reported of you into foreign parts! woe
to you Tyrants and Nimrods of the earth, that do now rule over the Saints and
make them to howl, Isai. 52. 5. because the time of the end does come wherein
you shall howl, and the Saints shall rejoice and rule over you! Isai. 14. 2.
and there was written therein lamentation, mourning and woe, Ezek^ to even so
Amen, Dan. 7. 18. but the Saints of the most High shall take (Vikabb^lun
undertak^) the Kingdom.

JOHN ROGERS.

The time of the End.
Wherein is showed, that until the three years and half begin, (which are the
last of the 1260 days) Gods people will not understand the period of the Fourth
Monarchy, and the Beasts dominion. But when that Time shall come, they shall
have (before its expiration) the certain knowledge of it, by the appearing of a
Little Horn, the later Apostacy, and a Beast. The particular Characters of
which little Horn, Apostacy and Beast (as the holy Ghost in Scripture sets
them down) are here opened, and so left for the Wise to understand, by
application.

THe great Business of Christ's Little Flock at this time, is about 1 Chro. 12,
32.
the understanding of the Times, to know what Israel ought to do; when Daniel
and John's Numbers shall end, the Spoiler cease to spoil, and the STONE begins
to smite the Image. Many of the Lords Worthies have spent their study, and
much time in the search thereof. And no marvel, considering how necessary it is
that the SET-TIME be understood, before any Action can safely be undertaken by
the Saints of the most High against Babylon. Among others, I (who am one of the
least of the flock) according Jer. 50. 58.
to the measure of grace given me, have, with a broken and humble spirit,
sought the Lord, and searched diligently the Prophecies, to find out the end
of these Wonders. Now after much seeking, and long waiting upon the great
Revealer of Secrets, what I find upon my heart (as given in I hope from God)
to be Truth, I shall willingly make it known unto my brethren and companions in
tribulation. And because the way which I shall take, has not been (I think)
observed before, I shall therefore endeavor to express my mind, and
meditations of my heart, the more plainly: and will first lay down certain
General Considerations; to the end, what I shall say afterward (as more home
and proper to the TIME) may the better be understood.

CONSID. I.
To understand the Times, it is of great use, that the Prophetical Numbers be
distinguished, and rightly applied: that is, to know what Numbers are proper to
the Gentile-Christians, and what to the Jews. These, Viz. Until a time, times,
and the dividing of time, Dan. 7. 25. So Chap. 12. 7. It shall be for a time,
times, and half. Again, the forty and two months, Rev. 11. 2. and the one
thousand two hundred and sixty days, v. 3. and the Witnesses lying dead three
days and an half, v. 9. So again, the 1260 days, Rev. 12. 6. and the time, and
times, and half a time, V. 14. these Numbers (I conceive) concern the Gentiles,
as proper to their work and time. But the two thousand and three hundred days,
Dan. 8. 14. and the one thousand two hundred and ninety days, Dan. 12. 11. and
one thousand three hundred thirty and five days, verse. 12. are to be understood
of the Jews only.

Again, as these Numbers are to be distinguished, so they must be kept apart.
For the Gentiles account and the Jews, do not (as I take it) contemporize. The
Gentile-Saints will be upon their work (how long I shall not say, but) before
there will be any life or visible stirring amongst the dry bones. This to me is
evident, by the order of the Vials, if well considered: five of the seven, are
to be poured out by the Christian Gentiles, before the Jews awake under the
sixth Vial. And as for these Vials, or seven last plagues, I humbly conceive
(though many good men are otherwise minded) that none of them are yet poured
our. Besides, I take it, Moses words, Deuteronomy. 32. 21. have this meaning, that the
Jews shall be provoked to rise, and seek their own enlargement and liberty,
partly by the example of the Gentile-Saints, when they shall see the Lords work
prosper in their hands, against the Western Beast: and partly, by the
assistance and help which they shall have from the Gentiles many ways, Isat.
60. 9.

CONSID. II.
It will not be known, when the forty and two months and one thousand two
hundred and sixty days shall end, (the Time of the Beasts reign, and the woman's
abiding in the wilderness) until the three years and half are come. For
howsoever these three years and half are to be reckoned in the number of the
one thousand two hundred and sixty years; yet must this last time begin (yea, I
think, well-nigh expire) before the Wise will understand that the set and
appointed Time is come. This to me seems very clear, by the Angel's words to
Daniel: But thou, O Daniel, shut up the words, and seal the book, even unto the
Time of the end, Chap. 12. 4. Again: Go thy way, Daniel; for the words are
closed up, and sealed, till the time of the end, Chap. 12. 9.

Three things are here observable: 1. The opening and understanding of the
Vision, is referred to a certain and prefixed time; and not to be revealed till
then. 2. In both places, it is called, The time of the End: which methinks must
needs be, the three years and half: for I know no other time but this, that
periods the number of the one thousand two hundred and sixty years. 3. He faith
not times, but time; intimating, howsoever the whole account should have
several times, or periods, (in respect of the diverse actions of the Beast Civil
and Ecclesiastical; and the various changes and condition of the Witnesses and
Woman, all the time of his Tyranny) yet the unsealing of the Book should not
be, till the last time of all the several periods. So Habak. 2. 3. The vision
is yet for an appointed time: at the end, it shall speak, and not lie. What can
we understand by the end, and the appointed time, but as Daniel has it, the
time of the end; that is, the three years and half: then is the vision to
speak, and not before. So Rev. 1. 3. For the time is at hand. And Chap. 22. 10.
Seal not up the sayings of the prophecy of this book: for the time is at hand.
For my part, I cannot conceive what time may be taken, as distinct from other
times, and proper to the places, if not the three years and half. But that in
Daniel seems yet to be more full: It shall be for a time, times, and an half,
Chap. 12. 7. What shall be for a time, times, and an half? till the end of
these wonders; that is, before they shall be opened. As if he should say, So
far forth as the Christian Gentiles are concerued in these wonders, the
manifestation of them is reserved, till the three years and half; and then the
wise shall understand.

Here observe, 1. It should be no cause of stumbling unto any person, that many
good men have missed of the time in their accounts, seeing in their time, the
words were closed up and sealed. 2. The cause of their mistake, was not (as
some think) of an impossibility, as if the time of the end were not to be
known: but because the appointed time, or end, was not then come, in which the
vision was to speak. 3. Such as are now enquiring into the numbers of Daniel
and John, to know when the Beasts dominion shall end; ought to mind whether
they are come to the time of the end, in which (and not before) that great
Mystery is to be known.

CONSID. III.
The way which some good men have taken, to find out the period of the one
thousand two hundred and sixty years, viz. by beginning at the head of the
account, is not (in my opinion) the best nor surest. For here we must credit
(and depend on) humane Histories, and Records of Nations; things so uncertain
and disagreeing among themselves, as nothing but conjectures and ghesses can be
concluded and gathered from them. And hence it is, that many have been misled
concerning the times: whereby others have taken advantage to condemn all, which
search the times, and the Prophetical Numbers of the Scripture, as meddling with
things too high and secret.

If any should ask, Why are these Numbers mentioned as forty and two months,
and one thousand two hundred and sixty days? I answer* The Lord would have it
known, how long the Beast should reign, and the woman continue in the
wilderness; that his people might wait with the more faith and patience till
their enlargement came. Not that when the time of the end should come, he would
carry them back to enquire what was done some thousands of years before, or
search uncertain Stories for the rise of the Beast: I take it, he has a nearer
and better way to lead them in; more free from doubts and mistakes then the
other, and easier to be found out and known by babes and sucklings: The
wayfaring men, though fools, shall not err therein, Isa. 35. 8.

CONSID. IV.
So for the Signs of the times, which are much spoken of, and matter of
singular joy amongst Saints everywhere. These show us without doubt, that the
kingdom of God is nigh, and that the great work of the Lord is approaching upon
us: but as to the set time they come not home. And therefore we must have more
light then these, to order our motions by. For example: be it granted, that the
Lord has a people enquiring after the Numbers in Daniel and John; much
enlightened in the work of their generation; take pleasure in Zion's stones, and
favor her dust; are a willing people, and a praying people; and such as have
their hearts raised up against Babylon to take vengeance on her. I say, grant
all this (as blessed be Jehovah it is all true, and more too) yet it will not
follow, that the one thousand two hundred and sixty years (the time of
Antichrists tyranny, and the Woman's persecution) must therefore end this year
or the next. I confess, these are blessed Signs, and tidings of great joy; and
do evidently declare (like the tender branches and leaves of the fig tree that
Summer is nigh) that the Lord will arise and have mercy upon Zion; and that the
breaking work of the Stone is not far off: But yet they do not tell us how nigh
the time is: this must be known some other way. When the Dove brought to Noah
in her mouth an Olive-leaf, he knew that the waters were abated from off the
earth: yet he went not forth of the Ark till the Lord did call him, Gen 8. 11,
15. Indeed these signs (like the olive-leaf) do plainly demonstrate, that the
Antichristian deluge (which has so long covered the face of the earth) is
toward an end: nevertheless, we must abide where we are, till we hear that
great voice out of the temple, saying to the seven angels, Go your ways, and
pour out the vials of the wrath of God upon the earth, Rev. 16. 1.

CONSID. V.
So again, howsoever Providence is to be observed, and followed, when people
are called forth to their work; yet we must take heed that we make no^
Providence alone our call. Moses, Gedeon, David, and others, improved
providence; but it was after they were confirmed, that the time was come
wherein they were to serve their generation so and so: and in such cases, we
are still to follow Providence. When we know the forty and two months are
expired, and so the time come, in which the Lord God of heaven and earth will
set up his kingdom, take away the dominion of the little Horn, and execute
vengeance upon Babylon. Here we must, in the prosecution of the judgment
written, eye and follow the leadings of God in his providential dispensations.
It has been the practice of worldly powers, to justify their unrighteous Wars
and Murders, by crying up Providence: As if their Victories and Conquests must
needs be lawful, because of the Oportunities and advantages which they had;
though yet no otherwise then what Thieves and Highway-robbers may pretend to.
Saul fell twice into David's hands: might not this be thought a Providence, as
leading him to take the kingdom? but there was something more in David's eye,
(as he waited for the kingdom) namely, the Appointed time.

CONSID. VI.
Therefore near or about the period of the one thousand two hundred and sixty
years; that is to say, in the last three years and an half of that Number,
certain most remarkable and wonderful things will come to pass: for there shall
appear then a Little Horn, of which Daniel speaks, Chap. 7. the later
Apostacy, foretold by the Apostle, 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2, etc. and a Beast ascending
out of the bottomless pit, who shall slay the Witnesses, Rev. 11. 7. These
things shall be so obvious and plain, not only in respect of the certain time
when they did rise; but so exactly agreeing in all things with the Scriptures,
as hereby the wise shall understand, that now The Time of the End is come.
Concerning this notable Time, I find many Writers both ancient and modern to
mention it; although not agreeing in their Application. Some think these three
years and an half shall be immediately before the ultimate or last Judgment:
Others, a little before Christ*s personal coming to reign on earth. Others
think (of which opinion I am) that these three years and an half (in which will
be the Little Horn, the later Apostacy and Beast) shall be a long time before
the Judgment of the great day; yea, and many years before Christ's personal
appearing. But howsoever in application they differ; yet in these two great
points, they agree: 1. That these three years and an half do period the forty
and two months, and one thousand two hundred and sixty days; and that there
shall be in this Time a Little Horn, a great Apostacy, and a Beast ascending
out of the bottomless pit. 2. Immediately after these three years and half,
there will be a visible and universal change of things through the whole world:
For the little Horn shall be destroyed, Babylon fall, all earthly powers broken
to pieces, and the Saints of the most High raised up, to a most glorious and
blessed estate. Neither is it to be thought strange, that this has been the
opinion of some men in all ages, since the Primitive time, even hitherto: for
if the Prophecies be read with heed and observation, so much (in my
understanding) lies open and very clear in them. But of this more hereafter.

CONSID. VII.
Now for the characters of the little Horn, the later Apostacy and Beast; this
must be heeded: Look as the Scriptures set them down, so they must have all
their full and due accomplishment: yea more; these Characters (at least most of
them) cannot be applied to any persons or things, (without force to the Text)
but only to THAT little Horn, THAT Apostacy, and THAT Beast, which are to be
in the three years and an half. Hence I may say, (though with much tenderness)
some have very much wrested the Prophecies, in applying the Little Horn to this
man and that man; the Apostacy to be meant of such persons, and the Beast to
be understood so and so: the which applications in many particulars have no
ways paralleled. But there is no need of doing so: for when the three years and
half come, there shall appear such a Little Horn, Apostacy, and Beast, as all
the Scripture-characters shall fall in, altogether and every way with them.

CONSID. VIII.
Though we might find out a littile Horn, characterized according to Daniel;
but no Apostacy: or suppose an Apostacy, and a little Horn; but no Beast
slaying the Witnesses: This could not be the three years and an half: for (I
conceive) all three must be at one time, begin and end together. Not minding
this, some have been mistaken, in taking the little Horn single and apart from
the Apostacy and Beast; and would have him to be, many hundred years before
the two later were in the world. Whereas to me, the one shall not be before nor
after the other, but (as I said before) contemporize. Of this likewise I shall
speak more, when I come to the particulars.

CONSID. IX.
But the great Question is: Seeing the period of the one thousand two hundred
and sixty days shall be (as I think) in this way and manner made known, (viz.
by a little Horn, an Apostacy, and Beast, appearing in the last three years
and half) By whom and how will the Lord do it? This (methinks) is showed in
Daniel, chap. 12. 5, 6, 7, etc. Two are said to stand by the river, the one on
this side of the bank, and the other on that side of the river. These two, I
take to be Types: the one of the Gentile-Churches, the other of the Jews; to
whom Jesus Christ (the Man clothed in linen, which was upon the waters of the
river) being asked of both (for the word one is not in the text) How long shall
it be to the end of these wonders? the Gentile-type is answered first, verse. 7.
It shall be for a time, times, and an half; and so referred to the three years
and an half: as if he should say, What concerns you Gentiles as to the
understanding of the Visions and Prophecies of this book, the words are sealed
up for a time, times, and an half; and when that time shall come, namely, the
last three years and an half of the one thousand two hundred and sixty years, I
will put of my Spirit into some of my servants, (represented here by one of the
two standing on the bank of the river) whereby they shall open this great
mystery to the Churches of the Saints among the Gentiles. Fulfilling herein
what is said in the Prophet, Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he
reveals his secret unto his servants the prophets, Amos 3. 7. As for the
other, (carrying the type of the Jews) he has his answer, verse. 11, 12.

Again, (I conceive) the Gentiletype in Daniel, is the same with Rev. 18. 1.
that angel which comes down from heaven having great power, and the earth was
enlightened with his glory. If the order of things be duly observed, enlightening
goes before the work: I say, before smi^ing the Image, and rendering vengeance
upon Babylon. It is true, the followers of the Lamb are bid to reward her as
she has rewarded you, and double unto her double, etc. verse. 6. yet so, as to
be enlightened first; the which enlightening must needs be understood (part at
least) of the set and appointed time, when to begin to reward her.

That none of the seven last plagues are yet poured out, I have given some
Reasons publicly. See a Book entitled Truth with Time.
Now whereas unto John is showed in the wilderness the judgment of the great
whore, by one of the ange's which had the seven vials, Rev. 17. 1, 3. this may
be gathered: That near or about the time of the woman's coming out of the
wilderness, (John carrying the type of the Church in that present state) the
destruction of Babylon (as to the set time) shall be made known unto some of
the Lords faithful servants; by whom others shall have it revealed to them, and
whom he will employ, to pour out vials of wrath upon the kingdom of the Beast.

CONSID. X.
The time being known, when the three years and half shall end; that which
follows next (and immediately upon the expiration of the foresaid time) will be
to do, what the Lord commands his sanctisied ones. Li^t ye a banner upon the
high mountains, exalt the voice unto them, shake the hand, that ye may go into
the gates of the nobles, Isa. 13. 2. So Jer. 50. 2. Declare ye among the
nations, and publish, and set up a standard; publish and conceal not, that
Babylon is taken. The publishing of this war against Babylon, will be (I
conceive) by the angels, Rev. 14. 6, 8, 9. and that voice from heaven, Rev. 18.
4. These shall gather the Saints together, Psalm. 50. 5. the hundred forty and
four thousand, Rev. 14. 1. the called, chosen, and faithful, Rev. 17. 4. at
their rendevouz to the Lamb on mount Sion, where the Lord of hosts will muster
the host of Isa. 52 12.
the battle, Isai. 13. 4. So that the Lords people shall not go forth in haste,
nor conceal their work, or do things covertly; but come out in the light, and
boldly, as Israel did out of Egypt. They shall have Gods presence so visibly
and powerfully with them, that the enemies, through a dreadful fear, shall not
know what to do for their own safety, nor how to oppose the work of God in the
hands of his mighty ones. As it is said of Barak, Gideon, Samson, etc. that the
Spirit of the Lord came upon them, and in that Spirit they went forth,
conquering and to conquer: so now, the time being, come, and known, the like
Spirit will be in the Lambs followers, a faith to which all things are
possible, And in this Spirit and faith (I believe) those who are now waiting
for to see that day of the Son of man, shall rise up in the places where they
are, and join together against Babylon and all her helpers.

Hence the present worldly powers may take notice, how plainly that Scripture
is fulfilled upon them: THEY IMAGINE A VAIN THING, Psalm. 2. 1. Ah poor
wretches! ye do so indeed, in taking counsel against the fifth kingdom. For, 1.
These men which are for that Kingdom, will not stir till the set time be come
and known. Then 2. They will publicly proclaim war against Babylon, and say,
The day of the Lords vengeance, and the year of recompenses for the
controversy of Zion, is come. 3. As it is the Lords cause and work, so they
are sure, whosoever resists shall be broken to pieces, and become as the
chaff of the Summer-threshing-floor. Did not the first Monarchy fall before the
second, so that before the third, so again the third before the fourth, when
their times ended: and must not this fourth fall likewise before the fifth, in
the appointed time? The zeal of the Lord of hosts will perform this. But it
seems they have no Gamaliel now in their Councels: I say unto you, Refrain from
these men, and let them alone: for if this counsel* or this work, be of men, it
will come to naught: but if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it, lest happily ye
be found even to fight against God. Acts. 5. 38, 39.

CONSID. XI.
Though I shall here but speak over, what has been hinted before; yet because
the Consideration is weighty, and much to our purpose, I will add a little.
Howsoever it be true, (as I am persuaded) that the Visions and Prophecies of
the Scriptures concerning the period of the Beasts dominion, will not certainly
be known till the three years and half begin, (and probably the greater part
expired.) As Daniel knew not the deliverance of Gods people to be so nigh, till
the very year (or less) in which they were delivered: see Dan. 9. 1, 2. with
Ezra 6. 1. nevertheless when this time comes, before it expires, the knowledge
of it shall be given in to some, as they are seeking the Lord by fasting and
prayer, and searching the Prophecies, 2 Chronicles. 20 13, 14. This appears,

First, by Dan. 12. 10. The wise shall understand. If the series and scope of
the place be noted, two great Truths are there set down. 1. The holy Ghost
speaks not of understanding in a large sense, but restrains it to a special and
proper understanding; that is, they shall know the end of these wonders, verse.
6. As Noah knew the time when the sloud would come, (before it came) of which
the world was ignorant: so the end of the one thousand two hundred and sixty
days (before it is finished) shall be revealed to the wise: but none of the
wicked shall understand. 2. The wise shall not understand this, till the time
of the end: so much likewise is held forth in the place. The three years and
half must begin: and to know that such a time is come, there will be a little
Horn, an Apostacy, and Beast: whereby the wise shall have such understanding.

2. That the time will be known, before the forty and two months expire. I
think so much is manifest, by comparing Dan. 12. 9. with Rev. 10. 6. The first
tells us, that the words are to be opened at the time of the end: now this must
be, before the forty and two months are expired: for the other tells us, After
that, there shall be time no longer. Besides, if the two texts be observed,
they belong to one matter and time. The one says, the opening of the Mystery
of God is left to the three years and half: the other, that it shall be opened
before that time goes out.

3. I find, that one of the four living creatures gives unto the seven angels
seven golden vials full of the wrath of God, Rev. 15. 7. but these angels are
not bid by him to pour them out; that is done afterward, by a voice out of the
temple, Rev. 16. 1. The giving of the vials (I conceive) is the opening of the
mystery of them, as to the time when, and the work how to be done; and so to
prepare the angels for the execution of the wrath: and all this before the end.
But their call to it, seems to be after the forty and two months are expired:
He has showed his people the power of his works, that he may give them the
heritage of the heathen. Psalm. 111. 6.

CONSID. XII.
Seeing, according to the determinate purpose and counsel of God, to the little
Horn, the later Apostacy, and Beast, three years and an half are allowed; this
I would gather, as my own apprehension, That the Lord of hosts will not make
his worm Jacob a new sharp threshinginstrument having teeth; nor Israel his
battle-ax and weapons of war, with which he will thresh the mountains, and
break in pieces Nations, destroy Kingdoms, etc. until the foresaid time, that
is, the three years and half, are accomplished. The saws came not forth from
Babylon, by the Proclamation of Cyrus, till the seventy years were fulfilled.
Neither were their fathers before them, ^ brought ou^ of Egypt, till the whole
time was run out, which the Lord had foreappointed for their sojourning there:
And it came to pass* (says the text) at the end of the four hundred and thirty
years, EVEN THE SAME DAY, it came to pass, that all the hosts of the Lord went
out from the land of Egypt, Exodus 12. 41. So now, in the spirit of meekness be
it spoken, it is not the Lord's mind (I verily think) that the Stone should be
smiting the Image, or the little Horn, to take away his dominion, and to
consume and destroy it, until the times, time, and dividing of time, be out;
which by divine counsel they are to have.

Now whereas some may object that saying of Christ, For the elects sake these
days shall be shortened, Matthew. 24. 22. Mar. 13. 19, 20. as if this might be
gathered from it, That the set*time mentioned in Scripture, viz. the forty and
two months, and the three years and half, may be shortened, and so Gods people
go forth before it be expired: I answer: There is (I conceive) a great mistake
in the understanding of that place. For Christ speaks not of any shortning of
the set and fixed time allowed the little Horn, or Babylon, or the Witnesses
prophesying in sackcloth, or their lying slain: but the meaning is, There would
be such calamities and miseries in the world, that unless the Lord should
shorten the time, no flesh could be saved. But of what time speaks he? not of
the fixed time; that is, he means not the one thousand two hundred and sixty
days, or forty and two months, or the three days and half: but speaks of Time
largely; as if he should say, If the Lord should permit these calamities to
continue many thousand generations, there would be a consumption and end of all
mankind: but for the love he bears to his chosen, he has shortened the time:
that is, in his holy counsel determined: the woman in the wilderness, and the
Witnesses prophesying in sackcloth, shall not exceed such a time. So the little
Horn, the Beast and Babylon, etc. So that by shortning the time, he means not
any set time of years mentioned in Scripture; but shortened, that is, it shall
not exceed the years so and so appointed.

CONSID. XIII.
But that I may not be mistaken in some things I said before; as first,
Beginning at the head of the account: thus I would be understood. Howsoever (I
think) it is very uncertain, to know exactly the period of the Beasts dominion,
beginning at the head of the account; neither does the Spirit of God intend to
lead his people in such a way, viz. through the confusion and contradiction of
humane Histories, to find out CERTAINLY the time of the end; but in the way
here mentioned. Notwithstanding, if it come to pass, that some good men, by
their labors and study (beginning at the head) do period their account with
our three years and half, (or miss not much) the blessed truth by this is the
more confirmed, and the Lords good hand and wonderful providence greatly seen
in it. Again, heretofore, both others, and my self too, have sought to find
out the end of the Numbers, by searching the rise of the Beast; because then we
understood no other way: and in that respect (following the light we had) the
Lord no doubt was well pleased with our upright endeavors, yea and gave a
blessing to it; witness the fruit and advantage which many precious souls in
this Nation have had thereby. So that I am so far from seeking to have the
blessed memory of our former Worthies any way darkened, as I profess in the fear
of God, I judge my self to come short of many of them: and if any thing
delivered by me, be clearer in respect of the time, it is because THE TIME OF
THE END, is now nearer then when they wrote.

So for the Signs of the Times, I am for them (rightly improved) as much as
any man: When these things begin to come to pass, then look up (says Christ)
and list up your heads, for your redemption draws nigh. Luke 21. 28. Indeed
these Signs by Saints in all places ought much to be minded. Christ blamed the
Jews, for their neglect of this thing, Matthew. 16. 3. And I must confess, from
the Signs of the times, I have had much light and encouragement in this
present Undertaking. Only my opinion is: To know when the set-time is come,
for the Stone to begin to smite, and the last plagues to be poured out, we have
no Scripture Light to be guided by, but the three years and a^ half. And when
this time is come, it will be as easy to know the beginning and ending of it,
as to discern the Little Horn, the later Apostacy, and Beast.

CONSID. XIV.
To conclude with an humble and brotherly word ^o all, in all places, who are
for the Kingdom-work, and desire to follow the Truth in love and light: I have
no design (O ye precious ones) to weaken your hearts or hands, in the work of
your Generation, and your appearing for your KING and mine; but rather to
strengthen and encourage you, in whatsoever is from him and for him. These
CONSIDER ATIONS* I shall leave with you, as a Manuduction to the other Part.
All which gathered together, speak thus:

1. It seems to me, (as grounded on Scripture) until the three years and half
begin, and are wellnigh expired, (which are the last of the one thousand two
hundred and sixty years) Gods people will not understand the period of the Time.

Neither (...) may we say, that such a time is come, unless we see the Little
Horn in Daniel, the Apostacy foretold of Paul, and the Beast slaying the
Witnesses; all these must appear together, with all the Characters specified in
the places, and contemporize.

3. When such a time is come, Saints shall certainly know it, before it does
expire.

4. By all the search and enquiry I have made, I do not see any way but this,
to find out the time of the End; if we take the Word of God for our light and
guide.

5. Until these three years and half are finished, the rod of the Lords
strength will not go out of Zion. So that to begin war against Babylon, or any
of the Powers of this world, upon the account of the fifth kingdom, is not (I
humbly conceive) to follow the Lamb, but to go before him: I say, if the
aforesaid three years and an half be not come and ended.

Lastly, seeing we are not sent back to search the erring Histories of old
times, and to enquire what was done many hundred years ago; it does therefore
behove all such, who are running to and fro, that knowledge may increase; to
STUDY THE PRESENT TIME, whether the things which must be in the last three
years and half, are already come, or not.

THE CHARACTERS OF THE Last Apostacy, OPENED.
I Know already, what the understanding Reader does expect from me: If the
three years and an half are begun, that I show him the Little Horn, the Later
Apostacy, and the Beast ascending out of the bottomless pit, with all their
Characters set down in sacred Scriptures. If I do not this, and make it plain
upon tables, that he may run that reads it; let not my Writing be received.
For I desire no man's belief any further then he see every thing well and fairly
proved.

Now because from the Apostacy (as the bottomless pit) the Beast ascends,
who with his Horn slays the Witnesses: I shall therefore begin with the
Apostacy first.

And here we have two Questions:

1. Why the Apostacy in 2 Timothy 3. must be in the last three years and an half.

2. How it appears, that the present Apostacy of our time, is that Apostacy
of which Paul speaks should be in the Last day*

This know also] The particle (...) likewise, or besides, carries the matter
back to the former* Epistle* chap. 4. 1, 2, 3. and his meaning being opened, it
is as he should say: In thy person, I speak to all Saints of future ages, and
would have them forewarned of two great Apostacies which shall arise in the
Christian Church before the time of the end: And these distinguished, 1. By
their Times. The former shall be in the later times; that is, when he that
lets is taken out of the way, then shall the wicked be revealed: 2 Thessalonians. 2.
7, 8* meaning the Great Whore, or kingdom of the Beast: the other will be in
the last days, near or about the period of the Beasts dominion. 2. The former
Apostacy shall be in Doctrine: Some shall depart from the faith, giving heed
to seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils, speaking lies in hypocrisy:
forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats. The later will be in
manners and conversation: Men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous,
proud, etc.

Again, that by the last days, the three years and half are meant, I prove it
thus: The Word of God does not only distinguish between Time and Time, (as
there is a set time to every purpose under the sun, Eccles. 3. 1.) but likewise
shows, that all Prophecies have their due accomplishments in their fixed
appointments. Thus there was a time for the Dragon to reign in the Roman
Heathen Emperors: and that Time must be expired, before the first Apostacy,
or Antichristian kingdom could arise: 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3, 7, 8. So there is a time
for the two Witnesses to prophecy in sackcloth: which time must be finished,
before they are slain in their Testimony. Again, being killed in their witness,
they must lie three days and an half unburied; which is another distinct time.

For Application: This later Apostacy cannot be carried up to the persecution
of the Saints under the Heathen Roman Emperors: I think no man holds it so:
Nor can it be referred to the time of the Witnesses prophesying in sackcloth:
for then the last days were not come, for there was a time after that. Neither
can it be understood of a time after the sackcloth Witnesses are risen; for
then there shall be time no longer, Rev. 10. 6. to wit, either for the first or
second Apostacy; but both are to be destroyed, and the kingdoms of this world
become the kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ; and he shall reign for ever
and ever: Rev. 11. 12, 13, 15. Therefore I take it (neither before nor after)
the later Apostacy must necessarily contemporize with the last three years and
half. So that three years and an half is the whole time of the later Apostacy,
answerable to the time of the slain Witnesses.

But the other is the great Point, How it can be proved, that the Apostacy of
this age, is that Apostacy of which Paul speaks, 2 Timothy 3* 1, 2.

The matter being weighty, I shall speak the more to it; yet with bowels and
tenderness* sighing for the abominations that are done in the midst of us; and
mourning for them, as the Prophets did for backsliding Israel and Judah.

First, it appears by the Scriptures, that the two great Apostacies shall in
many things be like each other: the former being a Type of the later.
Concerning the first Apostacy:

1. It had its rise in the true Christian Church, and among the professors of
the Gospel. Hence it is called, a departure from the faith, 1 Timothy 4. 1. and a
falling away, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. And of this Apostasy (I think) Paul speaks: For I
know this, that after my departing, shall grievous wolves enter in among you,
not sparing the flock: also, of your selves shall men arise, speaking perverse
things, etc. Acts 20. 29, 30. Secondly, as the first Apostacy had its rise in
the Church of Christ; so the cause of it was, for that men were lovers of their
own selves, covetous, proud, etc. Through covetousness shall they with feigned
words make merchandise of you. 2 Pet. 2. 3. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4. Thirdly, this
Apostacy being made through self-love, covetousness, pride, etc. there was one
appointed to be Head or King over it, Rev. 9. 11. called, That man of sin, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. The lawless one, verse. 8. The angel of the bottomless pit, Rev. 9
11. and (typically) the Little Horn, in Dan. 7. To this King or Head of the
first Apostacy, it was given to change times and laws; as Sa^. ^^r^m. l. 1.
Tit. 7.
Having all power in his hands, and Nich. did. S. Romans in Glos^.
being above all, and to be obeyed by all: For Jo. de Paris^is potest. R^x and
Pap.
he is (dominus omnium temporaliu^, solus verus Dominus) The true and only
Lord of all Temporal things. Peter de Palud. de potest. Pap. el. 4.
Non potest subjicere se Concilio generali: He cannot subject himself to a
general Council. Inter casus Papales.
Legi non subjicet ulli; judicium est pro lege: He is subject to no law, and
his judgment is in stead of law. De concessione p aebendae Gloss. de Constit.
licet Du^an. l. 2.
He has all manner of law and right (in scrinio pectoris sui) in the closet of
his own breast. Trans. Episc. C. quanto in Gloss.
In its quae vult, est ei pro ratione voluntas: In those things which he will,
his Will is unto him for Reason. His power is absolute, and extends as far as
himself lists. He may do all things Inno. 3. ext D. concess. praeb. C.
proposuit.
suprajus, contra jus, and extrajus: Above Law, against Law, and without Law.
Fran Zorobel.
Facit quicquid libet, imo illicita: What he pleases he may do, yea although
unlawful.

Besides, as for the Head of the first Apostacy, he must Hugo in Gloss Did.
40. C. non nos. ^ Bellarm. de Romans Pontif. ^. 4. e. 5. in fine.
not (say they) be judged by any man, for any crime either of murder or
tyranny, but rather be excused. (l) Si Papa erraret praecipiendo vitia, vel
prohibendo virtutes, teneretur Ecclesia, credere vitia esse bona, and virtutes
malas, nisi vellet contra conscientiam peccare: If this Head should err in
ordaining evil things, or prohibiting good things, the Church is bound to
believe the evil things to be good, and the good evil, unless she will sin
against conscience.

Again, whereas Greg. q. 3. C. quat.
All other sentences and judgments both of Councels and persons may be
examined, for that they may be corrupt: but as the Head of the first Apostacy
is above all Civil powers, and free from all Constitutions whatsoever* So
Ulricus Wald. confessionale, and de Sacr.
whatsoever he acts, approves or disapproves; men are bound, without either
judging, or disputing, or retracting, to approve or disapprove the same. For
here, Cardinal. Cusan* Exer^. l. 2. c. 6.
obedience must be without enquiring, as a horse is obedient to his master: and
it were In Sept. Ext. Jo. 22. Tit. 14. C. cum inter l. Gloss.
heresy to think otherwise.

To know therefore whether the Apostacy of this age be it, of which Paul
speaks; we must consider the Parallel. 1. If it be the same, it has its
beginning and rise in the Churches of Christ, and among eminent professors of
the Gospel: this appears, by having a form of godliness. 2. Self-love and
covetousness, is the root from whence it springs: so much I shall show
presently. 3. If it be the l^^er Apostacy, it must have a Head conformable to
the first, who in his actions must speak great things, as the other did: Dan.
7. 8, 20, 25. It is given into my hands to change times and laws: and therefore
I will do what I please; neither shall there be any law, but according to my
will. I am above the people, and all their Representati^*s, to call them when I
please, and to break them to pieces at my pleasure. What I will, shall be for
Law, whether it be above Law, or against Law, or without Law: neither may any
man say, (Sir) why do you so? For I am not, nor will not be subject to any Law,
nor responsible for my actions to any Council, Court or Judicatory whatsoever.
Whom I think fit to banish, imprison, or any other way to destroy, that I will
do; neither am I bound to give any reason to any man for it. Those that
acknowledge me to be their Head, must justify whatsoever I do: for I judge him
a State heretic and traitor, that shall question my power, or say that I may
not do what I will. I am free from all Constitutions of men: all are bound to
obey me, without judging, disputing, or retracting: I say, All my commands and
commissions must be obeyed, without enquiring of Reason, as the Horse or Ass is
obedient to his master.

You that are enquiring after the Time of the end, ought to mind this: It is
not the present Apostacy which is come upon us, that the holy Ghost fore-tells
in Timothy, if it agree not with the first Apostacy; namely, had its beginning
in the Churches of God, and among professors of Religion: occasioned through
self-love, covetousness, and pride; and has a Head speaking great things, as
did the Head of the first Apostacy. For judging and applying things, this I
leave to the unbiased Reader* it being my work but to open the Prophecies.

But there is one thing (and the Scripture notes it) in which these two
Apostacies agree not: The former, by reason of the abominable Lies and damnable
Heresies which were received, was a departure, both from the power of
godliness, and the form too: The later being a falling away not in doctrines
but manners, will keep still a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof.

I have thought sometimes, what the reason might be, that the holy Ghost uses
the word (...), (hence we say apostacy) being a Hoc verbum est a re militari
ad religionem traductum. Nam inter milites is dici^ur (...), qui ord^nem suum
and locum in acie datum deserit turpiter; vel qui a nobis ad hosts trans^ugit,
qui etiam trans^uga appella^u^. Danaeus l. 4 de side, cap. ^5.
word proper to Soldiers; and borrowing it from them, applies it to religious
matters: Whether it might not be closely, foretelling of some eminent and
notable falling away which would be among such kind of men in the last days,
to the great scandal of the Gospel; being high and glorious professors thereof.
But I proceed.

2. And before we come to speak of the particular sins set down in 2 Timothy 3. it
is worth observing, the vices which are not there mentioned: as, Idolatry,
Adultery, Murder, Drunkenness, common Swearing, and suchlike: And no marvel;
for these are of so gross a kind, as they cannot well stand with a form of
godliness, and be defended and pleaded for, as the sins there specified. Here
again the judicious Reader is desired to consider, whether this come not home
to the present Apostacy: can the sins which are left out by the Spirit of God,
as Idolatry, Adultery, Murder, etc. be charged upon them, at least so
eminently, visibly, and generally, as the sins in the text? As for the vices
which are not named, do they not preach against them, and punish them? But for
the other which are named, if they are not as plainly seen in them, as was the
leprosy on Gehaz^'s forehead; they are not the MEN meant in Timothy.

So for the sins which are expressed* we must not take it of personal failings,
that is, of good men, who by occasion fall into such sins, for so we should
condemn the generation of the righteous. For who lives, and sins not? But
when the Apostle says, Men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous,
proud, etc. he means such MEN in whom these sins do reign; and they live in
them, and are under the power of them; and think it strange that other men run
not with them into the same excess of riot, and therefore speak evil of them.
This likewise must the Reader observe, that the sins in Timothy cannot be
applied to the Apostates of this age, unless they walk after their own lusts: 2
Pet. 3. 3 and are so far from acknowledging the evils which they have done, as
that they are hardened in them, go on in the constant practice of them, and yet
say, Stand by thy self, come not near to me: for I am holier then thou. Isai.
65. 5.

3. It was foretold by the wisdom of God in Paul, that the first Apostacy
should be a departing from the Lord in points of Doctrine, that is (as I said)
a turning aside from the Truth to lies and vanities: 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3. 2 Pet.
2. 1, 2, etc. The other, not in doctrine, but vicious walking? I hope the
Reader will mind whether this is fulfilled in our time. Are not the Tryers
zealous men against the Idolatry of the first Apostacy? They will tell you,
there must be no inventions in Gods worship; but every thing must be according
to the Pattern, viz. Church*Ministry, Worship, and Government. But what say ye
to the Characters of the later Apostacy? are they not lovers of themselves,
covetous, proud? etc. I wish, for their own sakes, it be not so. Since my
thoughts were upon this Apostacy, I have been considering whether till now,
from the rise of the first Apostacy, it has been known, that at any time the
Officers of true Churches, have so fallen in with the world, have gotten such
riches, houses, lands, moneys? have lived in such pleasure, plenty, riot, pomp,
and state? I cannot find, that the like has been before, and I hope after
this time, it will be so no more. And indeed I should have thought this thing
which is now come to pass very strange, had not this Apostacy been foretold,
that in the last days there should be in the Churches of the Saints, and
amongst the Ministers, Men, Lovers of their own selves, covetous, proud, etc.

4. If the present Apostacy be that, of which Paul speaks, the time under it
will be perilous, hard, difficult. The Dutch translates Schwertzeiten, heavy,
grievous, or troublesome; because, says their no^e, The time will be full of
grief and hard for the Godly, perilous (says Diodate) in regard of the
spiritual state of the Church. The Reasons why the time; will be so hard, and
heavy, under the later Apostacy, may be these:

1. Because out of this Apostacy (as the bottomless pit) a beast shall arise,
headed with a little horn, by whom the witnesses shall be slain.

2. It will be a hard and heavy time, because the Rights, Liberties, and
Freedoms of the people shall be taken from them: an Arbitrary Power set up,
illegal Taxes imposed and only force, and violence bear sway.

3. The prudent now must either keep silence, or extremely suffer: And so a
heavy time.

4. Such snares and temptations will be laid, as many good men shall be
corrupted, and drawn aside from their former righteous principles; and from
faith and a good conscience, to pernicious ways.

Lastly, so heavy a time will it be, that men shall be at their wits end,
Tempo^a molesta mquibus dissicile sit concilium capere quomodo te geras
adversus istiusmodi monstra que ex medio Ecclesi^ sinu prod^bunt. Piscator in
Loc.
not knowing what to do, nor what course to take for their own safety, nor how
to keep a good conscience without suffering by this Apostacy: For it will be as
much as a man's life, to appear for the just liberties of the people, and to
hold forth a public testimony, for the visible and glorious kingdom of Jesus
Christ. Hence the Aethiopick translator renders it the bad year, because
Religion and the holy Name of God, would suffer more dishonor and reproach at
this time, then in any age before, by reason of the base revolting of eminent
and forward professors every where. To prove these Reasons, that is my part,
the which (if God permit) I shall do, when I come to open the sins and
characters of the little Horn: Then I will show, that for these Considerations,
it will be a perilous time under the later Apostacy. The Application, that is
the Readers part: The which of the two (I conceive) is the least and easiest.

But fifthly, and to come nearer yet to the matter; The question is, Whether
the particular sins, set down in 2 Timothy 3. 2, 3, etc. may be found among the
Apostates of this age, directly and fully, and not appliable since the first
Apostacy to any men till now? If it be not so (without forcing the Text) what
I have said in the Considerations, I shall abide by it, viz. This Apostacy is
not that which the Spirit of God intends, in 2 Timothy 3. but some other is yet to
come. Now to name the sins, and open the wotds with a little Application, will
be enough for my part.

Lovers of their own selves] The Apostle (...)
begins at the Springhead: Self-love (as the bitter root) brings forth this
unblessed weed, called, THE STATE-APOSTACIE OF THE LAST TIMES. Neither indeed
can it be otherwise; for if men begin to love themselves, they will soon be
covetous, proud boasters, etc. And what think thou Reader? when men shall
love themselves more then their oaths, vows, covenants, etc. more then truth
and righteousness, more then the laws, liberties and rights of the people, more
then faith and a good conscience, say more then heaven and their own souls;
yea, and more then God and his Christ. Whether such may not be thought to be
the Self-lovers, intended by the holy Ghost, who should make the later
Apostacy?

Covetous] The word signifies, (...). Hic a Paulo di^ilu^, qui sive argentum
sive aurum, sive agros sive siumentum, sive quas^^b^t alias opes a^d^nt^r
^xpetit and v^^^ose. Danaeus in Loc.
not only lovers of silver and money, but of other things, As Lands, Houses,
Castles, Parks, Courts, Titles, great Offices and Places, etc. Besides, the
word signifies an immoderate desire and appetite, to have the possession of
such things. Hence the Greek (...), is often rendered studium pecuniae, the
Study of money. How this is made good in the present Apostacy, their practice
is proof enough; neither do I mean to speak much of their doings, seeing the
same is so obvious and manifest to the world, and by many published already:
For their coveteousness, what it is (from the head to the tail) God sees it,
and men know it; and what scandal and reproach they have brought to the truth
by it, they themselves will know one day.

But because the Reader may do his part the better, which is Applicative: I
shall commend three things to him:

1. That he take notice: These here, whom the Apostle says, shall be lovers of
their own selves, Covetuous, Proud, etc. were men formerly (seemingly at lest)
of other principles and practices: for else it could not have been an
Apostacy. It cannot be forgotten what was laid to the charge o^ the Bishops,
for their covetousness, pride, pomp, following the court, and what to the King
and his party for their excess. But now who more covetous of Money, Lands,
Houses, Castles, Parks, Courts, Titles, great Offices and Places, etc. then
they, who condemned these very sins in others, see Romans 2. 1, 3.

2. It must be remembered, If the Apostacy now be it, of which Paul speaks; all
the sins in the Text must be applied to it: for though we should see men to be
covetous, boasters, proud, etc. yet if they have not the other vices, that is,
if they are not truce breakers, false accusers, traitors, etc. it is not that
Apostacy.

Lastly, neither can it be the later Apostacy: if any having the form of
Godliness, have formerly walked (as these do) after such lusts.

(...),
Boasters] Crackers, or Braggers, vain-glorious-men, which boast of that they
have not, Ulpianus, Kickerm: and others take (...), to be such as arrogate and
assume too much to themselves, promise more then they can do, and more then is
truth. The word seems to be taken from Quack salvers, and Mountebanks, who
Crack of their great Skill and rare Cures; being in the mean time ignorant of
the true grounds and principles of Physic and Chyrurgery. If it be the last
Apostacy, great things will be promised the Nation, about Reformation of
Church and State. This shall be talked of a long time, and in their Books
published a ain and again. But what will all come too, Reader! Look about thee,
and be harkening, if thou do not hear poor creatures in bitterness make this
complaint (as having cause enough) ye are Physicians of no value, ye are
Crackers indeed, you have taken much upon you, and promised Mountains. But for
the Body of the Commonwealth, it is much worse, then it was before: worse
Magistrates, Ministers, Army, Navy, Councils: In a word, worse with us in all
public concernments, both at home and abroad. If this be not the mournful
complaint of all people, (except Revolters) and most true* I shall not fasten
the Later Apostasy upon them.

But, because the Tryers are the great Crackers, and think they deserve this
Name, viz. Mend-all, as having done a great piece of service about
Church-Reformation. This I think I may safely say, and that truly by
experience: That the present National Clergy, is more corrupt, and far worse,
then it was in the Bishops time.

For, 1. No Professors, but could have found then within few miles of their
dwellings, some honest Puritan, or Nonconformist, to go to; whereby to be
refresht and built up in Faith, Knowledge, Holiness: whereas now, men may
travel twenty, thirty, forty miles, and not find a Parish Priest that has
any Gospel savor in his Ministry; no power, swetness, or life, but old formal,
fruitless stuff, said over and a hundred times.

2. Though it be true, the Bishops took little care to reform the Clergy, but
rather how to suspend and silence, (as some do now) such as witnessed against
their unsanctified Callings and Places. Nevertheless, if the Times be compared,
the Enormities of the National Clergy are less looked into and reformed: I say,
less now, then in the Prelates Times. I remember, the old Non-Conformists, were
wont to call the Bishops making of Priests their Licenses and Visitations; the
picking of poor men's pockets. I wish it do not appear so in the day of Christ,
that some of these men have done little better. This I know, go to and fro
through the Nation, the iniquity of the Priests increases every where, and what
is done, amounts to little more then this: if a scandalous or ignorant Friest
be cast out from one place, he goes to another, and does there more hurt, and
lives worse then he did before: fitly therefore, is the name Crackers by the
Holy Ghost given them.

Proud] or arrogan:, Lastly: Qui (...).
super collem apparuerunt, men that will be under no yoke, but domineer, and
all must be subject to them. Grammarians take the word, for men that will be
masters, and will have no Superior, but all rule and authority must be in
their hands. I know* not a better way to find out the Last Apostasy, then to
follow the Light of the Scripture in paralelling the two Apostacies, and in
nothing more, then to observe the pride, loftiness, and arrogance alike in in
BOTH HEADS. I cannot but speak the more of this, because it cannot be the later
Apostasy, unless we see the HEAD of it, to be as PROUD and arrogant as the
former was, would the former HEAD acknowledge no Superior, the later must do
so: did they say of the former, Joan Bromiard sum. pradic. c. 17.
Quaecunque potest^^ est sub Coelo, est in summo pontifice: and that he is,
Bonaf. 6 dec. de cas. cap. licet.
Lex animata in terris, a living Law in the Earth: That Sy^a^^us, papa, 9. ^.
3. aliorum.
all Cases of other men, God has appointed to be judged by men, only he has
reserved the first Head to his own Judgementseat; as not to be questioned for
his doings by any Creature. And therefore though all other men, be under men's
judgment, yet is he to be judged of none, neither of Kings, Councils, or any
other Judicatory. Besides, Pelarg. do planco, Eccles. l. 1. Art. 6.
Whatsoever he pleases he may do, whether with a Counsel, or without; and if
the whole world should judge against him, ^et his Opinion were to be received.
For Lib Council. Polyd distinc. 7. Synodum.
a general Council is of no authority, except this Head do confirm and allow
the same. Such must be the Head of the Later Apostasy, his HAUGHTINESS will be
under us Law, all power he shall assume to himself, not to be tried or judged
by any man, but to be left to Christ's Judgment Seat alone; And the Greek
(...), signifies so much.

Though I shall leave, (as I said) the Application of things to the Reader, yet
I would willingly give him what light I can, Note therefore how the word proud,
lofty, arrogant, comes home to the Triers, who have assumed a Superiority and
Headship over all the National Priests, as if they were (as in part I think
they are) that image made to the Beast, who will not suffer any to buy or sell,
save he that has the Mark or the Name of the Beast, or the Number of his Name.

Much I could say, as to their Pope like pride and power: but it needs not,
seeing their folly is already manifest to all men.

Blasphemers,] or cursed speakers: (...)
so our old Translation has it. Blasphemy is two fold,

First, Against God: and thus men blaspheme when they reproach his Name,
Spirit, Power, Word, Works, Kingdom, Judgment, etc. Mar. 3. 30. Lev. 24. 11.
Rev. 13. 16. and 16. 9, 11, 12.

Secondly, There is Blasphemy against men: 1. By railing and evil speeches, Tit
3. 2. 2. By reproaching the Godly for the Name of Christ, 1 Pet. 4 14. 3. By
despising Lawful Government and Authority, Jude 8. 4. By raising false
accusations against Gods people, Romans 3. 8. 5. By causing men through
Persecution to deny Christ, Act. 26. 11. Lastly, By censuring and condemning
things which men know not, Jude 10. 1 Timothy 10 13, 20.

Howsoever, The men of the Later Apostasy will be Blasphemers all these ways:
and so much the Reader is to look after: yet because by Blasphemers here, I
think they are meant, whom Peter calls Scoffers; the Holy Ghost specially
intends Blasphemy against the Spirit, and the visible Kingdom of Jesus Christ.

Truly I would think, Some would tremble (if their Consciences were not seard)
did they but read what Christ said of the Pharisees; and consider well what
themselves despitefully have spoken against the Holy Ghost; because they said,
He has an unclean Spirit, Mar. 3. 30. How near to such Blas^ hemy are these
men who say, That the Prayers and other holy Exercises, of Saints are done by
the Spirit of Satan: who say, It is by the power of the Devil, that the
faithful Witnesses of this age, hold forth a Testimony against Apostasy,
Hypocrisy, Covenant Breaking, etc. who scoff at the Lords great Work, moving
by his Spirit in the hearts of his people; calling it the delusion of Satan,
hellish, devilish, damnable; and what not: who scornfully upbraid the Saints
with their Christ, as to be a pitiful Christ. So their blasphemous scoffing
God's people, Will ye not suffer for your God? Where is now your God? we will
answer YOUR GOD well enough. Mark Reader, as disowning our God and our Christ,
to be theirs; and a God and a Christ easily to be answered.

Disobedient to Parents.] The (...).
old English Bible has disobedient to Elders. Junius reads, Qui praesunt sibi
non obtemperant est Synecdoche generis pro specie; Baldvin, has this note on
the place; Superiores non curant, nulliusque monita admittunt: videtur enim
parentum nomen in genere complecti omnes, qui nobis praesunt. They regard not
their Superiors, neither will receive their Admonition; by the word Parents,
all such as are set over us as Rulers and Governors are meant: the Greek (...)*
properly, is one that is refractory, contumacious, will be under no Subjection
or Government. So then the Apostates here foretold, are such as shall cast off
all Duty and Obedience of Children: refuse to be under any Law, Power,
Admonition, etc. They are the rebellious Children of whom Solomon speaks, Rob
their parents, Prove. 28. 24. waste their father, and chase away their mother,
Prove. 19. 26. mock them and despise them, Prove. 30. 17. Foolish children which
bring shame to their parents. Here Reader, like the wise man, be sure to have
thy eyes in thy head: See if thou can any that have robbed the people of their
Power, Parliaments, Laws, Liberties, etc. have miserably wasted the
Commonwealth in Men, Money, Shipping, Trade, etc. And having done all this, do
laugh and mock at their Parents; and by their contumacy and rebellion, have
made the Government and Governors, which the Lord set over them, a derision and
scorn to all Nations round about. If thou see this, thou have the very sense
and meaning of the Word.

(...).
Unthankful] Junius renders it Negantes beneficium, men that deny the benefits
and good turns which others have done them. The Pope was said Speed Chr. l. 9
c. 9. page 622.
to be like a mouse in a sachet, or a snake in ones bosom, who did ill repay
their hosts for their lodgings. I have showed before of the likeness there must
be between the two Heads: They who banish and imprison their best friends, and
show no cause for it; they who lay daily snares to entrap and destroy good
men, which first raised them; they who make it most of their business, to undo
such as were most faithful to them, and have done most for them; because they
will not leave their good old Principles of honesty and justice, to follow them
in unrighteous ways, must needs by all rational men be judged VNTHANKFVL.

I have read (some where) how the Person that mur^hered the Prince of Orange,
bought with the money which the Prince gave him, the Pistol, Powder and Shot,
wherewith he killed him: an act of high Ingratitude.

But Reader, suppose a people in their Representatives, having raised any up,
and put Power into their hands, and this gratis, and of love* they Turned that
same Power against the people, and therewith destroyed them, their Laws,
Liberties, Representatives, etc. yea, more, the Interest and Cause of Christ,
for whose sake, that Power and Trust was committed to them: Might not these be
the unthankful men whom Paul speaks of? It is said of Nero, he used the
destruction of his Country to his own benefit, Tac. An. l. 5. c. 10.

(...).
Unholy,] or profane, unsacred. Quibus nullum jus est, nec fast, says Beza:
So Baldvin, Qui nullum jus nec fas curant: men in whom is no Right, Truth or
Trust. The Greek (...), is taken for such as break Religious Covenants, Vows,
Promises and Oaths; make not conscience of any thing they promise, either to
God or man, so they have again and some wordly advantage, by breaking the same.
Hence the Arabic translates, men altogether unjust. The Aethiopick, Departers
from truth.

To find out the Later Apostasy by this word, it must be observed, That the
Holy Ghost does not intend any low or small matter; but what is public,
general, and to be known and seen every where. This breaking of Religious Vows,
Oaths, Promises, etc. and departing from Truth, must be understood National.
Therefore I shall refer the Reader to the PROTESTATION made about the beginning
of the Long-Parliament, and to the Scots-Covenant, and to the Engagement, which
was drawn up, and sent out by the Parliament for all the Nation (who were then
counted wellaffected) to sign: which runs thus: I do hereby declare and
promise, to be true and faithful to the Commonwealth as new established,
without a King and House of Lords. As I am writing these things, that saying of
the Prophet is sadly upon my Spirit, My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I
am afraid of thy judgments, Psalm. 119. 120. Oh how solemnly (with hands lifted
up to Heaven) was it promised and sworn to, to endeavor the extirpation of all
Idolatry and Tyranny, to maintain the just Privileges of Parliaments, and the
Freedom, Rights, and Liberties of the People; to take off all heavy yokes,
burdens, and oppressions: not to suffer the King to exercise an unlimited and
Arbitrary Power; to have Abuses and Corruptions reformed in Church and State.
Now compare former Promises and Engagements, with present Actions: and one of
these two it must be: that is, since the First Apostasy arose, never did men
(having a form of godliness) violate so many Oaths, Promises and Engagements,
publicly made, as the late Revolters have done: or else the Present Apostasy
is not that in Timothy.

To add one word more: I have several times acquainted the Reader of the
likeness between the Two Apostacies. It is true, The Later having a form of
godliness, cannot in that respect Assert for Doctrines and Principles, what the
former does; either in ascribing so much to their Head, or in breaking Vows,
Oaths, and Engagements: But for action, what the former teaches and does, that
the Later will do; but not Teach it. As for Example, beside the Practice, it is
allowed and justified by the Doctrine of the First Apostasy, that men may break
their Vows, Oaths, and Promises: For thus they say, Sanche. Moral. Tom. 1. l.
3. n. 15. p. 25. Fulliar. Moral. T^a. 25. c. 11. n. 323. p. 204.
If a man promise to do a thing, having his reservation with himself, that he
does not purpose to make his promise good, he may deny that he promised any
such thing, neither tells he any lie, THOUGH HE HAVE SWORN TO DO IT; because
it was no obligatory Promise, and so no Promise nor Oath at all. But the Later
Apostasy, holding forth a glorious face and show of Religion, cannot teach this
for Doctrine: nevertheless, the Holy Ghost tells us, That in their Practices
and Doings, they shall be alike, both Breakers of of Religious Vows, Oaths,
Promises; the one making no more conscience then the other; as to Practice.

(...)
Without natural affection,] or inhumane, u^^^^iable Charitates exportes, faith
Beza: (...), erant bo^^i^es fine naturalibus affectibus, vel expertes exp^^^^^
charitatis, vel expertes na^^^^ pie^^ (...) M^n (faith Scultetus on the place)
without natural Affections, or void of natural Charity, or void of native
Piety. Baldvin, opens the word thus: Men in whom all humanity and love* is
extinguished, which Nature joins one to another; so that other men's evils are
not pitied by them, but their good envied. It may be englished, BEAST-LIKE: As
a Wolf sucking the blood of a Sheep, does it without pity, and is delighted in
the cruelty she uses,

1. Wherein can men more show themselves to be without affections of piety and
charity, then not to regard whom they destroy, nor how many, nor how illegal it
be, so their own wills and lusts may be satisfied?

2. Are not they without Christian affection, who will deal worse and more
cruelly with good men (I say good men) then if they were murderers and highway
thieves?

3. Is not all humanity extinguished in such men, who are so far from pitying
the Saints when they are devouring them; as is a Beast from pitying a poor Lamb
whilst he is sucking his blood?

4. What natural affection have they, who care not for their Country, nor what
wrong they do to the people, by taking away their Laws, Liberties and Rights;
and imposing what burdens and pressures they please, merely to support and hold
up their own private Interest? Consider of it, take advice and speak your
minds.

(...),
Truce Breakers,] Some read, absque foedere, without fidelity: the Dutch
translates, implacable, unappeasable. Beza and Pagnin: Nescii soederis.
Salmero, Inconfoederabiles. The Greek (...), signifies men who make no
consciences of their Promises and Agreements; and having done so, are
irreconcilable, will admit of no truce, but upon their own unlawful terms.

It is likely the Reader will expect that I should be large here, because the
word (as he thinks) leads directly to the present Apostasy. But I will speak
the less, because it is so plain; alas poor Creatures, here they cannot sew
fig leaves together, and make themselves aprons, (as our Parents did) to hide
their nakedness.

Two things, Reader, I would have thee mind:

1. As the Lord foresaw what would be the special sins of the Later Apostasy,
so he does mention them the oftener: He knew, that breaking Promises, Covenants,
and Engagements, would be the sins and evils chiefly committed by them, so he
repeats the same again and again. The Judgment of the present Apostasy, I
leave to others: whether it be that in Timothy or not: only this is clear by
the Text, That Covenant Breaking, will be the sin, (as most eminent and
remarkable) in them.

2. The Declarations, Remonstrances, Petitions, and other Writings of the Army
are worth the reading, specially a Book entitled, A LOOKING-GLASS FOR THE ARMY.

In this Book he shall find truly collected, what Vows, Promises, and
Covenants have been made, and whether all be not broken let hims lf be Judge?
But this remember also: It is not the last Apostasy, if the Vows and Promises,
which have been broken, be not upon religious Pretenses: that is, for the glory
of God, the safety of the Nation, the good of the Godly party, etc. and so
Righteous men still.

(...),
False Accusers,] or Calumniators, slanderers. Greek, Devils. Aretius says it
signifies, treacherously to take or deceive by false and lying words.

1. Wherein can men be more treacherous, then having unjustly cast Gods people
into prison, afterward to lay things to their charge which they never knew?

2. What greater slander, then to belie the Holy Ghost; in saying that to be
done by Satan, which is wrought by the Finger and Power of God?

So, 3. in reporting strange Plots and Conspiracies to be among the Saints:
whereby to render the Cause of Christ and his people contemptible and vile to
the Nation: There being no Truth in it, but a mere slander.

4. Are not those Calumniators who asperse their Brethren with the reproachful
terms of fools, knaves, villains, rogues, trayt^rs? etc. though known to be
wise, honest, sincere and sober Christians, because they will not serve their
wills and lusts.

5. Was it not Absolom's trick, that he might get the power into his own hands,
to slander his Fathers Government: There is no man, (says he) deputed of the
king to hear thee. Oh that I were made judge in the land! I would do justice:
read 2 Samuel 15. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Inquire whether our former Governors have
not been charged with much untruth, to the end that some might the sooner and
easier (like Absalom) raise themselves.

(...),
In continent,] so the old version' reads. Beza, intemperantes. Junius,
Subjecti affectui: (...), qui cupiditatibus suis laxant habenas, and ingenio
suo indulgente, says Baldvin. Men who loose the reins to their lusts, and
indulge their wit and will: properly the word signifies Excess, men that cannot
contain themselves, within Bounds, Limits, Laws; observe no Rule, Order or
Medium; exorbitant, unlimited.

Remon^trance of the General and council of Officers, at St. Albons, Nov. 16.
1648.
He that desires light here, let him read The Armies Remonstrance against the
late King: There this word is opened, in setting down particularly, his Excess,
his Exorbitancy, the unlimited power which he took: For which Excess, nothing
will satisfy some, but his Head.

So the Impeachment of Strafford, for High Treason, in the House of Commons,
Anno 1640, and 41. The Articles exhibited against him, are now worth the
reading. He died for Excess.

Likewise, the great Case of Shipmoney, when Sir John Finch, then Lord Keeper;
Chief Justice Bramston, Judge Berkley, Judge Crawley, Chief-Baron Davenport,
Baron Weston, and Baron Turnow, were accused and impeached of High Treason by
the House of Commons, for their extra-judicial Opinion in the Case of Shipmoney.

Here Reader, thy work is short: It is only to give thy judgment, whethes
such men as condemned the King and Strafford for being (...), EXORBIT ANT, and
had a chief hand in taking away their lives, made the Case of Ship Money
High Treason: because it was breaking Law-bounds. If they themselves should do
worse in exercising an unlimited and arbitrary power; I say, suppose so: thou
art then to judge whether without wresting the Text, the APOST ACY IN TIMOTHY
(so far as this word bears) may not fairly be applied to them?

And here I think good, (not going out of my way) to set down the Excess and
Exorbitancies of Duke d' Alva, leaving the Application to the Reader:

Meter Bell. ^^st. l. b. 3. Grimstone Nether. Hist. 311.
That which he did first in stead of assembling of the general States, he
appointed a Council of twelve men, which was called, The Mar. has it, the
Tyranny of the Duke and his bloody Council.
The bloody Council; in French, The Council of troubles, The first, second and
third months; the Duke and these sat in Council every fore-noon and
afternoon, as being directed still by the Duke, whose intent was, that the
Opinion of the Council should be but Consultative as giving judgment in some
causes, but to have all things depend upon himself alone, and they to stand to
the judgment he should give. By this Council, and by the Duke himself, all
power and authority was taken from the Provincial Councils, and the Inhabitants
robbed and spoiled of all their Jurisdictions and Appeals, clean contrary to
the Privileges of their Country; yea, and the Councils themselves (which were
like our Parliaments) were forced to stand to the judgment of the said council,
which had the command over all noble and unnoble, spiritual and temporal: so
that the DUKES WILL WAS AN ABSOLUTE LAW, without suffering or allowing any
Appeal, Reformation or Reviewing of the Sentence once given and pronounced by
the Duke: And that the Duke should be accounted by all men, absolute Governor;
and all men dispensed withal, not to hold or observe any Ordinance or
Institution made by any others, then by him; and that all things should be
referred to his discretion.

I would not be understood, as if Duke d' Alva were meant in this Prophecy*
for I think otherwise. 1. Because he was no Apostate, that is, did never vow
and promise better things. 2. He had no form of godliness. Both which must be
in the persons here foretold.

(...),
Fierce,] or unmild, not tame, wild, savage ^ Inhumani and seri beastiarum
more* says Osiander; Inhumane and wild after the manner of Beasts. So Junius,
Feri: Bestiaruns more efferatos: Arias Montan. The Dutch, Cruel, with whom it
is perilous to converse. The word properly is applied to the rage and cruelty
of Beasts. Hence some translate, Bestiales.

Memorable is the thing which fell out lately at Abingdon. The Soldiers were
more wild and savage, then the Beasts they rid upon: for the poor Beasts would
not do the cruelty upon the Saints, (though spurd, kicked and beaten) to trample
them under foot, being at Prayer; as their barbarous Riders would have had them
do. How will some stamp, rage, rail, threaten and shake their Heads, as if they
would eat up God's people, when they are brought before them.

But that which I take to be chiefly meant by the word, is this: Look as
Beasts, will hear no reason, neither is there any stopping of them in their
fierceness, by speaking to them. So to speak to these men (meant here in the
Text) of Reason, Law, Justice, Conscience, Right, it is to no purpose: they are
Feri, wild Beasts: their Will and Lusts must be satisfied. Again, as some
Beasts, having gotten by force or fraud, mastery over their Fellows, rule them
by no Law, but their will: such a Beast-like Government does the Spirit of God
here intend: so that without doubt by (...), Tyrants are here meant.

Now according to Statists and Lawyers, there are two sorts of Tyrants: Barth.
kick. Systemat. polit. lib. 1. c. 28. p. 422.
One, absquetitulo, qui Rempub. sibi non commissam, sine ullo justo Titulo, vel
Successionis, vel Electionis invadit, aut vi aperta, aut malis Artibus: He is
called a Tyrant, without Title, who invades the Commonwealth (not committed to
him) without any lawful Title, either of Succession, or Election; either by
open fraud or wicked designs. Others describe him thus: Qui sine ullo jure, aut
iniquo and minime legitimo Barlolus de Tyrannides.
Titulo, Principitatum invadit: who, without any right, or the least lawful
Title, usurps the Principality. The other is, Tyrannus exercitio sive ^su, id
est, qui legitimum quidem jus ad Principatum habet, sed eum injuste, and contra
Leges exercet: A Tyrant by Practice or Exercise, who though he have a lawful
right to the Government, yet administers the same unjustly, and against Laws.
Of this later Tyrant, Bartolus, and others give Ten Notes. Again, touching the
former Tyrant, their judgment is thus: Kicker, ibid. Steph. Jun. B^ul. in
vindic, contra Tyran. Quest. 3. Althusius, l. 14. pol. Tol. l. 6. c. 18 and l.
26. c. 7. Rod. l. 2. c 5.
Quia Tyrannus absquetitulo, nullum habet Fundamentum sut Principatus, sive
Regiminis, ideo e^ tanquam privato licet, sine ulla conscientiae difficultate
resistere, eumque pellere, vel^ medio tollere: Quin desensio est juris Naturae.
A Tyrant without Title, having no Foundation of his Principality or Government,
may as a private man without scruple of Conscience, lawfully be resisted, and
expelled and removed from his place: The Reason is, because it is the defense
of natural right.

The Conclusion is, When the Later Apostacy shall be in the World, (or rather
in the Church) Tyrants shall then reign: it is not said which of the Two; but
one of them will be: Neither have we ground to think that such an Apostacy is
already come, unless so much does appear.

There may be yet something more in the word: Out of this Apostacy, (as the
Bottomless Pit) ascends the Beast that slayes the Witnesses. Now observe it
Reader, it is a Beast that kills the Witnesses: and what are the Later
Apostates said to be? Feri, wild Beasts.

(...).
Despisers of those that are good,] or not lovers of good men, nor good things,
for the word takes in both: minime amantes bonorum. Beza. Negligentes bonorum:
Pagn. If good men are not loved it is for the good things which they hold and
practice. Two ways men are said to be good men: either as they stand for the
good of their Country, against Tyranny and Oppression; and for the Liberties,
Freedom, Privileges, and just power of the people. Or standing up for the
Truths of the Gospel, and the Interest and Cause of Christ. Now the Later
Apostates shall appear against Good Men both these ways: And if this be not so
now, it is not the Apostasy in Timothy.

(...),
Traitors:] A name given to Judas, Luke 6. 16. and to the Murderers of Christ,
Act. 7. 52. So that there are two sorts of Traitors: 1 Spiritual or
Gospel-Traytors. 2. Civil or Law-Traytors. Whether the Present Back-sliders are
meant here, I shall only show what they have said, and leave the Reader to be
Judge. For the first, thus they have Armies Declaration to the people of
Scotland, from Muscleborough, 1650.
said, We have not only proclaimed Jesus Christ King of Saints, to be our King
by profession; but to admit him to the Exercise of his Royal Authority. And
upon this simple account we engaged, not knowing the deep policy of Wordly
Statesmen: And those things simply were in our eyes; namely, THE DESTRUCTION
OF ANTICHRIST, THE ADVANCEMENT OF CHRIST's KINGDOM, THE DELIVERANCE AND
REFORMATION OF HIS CHURCH IN THE BEST ESTABLISHMENT OF HIS ORDINANCES ACCORDING
TO THE WORD OF GOD, and the just Civil Liberties of Englishmen. Besides, not
Armies Declaration, Sept. 17. 1648.
only would they have, That the exaction of Tithes and all manner of
Impropriations removed; but all corrupt forms of an outside-Religion and
Church Government. Now with this compare their PRACTICE since: whether the good
things they declared for, and the evil things they witnessed against, they have
not only declined, and most unworthily betrayed (as the destruction of
Antichrist and the advancement of the Kingdom of Christ:) but have and do most
cruelly hate and persecute, (by banishment and imprisonment) many of the Lord's
people, Because they do desire, (and for no other cause) to have such things
made good, as they themselves pretended sometimes to be zealous and earnest
for; but now have betrayed into the enemies hand^* if this be not true, the
Holy Ghost intends them not: neither do I.

For Civil or Law-Treason* besides what was said before in the Case of the
King, Strafford, and the Acts of Parliament Jan. 30. 1648.
Judges about Ship Money. I find four Acts of Parliament (not yet as I know
of, repealed) which say thus, Be it Enacted and Ordained, That whosoever shall
declare, publish, or any way promote any Person to be King or Chief Magistrate
of England or Ireland, etc. without consent in Parliament, shall be judged and
deemed a TRAITOR to the Commonwealth, and shall suffer pains of death, and such
other punishments as belong to the Crimes of High Treason*

The like Act was made March 17, 1648. and May 14, 1649. Again, in July 17,
1649. it was Enacted, That if any person shall maliciously or ad^^^edly publish
by writing, painting, or open declaring, etc. that the Commons in Parliament,
are not the Supreme Authority of this Nation: or shall plot, contrive, or
endeavor to stir up or raise force, etc. that every such offense shall be
taken, deemed, and adjudged by the Authority of this Parliament, to be
High Treason. Treason (says our Law) is an offense committed against the
Security, An^plitude and Majesty of the Commonwealth.

I am so far from taking the word (Traitors) for single persons, or to apply it
to things doubtful; that I think the Holy Ghost intends a Combination of men,
and such as shall most eminently betray both Gospel and Law, even Christ and
their Country. But I shall not take the Readers work out of his hand.

(...),
Heady,] or rash, inconsiderate, unstable, fickle, or giddy headed: such as
suffer them selves to be driven this way and that way, by their passions and
lusts. Dutch Note: The word as (some think) is taken from young birds, which
venture to fly before their Feathers are grown: or from little children, who
through their headiness, fall and get many knocks.

When thou have viewed their actions, first and last beginning at their
Instrument, or new model of Government, and consider what that was and how
hastily done. Their clapping up a sudden peace with the Dutch, and making war
as fast against Spain. What loss we had of men and treasure at Hispaniola: the
manner how, and what shame and scandal the English Nation had by it. Then pass
over to Jamaica, and inform thy self truly, what has succeeded since their
arrival. Besides, how many hundred Ships have been taken from us by the
Dunkerkers, whilst our Fleet were abroad, for what I know not* Their throwing
of Good Men, one while into Prison, another while releasing them again without
showing any cause either for one or other. Their Creating Major Generals, like
the Image that was made Rev. 13. 15.
to the Beast: preferring some to high Offices and Places, whom they had before
publicly charged to be Betrayers of their Country. Summoning the Countries to
choose Parliament Men, and when they came up, sent them home again; a hundred at
a clap. It would take up too much time to enumerate all particulars. If these
things considered, prove them not Heady and Rash, this then I would add: It may
be doubted (and I do) whether the Later Apostasy be fulfilled in them. If any
wise and sober man (not being one of them) can see upon any of their public
Actions, (wherein the good of the Commonwealth is concerned:) whereon there is
not engraven, and fairly to be read (...), HEADY, RASH AND INCONSIDERATE:
Either it is so, or this is not the last state Apostasy.

High-minded,] or puff*d up as a (...) vol.
Tympany, for that sore comes from the word, (...), significat eos qui sibi
videntur insignes in re quapiam aut opinione, quam de se concipiunt, and ideo
intumescunt. The word (says Salmeron) signifies men who to their own thinking
are famous in their actions and opinion; and being thus conceited of themselves
are therefore puffed up. Some Translators have (C^eci) blind: others, Fanatici
and dementati, fanatical and sottish. Indeed, the word does signify one that
is blind, and wants his understanding, yet conceives that he has both fight
and reason, and would have others think so too.

It is not to be doubted, but these men (whose Apostacy is here arraigned) for
King Craft and Statesmen* deem themselves* the Nonesuch of the Word, and all
Ruling men before them, Simplicians; and laugh at their Commonwealth.
Notwithstanding, if that which they are designing and building, be,

1. Against God, and therefore he shortly will destroy it.

2. If that which the Saints are every where praying against.

3. If that which was done before by the King, against the Privileges of
Parliaments, and Liberties of the People.

4. If that which the people every day more and more do hate them for.

5. If that which may ruin their Families, and render their Names odious to
posterity.

I say, Should such be their design and actions. The Question is (though
highly conceited of their own opinion and doings) whether according to the word
here, they are not in truth BLIND, and FOOLISH, STONE BLIND, as the
Aethiopick reads it?

Lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God,] greedy upon voluptuousness: Old
Translation. The word signifies such as are Friends to pleasures. Here Reader
consider:

1. The Heathenish vanities and sports taken up since this Apostacy was made:
(banished and buried before:) witness what was done this year upon their Lord
Majors day, though an Independent and Churchmember: Such lightness and foolery
was then, as was a scandal to Religion, and a grief to the Saints. Many poor
Christians wanting bread, whilst they in wantonness vainly wasted away money:
see Amos 6. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.

2. Where can we see any of the present Revolters; specially, if crept up into
High Places and Offices, whether at Court or in Country; but they are
voluptuous and given to pleasures: yea, those which seemed sometimes to be
Barzilla's, men so mortified to carnal pleasures, and risen with Christ, as
such things were irksom and burdens to them. But now, who for excess and riot
more then they? who more then THESE MEN, for fine Clothes, sumptuous Houses,
costly Fare, and Court-Fashions? so that to see them now, they are more like
Dives then Barzilla^. In every vanity and foolery, as carnal and light as other
men.

Truly I should have wondered to see this great Change among professors: how
Barzilla's are become Diveses's: those who have preached much, and printed much
against base delights, are now the Men addicted to them. I say, To see this, I
should have thought it strange; but that I know this Prophecy of the Later
Apostasy (every jot and every tittle of it) must be fulfilled.

Having a form of godliness,] or formality, show, appearance, an outward
visage. Quibus est species reverentiae Dei: Junius: in whom there is a show of
fear, or worship of God. Specieminanem sive inane simulacrum: Piscator.

I beseech thee, Reader, Take notice of the singular Wisdom and Counsel of God,
who will discover the men of the Later Apostasy, in that way which they think
to cover their Apostacy. How will the Later Apostates (being lovers of
themselves, covetous, Covenant-breakers, Traitors, etc.) think to hide these
Vices, so at least to hide them that they may not be thought to be the
Apostates foretold in Timothy, By having a form of godliness, that is, by their
often praying, fasting, preaching, and practicing Church*Ordinances, etc. And
how will the Lord make it known, That they are the Apostates there prophesied
of? By having this form of godliness, that is, being men so forward for fasting
and praying, yet living all the while in these gross and scandalous sins. And
indeed, this here is necessarily added: for otherwise we might have looked for
the Later Apostasy, among Turks, Jews, Papists, Ranters, Quakers, etc. but the
Holy Ghost would have us to observe, that this Apostasy shall be in Sion, Isa.
33. 14. It shall have its rise in the Churches of Christ, and among eminent
Professors of the Gospel, as the first Apostasy began in the Church, out of
which rose the Beast, Rev. 13. So the later Apostacy will be in the Church,
out of which ascends the Beast that slayes the Witnesses.

So that by how much I see men strict and foreward in a form or show of
godliness, and would seem to be the only men of their time (as the Scribes and
Pharisees were in their ^ime) for bodily exercise, as fasting and prayer, yet
live in the manifest practice of the former sins. The more I am convinced and
confirmed, to think that SUCH ARE THE APOSTATES foretold in Timothy.

Having a form a of godliness:] It seems the Spirit of God foreseeing the
several Forms, which would be in the later Apostacy, and what crying up there
would be of this happy time, that all parties might peaceably enjoy their own
Form. Independents, theirs; Anabaptists, theirs; Presbyterians, theirs. He has
respect to this very thing; that is, what Liberty would be given to Forms; and
how zealous and devout the Revolters would be for their form, and what
acclamations: O blessed Time for such Liberty to FORMS!

I would not be mistaken, I am not against a Form, to wit, Church Order,
according to the Gospel of Christ. But it is to open the words, how the man of
the Later Apostasy, will rest in forms, and think to shift off the fowl Vices
they live in by having a form of godliness: See Isa. 66. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. For I
think that place, and this belong to one time and people.

But it may be said, Some are under no Form, as to Church Order. The word as I
said, signifies a show or appearance of godliness. Now this men may have, (and
many have it) who are members of no particular Churches: these may fast and
pray, and in words desire, That the Lord will disappoint the designs of those
that labor to lift themselves up against the the Interest of Christ and his
people. And it is Machiavels Precept: Externa specie pium and Religiosum
videri, etiamsi ex animo non sit: that his Scholars and Followers, seem to be
Pious and Religious, although in Truth, and really they be not so.

If a man have gotten any Ulcers or Sores upon his Body, he will not cast off
his Clothes to have them seen: but rather put on more and better to hide them.
So the Professors in last days, Church Members and their Officers: Such I mean
as are covered over with the Leprosy and scab of the Last Apostacy, (as
Covetousness, Pride, Covenant Breaking, Blasphemy, Treason, Voluptuousness,
etc.) They will not cast aside the form of godliness; but rather rise in the
Practice of it, to the end, if it be possible, their Rottenness may not be
observed.

But denying the power thereof.] A virtute Dei long discedant: Junius. This
needs no opening: for where such sins are as have been mentioned, there cannot
be the power of godliness. Hence observe, what foul and most gross sins men may
live in, and yet hold forth to the World, a glorious show of Religion and
Piety. So did the Scribes and Pharisees.

Calvin on the place, moves a Question, How Paul agrees with himself to say,
That men should be so wicked, and yet have a form of godliness? He answers, of
their impudence and boldness, as boasting to be Christians: whereas they are
rather Heathens and Devils. But I think something may be added.

1. Though these sins are gross in themselves, and abominable in God's sight;
yet seeing Whoredom, Drunkenness, Theft, etc. are left out, the particulars
named, may stand with a Form or show of godliness: as has been said.

2. The Apostacy being general in Ministers and People, and whole Churches
leavened: these sins are not looked after, but tolerated and born amongst them.

3. This Later Apostacy will have a great deal to say for its own
justification: as, that they have followed Providence; and if they are lovers
of themselves, Covenant breakers, Traitors, etc. there was a necessity for it;
the peace and safety of the people did constrain them to it. And add this, That
the Scripture might be fulfilled in 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2, etc.

Before I end, I would have the Reader take notice, there is something
published under a Great Man's hand, concerning the former and later Apostacy.
And word for word thus: Paul ( O. P. his Speech in the Painted Chamber, Septem.
4. 1654.
says he) when he would remember some things to be worse then the
Antichristian State, of which he had spoken in the first to Timothy: tells them
what should be the lot and portion of the last times; and says, In the last
days, perillons times shall come: for men shall be lovers of themselves,
covetous, boasters, proud, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, etc. And
when he remembers that of the Antichristian State, he tells them, In the later
days that State shall come in, wherein there shall be a departing from the
Faith, and giving heed to seducing Spirits and Doctrines of Devils, speaking
lies in Hypocrisy, etc. By which description, he makes the STATE of the last
Times WORSE then that under Antichrist. And surely, it may well be feared*
these are our times: for when men forget all Rules of Law and Nature, and BREAK
ALL BONDS, etc. So he,

In his words there are several things both true, and very considera^io^*

1. That there should be two State-Apostacus.

2. That the later Apostacy should be worse then the former under Antichrist.

3. That this later Apostacy is already in our time.

4. That the Apostates in the last days would forget all Rules of Law and
Nature, and break all Bonds. etc. In all this we agree (as being all (I think)
true.) But in the Application, as carrying the later Apostasy to Ranters,
Quakers, Levellero, Here I dissent: my Reasons are:

1. The Apostle speaks of a State-Apostacie (and he calls it so himself) not
meant of single persons under the power of others, and to be suppressed at their
pleasure: But as the first Apostasy was a State or Kingdom, which had a Head,
and none above it, and there were Laws made surable to that Apostasy, whereby
to support it: So the later Apostacy is to be a State, a Body or Dominion, (as
Dan. 7. 12. 26.) over which one person shall reign as Head, and whatsoever Laws
are made under this Apostasy, shall be suitable to it, that it may not fall
like the foolish man's house.

Then 2. How is the Later Apostasy (already come) appliable to Ranters? who
have no form of godliness, as both their Principles and Practice show: we must
find this Apostacy in Churches and among great Professors: men (though
covetous, proud, Truce Breakers, etc. yet) do fast and prey, practice
Church-Ordinances, and pretend great zeal and conscience for the Interest of
Christ and his people.

Again, 3. How can this Later Apostacy be worse then that under Antichrist? If
understood of Quakers, Ranters, etc. wherein are these men worse then the
other? it is true, the Later Apostacy shall be worse then the Former, in
slaying the Witnesses: The former destroyed good men, but not their Testimony.
It killed the Body, but not the Truth: This Later shall kill the Truth, but not
the Body; slay in most good men their Testimony and Witness for Christ, but
leave their persons unkilled. True therefore, (as he says) Of the two
State-Apostacies, the last is the worse.

4. That the Apostle should foretell the Later Apostacy to be heavy and
perilous: there is little ground to apply this to poor, naked and
inconsiderable persons: Besides, what have they done? whom have they banished
and imprisoned? wherein have they been Traitors? when did they change Laws and
Times? All which the Later Apostasy shall do, and more too.

5. Let the sins in the Text be viewed (as I have opened the words) and compare
them with Ranters, Quakers, etc. it will appear, they hold not parallel
(almost) in any particular; whereas the Text (as I have said) must not be
wrested, but such an Apostacy found out, which agrees with the place
altogether, and in every thing.

6. Seeing Ranters and Quakers err in Doctrine (as holding dangerous opinions)
they come under the first Apostacy, rather then the later.

Lastly, If the evils which he mentions, (viz. when men forget all Rules of
Law and Nature, and break all bonds, etc. (be essential characters of the later
Apostacy: I shall leave it to the Reader, whether he cannot find such things
(more visible and certain) somewhere else, then among. Ranters, Quakers, or
Levellers?

Neither does Paul alone speak of two Apostacies, but Peter likewise, and sets
them down in the same manner the other does: the first of things: viz. errors
and doctrines of devils, 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2, 3. the later of persons, namely,
corrupt and sinful walkers 2 Pet. 3. 3, 4. knowing this first, that there shall
come in the last days, scoffers walking after their own lusts, and saying,
where is the promise of his coming? for since the Fathers fell asleep, all
things continue as they were from the beginning of the Creation.

It is worth the heeding, how the Apostles begin their Prophesies alike: This
know also (says Paul) that in the last days. Knowing this first (says Peter)
that there shall come in the last days, etc.

1. They would have Saints upon whom the Time of the End is come: to observe
well the Symptoms and Characters of the Later Apostacy. Fore-warned,
forearm'd: to know when this Apostasy is come will be a special preservative
against it, and to shun it, and not to be parcaker of other men's sins.

2. They both pitch upon one Time: In the last days, that is, the three years
and half, as I have showed before: and as it is one time, so the persons here
are one and the same.

Scoffers.] When Popery overspread this Nation, besides Persecution of tongues
and hands, the Papists endeavored to refute the Protestants, by Scriptures,
Fathers, Councels, Antiquity* etc. And so did the Prelates, after them, the
Non-Conformists and Separatists, when the power was in their hands. But what do
we hear now? Truly, little more then scoffs and jests: so that he is no body,
if he have not a jeer, a gird, some taunt or other (and that in their Pulpits)
against the Fi^t - Monarchy-men. And this I take to be the reason why the Holy
Ghost uses the word Scoffers; to signify, that besides jesting and mocking at
the Assertors of Christ's visible and glorious Kingdom, little will be done by
the Adversaries as to the confutation of them: The Truth whereof appears
evident at this present Time: Psalm. 124. 3, 4. 2 King. 19. 3.

Walking after their own lusts.] What these lusts are, was showed before: the
sins mentioned by Paul, 2 Timothy 3. 2, 3, 4, 5. The phrase, [walking after them,]
denotes how their affections will be wholly set upon these lusts, and so
guided, and led by them, that all their Counsels and Designs shall be for the
upholding and maintaining of them. Insomuch, that not a Soldier in the Army,
not a Mariner in the Navy, not a Minister or Magistrate in the Nation, shall be
allowed, if they be known they are men disaffected to the lusts, proper to the
later Apostacy.

Where is the Promise of his coming?] Had not this been added, we should not
have known what kind of Scoffers the Holy Ghost intended: But the words do
manifestly show, who are meant. It cannot be understood of Christ's coming to
judgment at the last day: For who scoffs at that? all generally believe it; It
being an Article of their Creed. Questionless therefore, it must be taken of
Christ's personal coming to reign on earth; and of the throwing down of Babylon,
and all the corrupt powers of the World, and the bringing in of the new heavens
and new earth, wherein dwells righteousness. This indeed is mocked at, both in
Court and Country. The Promise of his coming, which these Apostates are said to
scoff at, are these and suchlike, Dan. 2. 44, 45. and 7. ^4, 27. Psalm. 2. 6,
7, 8. and 45. and 72. Rev. 2. 26. and 5. 10. and 11. 15, 17. and 20. 4. Luke
19. 12. Zach. 14. 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. Hos. 3. 5. Isa. 53. 12. Act. 1. 11. Joh. 1.
51. Act. 3. 19, 20, 21. Romans 8. 19, 20, 21. 2 Timothy 4. 1. 2 Pet. 1. 11. Joh. 18.
36.

That the Apostle brings in these Scoffers by way of Question: where is the
promise of his coming? He does it, to show the occasion of their scoffing. This
great Truth of Christ's visible Kingdom, and personal Reigning in it, being
publicly held forth by many, and some going so far as to fix the time, when
the Lord (as they thought) would begin to Roar out of Sion, and to utter his
voice from Jerusalem: Now nothing by the unbelieving Adversary being seen in
order to it; O what scoffing and jeering is there now? Where is the promise of
his coming? Watchman, what of the night? watchman, what of the night? Where is
your Kingdom? Where are your reigning Saints? where is your 56, and 57? Ha, ha,
say they, ye are dreamers indeed.

For since the Fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were:] That
this later Apostacy may be the better known when it comes. The Holy Ghost
shows what will be the saying of the Scoffers at that time: You talk (say they)
of wonders, what great changes there will be in the world, what breaking-work,
and destroying Kingdoms and Powers. Nothing but overturning, overturning,
overturning, and that strange things and unheard of, will shortly come to pass:
But this proceeds from the folly and vanity of your hearts, mere delusion: for
there is nothing new under the Sun; but what is done now, or shall be, the like
has been before, and so all things shall continue as they are, till Jesus
Christ come to judgment.

Hence it is, That these Scoffers (putting off the evil day, and saying in
their hearts, Our, Lord delayeth his coming) will begin to smite their
fellow servants, by banishing some, and casting others into prison, and to eat
and drink with the drunken; that is, leaving their former more sober and honest
walking, will fall into the works of darkness: as rioting and drunkenness,
chambering and wantonness; and so lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God.
Hence it is (like the men of the old world) their minds will be on nothing but
their lusts: as pomp, pride, honor, riches, great Titles, and places, etc.
Hence it is that in their Councels (having interwoven their Interest with
Babylon) much studying there will be how to heal the Beasts deadly wound, and
what provision to make, that this later State-Apostacie may continue to many
generations. But he that sits in the Heavens shall laugh, they Lord shall
have them in derision, Psalm. 2. 4. Mark it Reader, they are laughers now and
deriders: but there is a day coming (and nigh at hand) when the Lord also will
laugh at their calamities, and will mock when their fear comes, Prove. 1. 26.
And the righteous shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance, Psa. 58. 10.

From such turn aside,] have no communion with them, but fly from them: Dutch.
Eorum conscuitudinem vitare jussit: Theop. Desire not (says Baldvin) their
friendship: and if they offer it to thee, refuse it. The words I take it, have
this meaning, as if he should say, You that shall live in the days of this
later Apostacy, and by the description here given of it, do plainly see that
such a perilous time is co^^* beware that ye withdraw your selves from it, and
be not one of them, neither stand in any relation to them, (as they are
Apostates) either by holding any place or office under them, neither
acknowledge them any way, whether by counsel, person, purse, service, etc. But
as Lot left Sodom, and Gods people are to come out of Babylon; so must this
Apostacy be left and departed from, by all such as expect a hiding place in
the day of the Lords wrath. What Moses spoke to the Congregation, is the
warning which the Spirit of God gives us here: Depart I pray you from the tents
of these wicked men, and touch nothing of theirs, lest ye be consumed in all
their sins, Number. 16. 26

I have been the longer in opening the later Apostasy, Because most of our work
lies here: for if this Apostasy be known, I mean as to the Time of it; that
which concerns the little Horn, and bottomless Beast, will easily be
understood. Because where this Apostacy is, there the others are: for they do
all, (as I said) contemporize, as I shall show in their places.

He that walks uprightly, walks surely: but he that perver^eth his ways
shall be known, Prove. 10. 9.

The backslider in heart shall be filled with his own ways, Pro. 15. 14. The

(...) THE CHARACTERS. OF THE Little Horn, OPENED.
HAving ended the latter Apostasy, I come now to the Little Horn. And here we
will consider three things.

1 What this little Horn is?

2 How it does appear, that the reign (or rather Tyranny) of the little Horn,
shall be in the three years and half?

3 Whether the present state-Apostacy be the little Horn?

In handling these particulars, I intend to do no otherwise, then I did before.
Explain the matter as I humbly conceive to be the meaning of the Holy Spirit,
and leave the application to the judgment of the sober Reader. Granting
withal, if he find not all things here set down exactly to agree with the
State-Apostacy of our time, and never till now fulfilled, with so much
clearness and certainty, we are not yet come to the time and reign of the
little Horn.

For the first, I do not understand, by the Little Horn, any single person, as
Antiochus Epiphanes, Julius Caesar, Domician, Mahomet, William the Conqueror,
King Charles, etc. But a Kingdom, or State, and so the most judicious
generally take it. Hence it is verse. 11. that his body, is mentioned, and ver.
26. his dominion. So then, as the ten Horns, are ten Governments, or States, so
I think is the little Horn, a State, or Government, which may thus be described.

A company of men in the last days, having left their former principles of
justice, Law, and Conscience, shall assume unto themselves, lastate or body
politic, appointing one as Head, and framing an instrument of Government
suitable to it.

This Horn is said to be Little.

1 Obscuro loco natum et plebium. Jacobus T^rin. Of his low birth, small and
mean beginning, which shows that this little Horn cannot be the fourth
Monarch. Chap. 11. 21.

2 Because The Kingdom does not by right belong unto him. Diodate, that is,
this Government shall be set up by a few persons, without the consent of the
people, yea against their will.

3 Little, because it will not have the faithful prayers of the Saints for it,
nor the hearts or hands of other people: but such Apostates, as are named, 2 Timothy 3. 2, 3, 4, 5.

4 Little, because among other Horns, or Kingdoms, this will not be allowed
for a Lawful State, otherwise then to serve their own turn, and to make
advantage and gain by it.

5 Little, because the Lord will not suffer him to be great, but will blast
his designs and actions both at home and abroad.

6 Little, because of the short time this State is to continue. viz. Three
years and an half; no longer.

I know some have thought, that by the word Little, A younger brother is meant.
I confess there may be something in it, for many do read, Cornu ultimum and
parvun, a horn, the last and little; Signifying that this Horn shall arise,
near or about the time, when the Elder, or former States and Kingdoms are
going down, and ready to be plucked up by the roots.

But howsoever it be Little in such considerations, yet it is said to be a
Horn, that is, a State, or Government.

1 Because, it shall have the name and Title of a civil power or Government
given to it.

2 It will push as hard as other Horns have done, against the Laws and
Liberties of the Nation, yea, and against the interest of Christ and his people.

3 This State will make Laws and Ordinances, which shall be as duly kept and
observed by the Apostates under it, as if they had been enacted by the greater
Horns, that is, by a more Lawful and just power.

Touching the second point, viz. that the Tyranny of the Little Horn shall be
in the three years and half; To prove this, the Text says, until a time and
times, and the dividing of times, Dan. 7. 25. The sense (I conceive) is thus.
From his rise, he shall have so much time allowed, or he shall so long
continue by the Lords sufferance, to exercise the cruelty and wickedness
mentioned in the Vision. That the meaning is so, appears by the Question and
Answer, Dan. 12. 6, 7. How long shall it be to the end of these wonders? for a
time, times and an half. As if he should say, For the vision of the little
Horn it shall be for a time, times, and an half, so long he is to continue,
to scatter the power of the Holy People, and when that time shall be expired,
the words of the Prophesy are fulfilled concerning him: For soon after the
judgment shall sit, and they shall take away his Dominion, etc.

Qu. But by a time, and times, and dividing of time what time is there meant,
or how much is this time? The common received opinion is, three years and an
half. These persecutions (says Diodate) shall last, one year, two years, and
half one year, that is to say, three years and half.

I confess in the application, I find few to agree with me, yet for the time,
tobee three years and an half, (neither more nor less) few writers which I
have seen, but take it so as I do. And for these few which understand it
otherwise, as making first, a time, times, and dividing of time, to be three
years and an half, and then out of the three years and half, to reckon each day
for a year* this I conceive neither agrees with Daniels manner of reckoning the
time, nor with other Prophets. That three days and an half, should be taken,
for three years and an half. So forty two months, for so many years, as there
are days in the months. Again One thousand two hundred and threescore days
for so many years: this is right, and according to the Scriptures, Numb. 14.
34. Ezekiel. 4. 5. But by a time, to understand a year, by times two years, and
dividing of time* an half year, and afterward, from these three years and an
half, to number years by days. There is not for this (I think) any ground in
the word of God.

Besides, why should not Daniel when he uses words and terms alike: be alike
understood: in chap. 4* 25. it is said seven times shall pass over ^hee; here
it is not questioned but by seven times; seven years are meant, no raising of
another number from days, to years: Now I see no reason why the Prophet in one
place should be understood, by Time, strictly a year, and in another, as many
years, as a year has daves, especially seeing it is familiar with Daniel to
set down his account in this manner, as chapter 11. 13. in the end, Haghi^tim
shan^m, of the times of years, see chap. 7. 12. and 8. 17. and 11. 14, 35, 40.
and 12. 4, 9. I might add, how three years and half was the term of Christ's
persecution in the flesh: the which being expired, immediately begun (upon
his resurrection) the setting up of his spiritual kingdom all the world over.
So three years and an half is the time of the sufferings of his witnesses under
the little Horn, the which being ended, they shall rise and stand upon their
feet again, and then begins, that which you have Rev. 11. 13, 14. the great
earthquake, and the sounding of the seventh Trumpet, and the kingdoms of this
world becoming the kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ.

Quest. But how does it appear, if by time, and times, and dividing of time,
three years and half are meant, that these are the three years and half, which
period the number of one thousand two hundred and threescore years, and
contemporises with the latter Apostasy, and slaying of the witnesses.

Answ. 1 Graserns against Junius, gives many reasons, that the Vision showed
Daniel concerning the Little Horn is to have its accomplishment in Novissim.
diebus, in the very last times toward the end of the world, and judgment shall
not pass upon him, usque ad consummationem irae, until the indignation be
accomplished. Dan. 11. 36. that is unt ill the forty two months are expired.
Histor. Antichrist. page 115. 119. etc.

If this be so (as I see nothing against it) then must this little Horn, be
before the rise of the witnesses, and the forty two months are expired: for he
shall have no Dominion or Power after that time.

2 Upon the destruction of the Little Horn, the Saints possess the kingdom:
but this they do not, neither is the Kingdom theirs, till the witnesses rise,
and the time of the Beasts Tyranny is expired. Hence I gather, that the three
years and an half, allowed the Little Horn, and the three years and an half, in
which the witnesses lie slain, must needs contemporise. I would have the reader
observe this, for I think there is some weight in it. If the taking of the
kingdom by the Saints, be upon the ruin of the Little Horn, and the rising of
the witnesses (as clearly it is so to me) then it must follow necessarily, that
the three years and half, given to the Little Horn, and the three years and
half spoken of the slain witnesses, are all one, see Dan. 7. 25, 26, 27.
compare Rev. 11. 8. 11, 12, 13, 15, etc.

3 Another Argument, I lay down thus, the book is not to be opened, until the
time of the end; which is in the three years and half, and the understanding of
it will be partly by the Characters of a little Horn. Now it is the Lords
usual manner not to lead his people back to things past, but to teach them the
understanding of Prophesies, by what is present, and doing in their own time,
when ye shall see the abomination of desolation spoken of, by Daniel the
Prophet, stand in the holy place etc.

Again, when ye shall see all these things, etc. Mat. 24. 15. 33. So the
little Horn must be seen before the wise will understand the end, and this is
proper to the three years and half.

4 It seems by Daniel, that the cause and ground of the Little Horns, making
war against the Saints, wearying them out, and scattering their power, will
be for bearing witness to Christ's visible and glorious kingdom, so that the
controversy now, will not be (as formerly it was) about the Church, Ministry,
worship, and discipline, but about the whole Rule, Dominion, and government
under the Sun, that is whether the kingdoms of the world shall continue (as
they are) in the hands of Tyrants, and oppressors, or they shall be Christ's,
and the Saints of the most high, according to that promise, And there was given
him dominion and glory, and a kingdom, that all People, Nations, and Languages
should serve him, and his Dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not
pass away, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed. Again, And the
Kingdom, and Dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven,
shall be given to the people of the Saints of the most high, whose kingdom is
an everlasting kingdom, and all power shall serve and obey it, Dan. 7. 14* 27.
And this proves likewise, that the three years and half of this Little Horn
must be the last of the one thousand two hundred and threescore years, it
being the last testimony of the witnesses, in the behalf of Christ, and the
main cause of their slaying by the Beast.

And here the Reader may understand not only the Time when the Little Horn
shall stand up, but one manifest Character to know him by: under his government
there will be a large tolleration of Religion, for he will pretend great care
to tender consciences, as that every one may have liberty to worship God in
what form he lists: only he will not allow that any should assert, what
the Scriptures plainly testify, concerning the breaking of the Image, and in
particular, that he shall be slain, and his body destroyed, and given to the
burning flame: The Saints shall take away his dominion to consume it, and to
destroy it* unto the end, any thing but this: but this will not be suffered:
no tolleration here of tender consciences: any lie rather will be born then
this truth, and how to suppress it will be the great business. And therefore
crafty council will be taken against Jehovah and his Christ.

I have handled the former points the more briefly, because I think they lie
open to very little exception. That which follows next is, whether the present
State-Apostacy be the Little Horn? I have said often before, I undertake not
the APPLYING PART: I shall only show (going over all the Characters) what this
Little Horn will be, as to his deportment and carriage, when he comes upon the
stage, to act a sad tragedy.

Behold there came up among them another little Horn, Dan. 7. 8.] Though this
little Horn be not one of the Ten; yet he grows upon the body of the fourth
beast, verse. 7. and so is part of the Image, Dan. 2. And here I would have the
Reader observe (which indeed has not been heeded by Expositors) that the
little Horn cannot be the persons or states, to which most men formerly have
applied it: for either they have taken it for a person or state: which was not
upon the head of the fourth beast, as Antiochus Epiphanes, Mahomet, the Turkish
Empire, Antichrist, or one of the ten Horns, as the Norman race, William the
Conqueror, Charles Stuart* etc. And thus both ways have mis'd the mark. For
however (as I said before) this little Horn, is not one of the ten, yet among
them, that is, upon the head of the Beast, as the rest are. Hence (I think)
this certainly may be asserted, that if the present state-Apostacy be not the
little Horn, it has not yet risen; For Daniels descripttion of it in this
place (among them, and yet another) agrees not with any person or State
hitherto mentioned by any writer that I have seen.

Quest. But why is he said to be among the ten Horns on the body of the Beast?

Ans. 1 Though he be none of them, yet through ambition he will seek to be
like them in state pomp, and all wastful vanities, he will assume their
Titles, Power, Privileges, be as absolute a Monarch as any of them; in a word,
either he will follow the former Horns, in all their exorbitancies, riot, and
excess, or will strive what he can to have it so.

2 That he is said to be upon the Beast, it is to show; notwithstanding his
former Declarations and Engagements, and warring a long time against Kingship,
when he comes to be the Horn, he shall uphold the rotten interest of the
fourth Beast (as her members) namely Priests and Lawyers, her moth-eaten
customs, and Traditions, and what else that filthy part of the image (viz.
feet and toes) is compounded of.

Another Little Horn] Junius, Piscator, and many others translate, the last
horn, being little, achari (says Willet) signifies the last as well as
another. The wisdom of the Holy Ghost is to be minded here, in making choice
of a word, whereby to show what this little Horn shall be.

1 Another; here is signified, though this horn be a State, or Government (as
was said before) yet shall it not have the constitution and form of a civil
State, it shall not have (I say) any stamp upon it, suitable either to a
kingdom, or a Commonwealth, as the ten Horns had: for howsoever some of them
at first were not fairly constituted, yet within a while that question was
taken off, and the government acknowledged by the People, to be just and
lawful. But this little Horn for all his policy and craft, will be Another
still, never able to wipe off usurpation and Tyranny, by gaining a formal
constitution of a State; And hence I take it he is said to be another.

But secondly, That he is said to be the Last, me thinks here I cannot but say
with Paul, O the depth both of the wisdom and knowledge of God: As there are
two Apostacies, the first and the last: so there are the first Horns, and the
last Horn: the first Apostasy, and the first Horns rise together, So says the
Scriptures: And the ten Horns which thou saw are ten Kings, which have
received no kingdom as yet; but receive power as Kings, one hour with the
Beast, Rev. 17. 12. The Kings and Horns I understand to be all one. The Roman
Empire broken to pieces, that is several Nations and people casting off the
Roman yoke, and constituting themselves absolute and free States: The Beast to
be the first Apostasy, or Antichristian kingdom, now these two have their rise,
and beginning at one time; so the last Apostasy and the last Horn rise
together; I hope the Reader will heed the sweet harmony of Scripture
Prophecies; surely it is not for nothing, that the little Horn is called the
Last; for as the first Apostasy and first Horns came up at one time, so the
last Apostasy, and the last Horn will be in one hour.

But again (for great is the mystery of godliness) here also may be meant as
the little Horn shall not grow upon the body of the Beast, till in the last
days, when perilous times shall come, and the former Horns near cutting, off.
So he shall be the last indeed, as verse. 24. For I think Gods hand, will be
so visible and eminently lifted up against him, in giving his body to the
burning flame, that none after him will presume to set up any State or
government any more upon the old Beast

Before whom there were three of the first Horns] I think it would rather
darken than lighten the matter, to mention the several opinions of men about
these three Horns. Some (understand the Turkish State to be meant by the
little Horn) will have Asia, Grecia, and Syria, to be these three Horns. Others
Egypt, Syria, and Cylicia. Others Siria, Egypt and Africa.

Again, such as take Antiochus Epiphanes, for the little Horn, are various in
their account. Some number Seleucus his elder brother, and Demetrius son to
Seleucus, and Philopater, his sisters son. Others leaving out Demetrius, choose
Antiochus the great, father to this Antiochus the vile. And a third sort leave
it indifferent which be named. So for others applying the little Horn to the
Pope; One takes it for the excommunication of this King, and that Emperor;
another for the deposing of such and such: Now that which I shall say to all is
this, whether we consider Kings or Kingdoms named by them, they were not any
of the ten Horns: neither were they broken by a little Horn, which grew upon
the fourth Beast, nor in three years and half, neither together, and at one
time: Nor does it appear by any History, that so many Horns (more nor less)
were plucked up by the persons named by them: nor that it was the last Horn,
which grew upon the fourth Beast, and another from the ten Horns.

Therefore I shall propound this to the Reader, to be considered and weighed
by him. whether England, Scotland, and Ireland, are not three kingdoms: and
these three at one time (as to their Privileges* Laws, Rights, Freedoms,
etc.) broken? And whether this be not done by men, who have the Characters of
the last Apostasy upon them; and such as call themselves a State and
Government, but never could formally put themselves either into a Kingdom or
Commonwealth. And whither the time in which all this was done, were not (as
probably it may be thought) near or about the period of the forty-two months.
But it is likely some will question, whether England, Scotland, and Ireland,
are three of the ten Horns, in the division of the Roman Empire.

To this I Answer. 1 All know that are acquainted with Histories and
Interpreters, such difference there is among them in the enumeration of the ten
Horns, whether understood of persons, or States, that nothing from them can be
certainly concluded.

And therefore I may say, and as groundedly (granting there were ten disstinct
divisions) that England was one, Scotland another, and Ireland a third, as
others who name either this or that Country.

But 2. My opinion is, (and so is the judgment of most) by ten, no precise and
certain number is meant, but an uncertain and indefinite: that is, the Roman
Empire dissolved into several States and Kingdoms. And thus was England one,
Scotland another, Ireland another. Neither does the Holy Ghost (I think) intend
any thing further; But many Nations and Countries should withdraw from the
Power of Rome, and become Independents, free and absolute in and among
themselves. So that by ten many are understood, as it is often so in scripture.
Numb. 14. 22. Job 19. 2.

Plucked up by the rootes] The Angel opening these words* verse. 24. says, he
shall subdue three Kings, Humiliabit, says Rob. Steven, and Pagnim, bring them
low, or humble them, as if he should say three Kingdoms, which shall arise
after the division of the Roman Empire (I would have the reader to consider
whether these may not be England, Scotland, and Ireland) being by the mighty
hand of God brought off, and raised up from a great deal of Tyranny, and
arbitrary Poner, under which they were enslaved, and having obtained much of
their ancient freedom, rights and Privileges, and in a hopeful way to a
through Reformation at home, and to have been instruments abroad of much good us
other Nations, in suppressing Tyranny and Idolatry: Behold on a sudden out of
the last Apostasy (as the bottomless pit) up starts the last Little Horn, who
humbles them, and brings them down under the oppression and bondage wherein
they were before (or rather more) hinders them in going on, in the work of
Reformation, and instead of doing good to other Nations, makes these three
Countries a reproach and scorn every where.

Now howsoever this Humbling and bringing down, may largely be taken. Yet, I
think the holy Ghost chiefly intends religious things, that is, this last Horn,
shall be an occasion of rendering the blessed name of God, and the cause of his
dear Son, contemptible to the World: The which before, was not only mightily
cried up and pretended to, but gloriously held forth, as a burning light,
before all people and kindreds, and Tongues, and Nations.

In this Horn were eyes, like the eyes of a man] This may be taken two ways.
1 Of his Carnal Wisdom worldly prudence, subtlety, policy, making an outward
show to be a great lover of Laws, of justice, and Equity, and the interest of
the People, hereby the easier and sooner to effect his own design. That he is
said to have Eyes, and no such thing mentioned of the Ten; This I understand
comparatively: For they did see, that is, they were crafty and politic, yet
so, as blind to what sight this Horn shall have, in all cunning devices. He
will exceed all that were before him, both for matter and manner of deceits;
their craft was showed, but now and then, and only in some of their public
affairs, and transactions, they studied other things, besides carnal policy,
and carried on some of their Actions without deceit, simply and honestly. In a
word, their Policies were but rough draughts at the belt. Whereas this Horn
(whosoever he be) will manage none of his actions without deceit, his head
and heart will never be off from studying craft, and for all his projects and
contrivements, they will be most artificial works.

But 2. And this I rather take to be the meaning. The Little Horn has Eyes,
the other none; Here is signified, that he will, by a subtle Practice, called
Religion; Liberty of Conscience, Gods glory the advancement of Christ's kingdom,
etc. set up himself, and his own Interest. A thing which the ten Horns never
saw, such eyes will be proper to this Horn: for he shall join himself to the
people of God, and take part with them against Tyranny and Idolatry, as seeing
it to be the way for his own advantage: As the Pope, Mahomet, and others,
brought their designs to pass by such Eyes: to wit religious pretenses.

In the same way will this Horn exalt himself: It will not be so much by
carnal Policy and the Wisdom of this World (for in this respect the other
Horns were not blind) but he gets power, place, and authority, another way
into his hands* namely, by standing up, for, And with a good Interest, and so
gains the hearts, and prayers of Gods people* and afterward having what he
desired, turns his HORN, that is, his Power, Army, and Council, against the
holy People, and the good old Cause, by which he was first raised.

Eyes of a man] Not of an Angel, this is added, to show, that all the time of
his Saint-like carriage, and when he appeared most earnestly zealous for the
interest of Christ and his people: like another John, his heart is not upright
before the Lord, but is a very Hypocrite, even that Fool, who says in his
heart, there is no God: For under all his Protestations, Oaths, Covenants,
great undertakings, etc. The Plot and Design which he will carry on, is how to
make himself, and his Family great, by the ruin of that CAUSE so much before
pretended to.

In a word, that he is said, to have Man's Eyes* I take the meaning thus: This
Horn shall be a notorious Hypocrite, a very Atheist, a Monster, a monstrous
Monster, one that shall discover more Hypocrisy, and Atheism, (if his former
and latter actions be compared together) then ever was done before him, by any
person upon the face of the earth.

And a mouth speaking great things] This is often mentioned. I beh^ld then*
because of the voice of the great words which the Horn spoke, verse. 11. Again,
A mouth that spoke very great things, verse. 20. the which is afterward
explained by the Angel, He shall speak great words against the most high, verse.
25. So indeed many Interpreters read. But others Translate it otherwise, as
Vatablu^, Pagnim, Montanus, To. Steven, etc. Men known to be skilful in the
Tongues: Not against the most high, but ex part altissimi, Letzad. On the part
of the Almighty: for the Most High, or in his behalf. Symmachus renders it,
(...), He shall speak as the high God, That is, his words shall be of
Holiness, Righteousness, Goodness, and Truth. Though in his Actions and
Practice there be no such thing. And if the matter be considered, there is good
ground for this reading. That which does most astonish Daniel, are the words of
the Little Horn.

Now there is little cause of Admiration, to hear a man speak wickedly, that
does wickedly. But to see a man make war against the Saints, weary them out,
by Bonds, and Imprisonment, destroy the Laws, Liberties, and Rights, of the
People, and commit all kind of Tyranny, and yet in words to Profess, he is
for God, and for the interest of Christ, and his people, and for the
Privileges, safety, and public good of the Nation, this indeed is enough to
amaze a Prophet. Therefore as Graserus rightly observes, this Horn, is one qui
impietati su^e Dei nomen pretendit, which shall pretend the name of God in all
his Impieties. He shall not cast a Saint into Prison, but will pretend Gods
glory for it. He shall not pluck up three Kingdoms by the roots: but will say
it is for the honor of God. If he break his Vows, Promises, Oaths, etc.
Really says he, it is for the sake of the most high: Thus every thing he
does, though it be for Babylon, and the great Whore, and to keep up any base
corrupt interest in the Nation, it is for Christ's sake, as he says*

Again, the reason why the word Letzad, has been rendered against the most
high. I conceive it to be thus, the little Horn has been taken by
Interpreters, for the open professed enemy of the Truth, as Antiochus
Ephiphanes, Mahomet, the Pope, etc. where as he is a subtle Hypocrite, always
speaking for God, and good things, though in his Actions (if you observe him
there) he shall plainly demonstrate that he regards neither God nor goodness.

I would not have men to be rash and heady Censurers, specially in the
Application of this little Horn. For truly I think, one of the clearest
Characters of him, is set forth in this place. Whenever this Dominion of his
shall be erected, if any complaint be made against it, for unrighteous
doings, (and for doing worse than any men did before) what will they say for
excuse; ex part altissimi, it is in the behalf of Christ, for the sake of the
godly party, to prevent new wars, and effusion of blood: Briefly all the
impleties and wickednesses committed against God and man, shall be defended
this way.

And to say the truth, except it be this shift, they will not find a fig-leaf
to cover their Nakedness.

And here it will not be a miss to give the Reader notice, that this little
Horn shall be so famous and notorious in his day, concerning the matter here
mentioned, that the same in scripture is often foretold. Your brethren that
hated you, that cast you out for my name sake, said, let the Lord be
glorified, etc. Isa. ^6. 5. Observe here four things.

1 This casting out must be by a Government, men who have gotten Power into
their hands, and so are stronger than their brethren.

2 They were Brethren, either in some Church, Army, Council, Parliament, Equals
and Companions.

3 How unjust, and sinful soever their proceedings are against their brethren,
by banishing some, or imprisoning others, etc. Gods Glory is pretended, as if
all were done of Conscience, and to do God good service.

4 Though this Apostate-State, thinks to cover their Malice and Cruelty by
mocking God: yet God will not be mocked, but as he sees their Hypocrisy and
Deceit, so he will discover it to their everlasting shame, and the honor and
comfort of the other.

This little Horn or Apostate-State, is likewise (as I take it) foretold by our
Savior. But and if that evil servant shall say in his heart, my Lord delayeth
his coming, and shall begin to smite his fellow servants, and to eat and drink
with the drunken* etc. Mat. 24 48, 49. First, this smiting must be understood
(as I said before) of persons that have gotten power into their hands, and so
exercise tyranny by authority. 2 They are fellow servants. All professors of
the Gospel, the persecutors have a form of Godliness, as the sufferers have
both form and Power. 3 That the wicked servant, smites his fellows, he
pretends, Justice, Conscience* and necessity for it: For so I take the sense:
as if he should say: I acknowledge Jesus Christ to be your Lord, and mine,
and do expect his coming as well as you, and that he shall be the only
Potentate, King of Kings. and Lord of Lords, have all power and Dominion given
him: notwithstanding seeing it will be a long while before that time comes,
and you would persuade the people that day is at hand, whereby occasion is
given of wars and Commotions, and to have my Dominion (as the LITTLE HORN)
taken away and consumed: these things I cannot suffer, as being against the
honor of God, and the good of his people; and therefore must correct such
persons as disturbers of our present Government.

4 Notwithstanding the specious pretenses of this wicked servant, as if he did
not smite his fellow servants, but out of tenderness and Conscience to the
glory of God: yet this, all the while apparently shall be seen in him, that
he eats and drinks with the drunken, all the vices and sins which Paul
reckons up of the Last-Apostates, are as visibly to be seen in him, as was the
Leprosy in Gehezies forehead.

For the close of this Character: it seems to me that Isa. 66. 5. and Mat. 24.
48. with the little Horn, Dan. 7. and the last Apostasy, 2 Timothy 3. are parallel
Texts of Scripture-prophesies.

His looks were more stout then his felows] If this Character had been well
minded, William the Conqueror, Charles Stuart, and the like, had never been
pitch upon: For it is expressly said, that this Horn must be stouter than any
of the ten.

I shall open the words in three things.

1 Howsoever we read of many stout Horns among the Ten, which were very
Tyrants, and for their oppression and cruelty, some of them were deposed,
others banished; some imprisoned; some put to death (as Charles Stewart in our
time) yet he cannot be the little Horn, who does not in an arbitrary and
lawless way exceed them all, how tyrannical soever their Government was. And
therefore unless we see a State, that has more violated and broken the Laws
of the Nation, destroyed the privileges of Parliaments, and Rights of the
People, more than ever Charles Stewart did, yea than ever was done since the
Conquest, or since the rise of the Beast; the Holy Ghost acquits it here from
being the little Horn. Nay, I say more (for God forbid, I should condemn the
righteous) if since the rise of the Ten Horns, it can appear that for plucking
up by the roots, the Laws, Liberties, and Freedom of the people, and ruling
according to will and lust, there has been done, by any of the Ten, what has
been done in our Time, we are not yet come, (I speak as I think) to the days
of the little Horn.

2 That he is said to have his looks sto^^ter then his fellows, here I think
the spirit of God, intends the likeness between the heads of the two
Apostacies* how stout the first was, we have showed; now much more might be
added. As thus

Pope Innoc. 72 Ar. 17 q 4 Siquis.
No man (says he) must dispute or doubt of my actions. Pope D^mase. 25. q. ^.
C. omnia.
Those that will not obey my Decrees are to be dispossessed, and sequestered of
all Honors and Estates without restitution. Auto-m^n. Sum. par. ^. Tit. 22. c.
5.
My power is greater than all created powers. Pop. Nich. 15. q. 6. Aut. de
elect. et elect. significa* in Glos.
I can aispense with Laws, Vows, Oaths, Covenants, etc. Bellar. de verb. dei.
What I say that must be reverenced and received for Truth. Greg. distin 81 c.
siquis et Leo cause. q 6. cap. multa.
And whosoever speaks against it, is forthwith an Heretic, yea, a very
Pagan, a Witch, an I do later, an Infidel. Bellar. de Romans pont. l. 2. c. 26.
In a word, I cannot be judged by any Prince or Prelate upon the Earth. Neque
ab omn bus simul in Concilio congregatis, not by all the Princes and Prelates
in the world, though in Council together. Glos. in c. 24. q. 3 si inimicus.
And such as I take to be my enemies, others are to take their enemies, and
forthwith to withdraw from them, and not so much as to look upon them.

I would have all men very careful whom they make the Little Horn: For I am
persuaded, what person soever he shall be, for Stoutnesse, he will be like
the head of the first Apostasy, that is, what the former has said, the latter
will attempt to do.

3 It is observed by some Expositors; that in verse 8. there is no mention made
of his Stunt looks. But afterward, verse 20. Hence they conceive, that he will
be worse at last, than at the beginning, grow more fierce and tyrannous
against the interest of Christ, and his people, toward his end, than he was
before: Indeed Evil men and seaue^rs shall wax worse and worse, 2 Timothy 3. 13.

And the same Horn made war with the Saints, and prevailed against them ^] As
the Characters of this Horn are proper to him: so in opening each particular,
if the meaning of the spirit be understood, we must find out such things to
be done by him, as were not done before by any other. Touching this war.

1 The ground of it will be (as has been said) about Christ's interest and
right to the Kingdom: For in the days of this Horn, the Saints will be
raised up very high in bearing witness for the son of David, against the
Rulers of the World, that the Time is at hand* in which all their Power and
Dominion, shall be taken from them. But more especially, will they stand up
against the Horn, as taking him to be the little Horn, and the first Enemy that
must be destroyed (as the subject of the first vial) and the greatest
obstructer to the work of the last times, in execnting the vengance of the
Lord, and of his Temple upon Babylon; whereupon he will use all the Policy and
Power he has (to keep his body from the burning flame) by persecuting the
Saints many ways, in appearing thus for the Lamb.

That such a Controversy shall be before Christ's Personal coming is manifest.
But those my enemies which would not that I should reign over them, bring
hither and slay them before we, Luke 19. 27. I know the place is usually
interpreted of Christ's spiritual reigning in the hearts of Believers: But the
scope and series of the Parable carries it otherwise, read verse. 11. 12. and
foreward. The meaning I take thus, toward the end of the forty two months, in
the three years and half, the dispute will grow high about Christ's visible
Kingdom: Some will assert it, others oppose it, and here begins the war
between the Horn and the Saints, which was never before in the world.

2 Though the war be raised upon this occasion, yet will the Horn so
palliate the same with pious pretenses, as it may well have the name of the
Holy War. For here the Persecutors, Smiters of their Brethren, and who cast
them out^t these must be Saints, and the well affected, and the good people:
And they that are imprisoned, banished, and overcome, these Malignants,
Traitors, Fools, Beasts, not worthy to live in Church or Commonwealth. So that
for Hypocrisy, the like was never showed before.

3 For this, War, I^o not conceive, that the Saints shall come forth into the
field, and fight the little Horn, and so be overcome by him; For till his
three years and half are expired, The Lord of Hosts will not muster the Host of
the battle against him. But by making war is meant, he shall oppress them
many ways, for bearing witness to Christ's Kingdom, against his power and
standing. See Jam. 4. 1.

Quest. But why is it called a war, if nothing be more intended, than the Horn
persecuting the Saints, they making no resistance.

I answer, the Holy Ghost (I conceive) calls it a making war, because this Horn
shall have his greatest aid, and help by an Army; These kind of men will
principally do his Commands against the Saints, be they never so unrighteous
and cruel. For other men in Civil places, as they will not care to serve him in
such a way, so he will not make use of them as of Soldiers under him. These
will be most for his turn, whether it be to banish, or imprison, or to put a
Saint to death.

Truly for this Reason (I think) though the Saints are mere Patients, yet it
is called a war. To signifye if it be this little Horn: Then 1 The instruments
which he shall chiefly employ against Gods people will be Army-men. 2 His
Soldiers will be so degenerate and mercinary, as they will not spare any of
the Lords precious ones, but whomsoever he bids them, to banish, imprison,
murder: they will do it, though they know no offense or fault they have
committed. Reader, the Application is thy part.

And prevailed against them] How this is done is showed, chap. 12. 7. he shall
scatter the Power of the Holy people: the which place has reference to Moses
words: when he sees their Power is gone, Deuteronomy. 32. 36. Not only may the
slaying of the Witnesses be here meant: but this Horn shall proceed and
prosper so far in this war, as all hope will be taken away from Christ's
cause ever to rise again. I shall give the Reader my thoughts of the thing. As
the darkest time of the Night, is about the dawning, so a little before the
expiration of the three years and half: The interest of Christ and his People
will be at the lowest ebb, and the Horn-State at the highest spring of glory
and greatness: For the Lord shall judge his people, and repent himself for his
servants, when he seeeth that their power is gone, and there is none shut up or
left. Thus Moses and Daniel, speak of one thing, that the Horn will not be to
the height of his persecution, till his body be ready to be given to the
burning flame, and therefore whosoever shall live under his Dominion, must
expect that he will be most fierce and cruel, when the period and end of his
time is come.

And shall wear (or tire) out the Saints, of the most high] Here we have the
Angels explanation of the words before, how he shall prevail, namely, weary
out the Saints, that is* by keeping some of them under bonds and banishment, as
thinking thereby to ire them out, and so compel them to deny Christ, as himself
had done before.

Others by poverty and outward wants being forced to leave their former
employment, and maintenance, that they might not be partakers of his sins. Re.
13. 16, 17.

This makes me think, that the Lord will not suffer him to shed much blood:
for howsoever he will not fear God nor man, and be most wrathsul, specially
toward the end of his time: Nevertheless, he shall but fulfill the Council
and purpose of God (as did Pharaoh, Judas, Herod, and Pontius P^late) that is,
not put the Saints to death, but ^ eary them out; no further (or very little)
shall he go, in spite of his Stont looks.

But again, they are not only Saints, but of the most high; which seems to
import that some Saints shall do well enough under this Horn: as to their peace,
liberty, and worldly enjoyments; only those who are (not for him but) for the
most High, he will make war against. And in this, his Hypocrisy, and other
wickedness, will be ^he less seen and noted. In honoring some Professors of
Religion: promoting them to great places and offices in his Council, Army,
Colleges, and making them his familiar friends, such I mean as will have
fellowship with him in the works of darkness, and justify his unrighteous
ways. howsoever in the mean time, he shall persecute others, who are in
truth, and really for the cause and interest of Christ.

I would have the Reader likewise to observe this, as a special thing whereby
to know the time of the Little Horn. There will be then two sorts of Saints*
the one he will hate, the other seem to love: the one he will take into his
Palace, the other cast into Prison: the one shall be raised from one degree of
preserment to another, the other thrown out of all. And the Reason is* because
the former are Saints of the most high: The latter are not, according to the
meaning of the text: The former like Moses will esteem the reproach of Christ,
greater riches than the treasures in Egypt: The latter like Demas, will embrace
the present world: and not care what becomes of the Kingdom of the most high,
so they may reign as Kings themselves in Pomp, Pride, and Pleasure, etc. with
the HORN.

And think to change times and Laws] To know what is here meant, it must be
observed, what the Holy Ghost speaks of this Horn, as to be his great work and
business: and this is set down in two things: viz. making war against the
Saints of the most high, and plucking up by the roots three Kingdoms: so that
as he takes twosorts of people for his greatest enemies. The fifth Monarchy-men,
and the Common-wealth-men: so he is fallen upon a design, whereby he thinks to
keep up his Power and Dominion, in spite of both Parties: that it, by changing
times and Laws: where note, how in the first he shows himself a very Atheist:
in the latter, a deep Politician. We will speak of both distinctly.

By Times in this place, I understand the set Time, in which the father has
promised to give his son, and the Saints with him, the Kingdom and Dominion,
and the greatness of the Kingdom, under the whole heaven, Psalm. 102. 13. Isa.
14. 31. Hab. 2. 3. Rev. 10. 6, 7, and 22. 10. Dan. 8. 19. and 10. 1. and 11.
27, 29, 35. As the Israelites after four hundred and thirty years were set free
from the Egyptian bondage. And afterward delivered from the Captivity of
Babylon, the seventy years, being expired. So the forty two months, and the one
thousand two hundred and sixty days, and the three years and half being
sulfilled, it is Gods purpose to begin the deliverance of his people from
Tyrants, and Oppressors, and to make them his battle Axe, and rod of his
strength to break the Image to pieces, and take the Kingdom, Dan. 7. 18. Now
the little Horn, reading such prophesies, and what great things are promised
the Saints, after a Time, Times, and dividing of time, and when three days and
an half are ended. And perceiving what encouragement some take from such
places, as intending to follow the call of God, when that Appointed time shall
come. What does he I (not believing the holy Prophesies*) be thinks to change
the Times: that is, whereas after three years and half, the Saints make account
the Times will be Christ's and Theirs, he on the contrary THINKS, to have it
his still* and to continue the Little Horn, as he was before; Yea, and to have
his son a Horn, after his decease.

That the Reader may clearly understand, what my meaning is, This I think. When
the days of the Little Horn are almost expired: the Wise shall understand,
that he is the Horn, and God will put in their hearts to fulfill his Will upon
him, which is to take away his Dominion, to consume it, and to destroy it unto
the End, Dan. 7. 26. This being perceived by him, he shall persuade himself to
frustrate what the Scriptures testify, and the Saints believe concerning him,
by some crafty devises which he has thought upon.

As Herod (a Type of this Horn) when he heard of the birth of the King of the
Jews, gathered all the chief Priests, and Scribes of the people together, to
know of them where he should be born. Though he intended only the death of
the Holy Child Jesus: yet he seeks to know, what the Scriptures had foretold
of the place and time; And why so; to change the time, that is, to make void
the Council of God. The like may be done by the Little Horn: being Troubled to
hear, that Christ is appearing against him, to take away his Dominion, he
gathers the Priests and Scribes together, and inquires of them about the Time:
who can inform him, (some of them at Least) that after three years and half,
the Horn must be destroyed: what does he now? Thinking to change the Time,
he does all that he can, by power and craft to escape the revenging hand of
God.

Again, it is worth the noting, though the chief Priests and Scribes, had not
the Grace, to go with the Wise men unto Christ, yet had they so much knowledge
in the Scriptures, as they could tell the Tyrant, the place where he should
be born, whereby to further his bloody design.

So some Ministers of the last Apostasy, by the light which they have of the
Prophesies of the Last Times, may be able to inform the Horn, when his three
years and half are ended, and yet remain still with him, and not go forth with
the Wise to follow the Lamb.

Quest. How will he think to change the Times, that it may not be Christ's
time, but His after the three years and an half are expired.

Answ. My opinion is, these three ways.

1 As the Saints of the most high will rise in their Testimony against him
(especially about the Time of his End:) So on the other hand, he will engage,
revolted Professors, to appear for him more than they did, in justifying his
Government and ways: aspersing their Dissenting Brethren, to speak things, of
spite, ignorance, Preposterous zeal, and what will they have? men may be as
good as they will, etc. And thus getting the Apostates every where to cry him
up, for a Nursing Father, and his Government, the prop and pillar of Religion,
he will think to change the times.

As a little before Isreal's deliverance out of Egypt, Moses and the Magitia^s
had a sore conflict; and the like between Elias and Baals Priests, a little
before they were put to death* So I conceive, a little before his Dominion is
taken from him, the Controversy will grow high between the Witnesses of Christ,
and Apostates, on whose side the Truth is.

2 He will scatter the Power of the holy people, grow so high in Pride and
Stoutnesse, near his end, that it shall seem their Power is gone, and there is
none shut up or left. So far shall he prevail against the remnant of the
woman's seed; that having before stain the witnesses, he shall think there are
none left, either in prison, or out of Prison, to take away his Dominion, and
cast his body to the burning flames, when the three years and half are expired.
As the scum and dross is wiped off, and thrown into the fire, when it has
spread it self over the Pot, and nothing of the liquor seen: so the destruction
of this Horn will be, when he thinks he has the cause of Christ down under
him, and no appearance or sight thereof is left, Psalm. 119. 119.

But lastly, He thinks to change the Times by his Army: And indeed his
greatest hope will be in this.

For first, The Army must be purged, that is to say, not a conscientious
Soldier left in it, specially an Officer: not a Man if known that his
Principles are for smiting the Image. Secondly, Such mercinary fellows shall
be raked together* as like the Turkish Janazaries, and Spanish slaves in the
Indies, they will serve his turn in any thing. As those Bloud-suckers which are
applied to men's bodies. Wheresoever they are laid (be the place well or ill)
there they stick, and do the work they are applied for: So the Soldiers of
this Horn, whatsoever they are Commanded, that they will do, be the party good
or bad, sick or sound, all is one to them: The will and Lust of their great
Master shall be obeyed, though it be against the express Law of God.

3 Their main business is now, to hunt after the Saints of the most high,
break their meetings, and imprison such as they think might promote the
interest of Christ, and his people, against the Little Horn, had they liberty.
Fourthly, it is probable he will cause his soldiers to take away from some of
the Fifth Monarchy-men, their Arms, and Weapons, not leave them a Sword,
Musket, Pistol, Pike, etc. it may be not a Horse, nor Money to buy them bread:
And having done all this, now he thinks (and has he not reason for it) he
has changed the Times.

It is observed by some, when Ahab was told by the Prophet, that the Lord would
bring evil upon him, and cut off his posterity, 1 King. 21. 21. that he takes
more Wives and Concubines, and begets no less than seventy Sons, 2 King. 10.
1. Thinking thereby either to have prevented what the Lord had threatened, or to
make him the more work: So the Horn understanding, that his Power and Dominion
is to be destroyed: now he will bestir himself: devising and practicing all
he can, either to cross the Lords decree against him (change the Time,) or put
him hard to it. Thus vain man would be wise, though man be born like a wild
asses colt. Job 11. 12.

For the other particular: We are to consider 1 What is meant by Laws? 2 How
he thinks to change them?

Quest. What are these Laws which he thinks to change?

Answ. 1 That Form of Government, which was established before, and to which
the People had submitted and engaged to maintain. This I think is meant by
changing the Laws, the abrogating of that kind of Government, which by the
Legislative Power of the Nation, was ordained, and the good people every where
had consented to.

2 A change in all Fundamentals. As to that Power, and Right which is in the
people, to choose their* own Representatives, and the Privileges of
Parliaments. These two things he will pluck up by the roots, viz. take away
from people and Parliaments, their power and privileges: and assume all to
himself: yea, so Arbytrary and Lawless will he be herein, that never a
Tyrant before him (governing the Nations where he shall be) ever durst to
attempt the like. And so much the Reader is to observe: For my mind gives me,
whosoever does not this, he is not the little Horn in Daniel. If the
foundations be destroyed, what can the righteous do? Psalm, 11. 3.

3 Such laws as were made for every individual person, whereby every private man
before had ways and means to help himself in case of wrong and oppression,
whether it concerned his person or Estate: But these he will make void, and
instead thereof his Will shall be for a Law, as to imprison and banish whom he
will, and keep them there as long as he will: And to take men's Goods and
Estates from them, when, and how much he pleases: So that only his will, and
nothing else shall be a Law for men to walk by, and trust to, neither will they
have any other defense (whiles this Horn raigns) to preserve themselves and
families from ruin.

Quest. But how does he think thus to change the Laws?

Answ. 1 Ex part altissimi, in the behalf of God, as following providence and
necessity, and that he could do no otherwise, to preserve the Nations in Peace:
Especially the godly party, and tender Consciences, who above all earthly
things he has a fatherly care of. And this will be (in the time of the Horn)
the greatest plea among Apostates. How much it concerned the honor of God, and
the interest of Christ, and his people, to take away from the People their
Power, and from Parliaments their ancient Privileges: Remove foundations, lay
the Law aside, and Rule by Will and Lust, leave the People nothing to help
themselves from violence and wrong, in respect of their Persons, or Estates:
yea, the Impudence of Turn-Coats and Hypocrites at this time will be such*
that whosoever grieves and Complains because the Laws are changed, shall be
branded for Malignants, men that seek themselves, and are discontented because
the Power is not in their hands.

2 Whereas it is said he will change Laws, the meaning seems to be, when he
has laid the former aside, he will (to use the Scripture phrase) Invent to
himself the INSTRVMENT of a foolish shepherd: stuff up some thing (as Michal
did the Bolster with goats-hair) and lay it in the place of the other. Not that
he shall think what he has done, is worth any thing (for he will laugh at it
himself, and before the three years and half are expired, call it all to
naught) But as men to quiet fools and children, when they have taken good
things from them, put a babble or trifle into their hands: So it is some BABBLE
or Trifle* which he will give the People: of purpose (as Children and fools)
to still them and that they may not cry after the GOOD OLD LAWS which he has
taken from them.

3 My Opinion is (when this Horn shall reign) in changing the Law, he will do
as D. Alva did, choose a Council. And in this he will be very subtle, as taking
the persons (whom he will have to be of his Council) out of several sects and
parties. It may be from the Anabaptists one, from the Independents two or
three, and so from the Presbyterians, and Cavileers, more or less.

By which means he makes account that his changing of the Law: will be the
sooner allowed by all sides and sects.

4 In this change of the Law, he will make use of Corrupt Lawyers: a thing easy
to be done (for I verily think when this Horn shall rule, there will be few
Lawyers but as rotten as dirt) These Wretches and Traitors to God and their
Country (to have preferment and places under him, and to keep up old rotten
Customs and Corruptions in the Law) will bend their tongue like their bow for
lies: Countenance him, and go along with him, in the worst o^ his Actions,
contrary to all Law, and against their Knowledge, and Conscience, and Oaths
which they had often taken. To this might be added, what a watchful Eye the
Horn will have on such, as shall appear for Laws and Freedom of their poor
Country, not only thrust them out of place and practice, but imprison them,
and possibly more too (when that time is) before it do expire. But

5 And Lastly, as no People have had their Laws changed, and an Arbytrary Power
set over them, and so enslaved to the unlimited Commands of some men, but it
has been by the Power of the sword: so questionless, whatsoever this Horn
shall do, he will do it by an Army, which will readily put in execution all his
Orders and Appointments, be they never so unreasonable, illegal, and unjust,
as was said before.

It is said of Christ's enemy, Mat. 13. 25. that he sowed Tares among the wheat:
He plucked not up the wheat, though he mixed his Tares with it. But this Horn
does worse: For though other Tyrants before him, sowed Tares, that is, brought
in many things which were Arbytrary, and Illegal: yet they plucked not up the
Wheat: but this MIGHTY MAN will not leave any good Corn standing: nothing but
his bitter Tares for the people to feed upon.

But for all this, the Holy Ghost tells us, he does but think to change Times,
and Laws: for no such think indeed can he do. But like a man in his sleep,
dreams he has great things, and when he awakes finds it altogether
otherwise. So will his actions be, he builds Castles in the Air, promises a
great deal to himself, but he that sits in heaven, does laugh him to scorn,
and will scatter this proud Horn in the imagination of his heart. So that in
the three years and half, nothing is done for him (as to the changing of Laws
and times, though his own creatures be employed in the work, read Psalm 52.
and 75. Exodus 15. 9, 10. as appliable to this.

That it was no more but Thinking in respect of changing the Times, will appear
by and by, when we come to speak of his End. Neither will it be more than
thinking, in respect of changing Laws: For never shall he be able to establish
his Government: nor will any of his Acts or Ordinances (made by him in the
three years and half) be acknowledged for LAW, when that short time is
expired, but thrown out as things execrable and abominable.

This too, is very considerable; howsoever the main work of the Horn, in the
three years and half, will be about his own interest, how to secure himself
and settle the Government of the three Pro^ince^ (which he has plucked up by
the roots) in his own Family, yet shall his Dominion be taken from him, before
any thing is perfected. So that he is but a THINKER and DREAMER at most:
Nothing shall he bring to pass for his own turn and purpose. Thus shall the
Scriptures be fulfilled in him. A man shall not be established by
wickedness, Prove. 12. 3. The expectation of the wicked shall perish, Prove. 10.
28. The wicked shall fall by his own wickedness, Prove. 11. 5. The house of the
wicked shall be overthrown. Prove. 14. 11. The Lord will destroy the house of
the Proud, Prove. 15. 25. An inheritance may be gotten hastily at the
beginning: But the end thereof shall not be blessed, Prove. 20. 21.

And they shall be given into his hand] This may be meant

1 Of God, by whose sufferance the Horn shall prosper, yea take root and grow
as the Prophet says, Jer. 12. 2. and so doubts not, but to bring to pass all
his designs in respect of changing both Times, and Laws.

2 They shall be given him by men, viz: the Apostates of that time: And these
the most eminent and heads of the people, whether Ministers, Magistrates,
Lawyers, Soldiers. It was told David, that Ahitophel was among the
Conspirators with Absalom. He had but one Ahitophel with him, this Horn will
have many, subtle and crafty foxes. But I wish them a better end. So then by
this giving, is signified, that he will plead Right to his Dominion and
Government, as appointed thereto by God and man, no Intruder or Usurper:
neither in attempting to change times and Laws, does he more, then he has
warrant and ground for it.

I would have this likewise to be heeded: whosoever this Horn is, he will
plead hard for the lawfulness of his power, as Given by God and man into his
hand. Howsoever in truth, he receives it from Gods only permissively. As a
Theif may take a purse from men by force and fraud.

Thus I have done with the Little Horn as to his Action: That which follows is
his suffering. Thus the Spirit of God gives us a full history of his life and
death. In his end and punishment we may consider. 1 The Time. 2 The Author. 3
The Instrument. 4 The Judgment it self. And lastly, How and in what manner.
Some thing I will speak (though briefly) to each particular.

For the Time] It will be immediately upon the expiration of the three years
and half. Though the Lord did not shorten the term of his peoples abode in
Egypt (viz. four hundred and thirty years, Fxod. 12. 41.) nor their seventy
years captivity in Babylon, but let it run out to a day: yet being out, he
presently delivered them according to his promise: So the little Horn shall
have his full time of three years and half (bearing date from the day he was
constituted a Horn) but no more may he expect, for the mouth of the Lord has
spoken it. Be silent O all flesh before the Lord: for he is raised up out of
his holy habitation, Zach. 2. 13. This Time contemporises with the woman's
second coming out of the wilderness, Rev. 12. 14. and the rising of the
witnesses, Rev. 11. 11. and with that set Time in the Prophet, Psalm. 102. 13.
So likewise, Rev. 16. 1. And I heard a great voice out of the Temple, saying to
the seven Angels, go your ways, and pour out the vials of the wrath of God,
upon the earth. And the first went and poured out his vial upon the earth, etc.

It is an Allusion to Soldiers, who are ready to charge and fight the enemy,
but do it not till they have the word of Command. So Gods people will be
prepared for the work, before the years be expired. But as no word of Command
will be given them to go out, till then: so they will wait (as a people
prepared for the Lord) until that time shall come.

But howsoever by the Scriptures we may know the beginning of this judgment,
yet how long the time will be in the execution, that is not certain; but
probably a very short time, yet so, as gradually. First, A dawning, and
afterward the light more and more appearing.

2 For the Time, The Little Horn is to be destroyed before the other ten. I
beheld till the beast was slain, and his body destroyed, and given to the
burning flame, As concerning the rest of the Beasts, they had their Dominion
taken away, yet their lives were prolonged for a season and Time, Dan. 7. 11.
12. The meaning I take to be thus. The Term of the ten Horns do expire with
the little Horn; and in that respect, their Dominion is said to be taken away:
yet their lives were prolonged: that is, their Power and Government is not to
be broken to pieces, till the little Horn be first consumed. Hence it is that
the little Horn or State-Apostacy, (for I tak it to be all one) is the subject
of the first vial, as I have showed and provedelsewhere. (see the Book Truth
with Time.)

Quest. But why is the little Horn to be destroyed before the other ten?

Answ. 1 As the Israelites overthrew Moah and Ammon (Lots posterity and near of
kin to them) because they sought to hinder them from going into the good Land,
to fight the Lords Battles against the Kings of Canaan. So this Horn (by
profession a brother) in that he will hinder the Saints of the most high, from
going forth against Babylon, and the Kings of the earth, it is a righteous
thing with God that he should fall first by the hands of the mighty O^es, Isa.
63. 1, 2, 3, 6. I take the meaning thus, The Lord will smite Edom first, that
is, false brethren and Apostates, and afterward tread down other people in his
anger.

2 This Horn and latter Apostasy, is a luke warm State, neither hot nor cold,
and therefore the Lord will spue it out of his mouth, not cold because it has
a form of godliness, not hot, because it denies the power of it.

A thing offensive to the Stomach cannot be born, but a man will be rid of it
as soon as may be. When the forty two months are ended, the Horn will be
destroyed first: And no marvel* for he is more offensive and odious to God
than the rest (I would thou were cold or hot) and therefore the Lord will ease
himself of this Enemy, as one that he cannot bear, nor suffer to have his life
prolonged, as the other Ten.

And here Gods order in pouring out the last Vials is to be noted: he will not
begin with Spain, France, Germany, etc. But with the little Horn; Neither may
we reckon any war past, or to come, to be the war of the Lamb against the
ten Kings, Rev. 17. 14. or the smiting of the Image, Dan. 2. or rewarding
Babylon, Rev. 18. 5, 6. till this Horns Dominion be taken away, and utterly
consumed. Not observing this, great mistakes have been about former wars, in
bringing them under the Vials, as the Sweden, English, Holland, to the second,
third, and fourth vials. Whereas to me it seems clear by Scripture, the first
thing which will be done in fulfilling the Prophecys of the last times (I
speak of war) is the cutting off of this Horn, and nothing will be done
against Babylon and the ten Kings (as the proper work which the hundred forty
and four thousand, and the called chosen, and faithful shall be put upon) till
this thing be done.

2 For the Author of his judgment? It is God and Christ, as appears Dan. 7. 9,
10, 11, and afterward more briefly, verse. 26. But the judgment shall sit. That
this Horn, by a divine judicatory, is to have his dominion taken from him, and
his body given to the burning flame: there are many memorable things in it.

1 Here is showed, that the Lord will give him no more time, nor be patient
any longer, neither suffer him to proceed any further in his Tyranny, and
Hypocrisy, but set all his former sins before his face, and tear him in pieces,
and there shall be none to deliver him. He thought to have gone beyond his
time, yea, and God too, but now vengeance has reached him, notwithstanding all
his former cunning shifts in hope to have prevented it. Lo this is the man that
made not God his strength, but trusts in the abundance of his riches, and
strengthens himself in his wickedness, Psalm. 52. 7. and 9. 6, 7. and 94. 20.

2 That the Lord from his Throne judges him. Here is signified, what God is
about to do: viz. destroy Tyrants and all unrighteousness of men, and to
establish Peace and Righteousness in the earth: And indeed now is the way made
for it, and never the like before in the World. Open ye the gates, that the
righteous Nation which keeps the Truth may enter in, Isa. 26. 2. This lest
Horn, or Apostasy, kept shut the gates of righteousness: Other Nations because
of him, could not come into the ways of Truth, therefore he that loves
Righteousness, and hates Wickedness, brings him before his Throne, and cuts
him off for a worker of iniquity, Psalm. 45. 6, 7. and 79. 2.

3 This shows, that the Saints in taking away his Dominion, and casting his
body to the burning flame, shall therein do no more but what is just and right,
and what ought to be done. No man can justly blame an Officer for putting in
execution the just sentence of a lawful Judge: But the judgment shall sit.
Though Hypocrites, and Apostates may cry out against them of cruelty, and self
revenge, when they shall see the Horn trampled under their feet like dirt: his
Abetters and Followers bound in Chains and Fetters of iron, and made exemplary
to the World, for causing the name of God and his Truth to be blasphemed: yet
will they be faultlesse in all this before the Throne of God: for they only
execute the judgment written; for his banishing and imprisoning of the Saints,
he had neither the Law of God nor Man for it; but what is done to him, is from
the throne Psalm. 89. 14.

4 Here likewise is signified what knowledge and light, Saints shall have, in
pouring out the vial upon him, and how free they will be in that work. It
grieves Officers many times, and troubles their Consciences, to do what they
are commanded about punishing of others. But here will lie no scruple in the
way: for the Judgment shall s^, they shall certainly know it is the mind and
will of the Lord that they should do so. The servants of the Horn, when they
persecuted the Saints, knew indeed, therein they pleased him, but not the Lord.
It will now be quite otherwise, they who destroy the Horn, will know they
please God, though not him.

5 This shows how impossible it is for the Horn to escape destruction, when the
three years and an half are ended. As a Malefactor being condemned at the Bar,
and delivered up into the Executioners hand, has small hope to br^ak away from
him. So this Horn (his time being out) as a condemned person in the Court o
Heaven is given up to the Saints of the most High, and they shall take away his
Dominion, etc. Now i^ he can get out of their hands let him.

6 That he has his judgment from the throne, It denotes, in what an
amazement, and fright the Apostates will be round about him, as having neither
Hope nor Heart to stand any longer by him. Who will dare attempt the rescuing
of a Murderer or Theif, being by the judgment of the Court delivered over to
the Executioner. THE JUDGMENT SHALL SIT. It is said verse 11. His body shall
be given to the burning flame. Men fly from fire: If a House be burning, and
in a flame, who will venture to run into the burning flame to fetch out the
richest Treasure. It will be here with the Horns confederates, as it is said
of the Merchants of Babylon. They shall stand a far off, for the fear of his
torment, weeping and wailing, and saying alas, alas, that great Apostasy, and
head of it, that was clothed in fine linen, and purple, and Scarlet, and
decked with gold, and precious stones, and pearls: For in one hour so great
riches is come to naught. Of this Horn and Apostasy, given to the burning
flame, and what dreadful terror it will cause among the Apostates: The Prophet
speaks, The sinners in Zion are afraid, fearfulness has surprised the
Hypocrites: who among us shall dwell with devouring fire? who amongst us shall
dwell with everlasting burnings? Isa. 33. 14. when the earth opened and
swallowed up Kora^h, Dathan, and Abiram, it is said, all Israel that were round
about them, fled at the cry of them, for they said, lest the earth swallow us
up also, Numb. 16. 34. That the Horn has his judgment from so glorious a
Throne: Read Dan. 7. 9, 10, 11. No doubt is signified, that his destruction
will be so terrible, strange, and unheard of, as those near him will be at
their wits end, striving who can be farthest off, Revel. 11. 13.

7 And Lastly, That the Horn is thus judged: it is to show how the Lord will
acquit his innocent servants, from all the false aspersions of Apostates
formerly raised against them. In the days of the Horns reign, how were the
faithful servants of Christ abused, called Traitors, Beasts, Devils: thrown
into Prison, and scattered every where; for witnessing against their Hypocrisy,
Apostasy, Covenant breaking, and nothing thought bad enough to inflict upon
them. But the judgment shall sit. Now it shall be discerned between the
Righteous and the Wicked, who were sincere, and on the Lords side, and who were
dissemblers, and sought only themselves and their own interest. Now as Jannes
and Jambres with stood Moses; so do these also resist the truth, men of corrupt
minds, reprobate concerning the faith. But they shall proceed no further: For
their folly shall be manifest unto all men, as theirs also was. 2 Timothy 3. 8,
9. But how was the folly of Jannes, and Jambres made manifest? I Answer, when
they could not do with their enchantments as Moses did, but were forced to
confess unto Pharaoh, This is the finger of God, Exodus 8. 18, 19. And when
they could not stand before Moses, because of the boils, chap. 9. 11. So shall
their folly be manifest (he means directly the last Apostates) their spiritual
enchantments shall fail them, and Gods stroke will lve (like a boil) so heavy
upon them, as they shall be forced to say, we have been Apostates, and played
the Hypocrites, and these that witnessed against us, kept the Commandments of
God, and had the testimony of Jesus Christ.

We come now to the next particular; namely, the instruments, by whose hand
the Lord will destroy him. It is said, they shall take away his dominion, to
consume it, and destroy it unto the end, Dan. 7. 26. Observe here, it must be
taken from him, he will not freely give it up. As thieves, and pirates, having
by unjust ways taken great bootys, will not let them go, unless by a stronger
party, they are forced from them. By the word (they) Saints are meant, verse.
18. And particularly I take it to be the Angel, which shall pour out the first
vial, Rev. 16. 2. under that Angel are specially comprehended, such who before
witnessed against his Apostasy; and Tyranny, and suffered under him, for their
testimony, Isa. 14. 2. and 33. 1. Ezekiel. 39. 10. As Gideon with three hundred
men, broke the Hosts of the Midiarites, and others afterward came in to them,
and pursued the enemy, and so obtained a full and perfect victory: Thus some
may begin the work, and then others fall in with it, till his Power and
Government be utterly destroyed.

Quest. But shall none but Saints, be used as instruments, to execute Gods
judgment upon him?

Answ. Some indeed think so, and give these Reasons. 1 This honor have all his
Saints, Psalm. 149. 9. as if this were their privilege alone, to execute the
judgment written: the which relates (say they) unto the Vials.

2 If the hundred forty and four thousand, Rev. 14. 1. do take in the whole
number which the Lord will employ against the Dominion of the Beast, Civil, and
Ecclesiastical, then it must follow, that Saints only shall destroy him. But
the first is clear, and cannot be denied. Ergo, etc.

3 They read no where in scripture, that Christ will take any Instruments with
him, to execute his last plagues upon the Kingdoms of the World, but holy
persons, neither are wicked men, in any place so much as once named, Psalm. 149.
5, 6. 7. ^sa. 13. 3. Dan. 7. 18. Joel 3. 11. Rev. 17. 14. Psalm. 110. 2. Psalm.
50. 5.

4 The work it self, (they think) will not admit of any but Saints. For, First,
It is to destroy all manner of ungodliness and unrighteousness in persons and
things. Secondly, It shall be done fully and faithfully, not by halves, and
haltingly, as things formerly were, which cannot be so, if profane persons
should be used. Thirdly, The work is properly Christ's and for Christ, that he
alone may be exalted, and therefore very unlikely it is that he will be
beholden to his Enemies for it. Fourthly, It is a work that requires spiritual
principles: neither can it be done without Faith, which wicked men have not.
Thus some.

Howsoever I do agree with these men. that the Kingdome-work shall be in the
hands of Saints, and by them managed, and carried on: And therefore called the
War of the Lamb.

Yet two things are to be minded.

1 Though they shall all have (I think) the Characters of visible Saints, yet
not all alike: Some will be weaklings, men very low, and of little light, and
life, to the work, to what others have: and yet received. Again Secondly,
howsoever in the judgment of Charity all may be reputed Godly, yet there may
be some not enlightened further, than for Reformation in Civil things: And in
that respect, to wit, upon Commonwealth principles, will join with their
brethren, the fifth Kingdom men, against the Little Horn, and Babylon, thereby
to recover their Ancient Liberties and Rights. As the Two Tribes and half, went
armed over Jordan, before their Brethren, and left them not, till the other
Tribes were set and settled in Canaan; and then returned back to the Country
which they had chosen. So it is probable, some who have chosen the Land on this
side Jordan (I mean) COMMONWEALTH-PRIVILEDGES will not only join with their
Brethren, whose Lot is on the other side: but it may be, be before them in
the War: and when the Canaanites are subdued, will be content to sit down in
their Lot of Freedom and Liberty.

Object. But some say, that Saints shall not destroy the Little Horn, nor the
ten Horns, neither the Image, Babylon, etc. neither must they (as Saints, and
to advance the cause and Kingdom of Christ) make War at all. But suffer all
things, and be patient under Tyrants and Oppressors, till Christ himself
appear, and march in the head of his Army.

When the Ziphites had treacherously betrayed David, unto Saul, what says the
Tyrant? blessed be ye of the Lord, for ye have compassion on me, 1 Samuel 23.
21. I must confess, these men show a great deal of Compassion to Tyrants and
Persecutors, as to hearten and encourage them in their cruel and bloody ways:
But in the mean time let them know (whether it be done of knowledge or through
ignorance, that I leave) They do most unworthily betray the son of David, as to
his Cause, Kingdom, and People, into the hands of Bloodthirsty Saul's.

That much work shall be done by Saints (as Saints) and upon the account of
the fifth Kingdom, before Christ personally appear, I prove thus:

1 Christ's personal coming will not be, till after the pouring out of the
sixth Vial, at the great battle of Arma-geddon, against Gog and Magog,
specially in the Jews behalf, Rev. 16. 15. and 19. 11, 12. etc. Ezekiel. 38. 12.
Joel 2. 11. Zach. 14. 1, 2, 3. Dan. 12. 1. But before that time, the Little
Horn and the ten Horns, and the great Whore, or Babylon, are to be destroyed
as the subjects of the five first Vials.

2 The Ten Kings which shall hate the Whore, and make her desolate, etc. Rev.
17. 16. do not this, until the Lamb overcomes them, verse. 14. Now by the Lamb,
Christ personally, cannot be understood, but his powerful presence with his
called, chosen and faithful, as instruments in that work. For if Christ
overcome them personally, how can it be said, that they afterward have burnt
the Whore, and yet Christ not come; Reader note this, it seems clear by the
Scripture, that the Whore (I mean the State and Dominion of the Beast) must
fall by the ten Kings, before Christ come in person, see Revela. 18. with
Chapter 19. 1, 2, 3, 4. where the Lord is praised for that victory, and this is
before Christ appears, verse. 11, 12. etc. Now then, what more absurd than to
say, Christ in person shall overcome the ten Kings, and they afterward ruin
Babylon, and yet Christ does not come till Babylon be ruined.

3 In Psalm. 110. The Prophet shows how and in what manner the Father will set
his Son upon his holy hill of Zion, and the Throne of David, to order it, and
to establish it with judgment and with Justice. The Lord shall send the rod of
thy strength out of Zion, ve. 2. By the rod of his strength, surely he means
the Saints, called the Rod of his inheritance, Psalm. 74. 2. Jer. 10. 16. with
which Rod he will smite the earth, Isa. 11. 2. break the Powers of Nations and
Kingdoms to pieces, like a potters vessel* Psalm. 2. 9. ler. 51. 19, 20, 21.
etc. Then follows, The Lord at thy right hand, shall strike through Kings in
the day of his wrath, verse. 5. meaning no doubt at the Arnia-geddon Battle,
where the Kings of the Earth, and of the whole World are gathred together, Rev.
16. 14. In the former War, Christ sits at the fathers right hand, whilst he
is making the enemies of his Son, his footstool, that is, by the rod of his
strength sent out of Zion. But in the latter war, the Father is at the Sons
right hand. Besides, in that he says, I will make, etc. this cannot be
understood of Christ, as the instrument of the work, but Saints. And this same
order and manner of proceeding we find every where in scripture, that the
executing of the last judgments upon the Kingdoms of the world, shall be by
Gods people first, these shall cut off the Little Horn, be new threshing
instruments and weapons of war, Carpenters, Reapers, the Angels of the Vials,
etc. by whom Jehovah will make Christ's enemies his footstool, Dan. 7. 26. Isa.
41. 15. Jer. 51. 19. Zach. 1. 21 Rev. 14.

4 Upon the rising of the witnesses, there follows an Earthquake, and the
tenth part of the City fell, Rev. 11. 13. This cannot be meant as done by
Christ personally, for afterward it is said, The Kingdoms of this World are
become his, and ^ee reigns, verse. 15. 17. Therefore (I think) the Earthquake,
and the Earth, Rev. 16. 2. is one thing, viz. The earthly Apostasy headed with
the little Horn, on which shall be poured out the first Vial, as soon as the
Witnesses are ascended up into Heaven.

5 When Christ shall come, and all his Saints with him. Zach. 14. 5. The enemy,
shall not be destroyed by any material weapon. And the Armies, which were in
heaven followed him, upon white horses, clothed in fine linen, white and clean,
Rev. 19. 14. No armor is mentioned, neither do I think that any such thing
will be used, or that the followers of the Lamb shall strike a stroke, but the
enemies shall fall and perish by some extraordinary judgment. And there sell
upon men a great hail out of Heaven, every stone about the weight of a Talent,
Rev. 16. 21. Again I will plead against him with pestilence, and with Blood,
and I will rain upon him an overflowing rain, great hail stones, fire and
blood, Ezekiel. 38. 21. But in subduing the little Horn, and the ten Kings, in
smiting the Image, and the Dominion of the Beast; here shall be fighting, and
instruments of war used, Isa. 13. 18. Jer. 50. 9. 14. 22. 35, 36, 37, 42. and
chap. 51. 3. 11. Rev. 13. 10. and 18.

Now I come to the fourth head, which is the judgment it self. The Beast was
slain and his body destroyed, and given to the burning slame, Dan. 7. verse 11.
And they shall take away his dominion to consume it, and destroy it even to the
end, verse. 26.

1 Being now come to his end, that he is called the Beast, and a little Horn
before. The Reasons may be: First, to signify that he is fatted for
destruction; His Hypocrisies, Deceits, Mockings of God and men, and other
abominable sins, are full and ripe, Jer. 12. 1, 2, 3. and Jer. 51. 40.

2 Seeing the Witnesses, are to be slain by him, the Wisdom of God thinks
good, to give him here, the same name which he has, Rev. 11. 7.

3 That he perishes under the name of a Beast, though formerly a Horn, it
shows how little his death will be pitied any where: No more than if a bloody
Lion, or crafty Fox had been killed by hunters. Moreover, what rejoicing there
will be among the Saints: that so cruel and fierce a Creature is taken out of
the way. Allelu-jah, and again, Allelu-jah, Psalm. 58. 1^.

2 Though it be true, whatsoever is spoken of his end, is no more, (if we take
the words in general) then that his government and Pouer shall be broken to
pieces: yet I think there is something in every word, as to a particular kind
of punishment; and how several parties (as distinct) shall be punished some in
one kind, and some in another. This State or Government to be destroyed, is
made up of three sorts of people. 1 Soldiers to fight for it. 2 Lawyers and
Priests to plead for it. 3 The Authors and Inventers of it. Now observe, how
the Lord in destroying the whole, fits his judgment to each party.

1 The Beast is slain. This respects the Soldiery. And probable it is, that
many of them will be slain. For howsoever the greater part of them (at least
the better part: such as have any thing of God left in them) will lay down
their arms, and forsake him near his end: yet some desperate and profane
wretches (newly raised) will stand it out, and so fall by the sword of the Lord
in the hand of his mighty ones. It is said, in the earthquake were slain of
men seven thousand, Rev. 11. 13 what number of soldiers will be slain at this
time, it is not expressed: a great slaughter no doubt: Every one (I think) put to
the sword, that shall be found in Arms, for the Horn: they having warning
given them before to come out, and not to fight in his behalf. see Isa. 34. 2,
3.

And his body destroyed] This seems to be another kind of punishment; as
beheading* hanging, and putting to death by a Judicatory, and the word imports
so much. This follows the slain Army. But who is the body of the Horn? The
later Apostasy of which we spoke; so that Judgment will now begin at the house
of God, at the sanctuary. Woe now to Apostates; Woe to you Scribes, and
Pharisees, Hypocrites, The Lords day is upon you: such as did justifye and
encourage the Horn, when he thought to change Times and Laws. Acted
unrighteously under him, Executed his unlawful Orders and Commands against the
Saints of the most High, made to themselves, an advantage of his Tyranny and
Oppression: Oh how are the sinners in Zion afraid, and fearfulness surprised
the Hypocrites.

Now Church members, and Church Officers, are likely to experience, the soul
that sins shall dye, and that the righteous God loves Righteousness: And it is
not, fasting, praying, prophesying, etc. will deliver corrupt men, and such as
have basely betrayed the cause of Christ, in the day of the Lords wrath, Mal.
3. 2, 3. Isa. 33. 14. and 66. 5.

Thus the Lords hand at this time will lie heavy upon Professors, they are the
body of the little Horn (Apostates I mean) which must be destroyed. It will
be their turn (I verily think) to drink first of the Vials, 1 Cor. 3. 15. And
by this means, the Lord will make his way the more plain, and his Judgments
manifest: when he shall afterward go forth against the Ten Kings, and the
great Whore: for what may Idolaters, and men visibly Profane, and wicked
expect, but dregs and wrath, without mixture, seeing the Lord before, spared
not Church Members and such as had a form of Godliness, Jer. 25. ^8, 29.

And given to the burning flame] As this judgment is greater than the former:
so it is for the Horn himself, and the chief instruments which raised him up by
whose means, Soldiers, Lawyers, Ministers and others, were brought into the
Snare: This kind of punishment I take to be the same, with that of the Beast,
and false Prophet; a lake of fire burning with Brimstone, Rev. 19. 20. Now
howsoever this be not Hell, properly so called, yet it is some temporal
Judgment more than ordinary; I will not say directly what it is, nor declare
at present my own thoughts: yet this I shall say, (it being a truth I think)
when this Horn shall reign, whosoever shall be the Inventers and setters up of
his Power and Government, they will not dye the death of all men: not be slain
or dismembered as the former were: but some extraordinary punishment will be
inflicted upon them. If these men dye the common death of all men: or if they
be visued after the visitation of all men, then the Lord has not sent me,
Numb. 16. 29. And so much the word signifies.

And they shall take away his dominion] As the former respects persons, so
this does things: that is, the State and Government it self. The meaning I
conceive to be thus. After the Army is destroyed, and many put to death by a
Judicatory: for justifying the Horn, in his unlawful actions, and himself and
his MAKERS, given to the burning flame: Such a stink will that HORN leave
behind him, as some speedy course shall be taken to have the very remembrance
of him blotted out under the whole heaven.

It remains now to show how, and in what manner it shall be done? To take the
Scripture for our light. It seems thus: When the three years and half are fully
expired, the wise shall understand* that he is the Little Horn foretold in
Daniel, and to be destroyed: and this light shall spread it self among the
Saints of the Most High: yea, so clear and certain will the thing be (they
having the word of God and his spirit for it, providence likewise leading the
way) that they shall publicly declare, what they intend to do, The work
begins with an Earthquake, Rev. 11. 13. And it shall be such an Earthquake,
as will shake the Horn to purpose, in his Council, Guards, Army, and relations
every where: Insomuch as he will be miserably forsaken and left by most
people. Few abiding with him, unless desperate men, and such who are so deeply
engaged with him, as have no hope to save themselves, (from bodily punishment)
by Repentance.

The Saints knowing the set Time is come, that the Lord will have mercy upon
Zion; and being called out of the Temple, to pour out the Vial upon the
Earth-Apostacy (being ready) go forth in the Name and strength of the Lord. And
though they may have some opposition at first, yet I think they will be
Conquerors at last without much loss, I say fighting for the Lamb; For so
wonderful will the presence of God be with them, and so dreadful to the
enemy, that this war will be short, and none of them after once broken to
pieces, will durst lift up their hands any more in the Horns behalf.

Thus I have ended with the Little Horn. And in the close, this I can truly
say, what I have written, is (my Conscience bearing me Witness) no otherwise
than I understand the Prophesy: neither have I said any thing, but what I
conceive to be the Truth in Jesus. And further, I have all along with Sighs
and Groans, besought the father of Light, That I might be lead by his Spirit
into the way of Truth.

The meek will he guide in Judgment; and the meek will he teach his way,
Psalm. 25. 9. Call unto me, and I will answer thee, and show thee great and
mighty things, which thou know not, Jer. 33. 3.

Job 20. v. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

Know thou not this of old, since man was placed upon earth. That the
triumphing of the wicked is short, and the Joy of the Hypocrite but for a
moment? though his excellency mount up to the heavens, and his head reach unto
the clouds. Yet he shall perish for ever, like his own dung: they that have
seen him, shall say, where is he? He shall flee away like a dream, and shall
not be found, yea, he shall be chased away; as a vision of the night. The
eye also which saw him, shall see him no more, neither shall his place any more
be hold him.

THE CHARACTERS OF THE Beast, Slaying the Witnesses, OPENED.
THAT General Head which remains, is, The Beast slaying the Witnesses. In the
opening and handling whereof, we shall propound four things.

1. What this Beast is?

2. Who are the Witnesses, and how they are slain by the Beast?

3. How it does appear, the Witnesses (slain by the Beast) lying three days
and an half unburied, are the three years and an half contemporizing with the
latter Apostacy and little horn?

4. Whether the Prophecy of the Beast, slaying the Witnesses, be fulfild in
our Time?

First, I would have the Reader take notice, Howsoever I handle these things
distinctly, and a part; yet I understand the Ap stacie and the little Horn,
and the Beast that slayes the witnesses, to make up but one Government, or
State. The Apostacy part, is the Body and Relly out of which comes the other
Two. The Beast is that Pert, by whom the witnesses are killed* and it has the
Name of a Horn; for its Sovereignty and kinglinesse. So that (as I said in the
beginning) it cannot be the three years and half, unless there be all three
to make the l^st Dominion.

And when they shall have finished their Testimony, Rev. 11. 7.]

That is, Near or about the time of finishing their Testimony. And so the words
are rendered by many Interpreters. It is true, some think, the three years and a
half, are not to be reckoned with the 1260 years, but apart from that account.
But (methinks) this cannot be: For the 42 months being expired, the Saints take
the Kingdom; And so I understand Rev. 10. 6. There shall be time no longer.
But when is that? When the 1260 years are ended, the mystery of God is
finished, as to the reign of the little Horn, and Tyranny of the Beast* not
to scatter the Saints, and kill the Witnesses any longer. But the Woman comes
out of the Wilderness, and the Witnesses ascend up into Heaven, and fire comes
forth from the Lord to devour the Adversary. But whether we take the three
years and an half, in the number of the 1260 days, or a part, it is all one
to the matter here. Howsoever I think it periods the first account.

The Beast that ascends out of the bottomless Pit] rather depth or gulf,
for pit is not in the Text, nor in Cha. 17 8. but Chap. 9. 1. it is.

It is to be observed, the Beast here, cannot be that Beast, Rev. 13. 1. which
is said to rise up out of the Sea; for he is to continue 43 months, that is,
1260 years, v. 5. But this rises not till that term be near expired* only
three years and half remaining. And so much the Text plainly holds forth. When
they shall have finished their Testimony, a Beast ascends out of the depth,
etc. Not the Beast which was risen before, but a Beast now comes forth.
Intimating, that purposely and for no other end (as it were) he ascends out
of the gulf, then to slay the Witnesses when they have finished their
Testimony. Hence I think this may be asserred for a Truth, Whosoever this Beast
is, it cannot be the Dominion of the Papal Beast, nor can the German Empire be
meant, nor any of the ten Horns or Kings; for these were risen long before the
Witnesses had finished their Testimony. The matter here is of weight, and being
well considered, will give us some light to know who this Beast is, and where
the Witnesses shall be slain: The Popes Jurisdiction it cannot be, nor the
Emperors, Spaniard, French, etc. these rose before the three years and an
half, and have stood many hundred years.

It is a common received opinion; In the Lords bringing Israel out of Egypt,
was shadowed out the deliverance of his Church and people, from all Tyranny and
oppression in the last days. Now of Pharaoh (a Tipe of this Beast, and
commanding all the male to be cast into the River a figure of killing the
witnesses) it is said. And in very deed for this cause have I raised thee up;
for to show in thee my power, and that my name may be declared through out all
the earth, Exodus 9. 16. As Pharaoh at that time was raised up, that is ascended
out of the bottomless pit, that in him the Lord might fulfill his Council and
purpose, concerning the enlargement of his people, and thereby glorify
himself, in showing his great Power* wisdom, faithfulness: So this Beast
(as another Pharaoh) is brought up out of the depth for the three years and an
half, that in him, and by him, the Lord might accomplish what in his eternal
council he had determined, contained in this Prophecy.

Secondly, There may be something in the phrase (ascends) To signify.

1. How suddenly and unexpectedly this Beast will appear; altogether unlookt
for; yea and to strange the thing will be, (especially among Saints) as they
would never have believed it, though thousands had told them so much before,
had they not seen it with their own eyes.

2. Whereas it is said, the Beast ascends, it is to show, that he comes up of
himself, not sent for, nor desired by the people; but it is his own plotting
and designings that he takes power and Rule to himself. And this I take to be
an essential character of this Beast (Ascends) he will be a meat Intruder,
and will slay the witnesses by a power which he has assumed, and usurped, and
not otherwise. Compare with this Dun. 7. 8. The little Horn comes up, that is,
of it self; he arose not by Election nor by Inheritance, Right, or such kind of
Succession, but by his own craft and strength. So the later Apostacy is said
to rise or ascend, 2 Timothy 3. 1. Not raised up by the Lord.

3. By the word, may be signified, the horrible pride of the Beast, for though
his descent be from the Depth, that is, a most base beginning, yet ascends,
viz. In Titles, Pomp, State, Court, etc. As if he had not been illegitimate,
but lawfully begotten. That which the Lord by the Prophet speaks against the
King of Babylon, I think is in part meant of this Beast. For thou have said in
thy heart I will ascend into Heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of
God, I will sit also upon the Mount of the Congregation, in the sides of the
north. I will ascend above the height of the Clouds. I will be like the most
high* Isa. 14. 13, 14. Is not this the boastine of a mighty man? Not only will
he be above the Stars, and ^it upon the Mount of the Congregation; scatter the
holy people, weary out the Saints, and kill the witnesses. But like the most
high, take to himself the Attributes of God, Isa. 13. 3. That this Beast
ascends out of the depth, inmay be for these Reasons.

1. Because of the great secrecy, and closeness which is used in the forming
of him. All things here must be done in the deep, and under ground; None
(except a few, six or eight persons perhaps, which model the Beast) must know
any thing of it, until he come forth, to the public view of the world; Doing
herein like those against whom the woe is pronounced in the Prophet, That seek
deep to hide their counsel from the Lord, and their works are in the dark, and
they say who sees us, and who knows us? Isa. 29. 18.

2. Of the deep policy used in the framing of him. All Civil Beasts before
him, rose either out of the Earth or Sea; but this out of the depth:
signifying, that there was not half that craft and subtletie about them, as
about this Beast: For there shall be so much art and workmanship bestowed about
him, that when he comes forth, To war against the witnesses, and to overcome
them, and slay them, very few will perceive any such thing; Not one (I say) of
many will take him for all this, to be the Beast. And why so? He ascends out
of the depth, from the depths of Satan; as being transformed (and no marveil,
for at this time he will be Satan's chief Minister) into an Angel of light. So
that by the place may be signified, He will not be taken for the Beast, but a
great Saint.

3. Whereas the last Apostasy is here called the depth, it shows that there is
no way to carry on a bad design (for closeness and craft) like to Apostasy
and Hypocrifie in Religion. And by how much men rise high in a show and form of
Godliness (though hypocrites) the more they shall advantage themselves by it.
It is true, other Beasts before him, carried on their own Interest, partly by
Religion, but they were ignorant and unskild of the great mystery which this
Beast has learnt. For before him (note it Reader) no Civil State ascended out
of this depth of Satan, that is, from Apostasy in Religion; And therefore
before him there was never a Government in the world raised up by hypocrisy in
Religion, in that manner, as this will be. Hence Justin Martyr, calls the
little Horn, (...), The Man of Apostasy. In Dial. cum Trypl. page 336.

4. Whereas the a sine and byss^^ quod est genus lini c^n^idissimi: and sic
Abiss^^ d^ci^ur quas^ sine clarita^e, Alex. de Ales.
word signifies without light; it may be to denote, what shall be the practice
and doing of this Beast, (notwithstanding his secrecy, policy, hypocrisy)
when he is ascended. It is said of the first Beast, His kingdom was full of
darknesses, Rev. 16. 10. So the kingdom of this Beast (the head of the latter
Apostasy, as the other was of the first) his kingdom will be full of
darkness; For he will destroy and put out the light of the Law, and leave
nothing to the people but Abissus, his Own blind will, for them to walk by.

From what has been said, we may gather in short, A true description of the
Beast, according to the Scripture, (for I desire to follow that perfect word,
without adding auy thing of mine own to it.) Thus then by the Scripture, I take
the Beast to be.

A State or Government, set up by a few Apostates, three years and an half
before the end of the 1260 years (neither sooner nor later) and done with so
much secrecy, policy, and craft; as no such Beast or Government shall be
expected, or thought of, till it be brought forth. And howsoever it has a mean
and low beginning, yet it will rise to a monstrous height of Pride, against God
and man. This State or Kingdom of the Beast will be full of darkness; great
oppression exercised by reason the people have their power, Laws and liberties,
taken from them. And howsoever this be so (yea, and withal, the blessed Cause
of Christ destroyed in his Witnesses, by an usurped power) yet this Beast or
Government, shall have with it, such a glorious outside of Religion and Form of
Godliness, as among Gods own people, many of them shall not know this State or
Government to be the Beast which slays the Witnesses, till the three years and
half are expired.

And thus much for the Beast, who he is, and what is signified by him.

We come now to the Witnesses, and how they are killed.

1. By the Witnesses, I understand not persons, but the Truth or Testimony it
self, which is held forth and asserted by them. I say, it is not the person,
which the Beast is said to kill; but the holy Cause and Interest of Christ,
witnessed too, and for, by the Saints of the most High. So that the person may
live, though he be slain in his Testimony.

2. For the Testimony or Witness, it comprehends not all Truth; For the Beast
shall allow much Truth, and countenance men in the practice of it. Therefore
the Testimony which he shall slay, is to be taken restrictively; that is, some
particular Truth, which he will not endure, as proper to that Generation and
Time. In all the days of the Papal Beast, the Sackcloth Witnesses might
safely and without danger, assert many Gospel Truths; That which they suffered
for, was for asserting such Truths, and speaking against such Errors, and
lies, as that Time would not bear, it being to the disadvantage of the Beasts
Kingdom, that such abominable filthiness should be discovered. So this Beast
will not make war against every Truth, but seeks only to destroy that
Testimony, which he thinks (if not killed) will be his utter ruin.

Quest. What is that Truth, or Testimony, here slain by the Beast.

Answ. It is the last witness which Saints shall hold forth, for, and in the
behalf of Jesus Christ, against the Enemies of Gods people. And being the last
of their Testimony, it can be no other then bearing witness to Christ's blessed
and visible Kingdom. That he (as heir of all things) will take all power, rule
and dominion into his own hands, and that all the present Powers and
Governments of the world, shall be broken to pieces. And more particularly,
they shall now bear witness against this Beast, as to be that Power and State,
by whom the witnesses are to be s^ain, and after three years and an half, his
Dominion shall be taken from him.

The observing of this, will lead us to the knowledge both of the Beast and
Time: for it cannot be this Beast; unless he slay such a Testimony in the
Saints as is here set down; that is, A testimony for Christ against all present
powers, and particularly against the Government of this Beast, as declaring
openly who he is, where his seat is* and that the Lord after three years and an
half will utterly consume him. And here (I think) lies the difference, between
the Testimony of the Sackcloth witnesses, before the Beast ascended out of the
bottomless pit, and afterward. Their Testimony before, was mainly against the
Idolatry of the whorish Church; bearing witness, to the Prophetical and
Priestly office of Christ; and suffered upon that account: But afterward (when
the three years and half begin) their Testimony is (as I said before) for his
Reign and Kingdom; And this witness will the Beast seek to murder; allowing
that Testimony which was born before to his Prophetical and Priestly office:
by which means the slaughter and murder he commits, will not easily be
observed.

3. That the witnesses are said to be two. I conceive it is for this reason.
Because their Testimony consists of two parts, viz. 1. That Jesus Christ ought
to have his right, his honor, glory, service, dominion. 2. That his enemies in
not giving the same to him; But instead of exalting him, exalt themselves, and
their own interest* shall extreamlysuffer for it; Or two, as witnessing for
righteous things, and against unrighteous things.

Now for the manner of their Slaying. He shall make war against them, and shall
overcome them, and kill them,

First, though the witnesses in their Testimony are slain, upon the rise of
the Beast, and there we are to begin the three days and an half, yet does he
continue his persecution till the whole term be ended.

Secondly, There may be something in the words (make war, overcome, and
kill*) more then hitherto has been minded. In Chap. 12. 14. The woman^ to shun
the face of the Serpent slyes into the wilderness, where she is nourished for a
time, and times, and half a time. The slaying of the witnesses, and that
slight of the woman is at one time. And I think the occasion of that flight, is
this war of the Beast. So that he slays not the whole Testimony or witness,
but the Lord preserves a remnant (as he did the 7000 in Israel) up and down the
Nation, which keep the Commandments of God, and have the Testimony of Jesus,
all the time that the witnessesly slain.

Thirdly, He shall make war* against them, and shall overcome them. These
words are taken from Dan. 7. ^2 and have been opened before. It is true in
Daniel there is no mention of killing; The reason may be, because he has
respect to what the Horn or Beast shou*d do, against the persons of the
witnesses, but speaks nothing of killing, because the Lord will not suffer him
to proceed unto blood. John names killing in regard he should slay the Truth
and Testimony in many persons, though not the person for the truths sake. This
likewise is worth the Observing to know the Beast by.

Quest. But how does he slay the Testimony of Jesus?

I answer, many ways.

First, In some he slays their Testimony, by preferment, and bestowing great
Offices and places upon them* Here I may say (changing a few words) what is
said, Rev. 12. Woe to the Inhabiters of heaven* Churches, and Church Officers,
and Professors of Religion, for the Devil is come down unto you, having great
wrath, because he knows that the has but a short time. This Beast scorns to
be served for naught, specially if they are religious, and men searing God;
these rather then others, shall be preferred in his Council, Army, Navy,
Universities, Parish-Tithes, so they will fall down and worship HIM and his
Image. And in this design he has a double advantage. 1. He is sure to slay in
them, the last Testimony of Jesus; for, Noman can serve two Masters, He that
acknowledges the Government and Power of the Beast to be Lawful, cannot bear
a faithful Testimony to the present Cause and Interest of Christ. For to have
now the Testimony of Jesus, is to bear a witness against the Beast. 2. That he
slayes the Testimony of Jesus, by preferment, in many great Professors, such
as formerly asserted what they now either deny or are silent in; By this means,
the common people (ignorant of the mystery of iniquity, working in the last
days) following the others example, have their Testimony killed likewise, Gal.
2. 13.

Secondly, Another way is by his hypocrisy and dissimulation in religion. As
David said of Goliahs sword, there is none to that, give it me. So I think
there is no weapon or crafty course which this Beast will use, like to his
hypocrisy in the things of God; as his fasting, weeping, praying, honoring
Ministers, Sermons, etc, The report and noise of this will ring far and near,
and by the simple (who believe every thing) so believed, and he taken for such
a Saint, that now he may do what he will. For though he have all the Characters
of the little Horn, and do whatsoever is foretold of the Beast, yet his
hypocrisy will cover all, and hence slaves the Generation Testimony.

Thirdly, When Christ was put to death by the Jews, though they could prove
nothing against him, neither indeed had any thing to lay justly to his charge,
yet they pretended great matters, and would have men believe what they did in
the killing of him, they had cause and reason enough for it. So will this Beast
slay Jesus Christ in his Testimony. (Hence it is said, Where our Lord also was
crucified.) Howsoever he has nothing against the present Generation Truth,
born Witness to: For what can he have? Seeing nothing is Asserted by them, but
what the Scriptures plainly declare; nor is he able to resist the Wisdom and
the Spirit by which they speak, yet will he pretend high things against them.
As Nero when his Mastives would not destroy the Christians, clad them in
Bearskins. So will this Beast do, that his Dogs may rent and tear the
Testimony of Jesus; He will cloth it, with reproachful names, as Blasphemy,
Error, Madness, Faction, Treason, Sedition, etc. And by this trick the sooner
effect his purpose. So that howsoever it be the Testimony of Jesus that he
kills, yet he will kill it, under pretense, that it is the doctrine of Devils,
blasphemy, the delusion of Satan, etc.

Fourthly, This Testimony is to be slain by War. He shall make war against
them. Howsoever I have showed my opinion already, yet the matter being
considerable; I would have the Reader observe.

1. This Beast (whosoever he be) shall trust in the arm of slesh; by this he
will seek to strengthen his Government and Greatness, and to reach his ends
and designs every way.

2. His Army will be so corrupt, that whatsoever he shall bid them do, against
the Testimony of Jesus, they will do it, right or wrong; For they will be men
not having principles of honesty or conscience. And by this means likewise, he
will prevail very far over the Witnesses, viz. by his Soldiers: For those men
(if he command them) will banish and imprison any of the Lords faithful
Servants, that they may not Witness for Christ, against the Beast.

Fifthly, No sooner is this Beast ascended out of the bottomless pit, but
doubtless he will enact some Law against the Testimony of Jesus. As for
Example, That it shall be Treason for men to speak or act any thing against his
Person; promise to live quietly under his Government, not call him the little
Horn and Beast. And what is the meaning of all this? But to require all men
upon pain of death, to deny Christ before men: For if it be the Government of
the little Horn and Beast, in the three years and half; Not to Witness then
against it (much more to promise not to Act any thing against it) is no other
then to deny Christ, so far as concerns a Generation-Testimonie. But howsoever
this be so, yet the dread and terror of such an Edict* will so seize upon
people of low and poor spirits, as they will choose rather to have the Witness
of Christ killed in them, then be persecuted by the Beast for bearing any public
Witness against him.

Thus I have showed, Who the Beast is, and the Witnesses, and how they are killed.

Our Third Point is, How it does appear, their lying three days and an half
unburied, contemporizes with the last Apostacy and the little Horn.

And after three days and an half.] I shall speak the less of these three
days and an half, because it is not questioned scarce by any one (neither
indeed rationally can it) But here is meant either the last three years and an
half, which close the number 1260. Or so much time following immediately upon
it.

Indeed there are some few, whose opinion is; the term here, is the same with
the 1260 years. But,

1. This is plainly against the Text. For the Witnesses are not slain, till
about the finishing of their Testimony; that is, when the 1260 years are almost
expired.

2. To take days for years, and then again to reckon so many years by days,
I see no ground for this in Scripture, to cast up Prophetical numbers. This
Point needs no further enlargement.

3. The Apostasy is to be in the last days; Now if we consider Times and
seasons by their appointments and periods. No Days can be said to be last, but
the distinct time closing the 1260 years; in which Time is the little Horn and
Beast. And therefore necessarily they must contemporize.

But there are some other things which need Explanation.

First, What the Street is, in which ly the dead bodies of the Witnesses?

Answ. Where they were slain, there doubtless they ly. The Greek (...) as it
is well observed by many (signifying a broad and spacious place) cannot be
taken for any street within the walls of the great City. For,

1. Our Lord was slain in no street of Rome or Jerusalem, but without the gate
in Golgotha.

2. Men seldom make war within the City walls, but in open fields.

3. In Cities are many Streets, but this is expressed in the singular number,
neither is the word properly a street.

4. That their dead bodies lie visible and obvious to all Nations, kindreds,
peoples, etc. it must be without the City, and not within the walls.

By the great City, I understand here (and so always in this Book) the
Dominion and Jurisdiction of the Papal Beast, not only the Ecclesiastical
kingdom, but all Civil States and Governments under the Sea of Rome,
acknowledging the Pope head of the Church. This is the Great City often
mentioned in the Revelation; It is said, And the same hour was there a great
earthquake, and the tenth part of the City fell, v. 13. Here it is not the
great City, but City; which I take to be (...) the place without the walls of
the great City, where the slain Witnesses lie; that is, the power and
Government of the Beast, by which they were killed.

But to open the matter more fully. The place where the Witnesses lie dead, is
not any Kingdom, Commonwealth, Province, or Country, under the Authority and
Jurisdiction of the Pope. Neither are they slain (in their Testimony) by any
State or Government, that holds the Great Antichrist of Rome head of the
Church: For all this is within the wall, and part of the great City. So that
the Witnesses are not to be slain under the power of the Germane* Emperor, nor
the Kings of France, Spain, Poland, or any Catholic King, Prince, Duke, etc.
so called. But by a power, and State that is off from subjection and Obedience
to the Romish Beast.

There are two things (one I hinted before) which will give us much light to
understand where the Witnesses lie, and by whom they are slain.

1. By a Beast that shall not ascend out of the Bottomless Pit, till the 1260
years are near expired. Neither, shall his power and dominion (being risen)
continue above three years and an half. Hence then none of the present
States, and Governments of the world which have stood many three years shall
kill them.

2. Their dead bodies lie not in any Popish Country: Nor are they slain in
their Witness, by any State subject to the Sea of Rome. So that whosoever the
Beast is, it cannot be the Emperor, nor the Duke of Savoy, or such like, nor
in any such Countries; For it is but one State or Government that slayes them,
neither shall they ly dead under more States then one. And this one not under
the obedience of the Church of Rome. Reader, Consider what I say, and the Lord
give thee understanding in all things.

Object. Though (...) be without the walls, yet it is of the great City.

Answ. It is so indeed, and the thing is very much to be heeded. For howsoever
the State and Government, by which the witnesses are slain, is not under the
Jurisdiction of the Roman Beast; yet it is FOR IT. That is, it does more
strengthen and support Babylon at this time, then any State or Government
properly the Beasts. For observe who are slain, the last Witnesses; that is,
the Testimony of Jesus never till now so high, eminent, and full of light, and
life against the Antichristian Kingdom. The Witnesses before plucked off but
leaves and branches, these laid the ax to the Root, and would have the very
Foundation of Babylon razed down. And now ascends the Beast out of the
bottomless pit, and slayes such A WITNESS as the like was never before held
forth against the Great Whore. So that in doing such a thing, he has done more
in the behalf of the Great City, then any State under the Beasts dominion ever
did before. For in this regard, he would not suffer, her abominations to be
ripped up, her basterdly Brats to be dash't against the stones* nor the blood of
the martyrs found in her to be revenged: But sought to cure her deadly wound.
And therefore not without cause does the holy Ghost tell us, though the place
be without the great City, yet FOR IT; a friend and brother to it, and one that
does her more service, then any formal member and part of it.

One thing further may be meant here; Whereas the Spirit of God, tells us, that
the place where the Witnesses lie slain, is without the great City, yet of it.
The hypocrisy of the Beast (the GREAT CHARACTER of him) is here again notably
laid open. As if he should make war with one part of Babylon, (For Example, The
Spaniard) pretending therein to be without the great City, and against the
Whore; and yet at the at the same time to be of it, and for it, in making
Leagues and Covenants, Offensive and Defensive, with others of the same
Antichristian kingdom (suppose Portugal and France) and as Idolatrous, and as
great Enemies to Jesus Christ, as that part of Babylon against whom he Wars.

Secondly, That the slain Testimony of Christ, is set forth under dead bodies.
This may be to signify.

1. As a thing dead is soon forgotten, yea men will endeavor to put away the
remembrance and thoughts of it; So Apostates having forsaken the Truth. It is
no other now then Dead, and that their consciences may not smite them for it.
They fall upon new matters, not intending to bear witness any more to the good
old cause, IT IS DEAD.

2. Persons dead loose their beauty; No fairness, or comeliness appears in
them. Though living sweet and lovely to behold: So the Principles of Justice,
honesty, Conscience, etc. When once slain, what excellency can the Beast see
in them: Hypocrisy, deceit, pride, oppression, look better in his eye a
thousand fold.

3. To show the cruel design of the Beast, that nothing would satisfy his
turn but the HEART BLOOD OF GODS CAUSE, the utter extirpation of it, that the
name of Israel might be no more.

4. Dead men are not feared: Neither does the Beast now fear, the Testimony of
these men; for he has by craft and cruelty taken such a course: As he thinks
himself, very secure, and the dead Interest of the holy Child Jesus will never*
rise to trouble him more.

5. When they put Christ to death, some mocked at him, Let him come down from
the Cross, and we will believe him. As if he could not be the Son of God,
because they slew him. So here is meant, How the Enemies of our Lord, passing
by the dead bodies, will scoff, wagging their heads, Had it been (say they) the
Testimony of Jesus, it would have saved it self and not been killed; but it
appears now, it was only their own Testimony, when they were so hot against
Tithes, Tryers, Priests, Lawyers. Ha, ha! And this is one Reason, why the wrath
of God will be so terrible upon the Beast, and the Apostates of his Time;
because none before them, caused the holy name of God and his Truth to be so
much blasphemed: For in the whole Time of his Reign, men will not cease to
curse and revile the Testimony of Jesus; yea, the very Apostates themselves,
will turn Scoffers. Specially, near the Time of the Witnesses Rising: Then
Apostate-Professours, will begin to jeere and taunt indeed; when they see
Christ in his Testimony, not only naild on the Cross, but (to their thinking)
gives up the Ghost. Now hearken, Where is your fist Kingdom (say they?) The
little Horn! Your three years and a half? Neither will they spare the slain
Testimony, in their Pulpits; But there they will break their Jests against it,
to have the people laugh.

But, Thirdly; It is worth enquiring, Why not only the great City is named,
which should be preserved and defended by the Beast slaying the Witnesses? But
added, which spiritually, is called Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was
crucified?

Answ. There is great Reason for it.

1. To discover the gross hypocrisy of the Beast, pretending to be against
Babylon in all her lies and beastly vanities.

2. To aggravate his wickedness the more. There is little said of the Beast,
as to the Characterizing of Him; besides slaying the Witnesses. The Reason may
be, because this was done before in the little Horn and last Apostasy.

That which the Holy Ghost seems here chiefly to intend, is to unmask HIM, and
to set HIM forth to the life.

For Example. Should he be asked (being ascended out of the bottomless Pit)
What he comes for? What he means to do, having taken so arbitrary a power to
himself? His answer will be, He is for Christ (I really) against Antichrist:
For Zion against Babylon; as one of the seven Angel, I am com out (says he) of
the (Temple note it, not the Bottomless Pit) to pour out a Vial full of wrath
upon the great Whore: and as one called, chosen and faithful, to be with the
Lamb against the ten Kings, to overcome them. And ask (says he) my Chaplains,
and new made Doctors, if this be not so?

But what says the Spirit of God? O thou dissembling H^ pocrite! Does thou War
against my Witnesses, overcome them and slay them, and yet pretend Ex part
altissimi letzad, On the part of the Almighty. For me, and against the great
Whore; What an impudent face have thou? what a Whores forehead! Thou thoughtest
I was altogether such a one as thy self: but I will reprove thee. Thy falsehood
shall not serve the turn. For I have a way to make thee known what an hypocrite
thou art, in spite of all thy enchantments; and the wise shall understand,
though the Prophets will not* viz. In slaying so glorious a Testimony, to rouse
up thy self out of the bottomless pit, In this the Saints of the most high shall
clearly see, that thou art of the great City (not in words but actions) a main
supporter and prop of it: Nay more, thou have kept her up, as she is Sodom and
Egypt, in the vilest of her filthinesses, and abominations, and the greatest of
her cruelties, and oppressions: yea and more, as she has murdered me (I say my
self) in my truth, and servants: thus thou have wrapped thy self in all the guilt
and blood that has been shed there, and which shall be found in her; the blood
of the Prophets, and of Saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth.

Thus the place gives us more light to know the Beast by; The Government and
state by which the witnesses shall be slain, is without the great City, not
under the authority of the Church of Rome, in profession and words an enemy to
Babylon. But in practice and works not only a bare defender, but a supporter of
her, in the worst and greatest of her sins, as in her whoredoms, oppressions,
blood of martyrs, etc. Namely, by slaying the highest Testimony that ever was
upon earth against the whole dominion of the Beast.

I have done with the Beast and Winesses as to the killing-part.

It remains that something be spoken of the effects of it.

And they of the people, and kindreds, and Tongues and Nations, shall see their
dead bodies three days and an half, and shall not suffer their dead bodies to
be put in graves.

Here we will consider.

1. Who these People are?

2. What is meant by putting in graves?

3. Why they will not suffer the dead bodies to be put in graves?

4. How they keep them out?

First, It is said that Satan showed Christ (being upon an exceeding high
mountain) all the Kingdoms of the World, Mat. 4. 8. I do not take it
imaginary, as deceiving the sense: but a real sight: Not that he saw all
Kingdoms absolutely, but whatsoever were discernable in respect of the place
where he stood: that is, all the adjacent Countries. So here by people,
Kindreds, tongues, and Nations: all are not meant under the whole Heaven; but
such as are within the sight of the dead bodies, and have knowledge of their
slaying.

Again, Neither do all the people and kindreds, etc. which see the dead
bodies, oppose their burial, but a part of them; They of the people and
kindreds, etc. That is, among the people and kindreds, etc. there are some will
not suffer, etc. Now howsoever we are to understand the place, no further then
of such as know what the Beast has done, (for so much is clearly in the Text,
They shall see their dead bodies) yet the Holy Ghost mentions Peoples,
kindreds, tongues and nations; Because this party which will not suffer the
dead bodies to be put in graves, are not all one People. As for Example, Some
may be English, others Welsh, some Scots, others French, or Dutch, etc. So
likewise of diverse Provinces, Countries, Shires, etc.

As for this Party, I take it not to be cruelty done in despite and disgrace
by Enemies, to deny them Burial; But courtesy of Friends and Favorers, to
provide for their rising again. And my opinion is, here are meant.

1. The Woman who was occasioned by the war of this Beast, to fly into the
Wilderness.

2. The Remnant of her seed.

3. Those whom we named before, Commonwealths men: For howsoever these do not
fully close with the Witnesses in the Principles of the fifth Kingdom, yet they
are clearly convinced, that the Power and Government of this Beast is unlawful,
and that they suffer unjustly under him. And this Party I take to be The earth
which helped the Woman, by opening her mouth, and swallowing up the flood,
which the Dragon cast out of his mouth, Rev. 12. 16. For howsoever that thing
they contend for, be but an earthly Intererest; as Laws, Liberties, Power of
the People, Privileges of Parliament, etc. yet in standing for such things,
they give the Beast such a Check, as Mauger all his venom and wrath, he cannot
devour the woman standing for the dead witnesses.

Secondly, For the second Point. By putting in graves; I understand an
extirpation of the Testimony of Jesus. That is, Christ's visible Kingdom, to be
no more asserted: the corrupt powers of the world left alone, so the Apostates
and hypocrites in the last days, not so much as named: briefly for the little
Horn and Beast, no more to be spoken against, But all for conscience sake be
subject to his Lust and Will. Thus indeed the Beast would have the Witnesses
buried, but he is not suffered: They remain above ground in spite of him;
that is, kept up for a glorious resurrection.

Thirdly, Knowing the Parties, we may the more easily guess at the Causes.

1. As the Woman and her seed are deeply concerned in the Testimony, so they
endeavor what they can to maintain it; And the rather, because they know
whatsoever design the Enemy has against it, to bury it, he shall not, let
him do his worst. As when Michael the Archangel, contending with the Devil
about the body of Moses, the Angel prevailed. So in this Controversy about the
dead Witnesses, the Woman and her seed will certainly overcome; which is
comfort and encouragement enough.

2. They will not suffer it, because of their zeal and affection to the
Testimony of Jesus. Though David a long time was numbered among the Dead, by
reason of Saul's bloody persecution, yet always; he had some friend* which stu^k
fast to his Int^rest. It is true, there may seem to be a death upon the Cause
of Christ during the Beasts reign, but it shall not want friends to keep it
from the Grave; The love of God will constrain them.

3. The Beast in slaying the Witnesses, will show so much hypocrisy, falsehood,
lying, Tyranny, etc. As will occasion People, and Tongues, and Nations, etc.
continually (sometimes in one place, otherwhile in another) to appear against
him, and plead the Cause of the poor and needy; In so much, as he will not know
what to do. Nor how to proceed any further; to wit, (having slain them) to
put them in Graves.

4. The Testimony of Jesus being slain; that is, comparatively now dead, to
what spirit and life it had. (For it stood upon its feet before, and had Power
and Authority with it, till the Beast came up.) Notwithstanding all this, (I
say) though Dead, in respect of Spirit, Life, Power, Authority; yet shall not
the Beast be suffered to extinguish it altogether, in the Nation, where he has
slain it.

1. Because if he should so far prevail, it would not only strengthen the
present Atheists, but open a gap of Athiesm to many others: For as the Beast in
slaying the last Witness makes many Hypocrites, so should he bury it, he would
make as many Atheists.

2. Should he be suffered, he would do more wickedly then he does; For in that
he cannot bury Christ's Testimony, he is restrained from acting the mischiefs,
which otherwise he would.

3. He is not suffered. Because this Witness (though comparatively dead to
what life it had) shall be his ruin, when the three years and half are
expired.

Fourthly, For the last point, How they keep them out? To open this it must be
remembered; It is the Witness of Christ I take to be slain. Not suffered to be
put in Graves; because some shall plead for it, defend it, and hold it forth,
all the time of the Beasts rage and Tyranny. So that in one respect it is killed,
in another alive; For some shall still appear for that Testimony, which in
others the Beast has slain. In the days of Elias, when they had thrown down
the Lords Altars, and slain his Prophets with the sword, yea and the Prophet
himself forced to fly for his life: here it might well be said, that the Lords
witness was slain, yet not put in grave. For at the same time. The Lord had
7000 which had not bowed the knee unto Baal.

And this I take to be the meaning here. The prevailing power of the Beast
shall be such* as he will slay the visible Testimony of Jesus, held forth in
some public manner before his rising; yet he shall not be suffered to put it
in grave: For God will have some thousands still, which shall not bow the knee
to the Beast; but own and honor the truth n urdered by him, all his Reign.

And thus much for the first Party. The other sort follows.

And they that dwell upon the Earth*: shall rejoice over them, and make merry,
and shall send guists one to another, because these two Prophets tormented them
that dwelt on the Earth.

To these is given a special Character, Dwell on the Earth. The subject of the
first Vial is Earth, Rev. 16. 2. and the same mentioned here* the latter
Apostasy, whose description we had before from 2 Timothy 3. The Cause of their
joy, is the great advantage which they have by the death of the Testimony. For
no sort of men shall outwardly thrive and prosper under the Beast, like
Apostates; It being a Government or State erected by them, and for their own
Interest alone.

Another good Note to know the reign of the Beast by, viz. WHEN APOSTATES
FLOURISH. It cannot be his time, if it be not Apostates time; if carnal
Professors do not hold up their heads, look big, and domineere: and he that
will like Judas, get the bag, must get himself into some Church. For as in
Christ's time buying and selling was in the Temple, and there were the Money
changers. So under this Beast, places, offices, and preferment, will be crept
into the Church: In so much as no considerable preferment will be gotten,
unless the person be a Churchmember, or can procure some Church-mans hand for
it. Thus we see who they are, that will rejoice at this time, and make merry,
and send gifts one to another. None like Apostates, who are fallen from Heaven
to dwell upon the Earth. As for others who are faithful and constant to the
Interest and Cause of Christ, they sigh and cry for all the abominations that
are done under the Beast.

It is said, Because the two Prophets tormented them. But wherein? Because they
spoke against all unrighteousness of men; Pressed men to keep their Promises
and Engagements: Declared openly against dissembling, lying, and hypocrisy;
would have Babylon down, with all her will worship and inventions; People to
have their power, freedom, and liberty, according to Reason and Conscience,
and none to have any Arbitrary Government fore't upon them. But such a
Testimony as this could not be borne, it was worse then an Egyptian boil;
Insomuch, as they had no peace, or rest, till they had slain that which so
tormented them.

This place puts me in mind of what happened upon the Dissolution of the little
Parliament: The Joy then among the Priests and formal Professors, was much
like that of the Philistines, when they had Sampson in their hands. Then the
Lords of the Philistims gathered them together, for to Offer a great Sacrifice
unto Dagon their God, and to rejoice; for they said, Our God has delivered
Sampson our Enemy, into our hand. And when the People saw him, they praised
their God; for they said, Our God has delivered into our hands, our Enemy, and
the destroyer of our Country, which slew many of us. And it came to pass when
their hearts were merry, that they said, call for Sampson, that he may make us
sport, Judge. 16. 23, 24, 25.

Some of them, more Religious (seemingly at least) were for Sacrifice. Hence
Days were kept of Thanksgiving (as they call it.) And now the Trumpets sound
aloud, Oh what the Lord has done for the Sons of Levi, the holy Ministry, and
Maintenance; The Enemy and Destroyer of their Country, had likely to have put
out all the lights of the Tabernacle. One of them I remember told the people,
The National Clergy, was like good Isaac, bound and ready to have been
Sacrificed. And that God by a wonderful deliverance had preserved them, when
the Parliament-Knife was at the throat of their sacred Calling, Tithes, and the
like.

For the other sort, what they did, I need not mention: But when their hearts
were merry, Then Sampson is called for. And what is now the Subject of all their
scurrilous Talk and Jests, but the short lived Parliament: Oh this cruel
Sampson* that had it in his heart, not only to have brought their Craft in
danger to be set at naught, but the Temple of the great Goddess Diana. And to
say the truth, the Priests were not much mistaken in it: For probable it is,
had not that glorious Testimony of Jesus been killed, They would have sent the
Tail of the Beast, after the Head; Swept away that other part of Popish dung
and trash, which the former Parliament had left in the Nation. Now if the Holy
Ghost meant not these men, and their making merry; yet I am sure, it was
fulfilled in them, according to the letter of the Text.

One part of the Prophecy yet remains, and it is the better part; Namely, The
rising of the Witnesses. And here we have the Time, the Means, and the Manner,
with the Enemies amazement at it, and the like.

And after three days and an half, the spirit of life from God, ^ntred into
them, and they st^od upon their feet, and great fear sell upon them that saw
them. And they heard a great voice from Heaves, saying unto them, come up
hither. And they ascended up to Heaven in a cloud. And their Enemies bsheld
them.

First, Of the Time I have spoken: As Soon as the Beast ascends out of the
bottomless pit, he kills the Witnesses; Three years and an half they lie
unburied: The which time being expired, they immediately Rise, and then begins
the ruin and fall of the Beast. So that I conceive, it is not the Lords
meaning that any should go forth to take his Dominion from him, until it
evidently appear, that the Witnesses are Risen, the Spirit poured forth, the
Beast certainly known; and the Lord appearing in some visible providence,
making the way plain for the Angel of the first ^i^ll.

Secondly, By the Spirit of life from God, etc. I understand and the sending of
the Comforter, that great promise of the Father to be endued with power from on
high, Lak 24. 49. As herbs, flowers, and grass, seem dead and hang the head,
by reason of drought; but rise again flourish, and grow green, when rain
falls thereon. So the Testimony of Jesus, which seemed withered, and scorch't,
has now from the Lord life and Spirit put into it, and so that Death is taken
off which lay formerly on it.

And this I take to be the Time in which Saints may expect the return of their
prayers, concerning the pouring out of the Spirit, and the fullfilling of such
Promises. In the wilderness shall waters break out, and streams in the
desert, Isa. 35. 6. I will pour waters upon him that is thirsty, and ^louds
upon the dry ground. I will pour my Spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon
thine Offspring: And they shall spring up as among the gross, as willows by
the watercourses, Isa. 44. 3, 4. I will put my Spirit in you and ye shall live
Eze. 37. 14. After two days he will revive us, in the third day, he will raise
us up and we shall live in his sight, Hosea 6. 2. And it shall come to pass
afterward, that I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh, and your Sons and
your daughters shall Prophecy, your old men shall dream dreams, your young
men shall see visions: And also upon the servants, and upon the handmaids in
those days will I pour out my Spirit, Joel 2. 28, 29.

Howsoever before the rising of the witnesses, there will be some sprinkling of
the Spirit, here and there. For the understanding of the Time: As a man knows
by the dawning that the night is past: yet I think till the witnesses are
risen: the Saints shall not be endued with power from on high, neither
Generally, nor largely. For now is The Tabernacle of the Testimony of heaven
opened, and not till now, Rev. 15. 6. I mean in respect of a beginning.

Thirdly, No sooner does a Spirit of life from God enter into them. But they
stand upon their feet: By which manner of speaking (according to the Scripture)
is signified.

1. An open confession and publishing, of the Lords wonderful mercy,
remembering his truth and Testimony in its low estate, 1 Chronicles. 28. 1. Acts 3.
7, 8. and 14, 14. As the Sons of Zion are to have a two-edged-sword in their
hands, so the high praises of God in their mouth. It is true, they are to
execute vengeance upon the heathen, and punishments upon the people. To bind
their Kings with chains, and their Nobles with fetters of Iron. But what goes
before. Allelujah sing unto the Lord a new song, and his praise in the
Congregation of Saints. Let Israel rejoice in him that made him, let the
Children of Zion be glad in their King, etc. Psalm. 14. 9. So then by this
standing upon their feet, is meant that New s^^^ Rev. 14 3. An high exalting
and ^^ung up the holy Name of God every where among the faithful Remnant; For
that life and Spirit which is now given them. The Testimony of Jesus it was
before flame, and born down by the Enemy. But now it goes forth conquering and
to conquer, prevails and gets victory in every place over them. And the
Ransomed of the Lord, shall come to Zion with songs, and everlasting joy upon
their heads: they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall
be no more. Isa. 35. 10. compare Rev. 15. 3, 4.

2. The standing upon their feet, signifies, not only The Testimony raised up
to greater boldness against the Beast, speaking more freely and plainly
against his hypocrisy, Apostacy, Blasphemy, Tyranny, etc. then before, Ezekiel.
2. 1, 2, and 3, 24. But likewise the hundred forty and four thousand, are
preparing to stand with the Lamb on mount Zion, Rev, 14. 1. Now I think open
war begins to be proclaimed against the Beast, and Babylon, according to the
Prophets, Isa. 13. 2. Je^. 50. 2.

Again, It shows with what assurance of victory the war is undertaken. For by
faith they see all ready: their feet upon the necks of their Enemies, and that
they shall take the Beasts dominion from him, and give his body to the burning
flame, Josh. 10. 24. Zech. 14. 4.

Some understand this, and their ascending up to heaven, of the witnesses not
only restored to their places, but promoted to more eminent preferment,
howsoever I take the witnesses (as has been said) for the Truth witnessed by
them: yet no doubt such as suffer under the Beast for their Testimony
(continuing faithful) the Lord will greatly honor. For out of Prison he
comes to Reign, Eccles. 4. 14.

Fourthly, For the persons upon whom this great fear fell. I take to be they
that dwell upon the earth, the Apostates and followers of the Beast: It seems
to allude to the State and time of Gods people coming out of Egypt, when the
Lord sent before them a dread and fear of them among their Enemies. It is
said, their hearts melted, neither was their spirit in them any more, because
of the children of Jsrael, Josh. 5. 1. This was upon the expiring of the 430
years: So the three years and an half being out, The presence of God will be
such among his faithful ones, in raising them up to such high Resolutions, and
filling them with so much Spirit, life, and power from on high, as it will
strike a terror and amazement every where among Revolters, None of the men of
might have found their hands, the stout hearted are spoiled. The King of
Babylon has heard the report of them, and his hands waxed feeble, anguish took
hold of him, and pangs as a woman in travel, Jer. 50. 43. It will be their
case now, as if a man should appear, who was thought to be dead and rotten many
years before. He needs not fight, his Enemies they will fly fast enough before
him. My opinion is, God will send such a faintness into the hearts of his
Enemies, and strike them with such a horror and dread, that the sound of a
leaf shall chase them* they shall fly and none pursue them. And as they are
Apostates, and so have sinned against knowledge and conscience, by so much
their fear and terror will be the more. Now will that Text be fulfilled; The
sinners in Zion are afraid, fearfulness has surprised the Hypocrites; who
among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? Who amongst us shall dwell with
everlasting burning?

Fifthly, Whereas it it is said, They heard a great voice. This voice I take to
be Christ's; the same which afterward speaks out of the Temple to the seven
Angels, Go your ways, and pour out your Vials, Rev. 16. 1. Isa. 66. 6. Joel
3. 16. Amos 1. 2. It is said to be great.

1. Because it is the voice of the Lion of the Tribe of Judah (roaring out of
Zion against his Enemies) which is powerful and full of Majesty, Joel 3. 16.
Amos 1. 2.

2. The matter spoken of, is of great concernment.

3. It must be heard by all the faithful risen Witnesses, every where.

4. To signify that it is operative and prevalent, see Psalm. 29. 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8, 9.

Sixthly, That the voice is said to be from Heaven. This Denotes,

1. Notwithstanding the great Apostasy at this time in Churches (especially In
Rev. 11. 16. the 24 Elders are mentioned, but not the 4 living cretures. To
denote, That near or about the time when Christ is to take his great power to
him, and to reign: there will be few Ministers of Churches to praise him: But
these have in the three years and half, like Demas, forsaken him; having loved
this present world.
the Officers) the Lord will have a remnant still abiding in the faith and
fellowship of the Gospel, which shall keep themselves pure and unspotted from
the world.

2. The fall of the Beast will be by a power from Heaven. There brake he the
arrows of the bow, the shield and the sword, and the battle, Psalm. 76. 3. O
God thou art terrible, out of thy holy places, Ps. 68. 35. Zech. 4. 6.

Seventhly, Come up hither. These words I think have this meaning. Christ
himself speaks now for Union and one-nes amongst Brethren, and will heal all
the breaches and divisions which have long been unhappily between them. Come up
hither. As if he should say, Howsoever you have born forth a good Testimony for
me against the last Apostasy, the little Horn and Beast; yet*ye could not agree
among your selves, but did bite and devour one another. But this enmity shall
cease and be no more. Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex
Ephraim. For I will have you now all here with me in heaven together: not
divided and sepe^ated as ye have been. And as there is but one Lord, and his
name one, Z^ch. 14. 9, So ye shall serve him with one consent Z^ph. 3. 9. Thus
is the primitive Spirit, restord and given again to the Saints, viz. to be of
one accord, and of one mind, Act. 1. 14. and 2. 1, 46. and 15. 25.

Eighthly, It follows; And they ascended up to Heaven in a Cloud. Alluding to
Christ's ascension, Act. 1. 9. The Saints of the most High, being (...)
together, and having the unity of the Spirit, in the bond of peace, are now
formed, the Armies of Heaven, to fight the Battles of the Lord of Hosts, to
destroy the little Horn, the Image, Babylon, etc. that Christ alone may Rule
in the midst of his Enemies. Who is she that looks forth as the morning,
clear as the Sun, and terrible as an Army with banners, Song. 6. 10.

The noise of a multitude in the Mountain like as of a great people, a
tumultuous noise of the Kingdoms of Nations gathered together. The Lord of
Hosts mustereth the Host of the battle. They come from a far Country, from
the end of Heaven, even the Lord and the weapons of his Indi* nation to destroy
tha whole Land, Isa. 13. 4. 5.

So then the witnesses being ascended up to Heaven. Now is fullsild that vision
which John saw; A sign in Heaven great and mavelous, seven Angels, having
the seven last plagues, for in them is filled up the wrath of God, Rev. 15. 1.
This is the stone cut out without hands which must smite the Image upon his
feet, Dan. 2. 34. To this time of the witnesses in heaven belongs, that in the
Prophet. Behold I will make thee a new sharp threshing instrument having teeth:
thou shall thresh the Mountains and beat them small, and shall make the hills
as chasse: Thou sh^lt fan them, and the wind shall carry them away, and the
whirlwind shall scatter them: And thou shall rejoice in the Lord and glory in
the holy one of Israel, Isa. 44 15, Again, The Lord shall send the Rod of his
strength out of Zion* Psalm. 110. 2, see also Jer. 51. 19. 20, 21, ^2, 2^, 24.

Ninthly, But what follows? And their Enemies beheld them. They saw them
before when they stood upon their feet, and were astonished at it. But much
more now, being ascended, and gotten above them, to pour out a vial full of the
wrath of God upon their heads. There is nothing said what the Enemies of the
Witnesses do, more then Behold them, that is, saw them as Balaam did Israel
abiding in his Tents, according to their Tribes. The Lord his God is with him,
and the shall of a King is among them. Behold the People shall rise up as a
great Lion, and lift up himself as a young Lion, he shall not lie down until
he eat of the prey, and drink the blood of the slain. God brought him out of
Egypt; he has as it n ere, the strength of a Unicorn, he shall eat up the
Nations his Enemies, and shall break their bones, and pierce them through with
his arrows, Number. 23. 21, 24. and 24. 8. In this manner and no otherwise, shall
the Enemy now behold them. Neither do I find any thing that they shall do, or
be able to do for their own safety. Is it not said, All hands shall be faint,
and every man's heart shall melt, and they shall be afraid, pangs and sorrows
shall take hold of them, they shall be in pain, as a Woman that travelleth,
and they shall be amazed one at another, their faces shall be as flames, Isa.
13. 7, 8. But when shall this be? At this time, I say now, the Lord having
called his Mighty ones, and his sanctified ones, and mustered the host of the
battle agaixst Babylon, v. 1, 2, 3, 4. And this is one Reason why I do
conceive, For material weapons the Saints have no need to make much provision
before hand. Though Joshua took All the People of war with him, and all the
mighty men of valor; Yet there died more with hailstones, then they whom the
children of Israel slew with the sword, Josh. 107, 11. So at this time,
howsoever there shall be the Sword of the Lord, and the Sword of Gideon: yet
Gideon but a thousand, and David his ten thousand.

And here I desire the discreet Reader to observe the Method and order which
the Lord (as it seems to me) will follow in making Christ's enemies his
footstool. When the three years and an half are expired (for till then the
appointed time will not come for him to arise and have mercy upon Zion) there
will be a pouring out of the Spirit in abundance, whereby the hearts of the
faithful every where will be raised up to high and great resolutions against
the later Apostacy, the little Horn and Beast: Even publicly to declare the
war of the Lamb against that Government and State, and the whole dominion of
Antichrist. This will strike a dreadful terror through the hearts of the
Enemies (especially HYPOCRITES AND SINNERS IN ZION) They will be driven to
their wits end, not knowing what to do, seeing judgment must begin at them.
And that the Lords work may the more effectually go forward and prosper, now
the Lamb himself will speak to the hearts of his sincere ones, touching the
great Commandment of love, and for peace and union. By whose Spirit (working
effectually in them) his Commandment shall be obeyed: ^o that all breaches and
differences will be speedily and perfectly done away, and they all of one
accord and of one mind: And what then? As the Armies of Heaven, and Angels of
the last plagues, go out of the Temple to pour out the Vials of the wrath of
God upon the Earth. And as the Saints are thus raised up in faith, life, light,
love, wisdom, courage, etc. So on the contrary the Enemies now fall and are
cast down under unbelief, death, darkness, division, folly, fear, etc.

Reader, I pray thee mark it. The three years and half being expird, This
will follow. As the followers of the Lamb, shall have faith, love, light,
courage, and understanding* rise and increase among them: So among the
followers of the Horn and Beast, quite otherwise, viz. Fear, unbelief,
contention, blindness, and confusion, will break out and abound. And by this
many will be convinced and satisfied, that the set time is come.

That which is next is Action; And it follows in the Text.

And the same hour was there a great earthquake, and the tenth part of the
City fell, and in the earthquake were slain of men seven thousand; And the
remnant were affrighted, and gave glory to the God of Heaven.

Here I think the Vials begin: this shaking Earth, is the Earth Rev. 16. 2. the
subject of the first Vial. That State-Apostacy (of which we have spoken) out
of Entitled which, as the Bottomless Pit,

Truth ascended the Beast, headed with with Time. a little Horn. But of this I
have elsewhere written, and shall refer the Reader to it.

I come now to our last point, and so will Conclude.

Whether the Prophecy of slaying the Witnesses be fulfild in our time, or no?

Answ. By what has been said let the READER Judge.

I shall add nothing of mine own. But draw up some particular Heads, from the
the Prophecy opened. If it be fulfild in whole or part; These things must be,
as I soberly think.

I. A Government, or State, set up by Apostates.

II. No sooner is it erected, but there will be a glorious Testimony of Jesus,
formerly held forth, imediately killed.

III. If it be this Beast, his dominion and Government must suddenly and
strangely come forth, neither expected nor desired of the people, nor has it
their consent. Yet,

IV. For craft and policy there will be more used about raising this Beast,
then has been known before.

V. Hypocrisy in religion will be the great thing, whereby the Beast being
ascended out of the bottomless pit shall seek to establish his Government.

VI. They are not Persons he shall slay; but the Truth witnessed by them: yet
not all truth: But that Testimony which is now held forth for the Reign and
Kingdom of Christ against worldly powers.

VII. This Testimony he will kill in many great Professors: by corrupting them
with preferment, Job 34* 30. Again he himself will pretend much piety:
persuading people it is not the Testimony of Jesus he kills, but error and
falsehood. Besides if he be the Beast he will have such Soldiers about him, as
will act any wickedness he bids them. Lastly, he will make Laws against the
witnesses.

VIII. This Beast shall not be under the authority of the Church of Rome,
neither shall the place or Country where the witnesses are slain (in their
Testimony) belong to the Jurisdiction of the Papal Beast.

IX. Nevertheless this Beast shall be a main pillar and supporter of Babylon
in her greatest Idolatry, and Tyranny.

X. Though this Beast shall endeavor to destroy utterly the present Generation
Testimony; yet he shall not be able: For the Lord will have a Remnant in whom
the witness shall live; Though he have killed it in others.

XI. Where this is, their hypoctites do reign, It will be a time in which
Apostates shall flourish.

XII. Now the Carnal and corrupt professor will rejoice and make merry. And
Priests say (as Agag) surely the bitterness of death is past* call for Samson
that he may make us sport.

Who is wise, and he shall understand these things? Frudent, and he shall know
them? For the ways of the Lord are right, and the just shall* walk in them:
But the transgressors shall fall therein, Hos 14. 9.

FINIS.
A POSTSCRIPT.
Ye Precious Ones, and Saints of the most High. It is not much that I shall
add; But it is to give YOU an Account of the Occasion of this Work.
UPON my Banishment from Hull (for what Cause I know not, there being nothing
to this day made known to me.) I went a part (as Elias did) into the
Wilderness. And as I lay under hedges, and in holes, my Soul in bitterness
breathed forth many sad complaints before the Lord. It is enough O Lord take
away my life, for I am not better then my Fathers. Often and sore wrestlings I
had with my God, to know His Meaning and Teaching, under this Dispensation; And
what further work (whether Doing or Suffering) he had for me, his Poor old
Sevant, being now again Banished, after 17 years Banishment before.

Being brought thus at the feet of God; and there waiting and Harkening What
the Lord would speak. I had the Former Things (for the Substance of them) given
in unto me. And I can speak it in Truth: I understood them not till now; But
thought The Time of the End, was to be found out and known some other way.

Now howsoever I could not but think, there was Something of God in This; As to
an Answer of Prayer. (Especially having these Things upon my heart as I was
pouring out my soul at the Throne of grace.) Nevertheless, Considering, the
weightinesse and difficulty of the Matter. How differing it was, to what Others
Held; And how deeply Some (and my self also) have suffered for our Mistakes,
in meddling with such High Things: But chiefly, what a poor worth-lesse and
empty Thing I was, More brutish then any man, and had not the Understand of a
man; And how subtly Satan works at this Time in Some, by a spirit of
delusion, in pretending to high things, and that it is God that speaks in
them. Upon these and such like Considerations, my Soul was sore distressed,
and I besought the Lord with Tears Day and Night, that he would take Pity on
Me, and not leave me to a Deceived Heart.

But as often as I set my face unto the Lord, by prayer and supplication, I
found my self more Encouraged, and had more of the Prophesies opened unto me.
Yea (and the Lord knows I lie not) whenever my heart has been most melted
and broken before him, and my soul swallowed up with the greatest Love and
Longing after his Glory; AT SUCH TIMES I have been most confirmed, and
strengthened, to believe, that it was the Spirit of truth which revealed these
things to me, a Worm.

Nevertheless, being yet unsatisfied in my self (as Fearful least I should
go aside from the Teachings of God.) I acquainted some of some of my Christian
Friends with the Thing, and how the Case stood with me; and desired that the
same might be Spread before the Lord: The which was done several Times; And
very earnestly was the Lord sought unto, for Counsel and Direction, that there
might be no miscarriage on either Hand. Much I could say concerning this
Particular; But I shall say no more then this, I found the Fruit of their
Prayers, A Greater Confirmation.

After all this (for I was not quiet yet) having put things into some Order, I
communicated my Thoughts unto other Friends: Some of these (whose Works praise
them in the Gate) I found to be of my Opinion; For which I thanked God and took
courage. As did Paul when the Brethren met him, Acts 28. 15. But Others (and
Precious Ones too) were (as I apprehended) otherwise minded. And here began, as
the last, so my sorest and sharpest Conflict.

For so much was I discouraged now, as I had Jeremiahs Complaint often up. O
Lord thou have deceived me, and I was deceived; Thou art stronger then I, and
have prevailed, Jer. 20. 7. I must confess the Considerations before named
(especially being conscious to my own Emptiness and Poverty) has so much
affected me. That I have been more ready (except in Prayer) to fall in with any
outward Discouragements, and to improve them, whenever they came; Then to
close with inward Ecouragements, even the Stirring and Motions (I think I may
say) the Visions of God, which I have powerfully felt upon my soul, when I
have been nearest the Mercy Seat. But Hallelujah, praised be the Lord, who has
taken from Me (a worm still) these Discouragements and Fears, by working up my
heart into joy of Believing.

It may be in Reading of this, you would willingly know my Intention? It is
Thus: I have not Published this Treatise, as I have done things heretofore; For
in Humility, and an awful fear of my God, Here I can say and that truly, THIS
IS A WORK OF FAITH AND PRAYER, Not of my own Labor and study (comparitively) as
former Things have been; For here I have been more out of the Body, and with
the Lord on the Mount. But oh I would be humble in such Exprestions, that THE
LORD ALONE MIGHT BE EXALTED. And I a remain still a Worm in my hole, and
numbered among the dead.

Neither have I rested in the Experiences of Gods inward Workings upon my
soul, that is, To his giving forth of the Spirit alone. But the Holy
Scriptures have been The Men of my Counsel, Psalm. 119. 24. Insomuch as I have
not hearkened any further, to the Persuasions and Operations of the Holy Spirit,
Though received as the Finger of God. Then what I might do (yea and ought) by
the Covenant-Promise, I say by Faith Grounded upon the blessed Word.

Such Scriptures, through the Free Grace of a divine Blessing, by a humble
Application in the Interest of them, have sweetly supported me. Jer. 31. 9. and
33. 3. Hos. 12. 4. Dan. 9. 20, 21. and 2. 18, 19, 23. Luke 11. 12, 13. Jam. 1.
5. Isa. 66. 2. Psalm. 10. 17. and 25 9. 2 Chronicles. 20. 13, 14. Acts 13. 2. Rev. 5.
4, 5. Psalm. 32. 8, 9. 1 John 5. 14, 15. Hence I saw clearly, that with
Supplications the Lord has led his people. And whilst they have been Mourning,
and by the Spirit making Intercession* for them, with Groanings which cannot be
uttered; For the Unction from the holy One, and to be guided* into all Truth.
The Lord has mercifully appeared to them. Neither have such humble and broken
hearted Babes, met with the Portion of Proud Pharisees, viz. Disappointment.

All flesh is grass, etc. But the Word of the Lord endures for ever, 1 Pet.
1. 24, 25. It is a sure word, 2 Pet. 1. 19. Believe in the Lord, so shall ye be
established: Believe his Prophets, so shall ye prosper, 2 Chronicles. 20. 20.

But howsoever in the Publishing of these things, I seem to declare a Humble
Boldness in my God, as to the truth of them. Yet this I desire the
Kingdome-Saints every where to mind; That as the three years and a half (of
which we have spoken) are to have their Period: So must all things following
(in order to the destruction of the little Horn) be likewise accomplished. It
is true, the latter Apostasy, the little Horn, and the Beast that slayes the
Witnesses, have but three years and an half: Yet it must not be understood, as
if at the End of that time, they should presently be destroyed. But when that
Time is expired, then the Judgment shall sit. The Witness rise; And so all
the rest of the Prophesies (concerning them) be fulfild, in due Order and Time.

This I thought good to mention again, to prevent mistakes: For suppose the
aforesaid Time should End about June 57. That which next follows will be no
more (as I take it) But the pouring out of the Spirit in the rising of the
Witnesses; Whereby the Saints of the most High, shall be raised up, in Faith,
Light, Love, Zeal, One-ness, etc. and so made meet for the Masters use. But
among the Apostates, Dread, Fear, Darkness, Divisions, Disappointment, etc.
Only the Lords Work (the appointed time being come) will go foreward, rise,
and always Prosper: Until Jehovah have fulfild his whole Counsel upon the
latter Apostasy, the little Horn, and Beast which ascends out of the Depth.

I thank thee O Father, Lord of Heav^n and Earth: Because thou have hid these
things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto Babes. Even so
Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight, Mat. 11. 25, 26.

This should have been Inserted Page 121.
He shall make War.

AS by the Witnesses I understand not Persons, but a Generation Testimony: So
here, No Civil War, as raising of Armies, and making use of Material Weapons;
But WAR against the Truth, and Killing it. As a man blows out the Light, yet
breaks not the Candle-stick: So this Beast shall principally endeavor to put
out the Light of the Testimony: Not that there shall be much suffering as to
the persons of men.

Hence it is (through the mistake of this) that strange conceits have been
taken up, to wit, that in these Three years and an half, great Battles would
be fought infinite blood shed, a general persecution of the Saints, by
bannishment, imprisonment, burning, hanging, drowning, etc. And horrible
commotions, and hurliburlies the world over. Whereas to me (humbly be it
spoken) I see no such thing intended by the Holy Ghost; No Civil War, nor
Civil killing intimated. But as the Thing slain, is Spiritual; namely, The
Testimomony of Jesus. So this War and killing is to be taken, Not Civilly, but
in a Spiritual sense. I say, it is the Truth that suffers, rather then persons
for it. And in this regard the Beast will slay the Witness without any great
Noise or Notice.

This also may serve to remove another stone out of some men's way; Occasioned,
through our streightning Things to a particular Country or Isle. As if the last
Apostasy, the Little Horn, and the Beast which slayes the Witnesses, should be
applied more General and Large, then we do.

Answ. 1. The kingdom of God will not come with Observation. I wish that this
might be Remembered. As the day breaks first but in one part of the sky; though
the Light from thence, swiftly spreads it self all over. So will the work of
the Lord, after the Three years and half are expired, begin (not every where)
but in one Country, and from them proceed, from one place to another, until
all Christ's Enemies be made his foot stool.

2. I am groundedly convinced that the work shall begin upon the last Apostacy
the little Horn and Beast. But by these not the Germane Emperor the Duke of
Savoy, nor any Popish Power or dominion can be meant. For my part I do not
apprehend, that there is any probable ground so to apply it: And therefore if
these men would but soberly, and impartially weigh things themselves (laying
aside what others have held) they would see the Apostasy, the little Horn, and
the Beast slaying the witnesses in one Country, and that ONE not within the
walls of Babylon, But without, at least I think so.

ERRATA.
PAge 36. line 13. see, read see's. P. 57. l. 13. this, r. his. P. 59. l. 6.
Lastly, r. Lofty. P. 70. l. 24. Charitates, r. Charitatis. P. 76. l. 4.
indulgente, r. indulgent. P. 77. l. 10. withes, r. wither. P. 81. l. 23.
principitatum, r. principatum. Ibid. marg. Tyrannides, r. Tyrannide. P. 95. l.
27. man. r. men. P. 144. l. 13. understand, r. understanding. P. 236. l. 9.
Angel, r. Angels. P. 237. l. 2. the, r. thy. Ibid. l. 4. rouse, r. raise.
FINIS.

