ILL NEWS FROM NEW ENGLAND: OR A Narative of New-Englands PERSECUTION.

WHEREIN IS DECLARED That while old England is becoming new, New England is
become Old.

Also four Proposals to the Honored Parliament and Council of State, touching
the way to Propagate the Gospel of Christ (with small charge and great safety)
both in Old England and New.

Also four conclusions touching the faith and order of the Gospel of Christ out
of his last Will and Testament, confirmed and justified

By JOHN CLARK Physician of Rode Island in America.

Revel. 2. 25. Hold fast till I come. 3. 11. Behod I come quickly. 22. 20.
Amen, even so come Lord Jesus. LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills living in
Fleet-Yard next door to the Rose and Crown, in the year 1652.

To the Right Honorable the House of PARLIAMENT, and COUNCIL of STATE for the
Commonwealth of ENGLAND, The author humbly craves of that mighty Counselor,
that Prince of peace, a large donation of the spirit of Counsel, and of the
spirit of courage, with a suitable and happy success for the Peace, Liberty,
and enlargement of these three Nations.
MAy it please you right Honorable, in some of those few vacant hours which it
pleases the most high (whose rod and staff you are) to afford unto you, from
those many, weighty, difficult, and distractfull incombrances, and affairs,
that do flow in, and press upon you daily, to cast your eye (at least for
recreation sake) upon this Treatise, and the rather, because it contains in it
matter of no small concernment, as in it self, so especially to your honored
selves; for in the first part, which is the narrative, you may please to read a
tragical story, wherein I hope your eye will not a little affect your tender
hearts, to see such a discurteous entertainment of strangers, and wayfaring-men
that were passing by, and tarried but for a night or two, and that by their
neighbors, men professing the fear of the Lord as they also do; who together
for liberty of their consciences, and worship of their God, as their hearts
were persuaded, long since fled from the persecuting hands of the Lordly
Bishops, your adversaries and ours, unto those utmost parts of the World, to
the extreme hazard of their lives, the wasting of their estates, and upon the
point, to the total loss and deprivation of their near and deer relations, and
the comforts thereof in this their native land; and the rather to see this
acted by that sword, that hand, which from your honored arm they are betrusted
with, and so to see your sword, your power, your hand misused therein. In the
second part, which is the confirmation of my testimony by the word of God, and
testimony of Christ Jesus the Lord, and especially in the later part thereof:
you that count it your greatest honor, and highest preferment in this world to
be servants of Christ (who is indeed the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings,
whose Sword-bearers you are, as was also that Caesar although he knew it not)
you (I say I hope) shall find that he has not required such things at your
hands, as generally they that have been his Sword-bearers before your selves
have been apt to conceive; and thereupon have been too deeply engaged in the
shedding of much innocent blood in this Land; being also persuaded thereunto by
their teachers, who to maintain their superstitious, humane, invented religion
and worship, for filthy lucres sake, it being the only curious art, and craft
by which they had their wealth and livings as those of old; not having the
two-edged sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God, to defend themselves,
and to maintain their craft, against the poor illiterate and despised servants
and witnesses of Jesus Christ, have been forced to call for the sword of stell,
the power of the Magistrate, to help to stop their mouths, to cut them off,
and so to take them out of their way, and by casting a mist before their Rulers
eyes they have still persuaded them, That this is their office, and duty to do,
and that hereby they did God best service with that sword with which they were
betrusted, whereas indeed they did but make their sword guilty of the blood of
the innocent; and thus were they taken off from attending upon the very thing
for which this sword was put into their hands, to attend upon their private,
and carnal interests, and so were brought into a double transgression. By
whose errataes, Right Honorable, I hope the Lord will teach you to beware, and
by giving you a clear discerning of his mind, and will in these more bright
sunne-shining days (wherein the Earth begins to be filled with the knowledge
of the Lord as the waters cover the Sea) will give you to understand that as
all power in earth is given to him, so he to the glory of God his Father, whose
power, and wisdom he is, does wisely manage the same by a two fold
administration of power suitable to the two fold state or being of man, whom in
the earth, and in the things thereof he has appointed Lord; that one may be
called an earthly, and outward administration, which suits the outward man, and
all those outward, and visible things (in reference unto man) that do belong
thereto, as he is Lord thereof, and is managed by an outward visible sword of
steel, and by a carnal or audible voice, or word of him, or them that holds it
in their hand, and to an outward and carnal end, (yet righteous, just, and
good, which being diligently attended to tends to the peace, liberty, and
prosperity of a civil State, Nation and Kingdom so far as it concerns the
outward man and visible state thereof;) which end is the preservation of it
self, the whole, and every particular part, and person, belonging thereunto,
safe in their person, name, and estate from him, or them that would rise up
visibly to oppress, or wrong them in the same; Thus in the general; and to
instance more particularly, in case by the caution of a wholesome Law, and just
penalty annexed thereunto, which by a carnal hand or way, is presented to a
carnal and visible eye, or ear, the Oppressor takes not warning, and will not
be deterred from offering violence to the person, name, or estate of his
neighbor, then by this power shall he be made responsible, and be forced
nolens volens, so far as he is able to make it good, and to restore; in case
any be impoverished, or fallen to decay in their outward man, and estates by age,
sickness, fire, or by some other way, or hand of GOD; so far as their present
strength extends, by this power they are to be employed, and where it fails, to
be relieved, and that by an equal, and just levy of their neigbours estates to
be taken also by force in case there be not so much love, and charity in them
toward their poor distressed neighbors to constrain them thereunto, and by
the same way also to maintain itself, and all other just undertakings that may
be presented for the preservation of the whole. And this in brief is the sum of
that administration of Christ's power in earth so far as it merely concerns the
outward man with respect to others that may uphold it, or molest it, and is
managed by that sword of steel which in reference unto him is called in
scripture the rod of iron by which he rules the nations, and breaks them to
pieces like a Potters vessel; and with this administration of his power on
Earth (Right Honorable) has he (who is the Lord of Lords and shall ere long
appear as King and Judge of all) betrusted you in these three Nations, having
as a manifest token thereof put into your hand that iron rod, and to admiration
has strengthened and upheld your arm for the subduing, and ordering of the
same.

There is yet besides this, another administration of Christ's power on Earth,
which compared with this, may be truly termed heavenly and spiritual, it being
that which suiteth with, and principally is exercised about the spiritual, or
hidden part of man, to wit, his spirit, mind, and conscience, which is indeed
the most natural Lord and commander of the outward, it and all things
belonging thereunto being but naturally subject, and readily obedient, from
which very consideration it is, that it is more safe, and also more honorable,
for the powers on earth to have one thousand souls to be subject to them for
love and conscience sake, than to have ten thousand times ten thousand bodies
seemingly subject, for wrath sake, and for fear of revenge; this spirit and
great commander in man, is such a sparkling beam, from the Father of lights,
and spirits, that it cannot be lorded over, commanded, or forced, either by
men, devils, or angels, but only leaving its first station, wherein it came so
near to the light and glory of God, it is now caused to possess death and
darkness, and by that means is in a capacity by men and devils to be deceived,
and so by persuasion to be misled. This spiritual administration of Christ's
power in and over the spirits and consciences of men, as it extends to all the
inward and hidden motions and actings of the mind, so to all the outward
manifestations of its powerful commands in the outward man, in reference unto
God, and especially unto such as appertain to the visible worship and service
of God, who has declared himself to be a Spirit, and will be worshipped in
spirit and in truth, and seeks such, and only such to worship him: This
spiritual administration so far as it concerns the outward man, is managed not
by a sword of Steel (which cannot come near or touch the spirit or mind of man)
but by the sword that proceeds out of the mouth of his servants, the word of
truth, and especially as to the efficacy, and to the inward man, by the
twoedged sword of the Spirit, that spiritual law and light with which these
candles of the Lord are enlightened, and that by himself, who is that light that
enlightneth every man that comes into the world; and this spiritual
administration of Christ's power on earth in and over the spirits, minds, and
consciences of the sons of men, and also over the outward man as to worship
merely, is committed into the hands of the Spirit of Christ, who is his
viceroy here on earth, and is only able to deal with spirits by way of
convincing, converting, transforming, and as it were anew creating of them,
and so to translate them out of the Kingdom of darkness, in which they are by
nature, into the glorious ^iberty of the Saints in light. Who is pleased also
to make use of the mouths of his servants, and through them, as empty reeds,
and crooked rams-hornes, to overturn the spirits, and spiritual strong holds
of men and devils, and by them to convict, avenge, and execute the sentence
written, which upon such as manifest the emnity that is in their minds in the
highest degree even against the holy Spirit himself (the only sin unpardonable
(for all other sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven) I say the written sentence
that is to be executed upon such) is anathema maranatha, that is, accursed with
this intimation, our Lord comes, leaving them until he meet with them; and
otherwise than thus the servants of Christ cannot proceed, having express
command not to strive, but to be patient, apt to teach, in meekness instructing
those that oppose themselves, and to wait if God at anytime will give them
repentance to the acknowledgement of the truth: Thus if it please the Father of
lights to give you (Right Honorable) to distinguish between these two
administrations of Christ's power here on earth, and to leave that part to
himself in the hand of his Spirit, which cannot be conferred on others, nor yet
rightly managed but by the two-edged sword of that Spirit, and wholly give up
your selves to improve that part which belongs unto, and well suits with that
sword which you are now betrusted with, it will much conduce to his glory, your
own praise, and the peace and settlement of these three Nations, over which the
Lord has set you.

And whereas Right Honorable, it is in your hearts, to propagate the Gospel of
Jesus Christ; the thing is excellent that is in your hearts, and I hope the way
to effect it is before you, which is, since the Lord of hoasts has said, that
works of this nature are carried on, not by might, nor by power, but by his
Spirit, therefore to give way to his Spirit for the effecting thereof: and to
this end I humbly propose, that your way to further this glorious design, as to
the might and power this Lord of Hoasts has betrusted you with, is

1. Not so much as to touch his Anointed, and to do his Prophets no harm, their
ointment being the Spirit of prophecy, and this Spirit of prophecy the
testimony and witness of the Gospel of Jesus. And

2. As obedient and dutiful servants to that Lord of Lords, to suffer the
Tares (which being by the adversary sown after the Wheat, must needs be meant,
erroneous, heretical, and antichristian persons professing the Gospel, I say
to let these tares) alone in that part of the field, or world, over which the
great Lord of the harvest has placed your Honors; since it is his pleasure they
shall there remain to the time of the harvest, being the end of the world, and
that out of his tender respect to the Wheat, lest in plucking up the tares
(though evidently discerned by his servants) the Wheat should be rooted up
also. And

3. To the same end not to give your sword, or power to the beast nor yet to
suffer your power, neither in these three nations, nor yet in any foreign part
of the world to be so misused by any to whom it is committed, as by virtue
thereof out of an ignorant zeal, and blind devotion, pretending to pluck up the
tares (which yet is contrary to the express mind of the Lord) to root up the
wheat also.

4. To countenance and encourage (as through Gods merciful hand on your hearts
in some measure you do) such as are faithful, and upright in the land, by this
means shall a wide and effectual door be opened, and so shall the word of the
Lord, which is the Gospel of Christ go forth, run, and be glorified through all
those parts of the world that acknowledge your power, and that which is of God
shall stand, increase and be propagated, and that which is not of God shall
fall, decay, and come to nothing. Thus shall you also accomplish the words of
the Prophets of old, in becoming nursing fathers unto the servants, and
children of God, who under you shall lead a peaceable, and quiet life in all
godliness, and honesty, and shall be greatly obli^ged to improve their interest
in the father of mercies by their presenting to him constant and earnest
petitions, supplications, intercessions, and giving of thanks on your behalf.
And for the furtherance of those worthy thoughts of your hearts, they shall not
cease to preach, and declare to great, and small what they have seen, and felt,
and heard touching the Gospel of Christ, and to pray the lord of the harvest to
send forth faithful and painful laborers into his harvest; which is also the
constant, hearty, and earnest request of

Your humble and faithful Subject, JOHN CLARK.

To the Honored Magistracy, the Presbytery, and their dependency in the
Mathatusets Colony in New England, The Author wishes repentance to the
acknowledgement of the truth as it is in Jesus Christ.
HOnored Friends, for so without scruple or dissimulation can I call you; some
of you I honor for your parts, others for your places sake, and both for many
good things I see in you, and for evils reformed by you; I call you friends,
for my love to you (in truth) is unfeigned, neither are there (I bless the Lord
notwithstanding the discourteous usage which I and my friends received from
you) any evil thoughts in my heart toward you, because I judge you were put
upon what you did by a zeal (I would not think, unto private or caanall
interests but) toward God, thinking thereby to do him service; although I
confidently believe, and therefore boldly do affirm that his soul abhors it;
And that I may deal plainly with you as a friend, I will tell you what in my
heart I think and judge, that such a zeal of God is not according to true
knowledge, or knowledge of the truth as it is in Jesus Christ, which would soon
take you off, and free you from that soul murdering, and blood thirsty lie. I
hope you will not be offended to see this Narrative brought forth into the
public view, it being upon the point forced from me by your friends and agent
here, seeing also the matter, which is contained therein is of no less than of
public concernment, was not done in a corner, is the fruit of your zeal, and
that wherein I suppose you glory and count your selves herein a worthy pattern
for all that sear the Lord, to follow you, and withal their might to be
conformed to; which if a truth, I then save you a labor, and further your
design, yea I publish your praise, and glory, but my own disgrace and shame;
but if a mistake, and falsehood, I shall then hereby give occasion unto your
faithful friends (whose words may be of more prevailing power, and force than
mine, through prejudice for present, are like to be) to tell you friendly, and
yet plainly, that you do but glory in your shame, so that the time may come, if
so be the will of God, that you may smite upon your thigh, and say within your
selves, what fruit had we then of those things, whereof we are now ashamed;
neither let it be offensive to your spirits to see my testimony for which thing
sake among you we were shamefully entreated, being also strangers to you and
belonging to another jurisdiction where and by whose means diverse of you, and
yours, and such as have been of chiefest note, and most highly esteemed by you,
have enjoyed courtesies with far greater liberties in point of conscience no man
gainsaying: let it not offend I say to see this testimony when none of you
(upon the often repeated motion) would come forth to oppose it, then to be made
yet more public, and by the word of God, and testimony of Christ Jesus the
Lord to be brought forth into the open view of all, confirmed and justified*
neither take it ill that fith I could not with freedom, and upon equal terms
speak with you, and discuss these points for which we have been sentenced, that
then I have made bold to write unto you some few lines, that thereby I might
remind you (least you let it slip) that we were brought before you as by a hand
from beneath, so not without a special, and good hand from above, and that to
be a testimony against you in these two weighty particulars; first to bear
testimony against your standing with respect to the worship of God appointed by
Christ, which in plain terms (for it is not now a time to dissemble seeing the
Lord is at hand) is false, and evil, not the order of the Gospel of Christ as
you pretend, and therefore disorder, confusion, and that, which in Scripture
language is called Babel; And secondly to bear testimony, or witness against
that way by which you maintain it, which being chiefly as it appears by carnal
weapons, which cannot reach to the heart or spirit of a man, which is the
principal part, and upon the point the whole in the worship of God, without
which there is no acceptance with him, this I say must needs also be falls, but
yet far worse, it being no way appointed, or approved of Christ, nor yet
groundedly expected or practiced by Christians who first trusted in Christ, and
therefore upon due examination will prove most unchristian, yea Antichristian;
I shall use but these two arguments in this place to convince you, The first
whereof stands thus.

That order, and way to maintain it which neither has precept from Christ, and
his Apostles in his last will and testament, nor yet president, or example
among those that first trusted in Christ, that order cannot be the order of the
Gospel of Christ, nor that way his way to maintain it.

But the order which you call the order of the Gospel of Christ, and the way
which you say is his way to maintain it, has neither precept, nor president in
his last will and testament.

The first proposition I suppose none of you can deny, unless you can find a
later than that which is called his last will and testament, and as for the
second the truth thereof, will as easily appear if you bring your order, and
way to maintain it to the precept of Christ, and practice of those that first
trusted in him; and first for your order, what precept from Christ, or practice
among those that first trusted in him have you for baptizing of infants (who
are declared to be but flesh and by nature the Children of wrath one as well as
another:) for rantising and sprinkling them, and not baptizing or dipping them;
for accepting such as were sprinkled with superstitious hallowed water, and by
the hand of as superstitious consecrated a ministry of Antichrist, and for
receiving of such as are sprinkled by your selves to the ordinance of baptism
as you call it, but yet to deny them communion in the Apostles doctrine, and in
breaking of bread: And if you cannot find either precept from Christ or his
Apostles, or example among those that first trusted in Christ for none of
these, then will you be a^ loss for the rest, and neither, find precept or
president for your joining together, or for your imitation of those that first
trusted in him in their ministry of continuance togegether in the Apostles
doctrine and fellow ship and breaking of bread, and prayer. And touching your
way to maintain it, what have you a precept and president in the last will and
testiment of Christ for such a gathering together with respect to the order of
the Gospel of Christ in the name, and by the leave of the Magistrate, so as to
make it a thing unlawful for the servants of Christ to do it, without him, by
the civil sword to correct error, heresies, and all false worships, to
constrain all Church Members, and such also as are without (and so cannot but
by you be looked upon to be without faith, without which it is impossible to
please God) outwardly and hypocritically to conform to your worship, or to
restrain them in like manner outwardly and hypocritically from enjoying their
own, when according to that rule (to which is annexed the promise of peace to
such as walk thereby) the greatest Apostacies and Blasphemies (that
unpardonable fin it self not excepted) were but punished with a delivery of the
person that was guilty thereof unto Satan the God of this world, that he might
learn not to blaspheme the God of heaven, and so to leave him to the coming of
the Lord who shall come in flaming fire to render vengeance upon such; and so
much is signified by the word anathema Maranatha. And I pray consider whether
this be not to place the Magistrate too high, or too low; too high in case you
make him the chief, and upon the point the only Judge in spiritual things (^uch
as appertain to the mystery of godliness that is so great, and such as belong
to the mystery of the Kingdom of Christ, that is so wonderful) so as to judge,
and determine what is truth, and what is error and heresy, what is the right
way of the worship of God who being a spirit has declared that he will be
worshipped in spirit, and in truth, and what is not; who are the worshippers he
seeks for, and who are such as his soul abhors? and again too low in case you
make him but the executioner only of other men's judgments; which indeed is the
ordinary practice. And so I have done with the first argument; the second
stands thus.

2. Arg. That order, and way to maintain it which is not only different from,
but contrary unto the precept of Christ in his last will and testament, and the
practice of Christians that first trusted in him, that order cannot be the
order of the Gospel of Christ, nor that way his way to maintain it. But the
order which you call the order of the Gospel of Christ, and the way which you
say is his way to maintain it, is not only different from but contrary unto the
precept of Christ, and the practice of Christians that first trusted in him.

The first proposition it undeniable, and the second will easily appear to be
true if your order* and that way by which you seek to maintain it be brought to
and compared with the precept of Christ, and his Apostles, and the example of
those churches that first trusted in him; and first compare but your order with
either precept, or president; and it will evidently appear not only to be
differing from, but contrary unto the order of the Gospel of Christ: for
according to the precept of Christ every creature to whom the Gospel was to be
preached was by the preaching thereof to be made a disciple before he was to be
baptized, and then being so made, and baptized he was to be taught to observe
all things which Christ had commanded, which was in reference to a sober,
righteous, and godly conversation in the order of his house, according to which
precept was the practice of those that first trusted in him, for they, and they
only that gladly received the word of salvation by Jesus Christ were baptized,
Acts 2 and they, and all they that were baptized were joined without the leave
of the Magistrate, and continued together steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine;
and in fellowship, and breaking of bread and prayer: but your joining together
not at the command of the Lord, but by the leave of the Magistrate, and your
continuing together in imitation of the first Churches, and appointing a
ministry before your selves be baptized, and so visibly planted into the death
of Christ as they were; and your administering baptism (as you call it) to such
as are not the true subjects thereof before they are taught, or made disciples;
and after a false manner, viz. by sprinkling, which no way resembles the death,
burial, or resurrection of Jesus Christ, being that which his baptism is
appointed to do; and your admitting some unto baptism (as you own it) which you
refuse to admit unto breaking of bread, and your receiving such to breaking of
bread, which yet were never baptized with the baptism appointed by Jesus Christ
the Lord; and your shutting out the exercise of the gift of prophesying, which
in the Church of Christ does admirably tend to edification; and your
introducing a mixed confused way of singing which fills the ear rather with a
loud sound of words, than the heart with any thing that is truly edifying, all
which is not only differing from, but contrary unto both precept, and
president, and so cannot be the order of the Gospel of Christ, and therefore is
no better than disorder, confusion, and a part of that which in Scripture
language is called Babell. And compare that way by which you maintain it,
either with the precept of Christ or with the president of primitive Christians
and it will as evidently appear not only to be different from, but contrary
unto them both; for first the precept of Christ was to learn of him who was
meek and lowly, and to expect trouble, and persecution from others, and not to
persecute, neither to force the Jews that would not follow him, nor yet to fire
the Samaritans that would not receive him, yea he expressly commands his
Servants to let the rares alone with the wheat, and suffers no small
inconvenience thereby to avoid a greater, and further declares that the servant
of the lord must nor strive, but be gentle unto all men, apt to teach (not to
strike) patient, in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if God
peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledgement of the truth that
they may recover themselves out of the snare of the devil who are taken captive
by him at his will; according to which precepts of Christ we find the primitive
Christians were meek, and gentle, and yet able by sound doctrine both to
exhort, and convince the gainsayers, who called not for carnal weapons to
manage their warfare, but declared their weapons were mighty through God, and
either by the word and a good conversation won men to the acknowledgement of
the truth as it is in Jesus, or else left them without excuse together with the
world, unto the judgment of the great day of the Lord; but now all men may see
that your way is not only different from, but contrary unto this precept of
Christ and president of Christians, and therefore cannot be esteemed any better
than unchristian, yet Antichristian.

Let not your adversary and mine (Dear Countrymen) fill your hearts with
indignation, and thoughts of revenge against him, who in a faithful discharge
of his conscience both toward God, and you, have made bold to deal plainly
with you, least my God to whom vengeance belongs, repay it upon you, and smite
you with blindness of mind, and hardness of heart that cannot repent, but
rather set before your eyes that memorable practice, and worthy pattern of
those noble Bereans, and (laying profits, honor and prejudice aside if it be
possible) peruse my testimony, and search the scriptures diligently to see
whether the things contained therein be so or no; if you find them so, viz.
confirmed, and justified by the word of God, and by the testimony of Christ
Jesus the Lord, then consider, not I but the Lord from heaven calls upon you to
break off your sins by repentance, and let me hereby give you warning to take
heed that you despise not him that speaks from heaven. As touching the wrong
and injury done to us, you having thereby much more wronged your own souls in
transgressing the very law, and light of Nations, doing as you would not be
done unto, it is in my heart to pity you rather, and to petition my Lord in
heaven not to lay this sin to your charge, than to complain against you, or to
petition your lords and ours here on earth for justice herein; no, no, we have
better learned Christ than so, having also given up our hearts to be led by his
spirit; and to walk in his steps, who when he was reviled, reviled not again,
when he suffered, he threatened not, but committed his case to him that judges
righteously, and who knows but that the spirit of judgment, and the spirit of
burning, has been, or may be ere long in your hearts, whereby you may be made
affectedly sensible, that the cause is the same, or very little differing from
this.

A poor innocent traveller passes along the Country upon his occasions: a man
having strength in his arm finds him, frames himself offended with him for no
cause he has given him, and because he cannot draw him unto his party, either
to rob, or to kill, or to say amen to his practices, he therefore binds him,
and casts him into a pit, and declares himself resolute there to keep him, till
he has his blood, unless he will deliver him his purse; the man either has
not a purse about him, or a heart to deliver it; and being unwilling either to
part with his blood, or that the other should be so deeply guilty in taking it
from him, he meekly, and earnestly thrice moves the strong man for a
discourse, and humbly entreats him that he would not seek by the strength of
his arm, but by the force of some arguments to convince his understanding, and
conscience, and so to draw him (as a man) to his party, but the strong man
delays him, and so puts him off; whereupon a good tender hearted Samaritan
passing by, and perceiving how the case stood, and that the strong man would
have his purse; or his blood without any dispute, being moved with compassion
to redeem this innocent blood from the handof the strong man he delivers him
his own purse, and so the man is released. Take it not ill that I have used so
much plainess of speech, for my study is now to speak plainly, and neither
flatteringly nor invectively: and to use plain dealing with all men, although I
verify the Proverb, and die a beggar; for as I told some of your selve^ (and
that in public) I abhor dissimulation, neither can I account him a wise man
who does not hate dissembling, or that does love to dissemble; and therefore
says Solomon rebuke a wise man and he will love thee, etc. and David the King
says on this wife, let the righteous smite me and it shall be a precious balm;
I know instruction is grievous to him that is out of the way, but what says
the wise man, he that hates instruction shall die. Consider I pray what has
been spoken, and turn not away your eye, nor your ear, nor your heart from
instruction, least that which was said by the prophet of old Isa. 9. 14, 15.
16. be in you verified, which to prevent is the humble and earnest request unto
the fathers of mercies of

Your loving friend and Couutreyman JOHN CLARK.

To the true Christian Reader.
THou may herein (Christian Reader) see, and peruse thy destiny in this
present evil world (which seems in a great measure to be subjected unto
devils) through which thou art to pass unto that purchased possession, and
promised inheritance of the Saints in light, which is in that better world,
which is not subjected unto Angels, but unto the Son of God himself; thou
may herein also observe, and take notice of the hand by whom from thy
heavenly father thou art to receive that bitter cup, which he drunk off when he
was here below; for thy sake chiefly was this treatise brought forth into the
public view; I hope not to discourage thee, but to strengthen thine heart,
that thou might not fear any of those things, which thou shall suffer,
either from men or devils for thy testimony, that Jesus is the Christ (it being
that which will shortly appear the only prevailing, and victorious truth in all
the world): for herein shall thou also see that worthy saying lively
accomplished; If ye suffer for the name of Christ blessed are ye, for the
spirit of the Lord, and of glory rests upon you; thou have a worthy name
called on thee. My hearts desire, and prayer to God on thy behalf, therefore is
that thou may enjoy such a plentiful pouring forth of that holy spirit into
thine heart, that thereby thou may be enabled to walk worthy of it, and
having so bright a beam of the Fathers glory in thy soul, it may so shine forth
before the sons of men, that they seeing thy good works may have cause
administered to glorify our father, which is in heaven; It is not words now
Christian, (although they were spoken with tongues of men and Angels) when that
worthy name is every where well spoken of, but faith that works by love, and
love by works that will distinguish a heady from a hearty Christian. Say not in
thine heart that Christ's Comands are low, and his appointments carnal, legal
injunctions, and at the best, but neat for babes; least hereby thine heart be
declared to be vainly puffed ^p in thy carnal or fleshly mind, and to have too
low, and carnal conceits of Christ himself, who is the injoyner, appointer,
and commander thereof, and shall ere long appear as Judge, yea least hereby
thou be declared ignorant, or at the best forgetful of this one thing, that it
is the great design of God in Christ as to glorify himself to admiration in
poor sinful flesh, so whilst he does it to hide pride from man, and therefore
as he has chosen not many wise, mighty, nor noble of this world, but the
foolish, weak, base, despised nothings thereof, so has he suited his commands,
and appointments thereunto, and intends through these foolish things so to
cause his wisdom to shine forth as thereby to confound the wise; through these
weak things so to cause his power to appear, as thereby to confound the things
that are mighty; and through these base despised things that are not, to bring
to naught those noble, glorious, and excellent things of the world that are;
Thou may herein see (gentle Reader) that I have rather chosen to bear witness
to the faith, and order of our Lord, and to show unto the world, but especially
unto thee, what is the mind of Christ in this time of his absence as to faith,
and obedience, to show I say rather what is truth, which is but one, than to
bear witness against the ly, which is so various, knowing that the truth once
established shall discover the falsehood, and light breaking forth shall scatter
the darkness. And whilst I lead thee forth to seek him whom thy soul loves,
and longs after, who is also thy joy, and thy Crown; while I lead thee I say
by the footsteps of those flocks that first trusted in Christ, and were fed by
such pastors according to his own heart, as he gave them, God forbid that thou
should be as one that wilt turn aside by the flocks of his companions, and
should be found remaining either on the left side in a visible way of worship
in deed, but such as was neither appointed by Christ, nor yet practiced by them
who first trusted in him, or on the right in no visible way of worship, or
order at all either pretending that the outward court is given to the Gentiles,
and the holy City is by them to be trodden under foot; that the Church of Christ
is now in the wilderness, and the time of its recovery is not yet, or else
pretending that God is a spirit, and so will in spirit be worshipped, and not
in this place or that, in this way or that. Well if thou be in these ways
misled I can no longer forbear in tenderness of spirit, and compassionate
bowels of love to stretch forth a helping hand thereby to try whether it be the
good pleasure of God at this time to drop down a word of light, and life, and
power into thine heart, that thou may be there by awakned, and quickened to
be still saying within thy soul; Lord what will thou have me to do? so shall
thou hear such a saying as this, Come out from among them (Oh my people) and be
ye separate from them, and touch no unsanctifyed thing, and I will receive you,
and be a father unto you, and ye shall be my sons, and daughters, says the
Lord* God Almighty, and also such a saying as this, Blessed are they that do
his commands for they have right to the tree of life, and shall enter in
through those gates of pearl into that glorious City; Rev. 22. 14. and know
that these are the commandments of Jesus sci. As ye have received Christ Jesus
the Lord, so walk ye in him; and behold I come quickly, hold that fast which
thou have, yea hold fast till I come; And such as may be under the later
disceptions let me entreat thee to ponder these words in thine heart sci. That
prophecies although marvelous plain, and easy to be understood, cannot warrant
a pure conscience to neglect, much less to cast off the commandments and
oppointments of Jesus, neither can the spirit of Christ direct or encourage the
heart of a Christian to cast off his lordship; no, no, the spirit of Christ is
hereby distinguished from that of Antichrist, in that he shall unfainedly
confess that Jesus is the Christ, and that this Christ Jesus is come in the
flesh, and when he is come according to promise into the heart of a Christian,
he shall not speak of himself, but as a messenger his office is to gloryfie
Christ by taking of him, and his, and showing it unto, yea writing it in the
heart of a Christian, so that I dare boldly say, there is none for the
exaltation of Christ Jesus the lord according to his last will and testament,
and for the nourishing a lively hope in the heart of a Christian concerning his
glorious return, I say there is none to that holy spirit of promise, who being
also the spirit of truth, shall guide the souls of the Saints to worship the
father, as in spirit, so likewise in truth; and therefore that spirit that
speaks of himself, and is so far from* taking of Christ's to exalt, and gloryfie
him according as he has foretold and his father intended, that he takes from
Christ, lays him low, and diminishes his glory, that spirit cannot be the
spirit of Christ, or that holy spirit of promise; and for as much as the spirit
speaks expressly that in these later days there shall be seducing spirits
that shall deceive if it were possible the very elect of God, whose encounter
will not be so much with flesh and blood, but with wicked spirits in high
places, let me therefore exhort thee in the words of that beloved disciple of
Christ; believe not every spirit, but try the spirits; and that by this rule,
whether they be of God or no, bring them to the wholesome words of the holy
Apostles, Prophets, and son of God; ye err (says Christ) not knowing the
scriptures, and the power of God; let it be thy care (Christian) therefore to
search the Scriptures, and therein to wait for the power and glory of the
spirit of God. And look to thy spirit for as immediately before Christ's
appearing in flesh, Satan in a large measure possessed the bodies of men, that
by his casting them out, his power in flesh might appear; So before his coming
again in glory I have grounds to expect that the minds and spirits of men shall
be strongly possessed; and that as this fundamental conclusion, Thou art Jesus
the son of the living God, shall be improved to the utmost by the holy Spirit
of Christ in the hearts and lives of the sons and daughters of God, so shall
the same conclusion be improved to the utmost by way of a bewitching deception
in the hearts and lives of the sons of men by the spirit of Antichrist, which
mystery being brought to the height, then shall Christ Jesus consume him with
the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy him with the brightness of his
coming. Therefore (Christian) stand thou upon thy watch, and know, that if
Christ be formed in thee, thou can not but be transformed by him, and the
best form that thou can be found in when thy Lord shall appear, will be in
that form, and so doing, as he has appointed, walking wisely and in peace
toward all men. Consider what has been spoken to thee, and the God of truth
and peace give thee to understand and do his will; which is the constant and
earnest supplication and prayer of

thine in Christ Jesus JOHN CLARK

A brief discourse touching New England, as to the matter in hand, and to that
part of it, sci. Rode Island, where my residence is, together with the occasion
of my going out with others from the Mathatusets Bay, and the many
providentiall occurrences that directed us thereto, and pitched us thereon.

As also the Contents of the whole Treatise.

NEw England is a name (as is generally known) that was, and still is, called
upon that place in reference to Old; yet not so much because it is peopled, and
planted from thence, for so are many other Plantations of the English in those
Western parts; but because it resembles the same, as the daughter the mother.
It resembles it in the climate, in the times and seasons of the year, in the
fruits which the land naturally produces, in the fouls, and the fish that are
there in abundance. It resembles it in their political affairs; for their
governments, laws, Courts, Officers, are in a great measure the same, and so
are the names of their towns, and Counties; and in point of good husbandry,
that which is raised and produced in New England, more substantial, and whether
it be for food or raiment it is the same with that which is here produced in
Old. It is a place (in the largest acceptance) that contains in it all the
Plantations of the English upon that coast of America that lie between the
Dutch Plantation on the West, and the French on the East, and extends it self
upon the Sea coast above one hundred leagues. In it is contained the four
Colonies, which call themselves the united Colonies. The Colony called by the
name of the Province of Providence Plantations, lying on the South and
South-East thereof, and two or three more lving on the Easter North-East, in
Agamenticus, Saco, Casco-Bay, and Pema juid, where is that treasure of Masts
for Ships. The names of the united Colonies are these, in point of precedence
first Mathatusets, etc. but in point of antiquity first Plymouth, then the
Mathatusets, then Conectecot, and last Quinipiuck. The chief Towns of these
Colonies, and seats of their Government are these, Boston of the Mathatusets,
Plymouth of Plymouth, Hereford of Conectecot, and of Quinipiuck New Haven.

Now as the name New England in the largest and truest acceptance extends to
all the Plantations of the English between the French and the Dutch, so in a
scanty and improper acceptance of the word (especially when it makes for
advantage) it is taken for these four united Colonies, by reason of the
precedence they have of others, and for the same cause, and upon the point as
well, it may be taken for the Mathatusets and the Town of Boston therein. When
I speak of New England, understand it of that part which has got the
precedence (by reason of shipping) and start of the rest, sci. the Mathatusets,
as both in my Epistle and Narrative is plain to be seen, which I have here also
inserted for fear of mistake.

In the Colony of Providence Plantations in point of antiquity the Town of
Providence is chief, but in point of precedence Rode-Iland excels. This Island
lies in the Narraganset Bay, being 14 or 15 miles long, and in breadth between
4 and 5 miles at the broadest; It began to be planted by the English in the
beginning of the year 39. and by this hand of providence. In the year 37 I left
my native land, and in the ninth month of the same, I (through mercy) arived
at Boston, I was no sooner on shore, but there appeared to me differences among
them touching the Covenants, and in point of evidencing a man's good estate,
some pressed hard for the Covenant of works, and for sanctification to be the
first and chief evidence, others pressed as hard for the Covenant of grace that
was established upon better promises, and for the evidence of the Spirit, as
that which is a more certain, constant, and satisfactory witness. I thought it
not strange to see men differ about matters of Heaven, for I expect no less
upon Earth: But to see that they were not able so to bear each with other in
their different understandings and consciences, as in those utmost parts of the
World to live peaceably together, whereupon I moved the latter, for as much as
the land was before us and wide enough, with the profer of Abraham to Lot, and
for peace sake, to turn aside to the right hand, or to the left: The motion was
readily accepted, and I was requested with some others to seek out a place,
which accordingly I was ready to do; and thereupon by reason of the suffocating
heat of the Summer before, I went to the North to be somewhat cooler, but the
Winter following proved so cold, that we were forced in the Spring to make
toward the South; so having sought the Lord for direction, we all agreed that
while our vessel was passing about alarge and dangerous Cape, we would cross
over by laad, having Long Island and Delaware-Bay in our eye for the place of
our residence; so to a town called Providence we came, which was begun by one
M. Roger Williams (who for matter of conscience had not long before been exiled
from the former jurisdiction) by whom we were courteously and lovingly
received, and with whom we advised about our design; he readily presented two
places before us in the same Naragansets Bay, the one upon the main called
Sow-wames, the other called then Acquedneck, now Rode-Iland; we enquired
whether they would fall in any other Patent, for our resolution was to go out
of them all; he told us (to be brief) that the way to know that, was to have
recourse unto* Plymouth; so our Vessel as yet not being come about, and we
thus blockt up, the company determined to send to Plymonth, and pitched upon two
others together with my self, requesting also M. Williams to go to Plymouth to
know how the case stood; so we did; and the Magistrates thereof very lovingly
gave us a meeting; I then informed them of the cause of our coming unto them,
and desired them in a word of truth and faithfulness to inform us whether
Sow-wames were within their Patent, for we were now on the wing, and were
resolved through the help of Christ, to get clear of all, and be of our selves,
and provided our way were clear before us, it were all one for us to go further
off, as to remain near ac hand; their answer was, that Sow-wames was the garden
of their Patent, and the flour in the garden then I told them we could not
desire it; but requested further in the like word of truth and faithfulness to
be informed, whether they laid claim to the Islands in the Naraganset Bay, and
that in particular called Acquedneck? they all with a cheerful countenanre
made us this answer, it was in their thoughts to have advised us thereto, and
if the provident hand of God should pitch us thereon they should look upon us
as free, and as loving neighbors and friends should be assistant unto us upon
the main, etc. So we humbly thanked them, and returned with that answer: So it
pleased the Lord, by moving the hearts of the natives, even the chiefest
thereof, to pitch us thereon, and by other occurrences of providence, which are
too large here to relate: So that having bought them off to their full
satisfaction, we have possessed the place ever since; and notwithstanding the
different understandings and consciences amongst us, without-interruption we
agree to maintain civil Justice and judgment, neither are there such outrages
committed among us as in other parts of the Country are frequently seen.

The Narrative declares
1. How those three strangers were apprehended, imprisoned, sentenced, and for
what. 2. How the motion was made for a public dispute, often repeated and
promised, and yet disapointed. 3. How two escaped, and the third was cruelly
handled. 4. How two, for taking him but by the hand after his punishment, were
apprehended, imprisoned, and sentenced to pay forty shillings or be whipped.
In their Testimony laid down in four conclusions, is opened and proved
In the First, 1. That Jesus is the Christ, [i. e.] the Anointed Priest,
Prophet, and King of Saints. 2. That Christ is also the Lord of his Church in
point of ruling and ordering them with respect to the worship of God. In the
Second, 1. That Baptism is one of the commandments of Christ, and to continue
till he come. 2. that visible Believers are the proper sub^ects thereof. 3.
That they are as well to wait for the promise of the Spirit, as for the
presence of Christ. In the Third, That every believer ought to improve his
talent both in and out of the Congregation. In the Fourth, That no servant of
Jesus has any authority from him to force upon others either the faith or
order of the Gospel of Christ. Wherein are produced 8 arguments against
persecution for case of Conscience.
A Faithful and True Relation of the Prosecution of Obediah Holmes, John
Crandall, and John Clarke, merely for Conscience toward God, by the principal
Members of the Church, or Commonwealth of the Mathatusets in New England,
which rules over that part of the World; whereby is shown their discourteous
Entertainment of Strangers, and how that Spirit by which they are led, would
order the whole World, if either brought under them, or should come in unto
them: Drawn forth by the aforesaid John Clarke, not so much to answer the
Importunity of Friends, as to stop the mouths, and slanderous reports of such
as are Enemies to the Cross of Christ. Let him that reads it consider, which
Church is most like the Church of Christ (that Prince of Peace, that meek and
gentle Lamb, that came into this World to save Men's lives, not to destroy
them,) the Persecuted, or Persecuting.
IT came to pass that we three, by the good hand of our God, came into the
Mathatusets Bay upon the 16 day of the 5th Month, 51; and upon the 19th of the
same, upon occasion of business, we came unto a Town in the same Bay called
Lin, where we lodged at a Blind-mans house near two miles out of the Town, by
name William Witter, who being baptized into Christ waits, as we also do, for
the Kingdom of God, and the full consolation of the Israel of God: Upon the
20th day, being the first day of the week, not having freedom in our Spirits
for want of a clear Call from God to go unto the Public Assembly to declare
there what was the mind, and counsel of God concerning them, I judged it was a
thing suitable to consider what the counsel of God was concerning our selves;
and finding by sad experience, that the hour of temptation spoken of was coming
upon all the World (in a more eminent way) to try them that are upon the Earth,
I fell upon the consideration of that Word of Promise, made to those that keep
the Word of his Patience, which present thoughts, while in Conscience toward
God, and good will unto his Saints, I was imparting to my Companions in the
house where I lodged, and to 4, or 5 Strangers, that came in unexpected after I
had begun, opening, and proving what is meant by the hour of Temptation, what
by the Word of his patience, and their keeping it, and how he that has the Key
of David (being the Promiser) will keep those that keep the word of his
Patience from the hour of Temptation; while I say I was yet speaking, there
comes into the house where we were, two Constables, who with their clamorous
tongues made an interruption in my Discourse, and more uncivilly disturbed us,
than the Pursivants of the old English Bishops were wont to do; telling us,
that they were come with Authority from the Magistrate to apprehend us; I then
desired to see the Authority by which they th^s proceeded, whereupon they
plucked forth their Warrant, and one of them with a trembling band (as conscious
he might have been better employed) read it to us; The substance whereof was as
follows.

BY virtue hereof, you are required to go to the house of William Witter, and
so to search from house to house, for certain erroneous persons, being
Strangers, and them to apprehend, and in safe custody to keep, and to morrow
morning by eight of the Clock to bring before me,

Robert Bridges.

When he had read the Warrant, I told them, Friends, there shall not be (I
trust) the least appearance of a resisting of that Authority by which you come
unto us; yet I tell you, that by virtue hereof you are not so strictly tied,
but if you please, you may suffer us to make an end of what we have begun, so
may you be Witnesses either to, or against the Faith, and Order which we hold;
to which they answered* they could not; then said we, notwithstanding the
Warrant, or any thing therein contained* you may; nevertheless, if you are
straightened in respect of your understandings and consciences in point of
hearing, do but withdraw your selves before the door, the timewill not be
long; which when they refused, we told them, then here we are, let our Lord do
with us what he please: So (although there were that proffered to be bound body
and goods for our appearance before Mr. Bridges the next morning, according to
the Warrant) they apprehended us, and carried us away to the Alehouse, or
Ordinary; where after Dinner one of them said unto us, Gentlemen, if you be
free I will carry you to the Meeting; to whom was replied, Friend, had we been
free thereunto we had prevented all this; Nevertheless, we are in thy hand,
and if thou will carry us to the Meeting, thither will we go; to which he
answered, then will I carry you to the Meeting. To this we replied, because we
perceive thou have not long been employed in this thine Office, and that may
follow hereupon which thou expectest not, we will inform thee, That if thou
forcest us unto your Assembly, then shall we be constrained to declare our
selves, that we cannot hold Communion with them; the Constable answered, that
is nothing to me, I have not power to command you to speak, when you come
there, or to be silent; to this I again replied, (Friend) know a little
further; Since we have heard the word or Salvation by Jesus Christ, we have
been taught as those that first trusted in Christ, to be obedient unto him both
by word and deed; wherefore if we be forced to your Meeting, we shall declare our
dissent from you both by word and gesture; after all this, when he had
consulted with the man of the house, he told us he would carry us to the
Meeting, so to their Meeting were we brought, while they were at their prayers
and uncovered; and at my first stepping over the threshold I unveiled my self,
civilly saluted them, turned into the Seat I was appointed to, put on my hat
again, and so sat down, opened my Book, and fell to reading: hereupon Mr.
Bridges being troubled, commanded the Constable to pluck off our hats, which he
did, and where he laid mine, there I let it lie, until their Prayer, Singing,
and Preaching was over; After this I stood up, and uttered my self in these
words following; I desire as a Stranger, if I may, to propose a few things to
this Congregation, hoping in the proposal thereof I shall commend my self to
your Consciences to be guided by that wisdom that is from above, which being
pure, is also peaceable* gentle, and easy to be entreated, and therewith I
made a stop, expecting, if the Prince of Peace had been among them, I should
have had a suitable answer of Peace from them; but no other voice I heard, but
of their Pastor, as he is called, and their Magistrate; Their Pastor answered
swered by way of Quaery, Whether I was a Member of a Church? etc. Before I
could give an answer Mr. Bridges spoke, saying, If the Congregation please to
give you leave, well, if not, I shall require you silence, for, said he, we
will have no Objections made against what is delivered, etc. To which I
answered, I am not about for present to make Objections against what is
delivered, but as by my gesture at my coming into your Assembly I declared my
dissent from you, so lest that should prove offensive unto some whom I would
not offend, I would now by word of mouth declare the grounds, which are these;
First, from the consideration we are Stangers each to other, and so Strangers
to each others inward standing with respect to God, and so cannot conjoyn and
act in Faith, and what is not of Faith, is Sin: And in the second place, I
could not judge that you are gathered together, and walk according to the
visible order of our Lord; which when I had declared, Mr. Bridges told me I
done and spoke that for which I must answer, and so commanded me silence: when
their meeting was done, the Officers carried us again to the Ordinary, where
being watched over that night, as Thieves and Robbers, we were the next morning
carried before Mr. Bridges, who made our Mittimus, and sent us to the Prison at
Boston; The words of the Mittimus are these. To the Keeper of the Prison at
Boston.

BY virtue hereof you are required to take into your custody from the Constable
of Lin, or his Deputy, the Bodies of John Clark.

Obediah Holmes, and John Crandall, and them to keep, until the next County
Court to be held at Boston, that they may then and there answer to such
complaints as may be alleged against them, for being taken by the Constable at
a Private Meeting at Lin upon the Lords day, exercising among themselves, to
whom diverse of the Town repaired, (...) with them, and that in the time of
Public exercise of the Worship of God; as also for offensively disturbing the
peace of the Congregation at their coming into the Public Meeting in the time
of Prayer in the afternoon, and for saying and manifesting that the Church of
Lin was not constituted according to the order of our Lord, and for such other
things as shall be alleged against them, concerning their seducing and drawing
aside of others after their erroneous judgments and practices, and for
suspicion of having their hands in the re-baptizing of one, or more among us,
as also for neglecting or refusing to give in sufficient security for their
appearance at the said Court; hereof fail not at your peril, 22. 5. 51.

Rob. Bridges.

We being by virtue hereof committed to prison, upon the the 5th. day
sevennight after were brought to our trial; in the forenoon we were examined,
in the afternoon, without producing either accuser, witness, jury, law of God,
or man, we were Sentenced; in our examination the Governor upbraided us with
the name of Anabaptists; To whom I Answered, I disown the name, I am neither an
Anabaptist, nor a Pedobaptist, nor a Catabaptist; he told me in have I was all;
I told him he could not prove us to be either of them; he said, yes, you have
Rebaptized; I denied it saying, I have Baptized many, but I never Rebaptized
any; then said he, you deny the former Baptism, and make all our worship a
nullity; I told him he said it; moreover I said unto them (for therefore do I
conceive I was brought before them to be a testimony against them) If the
Testimony which I hold forth be true, and according to the mind of God, which I
undoubtedly affirm it is, then it concerns you to look to your standing The
like to this affirmed the other two; so after much discourse we were committed
again to prison, and in the afternoon toward night, we were called forth
again, and immediately after the Court was set, my Sentence was read, which was
as follows.

The Sentence of John Clarke of Road-Iland. 31. 5. 51.
FOrasmuch as you John Clarke, being come into this Jurisdiction about the 20th
of July, did meet at one William Witters house at Lin, upon the Lords day, and
there did take upon you to Preach to some other of the Inhabitants of the same
Town, and being there taken by the Constable, and coming afterward into the
Assembly at Lin, did in disrespect of the Ordinances of God and his worship,
keep on your Hat, (the Pastor being then in Prayer) insomuch you would not give
reverence in valing your Hat till it was forced off your head, to the
disturbance of the Congregation, and professing against the institution of the
Church, as not being according to the Gospel of Jesus Christ; And that you the
said John Clarke did upon the day following meet again at the said Witters; and
in contempt to Authority, you being then in the custody of the Law, and did
there administer the Sacrament of the Supper to one excommunicate person, to
another under admonition, and to another that was an Inhabitant of Lin, and not
in fellowship with any Church; and upon your answer in open Court, you affirmed
that you did never Re-baptize any, yet did acknowledge you did Baptize such as
were Baptized before, and thereby did necessarily deny the Baptism that was
before to be Baptism, the Churches no Churches, and also all other Ordinances,
and Ministers, as if all were a Nullity; And also did in the Court deny the
lawfullness of Baptizing of infants, and all this tends to the dishonor of
God, the despising the ordinances of God among us, the peace of the Churches,
and seducing the Subjects of this Commonwealth from the truth of the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, and perverting the strait ways of the Lord, therefore the Court
does fine you 20 pounds to be paid, or sufficient sureties that the said sum
shall be paid by the first day of the next Court of Assistants, or else to be
well whipped, and that you shall remain in Prison till it be paid, or security
given in for it.

By the Court, INCREASE NOWELL.

After my Sentence was read, the Sentence of the other two were likewise
pronounced; the Sentence of Obediah Holmes was to pay by the aforesaid time
3^li. or be well whipped; and the sentence of John Crandall was to pay 5 pounds
or be well whipped; this being done, I desired to know whether I might not speak
a few things to the Court, to which the Governor replied, your sentence is
past. I told him that which I was to speak was in reference unto a promise that
was made us by Mr. Bridges when we were first apprehended, and brought before
him; then said the Governor speak on; When we were at first apprehended and
brought before Mr. Bridges (said I) I said unto him we are Strangers, and
Strangers to your Laws, and may be transgressors of them before we are aware,
we would therefore desire this curtesy of you as Strangers, that you would show
us the Law by which we are transgressors: But then no other answer could we
have from him than this, when you come to the Court you shall know the Law; now
we have been before the Court in the forenoon upon examination, this afternoon
we have heard our Sentence read, yet have we not heard the Law produced by
which we are condemned; we therefore now desire to see the Law in which our
Sentence may be read, and the rather, because we find in the beginning of your
Laws this provision for the security of your own, and we hope you are not less
regardfull of strangers, viz. That no man shall be molested, but by a Law made
by the general Court, and lawfully published; or in defect of a Law in a
particular case* by the Word of God. When this was spoken Mr. Bridges could
easily turn to the Law by which we might be freed, but none were able to turn
to the Law of God or Man by which we were condemned. At length the Governor
stepped up, and told us we had denied Infants Baptism, and being somewhat
transported broke forth, and told me I had deserved death, and said, he would
not have such trash brought into their jurisdiction; moreover he said, you go
up and down, and secretly infinuate into those that are weak, but you cannot
maintain it before our Ministers, you may try, and discourse or dispute with
them, etc. To this I had much to reply, but that he commanded the Iaylor to
take us away; so the next morning having so fair an opportunity, I made a
motion to the Court in these words following.

To the Honored Court Assembled at Boston.
WHereas it pleased this Honored Court yesterday to condemn the Faith, and
Order which I hold and practice, and after you had past your Sentence upon me
for it, were pleased to express, I could not maintain the same against your
Ministers, and thereupon publicly proffered me a dispute with them, be pleased
by these few lines to understand, I readily accept it, and therefore do desire
you would appoint the time when, and the person with whom, in that public
place where I was condemned, I might with freedom, and without molestation of
the Civil Power dispute that point publicly where I doubt not by the strength
of Christ to make it good out of his last Will and Testament, unto which
nothing is to be added, nor from which nothing is to be diminished; thus
desiring the Father of Lights to shine forth, and by his power to expel the
darkness, I remain,

From the Prison this 1. 6. 51. Your well wisher, John Clarke.

This motion if granted, I desired it might be subscribed by their Secretaries
hand, as an Act of the same Court by which we were condemned.

It was presented on the sixth day, and after much ado upon the last day it was
concluded it should be granted, and the disputation should be upon the fifth
day following, and so by one of the Magistrates information was given me in
prison; upon the second day when their Elders were come together, there was no
small stir (as I heard) about the business, and afterward about the stating of
the Question we should dispute upon; whereupon in the closure of the day the
Magistrates commanded the Iaylor to bring me before them into the Chamber,
which when he had done, they drew forth the motion, and showing it to me, asked
me if I owned that paper, I answered, yea, they quaeried further, whether I was
of the same mind touching a disputation, I told them I had not the least
reluctance in my mind touching the thing, provided my motion might be granted,
and the grant subscribed with the Secretaries hand as an act of the same Court
by which I was condemned; they answered that was but reasonable, etc. Then they
demanded of me what the question was that I would dispute upon, whether I would
dispute upon the things contained in my Sentence, and maintain my practice,
for, said they, the Court Sentenced you not for your judgment or Conscience,
but for matter of fact, and practice; to which I replied, you say the Court
condemned me for matter of fact, and practice; be it so, but I say that matter
of fact and practice was but the manifestation of my judgment and conscience;
and I make account that man is void of judgment, and conscience, with respect
unto God, that has not a fact, and practice suitable thereunto; and for the
things contained in my Sentence, they are rather collections, which the Court
was pleased to make and draw from my words, than my words, themselves;
nevertheless I do not say they were unduly collected; for in truth, if the
Faith and order which I profess do stand by the word of God, then the Faith and
order which you profess must needs fall to the ground; and if the way you walk
in remain, then the way that I walk in must vanish away, they cannot both stand
together; to which they seem to assent; therefore I told them, that if they
please to grant the motion under the Secretaries hand, I would draw up the
Faith, and order, which I hold as the sum of that I did deliver in open Court,
into three or four Conclusions, which Conclusions I will stand by, and defend
until he, whom you shall appoint, shall by the word of God remove me from
them; in case he shall remove me from them, then the disputation is at an end,
but if not, then I desire like liberty by the word of God to oppose the Faith,
and order, which he and you profess, thereby to try whether I may be an
instrument in the hand of God to remove you from the same; they told me the
motion was very fair, and the way like unto a disputant, and thereupon
concluded in my hearing, and directed also their speech to me, saying, because
the matter is weighty, and we desire that what can, may be spoken, when the
disputation shall be; therefore would we take a longer time; whereas therefore
the time appointed was the next fifth day, by reason of the commencement, which
will be the next week, and the meeting of the Elders, we must defer it now
until the fifth day come fortnight; and so I told them (to be brief) I was
their prisoner, and should atattend their pleasure; so I returned with my
keeper to prison again, drew up the Conclusions, which I was resolved through
the strength of Christ to stand in defense of, and through the importunity of
one of the Magistrates, the next morning very early, I showed them to him,
having a promise I should have my motion for a dispute granted, under the
Secretaries hand.

The Conclusions were as follows.
The Testimony of John Clarke a prisoner of Jesus Christ at Boston, in the
behalf of my Lord, and of his people, is as follows.
1 I Testify that Jesus of Nazareth, whom God has raised from the dead, is
made both Lord and Christ; this Jesus I say is the Christ, in English, the
Anointed One, has a name above every name; He is the Anointed Priest, none to,
or with him in point of atonement; The Anointed Prophet, none to him in point
of instruction; The Anointed King, who is gone unto his Father for his glorious
Kingdom, and shall ere long return again; and that this Jesus Christ is also
The Lord, none to, or with him by way of Commanding and ordering (with respect
to the worship of God) the household of Faith, which being purchased with his
Blood as Priest, instructed, and nourished by his Spirit as Prophet, do wait in
his appointment as he is the Lord, in hope of that glorious Kingdom which shall
ere long appear.

2 I Testify that Baptism, or dipping in Water, is one of the Commandments of
this Lord Jesus Christ, and that a visible believer, or Disciple of Christ
Jesus (that is, one that manifests repentance toward God, and Faith in Jesus
Christ) is the only person that is to be Baptized, or dipped with that visible
Baptism, or dipping of Jesus Christ in Water, and also that visible person that
is to walk in that visible order of his House, and so to wait for his coming
the second time in the form of a Lord, and King with his glorious Kingdom
according to promise, and for his sending down (in the time of his absence) the
holy Ghost, or holy Spirit of Promise, and all this according the last Will and
Testament of that living Lord, whose Will is not to be added to, or taken from.

3 I Testify or Witness, that every such believer in Christ Jesus, that
waits for his appearing, may in point of liberty, yea ought in point of du^y
to improve that Talent his Lord has given unto him, and in the Congregation
may either ask for information to himself; or if he can, may speak by way of
Prophecy for the edification, exhortation, and comfort of the whole, and out
of the Congregation at all times* upon all occasions, and in all places, as far
as the jurisdiction of his Lord extends, may, yea ought to walk as a Child of
light, justifying wisdom with his ways, and reproving folly with the
unfruitful works thereof, provided all this be shown out of a good
conversation, as James speaks with meekness of wisdom.

4 I Testify that no such believer, or Servant of Christ Jesus has any
liberty, much less Authority, from his Lord, to smite his fellow servant, nor
yet with outward force, or arm of flesh, to constrain, or restrain his
Conscience, no nor yet his outward man for Conscience sake, or worship of his
God, where injury is not offered to the person, name or estate of others, every
man being such as shall appear before the judgment seat of Christ, and must
give an account of himself to God, and therefore ought to be fully persuaded in
his own mind, for what he undertakes, because he that doubts is damned if he
eat, and so also if he act, because he does not eat or act in Faith, and what
is not of Faith is Sin.

These Conclusions being seen at least by one of the Magistrates,
notwithstanding the Message to the prison, answer to my self in the Chamber,
promise by him that came for the Conclusions, common report abroad that a
disputation was granted, the Court broke up, and did nothing; and the next
second day following, a Messenger was sent to the prison from the Magistrate,
with a release to the keeper, which having received he speedily put me forth;
The words of the release follow.

To the Keeper of the prison.
BY Virtue hereof you are to release and set at liberty the Body of Mr. John
Clarke, and this shall be your discharge for so doing.

Given under my hand the 11th. of the 6th. Month, 1651. WILLIAM HIBBINS.

To be brief, etc. Understanding that some friends had laid down the Money,
although contrary to my Counsel, when formerly at several times, and by
several persons I was moved thereunto, and perceiving now that the Countries
expectation (which was not a little raised) touching a disputation was utterly
frustrate, and being sensible that it was an easy matter to lay the blame on
me, being a person condemned, and also absent, I drew up the former motion, and
added thereunto these words following.

Whereas through the indulgency of tender hearted friends, without my consont,
and contrary to my judgment, the Sentence, and Condemnation of the Court at
Boston (as is reported) have been fully satisfied on my behalf, and thereupon a
Warrant has been procured by which I am secluded the place of my imprisonment,
by reason whereof I see no other call for present but to my habitaetion, and to
those near relations which God has given me there, yet lest the cause should
hereby suffer, which I profess is Christ's, I would hereby signify, that if yet
it shall please the honored Magistrates, or general Court of this Colony, to
grant my former request under their Secretaries hand, I shall cheerfully
embrace it, and upon your motion shall through the help of God come from the
Island to attend it, and hereunto I have subscribed my name,

11th. 6. 51. John Clarke.

Both these the next morning I delivered to the keeper to deliver to the
Magistrates, who were to meet at the Commencement at Cambridge, which being
accordingly performed it was noised abroad the motion was granted, and the
writing was in Mr. Cottons hand, who was thereby judged to be the man, and best
of all approved of by my self for that same purpose, he being the inventor and
suportor of that way, in these parts, wherein they walk, and thereupon I took
the thing for granted, and to that purpose wrote to my friends who sent to visit
me in the prison, but upon the fifth day, a little before their Lecture at
Boston, I received a writing subscribed with five of the Magistrates hands,
which when I had perused, and saw that they waved the motion, and instead
thereof laid two or three snares before me, I drew up an Answer to their
Writing, being hopeless of a disputation, desired the Iaylor to deliver it to
the Magistrates, took my leave of my friends, and so departed to go toward the
Island, having ten miles that night to travel.

Here follows their Writing, and my Answer also.

Mr. John Clarke,
WE conceive you have mis-reported the Governors speech in saying you were
challenged to dispute with some of our Elders, whereas it was plainly expressed,
that if you would confer with any of them, they were able to satisfy you,
neither were you able to maintain your practice to them by the word of God, all
which was intended for your information, and conviction privately; neither were
you enjoined to what you then were Counseled unto; nevertheless if you are
forward to dispute, and that you will move it your self to the Court, or the
Magistrates about Boston, we shall take order to appoint one who will be ready
to Answer your motion, you keeping close to the questions to be propounded by
your self, and a moderator shall be appointed also to attend upon that service;
and whereas you desire you might be free in your dispute, keeping close to the
points to be disputed on, without incurring damage by the Civil Justice,
observing what has been before written, it is granted; the day may be agreed
if you yield the premises.

11th. of the 6th. 1651. John Ind^cott, Governor. Tho. Dudley, Deputy Govern.
Rich. Bellingham. William Hibbins. Increase Nowel.


My Answer follows, superscribed,
To the Honored Governor of the Mathatusets, and the rest of that Honorable
Society, these present. Worthy Senators,
I Received a writing subscribed with 5 of your hands by way of answer to a
twice-repeated motion of mine before you, which was grounded as I conceive
sufficiently upon the Governors words in open Court, which writing of yours
does no way answer my expectation, nor yet that motion which I made, and
whereas (waving that grounded motion) you are pleased to intimate, That if I
were forward to dispute, and would move it my self to the Court, or Magistrates
about Boston, you would appoint one to answer my motion, etc. Be pleased to
understand, That although I am not backward to maintain the Faith, and Order of
my Lord the King of Saints, for which I have been Sentenced, yet am I not, in
such a way so forward to dispute, or move therein, least inconvenience should
thereby arise, I shall rather once more repeat my former motion, which if it
shall please the Honored General Court to accept, and under their Secretaries
hand shall grant a free dispute without molestation or interruption, I shall be
so well satisfied therewith, that what is past I shall forget, and upon your
motion shall attend it; Thus desiring the Father of Mercies not to lay that
evil to your charge,

From Prison this 14. 6. 51. I remain your Well-wisher. John Clarke.

This Answer with the motion for a dispute upon these fair terms the third
time repeated, (being a thing also generally desired, and longed for) was (as I
said before) by me delivered to the Keeper, and by him presented to the
Magistrates, and so to the General Court, yet was there no answer returned:
what made the obstruction considering the equity of the Case, the former
consent and grant of the Magistrates, and the peoples earnest desire thereof, I
know not, neither will I too readily conclude (lest it should ^avor of
prejudice) that it was either an apprehension it would be disgraceful, first
to Judge and Condemn the persons, and afterward to have the matter examined, or
else a fear and jealousy lest upon the examination thereof by the word of God
(which is a quick and powerful divider asunder of the Soul, and Spirit, and of
the joints, and marrow, and a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the
heart) their standing (in reference to the worship of God) should appear false,
and evil, and the way by which. they maintayn the same with a forcing of others
thereto, should appear far worse; surely, the standers by, and such, whose
minds are dis-engaged in the business will aptly conclude, and not without
probable grounds, that the utmost they can say for themselves, and to stop the
mouth of him that is contrary minded, lies in the Sword and power of the
Magistrate, which although it be a good Ordinance of God in this present evil
World, to restrain the oppressor, and let the oppressed go free, and so
approved and owned by Christ and all true Christians, in case of wrong and
wicked lewdness, as Gallio expresses it yet was it never appointed by Christ,
(to whom all power, not only in Earth, but also in Heaven, is committed, and by
whom all Earthly powers are to be judged, in that day in which he shall judge
the World in righteousness; I say it was never appointed by Christ) to inform
and rectify the minds and consciences of men in the worship of God, in that
great mystery of Godliness, and in those mystical matters concerning the
Kingdom of Christ, that being a matter that only belongs to the Holy Spirit of
Promise, and to the Sword of that Spirit, which is the Word (not of man, but)
of God, to effect, much less to conform their outward man, contrary to their
minds and consciences in the Worship of God; and therefore that Sword and Power
ought to take heed how they meddle herein (lest they attempt to take the place,
and enter upon the Throne and Kingdom of Christ) either to force such as be
conceived to be true Worshipers, to the true Worship, and service of God, for
it is written, Not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit, says the Lord of
Hosts. And again, In the day of thy power thy people shall be a willing people;
much less to force such as are no Worshipers, or false, to that Worship which
is true, and yet much less to force false, to that which is false, or true, to
that which is false; and hence it is, that although the Kings of the Earth have
been deceived, and through the righteous judgment of God have given their power
to the Beast, to their own dishonor and detriment, who have improved the same
to bear up the Whore, and to bear down and crush the Spouse of the Lamb, so
that Babel has for a long time rejoiced, and Sion has mourned; yet when the
time appointed is come, at the voice of her King Sion shall deliver her self
from the Daughter of Babel, though all the powers of this World seek to
withstand it; neither shall the gates of Hell prevail against it: for it is
written concerning those that keep the Commandments of God, and the Testimony
of Jesus, that they overcame him ( s^il* that great Red-Dragon called the
Devil and Satan, who also gave his power to the Beast, they overcame him I
say) by the Blood of that Lamb, and by that word of their Testimony, and they
loved not their lives unto the death.

Now touching John Crandall aforesaid, to whose charge they had also nothing to
lay, but his being with us, owning the same Faith, and Order of the Gospel,
and therefore refusing to stoop to that likeness thereto, which they had set
up; yet as is said, they sentenced him to pay 5 pounds by the next Court of
Assistants, or else to be well whipped. Whereupon the day following he inquired
of the Keeper, when that Court of Assistants would be, (being resolved not to
choose his punishment, they being not able to make it appear by the Law of God
or Man that he was a Transgressor so to be punished) and being by him informed
that it would be a quarter of a year before that time came; and also, that if
he were so resolved, he might put in Bail for his appearance at the time
aforesaid, and so depart, he forthwith put in Bail, and so departed to visit
his Family, being distant from thence threescore and ten miles. He was no
sooner at home, but his Spirit was unsatisfied in what he had done, in leaving
us behind in the Prison, though with our consent and counsel he did what he
did; whereupon, leaving his Harvest upon the spoil, within a few days he
returned to us again, and tendered his person unto the Keeper, who refused it,
saying, Since your departure I perceive your Sentence is, That you should not
depart the Prison, without either paying the money, or putting in security for
the payment of it; wherefore now either you or your Surety must pay it. To whom
Brother Crandall replied, you informed me otherwise before I went, and upon
other terms I departed, wherefore for my own part I am resolved I will not pay
it, and for my Surety he is at his liberty, being no otherwise bound, than for
my appearance, and here I am, and am your Prisoner; nevertheless when I was
released, and turned out of Prison, and could no longer upon that account there
remain, I counseled him to put the matter quite out of doubt, wherefore he
said to the Iaylor, Let me know what I shall trust to, for if you accept me
upon the former account, well, I shall willingly tarry, and remain your
Prisoner, but if not, I shall now repair home with my Friend to my Family; so
after the Jailer had advised with the Magistrate, he friendly told him, If he
would promise to appear at the time appointed, he would take his word, become
his Surety, and he might be gone; whereupon I being doubtful, though he was
confident concerning the time (there being an other Court between) desired him
to send us certain word to the Island, when that Court of Assistants would be;
so having his promise, we thankfully accepted his kindness, and so departed:
And being at home we waited for a word from the Keeper for a return, but the
first word we heard touching that matter, was, that the Court was past (which
was that Court I suspected) and that Brother Holmes had had his trial by cruel
scourgings. and that the Iaylor being Brother Crandals Surety, by reason of his
nonappearance was constrained to pay the money; hereupon not long after Brother
Crandall went to Boston, and charged the ^aylor with his misinformation, and
neglect of his promise; and moreover declared that he had told him, That being
Innocent, he would not make himself a Transgressor by choosing his punishment,
and therefore had resolved, as he also knew, not to pay them a penny; and
further he told him, that there was no necessity he should lay down the money,
it being but through a mistake, and he being but Surety, when the Principal
was present, and was able through the strength of Christ to answer the penalty:
and thus having argued the case with the laylor, he left him without any
grounds of hope to have it repaid, nevertheless if advantage will be so
strictly taken upon the Keepers mistake, neither Conscience nor Equity will
suffer us (it appearing to be a mere mistake, and no plotted thing) not to
suffer him to bear it, and thus it appears how a second came off, and escaped a
scourging: Now as concerning the third, by name Obediah Holmes, what is laid to
his charge this Sentence under their Secretaries hand (a Copy whereof is here
under written) will plainly express.

The Sentence of Obediah Holmes of Seacuck, the 31 of the 5th M. 1651.
FOrasmuch as you Obediah Holmes, being come into this Jurisdiction about the
21 of the 5th M. did meet at one William Witters house at Lin, and did hear
privately (and at other times being an Excommunicate person did take upon you to
Preach and to Baptize) upon the Lords day, or other days, and being taken then
by the Constable, and coming afterward to the Assembly at Lin, did in
disrepect of the Ordinance of God and his Worship, keep on your hat, the Pastor
being in Prayer, insomuch that you would not give reverence in veiling your
hat, till it was forced off your head to the disturbance of the Congregation,
and professing against the Institution of the Church, as not being according to
the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and that you the said Obediah Holmes did upon the
day following meet again at the said William Witters, in contempt to Authority,
you being then in the custody of the Law, and did there receive the Sacrament,
being Excommunicate, and that you did Baptize such as were Baptized before, and
thereby did necessarily deny the Baptism that was before administered to be
Baptism, the Churches no Churches, and also other Ordinances, and Ministers, as
if all were a Nullity; And also did deny the lawfullness of Baptizing of
Infants, and all this tends to the dishonor of God, the despising the
ordinances of God among us, the peace of the Churches, and seducing the
Subjects of this Commonwealth from the truth of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and
perverting the strait ways of the Lord, the Court does fine you 30 pounds to
be paid, or sufficient sureties that the said sum shall be paid by the first
day of the next Court of Assistants, or else to be well whipped, and that you
shall remain in Prison till it be paid, or security given in for it.

By the Court, INCREASE NOWELL.

And now because his sufferings, and the sense which his Soul felt of the Lords
Support, according to promise, is affectionately set forth, and commended as a
token of his love, in a Letter written with his own hand, and sent unto those
that have obtained like precious faith in London, or elsewhere, whereby by an
experiment which God has been pleased to give to him, and us, they may
evidently discern, that Jesus Christ is in point of tender compassions touching
those that confess his name before the Sons of men, the same to day that he
was yesterday; that as yesterday, so to day it may be said, as the sufferings
of Christ abound in us, so our consolation also abounds by Christ, so that
they which keep the commandments of God, and Testimony of Jesus Christ, may be
hereby encouraged to fear none of those things which they shall suffer before
they come, nor when they look them in the face, and begin the encounter with
them, be soon weary and wax faint in their minds, but faithfully and hopefully
expect (they suffering for the name of Christ, and as Christians) that the
spirit of their Lord, and of glory, shall rest upon them. The words of his
Letter follows.

Unto the well beloved Brethren John Spilsbury, William Kissin, and the rest
that in London stand fast in that Faith, and continue to walk steadfastly in
that Order of the Gospel which was once delivered unto the Saints by Jesus
Christ. Obediah Holms an unworthy witness, that Jesus is the Lord, and of late
a Prisoner for Jesus sake at Boston, sends greeting.
Dearly Beloved and longed after,
MY hearts desire is to hear from you, and to hear that you grow in grace, and
in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and that your love to
him, and one unto another, as he has given commandment, abounds, would be
the very joy and great rejoicing of my Soul and Spirit; had I not been
prevented by my beloved Brethren of Providence, who have wrote unto you,
(wherein you have my Mind at large) and also by our beloved Brother Clarke of
Road-Iland, who may (if God permit) see you, and speak with you mouth to mouth,
I had here declared my self in that matter, but now I forbear; And because I
have an experimental knowledge in my self, that in members of the same Body,
while it stands in union with the head, there is a sympathizing Spirit, which
passes through, and also remain in each particular, so that one member can
neither mourn nor rejoice, but all the members are ready to mourn or rejoice
with it; I shall the rather impart unto you some dealings which I have had
therein from the Sons of Men, and the gracious supports which I have met with
from the Son of God, my Lord, and yours, that so like Members you might rejoice
with me, and might be encouraged by the same experiment of his ^ender mercies,
to fear none of those things which you shall suffer for Jesus sake. ^t pleased
the Father of Light, after a long continuance of mine in death, and darkness,
to cause life and immortality to be brought to light in my soul, and also to
cause me to see that this life was by the death of his Son, in that hour, and
power of darkness procured, which wrought in my heart a restless desire to
know what that Lord, who had so dearly bought me, would have me to do, and
finding that it was his last will (to which none is to add, and from which
none is to detract) that they which had faith in his death for life, should
yield up themselves to hold forth a lively consimilitude, or likeness unto his
death, burial, and resurrection by that Ordinance of Baptism; I readily
yielded thereto being by love constrained to follow that Lamb (that takes away
the sins of the World) whither soever he goes; I had no sooner separated from
their assemblies, and from Communion with them in their worship of God, and
thus visibly put on Christ, being resolved alone to attend upon him, and to
submit to his will, but immediately the adversary cast out a flood against us,
and stirred up the spirits of men to present my self and two more to Plymouth
Court, where we met with 4 Petitions against our whole company to take some
speedy course to suppress us, one from our own Plantation with 35 hands to it,
one from the Church (as they call it) at Tanto^, one from all the Ministers in
our Colony, except two, if I mistake not, and one from the Court at Boston in
the Mathatusets under their Secretaries hand; whereupon the Court straightly
charge us to desist, and neither to ordain Officers, nor to Baptize, nor to
break bread together, nor yet to meet upon the first day of the week, and
having received these strait charges one of the three discovers the sandy
foundation upon which he, stood, who when the flood came, and the wind blew,
fell; yet it pleased the Father of mercies (to whom be the praise) to give us
strength to stand, and to tell them it was better to obey God, rather than man,
and such was the grace of our God to usward, that though we were had from
Court to Court, yet were we firmly resolved to keep close to the rule and to
obey the voice of our Lord, come what will come; Not long after these troubles
I came upon occasion of business into to the Colony of the Mathatusets, with
two other Brethren, as Brother Clark, being one of the two, can inform you,
where we three were apprehended, carried to the prison at Boston, and so to the
Court, and were all sentenced; what they laid to my charge, you may here read
in my sentence: Upon the pronouncing of which as I went from the Bar, I expressed
my self in these words; I bless God I am connted worthy to suffer for the name
of Jesus; whereupon John Wilson (their Pastor as they call him) struck me
before the Judgment Seat, and cursed me, saying, The Curse of God, or Jesus go
with thee; so we were carried to the Prison where not long after I was deprived
of my two loving Friends; at whose departure the Adversary stepped in, took hold
on my Spirit, and troubled me for the space of an hour, and then the Lord came
in, and sweetly releeved me, causing me to look to himself, so was I stayed,
and refreshed in the thoughts of my God; and although during the time of my
Imprisonment, the Tempter was busy, yet it pleased God so to stand at my right
hand, that the motions were but sudden, and so vanished away; and although
there were that would have paid the money if I would accept it, yet I durst not
accept of deliverance in such a way, and therefore my answer to them was, that
although I would acknowledge their love to a cup of cold Water, yet could I not
thank them for their money if they should pay it; so the Court drew near, and
the night before I should suffer according to my sentence, it pleased God I
rested, and slept quietly; in the morning many Friends came to visit me,
desiring me to take the refreshment of Wine, and other Comforts, but my
resolution was not to drink Wine, nor strong drink that day until my
punishment were over, and the reason was, lest in case I had more strength,
courage, and boldness than ordinarily could be expected, the World should
either say he is drunk with new Wine, or else that the comfort and strength of
the Creature has carried him through, but my course was this: I desired
Brother John Hazell to bear my Friends company, and I betook my self to my
Chamber, where I might communicate with my God, commit my self to him, and beg
strength from him; I had no sooner sequestered my self, and come into my
Chamber, but Satan lets fly at me, saying, Remember thy self, thy birth,
breeding, and friends, thy* wife, children, name, and credit but as this was
sudden, so there came in sweetly from the Lord as sudden an answer, it is for my
Lord, I must not deny him before the Sons of men (for that is to set men above
him) but rather lose all, yea wife, children, and mine own life also: To this
the tempter replies, Oh! but that is the question, is it for him? and for him
alone? is it not rather for thy own, or some others sake? thou have so
professed and practiced, and now art loath to deny it; is not pride and self in
the bottom? surely this temptation was strong, and thereupon I made diligent
search after the matter, as formerly I had done, and after a while there was
even as it had been a voice from Heaven in my very Soul, bearing witness with my
Conscience, that it was not for any man's case or sake in this world, that so I
had professed and practiced, but for my Lords case, and sake, and for him
alone, whereupon my Spirit was much refresht* as also in the consideration of
these three Scriptures, which speak on this wise, Who shall lay any thing to
the charge of Gods Elect? Although I walk through the valley and shadow of
Death I will fear none evil, thy rod and thy staff they shall comfort me. And
he that continues to to the end, the same shall be saved. But then came in the
consideration of the weakness of the Flesh to bear the strokes of a whip,
though the Spirit was willing, and hereupon I was caused to pray earnestly unto
the Lord, that he would be pleased to give me a spirit of courage and
boldness, a tongue to speak for him, and strength of body to suffer for his
sake, and not to shrink or yield to the strokes, or shed tears, lest the
adversaries of the truth should thereupon blaspheme, and be hardened, and the
weak and feeble-hearted discouraged, and for this I befought the Lord
earnestly, at length he satisfied my spirit, to give up as my soul, so my body
to him, and quietly to leave the whole disposing of the matter to him, and so I
addressed my self in as comely a manner as I could, having such a Lord and
Master to serve in this business: And when I heard the voice of my Keeper come
for me, even cheerfulness did come upon me, and taking my Testament in my
hand, I went along with him to the place of execution, and after common
salutation there stood; there stood by also one of the Magistrates, by name Mr.
Increase Nowell, who for a while kept silent, and spoke not a word, and so did
I, expecting the Governors presence, but he came not. But after a while Mr.
Nowell bad the Executioner do his Office, then I desired to speak a few words,
but Mr. Nowell answered, it is not now a time to speak, whereupon I took leave,
and said, Men, Brethren, Fathers, and Contrymen, I beseech you give me leave
to speak a few words, and the rather, because here are many Spectators to see
me punished, and I am to seal with my Blood, if God give strength, that which I
hold and practice in reference to the Word of God, and the testimony of Jesus;
that which I have to say in brief is this, Although I confess I am no
Disputant, yet seeing I am to seal what I hold with my Blood, I am ready to
defend it by the Word, and to dispute that point with any that shall come forth
to withstand it. Mr. Nowell answered me, now was no time to dispute, then said
I, then I desire to give an account of the Faith and Order I hold, and this I
desired three times, but in comes Mr. Flint, and says to the Executioner,
Fellow, do thine Office, for this Fellow would but make a long Speech to
delude the people; so I being resolved to speak, told the people; That which I
am to suffer for, is for the Word of God, and testimony of Jesus Christ; No,
says Mr. Nowell it is for your Error, and going about to seduce the people; to
which I replied, not for Error, for in all the time of my Imprisonment, wherein
I was left alone (my Brethren being gone) which of all your Ministers in all
that time came to convince me of Error? and when upon the Governors words a
motion was made for a public dispute, and upon fair terms so often renewed,
and desired by hundreds, what was the reason it was not granted? Mr. Nowell
told me, it was his fault that went away, and would not dispute; but this the
Writings will clear at large: still Mr. Flint calls to the man to do his
Office, so before, and in the time of his pulling off my clothes I continued
speaking, telling them. That I had so learned, that for all Boston I would not
give my body into their hands thus to be bruised upon another account, yet
upon this I would not give the hundredth part of a A Wampon Peague is the six^h
part of a penny with us.
Wampon Peague to free it out of their hands, and that I made as much
Conscience of unbuttoning one button, as I did of paying the 30 l. in reference
thereunto; I told them moreover, the Lord having manifested his love toward
me, in giving me repentance toward God, and Faith in Jesus Christ, and so to
be baptized in water by a Messenger of Jesus into the name of the Father, Son,
and Holy Spirit, wherein I have fellowship with him in his death, burial, and
resurrection, I am now come to be baptized in afflictions by your hands, that
so I may have further fellowship with my Lord, and am not ashamed of his
sufferings, for by his stripes am I healed; And as the man began to lay the
strokes upon my back, I said to the people, though my Flesh should fail, and my
Spirit should fail, yet God would not fail; so it pleased the Lord to come in,
and so to fill my heart and tongue as a vessel full, and with an audible voice
I brake forth, praying unto the Lord not to say this Sin to their charge, and
telling the people, That now I found he did not fail me, and therefore now I
should trust him for ever who failed me not; for in truth, as the strokes fell
upon me, I had such a spiritual manifestation of Gods presence, as the like
thereto I never had, nor felt, nor can with fleshly tongue express, and the
outward pain was so removed from me, that indeed I am not able to declare it to
you, it was so easy to me, that I could well bear it, yea and in a manner felt
it not, although it was grievous, as the Spectators said, the Man striking with
all his strength (yea spitting on his hand three times* as many affirmed) with
a three-coarded whip, giving me therewith thirty strokes; when he had loosed me
from the Post, having joyfulnesse in my heart, and cheerfulness in my
countenance, as the Spectators observed, I told the Magistrates, you have
struck me as with Roses; and said moreover, Although the Lord has made it
easy to me, yet I pray God it may not be laid to your charge. After this many
came to me, rejoicing to see the power of the Lord manifested in weak flesh;
but sinful flesh takes occasion hereby to bring others in trouble, informs the
Magistrates hereof, and so two more are apprehended as for contempt of
authority, there names were John Hazell, and John Spur, who came indeed and did
shake me by the hand, but did use no words of contempt or reproach unto any; no
man can prove that the first spoke any thing, and for the second, he only said
thus, Blessed be the Lord; yet these two for taking me by the hand, and thus
saying after I had received my punishment, were sentenced to pay 40 shilling,
or to be whipped. Both were resolved against paying their Fine: Nevertheless
after one or two days imprisonment, one paid John Spurs Fine, and he was
released, and after six or seven days Imprisonment of Brother Hazell, even the
day when he should have suffered, an other paid his, and so he escaped, and the
next day went to visit a Friend about 6 miles from Boston, where he the same
day fell sick, and within 10 days he ended this life; when I was come to the
Prison, it pleased God to stir up the heart of an old acquaintance of mine, who
with much tenderness, like the good Samaritan, poured oil into my wounds, and
plaistered my sores; but there was present information given what was done, and
inquiry made who was the Surgeon, and it was commonly reported he should be
sent for, but what was done, I yet know not. Now thus it has pleased the
Father of Mercies so to dispose of the matter, that my Bonds and Imprisonments
have been no hinderance to the Gospel, for before my return, some submitted to
the Lord, and were baptized, and diverse were put upon the wayof enquiry; And
now being advised to make my escape by night, because it was reported that
there were Warrants forth for me* I departed; and the next day after, while I
was on my Journey, the Constable came to search at the house where I lodged, so
I escaped their hands, and was by the good hand of my heavenly Father brought
home again to my near relations, my wife, and eight children, the Brethren of
our Town, and Providence having taken pains to meet me 4 miles in the woods,
where we rejoiced together in the Lord. Thus have I given you as briefly as I
can, a true relation of things: wherefore my Brethren rejoice with me in the
Lord, and give all glory to him, for he is worthy, to whom be praise for
evermore, to whom I commit you, and put up my earnest prayers for you, that by
my late experience, who have trusted in God, and have not been deceived, you
may trust in him perfectly: wherefore my dearly beloved Brethren trust in the
Lord, and you shall not be ashamed, nor confounded, so I also rest,

Yours in the bond of Charity, Obediah Holmes.


Three things would be well minded in this relation, 1 that God gave me Power
to confess his name before the Sons of Men.

2 That he kept my tongue that I did not speak evil of men, nor of Authority.

3 That he gave strength to weak Flesh that it failed not.

This Tragedy being thus acted in the face of the Country, must needs awaken
and rouse up the minds, and spirits of many, cause sad thoughts to arise in
their hearts, and to flow forth at their mouths as men offended, to see
Strangers professing Godliness, so discourteously used, for no Civil
Transgression, but merely for Conscience, and that by their hands who
pretended, that Liberty of Conscience was also the cause of their flight,
together with the other to the hazard of their lives by hard hearted, cruel,
and savage Barbarians, and other mischiefs which a vast, and howling
Wilderness is apt to produce; wherefore to stop their mouths, and to lull
them asleep, the old subtle Serpent as his custom ever has been, raised up a
cloud of disgrace, thinking thereby to darken the truth he professed, and to
obscure the glory that appeared in his sufferings, giving out, that he was but
an Excommunicate, and so an accursed person, and that it was vehemently
suspected, that he was notoriously given to that filthy lust of uncleanness,
which God will judge, and that the same was hinted in open Court, and that by
persons of no mean credit; wherefore again to resist the adversary who has
been a liar from the beginning, and thereby a destroyer and murderer, and to
deliver the Children of truth at least from his snare, whereby they might be
taken captive at his will, he drew up, and sent a letter unto the Governor of
the Mathatusets Colony, and desired it might be published so that the Sons of
Men, so far as the lie and slander might spread, might be acquainted therewith.
The Letter follows.

The 12 of the 7th. M. 51. To the Honored Governor.
Honored Sir,
HOwever you may judge of me, yet am I daily waiting to stand before him who
shall judge quick and dead, and now because I am under reproach, and sensure by
many, and the more by reason of some words spoken by your self, as though I
were an evil person in life and conversation, and although I may be accounted
as a fool, yet hear me a little to plead mine innocence, and I hope you will
not too far condemn me until you hear me speak; Sir, I acknowledge only free
grace, and that by his power alone I have been kept, and what my life and
manner of conversation was for six or seven years while I was with you, I
appeal to your self, and the experiences you have had of me, and to your
Elders, and to the whole Church; who ever reproved me of evil? and ye
recommended me to others, and for four years time I walked with them at
Rehoboth, who also should have reproved me if under Sin; but when it pleased
the Lord to cause me to hear his voice, and I separated from them, which was
occasioned by an unrighteous Act of theirs as I judged, which was, that seven
of the Brethren should pass an Act of Admonition upon a Brother without the
Consent of the rest, we being 23 in number, who might all in one hours space,
if in health, have come together, so when I heard of it I went to Mr. Newman,
and told him of the evil which he, and the other six had done, he told me they
were the Church Representative, and if 4 of them had done it, it had been a
Church Act; when this comes to the Congregation, with much a do, he got five
more to himself, and then they were 12, and we eleven, then they owned
themselves to be the Church, and so began to deal with me for saying, they had
abused the Church, and had took from them their power, whereupon I told them I
should renounce them, and not have any more fellowship with them, till either
they saw their Sin, or I further light; after which diverse others to the number
of seven, or eight fell off from them, and we met once a week, and every first
day, and so continued for a long space of time, yea and the day was known when
we intended to be Baptized, and there were many Witnesses observing our Faith,
and Order, and yet not one Man or Woman of Mr. Newmans company that ever came
to deal with me for evil, neither in Judgment, nor Practice, until a long
time after that appointment of our Lord was dispensed; Thus I say, when I had
separated from them, and a long time after, I understood by their Messenger
that they intended to proceed against me, so I desired the messenger to tell me
for what evil, he told me I should know when I came there, so I sent one of
their own Brethren to tell them from me, though I owned them not as Brethren,
yet if any Man or Woman had ought against me, I would come to them, although
they had not dealt with me according to any rule; but none came to me, nor
charged me with any evil; and when upon occasion I came before all the
Congregation, and strangers, I demanded for what cause it was that they
proceeded against me, seeing I had sent to them before, and no man accused me;
Mr. Newman told me, it was for non appearance; and now judge of the evil in
your own way, and that for my Excommunication as you call it, I am by you
rendered that wicked person; as for the suspicion of that most abominable evil
of uncleanness, and Adultery, which many think I am guilty of, by reason of
some persons speeches, I desire to bless my Lord, who has caused me to deny
all uncleanness and wickedness, and God forbid that I should take the Members
of Christ, and make them the Members of an Harlot, and I challenge all Men and
Women that dare stand before the judgment seat of the Lord, to come forth, and
say if they ever heard unclean words proceed out of my mouth, or any unseemly
gesture, much less action, to any in my life at Salem, Seacunck, or elsewhere,
yea let them come forth before any to meet me in private, or public, upon any
friends request without the Magistrates Warrant; but I remember my Lord was
called Beelzebub, and what though I be called an Adulterer, or Witch, or
Blasphemer, and every one says what he pleases, yet I stand before the
judgment of my Lord; And whereas it was also reported I Baptized Goodwife
Bowdish naked, I bless the Lord he has taught me to do that which is comely,
and of good report, yea and I know a Man, or Woman may be drowned in their
Clothes, or buried in earth with their Clothes, but that she had comely
garments from the Crown of her head to the sole of her foot, many being present
with her husband can testify and if any be pleased to reproach me behind my
back, and not to speak to my face, let them know the Lora knows how to deliver
the innocent, unto whom I commit my self, with my prayers for you, and am,

Yours still as formerly to command in all Lawful things Obediah Holmes.


Whilst he (through the spirit of the Lord that rested upon him) bore these
bloody strokes with so cheerful a spirit as if he felt them not, diverse of the
standers by, beholding, it were so affected with joy, that when he was loosed
could not forbear to come to him, and to shake him by the hand, thereby to
manifest their rejoicing with him, that the Lord had supported him; but
information hereof being given to the Magistrates, warrants were sent forth (as
is reported to the number of 13) whereupon some through fear were fain to hide
themselves, and being strangers, to hasten away, or change their habit, two of
them were taken as aforesaid, that is to say John Spur, and old John Hazell,
and committed to prison as the Warrant herewith declares.

To the Keeper or his Deputy.
BY virtue hereof you are to take into your custody, and safe keeping, the body
of John Spur for a heinous offense by him committed, hereof not to f^il. Dated
the 5th. of the 7th. Month 1651. Take also into your safe keeping John Hazell.

By the Court, INCREASE NOWEL.

John Spur professed to me, and before many Witnesses, that his heart was so
taken with what he saw and heard, that he could not but go to him, take him by
the hand, and bless the Lord who had been so present with him, but to save me
a labor his own words here follows.

Mr. Cotton (says he) in his Sermon immediately before the Court gave their
Sentence against M. Clark, Obediah Holmes, and John Crandell, affirmed, that
denying Infants Baptism would overthrow all; and this was a capital offense;
and therefore they were soul-murtherers; when therefore the Governor M. John
Indicot came into the Court to pass Sentence against them, he said thus, you
deserve to die, but this we agreed upon, that Mr. Clarke shall pay 20 li. Fine,
and Obediah Holmes 30 li. Fine, and Jo. Crandall 5 li. Fine, and to remain in
prison until their Fines be either paid or security given for them, or else
they are all of them to be well whipped; When Obediah Holmes was brought forth
to receive his Sentence, he desired of the Magistrates, that he might hold
forth the ground of his practice; but they refused to let him speak, and
commanded the whipper to do his Office; then the whipper began to pull off his
Clothes, upon which Obediah Holmes said, Lord lay not this sin unto their
charge; and so the whipper began to lay on with his whip; upon which Obediah
Holmes said, O Lord I beseech thee to manifest thy power in the weakness of
thy Creature; he neither moving nor stirring at all for the strokes, brake out
into these expressions, Blessed and praised be the Lord, and thus he carried it
to the end, and went away rejoycingly; I John Spur being present, it did take
such an impression in my Spirit to trust in God, and to walk according to the
light that God had communicated to me, and not to fear what man could do unto
me; that I went to the man (being inwardly affected with what I saw and heard)
and with a joyful countenance took him by the hand when he was from the Post,
and said, praised be the Lord; and so I went along with him to the prison; and
presently that day there was information given to the Court what I had said and
done; and also a warrant was presently granted out that day to arest both my
self and John Hazel, which was executed on the morrow morning upon us, and so
we were brought to the Court and examined; the Governor asked me concerning
Obediah Holmes, according as he was informed by old Mr. Cole, and Thomas
Buttolph, of my taking of him by the hand, and smiling, and I did then freely
declare what I did, and what I said, which was this; Obediah Holmes, said I, I
do look upon as a Godly man; and do affirm that he carried himself as did
become a Christian, under so sad an affliction; and his affliction did so
affect my Soul, that I went to him being from the Post, and said, blessed be
the Lord, but said the Governor what do you apprehend concerning the cause for
which he suffered? my Answer was, that I am not able to judge of it, then said
the Governor, we will deal with you as we have dealt with him, I said unto him
again, I am in the hands of God, then Mr. Simons a Magistrate said, you shall
know you are in the hands of Men; the Governor then said, keeper take him, and
so I was presently carried away to prison.

The next day about one of the Clock I was sent for again into the Court; the
Governor (being then about to go out of the Court, when I came in) delivered
this speech to me; said he, you must pay 40 shi^lings or be whipped; I said
then to those of the Court that remained, that if any man suffer as a Christian
let him glorify God in this behalf then I desired to know what Law I had
broken, and what evil I had done, but they produced no Law, only they produced
what the two witnesses had sworn against me; my speech thereto was this, my
practice and carriage is allowed by the word of God, for it is written in Romans
12. Be like affectioned one toward another, rejoice with them that rejoice;
and it is contrary to my Judgment and Conscience to pay a Penny; then said Mr.
Bendall, I will pay it for him and there presented himself, I answered then and
said, I thanked him for his love, but did believe it was no acceptable service,
for any man to pay a penny for me in this case; yet not withstanding the Court
accepted of his profer, and bid me be gone, then came John Hazell to be
examined.

John Spur.

Here follows the testimony of those that came in against me.

I -- Cole being in the Market place, when Obediah Holmes came from the
Whipping Post, John Spur came and met him presently, laughing in his face,
saying, Blessed be God for thee Brother, and so did go with him, laughing upon
him up toward the prison, which was very grievous to me to see him harden the
man in his sin, and showing much contempt of Authority by that carriage, as if
he had been unjustly punished, and had suffered as a righteous man, under a
tyrannical Government Deposed before the Court the 5th. of the 7th. M. 1651.

Increase Nowell.

I Thomas Buttolph did see John Spur come to Obediah Holmes, so some as he came
from the Whipping Post, laughing in his face, and going along with him toward
the Prison to my great grief to see him harden him in his sin, and to show such
a contempt of Authority. Deposed the 5th. of the 7th. Month 1651. Before the
Court.

Increase Nowell.

As for John Hazell, to my knowledge, although he had some occasion of business
in these parts; yet the main business that drew him hither, was to visit the
prisoner, whom he at this time took by the hand, who was indeed his near
Neighbor, lived in the same Town together, walked together in the same
fellowship, and faith of the Gospel, and had their hearts knit together in a
more than ordinary near bond of love, and as a manifestation thereof, he
undertoke so great a journey (it being between forty and fifty miles) to visit
him, he being indisposed by reason of his age for such an undertaking (being
between three and fourscore years old) and when he was there understanding it
would not be long before he should suffer; out of the same tender love, could
not leave him before it was over; who also accompanied him from the Prison to
the Post, and so back again; now for him, only for taking his friend by the
hand, when he had suffered his punishment, and was loosed from the Post, to be
thus handled, shall not the Nations that know not civility, that neither fear
God nor reverence man, be astonished at this? if this be to do to others as we
would that others should do to us, which is the Law and the Prophets, the
command of Christ and his Apostles, let all true Christians judge; the Man
being old did profess, as I was informed, That if they should have laid the
strokes upon him, they would certainly have killed him, which I know ceized not
a little upon him, and how far what was done had influence into his death, the
Lord only knows; for as is before said, the same day he went forth, he fell
sick, and within ten days he died; The Lord grant that no part of his death
may be laid to their charge, and that they may see the exceeding greatness of
the evil of thirsting after the blood of the Innocent, before the Lord come
forth to avenge it, and as to that story I shall say no more, but leave the
Reader to his own relation, which partly in Prison, and partly upon his death
Bed, as may be perceived, he wrote and left behind him, with an intent it
should be published. The relation follows, writ and subscribed with his own
hand.

A Relation of my being brought before the Magistrates the 6th of the 7th
Month, 1651.
I Going from place to place, to buy and take up commodities for my use, was
attached or arrested by the Marshall, by virtue of a Warrant from the Court, to
appear in the Court, and there to answer for a high misdemeanor committed by
me, and coming into the Court (which was then privately kept in the Chamber)
they asked me diverse questions, amongst which this was one; Whether I did think
that Obediah Holmes did well or not, in coming among them to baptize, and
administer the Sacrament. laying this to my charge, that I was one with him,
and of the same judgment, and whether I did think he did well, or no, in his
so carrying himself; to which I answered, I had here nothing to do with that
which another Man did* but I was here to answer for what I my self had
committed against their Law; then said they, you have offended our Law, and
have contemned Authority, for you took him by the hand, and did countenance him
in his sin, so soon as he was gone from the Post, to which I said, If I have
broken any Law of the place, by what I then did, I am willing to submit unto
punishment; yea said the Governor, you took him by the hand, did you not? and
spoke to him, what said you? did you not say so and so? Blessed be God, etc. To
which I said, I shall refer my self unto the testimonies that may or can be
brought against me; well, said the Governor, we shall find Testimony enough
against you; take him to you Keeper, and we will call you forth in public for
that we do with you we will proceed in public with you, and so I went to
Prison. This was the sum and substance of the first time I was called before
them; the next day being the last day of the week, and the last day of their
Court, I was in expectation all the forenoon to be called forth, but was not,
so after dinner, when (as it appears) the Court was risen, and some of the
Magistrates departed, I was sent for again into the Chamber, where was the
Governor with three others, scil. Mr. Bellingham, Mr. Hibbins, and Mr. Increase
Nowell, as soon as I was come into the room, the Governor read my Sentence,
which was, that I must pay 40 sh. or be well whipped, and so immediately he
departed, and when he was gone (for I could not have time before) I answered,
that I desired the privilege of an English Subject, which was to be tried by
the Country, to wit, a Jury, and to be made to appear (if they can) to be a
Transgressor by a Law: To which they said, I had contemned Authority, and they
had a Law to punish such, and said they, you did show your contempt of
Authority in that you did take such a person by the hand, as soon as he was
from the Post. To which I answered, I could not do that which I did in
contempt to Authority, seeing he had satisfied the Law to the full, and was
departed from the place of suffering; and in the next place what I did, I did
unto him as my Friend; And further I said, if I had taken him by the hand so
soon as he was loosed from the Post, and had led him out of the Town, I should
not have broken any Law either of God or Man. To this they said, That there was
a Law in all Courts of Justice, both in Old England, and other Countries, to
punish contempt of Authority, and so had they such a Law among themselves; To
which I said, That in Old England, and in other places they had such a Law I
denied not, but that Law also was both Enacted and published, but what Law have
I broken in taking my Friend by the hand, when he was free, and had satisfied
the Law? To this they replied, That he had not satisfied the Keeper; To this I
answered, That he had talked with his Keeper, and there was some Agreement
between them, and so in that sense also not under the Law, but free; Then said
they* if you would have showed kindness unto your Friend, you might have
forborne in that place, and done it more privately; To which I answered, I knew
not but that place was as free as another, he having satisfied the Law. The
Testimony that was given by Mr. Cole was this, sci. I saw John Hazell take
Obediah Holmes by the hand, but what he said I cannot tell; this is the
Substance of all the proceedings until the last day at night, and then they
said I should be whipped, but said some of their Officers, the Whipper cannot
be found, then they commanded that they should be ready by the second day
morning, and then I did expect to be called forth, but neither that day, nor
the third, nor fourth, was I called, but am as I understand reserved unto the
5th day, to be more public in the view of the World, and when the 5th day
came, as I had many before, so also then, that would have paid the Fine, if I
would give my consent, which I denied to do, and so set my self by the power
of Christ to suffer what should be inflicted upon me, but when Noon came I was
told I should not suffer whipping, yet not having a discharge, I did not look
to be freed until the Keeper told me, I might go about my business; then I
demanded a discharge (meaning under the Magistrates hands) so he bad me go, he
would discharge me.

The strokes I was enjoined by the Court to have, were 10 with a three-corded
whip, the very same number I understand, that the worst Malefactors that were
there punished had, of which some were guilty of common Whoredom, other of
forcing a little Child, and one Indian for coining of money; thus far have you
a relati* on according to my best remembrance fromt he first to the last, of
all the passages concerning this matter; By me John Hazell, written with mine
own hand in Boston Prison, the 13 day of the 7th month, 1651.

A Po^^cript* Since I wrote, I understand there is a report that I was willing
to pay my Fine, and that the Magistrates would not accept of it without I were
willing. Gentle Reader, be pleased to understand that this is false, for it was
without my consent or approbation; And further understand, That the Fine was
taken by them, upon the profer of Mr. Bendall for John Spur, it was willingly
accepted by the Magistrates, and approved of, although John Spur did to their
faces contradict it, and oppose it; therefore good Reader believe not such
reports.

By me John Hazell

Now of what has been spoken in this Narrative (Reader) this is the sum.

1 THou may understand that the next morning after we three, being strangers,
were come to our friends house at Lin where we lodged (it being two miles out
of the town) we were persued and also apprehended by the Constables under the
name of erroneous persons being strangers, and by that power were carried (after
a full and clear manifestation of our unfreeness) unto their Assembly, then to
Prison, and after a while were also brought before their Judgment seat; in
which two Assemblies, to which we were forced, they drew forth matter enough as
they conceived to make us transgressors, and thereupon proceeded to sentence us
without producing either Accuser, Witness, Jury, Law of God, or man, whereby
either we might appear to be guilty, or they to be just and justified in their
proceedings against us.

2 After we were thus persued, and apprehended under the name of erroneous
persons and strangers, and by their Court condemned and sentenced as Herericks
or scismaticks, a motion being made by their Governor touching a discourse
with their Ministers, was readily accepted by us, and often repeated, and as
often promised by them, but yet could not be obtained, as is here at large to
be seen.

3 Although through the merciful hand of our God upon us, we had wronged no
man, corrupted no man, defrauded no man, as he, together with our Consciences,
then did, and still to this day, do bear us witness yet besides the exceeding
great loss and detriment otherwise sustained, we had all no doubt met with as
cruel Scourgings as his faithful servants of old, had not the provident hand
of our God so disposed the hearts of some of our friends to lay down our
ransom, by which two did escape; and this did evidently appear in the third
who came under their zealous, yet merciless hands, and received from them 50
stripes above the restraint of the Jews, as writers report, yea and such
entertainment no doubt should strangers or Angels from Heaven, yea Christ Jesus
himself have received at their hands, if they could effect it, in case they
should have come among them, and not submitted, (as it is not possible they
should) unto that golden, and glorious Image or likeness of the worship and way
of God appointed by Christ which they have set up.

4 When this faithful Martyr and Witness, that Christ is the Lord, had born
this fourscore and ten stripes cruelly laid on, not only with a patient mind,
but with an exceeding great joy of the holy spirit, as the spectators could not
but discern, and was loosed from the Post, and was going to Prison again, some
being inwardly moved with joy in beholding the gracious support which the Lord
afforded him (as they have affirmed) could not forbear to take him by the hand,
for which thing sake two of them were apprehended and sentenced to pay each of
them 40 s or else be whipped. Let the Actors themselves, and all that peruse their
practice for cautions sake consider, whether the spirit by which they are led
thus to act, be not very like unto, if not the same which is seen, Revel. 13.
Acting the second Beast that arose up out of the Earth which had two horns
like a Lamb, yet spoke like a Dragon, and exercised all the power of the first
Beast that was before him, caused a lively Image to be made unto him, and
forced the Earth and them that dwell* herein, both small and great, rich and
poor, free and bond, to worship his Image, and that no man might buy, or sell,
save he, that had the mark, or the name, or the number of his name. Here is
Wisdom! and let such as desire from their hearts to live Godly in Christ Jesus,
and do as really expect to suffer with Christ in this present evil World, as
they do to reign with him in that good World which yet is to come, let such I
say consider, and bear still in mind these expressions, Revel. 13. 10. He that
leads into Captivity shall go into Captivity, he that kills with the Sword
must be killed with the Sword; here is the patience and faith of the S* ints.

Rev. 12. 11. And they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the Word
of their Testimony, and they loved not their lives unto the death.

Rev. 6. 9, 10, 11. I saw under the Altar the Souls of them that were slain for
the Word of God, and for the testimony which they beld; And they cried with a
loud voice saying, how long holy and true will thou not judge and avenge our
blood on them that dwell on the Earth, etc.

Rev. 20. 4. And I saw the Souls of them that were beheaded for the Witness of
Jesus, and for the Word of God, and which had not worshipped the Beast, neither
his Image, neither had received the mark upon their foreheads; or in their
hands, and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years.

And now forasmuch as it was boldly affirmed by a Solicitor for New England,
and that in the Council Chamber before that honorable Committee there
assembled in Council, that men in New England might freely enjoy their
understandings, and Consciences, provided they walk civilly among them, and
that they that suffered of late, did not suffer for their Consciences but for
some misdemeanor, thereby endeavoring to possess those noble breasts with that
which is false; therefore I think it necessary (both for the Vindication of
truth, and to the end that such worthy persons may not be taken with, or
deceived by such unworthy reports, so as to be drawn to countenance persons
that walk in a way that they are ashamed in plain and open terms to prosess,
and acknowledge, for these ends I say I think it necessary to produce their
Laws, at least such as speak to the matter in question, whereby these two
things will plainly appear.

1 That they that will not, or else in Conscience toward God cannot conform to
their worship, or suspend the worship of God as their Souls are persuaded, are
by the authority of their Laws to be forced to the one, and restrained from the
other, and that the Magistrate is thereby not only justified in, but also
enjoined unto, such a proceeding against them, although the men otherwise walk
not only as civilly or soberly as themselves, but also righteously, and Godly
in this present evil World, and are such indeed as are a Law to themselves.

2 Although they have Laws thus to proceed to force all to their worship, and
to restrain those that differ from them, from that worship to which their Souls
are persuaded, yet in our case they were so far transported with zeal, that,
what they did unto us, they did without Law, yea against those Cautions which
their own, Laws have provided.

Certain Laws established in the Colony of the Mathatusets in New England, and
drawn forth (by constraint) to prove that the Authority there established
cannot permit men, though of never so civil, sober, and peaceable a Spirit and
Life, freely to enjoy their understandings and consciences, nor yet to live, or
come among them, unless they can do as they do, and say as they say, or else
say nothing, and so may a man live at Rome also.
IT is ordered by this Court, and the Authority thereof, That no man's life
shall be taken away; no man's honor or good name shall be stained; no man's
person shall be arrested, restrained, banished, dismembered nor any ways
punished; no man shall be deprived of his wife or children, no man's goods or
estates shall be taken away from him; nor any ways indamaged under color of
Law or countenance of Authority, unless it be by virtue, or equity of some
express Law of the Country warranting the same, established by a General Court
and sufficiently published; or in case of the defect of a Law in any particular
case, by the word of God. And in capital cases, or in cases concerning
dismembring, or banishment, according to that word to be judged by the General
Court. see p. 1.

For the suppressing of Anabaptists.
It is ordered by this Court and Authority thereof, that if any person or
persons within this Jurisdiction shall either openly condemn or oppose the
baptizing of Infants, or go about-secretly to seduce others from the
approbation or use thereof, or shall purposely depart the Congregation at the
administration of that Ordinance; or shall deny the Ordinance of Magistracy, or
their lawful right or authority to make war, or punish the outward breaches of
the first Table, and shall appear to the Court wilfully and obstinately to
continue therein, after due means of conviction, every such person or persons
shall be sentenced to Banishment. see page 2.

Against Blasphemy, being a capital transgression.
It is ordered, that if any person within this Jurisdiction, whether Christian
or Pagan, shall wittingly an willingly presume to BLASPHEME the holy Name of
God, Father, Son, or Holy Ghost, with direct, express, presumptuous, or
high-handed blasphemy, either by wilful or obstinate denying the true God, or
his Creation, or Government of the world: or shall curse God in like manner, or
reproach the holy Religion of God, as if it were but a politic device to keep
ignorant men in awe; or shall utter any other kind of Blasphemy of the like
nature and degree, they shall be put to death. Lev. 24* 15, 16. See p. 5.

To raise money for Public charges in Church and Commonwealth.
It is ordered by this Court, and the Authority thereof, that every Inhabitant
shall henceforth contribute to all charges both in Church and Commonwealth
whereof he does or may receive benefit: and every such Inhabitant who shall not
voluntarily contribute proportionably to his ability with the Freemen of the
same Town to all common charges, both Civil and Ecclesiastical, shall be
compelled thereto by assessment and distress to be levied by the Constable or
other Officer of the Town as in other cases: and that the lands and estates of
all men (wherever they dwell) shall be rated for all Town charges both Civil
and Ecclesiastial as aforesaid, where the lands and estates shall lie: their
persons where they dwell. See p. 9.

Laws Ecclesiastical.
1 All the people of God within this Jurisdiction, who are not in a Church way,
and be orthodox in judgment, and not scandalous in life, shall have full
liberty to gather themselves into a Church estate, provided they do it in a
Christian way, with due observation to the rules of Christ revealed in his
word. Provided also that the General Court does not, nor will hereafter approve
of any such companies of men as shall join in any pretended way of Church
fellowship, unless they shall acquaint the Magistrates and the Elders of the
neighbor Churches where they intend to join, and have their approbation
therein.

2 And it is further ordered, that no person being a member of any Church which
shall be gathered without the approbation of the Magistrates and the said
Churches, shall be admitted to the Freedom of this Commonwealth.

3 Every Church has also free liberty to exercise all the Ordinances of God
according to the rules of the Scripture.

4 Every Church has free liberty of election and ordination of all her
Officers from time to time. Provided they be able, pious and orthodox. Now the
question is who shall judge of these words of restraint, Christian way, rules
of the Scripture, word of God, able and orthodox.

13 That if any Christian (so called) within this Jurisdiction shall
contemptuously behave himself toward the Word preached, or the Messengers
thereof called to dispense the same in any Congregation; when he does
faithfully execute his Service and Office therein, according to the will and
word of God either by interrupting him in his preaching, or by charging him
falsely with any error which he has not taught in the open face of the
Church: or like a son of Korah cast upon his true doctrine or himself any
reproach to the dishonor of the Lord Jesus who has sent him, and to the
disparagement of that his holy Ordinance, and making Gods ways contemptible
and ridiculous: that every such person or persons (whatsoever censure the
Church may pass) shall for the first scandal be convented and reproved openly
by the Magistrate at some Lecture, and bound to their good behavior. And if a
second time they break forth into the like contemptuous carriages, they shall
either pay five pounds to the public Treasury; or stand two hours openly upon
a block or stool, four foot high, on a lecture day, with a Paper fixed on his
breast, written in Capital letters [AN OPEN AND OBSTINATE CONTEMNER OF GODS
HOLY ORDINANCES] that others may fear and be ashamed of breaking out into the
like wickedness.

14 It is ordered and decreed by this Court and Authority thereof, That
wheresoever the ministry of the word is established according to the order of
the Gospel throughout this Jurisdiction, every person shall duly resort and
attend thereunto respectively upon the Lords days, and upon such public
Fast-days, and days of Thanksgiving as are to be generally kept by the
appointment of Authority: and if any person within this Jurisdiction shall
without just and necessary cause withdraw himself from hearing the public
ministry of the word, after due means of conviction used, he shall forfeit for
his absence from every such public meeting 5 shillings. All such offenses to
be heard and determined by any one Magistrate or more from time to time.

15 It is ordered by this Court, That the civil Authority here established
has power and liberty to see the peace, ordinances and rules of Christ to be
observed in every Church according to his word. As also to deal with any
churchmember in a way of civil justice notwithstanding any church relation,
office, or interest; so it be done in a civil and not in an ecclesiastical way.
Nor shall any church censure degrade or depose any man from any civil dignity,
office or authority he shall have in the Commonwealth.

It is ordered, that from henceforth all lands, cattle, and other estates of
any kind whatsoever, shall be liable to be rated to all common charges
whatsoever, either for the Church, Town or Commonwealth in the same place
where the estate is from time to time. see page 18, 19, 20.

Heresy.
Although no humane power be Lord over the Faith and Consciences of Men, and
therefore may not constrain them to believe or profess against their
Consciences: yet because such as bring in damnable heresies, tending to the
subversion of the Christian Faith, and destruction of the souls of men, ought
duly to be restrained from such notorious impiety, It is therefore ordered and
decreed by this Court;

That if any Christian within this Jurisdiction shall go about to subvert and
destroy the christian Faith and Religion, by broaching or maintaining any
damnable heresy; as denying the immortality of the Soul, or the resurrection
of the body, or any sin to be repented of in the Regenerate, or any evil done
by the outward man to be accounted sin: or denying that Christ gave himself a
Ransom for our sins, or shall affirm that we are not justified by his Death and
Righteousness, but by the perfection of our own works; or shall deny the
morality of the fourth commandment, or shall endeavor to seduce others to any
the heresies aforementioned, every such person continuing obstinate therein;
after due means of conviction, shall be sentenced to Banishment. see page 24.

Disturbing of Churches.
It is ordered and decreed by this Court, and the Authority thereof, That if
any person, whether in Church Fellowship or not, shall go about to destroy or
disturb the orders and peace of the Churches established in this Jurisdiction,
by open renouncing their Church, Estate, or their Ministry, or other ordinances
dispensed in them, either upon pretense that the Churches were not planted by
any new Apostles, or that ordinances are for carnal Christians, or babes in
Christ, and not for spiritual, or illuminated persons, or upon any other such
like grounded conceit, every such person, who shall be found culpable herein,
after due means of conviction, shall forfeit to the public Treasury forty
shillings for every month, so long as he continues in that his obstinacy.

Torture.
That no man shall be beaten with above forty stripes for one Fact at one time.
Nor shall any man be punished with whipping, except he have not otherwise to
answer the Law, unless his crime be very shameful, and his course of life
vicious and profligate. see p. 50.

The Testimony of John Clarke, Obediah Holmes, and John Crandall, Prisoners at
Boston in New England, concerning the faith and order of the Gospel of Christ
Jesus the Lord, as the same was laid down in four Conclusions, and proffered to
be openly and publikly defended against all gainsayers; when none would
comeforth thus to oppose it: now again by the aforesaid John Clarke reviewed,
particularly, and strictly examined by the Word of God, and Testimony of Jesus,
and thereby, (as is here at large to be seen) confirmed and justified.
The first Conclusion.
[ ITestifie that Jesus of Nazareth, whom God has raised from the dead, is
made both Lord and Christ] you may see this testimony clearly, and plentifully
witnessed and confirmed by the Scriptures of Truth; for First, that God raised
him from the dead, appears by the testimony of 12 chosen Witnesses, Acts 2. 24.
32. This Jesus, say they, has God raised up, whereof we are Witnesses; so also
chap. 3. 15. And being alive again he was seeen of above 500 Brethren at once
being faithful Witnesses, Children that will not lie, see 1 Cor. 15. 6. And
last of all he was seen of Paul, whom he sent to the Gentiles, see 1 Cor. 15.
8. Acts 22. 18. 21. And this is laid by Paul as the foundation of the hope of
the Israel of God, that they shall be raised, and shall share in that glory
that shall then be revealed; yea it is that word of Truth (as Peter witnesses)
by which the Father of mercies does again beget such as had sinned and fallen
short of the glory of God, and were without hope, unto a lively hope of the
glory of God, in an inheritance, incorruptible and undefiled, that fades not
away, and is reserved in heaven for them, see 1 Pet 1. 3. 4. And in the second
place, that God has made this Jesus whom he has raised from the dead, both
Lord and Christ, see it also confirmed Acts the 2d, the 36. 10. 36. 2 Cor. 4.
5. Acts 18. 5.

[ This Jesus I say is the Christ, in English, the Anointed One, has a name
above every name] that he is not only said to be a Christ and an Anointed one,
which, although it be a name of eminency among men, yet may there be sound
many, both before the time of Reformation, and since, upon whom this worthy
name of Christ, or Anointed one may be worthily called, as were those names of
eminency among the Israel of old, as King, Priest, and Prophet, and such as
being washed in the blood of the Lamb are also Anointed, and made Kings and
Priests unto God, and Prophets to men compare the 2 Cor. 1. 21. 1 Io. 2. 27.
with Rev. 5. 10. 19. 10. I say he is not only a Christ, but that he might
appear in this eminent name to have the pre-eminence, he is called the Christ,
see Mark 8. 29. Io. 11. 27. 6. 69. 20. 31. which in English is the Anointed
one, as will appear, 1 Io. 41. We have found, says Andrew to Simon, the
Messiah, being the Hebrew word, which being interpreted into the Greek
Language, is, (...), or the Christ, but rendered in English as in the margent,
is the Anointed, and hence he is called in the 9 Luke 20. the Christ of God, or
in more plain English, the Anointed of God, suitable to this are such
expressions of the spirit of God, in the Scriptures of truth, as these; Him
has God Anointed, and that with the oil of gladness above his fellows, see
Acts 4. 27. 10. 38. 1 Heb. 9. And that he has a name above every name does
evidently appear; for it pleased the Father that in him should all fullness
dwell, yea, all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, that in all things, or as
it is in the Margent, among all, he might have the preeminence, see Coll. 1.
18, 19. 2. 9. so Phi. 2. 9. Wherefore (says the Apostle) God has also highly
exalted him, and given him a name above every name, he has a name above the
Anointed, Kings, Priests, and Prophets of old, they being but types and
shadows of him, and yet were the highest names in Israel, which was a Family
that had a name above all the Families of the Earth; and so a name above all
the names on the Earth: and yet this is not all, for he has a name above all
Principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is named,
not in this world only, but also in that which is is to come, Ephe. 1. 20, 21,
22. Phi. 2. 10, 11. --

[ He is the Anointed Priest; none to, or with him in point of attonement] That
he is the Anointed Priest, compare Heb. 3. 1. with 1. 9. and there shall we see
the Spirit of God, calling him an High Priest, who was of God anointed with the
oil of gladness above his fellows, which cannot but be understood of his
fellow-Priests, either such as were ordained of old, before the time of
Reformation, and so were types, or shadows of him, or else of such as were
since by him made Priests unto God, and so received of the fullness of that his
ointment: Now that there is none to him in point of atonement, will easily be
made manifest, if these three things be considered; 1 The nature of the
atonement it self. 2 The weakness or insufficiency of all other Priests,
whether ordained, or made to perform such a work. And lastly, the sufficiency
of this High Priest to make a perfect atonement for all those that come to God
through him.

Touching the nature of the atonement, it is not amiss to consider, that what
was by this word atonement expressed under the first Testament, while that
Priesthood stood, has been since under the administration of the last
Testament, that is established upon better promises than that, been expressed
more frequently by the word Reconciliation, and therefore the word that in the
5 Romans 11. is rendered atonement, is in 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19. and in all other
places translated by the word Reconciliation; Now Reconciliation does
pre-suppose an estrangednesse, or enmity rather, between two parties, and if
the parties were men, peradventure there might befound a man to mediate; but
the enmity lies not so much between man and man, or between men and Angels,
good or bad, but between God and man, the Creator and the creature, and who is
he in Heaven, or in Earth, that dare interpose, or step in to make a
reconciliation between these two? yea, who can effect it? especially if we
consider that the enmity on the creatures part is rooted in his mind, and
cannot be eradicated (I had almost said, and yet I think I shall not need to
retract it) by the powerful hand of God himself stretched forth in his wrath,
his mind still remaining, as indeed does notably appear out of the mouth of the
Lord himself, by the hand of his Prophet Isay, 57. 16, 17. For the iniquity of
his covetousness, was I wroth, and smote him; I hid me, and was wroth, and he
went on frowardly in the way of his heart. So see it confirmed also in Rev. 16.
9. 11. 21. when the wrath of God breaks forth with an exceeding great Plague,
then shall you find men blaspheming the name of God, who has power over those
Plagues, because of their pains and their sores, and repented not of their
evil deeds, to give him glory; and if the wrath of God does it not, how unlike
is the wrath of man to effect it? But further to show the greatness of the
work of Reconciliation as it lies on man's part; for as he has not an
alienation only, but an enmity in his mind, so is he apt upon all occasions to
the utmost of his power to manifest the same, by wicked provoking works
against the God of Heaven, so that let but God himself be manifested in the
flesh, or any bright beam of his glory break forth, and shine through mortal
flesh, presently shall the Jews, and Gentiles, though otherwise full of enmity
one aagainst an other, concur; yea, Herod and Pilate shall now be made
friends, and shall agree to Crucify the Lord of Life and Glory; to pour forth
the precious Blood of God, and to tread under foot the Son of God, and to
count the blood of that Covenant as an unholy thing: So that from hence we may
conclude, That as he that hates his Brother in his heart may be said to
murder a man, so he that hates God in his heart, may be said in a sense to
murder God. Now as on man's part there appears such enmity in his mind, such an
aptness to vent it, and such backwardness (as I might show) in him to accept
of any, but especially the Gospel terms of Reconciliation, whereby the work
appears to be great; So if we consider it on Gods part, that the wrath of God
is revealed from Heaven, against all ungodliness, and against all
unrighteousness of the Sons of Men, and that his word is gone forth and
cannot be recalled; In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely dye;
and the Soul that sins, it shall dye; and cursed is every one that
continues not in all things that are written in the Law to do them, so that
his Wrath, lustice, and Truth are all engaged in this main controversy that he
has with his creature, and by reason thereof, he will not be pleased with
thousands of Rams, nor yet with ten thousand Rivers of Oil, etc. And therefore
if the question be asked who is worthy, or who is able to stand between God and
Man, to make the atonement, to slay the enmity, and so to make peace? The
answer will be the same, That no man (that is merely so, no nor Angel) in
Heaven, nor in Earth nor under the Earth is either worthy, or able to undertake
this great work, no nor in that sense to look thereon; And therefore in the
second place all other Priests will be found insufficient; for as for the
Priests of old, and all that belonged to them, as Vestures, Vessels, Altars,
Temple; and all that was officiated by them, as their Sacrifices, Attonements,
Oblations, blessings, they were too weak to accomplish this work, for they were
not able to make him perfect that did the service, as appertaining to the
Conscience, but brought their sins to remembrance, in stead of blotting them
out, so as to remember them no more, and were indeed but mere shadows of good
things to come, which they that believed had in their eye, and saw a far off,
see Heb. 7. 18, 19. 9. 9. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4, 11. and as for others that are made
Priests unto God, they do but receive of his fullness, and will readily
acknowledge with Paul, that through the Law they are dead to the Law, so as by
their own works or righteousness (which now appears to be but glistering
wickedness, and no other than fruits of that enmity that was in their minds,
by them I say) not to expect to make their own peace with God; and although it
is true they have liberty to enter into the holiest, yet it is by the blood of
Jesus, and by a new and living way which he has consecrated for them; and
although they may draw near unto the holy God with a true heart, and full
assurance of Faith, yet they must have their hearts sprinkled with his blood
from an evil conscience, and their bodies washed with pure water; and although
being in the holy presence of God, they may, as the Priests of old, offer up
prayers with strong cries for themselves, and others, yet must they be offered
upon the golden Altar that is before the Throne, and must be mingled, and
perfumed with much sweet incense out of the golden censer that is in the Angel
of the Covenants hand, and the smoke of the incense must ascend with their
prayers before God out of the Angels hand: Rev. 8. 3, 4 so that in this point
they are nothing, yea less, and worse than nothing; but Christ is the very
power of God in this point, the substance of all those shadows, and what he
did in reference to the work of atonement, and reconciliation, he does it
substantially and effectually, both on Gods part and man's; for he has both
natures in himself, and by reason thereof is an apt Mediator fit to interpose
between both to make reconciliation; for he is declared to be the Son of God,
wholly without sin, consecrated with an oath of God to be a Priest for that
purpose for ever, Heb. 7. 21. comp. with 27. 28. who by the eternal spirit of
God offered up himself without fault to God his Father, the just for the
unjust, so that by one offering, he has consecrated for ever them that are
sanctified, so that there is no more need of offering for sin, see Heb. 9. 4.
comp. with 10. 14. 18. and is now entered, not into the Holy places made with
hands, but into Heaven, to appear in the sight of God for those that believe
through him, and not with the blood of others, but with his own blood, whereby
their consciences are purged from dead works to serve the true and the living
God, see Heb 9. 26. 14. yea, and there remains, and is set down at the right
hand of the throne of the Majesty in the highest, being the memediator of that
better covenant, even that which is established upon the best and absolute free
promises, which are to pardon their Heb. 1. 3. 8. 1.
enmity, and iniquity, and to remember their sin no more, to write his Laws in
their hearts, and to be to them a God, and to undertake that they shall be to
him a people; so that as God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself,
not imputing their trespasses unto Heb. 8. 6. 10, 11, 12.
them; so in the ministry of reconciliation Christ is by his Spirit in man
shedding abroad the love of God in his heart, and thereby slaying his enmity,
by which means he is reconciled to God; so that whom he blesses, being the
High Priest and Captain of our salvation, shall be blessed indeed; see Acts 3.
26. By all which it does appear to be a truth, that there is none to him in
point of atonement to make reconciliation between God and Man. And now that
there is none with him in that great work, neither person, nor service, is also
as evident. God the Father has designed him alone in that business, that no
Flesh might glory in his presence, see Acts 4. 11. 12. 1 Timothy 2. 5. Colloss. 1.
20. 1 Cor. 1. 29. And Paul tells the Galatians who were about to join
circumcision, and so works with Christ in this point of acceptance with God,
that then Christ should not profit them, and that they were fallen from grace,
see Gal. 5. 23.

[ He is the Anointed Prophet, none to him in point of Instruction.]

That he is the Anointed Prophet, or a Prophet Anointed with the Spirit of
Prophecy above his fellow Prophets, and a Teacher immediately sent from God
from Heaven, see Io. 9. 17. Luke 24. 19. Heb. 1. 9. Ioh. 3. 2. 13. 6. 38. 16.
28.

And that there is no Prophet to him, will evidently appear; for all the other
Prophets of God were such as did bear witness to him, or Act. 10* 43 Jo. 1. 45.
were types of him, yea Moses and Elias, those two great Prophets, lay
themselves low that he may be exalted; wherefore Deuteronomy. 18. 15. I (says the
Lord by the hand of Moses) will raise them up a Prophet Acts 3. 21. 7. 37.
from among their Brethren like unto thee, and will put my words in his mouth,
and he shall speak unto them all that I shall command him, and it shall come to
pass, that whosoever will not hearken unto my words which he shall speak in my
name, I will require it of him. And Ioh. 3. 30, 31. He must increase (says
John the Baptist, who came in the spirit of Elias, and was, says Christ, more
Matthew. 17. 12, 13. Matthew. 11. 11, 12, 13, 14.
than a Prophet, so that among those that were borne of Women before him there
was not a greater) and I must decrease; he that comes from above (says he) is
above all, he that is of the Earth is Earthly, and speaks of the Earth, he
that comes from Heaven is above all, and what he has seen and heard, that he
testifies, and no man receives his Testimony; he that has received his
Testimony has set to his seal that God is true, for he whom God has sent
speaks the words of God, for God gives not the Spirit by measure unto him;
and as these great Prophets thus witness to Christ, so the voice that is heard
from Heaven by James, Cephas, and John, do confirm their testimony, that there
is no Prophet to him, for when upon the Mount, Moses and Elias appeared talking
with Christ, and Peter would have three Tents or Tabernacles, one for Christ,
one for Moses, and another for Elias, that so no doubt at some times, and in
some cases, he might be harkening to them, immediataly upon the motion, and as
an evident manifestation of a dislike thereof, they both vanished, and a cloud
overshadow'd them all, and Christ being the Prophet only remaining, there comes
a voice out of the cloud which said, This is my wel-beloved Son in whom I am
well pleased, hear ye him; Mat. 17. 5, 6, 7. And now that there is none to him
in point of instruction, will also appear with respect both to the matter and
efficacy. 1 For the matter of instruction, he that comes from above being also
in the bosom of the Father, must needs be above all in his matter of
instruction, for what he has heard and seen in the Fathers bosom, that he
Testifies, and speaks the very words of God, yea declares and makes known
God himself, being the bright breaking-forth of the Fathers glory, which was
that which Moses, that great Prophet did so much desire to behold, and could
not obtain it; and hence it is, that it is said his hearers were astonished at
his Doctrine, concluded no man ever spoke like this man, and the best of them
knew not whether to go to better themselves, forasmuch as he had the words of
eternal life, yea and that holy Spirit of promise which the Saints were and
still are to receive, was but to glorify him, to take of him and his words,
and to show unto them the treasures of light and life, and refreshment that is
contained therein; see for the proof of all this, 1 Io. 17. 18. Io. 3. 31, 32,
34. Heb. 1. 3. Exo. 33. 18, 27. Mat. 7. 28. Io. 7. 46. Io. 6. 68. Io. 14. 26.
and 16. 12, 13, 14. And as for excellency of matter, so for efficacy and
powerful instructing, there is none to him in point of instruction, for he it
is in whose hand is the Key of David, and he opens the heart to understand
the scriptures; and to show a lively experiment of his powerful instructing,
when he was here upon Earth, he past by the wise and learned Rabbis, and
called the illiterate and foolish Fishermen, and to this day does choose not
many wise, nor many learned, but the poor foolish and despised ones, that as a
teacher he may show his abilities, thereby giving understanding to the simple,
speaking words of light, and life, and spirit to them, and by them to confound
the wise, and learned, and mighty; yea he indeed is the light of the Gentiles
which sat (and still in a great measure sit) in darkness, and is that true
light that enlightneth every one that comes into the World, see 24 Luke 45. 1
Corinthians 1. 26, 27. John 6. 63. Acts 13. 47. John 1. 9. And as he was the
Prophet, opening his Fathers Bosom, and showing the things that were past and
present, so the things also that were to come; he tells them how many things he
must suffer of the Elders, and Chief Priests, and Scribes, and be killed, and
raised again the third day, and therein foresheweth his Office of Priesthood;
he also foretells how after he is risen as a Lord, he will set his House in
order, and so depart to his Father to receive his Kingdom, and to return, and
what shall befall his Servants in the time of his absence, by the reign and
rage of the Beast, and Spirit of Antichrist, and what will be each ones portion
at his return, as appears in the book of the Revelation, which is surrounded
with blessings to him that reads, Chapter 1. 3. and curses to him that adds
to it, or takes from it, Chapr. last 18. 19. Wherefore seeing there is no
Prophet or Teacher to Christ and his Spirit in point of instruction, both for
excellency of matter, and efficacy in teaching, it well suites with Christians
to be still cleaving close to this Prophet, and concluding with the Disciple
that first trusted in him, Whither shall we go, thou have the Words of Eternal
life. But to proceed, he is

[ The Anointed King, who is gone unto his Father for his glorious Kingdom, and
shall ere long return again] That Jesus of Nazareth is the Anointed King could
not be hid in the day of his humiliation, as appears Luke 23. 2, 3. and Chapter
19. 38. The Majesty of a King did to appear in that lowly and meek form, while
he rode upon an Ass, that if the multitude of the Disciples had not confessed
him, but had held their p^ace, the stones would cry out; yea and then his word
had a powerful efficacy like the word of a King among Men and Devils, the
winds and Seas, so that he speaks but the word and the blind see, the lame
walk, the deaf hear, the dumb speak, the dead are raised, the Devils are cast
out, the poor receive the Gospel; when he is at the weakest, then is Pilate
fore'd to confess that he is King of the Jews, and to propagate this confession
as far as Latin, Greek, and Hebrew will carry it; this appears more evident,
since he was raised and sits as Lord at the right hand of the Father, at least
in the hearts and lives of his Servants, by pouring forth that Spirit or
ointment received, Acts 2. 33, 34, 35, 36. So that the Kings of Israel were but
his types, and the Kings of the Nations are but his Sword-bearers, for he is
King of Kings; but most lively shall this truth be made manifest, when all
enemies shall become his footstool, and he shall appear indeed in the form of a
King with thousands of his Saints, and ten thousand times ten thousand of the
heavenly Hosts, and shall in the powerful word of a King command the Earth and
the Sea to give up their Dead, and both wicked men and Devils to go together
into torment, and they shall be tormented, and the Saints to enter into the joy
of their Lord, and it shall be unspeakably glorious, 25 Mat. 31. 32. Luke, 9.
26. John 5. 28, 29. And that he is gone unto his Father to receive his Kingdom,
and shall ere long return again, will be made manifest by these scriptures, Io.
20. 17. Lu. 19. 12, 13. Heb. 9. last. 2 Timothy 4. 1. Rev. last, so that as
certainly as he has had a time for his Prophetical Office and for his
Priestly, so shall he have a time for his Kingly; and as the dream of
Nebuchadnezzer has been found certain, and the interpretation of Daniel sure,
concerning those four Monarchies or Kingdoms of men which should come to pass
in the Earth, so certain and sure it is, that the day is aproaching that the
God of Heaven will set up his Kingdom by that despised yet Cornerstone that
was cut out without hands, Dan. 2. 44. 45.

[ That this Jesus Christ is also the Lord, none to or with him, etc.] That he
is the Lord, appears 2 Cor. 4. 5. We preach Christ Jesus the Lord, says Paul,
and Acts 10. 36. says Peter, he is Lord of all, and hence it is that he is
called Lord of Lords. Rev.

And that there is none to him by way of commanding and ordering with respect
to the worship of God, the household of Faith, will evidently appear if the
nature of the household of Faith, the worship of God, and the commanding and
ordering power that suits therewith, be considered with respect unto him. For
the nature of the household of Faith, they are a company of faithful ones,
that are Ephesians. 1. 1. Col. 1. 2. 1 Cor. 6. 2^. 7. 23. 1 Cor. 12 13. Col. 2 19 2
Ephesians. 20. 21, 22. 1 Cor. 3. 16, 17. Heb. 12. 2. Acts 9. 6. Ps. 85. 8. Io. 10. 5.
4 ^o. 23, 24.
bought with the price of his blood, knit together in one by his Spirit,
founded wholly upon himself, built up by him to be a holy habitation of God,
and therefore not in the least measure to be defiled with the inventions and
commandments of men, from whence it is that they are still with their ey fixed
upon him whom they look upon to be as well the finisher as the author of their
faith, still in their hearts calling on him that has bought them, and saying,
Lord what will thou have me to do, and still standing upon their watch to
harken what this Lord will speak, for the voice of a stranger they will not
hear; so that by this it evidently appears, that there is none that has so
much right unto this household of Faith by way of ordering it, not yet freedom
in it by way of commanding, as has Christ Jesus the Lord; And from the nature
of the worship which is spiritual, to be performed by a spiritual worshipper,
and after or in that true manner that the Father of spirits has appointed, it
will as evidently appear, that there is none to him by way of commanding and
ordering in this matter, who is the only begotten of the Father, came out of,
and yet is, in his bosom, and has declared him, the true way of his worship,
and who are such worshippers as he seeks for; who as a Lord faithful over his
house before his departure gave order thereto, commanded his Servants to watch,
and to hold fast till he come, and in his absence being at the right hand of
his Father, is mindful to shed abroad of that holy Spirit of Promise, whereby
the true worshippers shall be led from truth to truth, until they be brought
into all truth. And if the nature of the commanding and ordering power, that
suits both with the worship, and with the worshippers, which the Father of
Spirits seeks for be also considered, which is not a law of a carnal
commandment seconded with carnal weapons, or an arm of flesh: but a spiritual
law, or as the Apostle calls it Romans 8. a law of the Spirit of life from Christ
Jesus, spoken unto, or rather written in the heart of a Christian by the Spirit
of Christ, by reason whereof he obeyes from the heart, readily, willingly and
cheerfully that form of doctrine which is engraven and laid up therein, Heb. 8.
10. 2 Cor. 3. 3. Romans 6. 17. If this I say be considered, that the worship is
spiritual, such as must begin in, spring up, and rise from the heart and the
spirit, and so be directed to the Father of spirits, and so the commanding
power that suits herewith, must speak to the heart and spirit of a man, then is
there no Lord in this matter to Christ Jesus the Lord, who speaks to the heart
in the Spirit, and his words are as commands from the head to the members,
which conveigh together spirit and life to obey them, by reason of which his
commands are not grievous, for where the Spirit of this Lord is, there is
liberty, and they by beholding the glory of the Lord, are transformed into the
same Image, from glory unto glory, by the Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3. 17, 18.

And that there is none with him, he is the only Lord, and lawgiver of this
spiritual building, and so of the spirits in this sense, appears by such
scriptures as say, One is your Lord and lawgiver, James 4. 12. Ephesians. 4. 5.
Mat. 23. 8. 10. and by such as say, ye are bought with a price, be ye not
therefore the servants of men, and the Apostles that had greater authority in
this point than any men living, yet they acknowledge they had not Dominion over
men's faith, and therefore declare this to be the express mind of God, that the
servants of this Lord must not strive (as if they were Lords) but be patient,
in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, or as the word imports,
that set themselves by covenant in opposition to that living Lord. And whereas
it is declared in the testimony, that this household of faith was purchased by
his blood as Priest, instructed and nourished by his Spirit as Prophet, etc.
this will all evidently appear to be true Acts 20. 28. John 16. from the 7. to
the 16. 1 Cor. 2. 9, 10, 11, 12. Romans 8. John 1. 2. 26, 27. Rev. 2. 11. 17. 29.
2 These. 14, 15. 1 Cor. 11. 2. and 1. 7. And so is the first part of the
testimony by the word of God confirmed and justified.

2. [ I testify that Baptism or dipping in water is one of the commands of
this Lord Jesus Christ.] That this commandment of Jesus is by way of dipping,
and as it were by drowning, overwhelming, or burying in water, and not by
sprinkling with water, appears many ways.

1. In that although there be frequent mention made of that appointment of
Christ in his Last Will and Testament, yet is it never expressed by the word
that may be rendered rantism, or sprinkling, but by the word that is rendered
baptism, or dipping.

2. In that the word by which it is so frequently expressed does in proper
English signify to dip, to plung under water, and as it were to drown, but yet
so as with safety, so that the party (as to the manner) may be drowned again,
and again; see the instance of Naaman, he dipped himself seven times in Jordan,
2 Kings 5. 14. and to this sense of the word (at least in that place) both the
Greek, Latin, and English Churches agree.

3. In that the phrase (in which there is mention made of such an appointment
of Christ) does necessarily import such a thing, and therefore when mention is
made of baptizing, there generally follows that word the preposition ((...))
which is commonly translated in, or into, which suits with dipping, and not the
preposition ((...)) which signifies with, and so suits with sprinkling. And
therefore it may be as well rendered, I baptize you in water, and he shall
baptize you in the holy Spirit, Mar. 1. 8. as it is rendered John did baptize in
the wilderness, and in the River of Jordan, verse 4, 5. or that John was in the
Spirit on the Lords day, Rev. 1. 10. and they were baptized in the cloud and in
the Sea, 1 Cor. 10. 2. yea it may as well be rendered, I baptize, or dip you
into water, as it is rendered they were casting a net into the Sea Mar. 1. 16.
for the words are the same, and it would be an improper speech to say John did
baptize with the wilderness, and they were casting a net with the sea.

4. That this appointment of Christ is by way of dipping, and not sprinkling,
appears, in that for the resemblance, and likeness hereunto, the Israelites
passing under the cloud, and through the sea, where the Egyptians that were
their Lords, and commanders, their pursuers, and enemies, that sought their
destruction, were drowned, left behind, and seen no more, is by the holy Spirit
called a baptism, 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2. they were baptized in the cloud, etc. Where
observe it is not here rendered with the cloud, and with the Sea, as in the
other place, Mark 1. 8. with water, because it suits with sprinkling, although
the word be the same; but in the cloud, and in the Sea, which suits with
dipping, or overwhelming, and so with the appointment of Christ, they passing
through the midst of the red or bloody Sea on dry land, which stood on both
sides as a wall, and being under the Cloud, were as men in a carnal eye
overwhelmed and drowned, and yet truly saved, and safe from their enemies.

5. That this appointment of Christ was not by sprinkling, but by dipping, or
putting the person into or under the water, appears by Philips baptizing the
Eunuch; It is said, They went both down into the water, both Philip the
baptizer, and the Eunuch that was the person to be baptized, and being there in
the water, Philip baptized, or dipper him in that water, as John did Jesus in
the river of Jordan, and then it is said as they descended, or went down into
the water, so they ascended, or went strait way up out of the water, see Acts
8. 38, 39. Mat. 3. 16. mark the expression, And Jesus when he was baptized went
up straitway out of the water, therefore had he been down in the water.

6. That this appointment of Christ was not by sprinkling, but by dipping, or
as it were a drowning, appears, in that John the Baptizer, his work being to
baptize, remains in the wilderness by the river of Jordan, and afterward in
Aenon, and the reason that is rendered by the Spirit of God why there he abode,
was, because there was much water there, which need not have been, if that
appointment could have been performed by sprinkling, and not by dipping. See
Luke 3. 2, 3. John 3. 23.

7. That this appointment of Christ was not to be performed by sprinkling, but
by diping, etc. appears from the nature of the Ordinance it self, for it is
such an ordinance as whereby the person that submits thereto, does visibly
put on Christ Jesus the Lord, and is hereby visibly planted into his death,
holding forth therein a lively similitude, and likeness unto his death; whereby
only through faith he now professes he has escaped death, and is in hope to
obtain life, and peace everlasting, and so to have fellowship with him in his
death, as to be dead with him, and thereupon to reckon himself to be dead
indeed unto sin, Satan, the law, and the curse. See Gal. 3. 27. Romans 8. 2. 3.
5. 7, 8. 11. 1 Cor. 15. 29. But the planting of a person into the likness of
death is no ways resembled by sprinkling; but by dipping it is lively set
forth and demonstrated, therefore.

8. This appointment of Christ, sci. Baptism, is an ordinance whereby the
person that submits thereto, does hereby visibly and clearly resemble the
burial of Christ, and his being buried with him, so as in respect of the old
man, the former lusts and conversation, like the Egyptians, to be taken out of
the way, and seen no more. See Romans 6. 4. 6. Col. 2. 12. But sprinkling does
no way lively resemble the burial of Christ, or the persons being buried with
him, as dipping does; therefore.

9. This appointment of Christ, sci. Baptism, is an ordinance whereby the person
that submits thereto, does visibly, and lively hold forth herein the
resurrection of Christ, declares him, whose life was taken from the earth, to
be alive again, who although he died and was buried, yet was he not left in the
grave to see corruption, but was raised again, and behold he lives for
evermore; and as hereby he holds forth the resurrectiof Christ, so does he also
his own, being planted into the likeness thereof, so as to reckon himself to be
in his soul and spirit quickened, and risen with Christ, from henceforth to live
unto God the fountain of life, and to Christ Jesus the Lord who died for him,
and rose again, and so to walk in newness of life in this present evil world,
being also begotten unto a lively hope, that in the world to come he shall be
raised, and quickened both in soul, and body, to a life everlasting. See Romans 6.
4, 5. 8. 11. Acts 8. 33, 35, 36. Col. 2. 12. Romans 8. 11. 1 Cor. 15. 29. 1 Pet.
1. 3. but sprinkling does no way lively resemble the resurrection of Christ, or
the souls or bodies rising, or being raised by him, as the way of dipping does.
Therefore this appointment of Christ was, and still is, to be performed by way
of dipping or putting the person into or under the water, and not by sprinkling.

And that this dipping in, or into water, in the name of Jesus, is one of the
commandments of this Lord Jesus Christ, does evidently appear Mat. 28. 19. Mark
16. 15, 16 compared with Acts 2. 38. 41. 8. 36. 38. and 10. 47, 48. And that it
is also to be observed by all that trust in Christ, as other of his commands,
as he is the Lord, until he come again, is likewise expressly manifested to be
his will, Mat. 28. 20. Gal. 1. 7, 8. Jude 3. 2 Timothy 2. 2. Col. 2. 5, 6. Rev. 2.
25. 3. 11. Hold fast till I come. Rev. 22. 14. 19. Heb. 12. 25. But to proceed.

[ That a visible believer or disciple of Christ Jesus (that is, one that
manifests repentance toward God, and faith in Jesus Christ) is the only
person that is to be baptized with that visible baptism or dipping of Jesus
Christ in water] That a visible disciple or Scholar of Christ, one that
manifests himself to have heard him, to have been taught by him, and to have
yielded up himself to him as his teacher, is the only person, etc. will be made
manifest,

1. By the commission it self, and the argument stands thus, they and they
only have right to this ordinance, and appointment of Jesus Christ, whom the
ordainer himself, sci. Christ Jesus the Lord, has in his Last Will and
Testament appointed it to; but Christ Jesus the Lord has appointed it to
Disciples, and to Believers, and to such only. Therefore.

The first proposition cannot be denied, and the second will easily be proved:
see the commission by which the Apostles were warranted to administer this
ordinance, and so must all that baptize or they will appear but usurpers Mat.
28. 18, 19. All power is given unto me in heaven and in Earth, says the Lord,
go ye therefore and discipulize or make disciples not among the Jews only, but
among the Gentiles, and Nations, and baptize them; so that if the question
should have been made, Lord whom shall we baptize of the Nations among the Jews
and Gentiles? his answer was given in the words before, and he would have given
no other, you shall baptize amongst the Nations Jews and Gentiles, such as
first have been taught, and by teaching have been made my disciples; so Mar.
16. 16. Go ye into all the world, says the Lord, and preach the Gospel to
every creature, to the Gentiles as well as the Jews, he that believes and is
baptized shall be saved, etc. So that if the question here again should be
propounded who among the religious and strict Jews, and the loose and profane
Gentiles, should be baptized, the answer is plain, those to whom the Gospel
first has been preached, and they through that Gospel have also believed.

2. By the practice of the Commissioners who were faithful unto their Lord, and
to the charge which he gave them, and the argument stands thus.

Such as the faithful Apostles, and first Commissioners of Christ Jesus the
Lord administered this ordinance of baptism unto, such and such only ought to be
made partakers thereof.

But the Apostles and first Commissioners of Christ administered not this
ordinance unto carnal babes, infants of days, such as are by the testimony of
the Scriptures declared to be conceived in sin, to be brought forth in
iniquity, and being born of the flesh to be but flesh, and so by nature the
Children of wrath one as well as another; being also untaught. But to such as
first were taught, and were ordained, by the immortal seed of the word, to be
born again, and as new born babes in Christ, having tasted of the sincere milk
of the word, desire still more of the same, that they might grow up thereby,
and such as appeared to be converted and to become as little ones, such little
ones as believed in Jesus.

The first proposition I suppose none that own Christ and his Apostles will
dare to deny. And the second which is more questionable will also be proved.
See Acts 2. 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, etc. Although Peter with the 11 calls upon the
convicted Jews to repent, and to be baptized every one in the name of Jesus for
the remission of sins, and tells them that then they shall be made partakers of
the holy Spirit; and that they should not need to distrust it; he shows them
the largeness of the promise that was made concerning the pouring forth of the
Spirit, it being promised to be poured forth upon all flesh, as they had
expressed in the beginning of their discourse out of Joel v. 16. and 17. and
therefore ^aith, it is to you and to your Children, and to all that are a far
off, even as many (of you, your children and such as are a far off) as the Lord
our God shall call; yet he baptizeth none, but such as were called by the
holding forth the word of salvation by Jesus Christ, as appears in the words,
for they that gladly received his word were baptized; and they only; for they
that were baptized were added, and continued together in the Apostles Doctrine,
and in fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayer, and continued daily
with one accord in the Temple, and breaking bread from house to house did eat
their meat with gladness and singleness of heart, praising God: all which
cannot be understood of infants of days. And therefore this place if rightly
considered will be so far from affording a ground for the baptizing of the
children of believing parents, because here it is said the promise is to you
and to your children, that it will sufficiently evince the contrary; for indeed
such an apprehension is accompanied with 2 or 3 evident mistakes, there is a
mistake in the promise, in the parties to whom the promise belongs, and the
manner how it is to them and their children, etc.

1. There is a mistake of the promise, in that it is looked at as the covenant
of Grace which does ingratiate the soul into, and gives it an interest in all
the privileges of the Gospel of Christ, and so in order does go before baptism
or any other visible ordinance and appointment of his, whereas in very truth by
promise there, is meant that holy Spirit of promise which they which believed
in Christ, and obeyed him, should according to promise receive after he was
ascended unto the right hand of the father, as appears Joh. 7. 39. 14. 16. 16.
7. That which he had here shed a broad in a powerful manner upon the Apostles,
and that which these Jews also in believing and obeying the Gospel of Christ
should also receive, and therefore says Peter, repent, and be baptized and ye
shall receive, etc. and was no other than that which was of old prophesied of
by Joel, as is declared v. 16. and so is a promise that follows faith and
obedience, and not such as goes before to give right to this appointment of
Christ.

2. There is a mistake in the parties to whom this promise belongs, for whereas
it is said to you and to your children, and the reupon it is conceived to be
meant believers, and their infants of days, which upon that account are to be
baptized, it is plain and evident when the Apostle spoke these words to them,
they could not be looked upon as believers, forasmuch as they being pricked at
the heart, and only convinced of their evil in murdering the Lord of life,
propounded what they should do to be saved, which is far from believing, to
which the Apostle replies, repent, and be baptized in the name of Jesus for the
remission of sins; and to conceive that by their children were meant infants
of days, it may be as well so understood by your Sons and daughters, which
should so receive of the promise of the Spirit as to prophecy mentioned in the
seventeenth verse of this chapter, to which these words are related; and to
make it appear that the promise was not so either to them or their children (as
yet manifested) to give them right unto baptism, after many more words used by
the Apostle to persuade them to save themselves from this adulterous
generation, it is said, but as many as gladly received his word were baptized,
and but only such, and not their infants of days, for they that were baptized
continued together in such appointments of Christ as infants are in no measure
capable of.

3. There is a mistake in the manner how this promise is to them, and their
children, not spoken to them now as believers, and their children as having
right and interest peculiar by them, but indeed to them and their children no
otherwise than to all that are a far off, which if taken in the general cannot
be understood but with respect to the general promise, which is to pour forth
his Spirit upon all flesh, but if with the restriction, which is, even as many
as the Lord our God shall call, then, parents and children, Jews and Gentiles,
such as are near, and such as are a far off, must be called by the word of his
grace before they can have a peculiar right and interest in this spirit of
promise, and so a child that is called to believe and obey the Gospel may have
this promise made good unto him before his father, and a Gentile that is a far
off before a Jew that is near.

This will appear also by other instances, as of Philip baptizing in Samaria,
they were men and women that he baptized there, such as believed and received
the word with great joy, Acts 8. 8. 12. and when the Eunuch seeing the water,
asked what should let him to be baptized, Philip intimates that although he had
been taught, yet the want of a manifestation of faith would be a let, v. 36,
37. And whereas there is mention made of whole houses that were baptized; that
the Commissioners might appear faithful unto their Lord, and keep close to the
very words of their Commission, you shall find they were first taught, and by
teaching were made his disciples, and gladly received his word. See it in
Corn^lius household Acts 10. 33, 34. compared with the 44. 47. the Iaylors
household Acts 16. 32. 34. they spoke unto him the word of God, and unto all
that were in his house, and he set meat before them, and rejoiced, believing in
God with all his house; see it also in Crispus household, Acts 18. 8, 9, 10, 11.
Stephanus household 1 Cor. 1. 16, 17. compared with chap. 16, v. 15. And as for
Lydias household Acts. 16. the Spirit of God being more silent therein, they
that cannot interpret it by the other four, nor yet by the Commission it self,
nor by the Commissioners faithful observance thereof in all other instances,
let them prove if they can these three particulars. 1. That Lydia ever had a
husband. 2. In case she had, that ever she had any children by him, and if so,
then in the 3. place that they were not dead, or so grown up that they might
hear and receive the word gladly as well as their mother.

3. A third argument to prove that a visible believer is the person that
according to the mind of Christ is to be baptized in water, may be taken from
the order which the Spirit of Christ lays down, faith and baptism, in the
scriptures of truth, putting faith still in the first place, witness Mark 16.
15, 16. Mat. 28. 19. Heb. 6. Ephesians. 4. A 4 argument may be taken from the nature
of the ordinance, and a 5 from John's Baptism. Yea much more might be said to
this point, but this may suffice.

[ And also the only person that is to walk in the visible order of his house,
and so to wait for his coming the second time in the form of a Lord and King
with his glorious Kingdom according to promise] That he is the only person
that is to enter into, and walk in the visible order of his house, will
evidently appear, if the order in which our Lord left his house when he went to
his Father to receive his kingdom be duly considered, for in his last will and
testament we shall find it thus recorded, when our Lord was about to be gone,
he gave order unto his Apostles, whom he made stewards in his house of the
mysteries of God, to make him Disciples of all Nations, and that such as were
so made should then be baptized, and so visibly planted into Christ, and put on
Christ, and having so received him, should walk in him, observing all things
whatsoever he had commanded, the first thing whereof as touching order was, to
be added or joined one to another in the fellowship of the Gospel by a mutual
professed subjection to the Scepter of Christ, and being a company thus called
out of the world, from worldly vanities, and worldly worships, after Christ
Jesus the Lord (which is the proper English of these words the Church of
Christ, and is in other terms called the Household of faith) should steadfastly
continue together in the Apostles doctrine, sci. the consolation, reproof, and
instruction thereof, in Fellowship, sci. mutual support both inward and
outward; in Breaking of bread, thereby remembering the death of our Lord, whose
soul was made an offering for sin, as his flesh is meat indeed, and his blood
drink indeed, by the help of the Spirit, to nourish our souls and spirits up
unto eternal life, and in prayer, one with and for another; And that this is
the absolute order which the Lord has appointed in his last Will and
Testament, does evidently appear both by his own precept, and command, and by
the practice of such as first trusted in him, and if so, then neither infants
of days, nor yet such as profess themselves to be believers in Jesus, but
refuse as a manifestation thereof, according to the practice of such as first
trusted in Christ, to yield up themselves to be planted into the death, burial,
and resurrection of Christ, and so visibly to put Christ on, as did the
Christians of old, I say such have no visible right to enter into, or walk in
the order of the Gospel of Christ; and to conclude the point, the argument
stands thus. They, and they only, have visible right to enter into, and walk in
the visible order of Christ's house, and so to wait for his coming, whom Christ
Jesus himself being the Lord of the house, has appointed, and his Apostles
being his stewards, have approved of; But such as first have been taught and
made disciples or Scholars of Jesus, and believers in Christ, and afterward
have bin baptized or dipped and thereby visibly and lively planted into the
death, burial, and resurrection of Christ, are they, and they only, whom Christ
has appointed and the Apostles have approved of. See his Commission, peruse
their practice; Ergo They, and they only, have visible right to enter into, and
walk in the order of Christ's house, and so to wait for his coming the second
time, in the form of a King, with his glorious Kingdom, according to promise.
See for a farther confirmation of the last clause, in the first Epistle to the
Corinthians 1. 7. 1 The* 1 10. 2. The. 3. 5. But to proceed.

[ He is the person that is also to wait for his Lords sending down from the
right hand of his father in the time of his absence the holy Ghost, or holy
Spirit of promise, and all this according to the last will and testament of
that living Lord] That this living Lord did promise when he left this present
evil world, that is in a great measure subjected to devils, and went to his
Father, not only to return again, but in the time of his absence (as a
testimony of his great love unto such as are called to be his disciples, and
manifest the same by loving him and keeping his commandments, and as a
te^^imony of his loving acceptance at the right hand his Father) to send down
the holy Spirit, which should be in them as a wellspring of living water
flowing forth unto eternal life, who being a Spirit of truth, and sent by
Christ who is the truth which God will exalt, shall glorify him, take of him
and his, and show unto them, and so lead them from truth to truth, until he
has brought them into all truth: as a comforter or Spirit of comfort, shall
fill their hearts with joy in believing, by bearing witness with their spirits,
that they are the children of God, and by revealing unto them the precious
things which God has prepared for them that love him, which neither eye has
seen, nor ear has heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man to
conceive; and as a holy Spirit shall set them apart that are justified by the
blood of his Son, unto the holy God, and sanctify them throughout in soul, and
spirit, and body; and as a Spirit of supplication shall help them to speak unto
God; and as a Spirit of prophecy to speak unto men: that this Lord I say did
promise unto his disciples, who love him and keep his commandments, in the time
of his absence the presence of such a Spirit as this, which has supplies in
him beyond what the ^oul lacks, and that therefore they are to wait for this
promise, and for these supplies in his appointments, will clearly appear.

1. Out of the words of the Lord himself. See John 14. 15, 16, 17. so v. 26.
chap. 15. 26. chap. 16. 7, 8. so v. 13, 14, 15. five times in that night in
which he was betrayed does he repeat that promise, to his Disciples that loved
him and kept his commandments, and that he intended the same unto other visible
disciples that should love him and keep his commandments unto the end of the
world, will also appear; for if the appointment of Christ, sci. the supper that
went before, and is expressed chapter the 13. and the prayer of Christ that
followed after, and is expressed chapter 17. did belong unto them that should
believe through their word till he come again, then this promise that is so
often repeated between, does as well belong unto them, as to these; but the
former is true; See John 17. 20. 1. Cor. 11. 26. therefore the later.

If the consequence be denied, it will still be proved out of Christ's own
words; See John 7. 37, 38. and the consideration even in reason of Christ's
exceeding love and tender care toward all his disciples that love him and keep
his commandments, and their sensible wants of the same supplies of the Spirit
will clearly evince it.

2. It will clearly appear out of the words of the Apostles of Christ; See
John's interpretation of these words of Christ, Out of his belly shall flow
rivers of living water, This spoke he (says John) of the Spirit which they
that believe on him should receive, for the holy Spirit was not yet, because
Jesus was not yet glorified, John 7. 29. See also what they all say with one
mouth, after they had received this holy Spirit with power, whereby they were
furnished as Apostles or Ambassadors (of him that had all power in heaven and
earth in his hand) to go forth with the embassage of peace into all Nations,
and could deliver the mind of their Lord unto them in their own language, Acts
2. 38, 39. Repent and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus, for
the remission of sins and ye shall receive the gift of the holy Spirit, for the
promise is to you, and to your children, and to all that are a far off, as many
(of all these) as the Lord our God shall call, sci. to repentance from dead
works, to faith in Christ Jesus, to this visible manifestation thereof by being
baptized, and so visibly planted into the death, burial, and resurrection of
Christ for the remission of sins.

3. This will also appear by the enjoyments of those that first trusted in
Christ, and visibly manifested their faith and love in and to the Lord, by
keeping his commandments: The Disciples which were also called* Apostles,
waiting in the appointment of their Lord at Jerusalem, received and were filled
with that holy Spirit, with power according to promise. See Acts 1. 4. compared
with 2. 2. So that great number that were about three or rather five thousand
souls that believed through their word, and were baptized in Jerusalem, and
waited in the appointments of the same Lord, that is to say, together
steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine, and in fellowship, and in breaking of
bread, and in prayer, they also enjoied this holy Spirit according to promise.
See Acts 4. 31. The like may be found among the Saints in Samaria, Acts 8. 17.
in Ephesus, Acts 19. And the same may be found among the Saints that thus put
on Christ, and walked in him, among those that first trusted in him in all
places. See it in the Romans chap. 5. 5. and chap. 8. at large. See it in the
Corinthians Epistle 1. chap. 2. 10. 12. and 6. 11. 19. and chapter 12. at large. In
the Galathians chapter 3. 2. 4. 6. In the Ephesians chap. 1. 13. In the Philippians
chap. 3. 3. In the Colossians chap. 1. 8. In the Thessalonians Ep. 1. chap. 1.
5, 6. and chap. 5. 19. This promise is also found true in the little children
that John writes to, and is often repeated 1 John 3. 24 4. 13. and in the 2.
27. he speaks unto them after this manner, but the anointing (speaking of this
holy Spirit of promise) which ye have received of him, abides in you, and
(such is his supply) that you need not that any man teach you, but as the same
anointing teaches you of all things, and is truth and is no lie, even as it
has taught you ye shall abide in him: And now little Children abide in him,
etc. And Jude tells us, that the very ground why some that had made a
profession of the faith, and order of Jesus, caused divisions and offenses,
contrary to that doctrine they had received, and separated themselves, was,
because they were sensual, not having this Spirit, Jude 19* And as all this
has been proved by the last Will and Testament of that living Lord, so is it
also clear, that his Will is not to be added to, or taken from, compare Gal. 3.
15. with Rev. 22. 18, 19. which notwithstanding if any man shall attempt to do,
let him know this Lord is alive, and will ere-long appear sufficiently able to
avenge it.

3. [ I testify that every such servant of Christ Jesus, may in point of
liberty, yea ought in point of duty, to improve that talent which his Lord has
given unto him] That it is their duty to improve the talent the Lord has given
unto them, and that for that end it was also given, will appear by those two
instances of the Lord himself, the first is Mat. 5. 13, 14, 15. Ye (says the
Lord to his Disciples) are the salt of the earth, the light of the world, etc.
neither do men light a candle and put it under a hushell, but on a candlestick;
whereby he intimates, that if it be far from the intention of men (who are but
weak and foolish in their intentions and actions) to sight a candle which is
for use, and then to put it under a bushel, and so make it useless; then much
further from the purpose and intention of God, who is the father of lights, to
enlighten the spirit of a man, which is the candle of the Lord, and then to
have that light concealed and withheld; therefore it follows, let your light
(says the Lord) so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your father which is in heaven. The other instance is in the 19th
chapter of Luke 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. to the 27. verse, in which Parable is
lively declared by the Lord, 1. That that glorious Kingdom of God that shall
certainly appear, should not so immediately appear as some thought it should,
for which end is the Parable spoken verse 11. and the first words of the
Parable will prove the same thing, for the Nobleman (which is Christ Jesus the
Lord) must first go into a far coun^ry to receive his Kingdom, which is, to
the right hand of the Father, there to sit until all his enemies become his
footstool, and so return. 2. Here is declared the order in which this Lord left
this household when he went to receive his Kingdom, he bestowed gifts or
talents upon them, and commands them as his servants, in their several places
to occupy till he come, verse 13. which proves that, for which I produced this
scripture; and for further encouragement unto a servant of Christ to improve
that Talent in his Lords service that he has bestowed upon him, 3. In the
third place is declared the exceeding great countenance, and rich reward which
this Lord will bestow upon a faithful servant that has thus improved his
Talent, when he shall have received the Kingdom, and shall return in the glory
of his Father; the countenance (I say) appears in these words, he will say,
well, or as it is in the 25 of Matthew, well done thou good and faithful
servant, thou have been faithful in a few things; the rich Reward appears in
these, Enter into the joy of thy Lord, or have thou Authority (in my Kingdom)
over ten Cities, be thou also ruler over five Cities, etc. But to proceed.

[ And in the congregation he may either ask for information to himself] This
was a liberty amongst the Jews in their synagogues or congregations, as appears
Luke 2. 46. where Christ being about twelve years old, is found by his parents
among the Doctors, in the Temple, not only hearing them, but asking them
questions; and when he also taught in the Temple, or elsewhere, the people did
not only hear him, but asked him questions, yea made objections against what
was delivered, without interruption, and it cannot be conceived but this is
much more a liberty in the congregations, and Churches of Christ; and therefore
1 Cor. 14. 35. where women are directed to ask their husbands at home if they
will learn, and the reason is given because it is a shame for them to speak in
the Church, it is plainly declared, that men that will learn may ask in the
Church, for it is not a shame for them to speak there. But to proceed.

[ Or if he can, he may speak by way of prophecy for the edification,
exhortation, and comfort of the whole] by prophecy here I mean a plain, and
brief declaration of the mind, and counsel of God, in words significantly and
easy to be understood, confirmed by the words of the Apostles and Prophets of
God, and brought forth for the edification, exhortation, and comfort of the
whole; The 14 of the 1 Cor. will plentifully clear this truth, and make this
liberty good unto the Saints, in the Churches of Christ, and it cannot be shut
out but by the spirit of Antichrist. See verse 1. 5. 12. 24. 26. 30, 31. 39,
40. So 1 These. 5. 19, 20. Quench not the Spirit, is the exhortation to him that
is thereby moved to speak; and despise not prophecyings, is the exhortation to
them that are present to hear. But to proceed.

[ And out of the congregation at all times, upon all occasions, and in all
places, as far as the jurisdiction of his Lord extends] which is not only to
the utmost parts of the Earth, but also to heaven. See Mat. 28. 18. Heb. 1. 2.
Ephesians. 1. 20, 21, 22.

[ May (yea ought to) walk as a Child of light, justifying wisdom with her
ways, and reproving folly with the unfruitful words thereof, provided, etc. For
a warrant here, see Deu. 6. 7. Mat. 5. 14. 16. 10. 32, 33. 11. 19. Ephesians. 5. 11.
Act. 4. 20. Jam. 3. 13. And so have I done also with the 3d. Conclusion, the
fourth follows.

4. [ I testify that no servant of Christ Jesus has any liberty, much less
authority, from his Lord, to smite his Fellow Servants.] This will be evinced to
be a truth many ways from the mouth of the Lord.

1. In that it is the great commandment of this Lord to his disciples, and
servants, to love one another, and so to bear one another burdens, who ought*
to have their love stronger than death, so as to lay down their lives for the
brethren. See John 13. 34. 15. 17. 1 John 3. 23. 4. 21. Gal. 6. 2. 1 John 3.
16. Now to smite one another is a breach of that Law of Love in a very high
degree. Therefore.

2. The servants of Christ are called upon by their Lord to learn of him to be
meek, and lowly, and are put thereby into a capacity to be further taught the
way, and fear of the Lord, to increase their joy, and they are such as shall
inherit the earth, and also heaven, for they shall find rest for their souls;
and this meek, quiet and gentle Spirit is declared by the Spirit of the Lord to
be an ornament of very great price. See for a proof of all this Mat. 11. 29.
21. 5. Psalm 25. 9. Isaiah 29. 19. Mat. 5. 5. 1 Pet. 3. 4. but to smite is an
argument of a domineering, proud, and lofty spirit, which is far from a Spirit
that is meek and lowly. Therefore.

3. The servants of Christ are called upon by their Lord to be so far from
smiting their fellows, that in case they should be smitten by others for his,
and the Gospels sake, merely on one cheek, they should rather turn the other,
than seek to revenge it. See Luke 6. 20. Romans 12. 17. 1 Cor. 6. 7. why do ye
not rather take wrong (says the Apostle) why do you not rather suffer your
selves to be defrauded? but this is far from smiting one another. Therefore,
etc.

4. This Lord being also that Prince of Peace, does so far dislike such
practices as these among any servants of his, that belong to his house, that he
has absolutely and expressly declared, that he by no means will have a striker
to supply the Office of an Elder, or Steward therein, no nor one that is of a
Lordly, or domineering spirit, nor yet one that is froward, and will be soon
angry. See in the first Epistle of Timothy 3. 3. Titus 1. 7. Peter 5. 3.
Therefore, etc.

5. That no servant of Christ has such authority from his Lord to smite his
fellows, does plainly appear in that Parable Mat. 18. 34. where it is said, The
Lord was so wroth that he will have that wicked servant delivered to the
tormentors, that did but take his fellow by the throat; and him that fell to
smiting his fellows in his Lords absence: Mat. 24. 51. it is said, The Lord
shall come upon, in a day when he looked not for him, and in an hour that he is
not awar of, and shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion with the
hypocrites, where shall be weeping, and gnashing of teeth. But to proceed in the
testimony, where it is said,

[ No nor yet with outward force, or arm of flesh to constrain, or restrain
another conscience, nor yet his outward man for conscience sake, or worship of
his God, etc.] That this is a truth will be made out by the Scriptures of
truth, and that many ways. The first argument to prove it stands thus.

1. Arg. If any Servant of Christ Jesus (be he high, or low, rich, or poor)
have any such liberty, or authority from his Lord so to do, then he is able to
show it, (as that which may be his warrant so to act) either out of the words
of the Lord himself, or out of those that were spoken, or writ by the Apostles,
which were his Ambassadors, and were furnished from their Lord with commands
for his Servants observance until he come again.

But no servant of Christ (I suppose) is able to show, either out of his own
words, or out of the words of the Apostles, any such liberty, or authori^y from
the Lord, as that which may be his warrant so to do. Therefore.

The first Proposition cannot be denied, which is this, If any servant of
Christ Jesus have any such authority from his Lord, he is able to show it,
either out of his own words, or from the Apostles. And indeed for a man to act
in the name of the Lord, and not to have a word, or warrant from him, is high
presumption, and so will it appear if these these things be considered.

1. In that it is plainly declared, That all power in heaven, and in earth, is
given unto Christ, and therefore must all authority in heaven, and in earth, be
derived from him; and hence it is, that it concerns the feet and the toes of
that great image, if it be possible, to stand clear of him who is that little
stone cut out without hands, and shall ere long become great mountain, and fill
the Earth.

2. In that it is as plainly declared, that the living God has in these last
days spoken by Christ, Heb. 1. 1. has made him the heir of all things, and
thereupon has called upon every one that has an ear to hear him, has
threatened that soul that will not hear him that he shall be cut of; therefore it
concerns every servant of his to take heed he use no such authority over
another which he has not heard and received from Christ.

3. In that it is declared that Christ Jesus the Lord is that one lawgiver, and
that they are blessed that do his commandments, yea, so blessed, that the
Apostle says he is become the author of eternal salvation to those that obey
him, and that he is also the Judge unto whom the living God, has appointed a
great, and notable, and terrible day, in which and by whom he will Judge the
world in righteousness, yea, the very secrets of men's hearts, according to his
gospel. See James 4. 12. Rev. 22. 14. Heb. 5. 9. Acts 10. 42. and 17. 31. Romans
2. 16. From which consideration it also appears, that it concerns the servants
of Christ, that they despise not such a Lawgiver and such a Judge as he is, in
taking such liberty, or exercising such authority, over other men's consciences,
which cannot be made out from his words that he has given them; all which, as
so many arguments, will prove the first proposition.

And as for the second, which is this, sci. No servant of Christ can show a
warrant from Christ for such an authority, either out of his own words, or his
Apostles; if that be denied, we must then call for the warrant, which must be
showed either out of the Evangelists, the book of the Acts of the Apostles, the
Apostles Epistles, or the Revelation of Jesus: but I suppose it cannot be shown
out of any of these. If the 13. of the Romans be produced for a warrant, no man
can deny that the power there spoken of was such as belonged to a heathen, and
I think no man will acknowledge that he had such an authority from Christ to
order men's consciences, or outward man, with respect to the worship of God, and
therefore that word cannot be their warrant.

If the words of Paul, Gal. 5. 12. I would they were cut off that trouble you,
be produceed for a warrant, let the words be considered (and in the first
place) there is no mention made of outward force, or outward affliction, and
therefore no warrant for any outward or carnal hand so to afflict; but 2. The
words were spoken to the Churches in Ga atia, which were spirit all societies,
and concerning spiritual transgressors, and therefore their cutting off must
be from that spiritual relation and union which hitherto they enjoyed, and how
that is done, compare 3. Acts 23. with Mat. 18. 8. 17. Romans 11. 17. 19. 20. 22.
And the carnal cutting off from the carnal Israel (before the time of
reformation) was but a type of this spiritual cutting off and casting out from
the spiritual Israel of God since.

And thirdly, consider, the words were spoken by the Apostle Paul, who would
have us to know (as he declares it, 2 Cor. 10. 4.) that the weapons of his
warfare were not carnal, he was not wont to strive with them that opposed
themselves with carnal weapons, and therefore if he speaks to such persons as
these Galatians were (that had received such power from the Lord) touching a
cutting off, which is a business that belongs to a sword, it would be too
carnal an understanding of the place to conceive that this should be done by
any other sword, than by the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God, and
can reach to their Spirits, and is the only offensive weapon the Saints are to
take in such cases as this against their spiritual opposers; and so have I
done with the first Argument. A second, to evince this, is taken from that law
wherewith Christ Jesus, that Son of Righteousness, has more or less
enlightened the Nations, which I may therefore call the law of Nations, being
that law by which the Lord will Judge those which may otherwise be said to be
without law: the Law is this, Do, as thou would be done unto, which is also
(as Christ speaks) the Law and the Prophets. The argument stands thus.

2. Arg. If every servant of Christ Jesus have a commandment from his Lord, as
he will answer it before him when he shall appear as Judge, to do to others, as
he would have others to do unto him; then no servant of his can have either
liberty or authority from him thus to force another man's conscience, or his
outward man meely for conscience sake.

But every servant of Christ has this command from his Lord, viz. Do to others
as ye would that others should do unto you. Therefore, etc.

The second proposition is undeniable. See 7. Mat. 12. Luke 6. 31. The
consequence of the first proposition can scarce be denied, but if any should
rashly deny it, then I appeal to that man's conscience, not being seared, which
also knows but in part, in the fight and presence of God, whether he can be
willing that another who is further informed in the things of God, and is also
stronger than he (whether he can be willing, I say, that he) should by such a
force constrain or restrain his conscience, although in smaller differences,
but how much less in things that do so vastly differ.

3 Arg. The third argument stands thus.

If Christ Jesus the Lord instructed his servants to be meek, lowly, and
gentle, yea, kind and courteous to all; sent forth the chiefest of them, and
told them that they should be as lambs in the midst of wolves; yea, holds them
and us, and all that shall reign with Christ, when he shall appear with his
Kingdom, in a continual expectation of a persecuted and afflicted condition
in this present evil world, then it cannot be expected that they should have
any such liberty, much less authority, from him thus to persecute, prosecute,
or enforce others.

But the first is true. See Mat. 11. 29. 1 Cor. 13. 4. Ephesians. 4. 34. 1 Pet. 3. 8.
Mat. 10. Tim. 2. 3. 12. All that will live Godly in Christ Jesus (says Paul,
who well discerned the spirit that was abroad, and that which should remain and
increase in the world) shall suffer persecution, and, theservant is not greater
than his Lord, says Christ, Mat. 10. 24, 25 So that by this it appears, that
the first is true, and therefore the second which is this, That no servant of
Christ can expect any such liberty or authority from his Lord thus to
persecute, prosecute, or enforce others.

A Fourth argument against forcing men against their consciences' in the
things, and worship of God, is taken from the nature of the conscience of man,
and of the worship of God, which are both spiritual; and it stands thus.

4. Arg. That which the Lord has reserved in his own hand, and has intended
to manage as part of his own Kingdom by his own power or Spirit, and by
another manner of ministry, and sword, than that which is put forth in the
Kingdoms of men, his being such as fuits with the understanding and conscience
of man, as it is a spiritual thing, and with the worship of God, which is also
spiritual, that, I say, can no servant of Christ have authority from him, by an
other sword, or arm of flesh, to undertake, manage, or think to effect.

But the Lord has reserved this great work of ordering the understanding, and
conscience, which is the spirit of man, by way of constraint, or restraint; and
also the outward man, with respect to the worship of God, I say, he has
reserved this great work, in his own hand, and in the hand of the Spirit, and
has intended to manage it as a part of his Kingdom, by his own Spirit, and
by another manner of ministry, than that which is put forth in the Kingdoms of
men. Therefore, etc.

The first proposition, I judge, cannot be denied, because if it be by him
reserved in his own hand and power, then by his authority it cannot be in the
hand of another; and if intended by him to be managed by another manner of
ministry and sword, than that which is put forth in the Kingdoms of men, then
not by the same.

And as for the second, it will appear to be a truth by these following
testimonies.

1. That the great work of ordering the understanding and conscience, which is
the spirit of a man, by way of constraint or restraint; and also the outward
man, with respect to the worship of God, is reserved (as a part of his
Kingdom, the spirits of men being the throne of the Lord) in his own hand, and
in the hand of the Spirit, does appear Luke 17. 26. Romans 11. 32. Isa. 45. 22.
Zach. 4. 6. Prove. 2. 6. Iam. 1. 5. 10. 1. 9. Luke 24 45. 2 Cor. 4. 6. Ephesians. 1.
18, 19. Act. 2. 47. 11. 21. And

2. That he has intended to manage it by another manner of sword, or
ministry, than that which is put forth in the Kingdoms of men, is also
evident, in that he did neirher speak to, nor yet make use of the Kings of the
earth to make him discipies, nor yet call for their sword to constrain them or
others to the worship of God, or to restrain them from their own, although it
was performed to dumb Idols, and so unto devils; but made use of the sword of
the Spirit, which is his own word, and the ministry of his Apostles, and
servants, to hold it forth to the world, and tl ereby were disciples made unto
him, and so by him brought from their own to the worship and service of God.
See lo. 16. 8, 9, 10, 11* 26. Acts 15 16* 18. 1 The. 1. 8, 9. chapter 2. 13. Heb 4
12.

The fifth Argnment against forcing men's consciences, or rather the outward man
for conscience sake in the worship of God, stands thus.

5. Arg. That which presuppose^h one man to have dominion over another man's
conscience, and is but a forcing of Servants, and worshippers upon the Lord, at
the least, which he seeks not for, and is the ready way to make men dissemblers
and hypocrites before God and man, which wisemen abhor, and to put men upon the
profaning the name of the Lord, that can no servant of Christ Jesus have any
liberty, much less authority, from his Lord to do.

But by outward force to seek to constrain, or restrain an others conscience in
the worship of God, etc. does presuppose one man to have dominion over another
man's conscience, and is but to force servants, and worshippers upon the Lord,
which he seeks not for, and is the ready way to make men dissemblers and
hypocrites, and to put them upon the profaning the name of the Lord. Therefore,
etc.

The first proposition is undeniable, because it is evident that it is not the
will of the Lord that any one should have dominion over another. man's
conscience; no not such as had the largest power and presence of the Spirit of
God, and the largest interest in the hearts of his people, as had the Apostles,
Elders, and Brethren: See 1 Cor. 8, 11, 12. 10. 29. 1 Pet. 5. 3. Phil. 3* 15. 2
Cor. 1 23, 24. and chap. 4. 5. for this indeed would be to enter upon the
throne of Christ* to sit in the Temple of God, and is the very highest design
of the spirit of Antichrist. See ^ Thessalonians. 2. 4. 1 Cor. 3. 10. And for any man
to enter upon the throne of Christ to set a foot into the Temple of God, is to
defile it, and he that defiles the Temple of God, (says the Apostle) him shall
God destroy. And for a man to put servants and worshippers upon the Lord, when
he would not have others to put servants upon him, and make men dissemble, when
if he be a wise man, he cannot but hate dissembling, must needs be much more
abomination to the Lord, so that the first proposition (as I said) cannot be
denied.

The second will easily be proved in each particular thereof. As

1. This so cing of all to conform in the worship of God, does presuppose one
man ^o have dominion or Lordship over another man's conscience, for who knows
not that the worship of God is a case of conscience, and that that worship and
service that is pleasing to him, must have the spirit and conscience the chief
in it? and therefore, that man which by outward force would cause others to
conform in point of worship, must pre-suppose to have power over his spirit and
conscience, to cause it to conform likewise, or else he cannot attain unto his
Religious intent.

2. This is but a forcing of servants and worshipers upon the Lord, and I say
at the best, for it is more likely to force worshipers from him; And this will
clearly appear, because the true worshipers, and such as the fathe* seeks for,
are such as worship him in Spirit, and in Truth: See John 4. 23, 24. who having
received from Christ the Spirit of life and love, have his word stand in their
heart, as the word of a King, so that thereby they become a willing people to
do him service, and stand not in need of such outward force to compel them
thereto; they therefore that stand in need to be, and therefore are by outward
force compelled to the worship of God, to the faith and order of the gospel of
Christ (they I say) are such servants, and worshipers, as are forced upon the
Lord, whom he seeks not for.

This outward forcing men in the worship of God, is the ready way to make men
dissemblers and hypocrites before God, and men which wise men abhor; the truth
of this will be thus demonstrated; for if they be spiritual, true, and willing
worshipers, such as the Father seeks for, then what need is there of a
constraint or restraint? such are a law of life to themselves; but if they be
not, then what make they there before him, who calls for the heart, and wishes
men to look to their spirits, for he is a Spirit, and will be sanctified of all
those that draw near unto him? See Prove. 23. 26. Mal. 2. 15* Rev. 10. 3, 4.
Then as they are forced upon the Lord against his will, and without any warrant
from him, so are they also against their own, and therefore although their
bodies may be present, and through fear of the stroke, or hope of reward, may
seem to conform, yet their hearts and minds not being changed (and the strong
holds thereof not being beaten down, as by such carnal weapons they are never
likely to be) they I say, are absent, and far from the Lord; so then, while
their hearts, and confciences, still cleave to their Idols, and yet their
bodies are caused to conform, what is this but to make men dissemblers and
hypocrites before God and man? and that it is the way to put men upon the
profaning the name of the Lord, is also evident; understand by name his
attributes, word, ordinances, worship, they are all profaned by such a person
that stands in need to be forced to Religion. See Hag. 2. 13, for him to call
upon the name of the Lord, is to profane the name of the Lord, for their
prayers are abomination to him, Genesis 4. 26. Prove. 28. 9. Isay 1. 13. And a
calling the name of God or Christ upon such, is counted by him a blaspheming
his name. See Rev. 2. 9. 13. 1. 5, 6. and unto the wicked says God, Psalm. 50.
16. What have thou to do to declare my statutes, or to take my CoVenant in thy
mouth, Seeing thou hate instruction, and castest my words behind thee? By all
which it does evidently appear, that the second proposition does also stand
firm.

A sixth argument against the forcing of men against their understandings and
consciences, is taken from the prohibition of Christ, and stands thus.

6. Arg. If Christ Jesus the Lord has expressly forbidden his servants by such
a force to seek to constrain or restrain another man's conscience, or his
outward man against his understanding and conscience, in things appertaining to
God, although his understanding and conscience be clearly discerned to be
erroneous and evil, then can no servant of Christ Jesus have any liberty, much
less authority, from him so to practice; This cannot be denied.

But Christ Jesus the Lord has expressly forbidden his servants so to practice,
and for the proof hereof, take two or three instances, Mat. 15. 14. where
Christ speaking to his disciples, touching the Pharisees, who were blind
guides, seducers, hypocrites, strong opposers of Christ, yet seemingly full of
zeal and devotion, and such as brought a vanity upon the worship of God, and
made his commandments of none effect by their traditions, as appears, V. 3, 4,
5, 6, 7, 8, 9. of the same chapter, yet V 14. says Christ to his disciples,
let them alone, they are blind, leaders of the blind, and so leaves them to
that sad event, which is, their falling into the ditch, or perishing together.
See the parable of the wheat and the tares, Mat. 13. 24. interpreted by Christ
himself, V. 37, 38. And he that sows the good seed (says Christ) is the Son
os m^n, The field is the world, the good seed are the children of the Kingdom
(which being sown by the son of man, must needs be meant faithful land
sincere-hearted professors of the truth of the gospel:) But the tares (says
he) are the children of the wicked one, and the enemy that sows them is the
Devil, which being the children of the wicked one, and sown by the devil
after the children of the Kingdom, must needs be meant such as crept in
unawars, and were sent in as Paul* speaks, See Gal. 2. 4. to spy out the
Saints liberties, that they might bring them into bondage, and so were formal
Professors of Christ at the first, but afterward discovered to be Heretics,
Schismatics, Apostats, Blasphemers, such as was Hymi^^us, Phyle us, Alexander,
Demas, and such false teachers as Peter speaks of, 2 Pet. 2. 12. That should
bring in damnable heresies, eVen denying the Lord that bought them, and bring
upon themselves swift destruction, whose pernicious ways many should follow;
by reason of whom the way of truth should be evil spoken of: but to go on, the
harVest, says Christ, is the end of the world, and the reapers are no other
than the angels; Now the question (for our instruction in righteousness) being
made by the servants unto their Lord, when the tares were discovered, whether
it was his will that they should go and gather them up, and take them out of
the field, his first answer, V. 29. is nay, and the reason he renders, is this,
lest while ye gather up the tares, ye root up also the wheat with them; And the
next answer, V. 30. is an express word of command, that they should let both
grow together in the field, which is the world, and until the time of the
harvest, which is the end thereof, and then his purpose is to speak to the
reapers, which are not men but Angels, to gather them up, and bind them in
bundles to burn them. I shall produce but one instanee more to show that our
Lord Jesus forbids such a practice as this among his Disciples or servants, 2.
Tim. 2. 24, 25, 26. The serVant of the L Lord, says Paul, in the word of the
Lord, must not strive, but be gentle unto all men, apt to teach, not to strike,
patient in meekness, instructing those that oppose themselVes; which word
signifies a setting a man's self in an opposition to the truth in a more than
an ordinary manner, even by way of covenant or resolution of spirit, yet are
they still to be waiting with meekness upon them, if God at any time will giVe
them repentance to the acknowledgement of the truth, that they may recoVer
themselVes out of the snares of the deVil, who are taken captiVe by him at his
will.

Another argument that there can be no warrant from Christ for such a practice
as this, is taken from such expressions of his, wherein he shows his dislike
thereof, and it stands thus.

7. Arg. If Christ Jesus the Lord have sharply reproved and checked his
servants when he has espied such a spirit as this but breaking forth in them,
then can no servant of his have any countenance, much less authority from him
so to practice.

But the first is true, he has sharply reproved them when he espied such a
spirit as this but breaking forth, witness his words Luke 22. 24 25. etc. Joh.
18. 10, 11. Mat. 26. 51, 52, 53. 54. and Luke 9. 46, 47. and 49, 50. and 52,
53, 54. 55 56. where it is said, when the Samaritans perceived that Christ's
face was toward Jerusalem, they did so envy him for Ierusalems sake, which was
the place of Gods worship, that they would not receive him nor afford unto him
such common courtesy as belonged unto strangers; for which discurteous repulse
of their Lord and master, James and John in a preposterous zeal judged, that
they deserved to die, and thereupon moved the question to Christ in these words,
verse 55. Wilt*thou that we command fire to come down from heaven and consume
them? but what is the answer of Christ? it is said, he turned, and rebuked
them, saying, ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of, They were scarce
awar that they were hereunto moved by no other spirit than the spirit of
Antichrist, for says he, The Son of man is not come to destroy men's lives, but
to save them, and if he came into this world to save men's lives, and not to
destroy them, and will have his Servants to learn of him meekness, and mercy,
and to be as he was in this present evil world, I say, if he came to save men's
lives, even the rebellious, then no servant of his can have any authority from
him for such cases as these to destroy them.

The last Argument stands thus.

8. Arg. That which of it self is inconsistent with the civil peace, liberty,
prosperity, and safety of a Place, Commonwealth, or nation, no servant of
Christ Jesus can have liberty, much less authority from his Lord to do

But this outward forcing of men in matters of conscience toward God to
believe as others believe, and to practice and* worship as others do, cannot
stand with the Peace, Liberty, Prosperity, and safety of a Place, Commonwealth,
or nation. Therefore no servant of Christ can have any liberty, much less
authority so to do.

The first proposition can scarce be denied if these things be considered, sci.
That Christ Jesus the Lord is the Prince of Peace, Isa. 9 6 Heb* 7. 2. and the
more a man is made partaker of, and led by the Spirit of the Lord, which is the
Spirit of Peace, the more peaceable and quiet is he like to be toward all men
with whom he has to do, for this Prince of Peace has given express command
unto all his Servants, who are the Children of Peace (in whose hearts his word
stands, with power, as the word of a King) to be at peace among themselves, 1
These. 5 13. To live in peace, 2 Cor. 13. 11. To follow peace with all men, Heb*
12. 14. To seek peace and ensue it, 1 Pet. 3. 11. To follow after those things
that make for peace, Romans 14. 19. If it be possible as much as in them lies to
have peace with all men, Romans 12. 16. Yea not to seek their own, but every man
another wealth, 1 Cor. 10. 24. To seek the peace of the place, where God has
bounded his habitation, yea, and to pray unto God for it, and for the rulers
thereof, Jer. 29. 7. 1 Timothy 2. 2. By all which it does evidently appear, that
that which of it ^elf cannot stand with the peace and prosperity of a place,
and nation, that can no servant of Christ have by the authority of this Lord,
unless by a just judgment from him upon the rulers of this world for giving
their power, and sword, to the beast, thus to be abused and made drunk with the
blood of the Saints, which his tender heart cannot but avenge upon themselves,
and upon the Nations for their loving to have it so.

And as for the second Proposition, which is this, that this outward forcing of
men in matters of conscience toward God to believe as others believe, and to
practice and worship, not as themselves (but as others) are persuaded, cannot
stand with the peace, liberty, prosperity, and safety of a Place, Nation, and
Commonwealth; this will as plainly appear in the examination of each particular
thereof.

And first, it cannot stand with the peace of a Commonwealth; for as there
could be no peace expected in the Israel of old, so long as that harlot Jezabel
(who thirsted after innocent blood) could at her pleasure obtain the seal and
power of the King, to effect her bloody design upon the servants of the Lord,
who withstood her Idolatrous Priests, and that Idolatrous way and worship which
they had set up, so likewise as long as that spiritual Jezabell among those
that account themselves the Israel of God, (who is seen in Rev. 17. 3. to ride
upon that scarlet-colored beast, and to own her self as the City and spouse of
that great King, the King of Saints, so long I say as she) can by her glorious
deckings and splendours, so deceive and allure the Kings and Rulers of the
earth, to commit fornication with her, and to give their sword and power to the
beast that bears her up, there can be no expectation of peace in the earth, but
still of wars, and rumors of wars, until men's hearts fail them: for so long
as there is an outward force or power to be had to maintain and uphold the
carnal interests and advantages of some upon religious accounts, and to
persecute others, who for conscience sake toward God, dare not, yea cannot
conform to their way, What hopes are hereby begotten and nourished in some?
what jealousies, suspicions and fears in others? what revengfull desires in
most? yea, what plottings and contrivings in all? and as a fruit and effect
hereof, what riding? running? troublesome, and tumultuous assemblings together,
and ^idings? yea, and outrageous murderings and bloodshedings are hereby
produced in a Nation, to gain that power and sword to their party, either to
crush, suppress, or cause the other to conform, or at the least and best to
save themselves from being crushed, suppressed, or forced to conformity? But
were this snare of the destroyer and murderer once discovered and broken, which
is under a specious and religious pretense of doing God good service, to
oppress and slay his innocent servants and children, and to force men to that
which their minds and consciences are not persuaded unto, which is worse than
Idolatry* or at least would it please the most high to help the Kings and
Rulers of the earth, to take King David's counsel, Psalm. 2. which is, to kiss
the son lest be ang^y, and in his anger smite th^^ glorious Image, (which
Nabuchadnezzer saw in his dream) Dan. 2. 31, 32, 33, 34. upon his feet, that
were part of iron, and part of clay, and so break them to pieces, that the
iron, the clay, the brass, the silver and the gold be broken to pieces
together, become as chaff, and so vanish away, that there should no place be
found for them; And would it please the most high to put it into their hearts,
to manage that power and sword of steel which he has put into their hands (and
takes out again at his good pleasure) so that it might only attend the very
thing for which it is bestowed upon them, which is to do justly, and to show
mercy, as those that walk (in such eminent places) humbly before the Lord,
which are things more pleasing to him, than such burnt offerings and
sacrifices, although they amounted to thousands of rams, or ten thousands of
rivers of oil*, especially being such as he has not required at their hands;
how soon would the earth which now is moved exceedingly* reels to and fro like
a drunkard, and is removed like a cot^^^^* ^^ome a quiet and peaceable
habitation? for if there were neither fear on one hand, nor hope on the other,
that this sword should be drawn forth to maintain the carnal interests of
some, which they enjoy upon religious pretenses, and to suppress the
understandings and consciences of others, to the hazard of their proper and
lawful interests and outward enjoyments, and all men should see the Rulers as
resolute in this point as Galio was, so that men of all sects and religions,
which now are various, were become hopeless of any other help to support
themselves and their way, or to draw others thereto, than what by the word of
God they can attain unto, how soon would these tumults cease, the enmity in
point of Religion be sla^n, and all things in peace? and for my part I cannot
expect that the swords should be beaten into plowshares, and the spears into
pruning*hooks, that nation shall not rise against nation, neither shall they
learn war any more, which is a thing which the mouth of the Lord has spoken
of, until that be accomplished which should occasion it, which is exp^e^ by
the Prophet in these words. For all people will walk every one in the name of
his God, and we will walk in the name of the Lord our God for ever and ever.
Micha. 4. 3, 4, 5.

And as this forcing of men for their conscience sake, cannot stand with the
peace of a Nation or Commonwealth, so neither can it stand with the liberty
thereof, as those two instances Rev. 13. 10. and 15. 16, 17, together with
daily experience, do lively demonstrate, in which Scriptures it is plain to be
seen, that whilst the Beast reigns, through the power of the Kings of the
Eath, all are restrained of their liberty, and brought to* conformity, they
cannot buy nor sell, unless they conform to the Beast, no not the great ones.
Kings and Rulers themselves, they shall rather cease to be Kings than cease to
conform, when once they have given their power to him, for then they have not
been able to stand before him, as Emperors, Kings, Princes and Governors have
by woeful experience (through a sad hand of God) found to be true. And as by
the righteous judgment of God, they that have upon this account killed with
the sword, must have a time also to be killed with the sword; so they that have
led into captivity, must also be led into captivity: so that by this it
appears, it cannot stand with the liberty of a place and Nation.

And that it cannot stand with the prosperity and safety thereof will appear
from a twofold consideration, the first whereof is with respect to piety, the
second to policy.

That which is taken from piety is this, If the matter be duly considered and
weighd, it cannot be expected but that this outward constraint or restraint of
men in matters of conscience, and for the worship of God (in this present evil
world, and by the powers therein) much chiefly reflect, and light upon such as
being called out of the world, can neither conform to worldly vanities, nor
worldly worships, but to the pure voice and word of God, and to the testimony
of Christ Jesus the Lord, which if true, as indeed it cannot be denied, then it
will easily appear to be both unsafe and unprosperous for a state or nation to
be found meddling herein, for as much as the Lord of hosts has said, he that
touches you, touches the aple of mine eye, Zach. 2. 8. and again, Touch not
mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm, 1 Chronicles. 16. 22. and King David had
well observed concerning the Israel of old, that the Lord suffered no man to do
them wrong, but even reproved Kings for their sakes, Psalm. 105. 14. And if the
Lord of hosts who is full of bowels of compassion, be so taken with the
oppression of the poor, and sighing of the needy, that ^e will not long
forbear, but will arise, relieve him, and set (...) safety from him that
pusseth at him, or would ensnare him, Psalm. 12. 5. shall he not much rather
avenge his own elect, which give him no r^^t, but c^y night and day unto him?
Luk: 18. 7. yea, I tell you (says Christ) he will a venge them speedily. And
now how unsafe and unprosperous it is for a Kingdom, or State, to ly thus open
to the vengeance of God, which if it breaks forth is like to overturn,
overturn, overturn it as the prophet speaks, Ezekiel. 21. 25, 26, 27. will not be
a hard thing to discern.

Again it cannot well stand with the prosperity and safety of a State, or
Nation, upon a politic ground or consideration. For it best suits with policy
(be the power in the hands of Kings and Princes, but especially of States and
Commonwealths) 1. To engage (not only one party or sect alone, but) all parties
therein to the present power, and to the supporting thereof. 2. To do this (not
by giving away any part of the power to any party or sect to oppress or enforce
others to their way for their carnal and private respects, for that (as has
been shown) is the way to lose it themselves, except they conform, yea to be
brought to conformity, but to afford its protection equal to all without
respect unto any, at least in this, (...) keeping them thereby safe, under God,
in respect of their persons, names, and estates; 3 And to engage them all upon
the strongest engagements, which are not carnal outward advantage (they being
of tentimes so far from advancing the same, that they prove notable means to
make the obstruction) but this, wherein one man may be as well assured that he
shall not be forced to another man understanding and conscience, as that
another shall not be forced unto his. Which indeed is an engagement that is
stronger than death, the voice of each man^ conscience being to him as the
voice of his God; by this means shall all parties be deeply obliged to the
utmost of their lives and estates, to bea^ up that power, without which they
cannot expect to enjoy peace, liberry, and safety themselves, so shall the
rulers also have somewhat more vacancy to consider what it is that the Lord of
hosts does require at their hands, which is to do justly, to love mercy, and to
walk humbly before the Lord, Mic 6 7. 8. And whereas it is added (every man
being such etc.) which is to show that whether such liberty as this should be
granted or (...) in this present world, yet it concerns, and also well becomes
the servants of C^^^^t not to alter their course, but to be still found keeping
the commandments God and the testimony of Jesus, and to beating in mind what is
said, Rev.12.11. And they overcame him by the blo^d of the Lamb, and by the
word of their testimony, and they loved not their lives unto the death;
h^^kning also for his voice, who says Rev. last 20. Surely I come quickly,
with the like closing therewith as there is expressed. Amen, Even so come Lord
Jesus.

FINIS.

