THE SUM OF A CONFERENCE On Feb. 21. 1686.

BETWEEN Dr. Clagett, and Father Gooden, About the Point of TRANSVBSTANTIATION.

LONDON: Printed for William Rogers, at the Sun over against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleetstreet. MDCLXXXIX.

ERRATA.
PAge vi. l. 4. for me r. us. ib. l. 6. for me r. us. p. viii l. 4. r. a
greater thing than the Representers answering, etc. p. 2. after l. 13. add, Now
against This, I thus argue, p. 2. l. 14. add in the beginning Dr.

The SUM of a CONFERENCE On Feb. 21. 1686. BETWEEN Dr. Clagett, and Father
Gooden, About the POINT of TRANSUBSTANTIATION.
Introduction.
IT will perhaps appear to some a little strange, that I do not say almost
Incredible, that there should have passed a Conference above two years since,
in which Mr. Gooden was concerned, and the World yet to learn the Substance of
it. The Vanity of that Gentleman to thrust himself upon all Occasions into
Disputes with the most Learned Men of our Church first, and then to boast of
his own Performances in them, was so great, that there is scarce a Coffee-house
in the Town that has not been filled with the Noise of his Impertinent Vapors.
And if those of the Other Communion have been always remarkable for an
Assurance becoming the pretended Infallibility of their Church; I may venture
to say, that next to Father P -- the Jesuit, and his friend Mr. M --, I scarce
know any among them that have ever talked so loud, or made such Heroical
Defiances of the Champions and Armies of our Israel, in all Places, and upon
all Occasions, as Mr. Gooden these late Years has done am ng us. But thus
shallow Waters always run with the Greatest Noise and Violence; and little
Sophisters, who either want Capacity to see into their own Fallacies, or think
they have forehead enough to c^rry that off with Clamor and Confidence which
they cannot do by Reason and Argument, delight to expose themselves and their
Religi n to the most dangerous Trials; whilst Men of Learning and Judgment are
modest and ingenuous, and know it to be neither for the Honor of their Church,
nor their own Reputation, to challenge all Mankind to answer Paradoxes, and to
show that not to be Demonstration, which when brought to the Trial is hardly
sense. See Mr. G's. Pap.


I hope will this not be thought too severe a Reflection on the late Pretenders
of this kind among us, which I speak out of a just respect to the more Learned
and Charitable Persons of the Church of Rome; who have been no less Scandalized
at these f^rward Zealots, than our selves; and to whom I ought to give this
Testimony, That during a long acquaintance with many of them, I never met with
any thing of the Vanity of those I have before mentioned. Our Differences in
matters of Religion, made no Disturbance either in our Friendship or
Conversation with One Another. If the discourse at any time led to a
Controversy of Faith, we argued it upon the same Principles, and with the s^^e
Calmness, that we did any other Subject whatsoever; by Arguments drawn from the
Authority of the Holy Scriptures, or from the Testim^n^es of the Ancient
Fathers, as the Nature of the thing required us to do. I^ these did not
Convince, they never flew off to the Common Place Topic's of the Authority and
Infallibility of the Church; much less to that Exploded refuge of Oral
Tradition; but the Controversy Ended. And when all was done, they were content
to h^pe well of those of our Church, who being sincere in their Enquiries, and
willing to be led by Truth wherever it was, still continued to differ from
them. Instead of calling Me a Heretic or Schismatic, or Thundering out
Damnation against Me as such, a mutual Charity concluded the discourse. We
hoped and prayed for the Conviction of the Erring Party, which ever it was; but
made no question, but that the same Heaven might receive us All, tho we should
continue to disagree to the last.

But this was not the Temper of Mr. Gooden, and the rest of the little Herd of
that Church, who gave so much Trouble and Disturbance to their own and the
Nations repose; and have contributed what in them lies by their Heat and Folly,
to ruin both themselves and u^.

As for the Occasion of the present Conference, it was this. A Gentlewoman of a
Good Estate, and intimately acquainted with diverse R. Cs. was by a frequent
Conversation with them, wrought up by degrees into an Extraordinary Opinion of
the advantages of a Recluse Life, for the better performing the Exercises of
Religion; Ins^much that the desire she began to have for such a sort of
retirement, made her almost willing to leave our Church, and go over to the
Roman Communion; but that she still looked upon their Doctrine, in those points
wherein they differ from us, to be False, and Dangerous, and to one so
persuaded as she was, Destructive of Salvation.

Being thus prepared for their Seduction; they let slip no Opportunity to
finish their work, and gain their Proselyte. For which purpose, care was taken,
first by one of Her Acquaintance, to represent to Her all the Popular Pretenses
of that Church, by which many are Prejudiced in Favor of it; and the
Advantages it Had, in point of Antiquity, Unity, Universality, Infallibility,
and what not, beyond Ours; and then, in the next place, to get Father Gooden
brought to Her, as one that would give Her a fuller satisfaction in all these
matters, if she would but afford him the Opportunity of Discoursing with Her.
And to the End his Arguments might make the deeper Impression upon Her, it was
thought fit to set forth the Priest to Her; not in the Glorious Idea of the
Great Master of Demonstration, one who had devoured all Mr. I. Ss. Principles,
and was thereby become such a Mighty Man of Controversy, that none of our
Divines durst Cope with him; He in whose hands the Dean of Paul's himself was
nothing, who had a certain Paper that in a few lines baffled all that could be
said or written in favor of the Reformation, (which was a greater thing,
answering in a few sheets all the Books and Sermons that had ever been
published or preached against them); But in the humble Character of a Country
Priest, a little, inconsiderable man amongst them; and his Dress was
accommodated to his Character, that so under this disguise he might talk with
the greater Advantage to her.

But Mr. Gooden forgetting the person he had put on, presently fell into his
usual strain. He began to talk of nothing but Infallibility, Antiquity,
Demonstration: That all the Fathers and Councils were on their side: That he
had baffled our most considerable Divines, and particularly the Dean of Paul's;
who had in truth all of them so little to say for themselves when he came
amongst them, that he desired nothing more to convince her of the Truth of
their Doctrines, than that she would pitch upon some Point, and bring one of
our Men to meet him, and she should see what work he would make with him.

Such a noise as this from one of the little, inconsiderable Priests of the
Church of Rome, amazed the poor Lady: and had he Prudently contented himself
with the Boast of the Victories he had already gained, without aspiring after
the Honor of adding one more for the increasing his Triumph, he might possibly
have saved himself from the shame of that discovery the following Conference
made of his Abilities, and have gained his Proselyte. But as great Wits are too
often a little inconsiderate; and, before they are aware, run themselves into
difficulties, out of which they cannot tell afterward how to extricate
themselves; so it fell out with Mr. Gooden on this Occasion. For the Lady
presently took hold on his Offer, and applied her self to Dr. Clagett; and the
Time, and Place, and Subject being fixed, Mr. Gooden and the Doctor met
accordingly at Gray's Inn, Feb. 21. 1686.

I shall say nothing of the Menage of the Conference its self, but that it was
with much Noise on Mr. Gooden's side; who in Discourse let fall some very
extraordinary things, and which might have passed into the Abstract too, had
not another Person who was with him, and seemed much more modest and
understanding than himself, observed what passed, and corrected his Blunders.

After the Dispute was ended, which lasted about Four or Five Hours, a new
Discourse arose about the Paper which Mr. Gooden made such Boasts of about the
Town, and had so often represented to the Lady and others, as unanswerable. He
was very unwilling a great while to let the Doctor have a Copy of it, tho he
promised to give him an Answer to it; till at last it was declared, That if he
refused to let him have it, the Company would look upon it as an idle Paper,
that had nothing in it, and that therefore he durst not trust him with it. Upon
this he gave him a Copy of it, and the Doctor in pursuance of his Promise, the
next day sent him the following Answer to it.

For what concerns the Sum of the Conference here Published, it was taken in
Writing, and signed by both Parties upon the place; so that there can be no
cause for any one to question the sincerity of it: And tho the Abstract be very
short, yet I am persuaded it is enough to satisfy every impartial Reader, why
Mr. Gooden did not care to make any boasts of it. And those who were present at
the Meeting, and heard all that passed between them, as well as the Lady for
whose sake they met, were very well satisfied that he would not force them to
publish the History of it.

But tho the Doctor was willing to let this matter die, and showed himself as
careful of Mr. Gooden's Reputation after the Conference, as he was of the
Ladies Conviction in it; yet being now by the Providence of God removed from
us, I thought it a just debt to his Memory, to subjoin here a true Copy of
these Papers, there being several of them abroad, both to prevent an imperfect
Edition from some other hand; and lest Mr. Gooden and his Friends, who were so
silent in his Lifetime, should take occasion to raise any false Reports of
this Encounter, if they thought they could not be disproved now he is dead. And
if the great Esteem I had for that Excellent Person, and most useful Instrument
of God's Service, in our late dangerous and critical Times, does not render me
a very incompetent judge of whatever comes from his hand, the Reader will find
even in these short Notes, enough to reward his Pains, and to keep him from
thinking the time lost that he shall please to spend in the perusal of them.

A Private Conference BETWEEN Dr. Clagett, and Father Gooden, ABOUT
Transubstantiation, etc.
FAther Gooden Proposed the Rule of Faith, to be the Subject of the Conference;
but upon the Request of the Lady, for whose sake it was, the Question of
Transubstantiation was taken.

And the Father desiring that the Doctor would be the Opponent, the Question
was Stated on both Sides.

Dr. That the Doctrine of Transubstantiation is false Doctrine; and, That the
Natural Body of Christ is not in the Sacrament, but in Heaven.


Fa. That after the Words of Consecration. the true Body and Blood of Christ
are in the Holy Eucharist, and that the manner is well expressed by
Transubstantiation.


Dr. This is not all the Doctrine of Transubstantion in the Church of Rome, the
Doctrine of the Church of Rome is this, That the Substance of the Bread is
changed into the Substance of Christ's Body: and the Substance of the Wine is
changed into the Substance of Christ's Blood; which Change the Church of Rome
does conveniently call Transubstantiation.

If the Substance of Bread remains in the Eucharist, then it is not changed
into the Substance of Christ's Body; But the Substance of Bread remains in the
Eucharist: Therefore the Substance of Bread is not changed into the Substance
of Christ's Body.



Fath. I deny the Minor (viz) that the substance of Bread does remain.


Dr. If Bread remains, the substance of bread remains. But Bread remains.
Therefore the substance of bread remains.



Fath. If the Nature of Bread remains, Bread remains; but if only the Name of
Bread and Species remain, then Bread does not remain.


Dr. That Bread which is properly Natural Bread, remains in the Eucharist, is
proved from 1 Cor. 11.26. As often as ye eat this Bread and drink this Cup, ye
do show forth the Lord's death till he come. 1 Cor. 10.16. The Bread which we
break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? Now from hence we argue
thus:

If that which is here said to be Broken, and to be the Communion of the Body
of Christ, be properly natural Bread, then that which is properly natural
Bread, remains in the Eucharist.



Fath. I grant the Major.


Dr. But that which is here said to be broken, and to be the Communion of the
Body of Christ, is properly natural Bread, Ergo: Properly natural Bread remains
in the Eucharist.



Fath. I deny the Minor.


Dr. The Bread of which Saint Paul speaks, is Bread that may be broken, and
therefore it is truly and properly natural Bread.


Fath. I distinguish the Antecedent; as to the Accidents and Appearance of
Bread it may be broken; as to the Nature of Bread it cannot, because it is not
there.


Dr. This is to beg the Question; for the Question is, whether Bread be there
or not? and the Argument to prove that it is there, is, Because Saint Paul
speaks of Bread that might be, and was broken; but it is no sufficient Answer
to this, to say that the Accidents of Bread may be broken, because the Bread is
not there it self, which is the thing that was disproved.


Fath. The Question to be proved was, that the Nature of Bread was there;
therefore it is not a begging of the Question, according to the Distinction
given, to say that the Nature of Bread is not there, and consequently could not
be broken: For the Bread there spoken of, is not meant of Natural Bread, but of
Bread which came down from Heaven, and which is the flesh of Christ, John 6.41.
I am the bread which came down from Heaven. John 6.48. I am the bread of Life,
Ver. 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 58. From whence I infer my Answer to be good;
that though the H. Eucharist be called Bread, and broken as to the Species of
Bread; yet it is not natural Bread, but only in appearance, of which St. Paul
spoke; for the same St. Paul, 1 Cor. 11. speaking of the same bread, says, He
that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks Damnation to himself,
not discerning the body of our Lord. Christ also speaking of the same bread,
says, Take, eat, this is my Body, Matt. 26.26. Also Luke 22.19. speaking of
the same Eucharist, This is my Body which is given for you.


Dr. The Answerer forgetting the Part of a Disputant, has pretended to prove
largely by the sixth Chap. of St. John, and other places of Scripture, That St.
Paul in the aforementioned places, did not speak of Bread properly so called,
although he spoke of Bread that was to be broken. All which places, when it is
my turn to Answer, I will consider particularly.

But if that which is here said is to go for an Answer, the force of it lies in
this, That by the Bread which St. Paul spoke of, we are to understand the Bread
which St. John spoke of, namely, the bread which came down from Heaven; by
which the Answerer understands the Natural and ^roper flesh of Christ.

But that the Bread which St. Paul ^peaks of cannot be the natural flesh of
Christ, I prove thus; The Bread which St. Paul speaks of, was broken. But the
Natural Body of Christ cannot be broken. Ergo. The Bread which St. Paul speaks
of cannot be the Natural body of Christ.



Fath. As to the Species and Appearance of Bread, it was broken, I grant it; as
to any Nature contained under those Species of Bread, I deny it.


Dr. This Distinction does not avoid the Argument, because if the Bread in St.
Paul and the Bread in St. John are really and properly the same, and the Bread
in St. John be really and properly the flesh of Christ, then what is affirmed
of the one, must be true of the other, and therefore if the Bread be broken in
St. Paul, then the Natural body of Christ must be broken too; which cannot be.

I add further, That if by breaking of Bread St. Paul means breaking the
Accidents of Bread only; and if the Bread that is broken be really that which
is spoken of in St. John as aforesaid; it follows also that the Accidents of
Bread are properly the body of Christ.


Fath. That which St. Paul calls Bread, had in it both the Accidents of Bread
and the substance of Christ's body. As to the Accidents of Bread, it might be
broken; as to the substance of Christ's body which is mentioned in St. John, it
is not broken, unless you mean as Christ's Body was broken upon the Cross.

And if the bread which is broken be really that which is spoken of in St. John
as aforesaid, both as to the Accidents and nature of Bread, I grant, that the
Accidents of Bread would be the Body of Christ; and if it be not the same, both
as to the Nature and Accidents, I deny it.

This I profess not to understand.


Fath. As to the Doctor's Argument it includes a Sophism, as will appear when
brought into form, because it involves 4 Terms; because he supposes in one
Proposition for the Accidents of Bread and in the other for the Nature.


Dr. In the Argument I used, I went upon this Supposition, That the Accidents
of Bread were only to be understood, as the Answerer supposes, and therefore I
have not confounded the Nature and the Accidents of Bread together. Besides,
the Distinction between the Nature of Bread and the Accidents of Bread, was not
to be remembered any more by the Answerer, because I proceed upon his
Supposition, That the Accidents only are broken.

Now if St. Paul speaks of nothing but what is broken, and Accidents only are
broken, and yet if he speaks of the very flesh of Christ too, then the
Accidents of the Bread are the very flesh of Christ.

And whereas the Answerer by his last Answer, means the Nature of Christ's
Body, as he says, I understood him of the Nature of Bread. And now once more I
desire him to show me where the four Terms are.


Fath. The Text of St. Paul, the Dr. takes for his Medium, and argues from a
double Supposition, as first, taking it for the Accidents of Bread which were
broken, and afterward for the substance of Christ's Body under the Accidents,
in which latter sense it signifies the same that is meant by our Savior in St.
John.


Dr. I observe the Answerer will allow nothing to be broken but Accidents; I
observe also, that nothing is said to be the Body of Christ, or the Communion
of the Body of Christ, but what is broken; If therefore nothing is broken but
Accidents, then Accidents are either, according to the Answerer's long proof,
the very Body of Christ; or according to the Apostle, the Communion of the Body
of Christ.

But neither are the Accidents of Bread, the Body of Christ, nor the Communion
of the Body of Christ. And this, I say, is not answered, and believe will not
be answered by any man that maintains, that St. Paul does not here speak
properly of Bread.


Fath. All along in my Discourse I have supposed, that when St. Paul speaks of
this bread, he spoke of the H. Eucharist, in which were contained both the
Accidents of Bread, and the true body of Christ. How the Dr. has disproved this
Doctrine so clearly as to justify the Reformation, I understand not; Because,
I conceive no private Persons, or particular Church, ought to pretend a
Reformation, without clear evidence; whether the Dr. has given such, I leave to
the consideration of the Readers. And whether, having broken off from the great
body of the Universal Church, and its testimony, he can possibly have any
certain Rule to arrive at Christian Faith? If Scripture be pretended,
interpreted by a fallible Authority, how Certainty can be obtained, or why a
Socinian, following Scripture for his Rule of Faith, is not to be believed as
well as any other Reformer following the same Rule, I see not.


Signed W. Clagett. Peter Gooden.


Dr. CLAGETT's Answer TO A PAPER Delivered to Him by Father GOODEN.
The Paper
ARticles of Christian Faith are Truths; Truths are Impossible to be False;
Therefore Articles of Christian Faith are Impossible to be False; Therefore
those who obtain Articles of the Christian Faith, must have some Rule to
Acquire them by, which cannot deceive them: To a Parliamentary Protestant, the
Ancient Fathers cannot be such a Rule, because they are accounted Fallible; Nor
Councels, because they also are accounted Fallible; Nor Scriptures sensed by a
Fallible Authority, because all such Interpretations may be False; And
therefore Faith cannot be Obtained by any such means. For that which is
Doubtful can only Create Opinion, which is also Doubtful; And He that doubts
in Faith, (the Apostle says) is Infidelis; And a Company of Doubters are not a
Church of Faithful, but a Society of such as the Apostle calls Infidels.

Signed Peter Gooden.

The Answer.
Pap. Articles of Christian Faith are Truths.

Ans. The Design of the Disputer is to prove, that we are Doubters and
therefore Infidels; But never did any man begin a business more unluckily, for
at the very first dash he takes it for granted, that we do undoubtedly believe
Articles of Christian Faith to be Truths; for otherwise he ought to have proved
that they are so. But there is another Misfortune he is fallen into, no less than
that; for his Argument to prove that we must needs be Doubters, is, that we
want an Infallible Rule. Now if he is sure that we want an Infallible Rule, and
that without such a Rule there can be no Faith, I am sure he does notoriously
contradict himself, by supposing that we b^lieve all Articles of Christian
Faith to be Truths, though we have no such Rule. This is a very hopeful Paper,
and like to make wise Converts, which ends in making us Infidels, and begins to
prove it by an Argument, that manifestly supposes Us to be Believers; which
also pretends that we have no Infallible Rule, and therefore can be sure of no
Point of Faith; but yet manifestly supposes Us to be Assured of Some without
it; which shows the Paper to be a trifling Paper, and worth no more
Consideration. But because the Disputer is said to boast so much of the
Argument Contained in it, I will go on with every Clause of it to Convince him,
(if he does not already know it,) that there is not a Line in it, but is either
false, or nothing to the purpose.

Pap. Truths are Impossible to be False.

Ans. By Truths, the Disputer means, the Truth of Things, or of Propositions,
and therefore this is a vain and fulsome saying, which does not Advance his
Reasoning one jot farther than it was before: For this is no more than to say,
That which is true, is true, and it cannot possibly be, but truths must be
truths. I think he applies himself to us, as if we wanted not only Christian
Faith, but Common sense.

Pap. Therefore Articles of Christian Faith are Impossible to be False.

Ans. There is no doubt of this, supposing that they are Truths. So that the
Argument he begins with being put into the right order, and into other words,
is this; It is Impossible but truths must be truths, but Articles of Christian
Faith are Truths; Therefore it is Impossible but they must be Truths. The
Ancient Fathers had made wise work with Christianity, if they had gone this way
to work to Convert Infidels.

Pap. Therefore those who obtain the Articles of the Christian Faith, must have
some Rule to acquire them by, which cannot deceive them.

Ans. This is an obscure saying, and I must make the best of it. By obtaining
Articles of the Christian Faith, I suppose he means believing them, and by a
Rule by which to acquire them, He must understand a Rule, or means whereby to
know what the Articles of the Christian Faith are; and then his meaning is,
That those who believe the Articles of the Christian Faith, must be provided of
some such Rule or Means, to know what they are, as cannot deceive them. Now
whether this be in it self true or false, it does not at all follow from what
he had laid down before; For though the Truth of Things or Propositions is so
sure, that (as he wisely says) it is Impossible they should be false, yet it
does by no means follow, that the Reasons upon which I believe these things
must necessarily be as sure as the Truth of the Things themselves. And this I
make no doubt the Disputer was well aware of; But because I am sensible who
they are whom he designs to pervert by this Paper, and for whose sake I Answer
it, I will explain this matter by an Instance that will bring it down to all
Capacities: If there was such a man as Henry the 8th, It is certainly
Impossible that there should be no such man; but my Belief that there was such
a Man, is grounded upon such Reasons as do not imply an absolute Impossibility
of the Contrary, because it is grounded upon the Testimony of Fallible men: And
yet I should be very little better then a madman if I should entertain the
least doubt that there was such a man: which plainly shows, that I may have
sufficient Reason to believe a thing without any Evidence of the Impossibility
of the contrary; and this is enough to overthrow his Consequence. I shall now
inquire what truth there is in the Conclusion it self; To which end I observe,
That there are two things which may be understood by those words, cannot
deceive them, either first, that the Rule it self is so plain and certain, that
no man who uses it can be deceived by the Rule; or secondly, that it is
Impossible any man should be mistaken in the Use of it. If he means the former,
then I shall show him presently, that we have such a Rule as he speaks of, and
that he has said nothing to make us ashamed of it. If he means the latter,
then I say it is absolutely false, That those who without doubting believe the
Articles of the Christian Faith, must have such a Rule to know what they are,
as that they cannot possibly mistake in the Use of it. To make which plain to
every bodies understanding, I shall add another Instance easy to be Applied; If
a man skilful in Arithmetic has a great many Numbers before him, and desires
to know what Sum they make when they are put together; he has the Rule of
Addition to do it by, which Rule cannot deceive him. Now there are these two
things to be observed farther, which I think the Disputer himself will not
deny; first, that it is in the Nature of the thing Possible, that this man may
be mistaken every time that he puts these several Numbers together, to bring
them all into one Sum; but secondly, that notwithstanding this Possibility of
being mistaken, yet after he has tried it over and over again, he may be sure
without the least doubt that he has done his work right. Even so we may have a
Rule of Faith that cannot deceive us, and though it is not Absolutely
Impossible, that we should be mistaken in the use of it; yet we may for all
that be Assured, and believe without the least doubting, that we have learned
what the true Faith is by that Rule; For all the World knows, that it is no
sufficient Reason to Doubt of any thing, that the Contrary is barely Possible.

Pap. To a Parliamentary Protestant, the Ancient Fathers cannot be such a Rule,
because they are Accounted fallible.

Ans. We never said they were such a Rule. This therefore is Impertinent.

Pap. Nor Councels, because they also are accounted fallible.

Ans. This is Impertinent also: for we never said they were our Rule of Faith.
But we have better Reasons to give, why Fathers and Cou^^ils cannot be our Rule
of Faith, than this that the Disputer has made for us. And one is this, That we
cannot make them the Rule of our Faith, but by so doing, we must depart from
the Primitive Fathers, and the ancient Councils; in as much as all agree, That
the Holy Scriptures are the Rule of Faith, and they made it theirs.

Pap. Nor Scriptures senced by a fallible Authority, because all such
Interpretations may be false.

Ans. This is the Place, where I shall tell the Disputer, what we believe, and
why we believe it. And when I have done, I shall consider whether he has said
any thing in this clause, to shake our Assurance. We firmly believe all the
Articles of the Creed, into the Profession whereof, we have been Baptized. We
moreover believe all other Doctrine, that is Revealed in Holy Scriptures.

The Grounds of this our Faith, are these, That in the Holy Scriptures are
Recorded, those Testimonies of Divine Revelation, by which the Doctrines
therein contained, are confirmed. That these Testimonies were too notorious and
Public to be gainsaid; in so much that the Doctrine, built upon them, could
not be overthrown by the Powers of the world engaged against it. That the holy
Books were written by the Inspired Preachers of that Doctrine, which they
contain; And that for this we have the Testimony of Universal and
uncontrollable Tradition, which is a thing credible of it self. This is the Sum
of that External Evidence, upon which our Faith is grounded. In assigning of
which, I do by no means exclude that Internal Evidence, that arises from the
Excellent Goodness of the Doctrines themselves, which shows them to be worthy
of God.

Now whereas this Disputer says, That these Scriptures cannot be an Infallible
Rule to us, because they are sensed by a fallible Authority, that is, because
we, who are fallible, understand them as well as we can.

I answer, That no man needs to be Infallible, in order to the understanding of
plain Scripture. I who do not pretend to Infallibility, am yet certain, which
is enough for me, That I do find the Articles of the Creed in the Scriptures,
and many other Doctrines besides, which I do understand. I am sure that I know
what these words of St. John signify, 1 John 2.25. And Chap. 5.3.
This is the Promise that he has promised us, even eternal life. And, this is
the love of God, that we keep his Commandments; and the like. The Ancient
Fathers thought the Scriptures to be so plain, that they argued out of them,
without pretending to an Infallible Authority of Interpretation, as I will show
this Disputer when he pleases. If nothing less than Infallibility will serve to
understand, or as he says, to sense words, why does this Disputer put into my
hands, this Paper of his; which is none of the plainest neither? I am sure he
does not take me to be Infallible, and yet I am confident he would be angry, if
I should say his Paper was not to be understood without an Infallible
Interpreter; let him answer this if he can.

The Reason he gives, why Scripture sensed by a fallible Authority, cannot be
the Rule of Faith, is; because, all such Interpretations may be false, That is
to say, because, there is a bare Possibility of any fallible man's mistaking
the sense of plain Texts. Which kind of Reasoning makes impossible, that every
man should come to be a Believer, unless himself be first Infallible. And this
I shall Demonstrate so plainly, that no man who has any share of Understanding
and modesty shall be able to deny it.

There is no possible way, for any sort of Christians, to make known either the
Articles or Reasons of Faith, to those that are yet Ignorant of them, but by
words, or sentences, written or spoken. He who hears or reads the words and
Sentences, cannot tell either what is to believe, or why he should believe,
till he understands or (in the Disputers Phrase) till he Senses those words and
Sentences; but as yet his Authority is but fallible; and words sensed by a
Fallible Authority can never give a man certainty, either of the Rule, or of
the Reason of his Faith; If this Disputer be in the Right, therefore it is
impossible to make him a Believer, unless you can make him Infallible first,
that it may not be Possible for him, to be mistaken, in Sensing the words which
he hears or reads. And thus farewell to all Advantage that any man can have by
the Infallibility of Popes and Councils, or Oral Tradition, as well as by the
Scriptures; Nay, and to all Possible means of arriving to certainty in any
matter of Faith, unless every body be Infallible first; so that upon
supposition that God would have all men to be saved, and therefore to believe;
it inavoidably follows from the wild Reasoning of this man, that God has made
every Man Infallible. But if it be evident, that men are fallible Creatures,
then this Disputer has Advanced a Principle the most destructive to all
certainty of Faith, that ever was heard of in the world. But the comfort is,
that it is so very absurd that no body, well in his wits, can be misled by it.

Pap. And therefore Faith cannot be obtained by any such means.

Ans. Which is as much as to say, that Faith cannot be obtained, till a man
have the gift of Infallibility; And if every man has it before he can be taught
to any purpose, what need can there be of an Infallible Interpreter to teach
him? But, as I observed before; it is impossible to make Believers of those that
are not Infallible, unless the Disputer, or his Church, has a way to make known
the Doctrines and Reasons of Christian Faith, without words.

Pap. For that which is doubtful can only create opinion, which is also
doubtful.

Ans. Therefore since all words are doubtful to him that has but a fallible
Authority to sense them, as no man has more, before he believes; it is
impossible for the Disputers Church to create any thing more than opinion,
(which is also doubtful) in those whom she teaches, unless as I have already
said, she can make them Infallible first, and teach them afterward. And even
then there would be no need of teaching them at all, because they are now
Infallible themselves. Of all the Papers that ever I read, I never met with any
thing more absurd, and contradictious than the Reasoning of this; In which the
Disputer, out of a vehement desire to overthrow our Faith, and the Grounds of
it, has laid down Principles that do effectually overthrow all ways of making
men sure of any thing; and in particular, the use of those very methods by
which his own Church pretends to lead men to Faith.

Pap. And he that doubts in Faith (the Apostle says) is Infidelis, and a
company of Doubters are not a Church of Faithful, but a society of such as the
Apostle calls Infidels.

Ans. What Apostle says this? if the Disputer refers to Romans 14.23. as I think
he does, he has shown his skill in the Interpretation of Scripture, to be equal
to his mastery in Reasoning. If in the Infallible Church they can Interpret
Scripture no better than thus, give me the honesty and industry of a Fallible
Church, before it.

The Conclusion.
AND now after all, this Paper is as absurd in the design, as it is in the
management; for the business of it is to prove, That Protestants have no Faith,
but are Infidels; and that by this Argument they are and must be doubters: Now
whether I doubt, or do not doubt, is a Question concerning a matter of Fact
that I have more reason to know the truth of, than the Disputer can possibly
have; and if I know that I do not doubt, and he can yet prove that I do doubt,
he is an extraordinary man indeed. For then I am sure he can prove, That Truth
not only may be, but is false, which perhaps such a man as he can Reconcile
with what he said at first, That truths are impossible to be false.

And this alone had been a sufficient Answer to his Paper; for nothing can be
more frivolous, than to go about to prove to a man by fine Reasoning, that he
does doubt of a thing, when he is as sure, that he does not doubt of it, as he
can be of any thing in the World. But the design of this Paper seems to be as
Impious, as it is Absurd. And that is, to bring weak Persons to Infidelity
first, that they may afterward be settled upon Romish Grounds. I do acknowledge
it is a very proper way, to bring us over to the Church of Rome, to make us
Infidels first; But this they will not find so easy a matter; for we trust,
that we are not of those who draw back to Perdition, but of those that believe
to the saving the Soul.

I have omitted nothing in the whole Paper, but to take notice of that little
and mean Reflection, in calling the Protestant, a Parliamentary Protestant. I
have told this Disputer, the Reason and Ground of our Faith: If we moreover are
Protected in the Profession of it, by the Laws of the Land, I suppose it is no
more than what he would desire, for the Profession of Popery; and he would
think never the worse of himself, for being a Parliamentary Papist.

Thus I have Answered this Paper through every clause of it. And I am confident
destroyed all that little Appearance of Reasoning that it made. Let the
Disputer build it up again if he can, I promise him, by God's Grace, that I Will
pull it down again.

FINIS.

