A Second Lett^^ FROM THE AUTHOR OF THE DISCOURSE CONCERNING Extreme Unction,
TO THE VINDICATOR OF THE Bishop of CONDOM.

IMPRIMATUR.

Libellus cui Titulus, [ A Second Letter from the Author of the Discourse
concerning Extreme Unction, etc.]

December. 10. 1687.

H. Maurice.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXVIII.

A Second Letter from the Author of the Discourse concerning Extreme Unction,
to the Vindicator of the BISHOP of Condom.
SIR,
I Charged you with telling two Tales in the very same Breath, wherein you
delivered your Oracle about the Antiquity and Universality of Extreme Unction.

One was, That the Defender himself confessed this Extreme Unction to be so
Ancient and Universal a Practice as you would have it thought to be. You deny
that you pretended any such thing; which I can by no means commend you for, tho
I must praise you for one thing, and that is for retracting it, if you have
given any one occasion to think that you did. You might as well have confessed,
That you had given just occasion to think so, and so have saved me the trouble
of proving it; in doing which, if I discover that Artificial dealing of yours,
which I but just intimated to you in my former Letter, you may thank your self
for it.

You said of the Defender, that from 800 years practice, and the Confession of
Cardinal Cajetan, he concluded they had reason to leave off this Extreme
Unction, because Miracles are now ceased. And then you immediately proceed
thus; In answer to this, I told him; First, That Cardinal Cajetan did not
positively say as he affirmed he did? But what if he had? Would it be
sufficient to reject a Practice coming down from the Apostles, and from Age to
Age visibly continued in all Christian Churches, both of the East and West for
800 years, as HE HIMSELF CONFESSES, notwithstanding that the Gifts of Miracles
were ceased, and this upon the Testimony of one man's affirming that it cannot
be proved from that Text of Scripture? What if it may be proved by the
Universal Practice and Tradition of the Church? etc. Here I ask you, 1. Whether
by a Practice coming down from the Apostles, and from Age to Age visibly
continued in all Christian Churches, etc. you did not mean your Extreme
Unction, of which you had just spoken before? Or if this Question be not plain
enough; 2. Whether you did not speak of that Unction which Cajetan affirmed,
that it could not be proved from St. James? And whether that could be any other
than your Extreme Unction? And then 3. Whether they be not your own words, that
the Defender himself confesses this Practice of which you speak, to have
continued so long in all Christian Churches both of the East and West for 800
years? Pray, Sir, put these things together, and then tell me if no body but
one that has a mind to Cavil, can take occasion from your words to think that
you make the Defender confess such a continuance of Extreme Unction?

You would do well also to inform us with what sincerity you could come now at
last and say, that you AFFIRMED, that he himself confessed that AN UNCTION was
visibly continued in all Christian Churches both of the East and West for 800
years? to make which saying of yours more remarkable, you put it into a
different Character, as if indeed you had affirmed this; and those words AN
UNCTION, were to be met with in that passage. Really you had better have
followed my Advice, to confess, etc. for you will run your self into more and
more streights for want of it; and every Fault that you would hide, will break
out into a worse in another place: As for instance, if you should say next
time, that An Unction were not your Words, but that it was your Meaning; then I
come and show you, that you ought not to have said so, because thus you speak
here; But any one but they who have a mind to cavil, will easily see by what
went before, and my several Expressions after, that when I AFFIRMED that he
himself confessed that AN UNCTION was visibly contained in all Christian
Churches, both of the East and West for 800 years; I meant it with those
Limitations which he had expressed, etc. For here any body may see that you
produce those words, as if you had indeed Affirmed your Thoughts in those very
words; since you go on immediately to explain their Meaning, and show how they
ought to have been understood. But that which is worst of all is this, That tho
we are willing to make the best of every thing, yet we cannot find this to be
so much as your Meaning; for if we put these words [An Vnction] into the
passage where I charged you with this Tale; instead of explaning, it does quite
overthrow your purpose there, and makes it little better than Nonsense, instead
of giving it that sense which you now pretend: For then it must run thus; Must
we therefore reject Extreme Unction, because one man affirms that it cannot be
proved by this Text of Scripture, tho it continued for 800 years, as the
Defender himself confesses, by which I do not mean that Extreme Unction was by
him confessed to continue so long, but An Unction which was not Extreme. I have
put those two words for you in the best place that I can; if you can dispose
them better, I should be glad to see it.

I know well enough that, you mentioned the Defender's affirming St. James's
Unction, and the Ancient Unction to have a primary respect to bodily Cures, and
this not only afterward, but just before the passage now under Consideration.
But, Sir, I am not bound to take what you say in one place, for a limitation to
what you say in another; when that which you call a Limitation, is no better
than a Contradiction to what you say elsewhere, and being applied to it, makes
it Nonsense.

And since you will have it out, I saw into the Artifice and Contrivance of
this business from the first, as clearly as I do now, only I would not seem to
delight in exposing you, and was therefore content to let it pass with a
general intimation which I knew you must needs understand.

You saw it would set off your Cause not a little to slip in an Insinuation,
That Extreme Unction was by your Adversary confessed to have been of 800 years
standing after Christ; and because he had confessed that a certain Unction
primarily respecting Bodily Cures, was of so Ancient standing, you took
occasion to bring in his Confession in a place where it is so manifest that you
speak only of Extreme Unction, that you are not able to deny it: And to make
the best of this advantage, you insinuate also, That he confessed St. James's
Unction to have been so long practiced in the Church too. By which means an
unwary Reader might be strangely amused, and not know what to make of this
Defender and his Cause, who is brought in confessing in effect, that Extreme
Unction has the Authority not only of the Ancient Church, but of St. James's
too.

But then least so gross a business as this should be charged upon you, and you
have nothing to say for your self; you were content also to acknowledge what he
had so often said, that St. James's Unction, and the Ancient Unction, had a
primary respect to Bodily Cures; From whence you should have concluded, that
this Unction was not, according to him, Extreme Unction, or the Unction of your
Church; but if you had done so, there had been no opportunity left to have
slipped in the pretended Confession of the Defender, because the dullest Reader
must then have reflected upon the Contradiction.

Whereas therefore you say, p. 1. You cannot think, Sir, but that if I had
really thought the Defender had granted me such a Conclusion as this: Extreme
Unction as now practiced in the Church of Rome, was also Universally practiced
in the East and West, for the first 800 years, I should have made more benefit
of such a Concession. And again: 'You will not, I hope, when you reflect upon
what you say, think me so stupid, as to pretend such a Concession, and after
such a pretense, make no use of it. To this I Answer, 1. I never said that you
really thought the Defender had granted you such a Conclusion; for by calling
your pretense that he had granted it, a Tale, I supposed that you really
thought the quite contrary. 2. I did not charge you with putting those words
into the Conclusion, as now practiced in the Church of Rome; and I now say,
There was good reason not to put them in; for they would have laid open the
Trick too manifest, for any body not to have discovered it. 3. As I do not on
the one hand take you to be so stupid, but that if you had really thought the
Defender had granted you such a Conclusion, you would have made more benefit of
it: So on the other hand, I do not think you so stupid, but since you really
thought that he made no such Concession, you saw well enough that this was a
business not to make a bluster with, but to slip it in quietly, and then to
wish it good speed. And so much for the first Tale.

The next I charged you with, was, That Cardinal Cajetan did not positively say
as the Defender affirmed he did. And this you are so far from retracting, that
you say it still a third time. But whether you have made it Evidently appear,
is now to be tried.

Setting aside therefore your Reasoning, and the variety you have expressed in
ranging Propositions one against another, all which was but to make a show of
doing some notable thing; I come to the business Cardinal Cajetan's words are
these: It neither appears by the Words, nor by the Effect, that he speaks of
the Sacrament of Extreme Unction, but rather of that Unction which our Lord
appointed in the Gospel to be used upon sick Persons by his Disciples; For the
Text does not say, Is any man sick unto Death? but absolutely, Is any man sick?
And it makes the Effect to be the recovery of the sick, and speaks but
conditionally of the forgiveness of Sins: whereas Extreme Unction is not given,
but when a man is almost at the point of Death; and as the Form of words there
used sufficiently shows, it tends directly to the forgiveness of Sins.

Of this the Defender said: Cardinal Cajetan freely confesses, that these Words
of St. James, Is any man sick, etc. can belong to no other than bodily Cures.

For which saying you reproved the Defender, and affirmed, that Cajetan only
said, the other did not appear from that place.

The Defender says, he translated not the Words, but delivered the Sense, which
he did truly; For, says he, when two things only are in Controversy, for the
Cardinal absolutely to exclude the one, and apply it to the other, is in effect
to confess, that it could only belong to that.

To this, after all your flourishing about Propositions, you found your self
obliged to return an Answer; and it is this: p. 4.

Well, but what if the Cardinal do not absolutely exclude the one, but say,
this does not appear, but rather that, will you therefore infer positively,
therefore it can belong only to that?

To which Question I shall begin to answer with another: If it be very evident,
that the Cardinal does absolutely exclude the one, by establishing the other,
will you then confess, that you have given the World just occasion to think
evil of you, and promise for the future to do so no more?

Look you, Sir, you please your self with those words of the Cardinal, It does
not appear that St. James speaks of Extreme Unction, but rather of that which
our Lord appointed; as if he had said nothing else upon this occasion.

Now: first of all, those words, It neither appears by the Words, nor by the
Effect, were enough to have made you quiet here; since when an Effect is
mentioned, which always follows upon the thing spoken of, another thing cannot
possibly be meant by, the Words, from which the Effect does not follow; and
therefore according to him, your Extreme, Unction, cannot possibly be meant in
that place; and therefore that Sense is absolutely excluded. And therefore I
add,

2. That you were exceedingly to blame, when you gave me some part of the
Cardinal's Observation upon that place which I had translated, that you did not
add the rest which I translated too, and which I transcribed just now. For
there you see, that he did not only oppose but Two Unctions to one another, but
that they are such as could not possibly be meant by the same words, since the
intention of the one is the recovery of the sick, the intention of the other is
to do something for him when he is almost at the point of death. Pray remember
that this is the Cardinal's own Observation; and then mind what I say: So long
as recovery from sickness is absolutely excluded by being almost at the point
of death; so long also those words which establish an Unction for recovery from
sickness, which is the Effect of that Unction, do absolutely exclude an Unction
which is not to be given but when a man is almost at the point of death. I can
foresee but one possibility of Cavil against this Evidence, but it is so pitiful
a one, that I must beg the Reader to consider with what persons we have to do.
This it is, That Anointing for the recovery of health, does not absolutely
exclude anointing at the point of Death, because a man may be anointed at the
point of Death, and upon that anointing recover. Now though this be true,
according to our way of speaking, yet this could not be the Cardinal's meaning;
for by the Opposition of the Two Unctions, and the Effects of them, and most
evidently by those words of his, The Text does not say, Is any man sick unto
death? it appears, that by being almost at the point of death, he meant the
Case of a man that is in all appearance to die presently, notwithstanding
Unction, and upon whom therefore the Effect of St. James's Unction was not to
take place. I might make this as plain from that other Effect too of St.
James's Unction, which is conditional forgiveness of sins: Whereas, according
to the Cardinal, and the truth of the matter, your Unction tends directly to
the forgiveness of sins.

And now having proved it, I say, That the Cardinal does absolutely exclude the
one, as the Defender said he did, though he does not use those very words: Mark
what I say; He absolutely excludes your Unction from being meant by St. James:
And (which I had almost forgot) whereas you put the word Rather into a
different Character, as if you would beg the Reader to take notice of it: Be it
known to you, that it can do you no manner of Service. Since there is no phrase
more common, than to express sometimes absolute sayings by comparative ones, as
at other times comparative ones by absolute. Thus, When it is said, Let him that
stole steal no more, but rather let him labor: And, Neither filthiness, Ephesians.
4.28. v. 4.
nor foolish talking, etc. but rather giving of thanks. I am confident you will
confess, that stealing and filthiness are absolutely excluded, notwithstanding
the Word Rather.

By this time I suppose you are satisfied, that the parallel Case, by which you
would make your own clear, is nothing at all to the purpose; or rather, I
believe you knew it, and all these things before, that I have now offered; but
you would not be quiet till the World knew them too. Something however must be
said to your parallel Case, which is this.

Suppose I should tell you, you cannot positively prove from that passage, Go
ye baptizing all Nations, etc. nor from any other Scripture, without the
general practice and Authority of the Church, that Infants are to be baptized.
I suppose you would not deny me that Proposition. But should. I say, that
passage and all the other in Scripture concerning Baptism, can belong to no
other but to Adults, I persuade my self you would not readily give me your
Assent. And if this be not a parallel Case with the other, pray show the
difference. With all my heart, Sir, and because you shall have no occasion to
run into other matters, I will take your supposition in every part of it, and
suppose it all my self. I say then, that the Case is not parallel, but as cross
to the other, as any one you could have well chosen. For there is this
difference.

That on the one side, the Baptising of all Nations, is not there limited to
Adult persons, and therefore excludes not the Baptising of Infants. So that tho
I could not prove from that, or from any other passage in Scripture, that
Infants are to be baptized, yet from that and such like places, I could not
conclude, that Baptism does belong to no other but Adults, because the Baptism
of these is left to be consistent with the Baptism of Infants, and the same
words may include both.

But on the other side, That Unction which is given to those who are sick unto
death, cannot possibly be meant in those words which prescribe an Unction, the
effect whereof is this, that the sick person shall not die, but recover; and
that because Life and Death are two things, of which if you say the one, do
what you can, you unsay the other. And therefore he who says, that the words of
St. James speak of the Unction that is for Life, does not only say, that the
Unction for the point of Death, is not proved from them, but, if he be a man of
sense as the Cardinal was, he does in effect say, that it cannot be proved from
them; and that the words can belong only to bodily Cures, or to the Case of
those persons who recover by Unction.

And this is so substantial a difference between the two Cases, that I should
be ashamed to show any other; and I think, Sir, you have some little cause to
be ashamed of giving me this needless trouble.

We feel what Adversaries we have, and must be content to undergo this Drudgery
of answering what they please to put to us, tho we have not so mean an opinion
of them, as to think that they could not Answer it themselves.

But one comfort is, that your Objections and Accusations are so weak, that a
very little time serves to show that they are so; which is all I meant by
promising you some account of your Reply from the Defender in a Month. No
boasting, I assure you, Sir, of a Talent of answering Books so quickly. For
what matter of boasting is it, if a man can answer such a Letter as yours, as
fast as he can write? or if he sees presently what is fit to be said, where
there is nothing to surprise, but the confidence of an Adversary, and the
little reason he has for it.

As for you who have only spare minuits, which are not many, to employ this
way, the rest being spent in a nearer service to your Master: If you mean, in
saying your Prayers and the like, I am sorry to see no better effect of
spending the most of your time so well, then to spend the rest of it so ill as
you do.

I am afraid your next Letter to me will bring as bad an account of your spare
minuits as this has done; and to be Free with you, this is the reason of my
Fear. At the close of your new formed Argument, upon that Retractation of yours
spoken of before; you talk as if it could be made out by the very nature of
Tradition, that it was morally impossible for such successive Innovations to be
made as the Defender and Discourser have imagined. Nay, you say, that the
Defender could not but foresee the many woeful Contradictions which necessarily
follow such a pretended Change as Chemnitius invented, and I have Espoused
after him.

Now, Sir, this new Notion of the Nature of Tradition, and the Indefectibility
of it, being here brought in, without any thing passed on my side to make it
pertinent; I fear that all the pertinence it has, is with reference to what
your self intends to say in answer to the Second Part of my Discourse. That is,
whereas you have promised me to show how little I have brought against the
uninterrupted Practice of the Church ever since the Apostles time, which is to
be the Subject of a second Letter from yon; you will now accost me with the
Nature of Tradition: And notwithstanding that I have, from reasonable good
Testimonies, made it undeniably evident, (if those Testimonies are credible,
and if I have not misrepresented them) That Extreme Unction is an Innovation,
and a late one too; and though I have given a very fair and probable Account how
that Innovation crept into the West; yet all this is to go for nothing, because
you can demonstrate, That it is impossible this should ever happen, or any thing
like it.

But, Sir, I do not forewarn you of this, because I am afraid of the strength
of your Demonstration; for, say what you please, it is an hundred to one, bur,
God willing, I shall either tell you that* I am convinced, or show you reason
for the contrary; but I only foretell, That you will never make any Work of this
new Notion, which, as new as it is, has been driven as far as 'twill go. It was
intended for a Bush to stop every Gap; and if you could have baffled all
Ancient Testimonies against you, with a It Is impossible it should have been so,
you had been without all controversy the Men of this Age: And in stead of
going to the Fathers for Antiquity, we must come to your Church to know what
she holds, and to some few such Writers as you are, to know the Nature of
Tradition, for thus (Who would have thought it?) we could in many things more
certainly tell what Irenaeus, etc. and St. Austin etc. held, than by the dull
and fallible way of reading their Books.

But as this has all the Appearances, so it has had the Success of a Project.
Your Indefectible Oral Tradition, seems not to us only, but to the most
considerable Men of your own Church, a very ridiculous Pretense; and has been
confuted both by some of us, and some of them.

I shall give you but this other hint, That if you intend to go on this way,
you are undertaking one of the vainest things in the World, next to defending
Transubstantiation: For as he that does this, has that hard Task of maintaining
that to be true, which it is impossible should be so; so in the other
Undertaking you must spend a great many Words to prove that a Matter of Fact
was impossible to be, which yet most certainly was. But for this I beg your
pardon; you will go your own way to work, when I have said all I can; and you
may take this if you please. My spare Minuits are now at an end; and I shall
only add, That you would do very well both to make a civil use of the Ingenuity
of your Adversaries, and in some small degree to imitate it your selves: If you
understand me not, I will tell you my meaning more at large next time. And so I
rest, as before,

SIR, Your Friend and Servant.
December. 9.
FINIS.

