A SERMON PREACHED TO A Country Auditory, Upon the Eleventh of November, Being
the DAY Appointed for a Solemn Thanksgiving For a Late VICTORY by SEA; And His
MAJESTY's Safe Return OUT OF FLANDERS.

By SAMVEL CLERK, B. D.

LONDON, Printed for W. Crook. And Sold by R. Tailor, 1693.

To the Right Honorable JOHN Lord CUTTS, BARON of GOWREN.
My Lord,
TO whom could a Discourse of this nature (I mean, A Thanksgiving Sermon, for
the happy Deliverance of our Royal David from the hurtful Sword) be more fitly
Dedicated, than to your Honor, who so deeply shared in the Danger with His
Majesty?

Accept of it, Noble Sir, not for its own Worth, but as a Specimen of the
Author's Sense of Yours, and his Obligations to You.

You, by that of Virtue, are arrived at the Temple of Honor. Sir, I beseech
Almighty God, that You may be ever in the Ascendent, and that no malign Aspect
may intervene, at least to sully, much less Eclipse Your Splendour; till this
Mortal shall have put on Immortality, and You your Self become a Fixed Star in
Heaven, where is no Vicissitude or Alteration. Thus Prays

Your Honor's most humble and Faithful Servant, SAM. CLERK.

PSALM CXLIV. Verses ix, x. I will sing a new Song unto thee, O God: upon a
Psaltery, and an Instrument of ten Strings, will I sing praises unto thee.

It is he that gives Salvation unto Kings; who delivers David his Servant
from the hurtful Sword.


HAving but heard these Words read, there is scarce any One of so shallow a
Capacity, but may conceive them pertinent and suting well with the Time and
Occasion of this our present Meeting: For is here not mention made of Kings,
the Salvation of Kings; nay, of one above the rest, David in great Danger, yet
delivered, and that from the Sword too? All very pertinent and congruous. God
had many times and often delivered David; but he insists here chiefly on that
one, (that both to us is proper and peculiar,) the hurtful Sword.

Now, with me (I beseech you, dear Christians) ( Behold our KING! a Pious and
Protestant Prince, the Servant of God, Jealous for the Lord of Hosts, Zealous
for his Church and People; (like the Royal Eagle) throwing Himself between Them
and Danger: Behold Him, by God delivered, wonderfully delivered, from the
Death-threatning Cannon, and the hurtful Sword. And so the Words read, are no
other than a Comment upon the Day; at once pointing out to us, both our
Happiness and our Duty: Our Happiness in the Preservation of His Majesty; our
Duty in returning God Thanks for it; which to encourage us also unto, we have a
Royal President before us; who, upon the very same account, (even God's
Salvation and Deliverance,) snatches up his Psaltery, tunes his Strings,
promises a New Song. I will sing a new Song unto thee, O God: upon a Psaltery,
and an Instrument of ten Strings, will I sing praises unto thee.

See here the Subject Matter of this Song, a Song of thanksgiving: Of
Thanksgiving! For what? What Mercy, what Favor is the holy man so thankful
for? It was no other than the King's Safety.

Because God the Preserver of Kings, had here delivered his Servant David from
the hurtful Sword: He therefore resolves upon a new Song of Praise and
Thanksgiving. This is the Substance of my Text; And, as of what was then with
great Joy sung by Israel, so of what this Day we are called to. Upon the
receipt of any new Mercy, God shall not load David with his Mercies, but the
Heavens shall Resound with his grateful Praises and Acknowledgments. I will
sing a new Song unto thee, O God: upon an Instrument of ten Strings will I sing
praises unto thee. He it is that gives Salvation unto Kings: who delivers
his Servant David from the hurtful Sword. In which Words we have these
Considerables. (1.) Here is Salvation given; a Deliverance wrought. (2.) To, or
for whom? To Kings in general; to David in particular. (3.) By whom, viz. by
God. (4.) Here is the Return made by David, both in behalf of himself and
others. I will sing, etc. Take the Whole summed up in two Theorems, or
Doctrinal Propositions.

1. All Kings and under God's immediate Care and Protection; but above all,
good Ones. Or, rather thus: God gives Salvation unto Kings in general; but his
Servants, (such as David was) he delivers in an especial manner. He it is
that gives Salvation unto Kings: who delivers David his Servant from the
hurtful Sword.

2. Those that are thus delivered by him, should praise God, and be thankful to
him. I will sing a new Song unto thee, O God: upon a Psaltery, and an
Instrument of ten Strings will I sing praises unto thee. In the discussing of
which, (for my more methodical proceeding) I shall speak to these severals.
(1.) That God gives Salvation to Kings in general: with the Reasons why, and
manner how he effects it. I shall descend, (2ly.) to Particulars; and make it
good in David the Servant of God, in my Text. (3ly.) In our Royal David, King
William, in the Day. (4ly.) I shall speak briefly to my Second Proposition. And
(lastly,) I shall close up all, with a seasonable Application.

To clear the Thesis; That God gives Salvation to Kings in general: I shall
proceed by a Threefold Gradation. (1.) Showing, That God gives Salvation.
(2ly.) That he gives Salvation unto Men, above other Creatures: And, (3ly.) To
Kings, above other Men.

1. To give Salvation is so congruous to the Divine Nature, that God claims it
to himself as his Native Property and Peculiar, ( Isa. 43.11.) I, even I am the
Lord, and besides ^e there is no Savior. I, even I am the Lord: This redoubled
I, is emphatical and exclusive: And, besides me there is no Savior. They are
but gross Idolaters, that put their trust in Man: Or, with the deluded Papists,
set up for Saviors, the Saints departed.

It is worth our Note, what Ferdinand King of Arragon, sending his Son against
the Florentines, spoke to him, Victoria, mihi creed, non hominum disciplinis
nec industria comparatur; sed Dei Optimi Maximi benignitate and arbitrio:
Believe me, Son, Victories are not gotten by Art or Industry, but given of God.

If we look into the Prophecy of Jonah, what we meet with (Chap. 2.9.) may be
said to be the Argument of the whole Book, and might have concluded every
Chapter therein, viz, That Salvation is of the Lord. The Mariners, (says the
R. Rd. Bishop King, in his Lectures on that Prophet) might have written upon
their Ship, instead of Castor and Pollux, Or, the like Device, Salvation is the
Lord's. The Ninivites might have written upon their Gates, Salvation is the
Lord's. And whole Mankind, whose Cause is pitied and pleaded by God, against
the hardness of Jonah's Heart, might have written in the Palms of their Hands,
Salvation is the Lord's. It is the Argument of both the Testaments; the Staff
and Supportation of Heaven and Earth: They would both sink, and all the Joints
be severed, if the Salvation of the Lord be not. The Birds of the Air sing no
other Note, the Beasts in the Field give no other Voice, than, Salvation is the
Lord's. Which leads me to the Second Gradation, He is the Savior; and (that so
great is his Pity and Compassion) both of Man and Beast, ( Psalm. 36.6.) the
Beast as well as Man; but Man before (or, rather above) the Beast. Now, that
Man is more in the Eye, or Care of Divine Providence, than the Brutes, is clear
in this, That the very Brutes are made for Man, and much more the Creatures
below them: For Man does the Day break, and the Sun shine, and the Rain fall,
and the Waters flow, and the Grass grow, and all the Herbs of the Field spring
up and flourish, after their several kinds. For him are the Fields crowned with
Corn, and the Valleys laden with Grass: For Him are the Hills lifted up, and
the Cattle made that feed upon the Hills: For the feeding of him do the Herds
feed, and for his sake are the Flocks themselves clothed with Wool; for him
does the Horse were his hoof, and the Ox yield his neck unto the yoke, and
before him does the Camel kneel, to receive the burden upon his back. Now
since God made man the end of other creatures, and them a mean to his content
and preservation; and since the end is always valued more then the mean is; we
must needs conclude that God is more concerned for man, for whom all things
were made, then those very things which were made for him. Hence that of St.
Paul's double Expostulation, (1 Cor. 9.9, 10.) Does God take care for Oxen? Gr,
says he it altogether for our sake? For our Sakes no doubt this is written:
That he that Ploweth, should plow in hope, and he that Thresheth in hope,
should be Partaker of his hope: As much as to say, the Care of Beasts is not to
be taken before that of Men: We are God's chief Care; wherefore Job gives God
this Title as peculiar to him, ( Job 7.20. I have sinned, what shall I do unto
thee, O) thou Preserver of men? He it is that Gives Salvation unto men. But,

(3ly.) To Kings chiefly above the rest of Men mlia dio^preron basilon. (as the
Poet not impertinently,) Above all the Race of Mankind, Kings go nearest the
Heart of God, and are his prime Care. Great deliverance gives he unto them,
(Psa. 18. ult) He is their Tower of Salvation, says Samuel, and (Psalm. 28.8)
The Lord is their strength, and he is the saving strength of his Anointed. In
all Things God is wonderful; but of all, in the Preservation of crowned heads;
in none more, in none equal thereunto. What can be more evident now, than, that
God gives Salvation unto Kings? To Kings I say, in general; for of Kings as
they are God's Servants, I shall speak more at large in its proper place.

He gives Salvation: what Salvation gives? Be it of whatsoever kind it will,
it is from him; whether it be that of the physician, a sound and healthy body
against Diseases; as they are mortal men. For, as it was pointed out to us by
Daniel's Image, ( Dan. 2.33.) whose Legs were of Iron, his feet part of clay
and part of Iron. Thus Kings are the Peopl's Treasures; but yet treasures in
earthen Vessels; they have need therefore of God's help and salvation. It Is
true, if we should understand it in this sense; this God gives; but this is not
the genuine meaning of the place: For this salvation here spoken of, is from
the Sword, not from sickness; from evil Manners, nor ill humors, from external
Force, not internal Dyscrasie. God gives Salvation; this salvation gives he
unto Kings; and to Kings above others. I might argue a fortiori. If God takes
care of that which is less worthy and becoming his care, much more will he do
so of that which is more worth: Therefore since even the beasts and other
inferior creatures are cared for by God, much more must Men the highest of
creatures in the world, and Kings the highest of Men be under the same Watch.
It is he that gives Salvation unto Kings.

Here it may not be amiss to enquire a little into the Reasons of this God's
Care and Protection of Kings, and examine what probably may be the Causes, why
God is pleased to give Salvation to them above all others.

The Reasons I shall offer, are Three: The First, taken from God. The Second,
from Kings themselves. The Third, from the People.

1. God gives Salvation unto Kings; because by him they are raised up and
dignified: By me Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice, Prove. 8.15. And as
representing him, they are called Gods, Psalm. 82.6. I have said, Ye are Gods. I
have said it, who then dare gainsay it? Ye are Gods, that is, in God's stead,
set in his Room, invested with his Power and Authority, his Vicegerents, his
Representatives, his chief Ministers. Does not St. Paul, speaking of the
Supreme Magistrate, tell us, That he is the Minister of God, Romans 3.4. We are
not capable of immediate Converse with God, therefore he Rules us by Men like
our selves; he Governs Men by Man, and so puts Man into his own Place: There is
hereupon a necessity of God's Protecting them as his Delegates.

Among Foreigners, such as the Ambassadors of Kings, (as also their
Representatives at home,) those that Empower them, and whom they Represent, are
careful of their Preservation, and to vindicate them from Contempt; the Honor
of the Ambassador, is the Honor of him that sends him; and the Disgrace of the
Representative redounds to him whose Representative he is: our David himself,
when his Ambassadors were ill used, whom he sent to the King of Ammon, after
his Fathers Death, he took it as done to himself, (2 Samuel 10.4.) He thence
severely revenged the Injury as his own ( Cap. 4.) The great God of Heaven,
does he not the (...) same? His Honor cannot be entire and full, unless theirs
be so, who are his Substitutes; for his Honors sake he will procure their
Salvation. By him they are Ordained, by (...) what they are, Romans 13.2.
Hitherto is to be (...) whatever belongs to God, as he is interested for
them, being their Founder and Preserver; their Preserver so far forth, that
they be not Wronged, and their Reven^^^ if they be so.

(...) Therefore God gives Salvation unto Kings, and takes care of Princes,
above all others, because they are exposed to greater Dangers than other Men.
Certainly they must needs be in greater Danger, in that the Devil, that envious
one, maligns them most; he aims at their Destruction above all others, and no
better can be expected from him; whose Name in the Hebrew is Abaddon, in the
Greek Apollyon, and in our English Destroyer, a name diametrically opposite to
that of God, who is the Preserver; and of the Holy Jesus his Son, who is a
Savior, that is the import of his Name, ( Matthew. 1.21.) For he shall save his
people from their sins. To destroy all, is the Devil's whole Employ: whereas
God preserves and saves both man and beast (as before.) yet above all men,
Kings: and above all Kings, such pious Ones as our David was.

All Kings are hateful to the Prince of Darkness; even an Ahasuerus, an Ethnic
King ( Esth. 2.21.) He will cut him off (if possible) by his own Eunuchs: but a
David, how often shall he be set upon? It is his own observation ( Psalm. 118.1^
Thou have thrust sore at me that I might fall, but the Lord (...) ^^lped me.

It is altogether needful ther^ should be One to save; Sin^^ there is one, nay
many to destro^

But why is the Devil set so u^^^ the destruction of Kings? No doubt it is,
because Kings are Mortal Enemies to ^im: By their Authority and Power it comes
to pass that Sir is restrained, and his Kingdom weakened. Ye shall n^^ a^ after
all those things we do here this day, every Man wh^^ is right in his own Eyes,
(Deuteronomy. 12.8.) To do what ever a Man co^^^ or would, without Impunity, is that
wicked One's desire (...) cause it is for the advancement of his Kingdom to
have it so. Now when is it so; but when there is no King? When the Author of
the Book of Judges would pourtraict to the life, the sad and pitiable estate of
Israel, in the Intervals of Government; he ascribes this as the main Reason for
the Commission of their execrable Enormities, That there was no King in Israel;
and by consequence, no Peace, no Justice, no Religion: For then every Micah
will have his Closet of Idols, and will worship as himself thinks fit.

Truly, without Magistracy, not only whatever is Sacred would be usurped,
abused, destroyed; but also there would be no such thing as Liberty and
Property in this, or any other Kingdom, (which the Generality make such a
Clamor, a Noise about.) Therefore if Men would not have ^hese entrenched upon
and abridg'd, no better way to se^ure them, than by the preservation of their
Governors, more especially their Kings: For these, these are they that prevent
such Enormities.

What the Soul is to the Body, such is the King to the ^ingdom, the Principle
of Life, the Spring of M^^ion, the Vital Fountain of all Power and Activity.
Give me leave to speak once more, and add; That he is the Heir of Restraint,
Invested with the Sword, Which he bears not in vain. The Devil knows this to
his Cost, who is above all things for Anarchy and Confusion: As God is for
Decency and Order, which if he cannot bring about, then must Kings one after
another be cut off, and brought to utter destruction. We see the Reason plain
and obvious.

How the Devil does prosecute the ruin of Kings, may not be amiss likewise (by
the bye) to enquire briefly into* We have his Emissaries set forth to the life,
Rev. 9.2, 3. And he opened the bottomless Pit, and there arose smoke out of the
Pit, as the smoke of a great Furnace, and the Sun and the Air were darkened by
reason of the smoke of the Pit: And there came out of the smoke Locusts upon
the Earth: And to them was given power, as Scorpions of the Earth have power.
These are the Emissaries of that Infernal Monarch; sworn Enemies as himself, to
Kings. But what are these Locusts? the Monks Friars and Jesuits, (says an
Expositor upon the place) are most fitly called so, for their Numerosity and
Voracity These, like Locusts, are great Wasters and Devourers, and in other
respects peculiarly like them, which having no king go out by bands, Prove.
30.27. Those whom our Psalmi^ twice in this Psalm calls Strange Children; these
St. Joh^ styles Locusts here, a Generation (would I could not say^ better known
to us than to David, of which we have h^^ Swarms in our Age.

Strange Children indeed! a Generation of Men tha^ term themselves of the
Society of Jesus; But was n^^ Jesus a Savior? If they bear his Name, why then,
according to the import thereof, do they not give Salvation? I Am sure (to our
cost) we experience the quite contrary: than these, who worse spoken of, and
that not undeservedly? For as Satan's Emissaries, are they not Traitors to
Kings, and Betrayers of Kingdoms, wheresoever they get footing? I leave it to
all the World to judge, whether they be not strange Children? who under the
pretense of the Name of a false Jesus, act quite opposite to the Nature of the
true One. Destructions, Treasons, Seditions; are they not their main Employ?
Have not we to our cost found it so? We may truly comply with our Psalmist
here, That his strange Children and they are of the very same Progeny; they are
of one Stock and Lineage; their marks correspond in all things. These strange
Children, we have it twice repeated in this Psalm, that it might not escape our
Note, (see Verse 8.11.) Their mouth speaks vanity, and their right hand is a
right hand of falsehood.

Are not our Locusts in all things like to these? How dextrous are they at
Lying? What are their Equivocations better? Do they not speak one thing, and
think another? And that their right hand is a right hand of falsehood; whether
they give it upon a Civil or Religious account, their Faith (or Oath) is
nothing worth: their right hand is false, and deceitful, both Mouth and Hand
are alienated from their Heart and Mind; as that is from God: I mean from ^he
God of Truth: for the Devil, the God of this World, is well pleased with it. It
is he that makes use of these (under that Notion you please^) That of St.
John's Locusts, or David's strange Children; these he makes use of to sharpen
the hurtful Sword, mix the Poisons, and set on fire the Powder; with which
their King Apollyon gives diligent Command to his Agents, as the King of
Assyria did to his Captains, 1 Kings 21.31. Fight not with small or great, save
only the King. Him cut off any ways, so you do it some ways; by Sword, Fire,
Carbine, Cannon: It Is no matter which way, so it be done. This is their charge:
the King their Aim.

Concerns it not us now fervently to pray, That there may be one to save; since
there is such a Legion to destroy? that there may be one to cover the King with
his Shield and Buckler; since there are many to stretch out their hurtful
Swords against him. Oh! let there be a Jesus to save; while there is a Jesuit,
a Devil to destroy!

The reason why, and manner how Kings are maligned, and their ruin sought
after, you can be no longer ignorant of. As long as there is a Devil in Hell
who delights in, and will be contriving the Misery and Confusion of Men: So
long will they be standing at the hands of Kings; and endeavoring to stir up
evil men against them.

And so long as Pride and Ambition, Covetousness and Discontent find places to
harbor in, there will not wan^ Traitors and Rebels. Now the more dangerous and
hazardous the condition of Kings is, the more does the Divine Providence take
care of them; and more Signall^ remark it self in their Protection and
preservation, Lastly. God gives S^^vation unto Kings, out of his mere Love to
Mankind, for whose benefit and good they were ordained. ^ is ^asie to prove
(would time permit) that Monarchy is the b^ form of Government in the World;
and that Kings are the most regular conservators of order and government. Kings
are really for the good and happiness of the People: the good of the one is
included in, and greatly dependent on the other. Whatever we may think of their
State and Grandeur, or how much soever we may gaze at their Pomp and Splendor,
it is we that really gain by all; For the World is preserved and kept from
Barbarism and Confusion by their means. There Is nothing more certain, than that
the peoples Security, is wrapped up in their King's safety: God saves them, that
they may save us. Hereupon He has called the Magistracy, not Gods only; but
David's too.

Look we into the book of Judges, and as often as the Author thereof, makes
mention of the Chief Magistrate: God (says he) has raised up a Savior. Thus
were Othniel, Gideon, Jephthah, and the rest styled ( Judge. 3.9.15.) Saviors
they are of many thousands: and to save is consentaneous, becoming, altogether
worthy of God: He gives Salvation to them, in whom consists our safety.

It is a signal place that of St. Paul (1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3.) Let Supplications
and Prayers be made for all men, for Kings, and all that are in Authority: as
much as to say, if for them, then for all, it cannot be well with the People,
if not well with them: the Apostle's gradation: is remarkable; For Kings (says
he) that all men may be saved: and if so; then ^here will be a settled peace: if
a settled peace, then the knowledge of God: if the knowledge of God, then an
honest and pious Life: and if an honest and pious Life, then the welfare of the
whole World. As if the welfare of Kings were the Cornerstone of all Salvation.

But why do I straggle so much abroad, when we have nearer hand, even in this
very Psalm, plenty of instances? We are to give thanks (says my Text) and Pray
for the Kings welfare and Salvation: and why is it, but, That our Sons (v. 12.)
may be as plants grown up in their youth; that our daughters may be as
corner-stones, polished after the similitude of a palace: That our garners may
be full (v. 13.) affording all manner of store; that our sheep may bring forth
thousands, and ten thousands in our streets: That our oxen may be strong to
labor; (v. 14.) that there be no breaking in nor going out; that there be no
complaining in our streets. None of this will be; yet all will be, when the
King is safe Here are Earthly Blessings attend the Kings welfare. Now what
remains more? There is one more yet, which include all the rest, and that is (
v. 15.) Happy is that people, who^ God is the Lord: now to have God our Lord,
is to ha^ Religion secured amongst us, which depends much upon the Prince.

This is evident in holy Writ, would time suffer me t^ produce instances. Let
this suffice for the last reason, wh^ God takes such care of Kings, or gives
Salvation to them above others, even because God loves the society of Me^ he
delights in their Peace and Order, in their Prosperity an^ Happiness, to all
which they do not a little contribute. W^ have ten parts in the King, said the
ten Tribes, (2 Samuel 1^ 43.) every man has interest in the Prince; every man's
intere^ is his, and his interest is every man's; and being that a who^ Kingdom
is the general concernment of King, a King especially is hereupon the especial
concernment of God.

If now you ask me how God gives Salvation unto (...) I answer, By his Word.
(2.) By stretching forth (...) hand, and exerting his utmost power in their
defense. (i.e.) By a word of Salvation; which none yet was ever able to
withstand. By a threefold Edict (as by a triple hedge) He has fortified the
safety of Kings.

(1) Touch not mine Anointed, (Psalm. 150.15.) there (...) fenceth them from the
hand of violence.

(2) Curse not the Prince of the People, (Exodus 22. (...) there from the
virulent tongue.

(3) Detract not from him in thy very thought, (E^^^ 10.20.) Here from the
petulancy of the mind, if from these three they can be secure, they are safe
indeed. This care does God take of Princes.

But because not enough sometimes, in that breaking down this threefold hedge,
the strange Children will muti^y and rebel against them, therefore, (2) God
will make use of his hand as well as mouth, and exert his Power for their
preservation. He will oppose himself to their wicked counsels, and traitorous
persons.

(1) To their counsels: Either by detecting them before they come to maturity;
or quashing them and defeating them when ripe; and all things ready to
accomplish them.

(1) In order to their detection it is said, ( Psalm. 132.17.) (...) have
ordained a lamp for mine anointed. A lamp, wha^ that? it is faithful counsel.
Such as when Mordicai acc^^^ ^he two traitors for conspiring against Ahasuerus,
(Est. 2. (...) and when the Prophet Elisha (2 King. 6.9.) discover^^^ ^he
stratagems of the Kings of Syria, to the King of Israel.

(2) Where this Lamp of a King fails, there the lightning of God begins: which
shall make known what the other cannot: You will, I know, be inquisitive after
this lightning of God, what is meant by it. I shall refer you to Solomon, who
informs us ( Eccles. 10.20.) in these words, When the Birds of the shall
declare the matter. (i.e.) when by wonderful ways, and without the help of
Man, a thing is brought to light, they either make their own tongues to betray
themselves ( Psalm. 64.8.) or are so brought to con^^sion, that the hand of God
is manifested in it. God is ^onderful in the protecting of Kings; in none more:
by ^ending forth this his lightning, and bringing to light the most secret
counsels of rebellous Miscreants.

But supose all in a dark obscurity, and ready to take birth: why now even now,
God can confound all. He will touch the Mountains, and they shall smoke.
Absalom's affairs came to a great progress, Mountain-like: but God touches
Absal^m, and causes him to reject that counsel (which would have done his
business for him) to his own ruin (2 Samuel 17.14.) God will touch Adonijah, even
with a Panick fear, that when his business was almost done, he shall not dare
to accomplish it (1 Kings 1.49.) so that all things turn to smoke, and vanish.
Hence that of our Royal Psalmist, ( Psa. 62.3. How long will you imagine
mischief? ye shall be slain all of ye, as a bowing Wall shall you be, and as a
tottering Fence. Thus does God oppose himself to the wicked counsels of such as
hatch Treason, and conspire against Princes.

(2.) Against their Treasons God exerts himself, and shows that he will stand
up for the preservation of Kings; He will make ready his Arrows upon their
strings, against the face of their enemies, (Psalm. 21.12.) Then shall ye
understand (as in the case of Korah, Numb. 16.28, 29, 30) that the Lord himself
gives Salvation unto Kings, when the Hand of the Lord is gone out against
their enemies. For he that durst break down the Hedge before mentioned, what
shall become of him? Did not Sheba for this lose his Head? Shimei his life? and
the two Eunuchs theirs? What shall I add more? Time would fail me to tell you
of Baanah and Rechab, Absalom and Achitophel, Adonijah and Joab, Zimri and
Jozabad, with infinite more, who, for attempting their Kings death, procured
their own by it. Most sure it is, that Salvation is of the Lord, as ( Psalm
3.8.) and as sure that, He gives Salvation unto Kings, and delivers David
his Servant from the hurtful Sword.

Why is the Accent put upon Kings? Does not the Wing of Gods Providence extend
to all his Children? Have not others a share therein too? The Question is
propounded by the Reverend and Learned Dr. Featly, who thus answers his own
Proposal.

Yes, Gods Providence extends to all; but yet Kings are nearest to his Breast,
they receive more warmth from him, he has a special care of them; He keeps
them as the Signet of his Finger, because in them the Image of His Majesty
shines most brightly. It concerns him in Honor (^^ith he) to maintain them
that are his Vicegerent, upon Earth. It concerns him in Love to defend the
Defenders of the Faith, and cherish the Nursing-Fathers of his dearest Spouse.
It concerns him in Wisdom to save them who are the breath of so many thousand
Nostrils; to keep them whole, who are the bond which holds together the
Commonwealth. In the danger of a King is the hazard of a State; in the hazard
of a State, the ruin of a Church; in the ruin of a Church, God's House lies
in the Dust. The Heathen Poet glanceth at this Truth, when every where he
styled Kings diotrephe, as it were bred up and fostered in the bosom of Jove,
in their Dialect, Jehovah in ours: Keep [me (says David) as the Apple of thine
Eyes; Who can endure the least prick in that tender place? No more will God
abide his Anointed to be touched, (1 Chronicles. 16.22.)

You have heard, dear Christians! why God gives Salvation unto Kings.

(1.) Because they are his Vicegerents, his Deputies, and his Honor is
complicated in their Salvation.

(2.) Because the Devil, that malicious one, with his infernal Agents, seeks
their destruction, And

Lastly.) Because in their Salvation consists the Peoples happiness. You have
also heard why and how God gives Salvation unto them. Pass we now from the
Thesis to the Hypothesis; from Gods giving Salvation to Kings in general, to
his delivering David his servant in particular, from the hurtful sword, which
is the

(2.) And next in order, St. Paul tells us that God is the Savior of all men;
but chiefly of them that believe, and I shall dare to say, the Savior of all
Kings, but the Pious above all; the reason for both is entirely the same, We
may gather it thus:

If the Divine Providence watches over Kings indefinitely, Kings in general;
what must he needs do then upon those that are faithful, and rule over such as
are devoted to his Service? If he is wonderful in the Kings of the Earth, what
then must he needs be in those Kings who are Nursing-Fathers to his Church and
People? If in an Ethnic Ahasuerus, what in a religious David, a devout, a
Pious Prince? what a King is among men, that is a David among Kings: what then
shall God do for him? and for all like him? As they are precious in the eyes of
the Lord, so will he think nothing too much for them

Those things, which are but single in other Kings, we may find conjunct in
David, a King, and a servant of God too: wherefore, because a King, he will
give him Salvation, and because his Servant, he will deliver him from the
hurtful Sword. Because a King, he has in common with all Kings Gods care
attending him; and because his Servant, he has a propriety above the rest; as
a King, by him he Reigns; as God's Servant, he is directed and governed by him.

All Kings, as immediately constituted by God, are his Viceroys, and deputed
Servants; he is therefore, King of Kings, Lord of Lords. But yet all do not
acknowledge God, nor show themselves his Servants. His Servant Nebuchadnezzar;
so God spoke by the Prophet, Jer. 27.6. But did that great King acknowledge
this? No, he neither acknowledged himself Servant, nor. God, Lord. For so
speaks he to the Three Children, Dan. 3.15. Let us see what God can deliver you
out of my hands.

Nor did Pharaoh acknowledge this: Who is the Lord? (says he) Exodus 5.2. But
our Psalmist was in another Note, He is free in his acknowledgments this way (
Psalm. 116.16) Behold, Lord, I am thy Servant, I am thy Servant, and the Son of
thine Handmaid. Nor did he say this only, but in his works he showed himself
so: He spoke it not by constable aint, but he made it his business to do the will
of God. He was so solicitous in the Lords matters, that he would not go up to
his Bed, nor take his rest till the Ark of God was provided for, ( Psalm.
132.2, 3.) In the bringing that back again, among other Servants of God, he so
demeaned himself, that Michel (his own Wife) despised him, as contemptible for
his humility, 2 Samuel 6.20. But he never thought himself humble enough before
the Lord, never solicitous enough in performing his will. David was truly God's
Servant, humble as a Servant, faithful as a Servant, a Servant according to his
own heart, 1 Samuel 13.14. Most truly therefore, and to our purpose, it is here
said, David his Servant. Hereupon we have that of God concerning his Servant
David, Psalm 89.21. My own Hand shall help him, and my own Arm uphold him, nor
shall his enemies succeed against him, nor shall the son of wickedness approach
to hurt him (i. e.) in one word, I will deliver him.

Now, what God promised he perform (...) he save him, from many (shall I say?)
dangers; to keep to the Letter of my Text, I shall rather say weapons; keen,
drawn, wielded against him. He delivered him from the Sword of Goliath, from the
Javelin of Saul, and (which is most proper here) from the hurtful Sword.

All Kings are God's Servants pr gemna apadeuton (says Plutarch) for the
common good of Mankind; but David by a specialty. He was God's most special
care (as in the Text;) He it is that gives Salvation unto Kings, who
delivers David his Servant from the hurtful Sword.

(3.) Our Royal David, God's Servant also, and lately delivered, is the next to
be spoken to. The same God delivered both; both from the Sword, from the
hurtful Sword, both. I need not spend time in giving you the particulars, you
all know the danger he was in, danger so great, that we can attribute it to
nothing else but God's Care and Protection, that he has outlived it. How was
His Majesty wrapped over and over in the Snares of Death? yet has he broken the
Snares, and is escaped.

It is plain to all unbiased and considering men, that never did a Nation
enjoy more by a King, than ours have done by this we have: Never were People
more happy, than we might be under him (if we please and) were not the fault
^ur own. Never was it more remarkably true, that the Powers that are over us,
are set over us by God, than in our Case. His Majesty's coming in, and
Establishment here, be^^g a Miracle in the sight of all the World. And I wish,
it ^ould not be said as truly too, that never was a Prince expos^ to more
dangers and troubles, than he has been.

Should we recollect the past Passages of his Life, and soberly make remarks
upon the same, I do not well know, whether we should more admire his Fate, and
wonder to see so many dangers and adversities should encounter to spend their
spite against one man; or that Providence and Care of Almighty God, that has
still brought him through. These Providence and Cares have been freshly
instanced very lately, in a Deliverance from a Conspiracy abroad, hatched by a
sort of men that nothing can oblige; no kindnesses, no endearments; no, not
Religion it self, the tranquil enjoyment of the true Protestant Religion. Oh
the barbarous intendments of the worst of Men! Abhorrent in any, but above any,
in our Clime. Religious Plots, Protestant Treasons, oh Hellish Contradictions!

But can they deny what is obvious to all? The King's hazards in Battle,
wherein (not one, but often) he has exposed himself to the utmost dangers,
thereby greatly encouraging his friends, and striking a dread and terror into
his enemies, who never yet had the courage to withstand him?

Not to tell you of His Majesty's danger at the Boyne, where a Cannon Bullet
brusht upon his Shoulder; it was no less than a Miracle that it did but brush
him, importing Heavens Care of him, and that he was dear to God in his
Preservation.

But perchance some may think this too foreign, at least too antique and old. I
shall therefore produce a fresher Instance, and that within the compass of this
Days Thanksgiving, (being in Flanders, from whence our Royal Sovereign not long
since returned) an Instance no less miraculous tha^ the former, when another
Cannon Bullet, seeming to do him Homage, kissed the place where he just before
sat, but yet came not there till he himself had quitted it, which was not above
a Minute. An astonishing Deliverance! The late Naval Victory, can that be
oppugn'd, denied by any? and was not the Hand of God in it? It is as clear as
the Sun in its Noonday Luster, that the Wind fought against the Enemy, as the
Stars once against Sisera. The Wind hindered the French approaching us, and gave
us an opportunity of coming up to them, which was no sooner done, but God
blessed His Majesty's Forces with that Success which usually attends his Royal
Person; than whom, never any more signally delivered.

It is no new thing to hear of our Royal David and his troubles, his reiterated
troubles and dangers; nor (blessed be God for it) to hear of his Deliverances
also; his repeated Deliverances. The one runs parallel with the other,
literally making that of our Psalmist good ( Psalm 34.19) Many are the
afflictions of the Righteous, but the Lord delivers them out of all.

The truth is, the Life of our King William the Third, has been a continual
Scene of Providence and Danger, even from the Cradle, an Instance (hardly to be
seconded) of God's great and special Care, not rarely attending the Persons of
those Princes to whom Religion and his Honor is dear, (...) I am persuaded
they be to this our Sovereign. A Prince, (...) Pious as Valiant, and as forward
to Praise God his Savior, as he is ready to deliver him, which brings me to my

2d. Proposition, That those that are delivered, should praise God, and be
thankful to him.

(1.) Common Morality does inform every common capacity of this common
Principle in Divinity, We must be thankful unto them who have been bountiful
unto us: Whereupon Alexander, who exceeded all in Bounty, and Caesar, who
exceeded all in Patience, yet it was observed, that the ^^e did never give to,
and the other never forgive an ungrateful person. Yea, the very Heathen, in
their moral Favors feigned Ixion, because he had been unthankful to Jupiter,
who saved his Life, to be tortured and tormented on a Wheel, crying, tn uergten
gaua moiba poichomnou tmesthai: Oh remember to be grateful to your Benefactors!
Si ingratum dixeris, omnia dixeris (says the Learned Seneca, but a Pagan:) Him
that thou call ungrateful, thou call all to naught.

And Socrates (another Learned Heathen) did see and say karistan dikan enai;
that Unthankfulness is a gross act of Injustice; nay, Injustice against God
(says holy David) as depriving him of that quit-rent due to him the great Lord
of the Universe; so ( Psalm 50.15.) Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will
hear you, and thou shall praise me.

(2.) Nature does teach us this Lesson of Grace, for naturally every effect
must be brought back to his cause. Now God is the cause of all things and
persons, and the preserver of them too; therefore whatsoever we have, and
whatsoever we are, must be ascribed to God.

Hence is that challenge of St. August. (Confess. 4.4.) Quis Lauds tuas
enumeret unus, quas in se uno expertus est. What Man alive is able to praise
God for his Goodness, which he alone has received in his own Person? certainly
we should be all Bankrupts, if we were called upon for this one Debt.

Since now the very Heathens press this duty warmly: and since there is a
generous gratitude in Nature; what else means that of Israel's sweet Singer (
Psalm 19.1.) The heavens declare the Glory of God, and the Firmament shows
his handywork: How much more does gratitude become God's Children? Honor is
due, (there is none but will grant it) to the Creator, from the creature: and
who so tender of this his honor as his Children and Servants? Now what course
take they for it? How do they give it him? Who so offers me Praise and
thanksgiving, (says God) he honors me (Psalm 50.23.)

The Property of God is benefacere, and the property of Man is benedicere: God
does bless Man with his benefits: and Man does bless God for them. I need not
tell you that the Heathen after they had escaped shipwreck, hung up their
Votivas Tabulas to Neptune: and after Victory, besides Supplications, they did
put Garlands upon the Images of their Gods, and left the chief spoils taken in
War, in the Temple of Mars. I need not tell you that the Jews by the Command
meant of God, reserved a golden pot of that Mannah, in the Ark, in memory of
that Mannah which fell in the Wilderness: and in a thankful acknowledgment to
eternise the Memorial of their passages out of Egypt, and freedom from
Servitude, they altered their Calendar, and made that Month in which God by
Moses delivered them out of the House of Bondage, the beginning of their
Months. ( Exodus 12.2.) Let it suffice to tell you, that the Holy David in the
reflections he made, either upon his danger or deliverances, ever looks up to
Heaven, and acknowledges that the Race is not to the Swift, nor the Battle to
the Strong; but that God alone gives Victory unto Kings. How does he launch
forth in the praises of God his deliverer? ( Psalm 92.1.) It is a good thingto
give thanks unto the Lord, and to Sing praises unto thy name, O thou most High.
Likewise, (Psalm 34.1.2.) I will bless the Lord at all times: his praise shall
continually be in my mouth. My Soul shall make her boast in the Lord: the
humble shall hear thereof and be glad. Also, ( Psalm 146.12.) Praise the Lord O
my Soul. While I live will I praise the Lord: I will Sing praises unto God,
while I have my being. Again, (Psalm 115.1.) Not unto us O Lord, not unto us,
but unto thy name give glory: for thy mercy and thy truth sake. And, (Psalm
116.12, 13.) What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me?
I will take the cup of Salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord. Thus in
the Text: I will Sing a new Song unto thee O God! upon a Psaltery, and an
Instrument of ten strings will I sing Praises unto thee. Holy David (as some
conceive) was therefore styled a Man after God's own heart: because he abounded
much in Praise and Thanksgiving. Somewhat now briefly by way of improvement, and
I have done.

To wave generals; what I have further to say, I shall reduce to our present
Case: and so the Use I shall make of what has been deliver^d, will have a
threefold aspect.

To the Enemies of our King: to the King himself: To us, his Loyal Subjects.
(1.) Has God (who gives Salvation unto Kings) ^me after time, more especially
at this time, delivered our Royal David from the hurtful Sword? I shall then
improve it to the discouragment of all Traitors and Ill-minded Persons against
him: to let them see how hopeless and improbable all their wicked attempts
against him are like to be.

Oh that they would consider what a Darling of Providence hitherto our King
William has been, and how probable all attempts against him will be in vain,
as they have yet all along been, though never so closely and cunningly, and
probably contrived. His Enemies may plot, design, conspire, rebel; they may
stamp and rage, and fret and storm: but all to no purpose; for if God be for
him, who can be against him?

(2dly.) Is God so tender over Princes Safety (as has been told you;) and
ought not they to be as tender of his Honor? is he so gracious to them, and
ought not they to be as grateful to him? to come yet nearer home, Is our Royal
David delivered from the hurtful Sword, and shall he not sing a new Song, a
Song of Praise?

Beloved, he needs no Spur, that is free of himself; shall he not do it? what
mean I to render that in the least suspicious, which is obvious and plain, and
past all doubt? for he both knows his duty, and makes a Conscience of
performing it. I prae, sequar, is a thing most abominable to our King William,
whether in the Field or in the Chapel.

Does he confront the Enemy, a malicious, a Death-threatning Enemy? Eamus --
may most justly be his motto, Come, Let us go: He courageously leads on all the
rest.

Does he return Victorious? God shall be sure to hear of him, upon the Organ,
and other loud-sounding Instruments will he sing Praises unto him. This needs
no further confirmation, than our calling to mind this day we now keep, by
Their Majesty's Appointment, to preserve from oblivion his wonderful
Preservation from imminent destruction; attended (blessed be God) with a noble
Victory; and as not content himself to do it (to make use of our Psalmist's
words, Psalm. 15.14.) He enjoins us also to offer unto God praise, which

(3dly.) Suggests it our duty as well as his. We are all to write after the
Copy set us; and as we partake of the benefit, so are we to make one in the
duty of Praise and Thanksgiving. Salvation is come unto our Israel out of Sion,
and therefore must Jacob rejoice, and Israel be glad. Days of Mercy call for
Days of Thankfulness; and public Mercies, for public and extraordinary
Thanks. Thanks real, not verbal only. Thanks are not thank-worthy, if they
float only in the mouth for a time, and spring not continually from the heart;
if only lip-deep, and reach not our lives.

When our Praises are obediential, then, and only then, are they acceptable
unto God. Saul could not blind Samuel's eyes with his many good Morrows, that
the People saved the best of the Cattle for Sacrifice: Has the Lord (says he)
as great delight in Burnt-Offerings and Saerifice, as in obeying his voice?
behold, to obey is better than Sacrifice, and the fat of Lambs, (1 Samuel 15.22.)
As if he had said, What, Saul, think thou to bribe God with a Sacrifice
while thou art disobedient to his Command? Do thou take the Swan, and stick
the Feather in the room? Do thou deny him thine own heart to obey his word,
and give him a Beasts heart in Sacrifice for it? Is this the Oblation that he
has required, or will accept? Truly, God rises ^angry from our
Thanksgiving-Feasts, if Obedience be not a Dis^ (...) the Table; without this,
we and our Sacrifices may burn together.

If we sing a new Song, if we sing praises unto God, the Son of Syrac ^ill tell
us that Praise is not comely in the month of a Sinnor, for it was not sent him
of the Lord. To conclude, when a motion was made in ^he Senate of dedicating a
Statue of massy Gold to the Honor of Germanicus, Tiberius the Emperor opposed
it, but upon a very plau^ible pretense, that Images of Brass and Gold are
subject to many ^asualties, they may be stolen away, they may be defaced and
batter^d, foul indignity and scorn may be put upon 'em; These are the Sta^nes
of Virtue, and Altars of Fame, which are set up in Men's Hearts. Such Altars
has our Sovereign erected in the hearts of all his loving and loyal Subjects,
upon which we offer this day, throughout all his Dominions, the Sacrifice of
Praise and Thanksgiving, for His Majesty's marvelous Deliverance in his Royal
Person, and the Success of his Arms. ( Psalm 19.2.) One day shall tell another,
and one night shall proclaim it to another, the great things the Lord did at
this time for his Anointed.

Dxa mn t THe.

FINIS.

