A PERSUASIVE TO Peaceableness and Obedience: Seasonable and proper for These
Times. BEING A SERMON Preached at Bury Saint Edmunds in Suffolk, on July 29,
1683, in the Time of the Assizes held there.

By NICHOLAS CLAGETT M. A. Preacher at St. Mary's in St. Edmunds-Bury.

LONDON: Printed for John Marston in Bury St Edmunds, and are to be sold by W.
Kettilby at the Bishops Head in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1683.

To the Right Honorable William Mountague Lord Chief Baron of His Majesty's
Court of Exchequer, And To the Honorable Sir Richard Holloway Knight one of
the Kings Sergeants at Law, Justices of Assize in the Norfolk Circuit.
May it please your Lordships.
THe Age abounds with that variety of Excellent Discourses on all Subjects,
that I could willingly have suppressed mine. However had there been any thing in
this discourse more than the Seasonable and Honest Design of it to recommend it
to that good opinion Your Lordships were pleased to entertain of it, I could
with the less reluctance have complied with the first intimation of Your
Lordships pleasure, and the more readily have consented to its Publication. Not
that I was backward to print a discourse Honored with Your Lordships
Approbation, believing it could come to the view of any more Judicious than
your Lordships; but because I Fear there are Those who will be less Favorable;
Your Lordships Affection to the Sutableness of my Subject, having possessed You
with too kind an opinion of its Management too.

It is a very good thing to Endeavor the Promotion of Peace and Quiet in the
world; and I wish with all my heart it had been in my power to have handled a
Subject of this nature as it deserves, especially at such a Time, when it
appears plainly what a disturbance to the Government the Factious spirits of
those men have been, who love to meddle with things that do not belong to them.

If what I had the Honor to discourse before Your Lordships, may in any
respect help to Allay this Turbulent Humor, and to Engage men for the Future
to mind their own Affairs only, and live peaceably, I shall think my self Happy
to have gained my Design in the Preaching of it. But as for the Exposing it
thus Publicly to the Deliberate Censure of others, nothing can excuse so
Hazardous an Attempt, but that Obedience to my Superiors, which Your Lordships
may justly challenge as a debt due to your Lordships from

Your Lordships Most humble Servant, Nicholas Claget.

1 Thessalonians. IV. 11. And that ye study to be quiet, and to do your own business.


THe Doctrine of Peace is proper enough to be Preached at all Times; The Apostle
in the first Age of the Gospel thought fit frequently to persuade his new
Converts to it; but I think it never more needed to be Taught and Inculcated
than in our days, wherein Parties and Dissentions, Factions and Seditions,
Conspiracies and Treasons make no little noise in the world.

Saint Paul was a great Scholar, and well versed and studied in all parts of
Learning, and yet we see his Advice to his followers was not to put them upon
the study of Controversy, but of Peaceableness. It is thought he was at the
University of Athens when he wrote this Epistle to the Thessalonians; and being
there amongst the busy Students of the Arts and Sciences, he sends his Advice
to the Scholars under his instruction, what sort of Students he would have them
to be, and his counsel to them is to study to be quiet: And the Apostle seems
to have given this precept with regard to the great fault of the people all
thereabouts, and to have ^itted his doctrinal Advice for the bringing them off
from it: For the Greeks generally were a sort of people that were given to a
soft and idle way of life, and went about Scoffing and Tatling, and according
to the account of them which we have in the Acts, took delight and spent their
time in nothing else but either to tell, or hear some new thing, Acts. 17.21.

The word is (...), and signifies the endeavoring after a thing with some
vehement desire and care, and a kind of Ambition: it is Englished here
studying; for quietness is so excellent a thing, as to be worthy of our
ambition and study. But is there any difficulty in this matter? is it a hard
business to be quiet and still, or must it cost us so much trouble to avoid the
giving others any? Indeed the Apostle does well advise us to study quiet, as a
thing which we cannot very easily compass; and we must take some care and pains
with our selves before we can attain this skill, the way hereunto lying through
a great many parts and duties of Religion that are not suited to the corrupt
dispositions of men? For there are several lusts to be subdued in order to it,
from them St. James tells us, come Wars and Contentions, Jam. 4.1. There are
Passions and inordinate Desires to be ruled; and besides there is a busy Devil
too that stirs about, and always puts in for the furthering of Discord and
Confusion, where he can do it with advantage; and there are various incident
occasions of Animosity and Contention, which we meet withal in a bad World.
Finally, we may happen to fail of gaining the point with others, though we
study it to the utmost our selves, in which case the best that we can do is
what is required of us, and is all that is expected, the Apostle himself
exhorting us to no more than this, as much as in us lies, to live peaceably
with all Men, Romans 12.18.

And hence what the Apostle exhorts us to, as requiring Care and Pains to be
studied for, the Psalmist in like manner persuades us to, as a thing not to be
found without seeking for: Seek Peace and pursue it, Psalm. 34.14. Which two
expressions put together do import how much is to be done, for the sake of
Quietness. Study to be quiet, and to do your own business.

In which words the Apostle advises us to two things, to the latter in order to
the former: Be careful to live quietly, and that you may continue so to do,
mind your own business as you should do, and be duly intent upon those things
which concern your particular Condition and Vocation in the World, and then
others about you, your Neighbors and the Government will be in less danger of
receiving any trouble or disturbance from you: For the Apostle persuades us
here to the study of Quiet as we are Neighbors, and as we are Subjects, and
would have us peaceable men as considered standing in both those Relations,
though I conceive he principally respects here the Political quiet, wishing and
begging that all who are called Christians would do nothing against that.

Wherefore designing from the Apostles advice to discourse of quiet in humane
Life, I shall persuade men to live peaceably amongst themselves in common
Conversation, and to be quiet Subjects under the Government.

First, We are to consider how this quietness is to be studied, and the
contrary prevented in common Society between one man and another; and here I
shall be brief, for it is not that Quiet I would chiefly insist on at this
time: yet, however, for as much as the way we take, and the Rules we follow to
be quiet in common Society, will also dispose us to live quietly under the
Government; and they who are good Neighbors are the likeliest to make good
Subjects; I shall begin with the study of quiet, as we converse with one
another in common Life, and in treating upon this, I shall in few words explain
and improve the Apostles advice, as it respects common Conversation, by
resolving it into these following Exhortations.

1. Study to be so qualified your selves as to be rightly disposed to be
Children of Peace, as,

(1.) To be so Humble and Mean in your own Opinions of your selves, as Religion
teaches you to be: The Wise Man tells us, He that is of a proud Heart stirs
up strife, Prove. 28.25. and from Pride comes Contention, Prove. 13.10. and a
great many stirs are made about Honor and Priority of place. For it is certain
that an high value for our selves will make us quarrel with all those that go
about to hinder us of that respect we are greedy of; and to be wise in our own
conceits, and to exalt our selves above every body, is the way to be at Peace
with no body but them that flatter us.

(2.) To be followers of God, and to imitate the Divine Nature, in being slow
to anger, Ps. 145.8. to be able discreetly to defer it, Prove. 19.11. to be calm
and dispassionate, for unruly Passions do but break forth to the disturbance of
Conversation, and to the interrupting of the pleasure of Society, if not to the
incensing and raising Passions in others. And as we are not to be easily
provoked, so neither to be long angry when justly provoked: Never let the Sun
go down upon your Wrath, Ephesians. 4.26. Whereas they who are given to be angry, and
so implacably, can neither be quiet within themselves, nor without toward
others.

(3.) To be of a fair ingenuous and tractable disposition, not given to
humoursomness, which is a very troublesome quality, nothing being more
destructive of quiet, than a sturdy resolution to have our mind in every thing.

(4.) To be moderate in your desires and estimations of the things of this
World; whereas if your Hearts be upon Wealth, and you make have to be rich,
right or wrong, then you will be apt to fly upon all those as your Enemies that
are not Friends to your design, or stand in the way of your pursuing it.

(5.) To have the Universal love which the Gospel requires, even that of
Enemies; whereas if you bear Malice in your Hearts toward any Persons, it is
not likely you should be quiet long your selves, or let them be so; nor indeed
is it well possible to keep always at peace with them whom we hate, and whose
harm we wish, Malice and Hatred being ever Roots of Litigiousness.

(6.) To be equal and candid in your Judgings of others, and charitable in the
Constructions you make upon men's words or actions; to be always ready to
interpret every thing you hear of them or see in them, in as favorable a sense
as it will bear, extenuating what is faulty in them, as far as you are able:
whereas the contrary inclination to censure People rigidly, and to make the
worst of what they say or do, and to represent them in the basest Colors, and
to disgrace and expose them, and to aggravate all their mistakes and
infirmities, and the like, will often put us upon dealing unfairly with others,
and treating them contemptuously, as if we gave them defiance, and consequently
is very prejudicial to the quiet of Conversation.

Thus in order to Quiet, you are to begin with studying to rectify your own
Tempers, laboring to mend them where they are not right and fitted for
Peaceableness, and never leaving off till you have learned to be humble, and
dispassionate and wrathless and tractable, and moderate in your love of the
World, and void of all Malice, and Candid and Charitable in your Judgments of
your Neighbors: For so you are to lay the Foundation of Quietness toward
others in your own Peaceable Dispositions.

2. In studying to be quiet consult the dispositions of others too,
endeavoring to suit your demeanor thereunto in your conversation with them.
For there being variety of tempers amongst men, all are not be managed the same
way; The froward are to be handled more gently, the jealous more cautiously and
the passionate more softly, and the like; very needful it is for the quiet of
common society that we should take notice what men are as to their particular
dispositions and constitutions wherein they differ from others, and then use
our care and prudence accordingly in our carriage toward them.

3. For quiets sake study how to rule and bridle your own tongues, and to have
them under such Governance and restraint,

That you allow not your selves in speaking reproachingly and undervaluingly of
others, The same Apostle who would have us study to be quiet, advising us for
that end to speak evil of no man, Tit. 3.2.

That you be no brawlers, that you avoid all distastful and provoking scoffings
and derisions, all abusive jests and bitter Sarcasms, or any thing of that
nature, whereby others are affronted and disgraced.

That you be not the Tatlers the Apostle condemns, 1. Tim. 5.13.
making idle inquiries into other persons circumstances which you are nothing
concerned in, going about with Tales to disaffect people toward each other,
Speaking things you ought not, and censuring what you do not understand.

That you be able to break off from disputes and to let fall succesless
wranglings, when you see nothing can come on it in the issue but only heat and
passion and quarrelling on both sides.

That you manage your tongues aright in advising and reproving of others, that
is, with a care that you do it seasonably and prudently upon all accounts, lest
otherwise instead of doing good by this means you prove only disgustful and
offensive, and so disturb the quiet of conversation.

The Tongue is a little member, James 3.5,6.
but unless it be governed it is able to make a great disturbance, even to Set
on sire the whole course of nature, as St. James speaks; and David likewise in
that place where he exhorts us to seek peace and pursue it, would have us for
that endkeep our tongues aright.

4. At hearing ill of others be careful not to give heed to what is said of
them lightly and over-credulously; you are not to suffer your thoughts
concerning any person or your affections toward him to be presently altered
upon the talk of some backbiting ill-willer, nor are you lightly to take up a
reproach against your neighbor, or easily to receive an accusation against any
one, but you are to suspend a while, and to study the matter out, and examine
the thing further; for by this means a great deal of disquiet may be prevented.

5. In the studying of quiet weigh all things so wisely and soberly as always
to prefer peace and quiet before things not worth the breaking it, and never
offer to contend about things that cannot well justify contention. They are to
blame who make quarrelsome separations in Religion only upon the account of
little and indifferent things in Gods worship: And they are not the Students in
the Text, who when they have once begun to contend for any point will never be
willing to let the thing fall, though the matter contended for be but a trifle
or nothing, while the business only is, they must have their humor and get the
day: Nor do they study quiet, who are so litigiously given that they will go to
Law for small matters, and will right themselves upon every frivolous occasion
by a legal contest, and will molest the Court with Suits of no value: Nor do
They mind the Advice of the Text, who will enter into Contests about Opinions,
and agitate disputes with a great deal of eagerness and heat, when the Question
discussed, and the Matter of opinion contended for is very insignificant, and
hardly of any concernment or consequence; whereas it was the Apostle's counsel
to Titus Tit. 3.14.
to charge his hearers before the Lord that they strive not about words to no
profit. We must study quiet by weighing the nature of things thoroughly before
we go about to contend, considering with our selves that every little thing
ought not to disturb the quiet of Society, and that small matters cannot
justify the violation of Peace.

6. Study to be quiet by taking all possible care that you prove not the
occasion of beginning or of prolonging any differences between man and man:
Unless we would do what is perfectly repugnant to the advice of the Text, we
must take heed that we do not act as Incendiaries, and set people at variance,
and draw them into contests, or prolong them when they are begun, and foment
the differences between them, only to turn their Quarrels to our own advantage.
The Student in the Text is rather the Peacemaker, that does his best to
reconcile disagreeing parties, and to reduce them to a friendly accommodation.

7. For the preservation of peace study to be exact and punctual in giving
impartially every man his due, in giving men their due of that respect which
belongs to them in the place or station they are in, their due of all other
kinds, by being just and honest in your dealings with all, and true to your
words and bargains, wronging and defrauding no body.

8. For quietness learn meekly to pass by such small faults and offenses of
your neighbors, as you are not much the worse for your selves, considering
that in humane conversation there cannot well be that exactness but that now
and then something will be amiss, and therefore there can be no quietness in
common life, if we be given to be disordered at any thing, if we deeply resent
every little Affront, and be enraged at every little word, and all in a passion
at any little mistake or neglect, and take sire at the least spark.

9. To maintain quietness in Society study to be kind and obliging to all
people, to be helpful and beneficial to each other in all good offices, and in
all the instances of Humanity and Charity whatsoever, and be ready to
accommodate one another as need shall require, and to afford your mutual
comfort and assistance at all times when it is wanted.

Lastly, For this purpose, Study to do your own business which is the
particular mentioned in the Text, and is equally necessary in order both to the
private and public quiet. Not as though a commendable desire that truth might
obtain, and virtue increase more in the world, and a sincere concern for Gods
Honor and Glory, and a real love of our neighbor and desire of his good and
welfare, could not justly and laudably engage us in the matters and
concernments of others, the Apostle exhorting us in another place Phil. 2.4.
not to look every man on his own things, but every man also on the things of
another; whence it is not only allowable but our duty too to intermeddle in
other men's concerns when we do it upon the grounds and reasons forementioned.
But to rush upon other folks business, and intrude into their affairs, and pry
into their closest designs, and censure their proceedings, and molest them at
their employments is an immodest and pragmatical meddling that destroys all
peace and quiet in Society: And therefore to be quiet with others be busy with
your selves, serving God and doing good in your Generation in that place and
profession of life to which God has called you.

This is studying to be quiet in common society as we live together; To which
care and study for the Preservation of quiet amongst men there are these
Motives, That then Society will become easy and delightful, and true Christian
love and amity and mutual respect will be kept up and maintained, and we shall
be more able to do good to one another souls; for while we labor for the
things which make for peace we are then in the fairest way to edify one
another, and we shall avoid several sins which strife and contention does
mostly engage men in; and being at quiet our selves and studying to continue so
with all men, we must needs then be the best disposed to do the business of our
particular Calling as it should be done; and whilst we are no ways diverted
and distracted by Temporal disturbances and unquiet circumstances here, we can
also be the better intent upon the great Affairs of Eternity, and mind the
business of our General Calling; and when we are quiet without on every side,
having discharged all those Christian duties which contribute to peace, we
shall be sure to have the quieter minds and consciences within, and moreover
our care to live peaceably together will make us meet Candidates for an Heaven
of Everlasting quiet: And finally as long as we are here it will be our
happiness to have God amongst us to delight in us and bless us, as the Apostle
assured the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 13.11.
live in peace, and the God of love and peace shall be with you. Which is all
that shall be said concerning the study of quiet in common conversation.

I proceed then to discourse of the Political quiet, and of the study of that;
And to be quiet Subjects, and to be peaceably submissive to the Government is
what men are chiefly to be persuaded to, the mischief of the contrary being far
more fatal than what comes only by private differences and disturbances between
man and man: A seditious Subject is worse than a troublesome Neighbor; the
former disquiets a few about him, the latter the whole community: For which
reason the Law is more severe against Treason and Rebellion, forasmuch as they
strike at the Public quiet, and undermine the very foundation of Government.
And St. Paul in the Text where he exhorts us to the study of quiet, seems
chiefly to respect quietness under Authority and Government. For whereas the
Apostle and they that were with him were reported of as troublesome men that
turned the world upside down, upon which a Tumult began, he makes away to
Athens, begging of the Thessalonian Converts he had left, for that very reason
to study to be quiet, that so they might wipe off from themselves the reproach
of being a disorderly people. But we had need put men in mind of their duty to
Principalities and Powers, and exhort them to be quiet subjects in these Days,
wherein unpeaceable and ill-affected men have attempted to cut off the most
Gracious of Princes, and to destroy the best of Religions, the best of
Governments, the compleatest Constitution in Church and State that the
Christian world knows, and to have involved us all in a National confusion.

Now therefore in persuading men to the study of the Politicial quiet, to study
to be quiet as they are Subjects, these Two things are to be done: First, I am
to show how we may best follow this Advice of studying to be quiet Subjects
under Government. Secondly, I am to lay down several motives to enforce our
care and study so to be.


As to the first, how the Apostles Advice here may best be followed by us, and
what is studying to live peaceably under Government, I shall insist upon four
Particulars, and show, 1. What we are to be in our Selves, if we would be
rightly disposed to be thus Quiet. 2. What ought to be our care in our carriage
toward Others for the Preservation of this Quiet. 3. What Rules of Prudence
are to be observed that we may not be influenced by others to be unquiet. 4.
Why the Apostle prescribes this Expedient in particular, that we would mind to
do our own business.


1. Let us consider what we are to be in our selves, if we would be rightly
disposed to be quiet under Government, and by that we may understand partly
what it is to study to be so: Now there are several things which dispose men to
unpeaceableness under Government, and make them ready for Sedition and Treason,
though they be not actually engaged in any design against the Government. For
as all the Confederates in an Horrid Conspiracy do not propound the same Ends
to themselves, but some one, some another, so of those who are seditiously and
treasonably disposed, some come to be so upon one account, some upon another.
Wherefore that we may be qualified aright to be peaceable Subjects, I shall
take notice of those things which dispose men to unquietness under Government,
and prepare them to be in a Plot, when occasion serves: And here studying to be
quiet is, laboring to remove far from our selves all such Causes of
unpeaceableness; which are these that follow,

1. Ambition; for that is a restless thing, and will not suffer those to be
quiet in whom it is predominant, where any thing is to be done in the
prosecution of its own designs; it will make way and break through where it
can, stopping at nothing, nor regarding at all the Rules of Religion, the Good
of the Public, or the Sacredness of Sovereignty. When a man resolves to be
some body, he is as resolute to care for no body that stands in the way of his
design, if he can but effect his business. When the Bishops of Rome began to
grow to that vast Ambition, that nothing would serve them but the Imperial
Crown, and the Temporal Power, no wonder that there followed immediately
Combustions, Rebellions, and many a bloody Enterprise. When Absalom had set his
heart upon being King, he soon disturbs the Public quiet, and raises a
Rebellion against his Father: As also aspiring Adonijah got a Seditious Party
to himself, when he set up for the Kingdom against his Brother. The Government
is not secure of those that would fain be uppermost themselves: Ambition always
inclines me ntobe troublesome to the State, and they who are thus disposed, if
they do but serve their own designs, matter not though it be done by subverting
of Governments, and unhinging of the World. Study then to be quiet under
Government, by endeavoring to keep your selves meekly minded; and to subdue
all ambitious inclinations, and to check all motions of that sort when you find
them stirring in you, and learn to be easy and satisfied in that state and
place wherein God has set you.

2. Private Discontent: For that is another thing disposing men to be restless
and unquiet, especially when it happens to be their condition, who are Great
Persons, and so more able than others to be troublesome, and to contrive and
carry on a mischievous design against the State. Perhaps things do not go with
the man just as he would have them; peradventure he has not the Favor of his
Prince so much as he thinks he deserves, and then the next thing is, he is
ready to be engaged in a Party against him: and because he is crossed in some
particulars, and imagins himself not respected enough, he resolves to take his
fill of Revenge, though he makes the whole Body Politic shake for it, and
hurles the world into confusion; or at least he will seek to mend his
Condition, by trying to dethrone that Power which he judges is not favorable
enough to him, and by venturing what may happen upon a Change and new Scene of
things. And no doubt, where the Devil finds Malcontents of this sort, and
sees how they are disposed, he takes advantage against them, managing his
Suggestions accordingly, to push them forward to the most desperate attempts.
Study then to live quietly under the Government, by studying contentment in
your private Circumstances, though they be not just as you would have them: and
herein imitate St. Paul, who as he advises us in the Text to study to be quiet,
so he studied it himself this way; for he tells us of himself, Phil. 4.11.
I have learnt in whatever state I am therewith to be content.

3. The discontents of a Party do likewise dispose them who are of it to be
unquiet and turbulent, and to be engaged in most horrid Enterprises, especially
when Affairs are in such a posture and condition, that their great Designs are
bafled, and all their Hopes at an end. For when a Party is discontented, and
there is a common dissatisfaction amongst a great many people, they will often
rage together against the Government, and by this means hearten, and encourage
one another in mischief; and when it is come to that pass, that their ends
cannot be obtained from the Government, and nothing is to be done by gentle and
slow methods, they are for trying to dispatch their business more effectually a
quicker way, and their last desperate remedy is overturning the Government, to
set up for Governors themselves. This is what the discontents of Factious
people do commonly bring them to in the issue, when they are past hopes of
gaining their ends any other way. When Persons of Loyalty are put into all the
places of Authority, and they only who are true to the Throne are entrusted
with Public Offices, and the Church and State are the most firmly established,
then no wonder if a Party of Malcontents be driven to the desperate
resolution not to sit down quietly by the Government, but to put themselves
upon the last Extremities. Whenever then the Constitution of Affairs quite
spoils a design you have very earnestly pursued, take heed that you harbor no
angry discontents in your breasts, nor espouse the discontents of others, nor
join with Malevolent men in disloyal expressions of your displeasure at the
Government: but study a quiet submission to the present condition of things,
believing rather whatever point you have lost, which you could wish to have
gained, that what is ordered and disposed by God and your Superiors, will prove
best in the end.

4. Through want of Gratitude toward God for all the blessings of the
Government, men become ready for unquietness under it, when men have no due
sense of the Divine Mercies vouchsafed them, no marvel if they should prove so
voerseen, as to offer to bereave themselves of them, even by an Act of their
own. As for our present Government, if we either consider what it is in it
self, or compare it with what we see elsewhere in the world, we must judge it
to be the best and happiest of Constitutions; whence I infer, That if people
were duly thankful to God for National Blessings here in England, and knew when
they were well, the King and Government were as safe as possible: but if men
have no Sense at all of the happiness of a Constitution, nor ever look up to
God with Grateful acknowledgments of it, I cannot much wonder, if they should
become so weak, as to be for trying Conclusions by a Change. Wherefore, as the
Case is with us, would you study this Quiet, viz. to be as Loyal to the King as
you ought to be, study then to be as Thankful to God as you should be.

5. A distrusting of Gods Providence and care of us for the Future, and an
impatience to be at an end of some present fears, is another thing disposing
men to unquietness: Upon a prospect of ill times that may come, some must up
and be doing themselves, to prevent them by all manner of means, even by the
Diabolical ones of Treasonable Associations, Assassinations, and Insurrections.
Popery may come in, and that is to be kept out; and pray God it may; but God
forbid that we should offer to keep it out the same way by which the Papists
have attempted to bring it in: To conspire against the Prince, and to strike at
the Government, is going horridly to work to keep out Popery, and I believe
this Evil will hardly ever be prevented by means of this sort; we had better
Exodus 14.13.
stand still and see the salvation of the Lord, than think of saving our selves
by villainous and treasonable Devices; men had better leave the matter to God,
and stay his leisure, and trust in his care of his Church, which he has
somiraculously manifested in all Ages, than go about to show themselves Zealous
Protestants, by being Traitorous Subjects. Study then to be quiet, by learning
to rest and depend upon God for the Future, and to acquiesce cheerfully in his
Providential Disposal of things, without having any wicked designs against the
Government, to prevent what is feared.

6. A boisterous and misguided Zeal for Religion disposes men to be seditious
and unquiet, and makes them ready for Treason or Rebellion. This I cannot omit
mentioning, since it proved so Fatal to this poor Island in the Late Times, and
was the great cause of the many Troubles and Confusions under which the Land
groaned. And indeed, never are men more violently bent to be disorderly and
unquiet, nay to attempt horrible things, than when they are carried away with a
false and fiery Zeal for Religion; For, when the Religious Frenzy is at the
height, and men's heads run upon the goodness of a Cause, wherein they are
persuaded Gods Honor is concerned, they are commonly intemperately hot in the
service of such a Cause, insomuch that no place is left for a Deliberate
Prudence and careful Consideration, but they are ready to embrace all Motions,
and to engage furiously in any Enterprises that look that way, till at length
perhaps the Zeal for Religion ends in a Damnable Plot, and the Hot Religionists
are the Horrid Traitors. And such is the madness of that kind of Zeal, when men
are most acted and pusht forward by it, that they think they are zealous for
God, while they forget what he has commanded and forbidden, and that they are
his Busy and Godly Servants, when they are quite and clean gone beyond the
bounds of their Duty. Study then to be quiet, not by laying aside Zeal for
Religion, for it is a good thing always to be zealously affected in a good
Cause; but by taking care that your Zeal for Religion be the true Gospel Zeal,
that it steer right, and be well guided; do not suffer it to make you undutiful
to your Governors, troublesome to the State, or Rebels to your Prince, for it
can never be a right Christian Zeal that puts men on to these ill things; and
therefore do not think of showing your Zeal for God by breaking his Laws, of
being irreligious for Religion, and of playing the Devil for Gods sake; but let
your Zeal for Religion appear to be right and true, by its employing you most
of all in the practice of all the known Duties of Religion, by its making you
constant and resolute there, nay, courageous enough to die for Religion if need
be; and then moreover be as stirring and industrious as you can in the Cause of
Religion, to promote its interest in the world, where you can do it lawfully
and prudently; but study to be quiet withal, let your Zeal, as to its actings,
be kept within the limits of Peace, and then be as wise and busy for God and a
good Cause as your zeal prompts you to be. Jam. 3.17.
The wisdom that is from above, is peaceable, and so is the Heavenly zeal too.

7. Contempt of the Government is another thing which makes men unquiet under
it, and ready to do all they can to subvert it: And this disposedness to be
unquiet is too apparently in those people that will flock together contrary to
the Laws, when they know they are forbidden to assemble in Multitudes, because
the Government is jealous of them, and has reason enough to be so, especially
since the Old open Rebellion, and the New close Conspiracy. And by this time, I
suppose, we see sufficiently what little reason the King has to suffer and
persons to be Orators to great Assemblies, but such with whom he may safely
trust his People, and it is well known with what sort of Teachers he dares not
trust them, and therefore justly forbids their appearing to speak to Multitudes
of People unlawfully got together. But if nevertheless there are yet any that
will disturb the Government, and put it into fears of them, by getting into
separate meetings, and there venting their Doctrines to unlawful Assembles, in
defiance of the Laws and Authority of the Realm, and that too when there is no
need of their Teachings (His Majesty recommending his People to other and
better Instructers, whom he can trust, and who are Lawfully called to the
Ministry) what can we think of such men as these, and of the crowds that go
after them, but that they have learnt habitually to despise the Authority of
the Government, and consequently that they are too ready in any thing they can
do to contribute to the prejudice of it. For there can be no care or studying
to be quiet under the Government, where there is not a due Reverence and awful
Respect to it, and they are past pretending to that, who do any apparent
despite to the Government, to disturb and molest it.

Lastly, Disloyal Principles dispose men to be unquiet Subjects, viz. such as
these, That all Power is from the People, and is put into the Kings hands upon
trust; That it is lawful for Subjects to enter into Covenants and Associations
for the Defense of themselves and their Religion, against the command of the
Prince; That Princes must submit their Scepters to the Eldership and to the
Church; That Heretical Princes being excommunicate are to be Deposed, and may
be killed by their Subjects; That when a King is excommunicate by the Kirk, and
cast into Hell, he is not fit to live upon the earth, and the like, which are
the Doctrines of Jesuits and Fanatics, Doctrines of so pernicious a
consequence to the public Peace, that it is enough to make us reject them as
false without examining them further; and upon men of such Principles the
Advice of the Text is but thrown away, and it can do no good upon them, there
being no possible security of their being quiet. Study it then by a care not to
be debauched by such impious Doctrines and Principles as are destructive of the
quiet of the State, and do leave Governments and Governors insecure.

And thus having reckoned up those several things which dispose men to
unpeaceableness under the Government, we may see that to be quiet Subjects we
must study to be meekly minded, to be content with our private circumstances,
and with the public Administration of Affairs, to be duly thankful to God for
public Blessings, to conside in him for the future, to regulate our Zeal, to
revere the Authority of the Government, and to be peaceably and loyally
principled.

2. Next we are to consider what ought to be our care in our Carriage toward
Others, for the preservation of Quiet. And we must be careful that nothing come
from us which tends to have so ill an influence upon men, as to render them
disaffected toward the Government, and less contented to be quiet. We must
avoid all murmuring and repining at the present days, as if the former were
better than these. For when people hear this from us, they are apt to be put
out of humor, and to be left the more dissatisfied at the present constitution
of things, and so may in all likelihood be stirred up to be unquiet. It should
be our practice to study and promote Quiet, by representing the public
Blessings and Advantages God affords us, in so lively a manner, as to beget
rather peace and contentment, nay thankfulness in Men's minds. But let us be
very wary how we suggest our discontents, or whisper our dislikes of the
Government, or talk of Grievances, and take heed withal, that we put not Men
into causeless Fears and Jealousies, as if ill things were in hand, and bad
days were a coming, through an ill management of Public Affairs; lest by our
means People come to be startled and disquieted, and then remain Enemies to the
Government, tumultuously given, and inflamable to Rebellion. To study to be
Quiet, and to keep men so, is rather to do all we can to reconcile Men to the
Government, who it may be are apt enough of themselves to fly out against it,
and to complain where there is no Cause, and to fear where there is no Reason,
and to find flaws where there are none.

And then it must be our care likewise, that we do not lessen Peoples
inclinations to live as peaceble Subjects should do, by our exposing any ways,
or reflecting contemptuously upon the Prince, by dwelling upon his private
failings and infirmities, by attributing Public Judgments to him, or the like,
the consequence whereof is likely to be this, That Men will be the more
disposed to slight his Authority. The Student of Quiet will not speak evil of
the Ruler of his People, but is of a Loyal Disposition, like to that of the Old
Testament Saints, who thought Job 34.18
not fit to say to a King, Thou art wicked, or to Princes, ye are ungodly, or
Ps. 89.51
to reproach the footsteps of Gods Anointed.

Consider we further how we are to do, if we study to be Quiet, and would
continue so, that others may no ways incline us to the contrary; and here these
Advices will not be improper.

1. Decline to the utmost all occasions of danger in this matter, and shun
those places where you are like to meet with temptations to unpeaceableness;
and go not to the Schools of unquietness, where you may chance to find your
Prince abused, and his Ministers of State traduced, and his Government defamed,
and the Church railed at, and the gross Ignorance and blind Zeal of poor People
practiced upon, for the stirring them up to Sedition and Rebellion: And indeed
it is not likely that you should meet with any Doctrines of Obedience in such
Assemblies, where their very meeting together is an act of Disobedience; or
that Loyalty should be taught where Conventicling is practiced. And therefore
your Loyalty and Peaceableness will be much hazzarded, if you venture amongst
People got together in Crowds, contrary to the Law and Establishment; for when
you happen to hear canting Reflections upon the Government in great Assemblies,
you know not how far they may work upon you, especially if all the while you
perceive the Rabble about you are deeply affected therewith, and that Seditious
Complaints from the Speaker, are seconded with groans from the Hearers.

2. Do not easily believe, or hear with pleasure, any scandalous stories
concerning your Prince and his Government; and be not carried away presently
with News, Pamphlets, or Libels, that revilingly reflect upon both: We should
not too credulously hear ill things of one another in common Conversation, much
less of the King and Government: St. Paul would not have an Accusation lightly
received against an Elder, 1 Timothy 5.19.
or one in Authority in the Church; how much more careful should we be, that we
do not rashly entertain any Accusation against our Prince, whereby he is
reproached, or against the Government, whereby that is defamed: And consider
well the folly of being led by the Nose, and betrayed into Disloyalty by these
means: They that would make you out of Love with the Government, by their
scribbling or talking, may in all likelihood be misinformed, and take things
wrong themselves: Others of them may be foolish and short-sighted, and only
obtrude on you their idle and weak Conjectures upon the present condition of
Affairs: Others of them, possibly Knaves, who may know well enough that things
are not really as they represent them, and yet will scatter abroad their base
and scurrilous Reflections upon the Government, not that they intend you any
good by what they insinuate, but they have a design of their own to bring
about, and you, and as many as they can, they would draw in to be Parties in
their Service. Again, it is like neither they nor you are Competent Judges of
the intentions and proceedings of your Superiors, nor are their Arcana Imperii
subjected to Vulgar Apprehensions: And what if by means of the Seditious
Clamours of bad persons you become disaffected to the Government, and turn a
Party against it, and all upon a mistake? What if you engage presently in a
Treasonable Attempt to overthrow the Government, whilst endeavors are
faithfully used, that it might be managed more and more for the public
Security and Advantage, and to cut off a Prince, while he is really contriving
and consulting for your Welfare and Happiness? This is very possible, I am
sure, since we have had notorious instances of it even in our Days: For how
has a Government been reviled, which continues the Envy of the World, and is
so admirably fitted and constituted for the good of those that are under it,
and what numbers of Libellous things have flown about to alienate men's
Affections from a Prince, that sincerely intends and studies the Prosperity of
his Subjects, and has managed things so Happily by his Wise and Prudent
Conduct, A Prince of whom I may say what King David truly did of himself, that
Psalm. 78.72.
he has all along fed his people according to the integrity of his heart, and
guided them by the skilfulness of his hands. And let this teach you not to
listen credulously to ill Stories concerning your Superiors, and not to read or
hear with content their Intentions blamed, or their Proceedings Censured, let
it rather always be your Rule to suspect them that would tempt you to suspect
your Prince, and his Government.

3. Stand up vigorously to oppose the very first Motions to Sedition, whenever
you are surprised with any beginnings of discourse tending to that purpose; For
by checking and discouraging unquiet Talkers of this kind you will not only in
some measure rescue and save your selves from being attempted any more by them,
but you may possibly divert them from their unpeacable Designs, and from
entertaining such thoughts any longer themselves, and so may prevent, or at
least contribute considerably toward the preventing a great deal of mischief
that might follow; For we know what dreadful Rebellions, Parricides, and
Revolutions have arisen from small beginnings, and do remember for instance,
that the Miseries of the late times had their rise at first from seditious
Talk, which grew afterward to downright Treason, and the next thing was
Remonstrating, and at last it came to Arms, Arms.

4. We are to consider in the fourth place, why the Apostle exhorting us to
study to be quiet, prescribes this Expedient in particular, that we would do
our own business; and he thus advises to denote that there are two things very
prejudicial to the public quiet, viz. Idleness and Meddling; and sometimes they
meet together both in the same persons; for so St. Paul speaks of some whom he
blames for (...), idle and yet busy too, that is, busy in Affairs not
belonging to them, and Idle where they should be busy. Study to be Quiet, yet
not so as to do nothing; Study to do business, but let it be your own; Idleness
we know exposes men to all temptations, and so to the Devil, to be led captive
by him at his will. We read a story in Tertullian Lib. de Spectac.
of a woman that had been newly proselyted to the Faith of Christ, who going to
the Theater, returned from thence possessed of the Devil; whereupon in the
Exorcism the Devil being asked how he came to venture upon a Believer, his
Answer was, I do it most justly, for, in meo came inveni, I found her idling
upon my own ground: But we are better fenced against the Assaults of the Devil,
if when he comes to attempt us he finds us diligent at our own business; for
the idle are more ready for wickedness, according as Temptation from without
may prompt them, as in particular, are easily dealt withal to be in a Plot, and
the more there are of such, the greater are the dangers of the State, for as
much as such people are always ready to be called in to be Parties, and to
strike in for mischief upon any Tumultuous occasion. Study then to be quiet, by
avoiding idleness; but by doing your own business too, presumptuous Meddling
being as destructive of quiet as the other; And St. Peter ranks the busie-body
with the evil-doer, the theif and the murderer, 1 Pet 4.15. For when men's busy
thoughts carry them abroad, and they are all for prying into the Affairs of
other, which do not belong to them, ten to one if at length they do not look so
high as the Government it self, and imagining some pressure there, and
disliking the Conduct of Political Affairs, turn grave Medlers in the
Reformation of Church and State, taxing in the mean while what is done by their
Superiors. Now when every little place is a Counsel-Table, and every ordinary
fellow a Statesman, and men that have nothing to do in the thing, will be
modelling the Government according to their own fancy, and giving out their
Politics, and correcting the Constitution, as if it was defective, it is not
like to be a quiet world. Men would do God and their Country better service, if
they would keep close to the business of their particular vocations; and strive
to excel in that, not troubling others with their conceits concerning State
matters, when they are neither sought for, nor desired, nor needed, leaving the
Administration of the Government to God and our Superiors who are entrusted
with it, and are most concerned therein, and have greater helps from Almighty
God in their judging and managing of Affairs, than pragmatical Medlers can
expect. Wherefore study to be quiet abroad, by taking care not not to move out
of your own Sphere, and keeping your selves busy at home.

And this is all that I shall say upon the first head, viz. how we are to
study, or what is studying to be quiet Subjects, and to live peaceably under
the Government.

What remains in the second place, is to persuade men to this study of Quiet,
and that by arguments from sundry Considerations, which however I shall put all
together at this time, that being jointly considered, they might have the more
force to check and correct the unquiet and disloyal humors of the present
times. As,

1. From the common and known advantages of quiet to Humane Society, which are
better enjoyed than described. Things are at best in the fair temperate
Climate, and flourish most when we are all at quiet; for then Arts and Sciences
are improved, Traffic and Trade goes on, Riches increase, and so does Religion
too, St James telling us that James 3.18.
the fruits of righteousness are sown in peace, and Psalm. 85.10.
righteousness and peace kiss each other; James 3.16.
but where strife is, there is not only Confusion, but also every evil work.

2. From the nature of God, to whom Peace is so frequently attributed in the
New Testament, as the great Lover and Author of it; For he is styled Heb. 13.20.
the God of peace, Romans 1.7.
peace is said to come from him, and James 3.17.
the wisdom from above is peaceable, and our Savior pronounces them the
beloved and Math. 5.9.
blessed children of God that are peacemakers, and so do resemble their
Heavenly Father as his true Sons: And therefore methinks they cannot well pass
for the Godly Party, or the people of God, that are the unquiet Troublers of
our Israel, and are the Children of Sedition and Rebellion.

3. From the nature of the Religion we profess, which is an Institution of
Peace, all the Gospel Doctrines of Humility, Meekress, Patience, Contentedness,
and Contempt of the World, being calculated for the making men quiet. From the
manner of its entering into the world, which was not by Treasons and Tumults,
but in Silence and Peace; there were no Risings or Mutinies at the first
appearance of its Author, but a Song of Peace was sung by Angels at his Birth,
and His voice was not heard in the streets. And we know what was the Legacy he
bequeathed to his Disciples, and in them to all Christians when he left the
World, My PEACE I leave with you: and therefore it is strange that Christians,
should be the turbulent Men, that Christians should be Rebels, and Traitors,
and Troublers of the World.

4. From Romans 13.1.2.4. Tit. 3.1. 1 Pet. 2.13.17.
our being required in the Doctrine of the Gospel, more especially to live
quietly, as we are Subjects and under Government, as not to resist the Power,
because it is the Ordinance of God, to be subject to Principalities and Powers,
to Honor the King, to submit to him as Supreme, and as the Minister of God
next under him, and instead of making quick work with our Sovereign, and them
that are next him in the Government, by hasty Assassinations, our Religion bids
us pray for Kings and all that are in Authority, that under them we might lead
quiet and peaceable lives in all godliness and honesty. We are to be quiet
toward them, and are to pray to God for them, that we may live quietly under
them.

5. From the examples of the first Christians, who were the famed men of their
Time for Meekness and Quietness, and under very severe usage from the
Government, but yet could never find in their hearts to engage in any
Treasonable Design against it, nor ever looked upon their Numbers as an
encouragement to Rebellious Insurrections, but without giving any disrepect to
Authority, or disturbance to the Government, were resolute and patient
sufferers for Christ, and that was all.

6. From the great injury we do our Religion, and the reputation of our
Profession in the world by unquietness under Government, nothing being more
likely to render it odious in the eyes of others, and to cause it to be ill
spoken of, especially amongst the Princes of the Earth. Plots and Rebellions
are things that sound very ill in the world, and cast an horrid reproach upon
the Religion they are of that practice such Villainies; For which reason in
particular, as we see in the verse after the Text, the Apostle counsels the
Thessalonian Believers to study to be quiet, viz. That they might walk honestly
toward them that are without. If then you have any regard to the honor and
reputation of that Christianity you profess, and would not have the name of the
Lord blasphemed, nor the best and most Divine Religion and Institution of our
dear Savior suffer amongst Turks and In^idels, Study to be quiet, and let not
the world hear of Conspiracies and Treasons amongst Christian People, let no
such thing be told in Gath, or published in the streets of Askelon.

7. From the nature of unquietness, and plotting against Princes and
Governments, as it is the Devils great work, and his business to study it, and
carry it on in the world. God Almighty is the great Monarch of the world to
govern it by a wise and good Providence; The Devil is the God of this world to
roil and disorder it, to confound all things in it, and to put them out of
course as much as he can. 1 Kings. 22.22.
Ahab's overthrow was contrived by evil Spirits. John. 13.27.
Judas was spurred on by the Devil to betray his Master. 1. Chron. 28.1.
Satan stood up against Israel, and moved David to number Israel in order to
their common ruin; and in our days I suppose it is he that has moved a Party
of men to take a survey of their Numbers, and to examine their strength, in
order to Insurrections, a Rebellion, and National Desolation; And though the
Devil no doubt be very busy in contriving and bringing about private men's
harm; yet the sport that pleases him best, and which he loves and seeks most,
is the destruction of whole Communities and Bodies Politic, and whatever some
may happen to gain by a public Tumult and Confusion, and the ruin of a
Government, the Devil is sure to get most by it; and therefore to me nothing
appears to look more like the Devil and his handywork, than Seditious
Unquietness and a Plot; Treasonable Conspiracies are of that Nature, that he is
in nothing, if not in such things. Study then to be quiet Subjects, if you
study the contrary you are the Devils Students; if your minds be upon
disturbing the public Quiet, and overthrowing Governments, you are Scholars
managed by his suggested Instructions, and if you be in a Plot, you are his
Vassals and Tools, and upon his work. Blessed, says our Savior, are the
peacemakers, for they shall be caled the children of God: And it may be said,
Cursed are the Peace-breakers, those chiefly that disquiet Governments, those
yet more especially that Conspire against the best of Kings and Governments,
for they shall be called the Children of the Devil.

8. From the fearful Consequences of a Treasonable Success, when by Gods
permission a Plot takes effect, and the Blow is given, and the Land put into
Confusion: Roil the Water, and what gets up to the top but Mud and Filth? So in
the late times, when the Land was roil'd, the very Mud of the people got
highest, and to the place of Rule. And had this detestable Conspiracy
succeeded, and the Waters of our Israel been troubled, some of the filth of the
Land would soon have been uppermost, and instead of a most Gracious and Prudent
Prince, a Renowned Clergy, Reverend and Learned Judges, and the like Blessings
which we now enjoy, what a strange new set of Governors, and Teachers, and
Managers of Affairs were like to have come in their room? It is sure wholesome
Advice of Solomon, Prove. 24.21.
Fear God and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to change. For
when a Change in the Government is once begun, men do not know when or where to
make an end, having gone from better to worse, they still go on from worse to
worse, till either they return thither again, from whence they have wandered,
or stick fast in the Mire, and continue in a remediless Confusion. Study
therefore to be quiet, and peaceably to submit to the Government, not
foreseeing the Consequences of the success of a Traitorous Design, lest you see
your Folly in the end, and, with too late a Repentance, share in those miseries
you have brought upon your selves.

9. From its being the very first thing insisted on in the Proverbial
Instructions of the wisest of mere men, that we would be persuaded to have no
hand in wicked Conspiracies. This you see in the first Chapter of the Proverbs,
where the Wise Man desiring a due attention to his Instructions; Hear my Son
the Instruction of thy Father, v. 10. speaking as a Wise, and Grave, and
Experienced Person to a young beginner in the World: His first Advice is this,
which immediately follows, My Son, if sinners entice thee consent thou not, v.
10. What Sinners in particular? Bloody Associators: as appears by what follows.
If they say come with us, let us lay wait for blood, let us lurk privily for
the innocent without cause, let us swallow them up alive as in the Grave, and
whole as those that go down into the Pit; we shall find all precious substance,
we shall fill our Houses with spoil; Cast in thy Lot amongst us, and let us all
have one purse. My Son, walk thou not in the way with them, refrain thy foot
from their path. So he advises at the very first, which makes me wonder that
Men of any Prudence or Gravity at all, should be found in an horrible
Conspiracy, contrary to the ancient Advice of the Wise Man, who was so much
against bloody Confederacies, that he begins his Instructions with expressing
his great detestation of them: And surely what was Wisdom and what was Folly in
those Elder Ages of the World, and in the days of the Wiseman, is so now. When
therefore they say, as in the Parable, Come let us Kill the Heir, that the
Inheritance may be ours, Consent thou not; and in abhorrence of their
Treasonable Consults, let every one of us say in particular, O my Soul come not
thou into their secret.

10. From the absurdity of the usual pretenses that are made to cast some
color upon a Treasonable Design: And now Gods Glory, and the good of the
Public never fail coming in to be part of the Design when any great Villainy is
moved or set on foot. And is Religion and Gods Cause a pretense for Treason and
Rebellion? This is next to Blasphemy, and is an impious Reflection upon the
Wisdom or Power of God, as if to bring about his own Designs, he stood in need
of our Devilish Devices: And this is yet more absurdly pretended, when by those
who have no Religion at all; and while they tell you of Gods Glory, aim only at
their own, not serving God, but their own Bellies; and a wicked Conspiracy
seldom wants the help of some plausible Atheists to carry it on: Or, must men
undertake to be Traitors in defense of the Rights and Liberties of the People,
and upon pretense to put by Arbitrary Dominion? That Evil is like to be removed
by a Treasonable success, when the Government is quite unhinged, and all Laws
turned out of doors, and the Foundations of Property taken away, and people are
at their Liberty to scramble for what they can get, and the Party that happens
to be the Power shall enslave all the rest. And yet the strangest thing of all
is, that the best of Churches must be destroyed for the interest of Religion,
and the happiest of Governments for the good of the People, and the most gentle
and merciful of Princes to be delivered from Tyranny. But I suppose the case is
this, The Prince is a Tyrant merely because he is a Monarch, and restrains
unruly Subjects that threaten his Throne; and the Clamor for Religion is,
because men have not their full liberty to be of any Religion, or of none; and
the Government is a Grievance and Bondage, because not fixed in the People, and
men's Rights are invaded, because they are Governed, and they are Slaves only
because they are not Kings themselves, and if it be so, God keep us in our
Happy Slavery, and from the Grievances of Liberty and Property which our
wretched Conspirators would have procured for us, The good Lord deliver us. I
argue yet further to persuade men to quietness under Government,

11. From those heavy Punishments in the other world, of a seditious and
Treasonable unquietness in this, which will follow without repentance. This I
speak with the greatest seriousness: For can it be imagined that they who are
the Turbulent men in this world, and would overthrow States and Kingdoms here,
will be ever reckoned meet to be admitted into a Heaven of eternal Quiet and
Serenity hereafter? no; a miserable Hell of Havoc and Confusion is a place
more proper for them, and there, if they repent not, they are like to be. In
the Parable of the Lord and his Servants we read, Matthew. 24
that he came and found some of them smiting their fellow Servants, (and had
not this Plot been detected, what smiting work would there have been of
fellow servants and fellow subjects?) And the Lord commanded that these Smiters
should be cut asunder; where their punishment in the other world is threatened
to be very Grievous, as it is represented bearing some Analogy to that Temporal
punishment which the Law here inflicts upon Traitors, which is Quartering of
them, a Punishment they justly deserve, who go about to tear whole Societies
and Kingdoms to pieces.

12. From the little likelihood that such should escape the hand of Justice in
this world. For what Design is more foolish, or what Attempt is more unlikely
to take effect than a Treasonable Confederacy, especially when many are engaged
in it? And whereas infinite are those Accidents which may hinder the success of
a Plot, one of them may be enough to occasion its Discovery, and ruin the
Conspirators. Especially if another thing be considered, which is all that I
shall add to persuade men to the Study of Quietness, and to be peaceable under
Government, and that argument is,

Lastly, From the wonderful Providence of God, whereby he brings to naught the
Counsels, and defeats the Purposes of those who Conspire the ruin of
Governments. This I hope may in some measure prevail with men to be quiet,
though the other Considerations now mentioned should do no good upon them; if
Gods Word and other Arguments cannot teach you Peaceableness and Loyalty, yet
however be so wise as to learn it from his Providence; Nay do not wonder if by
his Providence he shows his dislike of such things, which he has expressly
forbidden in his word, viz. of Treasonable designs, in not suffering them to
take effect, or but seldom, and then for weighty reasons best known to himself.
Prove. 29.21.
There are many devices in the hearts of Traitors, but the Counsel of the Lord
that shall stand, and unless you knew what his secret Counsel was, it is in
vain to attempt those things which he is mighty like to hinder; For God in his
Providence has a particular regard to the Concernments of Kingdoms and Bodies
Politic, which last not beyond this life, and are his Care only here; and he
will make it appear that he really Governs the world, by his care over States
and Communities, because in their Preservation and Deliverances his providence
shows it self the most illustriously to be taken notice of by the Inhabitants
of the earth: Moreover if Gods Providence be not unconcerned in lesser matters,
and private persons are under the shadow of his wings, most assuredly he is
intent upon the good of Governments, wherein the happiness of Thousands is
involved. Be therefore quiet and still, for if you rise to be Traitors and
Rebels, then God will arise too, and scatter his Enemies; and though the design
may have gone on a great while, as if God was silent and neuter in the case,
and the keeper of Israel slumber'd and slept, yet when it is near the
Execution, as the Psalmist elegantly speaks, Psalm. 78.65,66.
Then the Lord awakes as one out of sleep, and like a mighty man that shouteth
by reason of wine, and smites his Enemies in the hinder parts, and puts them to
perpetual reproach. Accordingly the Wise Man, in that first Chapter of the
Proverbs before mentioned, where he expresses his hatred of bloody
Combinations, speaks in like manner: Surely in vain the net is spread, and they
lay wait for their own blood, and lurk privily for their own lives, v. 17, 18.
Wherefore learn to be quiet, because the Psalmist tells you, Ps. 99.1.
The Lord reigns and sits between the Cherubims, be the people never so
unquiet. Men may design and plot as they will; yet he governs, and will order
things as he sees good: Psalm. 135.6.
Whatsoever the Lord pleases that does he in Heaven, and in Earth, and in the
Sea, and in all deep places: He has shown his power and providence in all
Ages, in the miraculous Deliverances of his Church; he has time after time
wonderfully delivered this Church and State, and has as wonderfully interposed
to save us at this time; And from these repeated providence, whereby we have
been preserved, let our Enemies learn to be quiet, and to lift up their Heel no
more against us, lest they be found fighting against God, and striving with a
Reprobate Impudence against all those Repulses Heaven has given them; and
learn to be Loyal to a Prince whose Government over us is mightily asserted by
Providence, whom God has so frequently delivered from the Sons of Violence,
and has so miraculously preserved, that we may well think him to be the Care
of Heaven, and that God has undertaken his Protection: And in the mean while
let us beseech God that he would be pleased to discourage our ill-willers and
ill-affected Men from all Unquiet and Treasonable Attempts, by still appearing
graciously for us, that he would still go on to let the World know that he is
our Savior and mighty Deliverer: And so let us Conclude all with an excellent
Collect of our Church for this purpose, which we use in our daily Devotions,

O God, who art the Author of Peace, and lover of Concord, in knowledge of whom
stands our Eternal Life, whose service is perfect freedom; Defend us thy
humble servants in all assaults of our Enemies, that we surely trusting in thy
defense, may not fear the power of any Adversaries, through the might of Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen. FINIS.

