CLAMOR SANGVINIS: OR, THE CRY of BLOOD.
Being a Short, but True ACCOUNT OF A Barbarous and Bloody Assault made on
Thursday Night, the 15th of this Instant April, 1680. On the Body of John
Arnold, Esquire One of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County of
MONMOUTH. Who at this Instant lies desparately Wounded at his Lodgings, near
Temple Bar, London.
The tender Mercies of the wicked are Cruelty.
THE great Creator made Man in his own Image, and therefore forbad in his Holy
and Righteous Law any attempt to be made for the destruction of him; and was
pleased early to provide for his safety, by making it expressly Penal on
whomsoever should shed Blood wilfully: He that sheddeth man's blood, by man
shall his blood be shed. Yet so miserably corrupted are our Natures, that
forgetting these Holy Commands, almost every Week affords us sad and lamentable
Examples of the Cry of Blood against our Land, and amongst too many others we
cannot but with horror particularly remember that infamous Murder committed by
the, Papists, on that Vigilant, Worthy and Renowned Justice, Sir Edmondbury
Godfrey, whose remembrance ought never to be blotted out of the Memory of every
Loyal Protestant, and one of whose Successors (in Vigilance, and laborious
Endeavors for Discovery of the Plot, and obliging the audacious Papists to
conform to the Kings Majesty's Laws) that Worthy Gentleman the subject of this
present Discourse was.

Therefore to detain you no longer in an unnecessary preamble, be pleased to
know, that John Arnold, Esquire One of His Majesty's Justices of Peace for the
County of Monmouth, having been some years before the Discovery of the late
horrid Plot, esteemed a loyal and dutiful Subject, and useful Person in his
Country: It pleased His Majesty to put him into the Commission of the Peace
for the County where his Estate and Family is; where his Demeanor was such in
His Majesty's service, as was well approved by all, except the Papists, who
were, and yet are very numerous in that County, against some of whom at the
Assizes he had given Information, and prosecuted, as he was bound by his Oath
and Duty of his place to perform; yet so it was at that time, that a little
before the Plot brake out, he was put out of Commission, and coming to London,
was very desirous to understand his Offense; and being informed that Coleman
(then a Servant to the Duke of York, since Executed at Tyburn for the design to
Murder the King, and bring in Popery into this Nation, etc.) had offered
somewhat in his prejudice: He went to the said Coleman, desiring to know what
he had to charge him withal, for he was ready to answer any Misdemeanor before
King and Council; but received nothing else of an answer from him, but insolent
and saucy language, refusing to give him opportunity to speak with his Master,
and saying, He was not at leisure to answer such a Fellow as he was; which
being spoke to a Gentleman of his worth, you may well imagine could not but
move him to some passion; and amongst other expressions, he parted with this
fatal Oracle to Coleman, Sirrah, I shall live to see you hanged. But suddenly
after the Plots breaking out, His Majesty was pleased to put Mr. Arnold again
into a larger Commission than before; since which it is abundantly known to all
men, how careful and painful he has been in the Kings Service, particularly in
discovering the Jesuits College, Books, and Popish Trinquets in Herefordshire,
which he by Order of Council publicly caused to be Burnt; Also his seizing and
prosecuting Father Lewis, that notorious Villain and Priest, and diverse others;
Also his earnest endeavor to inform the Judges against admitting Papist Grand
Jurors in the Counties where they came.

These public services for his King and Country, you may well believe by this
time of day had made him more Enemies of the Papist Party, being frequently
threatened by them to be murdered, and particularly by one Evans; which Evans
was a Jesuit, executed in the County of Clamorgan; and who some time before his
apprehension had threatened to pistol Mr. Arnold: Yet it pleased God to preserve
him from their fury, till this instant time, when having been at a Tavern with
some Lawyers of his acquaintance, near Temple Bar, in order to prepare himself
to a trial of some matters that were the next day to be heard before King and
Council, and coming from thence about ten in the evening, the 16th of this
instant, toward his Lodgings, which were not far off the said Tavern; when he
came by Bell-yard, near Jackanapes-lane end, Four or Five Bloody Assassinates
(who no doubt had dogged him most part of the day, as Justice Godfrey was)
coming close up to him, on a sudden threw a large Campane Cloak over his head,
and muffled him up, and at that instant thrust him into the dark part of the
Lanes end, where they villanously threw him down, stamped on his breast, and
made more than twenty thrusts of their swords at him; but not above seven took
place on him, by reason of a Wastcoat he wore (to keep his body straight, not
as armor, as is vainly reported) made with stiff Whale-bone; which in that
hurry, and in the dark, they observing their swords would not enter to kill him
dead, cried out, The Rogue has armor, therefore cut the Dogs throat; which
immediately they attempted, by giving him many dreadful slashes on both sides,
yet so as by Gods good providence cut not his Windpipe, they only using these
hellish expressions, Damn ye Dog, now pray for the Soul of Captain Evans: But
at that instant a Link-boy coming by, they left the poor Gentleman miserably
mangled, yet living, and carried to his Lodging, not without some hopes of his
recovery, though extreme dangerous, by reason of much loss of blood, and those
inhumane bruises ( Godfrey-like) on his breast.

We must not forget, that these bloody Villains were so intent on their cursed
design, that in the hurry they wounded one of their own Companions in the Leg,
which though escaped, will we hope prove a good occasion of discovery, and for
that (since the writing hereof) his Majesty has been pleased to issue out his
Order of Council, declaring 100 l. to the Discoverer, and pardon for the fact
to him that shall come in.

And thus we leave this worthy Englishman to the care of his Chyrurgeons, and
desire (if it might so please God) he may yet recover to be a living Monument
of their merciless Cruelty. And in the mean time, though we cannot point out
his Murderers, yet we verily believe they may be known by those marks that
Reverend person gave of the inhumane Murderers of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, in
his most excellent Funeral-Sermon for him, and even before his Murderers were
known.

May all true Protestants be awakened at this sad Catastrophe, yet not
discouraged; but remember Admiral Coligni was shot in his Coach at Paris, which
proved but a dismal Prologue to that Parisian Massacre that followed some days
after, wherein he himself, with many thousands of Protestants were most
inhumanely butchered by the Papists.

And because we are on so sad a Theme, we would not have it forgotten, how Mr.
Mowbray, and Evidence for the King against the Plotters in Yorkshire, was
lately assaulted and stabbed as he passed Lincolns-Inn-fields; and little less
is daily done by those that stab the Kings Evidences in base Calumnies on their
persons and reputations, who have so clearly proved a Plot against the Kings
Life and Kingdom by the Papists, that both King, Lords and Commons have
declared a full satisfaction in it.

To conclude: You have now seen the King stabbed as it were in Effigy, in Two
of His Justices of the Peace, in the space of little more than one year, by
these Sons of Violence, to the great dishonor of God, and against the Crown
and Dignity of the King. What remains, but to beseech God to preserve his
Anointed from these sons of Zerviah, and to abhor their cursed and
ungospel-like Religion, and to be prepared to vindicate the Kings Honor, and
the Protestant Religion against all opposers? To which we hope all good men
will say,

AMEN.
LONDON: Printed for R. Janeway. 1680.


