A SERMON Preached at the Funeral of Mr. Nathaniel Ask, Late Rector of
Somerford Magna in North-Wilts.

By John Clark.

2 Cor. 5.2. For in this we groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with
our house, which is from heaven. LONDON, Printed for George Swinnock at the
Crane in Cheap^side, over against Merc^^s-Chappel, 1676.

To his highly valued Friend Mrs. Anna Ask, late Wife of the Reverend Mr.
Nathaniel Ask, Rector of Somerford-Magna.
Dear Madam,
YOur deceased Husband was pleased that I (amongst many others much more worthy
then my self) should preach his Funeral Sermon, and now at your request I have
published it: Not that I am in the least ambitious of being in Print, but would
rather decline it. Madam, I am very sensible of all your civil Favors, yet
would much more willingly have taken another opportunity to express my
thankfulness then this; but since you were pleased to lay your Commands upon
me, I readily submit. I must confess both the matter and method to be plain,
and not in the least worth your Acceptance; but I well remember the saying of
one that otherwise could speak in an eloquent style, (which was this) That it
is better that Grammarians should reprehend us, then that the people should not
understand us. This Sermon was preached principally before a Country Auditory,
although I must confess there were many of my Reverend Brethren there, but they
were the fewest in number; and I did endeavor to suit my discourse to the
most, and not the least of those Reverend persons, who understood matters of
this nature much better then my unworthy self. Madam, I desire not to exceed
the bounds of an Epistle, so as to make the Porch greater then the Building,
but in few words to conclude my self,

Your faithful Friend and Servant, J. Clark.

To the Parishioners of Somerford-Magna in North-Wilts.
THe uncharitableness and unfaithfulness of Relations concerning this Sermon,
have at last constrained my Publication of it; choosing rather to suffer the
severest Censure of a Just eye, then the unworthy distempers of unkind Tongues.
This Sermon was Preached at the Funeral of your late deceased Pastor; although
I confess all was not then Preached that is now Published, yet I do assure you
all is Published that was then Preached, and is very faithfully and fully
related in this Copy. The God of Peace teach us the things that make for truth
and peace, and to lay aside Slandering and Lying: For the first of these sins,
which too too many are guilty of in these our days, read that dreadful Curse
mentioned Deuteronomy. 27.24. Cursed be he that smites his neighbor secretly; this
was one of the Curses that was to be read by the Levites in the hearing of all
Israel under the Law, and all the people were to say, Amen. Now for that other
sin of Lying, let me beg of you to take the advice of the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.25.
Wherefore (says the Apostle) putting away Lying, speak every man truth with
his neighbor. I have observed these two sins too frequent amongst some of you,
especially of your late deceased Pastor, which makes me thus free with you.

I am your well-wishing Friend and Neighbor, Jo. Clark.

Philip. 1. verse. 23. For I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to
depart, and to be with Christ, which is far better.
I Cannot say these words were the choice of our deceased Brother, but they
were frequent in his mouth some few days before he dyed, which was the grand
motive of my choice of them. Great was the strait that the blessed Apostle was
in, he was divided betwixt two Affections, carried to different Objects, and
they were in a manner contrary each to other: The Question was, Whether to live
in the Flesh, or in the Body, were profitable for St. Paul? And what to choose,
Life or Death, he for the present knew not. Great was his love to the
Philippians, greater was his love to Christ; one while he was drawn with a
desire to be with Christ, far remote from the Philippians, another while he was
drawn with an earnest desire to abide with his beloved Brethren here upon
Earth, and to be for some time removed from Christ; the great necessity of his
Brethren did move him to desire the later; his great love to Christ did
persuade him to long for the former. Now betwixt these two different Affections
(which were contrary each to other) the Apostle had a great Conflict: And such
was his perplexity, that he knew not which way to turn himself, he was at a
strait what to make choice of; he was (as I may so speak) as Iron betwixt two
Loadstones, drawn this way first, and then that. We read of Jehoshaphat and the
people, 2 Chronicles. 20.12. that they were in a great strait, for the Text says,
They knew not what to do. And we read that King David was on a time in a great
strait, 2 Samuel 24.14. But now much different was the present perplexity of this
our Apostle, and that of David: David's was in regard of evils proposed, this
was for the enjoying of good. David's great strait was concerning an evil which
could not be avoided, but the Apostles was free and voluntary. David's
perplexity somewhat concerned himself, the preventing of his own evil; but now
the Apostles was for the good of others, which was joined with his own hurt.

Behold here, as in a transparent Glass, a heart truly Apostolical; wherein he
made known at once both his great love to Christ, desiring to be with him; and
withal his great love to his Brethren, willing to abide with them for their
profit.

I shall confine my discourse to the later part of the words: And therein
consider St. Paul's desire in regard of himself; and from thence take notice,
First, of the desire it self, and that was, To depart, or dye. Secondly, a
forcible Reason employed of this his desire, for then he should be with Christ.
Thirdly, his opinion or judgment of that Estate, To be with Christ is far
better, or best of all.

Here are several Observations or Doctrinal Conclusions that are clearly
deducible from these words which time will not permit me to prosecute. I shall
therefore present you but with one, wherein I shall endeavor to comprise the
sum and substance of my Discourse at this time: And that is, from St. Paul's
desire it self, wherein Note,

Doct. That Believers have in them a willing expectation and desire of Death.

The rise of this Observation is clear enough: For one spirit works in all Gods
people, and brings forth like effects, although not always in the same measure.
That therefore which is true in St. Paul, (viz.) That the coming of death was
expected and desired by him, is in some degree, sooner or later, verified in
all that are the Lords. We may see a lively instance of this in old Simeon,
Luke 2.29, 30 Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace according to
thy word, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation. St. Paul likewise avers the
same of all true Believers, 2 Cor. 5.2. For in this we groan earnestly,
desiring to be clothed upon with our house, which is from heaven. And that
they are rather willing to be absent from the body, and to be present with the
Lord, according to that of 2 Cor. 5.8.

Now there may be several Reasons given for the ground of this Doctrine, that
you may the better believe it. As,

First, Because Believers know and are well assured, that the day of death is
better then the day of a man's birth, Eccles. 7.1. When a man is born he comes
into misery, a world of misery; what tongue is able to express the internal and
external troubles of this life? I could enumerate in diverse cases, both as to
the one and other, but I pass them over. Now death puts an end to all these
miseries to Gods people; and therefore no wonder that the Servants of God have
in them such a willing desire after death.

Secondly, Because a faithful Soul when it departs is immediately after death
with Christ: I desire to depart and to be with Christ. And thus says the
Apostle it is Melius, it is better; yea, it is Multo melius, it is much better;
nay yet again, it is Multo magis melius, (we must bear with St. Paul's
incongruity of speech) it is much more better to be with him. And to the same
purpose speaks the same Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.19. If in this life only we have
hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable. Believers, the Children of
God, are most miserable, that is, if in this life, in this world, only for the
present we have hope and confidence in Christ, and the height of our confidence
reach no further, then we, we poor Christians, we the Faithful in the world, we
of all men are most miserable, yea, we are more miserable then any other men.

Thirdly. Again, Believers have in them a willing expectation and desire after
death, because they have hope in their death; Prove. 14.32. The wicked is driven
away in his wickedness; but the righteous has hope in his death. It is by
death Believers come to be partakers of the object of their hope. The time when
the righteous has hope is in his death. In the evil day, in time of greatest
disconsolation; when Friends stand weeping and wringing their hands; when
speech, sight, senses, strength fail; when riches will not profit a man; when
Physicians are of no value; when all creatures prove miserable Comforters; and
when all human helps fail, then, then is a Christians Soul full of hope, and
may comfortably use this motto, Spero meliora. Though I leave loving Friends,
near and dear Relations, many outward comforts and enjoyments, yet I hope to
enjoy and inhabit an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens, whose
builder is God. So that Believers upon this ground are willing to dye, because
they have hope in their death.

Fourthly. Again, Believers have in them a willing desire of death, because
here they look upon themselves but as Pilgrims and Strangers: They are in this
world, but not of this world; for Heaven is a Believers proper Country, and a
Believers desire is after this Heavenly Country, Heb. 11.16. But now they
desire a better country, that is, an heavenly. A wicked man's Country is here
below; here he lives, and here he desires to live. An Unbeliever is a Citizen
of the world, Terrae filius, a Son of Earth, he is one that minds only Earthly
things; his delights, his contentments, his portion, his happiness are in this
life; see Psalm 17.14. and there you will find it so. But now a true Believer
is a Citizen of Heaven, a Free-Denizen of that Country where Jesus Christ is at
the right hand of God. Believers do disclaim and disown the World as none of
theirs: The World accounts them as Strangers, and so they account themselves.
And as they disclaim the World, so they lay claim to Heaven; We desire, say the
Apostles, 2 Cor. 5.2. to be clothed upon with our house which is from heaven:
And indeed there is nothing that a Christian has that is worth the having,
that he has as a Christian, but it is in Heaven, (as is well noted by a
Reverend Divine) Houses, Mr. Jer. Dike.
Lands, Possessions, Goods, Riches, Honors; these men have not as Christians,
but as men; these are common to Heathens with Christians. But there be many
excellent things that belong to Christians as Christians; and all these things
are above in Heaven: Our Father is in Heaven, Mat. 6.9. Our Father which art in
heaven. Our Mother is in Heaven, Gal. 4.26. But Jerusalem which is above is
free, which is the Mother of us all. Our elder Brother and Head is in Heaven,
Ephesians. 1.20. He raised Christ from the dead, and set him at his own right hand
in the heavenly places. Our Inheritance is in Heaven, 1 Pet. 1.4. To an
Inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in
heaven for you. Our Mansion house is in Heaven, 2 Cor. 5.1. For we know that if
our earthly house of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God,
an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. Our Substance is in
Heaven, Heb. 10.34. Ye have in heaven a better and an enduring substance. Our
Hope is in Heaven, Col. 1.5. For the hope that is laid up for you in heaven.
Now if all these be in Heaven, where should Believers be but in Heaven also,
and have a willing desire of death to be with their Father, and with his Son
Jesus Christ?

Fifthly, Lastly, Believers have in them a willing desire of death, because it
is better to be with God then with men; better to be in Heaven then on Earth;
in a state freed from sorrow, sin and temptation, than in a state subject to
them all: for as holy Job speaks, chap 14.1. A man that is born of a woman is
of few days, and full of trouble; but a few days, and those days full of
trouble. But now blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord, for they rest from
their labors, and their works follow them: Here the people of God labor for
rest, I, but when they come to dye, they rest from their labor, Rev. 14.13.
Now they rest from their labors in as much as all tears are wiped from their
eyes: No more death nor sorrow; no more aches, pains, Agues, Fevers,
Consumptions nor pain does take hold of them; and therefore no wonder upon this
ground also, that Believers have such a willing desire and expectation of death.

Objection. Here some may object, That we see in many good Christians a fear of
death, and a desire of life: And I my self, (may some poor doubting Christian
say) do find that I am apt to tremble at the thoughts of death. How should not
death then be rather a day of misery to be trembled at, than a day of happiness
to be longed for?

Answer. To this I answer, That we are to distinguish concerning death: For
death is considerable two ways, (which is a common distinction we give of
death:) First, as it is in its own nature; Secondly, as it is altered by
Christ. In the first sense it is true, That death is the very Suburbs and the
Gates of Hell, and a day to be trembled at rather then longed for. But now in
the second sense, Death it ceases to be a plague, and becomes a blessing, in as
much as it is even a door opening out of this world into Heaven. Now Believers
look not upon death simply, but upon death whose sting and venom is plucked out
by Jesus Christ, and upon that account it is exceeding comfortable Christ's
victory over death, may serve for the incomparable comfort of all true
Believers. Yet further I answer, That there are two things considerable in
every Christian, Flesh, and Spirit, Corruption and Grace, and the best of Gods
Servants have many inward perplexities at some times, and doubtings of Gods
love and favor: For it is a known truth which our Savior delivers, Mat.
26.41. The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak: And as in all other good
purposes there is a combare betwixt the Flesh and the Spirit; so there is in
this betwixt the fear of death, and the desire of death; sometimes the one
prevails, and sometimes the other, but yet always at last the desire of death
does get the victory. I must confess many times, that worldly respects do often
prevail with the dearest of Gods children; care of Wife and Children, and the
like, but these are their infirmities; and as other infirmities dye in them by
degrees, so these also at last are brought under: And the Servants of God being
brought clearly to see the happiness into which their death in Christ shall
enter them, do here with St. Paul desire to depart, that they may be with
Christ, which is far better, or best of all.

Thus have I endeavored to make good the truth of this Doctrinal Proposition,
(viz.) That Believers have in them a willing expectation and desire of death,
with the grounds and Reasons thereof: There remains nothing but the useful
Application unto our Souls.

1. Use. And the first Use is by way of Information. Here we may be informed of
the different state and contrary condition of good and bad men, of Saints and
Sinners, of such as fear God, and of such as fear him not, when they come to
dye. A good man does willingly resign his Soul to God who gave it; but a bad
man is so far from desiring of death, that he cannot so much as think of death
or Hell without a great deal of terror and fear. The very thought of death to
wicked men, is like the Handwriting against Belshazzar upon the wall, which
was very terrible and amazing. But now with good men death makes way for their
eternal happiness. Though I walk in the vale of the shadow of death, says holy
David, Psalm. 23. yet will I fear none ill. St. Cyprian speaking of the nature
of death to Believers, says, it is Janua vitae, Victoria belli, Portus maris,
the Gate of Life, the Victory of War, the Haven of the Sea. Death to Gods
people, is as the Angel was to St. Peter, to fetch him out of prison, and set
him at liberty, Acts 12.7. or as Pharaoh his Messenger was to Joseph, to remove
him out of the Dungeon into Pharaoh's Court, Genesis 41.14. where he was highly
advanced to honor and dignity. Believers are willing to dye, because death
puts an end to sin; not only to the Dominion of sin, but also to the very Being
of sin; sin shall never molest them any more; when death comes they shall sin
no more, nor sorrow no more, they shall go to that place where all tears shall
be wiped away from their eyes, and live with God and Christ, with Angels and
Just men made perfect for evermore.

2. Use. The second Use is by way of Reprehension. This may serve for a just
reproof of them that are altogether unwilling to dye: But come now and let us
reason the case together; What person is there amongst us, that if he were
clothed only with ragged and much worn clothes, would not be willing to be
uncloathed of them, and to be clothed with better? And what else is this
mortal and corruptible body, but as ragged and rotten clothes wherewith we are
clothed? Why then should we not be willing to be shifted of these clothes, of
this mortal and corruptible body, and to be clothed with our house which is
from Heaven, even with incorruption and immortality? Again, what person is
there amongst us, that if he were in Prison, would not be willing to be set at
liberty? or being in a place where he is but a Stranger, would not be willing
to be at home? And what else is this sinful Body, but as a prison of the Soul,
wherein the Soul is so shut up, that it has small liberty until it return to
God who gave it? Or what else indeed is this world, but as a place wherein we
wander as Pilgrims and Strangers, and have no abiding City? Why should we not
then be willing to remove out of this prison of the body, and to be received
into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God? or to loose Anchor from this Land
wherein we are but Strangers, and by death to sail toward Heaven, where our
home and abiding City is? My Beloved, it were well that Christians would
meditate much on Heavenly Glory: God has revealed this Glory to the Elect, and
their interest in it, that their thoughts might continually dwell upon it. It
will be very profitable for Believers to muse much on the happiness of the
other world: as, First, it will abate our thirst after Worldly Glory: Secondly,
it will make Sufferings light: Thirdly, it will make us much more serious in
Duties of Religion: Fourthly, it will make us, with St. Paul, more desirous of
death. First, if Christians did but much meditate on this Celestial Glory, it
would make them undervalue the transitory Glory of this World. How comes it to
pass that Earthly Glory is so much affected, but because Heavenly Glory is so
little regarded? It is the Apostles grave advice to Christians, Col. 3.2. To
set their affections on things above, not on things on the earth. One hours
musing on the Glory that is above, would cause the Soul to be as a weaned
Child, to the Glory that is below. When a man has seen the glory of a Kings
Court, he contemns all that ever he saw in a Country Cottage. A Christian that
has this Heavenly Glory before his eyes, will quickly cast the best of Earthly
Glory behind his back. Secondly, if Christians did but consider much of this
Heavenly Glory, it would enable them to bear with patience the greatest
Sufferings of this present life. I reckon (says the Apostle, Romans 8.18.) that
the sufferings of this present life are not worthy to be compared with the
glory which shall be revealed in us. He that has his thoughts much on the
Crown of reward, will despise the ignomine and shame of the Cross. Moses when
he had by an eye of Faith looked a while on the recompense of reward, chose
affliction with the people of God, rather then the great preferment of
Pharaoh's Court. Reproach for Christ was preferred to the treasures of Egypt,
because he had a respect to the recompense of reward. And Christ himself, who
is far greater then Moses, for the joy that was set before him, endured the
Cross and despised the shame. Ille moeret si sibi male sit in seculo, cui non
potest been esse post seculum. The ill being of this life is not greatly
sadning to that heart that knows it shall have a well being in the other life.
The holy Martyrs did cheerfully kiss the Flames, because they had their
thoughts on that Glory which was far brighter then those Flames. Thirdly, if
Christians did but muse much on this Heavenly Glory, it would make them more
exact in all the Duties of Religion, as to the real performance of them: For
that Christian will be most abundant, and most serious in Duties, who has his
eye in Heaven while he is performing of them. No Saints will have so exact
conversations on Earth, as those that have their conversation most in Heaven.
We know what the Apostles advice to Christians tend to, 1 Cor. 15.58. That they
would be steadfast and unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord,
because they know their labor is not in vain in the Lord. Some few serious
thoughts of Heaven would shake off laziness, and work heart-enlargement in all
the Services we do for God. Fourthly, if Christians did but much think of this
Heavenly Glory, it would make them more desirous to be in the possession of it.
He that by holy meditation lives much in Heaven, will be weary of living long
on Earth. When the blessed Apostle St. Paul thought of being with Christ, he
desires a present departure, as in the Text. And so, many of the Fathers, when
they did meditate on their Heavenly Country, thought they had continued long
enough in their Earthly Country. So that from what has been said of this
Heavenly Glory, and the great profit and advantage that comes to Believers by
meditating thereon; and that death puts them into the possession of that Glory,
methinks many Christians should not be so unwilling to dye, as sometimes they
are.

3. Use. The third Use is by way of Exhortation, not to fear death. Too much
fear of death, argues want of Faith. Why should we be afraid of that which is a
part of our portion? why should Christians be afraid of that which is their
best Friend? When death was in Satan's hand, it was our Enemy; but now it is in
Christ's hand, it is our Friend. I confess Nature will be Nature still, and
death is a dissolution, and so the enemy of Nature, the last enemy, as the
Apostle calls it, 1 Cor. 15.26. I but though it be an enemy, yet it is a
Conquered enemy. Wherefore then should we so much fear it? I shall offer two
Considerations to keep us from the fear of death. First, consider to be under
the slavish fear of death, is an uncomfortable estate; the Apostle calls it a
bondage, Heb. 2.15. which shows the uncomfortableness of it. The Apostle says,
by the fear of death they were held in bondage all their life long. Secondly,
consider your Covenant, interest and relation shall secure your hearts against
the fear of death. They should not fear to live, nor yet to dye, who have God
to be their God, 1 Cor. 15. for the sting of death is gone, it is taken out by
the death of Christ. Death separates soul and body, but it can never separate
Believers from the love of God. And this the Apostle assures us of, Romans 8.38,
39. For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come; Nor height,
nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love
of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. My Beloved, the Covenant of Grace
holds beyond death; it does not bring Believers only into a present enjoyment
of God, but it is to bring them into a full, perfect and everlasting enjoyment
of God in Glory for evermore. The Covenant of Grace yields Christians the least
part of their good, of their portion, of their happiness in this life: The
greatest and fullest portion of good promised unto Believers by God in the
Covenant of Grace, lies in the arrears, in the referves, in the full possession
of the inheritance after death. And then why should Christians fear to dye, and
go to take a full possession? why should Believers fear to dye, and to enter
into the joy of their Master? why should they fear to dye, and go home to
receive all the desires of their hearts, and all the eternal preparations of
glorious blessedness for their Souls? I beseech you therefore that you would
well ponder these things against those dismal times wherein death may be
represented unto us as an ugly and grim thing: It is so to Nature indeed; but
to Faith death is become very amiable, (as I have formerly told you.) There is
nothing in the world that does us so much good as death; for it is the best
Physician; It cures all diseases of Soul and Body, and therefore why should we
so much fear it? Now therefore for ever blessed be God for Jesus Christ, that
has made in him even death, the bitterest thing of all, to be sweet and
pleasant to us.

4. Use. The fourth Use is by way of Direction, that we may (with St. Paul) be
willing to dye. First, let us labor to get an interest in Jesus Christ; and
when we have so done, let us value the Lord Jesus Christ more then ever we have
done, even because he did shed his most precious blood to redeem our Souls. Had
it not been for Jesus Christ, we had been under the power of Death and Hell to
this very moment: Christ suffered death to deliver us from death; Christ bare
wrath to deliver us from wrath. And let us dispute what we will, we shall never
find pardon of sins, or peace with God, but by Christ: his name only is the
Prince of Peace; Christ only is the Mediator of Peace; Christ only reconciles
God and Sinners: So that then we can never be happy either in life or death,
without an interest in Jesus Christ. Secondly, if we would, with St. Paul, be
willing to dye, then our great care must be to get our sins pardoned; for if
once our sins are forgiven, then nothing which befalls us in life or death
shall ever be an evil or hurt. Whatsoever state the unpardoned sinner is in, it
is a cursed estate to him: his life is cursed, and his death is cursed. But now
when sins are forgiven, the sting, the poison, the curse is gone, and nothing
is for evil to such a person: if he lives, life shall be a blessing; and if he
dies, death shall be a blessing. So that we can never have any true or real
comfort when we come to dye, unless we are assured by the Spirit of God that
our sins are pardoned. Much more I might add; but so much for the words of the
Text.

I know you expect something from me as to this providence which has
occasioned this Funeral meeting. Funeral Sermons are not comforts to the dead,
but helps to the living; it is for their sakes that survive, that God has
given these occasions. The cause of our meeting at this time, is to perform our
last office of love to our deceased Brother, the late Reverend Rector of this
place.

I could speak largely of his Birth and liberal Education, and therein tell you
he was descended of a very ancient Family in the North parts of England. His
Coat of Arms (of which you have a view) does sufficiently demonstrate the
Antiquity of his Family; but this being the proper office of an Herald, I
forbear to speak further to that. His life of late years, especially since he
came to this place, has been attended with much trouble: Not that he has been
the cause of it, (as some of his professed Enemies would make the world
believe) for my self and several others have again and again heard him declare,
He never in the course of his whole life was Plaintiff but in two Causes, and
but one of them tried: And to defend himself may well allow of a better
construction then altogether Contentious. Now in what I speak of him, as a man
he had his human frailties; but as a Christian, and one that knew so much as he
did, I hope he did bewail them. And I pray, which of us all are without our
faults? Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? Pro.
20.9. I, indeed which of us all can say this? I know some there are that talk
much of a State of perfection on this side the Grave, but alas experience tells
us the contrary, and that all our perfection is to bewail our imperfections,
that we cannot walk more closely with God. I am persuaded thus far of him, (and
without breach of Charity I speak it) That had he met with a more obliging
people, he might have proved a more useful Pastor. God was pleased to exercise
him with a long and languishing Sickness, which at length ushered in his Death.
I could not but take notice, that in the extremity of his Sickness, God was
exceeding merciful unto him, even to the last, in continuing his memory and
senses. I was with him several times in his Sickness, but more especially the
Wednesday before he died, and then had some private conference with him, in
which I received much satisfaction from him. He then (and at other times) told
me, he forgave all the World, and solemnly and seriously took the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper upon it, He told me, he wholly relied upon the merits of
Christ for Salvation; adding withal, that he did really by Faith apprehend
that infinite satisfaction in the blood of Christ, as did fully answer all his
fears, and resolve all his doubts. He knew and was well assured, that the
greatest of Sinners might be saved by that blood, and that the least of Sinners
could not be saved without it. He died in the Faith of the Church of England as
it is now by Law established, he owned the Doctrine and Discipline thereof, and
withal wished peace and prosperity to it.

He was a careful provider for his Wife and Children, and (considering his
extreme Sickness at times) he had a tender regard of them, which he did fully
manifest toward his dear Wife at his death, having that considence in her,
that he left the sole management of his Estate to her prudent care. To conclude
all, he had the charity to forgive all, and we ought as Christians to have the
charity to forget all. In few words, to such of you as were his professed
Enemies, let me bespeak you of having a care of rash judging of him, as to his
future and final estate; for it was in the power of God to save him, and which
of you all dare say it was not in his purpose. Now if any person shall charge
me with flattery in what I have spoken of our dear Brother, I shall answer them
in the words of St. Paul, Romans 9.1. I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my
conscience also bearing me witness, that in what I have spoken of him is
agreeable to Christian Faith and Charity.

FINIS.

