SEVENTEEN SERMONS Preached upon Several Occasions. Never before Printed.

By WILLIAM CLAGETT, D. D. Late Preacher to the Honorable Society of Gray's
Inn, and one of His Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary.

With the SUM of a CONFERENCE, On February 21, 1686, between Dr. Clagett and
Father Gooden, about the Point of Transubstantiation.

LONDON: Printed for W. Rogers, at the Sun in Fleet Street, over against St.
Dunstan's Church. 1689.

THE PREFACE.
THere will need no more to recommend the following Discourses to the Reader,
than only to assure him he is not imposed upon by the Title Page; but what is
here presented to him as Dr. Claget's Sermons, are really so, being published
from his own Papers, and by his own Brother.

And indeed the Sermons themselves do sufficiently speak their Author, for they
every where express the Spirit, the Judgment, and the Reasoning of that
Excellent Man; though some of them, perhaps, want that Finishing which his
Masterly Hand would have given them, had he been to have published them himself.

The first of these Sermons he meant to have Printed, if God had given him
Life, being prevailed upon by the Importunity of several of his Friends, who
then judged it very seasonable.

The last in this Collection was the last Sermon he Preached. It was preached
at St. Martins in the Fields, on the day of his Lent-course there. And that
very Evening he fell into that Sickness which put a period to his Life twelve
days after.

No Man perhaps in this Age of so private a Condition died more lamented. For
as he had all the amiable charming Qualities to procure the Esteem and Love of
every one that knew him: So God had bestowed upon him so many great and useful
Talents, for the doing Service to Religion, to the Church, to all about him;
And he so faithfully and industriously employed those Talents to those
purposes, that he was really a Public Blessing, and he had that Right done
him, as to be esteemed so.

He was born at St. Edmunds-Bury, Sept. 24. 1646. being the Son of Mr. Nicholas
Claget, then Minister there.

His Vniversity-Education was at Emanuel College in Cambridge.

His first Public appearance in the World was at his own Native Town of Bury
where he was chosen one of the Preachers. Which Office he discharged for
several years with so universal a Reputation, that it might be truly said as to
him, That a Prophet had Honor in his own Country.

From thence, at the Instance of some considerable Men of the Long Robe (whose
Business at the Assizes there, gave them Opportunities of being acquainted with
his great Worth and Abilities) he was prevailed with to remove to Gray's Inn.
And indeed it was no small Testimony given to his Merits, that he was thought
worthy by that Honorable Society to succeed the Eminent Dr. Cradock, as their
Preacher.

In this Place he continued all the remainder of his Life, and he behaved
himself worthily in it; and the Gentlemen of that House took all Occasions of
declaring that he did so, by the constant Kindness they expressed to him while
he lived, and the Respects they paid him at his Death.

He had indeed at the time of his Death two other Preferments besides that of
Gray's Inn. The Lord Keeper North (his Wives Kinsman) had given him a Living in
Buckingham-shire; but the other Place was that which he himself most valued
next to Gray's Inn, and that was the Lecture of Bassishaw, to which he was
chosen by that Parish about two years before his death. It was the Lecture
which Dr. Calamy had immediately held before him. Never was there two greater
Men successively Lecturers of one Parish; nor ever was any Parish kinder to two
Lecturers.

Dr. Claget dyed of the Smallpox, March 28th. and was buried in the Church of
St. Michael Bassishaw.

His Wife, Mrs. Thomasin North, a most Virtuous and Accomplished Woman, dyed
eighteen days after him of the same Disease, and was buried in the same Grave
with him.

There is this little Passage not unfit to be mentioned here. The last Sermon
Dr. Claget made, (though not the last he preached) was that which is the
sixteenth in this Collection, upon this Text, Shall we receive good at the
hands of God, and shall we not receive evil? This Sermon he made upon occasion
of the death of a Child of his that happened a little before. And he had writ
it fairly out, I suppose for this end, that his Wife might read it. And
accordingly she did so, but upon a much sadder Occasion: For it was after his
death that she got this Sermon into her hands; and then she made it her
continual Entert ainment (and a seasonable one it was) as long as her strength
would suffer her.

But to return to Dr. Claget. We owe it to the Society of Gray's Inn, that he
was brought to this City: But after he came hither, his own Merits in a little
time rendered him sufficiently conspicuous.

For so innocent and unblameable was his Life, such an unaffected Honesty and
Simplicity appeared in all his Conversation; so obliging he was in his Temper,
so sincere in all his Friendships, so ready to do all sorts of good Offices
that came in his way; and withal so Prudent a Man, so good a Preacher, so
dexterous in untying Knots, and making hard things plain, so happy in treating
of common Subjects in an uncommon and yet useful way. So able a Champion for
the True Religion against all Opposers whatsoever; and lastly, so ready upon
all occasions to Advise, to Direct, to Encourage any work that was undertaken
for the promoting or defending the Cause of God. I say, all these Qualities
were so eminent in Dr. Claget, that it was impossible they should be hid. The
Town soon took Notice of him, and none that intimately knew him could forbear
to love and admire him; and scarce any that had heard of him, to esteem and
honor him.

If the Reader would know more of Doctor Claget, let him peruse those Writings
of his, which he Published himself. By them he will in some measure be able to
make a Judgment of the Genius and Abilities of the Man.

If a Friend can speak without partiality, there does in those Writings appear
so strong a Judgment, such an admirable Faculty of Reasoning, so much Honesty
and Candor of Temper, so great plainness and perspicuity, and withal so much
spirit and quickness; and, in a word, all the Qualities that can recommend an
Author, or render his Books Excellent in their kind; That I should not scruple
to give Dr. Claget a place among the most Eminent and Celebrated Writers of
this Church. And if he may be allowed that, it is as great an Honor as can be
done him. For perhaps from the inspired Age to this, the World did never see
more Accurate, and more Judicious Composures in matters of Religion, than the
Church of England has produced in our days.

The Discourses writ and published by Dr. Claget, are these that follow.
A Discourse concerning the Operations of the Holy Spirit; in Answer to Dr. O.
1677. Octavo. A Second Part. 1680. A Reply to a Pamphlet, called, The Mischief
of Impositions: Writ by Mr. A. against the Dean of St. Paul's. 1681. Quarto. An
Answer to the Dissenters Objections against the Common Prayers. 1683. Quarto.
The Difference of the Case between the Separation of Protestants from the
Church of Rome, and the Separation of Dissenters from the Church of England.
1683. Quarto. A Discourse concerning the Invocation of the B. Virgin, and the
Saints. 1686. Quarto. A Paraphrase with Notes on the Sixth Chapter of St. John,
against Transubstantiation 1686. Quarto. A Discourse concerning the pretended
Sacrament of Extreme Unction. With a Letter to the Vindicator of the Bishop of
Condom. 1687. Quarto. A Second Letter to the Vindicator of the Bishop of
Condom. 1687. Quarto. A View of the whole Controversy between the Representer
and the Answerer; in which are laid open some of the Methods by which
Protestants are Misrepresented by Papists 1687. Quarto. An Answer to the
Representer's Reflections upon the state and view of the Controversy, etc.
Showing that the Vindicator has utterly ruined the new Design of Expounding and
Representing Popery. 1688. Quarto. Queries concerning the English Reformation
answered. 1688. Quarto. The School of the Eucharist, a Translation; the Preface
writ by Dr. Claget. Of the Humanity and Charity of Christians. A Sermon
Preached at the Suffolk Feast, in St. Michael Cornhil, London, Nov. 30. 1686.
J. S.

The CONTENTS.
SERMON I. Rev. II. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. AND to the Angel of the church in
Pergamos, write, these things says he, which has the sharp sword with two
edges:

I know thy works, and where thou dwell, even where Satan's seat is; and
thou hold fast my Name, and have not denied my faith even in those days
wherein Antipas was my faithful martyr, who was slain amongst you, where Satan
dwells.

But I have a few things against thee, because thou have there them that hold
the doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balak to cast a stumbling block before the
Children of Israel, to eat things sacrificed to Idols, and to commit
fornication.

So have thou also them that hold the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, which thing
I hate.

Repent, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will fight against them
with the sword of my mouth.

SERMON II, and III. Matthew. XVIII. 7. Woe unto the world because of offenses;
for it must needs be that offenses come; but woe unto that man by whom the
offense comes. SERMON IV. Matthew. XXVI. 41. Watch and pray, that ye enter not
into temptation: the spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak. SERMON V.
Matthew. IV. 10. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve. SERMON VI. Genesis XXII. 12. Now I know that thou fear God, seeing thou
have not withheld thy son, thine only son from me. SERMON VII. Matthew. XV. 1,
2, 3. Then came to Jesus Scribes and Pharisees, which were at Jerusalem,
saying, Why do thy Disciples transgress the tradition of the Elders, for they
wash not their hands when they eat bread. But he answered and said unto them,
Why do ye also transgress the commandment of God by your tradition? SERMON
VIII. 1 Cor. XI. 19. For there must be Heresies also amongst you, that they
which are approved may be made manifest among you. SERMON IX. 2 Pet. I. 19. We
have also a more sure word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye take heed,
as unto a light that shines in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the star
arise in your hearts. SERMON X. 1 Cor. XII. 13. For by one spirit we are all
baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles; whether we be bond or
free; and have been all made to drink into one spirit. SERMON XI. Genesis XV. 16.
But in the fourth generation they shall come hither again; for the iniquities
of the Amorites is not yet full. SERMON XII. Luke XIII. 5. I tell you, Nay: but
except you repent, ye shall all likewise perish. SERMON XIII. Luke XVIII. 8.
Nevertheless, when the Son of Man comes, shall he find faith on the earth? The
XIV. an Assize-Sermon, preached at St. Mores in Bury, 1678. Levit. XIX. 12. Ye
shall not swear by my Name falsely. The XV Sermon preached at Windsor, before
the Princess of Denmark. Genesis V. 24. And Enoch walked with God, and he was not,
for God took him. SERMON XVI. Job XI. 10. Shall we receive good at the hand of
God, and shall we not receive evil? SERMON XVII. Romans VIII. part of 34 and 35
ver. It is God that justifies: who is he that condemns? The Sum of a
Conference on Feb. 21st. 1686. between Dr. Claget and Father Gooden, about the
Point of Transubstantiation.
Imprimatur.

February 5, 1688. Hen. Maurice, Rmo in Christo P. D. Will. Archeipis. Cant. a
Sacris.

The First Sermon.
REVEL. II. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. And to the Angel of the Church in Pergamos,
write, these things says he, which has the sharp sword with two edges:

I know thy works, and where thou dwell, even where Satan's seat is; and thou
hold fast my Name, and have not denied my faith, even in those days wherein
Antipas was my faithful Martyr, who was slain among you, where Satan dwells.

But I have a few things against thee, because thou have there them that hold
the Doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balak to cast a stumbling block before the
Children of Israel, to eat things sacrificed to Idols, and ^o commit
fornication.

So have thou also them that hold the Doctrine of the Nicolaitans, which thing
I hate.

Repent, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will fight against them
with the sword of my mouth.


THAT the seven Churches of the Proconsular Asia, to which our Lord sent these
several Messages by Saint John, were then in being, when he saw this Vision and
heard these words, is a matter, I think, beyond question; and therefore there
is little reason to question whether in these Messages the then present state
of those Churches were described: and whether the design of our Lord was
likewise to describe the state of the Church from the days of the Apostles to
the end of the World, in several intervals thereof, as some men think, I dare
not take upon me to deny. Sure I am, that in these Epistles to the seven
Churches, there are Instructions no less useful for all Ages of the Church,
than if they were as truly prophetical, as they are historical; and that they
were designed not only for the Information of the then present Churches of the
Proconsular Asia, but for the Edification of all Churches in all places, and in
all Ages of the World, is evident from that so often repeated close, He that
has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches. Every Church
therefore, because it can hear, ought to hear; and every man of every Church,
because every man has an ear to hear: And because this Exhortation is also
added to the Epistle sent to the Church of Pergamos, part of which I have now
read to you, I may also exhort you to hear, or rather I need not, since our
Lord Jesus himself has required you so to do.

St. John, who had been the Founder of the Church of Pergamos, was now in the
Isle of Patmos banished thither for the Testimony of Jesus, as he witnesses
himself, chap. 1. ver. 9. I John, who also am your brother and companion in
tribulation, and in the kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ, was in the Isle
that is called Patmos, for the Word of God, and for the Testimony of Jesus
Christ. But he had committed this Church to the care of a Bishop in his
absence, who is here called the Angel of the Church, and to whom this Epistle
was directed in behalf of the Church under his care; and it consists of these
three general parts: I. Of a Commendation. II. Of a Reproof. III. A Warning to
Repent.


I. A Commendation: I know thy works, and where thou dwell, even where
Satan's seat is; and thou hold fast my name, and have not denied my faith,
even in those days wherein Antipas was my faithful Martyr, who was slain among
you where Satan dwells. Which Commendation consists of two parts.

1. That the Church of Pergamos retained the profession of the Name of Christ
in all points necessary to the being of a Church; for if she had parted with
any point necessary, she must then have ceased to be a Church: but a Church she
was by our Lord's own acknowledgment, and therefore by holding fast his Name,
and not denying his Faith, we must needs understand, that she had kept entire
that form of sound words, the Apostolical Creed which St. John had left amongst
them.

2. That which heightened her praise, was, that she had done this in such a
place where there was so great Temptations to Apostasy: First, Where Satan's
seat was, (i. e.) where there were so many Idol-Temples, that no place in Asia
could show so many; as if Pergamos had been Satan's Principal Court in that
part of the World. Secondly, Where by consequence there was likely to be, and
where indeed there was a great Persecution of the Gospel, under which Antipas a
faithful Martyr of Jesus Christ, whose Zeal and Courage was an Example to the
rest, was slain. This is the Commendation of the Church of Pergamos, that in
such a place, and at such a time, she had held fast the Profession of the
fundamental Truths of the Gospel, that she had held fast the Name of Christ,
and had not denied his Faith. But there follows,

II. A Reproof: But I have a few things against thee, because thou have there
them that hold the Doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balak to cast a
stumbling block before the Children of Israel to eat things sacrificed to
Idols, and to commit fornication. So have thou also them that hold the Doctrine
of the Nicolaitans, which thing I hate. (i. e.) Although she had the foundation
of the Faith, yet within the Communion of that Church the Doctrine of Balaam,
and the Doctrine of the Nicolaitans was taught and practiced: She had suffered
damnable Doctrines and wicked Practices to take place, which were likely enough
to endanger the subverting of the whole Christian Faith professed amongst them.
But more particularly.

1. The Doctrine of Balaam was openly taught amongst them; and that was, the
lawfulness of joining with Idolaters in the Worship of their Idols: for this
was the Stumbling Block which Balaam laid before the Children of Israel, not
only drawing them to carnal fornication with the Daughters of Moab, but
spiritual fornication also with their Idols. Now it seems there was such a
grievous Persecution of the Church at Pergamos, that some of that Communion, to
ease the Church from it, taught that it was lawful to sacrifice to Idols, and
to have External Communion with Idolaters in their Worship, to wit, by eating
things sacrificed to Idols, pretending, as we may gather from the Commendation
given them in the former verse, that if they did but still hold fast the Name
of Christ, and not deny any necessary point of his Faith, their External
Compliance with Idolaters in their Worship, would not deserve any severe
Reproof; but that because they should still retain the Name and Essence of a
true Church, they should therefore sufficiently approve their fidelity to
Christ, notwithstanding their burning Incense, and offering Sacrifice, and
giving Divine Honors by their outward Acts, to that which is not God.

2. The Doctrine of the Nicolaitans was also held amongst them, that is, a
Doctrine that tended to a licencious Life, and the corruption of good Manners;
and it is called the Doctrine of the Nicolaitans, from Nicolas the Deacon, who
being upbraided for doting too much upon his fair Wife, to show that he was not
to be blamed upon that account, made a prostitution of her to all Comers: which
lewd Example had, it seems spread its Contagion into some of the Asian
Churches, especially at Pergamos, where many of them held Community of Women to
be lawful; which was so vile and detestable a Doctrine, that God is here said
to hate it: So that the Doctrines for tolerating of which, the Church of
Pergamos is here reprehended, were such as grated very near upon the
Foundations of Christianity, the former leading to Idolatry, the latter to an
impure and vicious Life. A very strange corruption of the State of that Church,
in so short a time from the first plantation of it! Now,

III. We have in this Message of Jesus to the Church of Pergamos, a warning to
repent, and to make haste to repent too: Repent, or else I will come unto thee
quickly, and fight against them with the sword of my mouth. And what was she to
repent of, but of suffering those Coruptions in Doctrine and Practice to
prevail in her Communion, for which she was reproved before? And how was she to
repent, but by reforming those Abuses, and casting out of her Communion those
that would not be reformed, and returning to the Primitive Purity of her Faith,
and Worship, and Manners? And if she would not do this, Jesus threatened that he
would suddenly take the matter into his own hands, and cut them off by the
Sword of his mouth, from being a Church at all, who were so soon degenerated
from a pure Church; and it is reasonable to believe, that upon this warning she
did repent and reform: for she was not speedily cut off, as God had threatened
she should be, if she did not repent, but continued a Church for many Ages
afterward, till at length falling again into great corruptions of Doctrine and
Manners, she, with all the other six Churches of Asia, written to by our Lord,
fell to be no Church at all; and the Temples, wherein the Name of Christ was
called upon, are now become Turkish Mosques: and so the burden of Pergamos was
fulfilled.

And now having given you this Account of the State of the Church of Pergamos,
as it was represented by our Lord himself, I am much mistaken, if from this
Authority we may not be able to justify the Reformation of the Church of
England, against the most specious and popular Exceptions which they of Rome
make against our Reformation: And this I shall endeavor to do under these
three heads.

First, That in this Church, whilst it was in Communion with, and Subjection to
the Church of Rome, there were notorious Abuses and Errors both in Doctrine
and Worship, added to the Profession of the Common Faith. Secondly, That upon
this Supposition we might and ought to reform our selves, as we have done.
Thirdly, That the main Objections which they of the Roman Church do bring, and
whereby they seek to stagger those of our Communion, and to fright them into
their own, may by this instance of the Message of Christ to the Church of
Pergamos, be demonstrated to be vain and fallacious and therefore by no means
fit to remove us from our stedfastness.
First, That in this Church, as in all others that were in Communion with the
Church of Rome, there were notorious Abuses and Errors introduced into the
Faith and Worship of Christians: And first, as in the Church of Pergamos, so in
these Churches there were Doctrines and Practices leading to Idolatry; I wish
that were all, but it is not all: for Idolatry it self, if it be possible for
us to know what it is, was practiced, and that practice not only connived at,
but encouraged and commanded; and of this sort were the practices of Adoring
the Host, Praying to Saints, to dead Men and Women, and Worshipping of Images,
contrary to the whole tenor of the Scripture providing, that we should worship
the Lord our God, and that him only we should serve. And it is very observable,
that when we urge them with these things, they defend themselves from Idolatry
by the use of such distinctions, as it is impossible for the common People to
save themselves by, if indeed these distinctions would do the business. As for
Doctrines tending to licenciousness of Life and Manners, what can be more
evidently such, than the easy terms upon which they promised forgiveness of
sins, and security from Hell; Confession to a Priest with attrition being
reckoned sufficient to receive a Pretorial Absolution, which shall be valid in
Heaven, as also the invention of Purgatory, and the Power of the Church to
shorten the pains of it by Indulgences, by applying the treasure of the
Churches Merits, by Masses and Prayers, with a great many abuses of this
nature? And besides all these, what shall we say to their Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, their Half Communion, their Latin Service, their Sacrifice
of the Mass, for which there is no President or Rule in the Scriptures, or in
Antiquity; but plain and full consent there is both of the one, and of the
other against them? But now to all this, they make one general Reply, and tell
us, that the Church, meaning the Roman Church, has not erred in these points,
because she cannot err at all; for she is the Mother and Mistress of all
Churches, and the Standard of Catholic Unity and Faith; she is that One
Catholic Church, which cannot fail, to which Christ has promised his perpetual
Presence and Assistance, that the gates of Hell shall never prevail against
her; and of which St. Paul said, that she is the pillar and ground of the
Truth. In a word, that whatsoever is by her defined, is infallibly true, and
therefore that these Doctrines and Practices are neither damnable errors and
sins, nor errors and sins at all. Now if indeed such promises were made to that
Church, we should be brought into a very great strait, and not very well know
whether we should believe the Scripture speaking against the Doctrines and
Practices imposed by that Church, or the Scripture speaking to us to believe
and do, as that Church requires: But first of all, we say, that whatsoever
Promises were made to the Catholic Church, they do not belong only to the
Church of Rome, which is but a part of it; and that these Promises, that the
gates of Hell should not prevail against the Church, and that Christ would be
with his Church to the end of the world, amounted to no more than this, that
she should be preserved from so much error, as would utterly destroy the Being
of a Church, not from all Error whatsoever; but that no Promise in particular
was made to the Church of Rome, so much as to secure her from fundamental
Errors utterly destructive of the Being of a Church, especially since St. Paul
writing to the Church of Rome, plainly supposes, that it was possible for them
to be quite cut off from the Body of Christ, Romans 11.21, 22. where speaking of
the rejection of the Jews, he has these words: For if God spared not the
natural branches, take heed lest he also spare not thee. Behold therefore the
goodness and severity of God: on them which fell, severity; but toward thee
goodness, if thou continue in his goodness: otherwise thou also shall be cut
off. Which had been vain words, if it had been impossible by virtue of any
Privilege conferred upon the Sea of Peter for the Church of Rome not to
continue in God's goodness, or it be an infallible truth, that she shall not be
cut off. We do what we can to find the Infallibility of the Roman Church in the
Scriptures; but if we cannot find it, there is much more reason to conclude,
that she has erred, because some of her Doctrines and Practices do seem to us
apparently to contradict the Scripture, than to believe she is infallible,
because she says so of her self. But to this they say, that we mis-interpret
those Scriptures, which seem to condemn what they profess and practice, and in
short, that we cannot arrive to certainty of the true sense of Scripture,
without the Testimony of an Infallible Interpreter, which the Church is. Well,
for the present I will suppose this; but then this will be the consequence of
the Supposition, that it is impossible for that Church ever to convince me, or
any reasonable man of her own Infallibility by the Scriptures: For when she
tells me that Christ has said, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build
my Church, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it, and that the
Church is the pillar and ground of truth, and Lo I am with you always, even unto
the end of the world; she supposes that the Promise of Infallibility to her
self is so plainly made, that every man, who has a mind to understand the
truth, may be certain of the true sense of the words. But if I may arrive at a
certain sense of these Scriptures, without the Testimony of an Infallible
Interpreter, then why may I not be as certain of the sense of other Texts, as
plain as these, without such an Interpreter? It seems to me, that our Savior
said, Drink ye All of this, and therefore that you of the Roman Church may as
well take the Bread, as the Cup from the Laity. It seems to me, that St. Paul
calls the Communion of Christ's Body, Bread; The BREAD which we break, is it
not the Communion of the Body of Christ: and your Church says, it is Bread no
longer after Consecration. It seems to me, that the same St. Paul speaks for a
whole Chapter against Praying in an Unknown Tongue, and yet your Church does
it. It seems also to me, that the Author to the Hebrews does absolutely say,
That Christ was offered once for all, and that he sat down thenceforth at the
right hand of God; but you pretend to fetch him down from Heaven, and offer him
a thousand times in a day. It seems to me, that God has forbidden the making of
Images to worship them, as absolutely and universally, as words could do it,
and yet you picture God, and make Similitudes of the Blessed Trinity, and
Images of the Saints, and worship them when you have done: I demand now why I
may not be certain of the true sense of these places upon as reasonable
grounds, as you suppose I may be of those, which in your judgment conclude for
the Infallibility of your Church? If I may, then I am sure the Scripture
condemns what you say and do in these points; but if I may not be reasonably
assured, that I understand these (in my judgment) plain places of Scripture,
because I want an Infallible Judge to interpret for me, then I demand again,
why do you urge me with those Scriptures, that, as you pretend, prove the
Infallibility of your Church? for as yet I am not persuaded of the
Infallibility thereof, though I would gladly be persuaded of it. If you say,
this is the interpretation of the Church concerning them, which is Infallible,
and therefore you are to believe it, I think any body but a Child, would reply,
that that is the very thing in question; and therefore that you cannot convince
any man of your Infallibility, unless he will take your word for it, because he
cannot infallibly know the true sense of Scripture giving testimony to it,
before he believes it without any testimony from Scripture at all: So that it
is to no purpose to go about to persuade any reasonable man, that your Church
is Infallible, till he does already believe it, that is, till it is a needless
thing to do it, because he does believe it already. And therefore when all is
done, we must be content to understand the plain places of Scripture, without
an Infallible Judge, and to find out the rest, as well as we can; and if the
Scripture plainly condemns what you say and do, we have more reason from thence
to conclude that you have erred, than to conclude that you cannot err, because
you say so of your selves.

And indeed I look upon this Pretense to Infallibility, to be an Error of the
most pernicious consequence, because it seals them up under all the rest, and
adds incorrigibleness, which is the highest degree of obstinacy, to all their
other Errors; and it is so much the more shameless, because the whole World
that was in Communion with them, groaned for a Reformation before the Council
of Trent. One of their own Popes said, We confess many abominable Abuses and
Grievances have been for these many years last past in the Holy See; and we
look upon our selves concerned to endeavor a Reformation the more, because we
see the whole World does most earnestly desire it. At the Council of Trent the
Ambassadors of several Princes desired earnestly the Cup for the People, the
Marriage of the Clergy, Service in a known Tongue, and the Reformation of
diverse other matters; in which Christendom would have reformed it self, if
Italy would have suffered it: Italy, I say, who to hinder a general
Reformation, filled the Council of Trent with more Bishops, than came from all
the parts of Christendom besides.

Secondly, Upon this Supposition the Church of England might and ought to
reform it self, as it has done: for we find that the Church of Pergamos, which
was not overrun with so many false Doctrines and corrupt Practices, as those
of the Roman Church I have mentioned, was required by our Lord Jesus himself to
remove those Errors and Corruptions which had crept into her; and if she did
not presently return to her Primitive Purity, she was threatened to be cut off.
Indeed it had been a much more desirable thing, that the whole Western Church,
and more desirable still, that the East and the West had both united in a
Reformation; it had been a blessed thing, if by a Free and General Council of
all the Bishops in the Christian World, an Universal Reformation had been made;
but the latter perhaps was improbable, by reason of the vast distances of some
Christian Churches from one another; and the former was made impossible, by the
overruling Power of Italy: which therefore was to be done upon particular
Churches, by common consent; and perhaps there must never be a farther
Reformation till the Day of Judgment. It was very reasonable, and very
necessary therefore, that Christian Kingdoms should proceed in Provincial and
National Councils, to reform themselves, as this Church has done under her
Kings and Bishops, Parliaments and Convocations; that is, by all that Authority
which could be desired to make a public Reformation within the limits of this
particular Church. And this proceeding has been authorized by the Examples of
the best Ages of the Church, when it was thought fit not always to tarry for
General Councils, but very often for particular Churches to proceed out of hand
to the rooting out of Error and Heresy, and to the reforming of whatsoever
they thought amiss amongst themselves: and for this, we are to appeal to the
Councils of Laodicea, Gangra, Carthage, and many others, which are no General
Councils.

To conclude: Such Errors as had overspread the Church before the Reformation,
were in their own nature, and in their consequences, so pernicious, that every
Christian Man ought to reform himself from them, inasmuch as it is better to
obey God than man: Much more might a public Reformation be made by due
Authority.

But we had no regard to the Bishop of Rome in this matter, who was to be
considered either as Head of the whole Church, or the Patriarch of the West, or
as the Converter of the English Nation; and we were not only in Communion with
him, but in subjection to him, when the Reformation was made: so that what
cause soever there might be for it, the Reformation was however schismatical.

To all which, I answer in short:

1. As to the Universal Supremacy, it is a point to which Antiquity is wholly a
stranger; Scripture and the Fathers say nothing of it: Ignatius, who so often
requires, that nothing should be done of moment in the Church, without the
Bishop, would have found out some one occasion at least to have said, Let
nothing be done without the Bishop of Rome, if he had known of any such
Privilege and Power conferred on him by our Lord. But if Pergamos were
justifiable in removing those Corruptions which were crept into that Church,
without staying for the consent of the Bishop of Rome; England, in removing
more Corruptions, and of equal danger, was to proceed also without his leave,
if it could not be had.

2. As to his Patriarchal Power over this Nation, it did not anciently belong
to him; he had it not, when the Council of Nice confined him to his own
Province, nor when the Council of Ephesus decreed, That no Bishop should
presume to invade any other Province, which from the beginning had not been
under his or his Predecessor's Jurisdiction; or if any do, and make it his own
by force, that he should restore it. And then the Church of Britain was free,
acknowledging no foreign Jurisdiction; the Power that the Bishop of Rome gained
here in after-Ages, was got by fraud and held by force, and was ever and anon
disputed, and gainsayed, and overruled; and surely no injury was done him,
when that Authority was resumed, which he had usurped.

3. As to the Conversion of the Saxons by Austin, sent hither by Pope Gregory,
I say, it follows not, if long since the Inhabitants of this Island received
any benefit from Rome, therefore they should in all Ages be exposed to the
Usurpations of that place afterward; nor that because we once received true
Religion from Rome, therefore Posterity must receive also false Doctrines from
thence, when it should please her to send them hither: But in truth
Christianity had been planted here long before, by St. Paul himself in all
probability, and that in the Reign of Tiberius, before Rome her self had
received the Christian Faith. And the British Bishops, whom Austin found here,
would by no means submit to the Authority of the Roman Legate.

And so much for the right that this particular Church had to reform her self.
I come now,

Thirdly, To consider some of those specious Pretenses and Objections by which
they go about to weaken the stedfastness of our People in the Communion of our
Church, and to draw them to theirs:

1. They say, How was it possible that Errors could creep into the Church, of
that nature with those which we charge upon them? There must have been great
Opposition made to any the least design of such an alteration in the State of
Religion; and we meet with no such account of things in History: Therefore
these are not Innovations, but the ancient Doctrine and Practice of the Church.
To omit this, that concerning most of their Innovations, we can very nearly
show the time when they were brought in, but can plainly show, that there was a
time when they were not. I answer, It is much more easy to conceive, that in a
thousand years time Error should creep into that Church by degrees, and
without noise, than that in a Church planted by an Apostle, as Pergamos was,
guarded by the Angel or Bishop placed there by an Apostle, as Pergamos was,
should so soon tolerate the Doctrines of the Balaamites and Nicolaitans, even
while their Apostle was alive, and therefore very soon after he departed from
them.

2. They say, that the perpetual Succession of their Bishops from St. Peter, is
an Argument of the Succession of true Doctrine amongst them in the purity
thereof; but behold an Apostolical Church, in which a Bishop succeeded an
Apostle yet alive, corrupted in her Doctrine and Worship! Can they have
greater, can they have as great an assurance of a perpetual uninterrupted
Succession, after so many Ages, as the Church of Pergames had, before one Age
was gone? or does their Infallibility grow with their Succession? or, the
farther they are removed from the beginning of the Church, are they the surer
still that they teach nothing, but what was taught at first?

3. They say, we are departed from the whole Church of Christ that was visible
everywhere upon the face of the Earth, when the Reformation was begun, seeing
there was then no Communion in the World, nor had been long before, that
professed the same Doctrine in all points, which the Reformation brought in.
Now in great liberality to admit for once that the whole visible Church had
corrupted its way, as the Church of Rome has done, which yet is not true; but I
say, admitting it, what will then come of it? That we departed from the whole
Church of Christ? No: but that we departed from the general Errors and
Corruptions of it, and by that could not be said to depart from the whole
Church, whereof we our selves were a part, unless we departed also from our
selves. Nay, but say they, this is to fall into another damnable Error, and
that is, that the whole Church of Christ had failed from the Earth, and so that
the visible Church had perished for some Ages, till the Reformation brought it
to life again* Not so neither: For we do not say, that the Errors of the
Church were of that nature, as to make it cease to be a Church; but that they
were in themselves damnable, and that they made the Salvation of all that were
in it, extremely hazardous; but yet that we hope well of those, who believing
the fundamental Doctrines of Christianity maintained in the Church, and wanting
means to discover her Corruptions, served God according to their knowledge: so
that we do not say, the Church had perished, but that her Purity had been lost,
even as Pergamos was a Church, and so acknowledged by our Lord himself, because
she held fast the foundation of the Creed, while yet she was corrupted with
notorious Errors. To this, according to their usual way of arguing, they would
reply, that the case is not the same, between a Particular Church, as Pergamos
was, and the whole Visible Church, from which Luther and those that followed
him separated themselves: But then I would answer, That the case is the same,
as to the matter we are upon; for if a particular Church, though under great
Errors, may yet be a part of the whole Church, by like reasons, if the whole
Church were overspread with foul Errors, it would nevertheless still remain
the whole Church, and there is as great an obligation to depart from those
Errors in the latter case, as in the former; and a particular Church by
departing from such Errors, does no more depart from the whole Church, than she
did from her self.

4. They pretend Antiquity for their Errors, and are often asking that shrewd
Question, as they deem it, Where was your Religion before Luther? I would
answer this Question with another, That after the Angel of the Church of
Pergamos had purged away the Corruptions of that Church, Where was the Church
of Pergamos before that Reformation? Every one of common sense would answer, It
was where it is now, and where it ever was, since it was first a Church; for
the Reformation took away nothing that belonged to the Nature and Essence of a
Church, but only the Shame, and the Corruption of it. So I say, still
admitting, what yet can never be proved, that there was none for 500 Years
together, that declared against the Abuses and Errors that were crept into the
Church; admitting this, I say, that our Church, before our Reformation, or even
before Luther was, even amongst our selves, where the Roman Corruptions had
prevailed, only it was then a corrupted, now it is a reformed Church. That
which makes Rome a true Church, is, that she retains the Profession of the
Creeds, and the Administration of the Sacraments. That which makes her a
corrupt Church, is, that she has added as many more Articles of Faith, as there
were before, and brought in Idolatrous Practices into her Worship. Such a true
Church, and such a corrupted Church, was this of England before the
Reformation; but the Truth we have reserved, and the Corruption we have cast
away, and so have added Purity to the Truth of our Christian Communion; we have
kept that which is ancient, thrown aside that which was lately introduced, and
so are a Church built upon the same Foundation that we were built upon before,
but have thrown away the Hay and Stubble that was laid upon it. But if the
instance of the Church of Pergamos be not sufficient to answer this Question, I
shall add another to it, and that is Hezekiah's Reformation, who took away the
High Places, burnt the Images, and cut down the Groves, which had stood in all
probability four or five hundred years, for this was the abatement of the
commendation of good Kings before him, that nevertheless the High Places were
not taken away: And moreover, this Corruption had spread itself from one end of
Judah to the other. Here was universality of Places, and the Prescription of
some Ages, to give Authority to it; notwithstanding which, Hezekiah to his
immortal honor, made a Reformation. And now the Question, Where our Church was
before Luther? is just such another as this would have been, Where was the
Church of Judah before Hezekiah? And indeed such a demand was made; But by whom
do you think? Truly, by none of God's Church; but which is little for the
credit of such Questions, by Rabshakeh, that great Blasphemer of the God of
Israel: For thus I find him speaking to the Jews: But if ye say unto me, We
trust in the Lord our God; is not that he, whose High Places, and whose Altars
Hezekiah has taken away, and has said to Judah and Jerusalem, Ye shall
Worship before this Altar in Jerusalem? 2 Kings 18.22. By which Question it is
most apparent, that the corruption amongst the People in this matter, had been
so general, and ancient, that their Neighbors took this false Worship of
theirs, for their Religion; and therefore reckoned that Hezekiah had introduced
a New Religion, because he had but reformed the Old. I need not make any
application of so plain an instance.

5. They sometimes say, That since we confess them to be a true Church, and
consequently to hold no Fundamental Errors, we ought to have tarried in a
Church, in which we granted a possibility of Salvation; and we may now without
danger return to their Communion. But it is plain, that not only those Errors
which do unchurch a People, but even those that make their Salvation hazardous,
are to be reformed: Pergamos was still a Church, notwithstanding her Errors;
but yet was obliged to reform them.

6. And lastly, Since we grant them to be a true Church, and Christ can have
but one Church upon Earth, and there is but one Church, out of which there are
no ordinary means of Salvation, we must conclude our selves to be no true
Church, nor part of it, because we are separated from them, and consequently to
be cut off from the hope of Salvation. I answer, That there is indeed but one
Catholic Church, as we confess in our Creed, whereof the Church of Rome is one
part, and one of the worst in the World, and the Church of England another, and
perhaps one of the best. I do grant also, that Salvation is not to be
ordinarily had out of the Catholic Church; but then I add, that in that part
of it, which is best reformed, it is to be obtained with great safety and
assurance; and in that part of it, which is very corrupt, and refuses to be
reformed, not without great difficulty and danger: And though these parts of
the Church are separated in Communion from one another, it does not follow,
that either of them must be the Catholic Church, and the other no part of it
at all; but that there is but one part which can free herself from the blame of
the separation, and that it concerns every Man, as much as his Soul is worth,
to choose that Communion, which does not only afford him the means that are
absolutely necessary to Salvation, but those also without the mixture of such
false Doctrines, and unlawful Practices, which nothing but invincible
Ignorance, or Infirmity that is very pardonable, can reconcile with the hope of
any Man's Salvation. But if they will not receive this Answer, but still
contend, that because we charge each other with Heresy and Schism, it is
impossible both parts can be within the Unity of the Catholic Church; and
therefore that we granting them to be a true Church, must confess our selves to
be none. I know not what they will get by this; but that if this be true, we
must revoke all that charitable hopes of their Salvation, which we would fain
nourish: If either they or we must needs be quite out of the Church, and can
have no benefit by the Promises of the Gospel, and the Covenant of Grace; does
it follow that therefore we must go over to their Communion? No: But it follows
on the other side, that we have greater reason than we thought we had, to stay
where we are; because it seems, as they say, one part must needs be out of the
Church, and want all means of Salvation. For we confess our selves to be much
more sure, that our Communion is a safe way to Salvation, than we are, that
theirs is a way at all: And if they will not let us believe both together,
instead of giving us a reason why we should be Papists, they give us a new one,
why we should not. This I say, to show only, what Answer they may get by trying
to make an unreasonable advantage to themselves by our charity and moderation:
not that I believe their Errors have made them cease from being a part of the
Church, any more than the Errors of Pergamos made her cease to be so; nor, that
it is impossible the Reformed, and the Unreformed part of Christendom should be
within the Pale of that one Church, which we profess to believe in the Creed,
any more than it was impossible for the Church of Pergamos to have been a part
of the Catholic Church, both before and after her Reformation.

And thus I have gone through the task I set my self, and I hope need to make
no Apology for entertaining you with a Controversy of this nature, which
indeed ought to be no Controversy amongst us. But if it were needful, I have
this to say, Whereas the Church of England does not pretend to be an Infallible
Guide or Judge, and yet requires the People to believe as she believes, to
profess what she professes, and to do what she injoyneth; it is very fit that
her Ministers should sometimes make it plain, that she requires this, because
she has reason so to do, and is not in these points deceived, though she does
not pretend that she cannot err in any. I know not whether I have made the
things I have discoursed plain enough to every understanding; but whether that
be so or not, yet every one may perceive, that we appeal to his Reason for the
truth and honesty of our Cause; and for my own part, if I understood nothing
else of the Merits of it, I had rather be of a Church which pretends to guide
me with Reason, than of another that would govern me without it, and that
because the former is likely to take more care not to mislead me, than the
latter needs to do, which when it has gained me to an implicit Faith, and a
blind Obedience, may lead me whether she pleases. As for what I have now said,
I declare in the presence of God, that I have offered nothing to you, but what
I believe my self, and farther, that I am not conscious to my self of any
reason, why I am fixed in the Communion of this Church in opposition to the
other, but a full conviction of the Errors of that Church, which if I should
profess or practice, I could not entertain the least hopes of Salvation: And we
who are thus convinced, are as I take it, bound in conscience to take
seasonable opportunities of confirming our Brethren in our Communion, and
enabling them as well as we can, to make it appear, that the Arguments and the
Answers of the other side are unsatisfactory and vain, as I have in some part
endeavored to show at this time.

We should indeed not be unwilling to take pains to recover those to the
knowledge of the Truth, that are educated in damnable Errors; but there is
much more reason to do all we can to retain those in the profession of the
Truth, that have been educated in it, seeing if they revolt, we cannot have
that hope of their Salvation which we would fain have of theirs, who want
sufficient means to discover them.

It were a blessed state of the Church indeed, if all being united in true
Faith and Worship, we had nothing to do but to persuade and exhort men, and to
take care of them, that they live answerably thereto; but since we have two
Works upon our hands, to guard you against Error, as well as to warn you
against a wicked Life, I do not see how we can discharge our Duty, but by doing
one as well as the other: And that I may not say nothing to the latter, I am to
tell you, in the Conclusion, that we do not make the Communion of the best
Church in the World to be all in all; a man may go to Hell in the Communion of
a pure Church; and without true Repentance and Reformation, the best and purest
Church that ever was since the Gospel began, could have done him no service:
And I take it to be as great a Corruption as can be readily thought of, for any
Church to pretend to save men by a Trick, and send them to Heaven any other way
than the plain way of keeping the Commandments of God, and our Savior Jesus
Christ: Keep therefore the pure Profession of the Christian Faith, but withal,
keep a good Conscience void of offense toward God, and toward man: Hold fast
the form of sound words: But still remember, that if your Works be not
answerable, your Faith is vain; For not the hearers of the law, but the doers
thereof shall be justified: Not he that says, Lord Lord, shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of our Father which is in Heaven.

The Second Sermon.
MATTHEW. XVIII. 7. Woe unto the World because of Offenses; for it must needs be
that Offenses come; But woe to that man by whom the Offense comes.


THE great end of the Gospel is to bring Mankind to Salvation, and in order
thereunto to convert them from Sin and from all dangerous Error, and to lead
them to a right Faith, and a Holy Life: But it is too evident, that this end is
not attained Universally. And if any one should be tempted to suspect that the
Christian Religion is not therefore a Divine Revelation, because it has in so
great part failed of the end which it pretended to pursue; he may be easily
brought to assurance again, by considering the vast good which Christianity
has done in the World, but especially by observing that the Gospel has
foretold, that all men would not believe and obey. Our Blessed Lord himself
testified, that many were called, but few were chosen; and that strait was the
Gate and narrow the Way that leads to Life, and few there be that find it:
Nay, inasmuch as he has forewarned us of a Day of Judgment, and has told us
beforehand, That the word which he has spoken, the same should judge us at the
last day. This was a manifest Declaration, that he did not pretend to lead men
to Faith and Repentance by such means as could not but be effectual, but only
by such as were sufficient, if we would in any measure comply with his gracious
Methods; and it was also a plain intimation that a great many would be never
the better, but the worse for these means that God had provided for their
Salvation; and that some for not receiving them, others for not improving them,
would fall into greater Condemnation.

But our Savior did not foretell these things only, but the Causes of them too,
and what it was that would obstruct the Progress and Design of his Religion.
For this is the importance of those words of his which I have now chosen for my
Subject: Woe be to the World because of Offenses; for it must needs be that
Offenses come.

By Offenses, or Scandals, we are here, and almost everywhere in the New
Testament, to understand those Temptations to Sin, and Inducements to Error,
which some men lay in the way of others: They are sometimes otherwise expressed,
Snares, Stumbling Blocks, and Occasions of Fallings; for the thing meant by all
these expressions is the same. Now concerning Offenses; our Savior affirms two
things in the words I have read: First, That they would come; nay, that it must
needs be that they would come; i. e. that men would arise who should hinder the
prevailing of Christianity as much as in them lay, or pervert the Design of it,
to the great danger of other men's Souls, who were not well established in the
Truth. Secondly, That the consequence of these Scandals would be very sad and
pernicious, that is, that very many would stumble at them, and be turned out of
the right way. For this must be implied in those words, Woe to the World because
of Offenses: For, 1. It is no ordinary Misery or Calamity which is expressed in
denouncing a Woe; and this Woe must likewise refer to those that are turned aside
by the Scandals and Temptations that others lay before them; because if
Offenses were not taken as well as given, it seems not easy to say why they
should produce so much Sin and Misery as is implied in denouncing Woe upon their
account. Besides, our Savior did afterward express the guilt and misery of
those that should give Offense, by itself, But woe be to the man by whom the
Offense comes: That is, to every man that by his own Wickedness laith a
Stumbling Block in his Brother's way, and draws him into Sin. So that in the
former part of this Verse, that mischief is expressed which would come of
Offenses, because they would be taken. And then, 2. it is also implied that the
mischief would not only be in itself great, but likewise of a very large
extent; for it is said Woe to the World because of Offenses; where by the World
we cannot understand less than a very great part of Mankind, who should be
diverted by Offenses, either from receiving the Gospel at all, or from
entertaining it in the Purity and Power thereof.

There are therefore these two Heads which I am to speak to.

I. That Offenses would certainly be given; It must needs be that Offenses
come. II. That they would do very great mischief in the World: Woe be to the
World because of Offenses.
Which two Points being illustrated, I intend to apply them in order to farther
Instruction.

1. That Offenses would certainly be given: It must needs be that Offenses
come. By which words I do not understand, that it was absolutely impossible but
Offenses must come; for God has not necessitated any man to Sin: but the
meaning is this, that it was in it self probable, and that in the highest
degree, that Offenses would come; and moreover, God certainly foresaw that they
would arise, if he did not interpose his Almighty Power to hinder them, which
he determined not to do. And this is a sufficient ground of the certainty of
the Prediction; It must needs be that Offenses come. Now the true notion of
Offense being this, that it is an occasion given whereby men are either
discouraged from the Profession of the Truth, or encouraged Practices in
contrary to it. I shall 1. lay before you some instances under this general
Head: And 2. show why it was not to be expected but that Offenses would be
given.

The principal instances are such as these:

1. Opposing the Gospel with outward Violence, and making it the interest of
men to renounce the Truth, as they love their Fortunes and their Lives: Of
which our Savior spoke in the famous Parable of the Sower, where he explained
him that received the seed into thorny places, to be one that hears the word,
and with joy receives it, yet has he not root in himself; and not being
fortified with deep resolution, he dureth but for a while; for when tribulation
or persecution arises because of the word, by and by he is offended, Matthew.
13.20, 21. This was that Offense which our Savior warned his Disciples of more
than of any other. He told them plainly beforehand, That they should be
delivered up to Councils, and brought before Governors, and be hated of all
men for his Name's sake. But says he, He that endures to the end shall be
saved; and he that takes not his Cross, and follows after me, is not worthy
of me, Mat. 10. And this is in itself so great an Offense, or Stumbling Block,
to put Men out of the right way, that sometimes the general word is used to
signify this particular instance only: Thus when our Savior said, Blessed is
he, whoever shall not be offended in me, Mat. 11.6. The meaning is, Blessed is
he whom the Example of John the Baptist's Sufferings, does not fright from
being my Disciple. And thus when Peter said, Though all men should be offended
because of thee, yet will I never be offended, Matthew. 26.33. He explaim'd his
own meaning afterward, by saying, Though I should die with thee, yet will I not
deny thee, v. 35. But then,

2. Doctrines that give liberty to Lust, and that give ease to guilty Minds
without reformation, are a very dangerous Offense; for they are framed at once
to draw Men off from the Truth, and reconcile them to wicked Practice; and
therefore they who are under the strongest inclinations to sin, and need the
most powerful restraints, are most forward to receive them; i. e. they who will
be sure to make the worst use of them. He that offers a Key to let Sinners into
Heaven without Repentance, and keeping the Commandments of God, is sure to meet
with sufficient Numbers that will not be over-forward to examine how he came by
it. And this is that which makes all Doctrines of this nature Offenses, that
they are grateful to the corrupt Inclinations of Mankind; not that they carry
any appearance of Truth. It had been long enough ere Men could have been
persuaded, that particular Confession of Sins to a Man in secret, with a bare
purpose not to do the like again, will at any time suffice for the effect of
Absolution; if the belief of it were not as much for the ease of the People, as
for the advantage of the Priest: Or that bodily Exercise, mere external Works,
should either be Godliness, or supply the want of it. These things bear so hard
against what we know of God by Reason, and by Scripture, that nothing but
carnal Interest, and a desire that they should be true, could make way for
them, and provide them Entertainment. And what Wonders that can do, was too
evident in the beginning of Christianity, when the Gnostics seduced no small
number of Disciples, by giving liberty to fleshly Lusts, and discharging them
from all obligation to confess Christ, when they were to take up his Cross.

3. The mixing of Falsehood with Truth, is another great Offense, tending to
much Evil; as it meets with persons disposed either to overmuch Credulity, or
too much Distrust. By the former, the false Doctrine, or unlawful Practice is
embraced, because found in the company of Truth; by the latter, Truth it self
suspected, and perhaps thrown off, because it is disgraced with the company of
Follies and Lies. Thus the Pharisees recommended their absurd Traditions to the
People, because in the same breath they taught them the Law of Moses. Thus some
of the Gentiles were ready to reject Christianity, when they were made to
believe it necessary for them also to observe the Mosaical Law if they would be
Christians. And this is one of the common Scandals of the World, that Truth is
so often insincerely represented, and false Doctrines propounded still by the
same Authority that holds forth some necessary Truths. And for this reason the
Gospel does not allow, but command us to use a Judgment of Discretion; not to
reject that which is good, because it comes from the same Authority that
requires evil; nor to admit error, because it is accompanied with truth, but to
prove all things, and to hold fast that which is good.

4. All Popular Artifices that are used to recommend either wicked Errors, or
Practices, are also great Offenses, and lead many silly Souls astray; of which
kind the most obvious are these: An external show of Strictness and Piety,
without real Virtue and Godliness at the bottom of it. And of this the
Pharisees were the first notable instance, who placing Religion in abundance of
nice Observations, seemed to be the most strict and devour People in the World,
and therefore our Savior knowing the wickedness of their Hearts and Lives,
compared them to whited Sepulchers, that within were full of dead went bones,
and all uncleanness. And this Offense would be so powerful whenever it should
happen, that it seemed good to the Spirit to foretell it expressly, (...). That
in the latter times some should depart from the Faith, giving heed to seducing
Spirits, forbidding to Marry, and commanding to abstain from Meats, 1 Timothy 4.1,
2, 3. Another Offense of this kind, when was also expressly foretold is,
pretending the Testimony of Miracles. For says our Savior himself, There shall
arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall show great signs and
wonders; insomuch, that if it were possible, they should deceive the very
elect. Behold, says he, I have told you before, Matthew. 24.24, 25. And thus St.
Paul foretold, that when that wicked one should be revealed, his coming should
be after the working of Satan with power and signs, and lying wonders, and with
all deceivableness of unrighteousness. I shall name but one other popular
device for the supporting of Error, and that is to denounce Damnation
peremptorily against all Gainsayers; with which Artifice the Judaizers secured
themselves against the Gentile Christians, saying, Except ye be circumcised,
and keep the law of Moses, ye cannot be saved. Now although every man that has
a tongue, may, if he please, lay this weight upon his Cause, as to exclude all
from Salvation that are not of his way; and therefore the threatening be not
worthy of a wise man's thought, till the merits of the Cause be examined: Yet
it has two notable advantages, that it is framed to work upon the passions of
men, more than upon their judgment, and in most men their passion is stronger
than their reason; and it may be so used, as to bear the World in hand, that
it is not Uncharitableness, but mere Pity and Tenderness to the Souls of Men,
that compels them to speak so harsh, but so necessary a Truth. And it is a
wonderful thing to observe how easy Men are to be managed, when on the one
side there is a positive Sentence of Damnation to work upon their fears; and on
the other, an appearance of serious Charity to win their Affections: for by
this Art, Men of contrary Parties, have with strange success served contrary
Opinions and Practices. I cannot, if I were willing, reckon all the Offenses of
this kind, that is popular and plausible ways of deceiving. But that there
would be such, our Savior did not only foretell in the general, when he said,
It must needs be that Offenses come: but in particular also, when he said,
Beware of false Prophets, which come to you in sheeps-cloathing, Mat. 7.15.

5. To this I may add what St. Paul observes, 1 Timothy 6.5. Perverse disputings
of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth, supposing that gain is
godliness. That any thing may be defended as a part of Religion, which makes
for worldly Interest. It is no such hard matter to perplex things that are
plain, to find colors for denying things that are evident, to hide the
weakness or the strength of an Argument, to divert from the Cause to the Person
so artificially, as if the Cause went on still, to lose the matter in debate,
to make Truth look like Error, and Error like Truth, to those that are
willing to be deceived; if a man is resolved to bend all his wit this way, for
something may be said for any thing.

6. And lastly, bad examples of men professing the true Religion, are another
most dangerous Offense: Since I doubt most men are so framed as to take up
their opinions more easily from Authority than from other Argument, and they
understand more easily the difference between good and evil Manners, than
between strong and weak Reasons. And then they will be apt to judge of the
Truth or Falsehood of a way of Religion by the good or bad Fruits of Practice it
brings forth in those that profess it: which doubtless our Savior intimated in
those words; Let your light so shine before men, that others seeing your good
works, may glorify your Father which is in heaven. But to hold the Truth in
Unrighteousness, is not only a Scandal to those that are in Error, confirming
them in their wrong way, but likewise to those that are in the way of Truth, by
encouraging them to Sin in like manner; especially when evil examples are set
by those that are particularly obliged to set none but good ones, whose Place
or Office, Wealth or Quality makes them more conspicuous, and gives others any
kind of dependence upon them. And because of the pernicious influence of bad
examples, we find St. Paul often calling upon the Christians with whom he had
to do, to fix their observation upon those that were good: Brethren, says he,
be followers together of me, and mark them which walk so as ye have us for an
ensample: For many walk of whom I have often told you, and now tell you, even
weeping, that they are the enemies of the cross of Christ.

Thus I have very briefly, considering the largeness of the Subject, shown what
Offenses were to come, by laying before you the principal and most obvious
Offenses, which we know by the Predictions of the Scripture, and alas for the
World! by too sad experience. And now I proceed to the second Point, which was
to consider, why it must needs be that Offenses should come; that is, why it
was not to be expected, but that these, or such Scandals as these would be
given to the World.

And this Inquiry is necessary to be pursued upon this account, if upon no
other, that it may appear, that the certainty of Offenses coming, did not arise
from any defect or fault of the Blessed Gospel of our Savior. If we consider
the Harmless and Dovelike Temper of Christianity, the excellency of its Design,
the richness of its Promises, the Divinity of its Rules and Precepts, the
Comforts it has in store for all honest Minds, and that instead of running
cross to the Interests of Mankind, either here or hereafter, it shows an
infallible way to single Persons, and to Communities to be happy in this World,
and to all men to be for ever blessed in the World to come; We would rather
have expected it should have been foretold, that no man in any Age would ever
set himself to oppose the design of the Gospel, either in whole or in part. If
likewise we observe what clear and undeniable Testimonies of Divine Revelation
God approved and owned it by, how highly reasonable the Principles thereof are,
and how those things which could not be known but by Revelation, yet being once
revealed, do satisfy our Reason, and approve themselves to it; How evident the
Design thereof is, how plain the Precepts, how few the positive Institutions of
it are, and how significant and profitable they are, and how full of
Instruction, finally, how manifest those necessary Doctrines are, the belief
whereof is necessary to make a man a Christian; and what that Mystery of
Godliness is, which in the Apostles days was confessed, and without
Controversy: If we look upon these things, and no farther, we should rather
have expected that the Doctrine of our Savior should never have been gainsaid;
never perverted, never mingled with Error, never have given occasion to
wrangling and discord, and never have become the matter of nice and angry
Dispute, but only of an unblamable Faith and Practice. The Gospel of Christ is
undoubtedly a faithful Saying, or Doctrine clearly revealed, and standing upon
evident Testimonies of Divine Revelation; it is also worthy of all acceptance:
Why then must it needs be that Offenses come? To which I shall give a plain
answer in our Savior's words to Nicodemus: That light is come into the world,
and men love darkness rather then light, because their deeds are evil, Joh.
3.18. and therefore it must needs be that Offenses should come. For the
Religion of Christ is not suitable to the Spirit of this World, and therefore
the World hates it; and therefore no wonder if it has one way or other always
sought to obstruct the Progress and Design of it: In a word, it is not the
defect, but the exceeding excellence and purity of true Christianity, that has
given occasion to the World to oppose it, to pervert it, and to discourage the
Profession or Practice of it. For it is a Religion too wise and too good for
them that have no mind to be wise and good themselves; and therefore
considering the great corruption of humane Nature, which God would not
over-bear by an irresistible power, but cure by rational means and methods; no
wonder that Offenses have come, nay, that our Savior said it must needs be
that Offenses come. To argue more particularly:

1. The Doctrine of the Gospel is a Doctrine of Manners, lays a severe
restraint upon all the unreasonable Lusts of Men, and makes a great many
Liberties unlawful, which they are for the most part violently inclined to
take: And therefore every carnal man while he so continues, carries within
himself a terrible prejudice, a secret Enemy against the Truth as it is in
Jesus; and his Heart rises with as much anger against that Doctrine of God,
that tells him it is not lawful for him to pursue his worldly and fleshly
desires as he would, but to subdue and mortify them; as Herod, when he took
his Brother's Wife, expressed against John the Baptist, for saying, It is not
lawful for thee to have her. Man's Nature affects a lawless Liberty, and
cannot endure to be confined; it is diseased, and cannot endure to be healed;
and it was therefore likely enough that very many would reject the Physician,
and be angry with those very Remedies that our Heavenly Father has sent. The
true and sincere Doctrine of Christ, my Brethren, if it be believed, cannot but
make us very uneasy and unquiet while we are conscious of sin, and are not
willing to be reformed, because it reveals to us the Wrath of God against all
our unrighteousness and ungodliness; it forewarns us of a dreadful Sentence at
the last day, and of an everlasting Punishment, which we are unwilling at the
same time to venture, in which we are unwilling to part with our sins, and to
reconcile our selves to God by Repentance. And Men that are lovers of
Pleasures, and lovers of Gain, cannot easily admit a Doctrine which gives them
as much uneasiness and disturbance as if the point of a Sword were always
turned toward their very Hearts. For this Reason the Pharisees could not endure
the Doctrine of Jesus; and this was one Reason why the Heathens opposed it, and
persecuted it, and is one Reason why Christians have corrupted it; by finding
out other ways to avoid Damnation, than by a lively Faith, and true Repentance,
and effectual Reformation, and keeping the Commandments of God. It is this that
has made way for satisfactory Commutations, Merits of others, and the absolute
power of the Keys; and all those devices which are good for nothing but to
reconcile a wicked Life to the hopes of Heaven, and to entangle the plain sense
of those words of Christ; He that hears these sayings, and does them not, I
will liken him to a foolish man that built his House upon the Sand, and the
winds blew, and the rain fell, and the floods came and beat upon that House,
and it fell, and great was the fall thereof; that is, it suffered an
irreparable Ruin.

2. If we consider the Doctrine of Christ, as it is a Doctrine both of Faith
and Manners, it is no way framed to serve the ends of ambitious and
worldly-minded men, or to help them in pursuing those ends by a pretense of
Religion; and therefore it was not to be expected but in process of time it
would be by some or others molded for that purpose, when Opportunity should
serve. Our Savior taught the World no other Principles of Morality, no other
Articles of Faith, than what were equally for the Interest of all parts of
Mankind to believe and follow; a common good, and an equal benefit was intended
in them all. For let them prevail without corruption and alteration, the Honor
and Safety of Sovereign Princes is secured, and a quiet and peaceable Life to
Subjects; Neighbour-Nations shall give strength and confidence, instead of
creating Jealousies to one another; the Master shall be better served, and the
Servant better used; the Church by her Doctrine and Spiritual Authority will be
a Guard to the State, and receive at the same time Protection from it. Here was
no design in Christianity to set up any Nation or party of Men, in opposition
and to the disadvantage of all mankind beside; but it plainly aimed at a
general good, and under its Penalties requires all its Professors to aim at the
same too; and condemns those who are lovers of themselves in opposition to all
others, amongst the greatest Offenders. And this Religion, as Machiavel well
observed, was not calculated for the inspiring of Men with great Designs, such
I suppose as his Caesar Borgia aimed at. It was too plain, too Philosophical,
too Innocent and Charitable, to raise an ambitious heat, or to serve it. And
therefore it was very likely in process of time, that it should be helped out
by other Principles and Doctrines that would bring in the swelling of worldly
Pride into the Church, as the African Fathers, in their Epistle to Celestine,
called it, and advance one part of it to the depressing of all the rest. But
because true Christianity serves no such Design, therefore was our Savior
opposed by the Rulers of the Jews; his Doctrine did not tend at all that way,
viz. to make Jerusalem the Mistress of the World, and that all should depend
upon her; it did not minister to their ambitious and worldly Hopes, and
therefore was not for their turn.

3. If we look upon Christianity as a Rule of Worship, it will still hold true
that Offenses must needs come, because the Worship it prescribes is a Worship
of great simplicity, that has but two or three positive Institutions of Divine
Authority, viz. the two Sacraments, and the Invocation of God through the Name
and Mediation of his Holy Son Jesus. Now this was not likely to be acceptable
to the generality of Mankind, who love rather a pompous number of Ceremonies,
and nice Observations, than a grave and decent administration of Worship. For
the former does amuze the Senses, and entertain the Imagination, the latter
does that but very little in Comparison, and rather satisfies our Reason. But
most People are more apt to be affected with things that touch their Fancy than
their Judgment. And therefore it was hardly to be expected but in time their
would grow very great excesses in this kind, as there did even in St. Austin's
days, who complained of it not a little in his Epistle to Januarius. Neither
could it be doubted but such excesses would be accompanied with false Notions
of Religion, and of the way to please God: For whereas the excellent design of
our Savior in appointing so small a number of external Observations, leaving
the necessary Rules of Decency to be determined by the Church, was this, to
take Men off from all pretense of placing the weight of Religion in outward
Ceremonies, and by their very Worship to instruct them in Piety and Virtue; and
to show them that God will not be pleased without those things; whereas he did
hereby effectually declare, that God, who is a Spirit, would be worshipped in
Spirit and in Truth; that is, with the Affections of a pious Heart, and the
Obedience that is expressed in a good Life. The corrupt Nature of Man is as
averse from this, as it is fond of the other; and desires to please God by so
easy a Religion as that which runs out into a world of Mysteries, and Shows,
and Observations; and seems to save them the labor of subduing their Lusts and
Passions, and of serving God by a righteous and holy Life. And this was one
thing that made the Primitive Christians contemptible and odious to the
Heathens, that they had so few Rites and Ceremonies, so plain and simple a Form
of Divine Service; but one Altar, but one Mediator, no Tutelar Deities and
Patrons, no throngs of petty Gods; but one or two Mysteries, and those too
plain and instructing, without Pomp and Amuzement; for such causes as these,
they reckoned the Christians little better than Atheists, believing that a
Religion which made no stately show, to be as good as none at all. It Is true,
that God himself appointed a Form of Divine Service to the Israelites, that
consisted of a vast number of Ceremonies; but besides this, that they were to
be the Types to discover the Messiah when he should appear: There was another
end of Divine Providence observable in that Constitution, which was this; that
they having a stately and Mystical Form of Worship of their own, might be less
under a Temptation of learning of the Idolatrous Nations round about them;
whose numerous and gaudy Ceremonies in their Worship, would have bewitched the
Jews ten times more than they did, if they had not been able to vye with them.
But God by his Prophet said, That he gave them Statutes that were not good, to
be sure not the best, in themselves, but considering the time, the best for
them. For when God sent his Son into the World, who was to teach all mankind to
Worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth, and to convert the Nations from
Idolatry, the Scheme of the Mosaic Worship was taken down, and the Church was
furnished with nothing but Prayers and Praises, two Sacraments, and one
Mediator. But by all this it appears, that the design of the Gospel in this
matter runs counter to the fond and foolish inclinations of mankind; and
therefore that Offenses were ready to come upon this account also.

So that considering the temper and design of the Gospel, it was a Religion too
good for a wicked World, too wise for a vain and foolish World; I mean, it was
too good and too wise, to escape Opposition, and all change; the World would
either try to keep it out, or when that was in vain to attempt any longer, to
square and form it better to its own purposes and inclinations. It was upon
this account, viz. of the design of the Gospel which was exalted above a
worldly Spirit, that a peculiar temper was required by our Savior, in order to
the embracing of his Doctrine. A Spirit of Honesty and Sincerity, of Humility
and Teachableness; love of the Truth, willingness to learn, patience of
Reproof, and the like; without which Dispositions, the common prejudices
against Christianity would certainly hinder the efficacy of those Arguments and
Motives, by which it was recommended. And therefore since God did not intend by
an irresistible act upon the minds of Men to overruled them into a compliance
with the Gospel, it was not to be expected but that it should be first of all
greatly opposed, as it was; and afterward insincerely handled, as it has
been: And this, although the Doctrine of the Gospel is peculiarly furnished
with means to infuse a wise and honest disposition into them that want it. For
those means are consistent with the liberty of Humane Nature, and after all,
men may be the worse and not the better for them. Nothing could in its own
Nature be more fit to awaken Men to Consideration, and to lead them to Honesty
and Wisdom, and to conquer all worldly and carnal prejudices than the promise
of Eternal Life, and the warning of a day of Judgment to come. It is in this
that the great power of the Gospel to mend the tempers of Men consists: But
when all is done in this kind that can be done, Men may choose their Portion in
this World, because they will not hearken and consider. And it well became
Divine Providence to permit those to resist the Holy Spirit, and the means of
Salvation, who would not be reclaimed by any reasonable means; and that for
these three Reasons.

1. That there might be a clear difference made between the good and honest
heart on the one side, and the insincere and incourigible on the other: Which
had been impossible, if God had by his Omnipotence equally overborn all men
into the Faith and Obedience of Christ. But as the case stands, the Gospel is a
Touchstone that distinguishes between the Humble and Sincere, and the
Unteachable and Dishonest part of Mankind. And the Offenses which are given by
those that do not receive the Truth in the love of it, are a farther trial of
the sincerity and ingenuity of men, as St. Paul said of one kind of Offenses:
There must be Heresies among you, that they which are approved may be made
manifest. And therefore notwithstanding Offenses, that remains true which our
Savior said, All that the Father gives me shall come to me; and him that
comes to me I will in no wise cast out, Joh. 6.37. i. e. All sincere and
humble persons, who are committed to the special care of Christ, to train them
up to eternal Life, will be sufficiently armed against Temptations, and the
Offenses that are laid in their way, shall but clear their sincerity and wisdom
more to the World, and turn to the increase of their reward.

2. As the sincerity of the Righteous, so neither had the proper advantages and
power of Truth been seen had God interposed his irresistible power to prevent
all Offenses and Endeavors against the Truth: And therefore he was pleased to
suffer Error and Folly to appear upon the stage of the World, even after the
heavenly Wisdom of the Gospel was made known to Mankind, that by its own
strength it might struggle with all kind of opposition, and prevail, and be
justified of her Children.

3. By this way the Wisdom of Divine Providence, and the truth of God's word,
and his care over the Church is seen more illustriously, than if Offenses had
never been suffered. That Promise that the Gates of Hell should never prevail
against the Church of Christ, nor the Faith lost from the Earth, had lain in
the Gospel unobserved; we should have had no occasion for recourse to it, no
means of trial whether we put our trust in it; had the Truth been never
opposed, never corrupted, we had wanted one notable reason to praise God, that
while the Offenses are so rife in this World, this Church gives no Offense in
matter of Doctrine, or in matter of Worship; and that God may count us worthy
to enjoy so inestimable a Blessing, let us pray that we may give no Offense by
our Examples; let us adorn our Profession by our Conversations; and show the
Purity of our Faith, by the Purity of our Actions. Thus much for the necessity
of Offenses that thus would arise. It must needs be that Offenses come.

The Third Sermon.
MATTHEW. XVIII. 7. Woe unto the World because of Offenses; for it must needs be
that Offenses come; But woe to that man by whom the Offense comes.


I Come now to the second point, viz. That Offenses would do great mischief in
the World. Woe unto the World because of Offenses. In speaking to which I shall
consider, I. What mischief is done by Offenses? II. Whence it comes that they
are of so pernicious a Consequence?


1. What mischief is done by them? And in this Question I need not be large,
because the Answer to it has in some part been already given under those
several heads of Scandal which I mentioned before; it being impossible to show
where the Scandal of any Practice or Opinion lies, without touching upon the
mischief it is apt to do. But to what has been said, something may be added.

1. The general mischief of Offenses or Scandals, is this; That they are a
prevailing Temptation upon many in the World to forsake the way of Truth and
Piety. For as good Examples and Encouragements, good Counsels and Instructions
are proper means of making others better; so ill Examples, and the Arts of
Seducing must needs have a contrary influence. God has put us into a kind of
dependence upon one another, and has thereby given us Opportunities of the
greatest Charity, and the best kinds of doing good, viz. of leading and
confirming one another in the way of Truth and Virtue. But there is no help for
it; but the Society we have with one another may be abused into a means of
doing one another mischief. And therefore as where Truth is sincerely
represented, where Virtue is encouraged, where Authority protects them, where
Wit and Learning are engaged to recommend them, there abundance of good will be
done upon those who are framed to learn, and not to teach; to follow, but not
to lead the way: So on the other hand, it is not to be expected, but the abuse
of all those Advantages will create Prejudices against Truth and Goodness, and
mislead multitudes. And this is too evident from the Experience of the World in
all Ages. No Opinions, how foolish and absurd soever, how pernicious soever to
the common Interest of Mankind, if they have been set off with plausible
Colors, or supported by Authority, or have been accommodated to the Interests
of wicked Men; but they have had Abettors and Followers, and have very often
taken such deep Root in the Affections of Men, that it is one of the hardest
things in the World to convert them into the way of Truth. But more
particularly in the second place.

2. The scandal of advancing Doctrines that give liberty to the Lusts of Men,
and ease to their Minds without effectual Reformation. This Scandal, I say, has
this pernicious effect, that for the most part it fears the Consciences of Men,
and hardens their Hearts against all Reproof. Although it be a terrible
aggravation of Sin, for a Man to venture upon the doing of that which his
Conscience pulls him back from, and for which he knows he must give a sad
account at the last day, if it be not prevented by Sorrow and Reformation; yet
such a Man is in a better condition than one that is well satisfied with
himself, and believes his condition to be good enough, while he goes on in his
sins without Reformation, because he has another way to escape the damnation of
Hell. For so long as a Man believes the Promises and Threatenings of the Gospel
as they are, and knows the Terms upon which they are made, it may be hoped that
he will at length lay these things seriously to Heart; and that some awakening
Reproof from Men, or some merciful Providence of God may make the Truth which
he is already provided with the belief of, effectual to his Conversion. But
there is little Reason to hope this of a Man whose very Principles are
corrupted, and has no fears within himself for a charitable Man to take hold
upon. And therefore that saying of our Savior may be well applied to such a
Person: If the light that is in him be darkness, how great is that darkness?
Moreover, there is little hope to reform that Man's evil Practices, whose
persuations make him secure and easy all the while. So there is no little
difficulty to be met with, in trying to undeceive him; for Men will hold
comfortable Errors as long as they can find the least pretense for it. And
which is not the least mischief of this Offense, though such Errors are not
laid down without a great trouble, yet they are taken up with much readiness;
they are apt to spread far and wide: And to this I believe the experience of
the World agrees, viz. That although there are mistakes that lead to trouble of
Mind and overmuch restraint, yet for one that is led away by such mistakes, an
hundred there are that believe comfortable Lies, which either wholly take off
the restraints of Religion, or in such part, as to render them ineffectual.

3. Perverse Disputes, and an obstinate Maintenance of Error by all the Arts of
Sophistry, has this lamentable evil commonly attending it, that it renders many
Persons utterly careless to examine on which side the Truth lies. Perhaps they
are but few in comparison that are framed to an inquisitive Spirit; and they
who are not so framed by Nature, or by Education, must force their Tempers to
Patience, and take pains with themselves, which is an Employment that Men soon
grow weary of; and commonly they break off, pretending it is to no purpose to
search any farther; but that when there is so much to be said on both sides,
when there is such an appearance of Reason for and against the same thing, it
is time for them to give over being Judges for themselves. And indeed in things
that are either really disputable, or of less moment, this were not much to be
blamed. But in matters of high Consequence, and Questions that touch the very
Vitals of Religion, it often happens that Men grow weary of searching Truth,
and give up themselves wholly to be led by the Authority and Judgment of others
after the Controversy is stiffly maintained for some time on both sides. And it
were well in this case, if it were an even lay whether they choose the true
Guide or not. But when a Guide is to be chosen, and followed with an implicit
Faith, the false Guide has this Advantage always, that he exceeds in
Confidence, in lofty Pretenses, in swelling Titles, in positive denouncing
Damnation to all that are not of his way; and though a Modest Man that speaks
justly of things, and claims not to be Infallible, deserves the most Credit;
yet it is great odds that the other has most followers amongst those that
understand not the merits of the Cause.

4. The same Cause has too often a yet worse Effect, and that is to run some
Persons into Infidelity, and an utter neglect of Religion, as if no certainty
could be had of the Principles of Religion, seeing there is so much
Controversy about it. And some have said, that it will be then time enough for
them to believe in God, and to worship him, when they that pretend to oblige
them to it are agreed about it. The truth is, were it not for that secret
impression of his own Being which God has left upon our Nature, it is not
improbable but the monstrous Errors that have been obtruded upon a great part
of Mankind under the name of Faith, and the force and the fraud wherewith they
have been maintained, had let in Atheism like a Deluge upon the World;
especially considering that there are those in the World, who are so full of
Zeal for their own way, that they have no tenderness for the common Principles
of Faith, but are rather content that all should sink together, than that their
own Doctrines should not stand. We have been born in hand that no assurance can
be had of the truth of Christianity, but from the Authority of such and such
Men; and they that believe upon other Grounds had as good have no Faith at all.
That if it were possible for them to propound any thing that is false, we
cannot be certain of any one Article that is true. That the same exceptions may
be made to the Miracles of Christ and his Apostles that are made against the
stories of latter Miracles; and finally, that by the same Reason that any of
their Traditions are rejected the Holy Scriptures may be rejected too; and
indeed we have lived to see the utmost that can be done by Wit and Learning to
diminish the Authority of the Bible. Now this, I say, is a most dreadful
Offense, and has done infinite mischief in the World, that Men who are
violently engaged in a wrong way of Religion, care not for the most part what
they venture in the service of their own Cause; for whilst they lay the same
stress upon false, or at least disputable Points, that they do upon the most
necessary and acknowledged Principles of Religion, and bend all their Wit to
show that no difference ought to be made, they give occasion to Men that would
fain be Atheists, to deceive themselves into what they would be. For a very
little consideration will serve to satisfy them that something is false which
is propounded to them as an Object of their Faith. And they know that they have
then leave given them to conclude that nothing is true.

5. There is another great mischief of Offenses that are given by Errors in
Doctrine or Practice, and a mischief that often happens in the World; which is
that of running into a contrary extreme. The Church found this by sad
Experience in the fourth and fifth Ages, when men of no small note disputing
against one Heresy, fell into another of an opposite Nature, to the no small
trouble of Christendom. Truth sometimes as well as Virtue lies in the mean; and
they that transgress on any one side, do not only this mischief to give what
Authority they can to the wrong side they are of, but they do this mischief too
of giving occasion to others to offend on the other extreme. Thus the abuse of
Church Authority on the one side, has bred in some men contempt of all such
Authority on the other. The scandals that have been given by propagating
Opinions by Force and Violence, have produced in many a fond persuasion that
there ought to be no restraints whatsoever in matters of Religion. Superiors
have required unlawful things in Divine Service; and to be revenged upon that
abuse, it has been said, that they are not to be obeyed in matters of Prudence
and Expedience. Religion has been made to run out into Shows and Ceremonies,
and this has begotten prejudices against all appearance of Beauty and Reverence
in the external Worship of God. And on the other side, the excesses of men in
departing from one extreme, are scandalous to those whom they left, and do
confirm them in their Errors. Thus because there are some who abuse the Liberty
this Church gives to all of using the Holy Scriptures, and who reject the
assistance of their Guides; they that are concerned the People should know as
little of the Bible as is possible, argue from the Folly and Vanity of the
former, how dangerous an Instrument it is in the hands of the Laity. And
because it is impossible but that a Judgment of Discretion in matters of
Religion being allowed to all, must be liable to be abused; they that abuse it
to the making of Sects and Parties, and the bringing in of Innovations, give a
Candle to that Church to glory in her Dissension, which provides that all
should believe as she believes, because of her Authority; and that no Man
judges of the particulars of his Faith, for himself. The truth is, the
instances of this mischief are so many, and so undeniable, that whenever any
great Scandal is given by Communities or Churches, that consists in one
extreme; a Man may, without the Spirit of Prophecy, foretell that if the great
Mercy of God prevent it not, it will in time beget the other extreme. It is the
great unhappiness of Mankind, that opposite Errors, which look as if one would
destroy the other, do really strive to support one another. And yet there is
hardly any foolish Advice more frequent, than to run from an extreme as far as
is possible, as if that were the way to make an end of it. But by this means
woeful mischiefs have happened in the World; Divisions have been multiplied,
Uncharitableness increased, and Men more and more hardened in their ways of
Error and Sin.

6. The scandal of mixing absurd and impious Doctrines with the Truth, and
unjustifiable Practices with such as are to be commended, has this notorious
mischief still attending it, that it hinders the Conversion of Insidels, and is
a terrible obstruction to the propagating of Christianity. Averroes did not
speak his own sense alone, when he said, Since the Christians eat their God,
let my Soul be with the Philosophers. The Scandals that are given to Jews and
Turks I need not name, but to make an end of this unpleasing Argument.

7. And lastly, The mischief of these and all other Offenses, is so much the
greater, because when once Offense is given, no man can tell where the mischief
will end. For instance, suppose by my Example I animate another to sin in like
manner; or that I do not only corrupt his Manners, but his Principles too, and
so do him all the hurt I can. Who can say that this is all the mischief I have
done? Is it not likely that he will infect others, as I have infected him? and
that they may go on to propagate the mischief which had its beginning from me?
And that the next Age may be the worse for me? And that my Guilt may be growing
Ages after I am dead? Apply this to all the Offenses that are given in the
World, and consider not only the greatness of the mischief they do, but the
spreading Nature of it, and we shall find great reason in those sad words of
our Lord; Woe to the world because of Offenses. But, 2. Whence comes it that
Offenses are taken, and so all this mischief done by them?

In general it might be sufficient to answer, That for whatever Causes some men
are apt to give Offense, for the same others are apt to take it; and therefore
it would not be impertinent to call over in this place the unsuitableness of
the Gospel to the Lusts, and to the Vanity of Mankind, whether it be considered
as a Rule of Faith, or Manners, or Worship. But to this it may be added,

1. That there are a great many in the World, who for want of either good
natural Abilities, or good Education, have little ability to judge for
themselves; and therefore the most part take their Impressions from the
Authority of other men's Examples, or Instructions. And therefore when they fall
into ill hands, they fare accordingly; to which our Savior seemed to have a
particular regard in the Verse before the Text; Whosoever shall offend one of
these little ones, which believe in me, it were better for him that a millstone
were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea.
So that because there would be some Persons sincerely disposed, who in many
things could not judge for themselves, but must be led by Authority, our
Savior, for their greater security, provided this frightful Threatening, to
deter all men from taking the advantage of their weakness to mislead them.

2. Some stumble at Offenses laid before them, and take up pernicious
Doctrines, merely from impatience of considering, and taking time to lay things
together. He that judges rashly and hastily, may by chance make a true
Judgment, but he shall as often judge falsely; it being no difficult thing, as
I observed last time, to lay such colors upon Error, as will require some
leisure to see through them. And in such cases if a Man be unwilling to take
pains, and desires to come presently and easily to the Conclusion, he gives the
Seducer all the Advantage he could desire, and is indeed just the Person he
desired to meet with; one easily deceived by a false appearance of Reason.

3. The strange influence which the carnal Affections of Men, and their worldly
Interests have upon their Judgments, is a fatal cause of laying them open to
the mischief of Scandals. We are too apt to desire Doctrines and Examples in
favor of liberty to sin; and therefore when they are offered, we are not so
apt as we should be to guard our selves against them. Thus it was among the
Jews, as God said by Jeremy, Jer. 5.31. The Prophets prophecy falsely, and my
people love to have it so.

To these I might add other Causes, viz. The prejudice of Education, undue
admiration of men's Persons, prejudice against Truth, arising from prejudice
against Persons, an inclination to Opinions suitable to our own Temper and
Complexion; love of Novelty on the one side, and on the other hatred to change,
though it be for the better; all which Dispositions and Circumstances expose
those that are under them to the mischief of Offenses. But I should be
over-tedious to run into all the particulars under this Head, which may also be
more profitably supplied by Directions in the close of all.

And so I come to the third intention, which was to reduce what has been said
to matter of Exhortation. And I shall leave with you these two necessary
Cautions.

I. Be careful to give no Offense. II. Be careful to take none.
1. Be careful to give no Offense; i. e. to lay no stumbling block in any Man's
way to lead him into Sin or Error, or to confirm him in it. Remember the words
of our Lord Jesus, Woe be to that man by whom the Offense comes. Now, the way
to keep our selves free from this guilt, is to love the Truth our selves,
sincerely to desire it, diligently to pursue it; and likewise in all our
Actions to live by Rule, and then we shall be sure to avoid giving ill
Examples. And we are the more obliged to this, because we are not only to give
an account of our selves to God, but of our selves also with reference to the
good or ill that others have received by us. Let us consider, my Brethren, how
careful we should be of our own Actions, and those especially that lie open to
others; when if we do ill our selves, we shall not only be to answer for our
own transgression of God's Law, but very likely for the sins of others, who are
either led into some unlawful Practice, or confirmed in it by our Examples.
Which makes such an increase of Guilt, and is so great a sin in it self, that
it is sometimes needful for a Man to abate of the use of his own Liberty in
things not unlawful of themselves, lest another that is likely enough to make a
wrong construction of it, and to encourage himself in manifest sin, should
indeed do so. And for this reason St. Paul, handling the Question of eating
things offered to Idols, acknowledges, That meat commends us not unto God;
for neither if we eat are we the better, neither if we eat not are we the
worse. But, says he, take heed lest by any means this Liberty of yours become a
stumbling block to them that are weak, who are not thoroughly confirmed in the
worship of one God according to the Gospel. For, as he goes on, if any man see
thee which have knowledge sit at meat in the Idols Temple, shall not the
Conscience of him which is weak be emboldened to eat those things which are
offered to Idols? i. e. be emboldened to commit Idolatry, 1 Cor. 8. So that
although it was not in it self unlawful to be present at those Sacrifices, yet
the Example being scandalous, St. Paul concludes it to be a sin against the
Brethren, and against Christ, ver. 12. And this in as much as it would grieve
their weak Conscience; i. e. not (as we use, I doubt, to understand that word
grieve) that it would trouble and difplease them, but really hurt them, by
making them bold to partake of the Idolatrous Sacrifice. And now, Brethren, if
in things that are perhaps in their own Nature lawful, we ought to use caution,
lest by an uncharitable use of our Liberty we encourage others to do things
that are in themselves absolutely unlawful: How much more cautious should we be
not to give any Authority to sin, by an Example that is evil in it self? So
likewise we ought with the more care to choose our persuasions in Religion,
because in all likelihood we do not choose them for our selves only, but for our
Children, for our Servants, for some of our Neighbors, for many that some way
or other depend upon us, and for whom we must answer at the day of Judgment.
And since we cannot profess, we cannot live, but the World observes us; so how
instructing ought to be our Profession, how instructing our Conversation? How
apt to promote Innocence, Truth, Virtue, and Piety? And this the more, the more
we are in the Eye of others? In short, no words I can use, can make such an
impression upon you, as these words of our Savior ought to make. Woe be to him
by whom the Offense comes. But this is not all.

2. We must also be careful not to take Offenses, not to be led into Sin and
Error by Example or Allurements by any kind of Temptations whatsoever: To
justify which Exhortation, I desire you to observe these three things.

1. That our blessed Lord has foretold that Offenses would come; nay, that it
must needs be that they come: Nay, I have shown, that the most dangerous
Offenses are particularly foretold in the New Testament. Now, Brethren, this
very warning, in general, much more those particular warnings, were designed to
take away, in some good measure, the danger of those scandals, by Arming us
with caution against them beforehand. Since that is to be applied to all other
particular Scandals, that is expressly added to the Prediction of lying Wonders,
Behold, I have told you before. Now, if the Offenses, though very dangerous of
themselves, were lesned by being foretold, our guilt in falling by such
Offenses must be so much the greater, because being fore-warned we would yet
take no warning. The offensiveness of these Offenses is in some part abated by
the cautions of the Scripture, in as much as we have no cause to be startled
and amazed, and to question the care of God's Providence over his Church,
because Offenses come, since the Author of our Faith has told us beforehand,
that they must needs come. And,

2. We are also forewarned of the guilt and misery of falling by Offenses; in
as much as our Savior has said, Woe to the World because of Offenses; i. e. as
I told you at first, because of that evil which will happen by taking Offense.
But if Men were free from guilt in the committing of those sins which they fall
into by reason of Scandals that are laid in their way. In short, if taking
Offense were not it self a sin, and in many cases a very great sin, and such a
sin as we shall be sadly accountable for at the day of Judgment, there could be
no Reason given, why our Savior should denounce a Woe upon this account; Woe
unto the world because of Offenses.

3. Let us not forget what was observed last time, that God permits Offenses to
come; which, according to the common course of things, were in themselves most
likely to come; he permits them, I say, for the Trial of our Ingenuity, our
Honesty and Sincerity. There must be Heresies among you, that they which are
approved may be made manifest. It is by no means unavoidable to stumble at
Scandals, because we are forewarned of them; but if we take warning, it is for
the Praise and Reward of our diligence and faithfulness in keeping to God's
Word. Our Savior speaking of the Signs and Wonders done by false Christ's, and
false Prophets, says, That if it were possible they should deceive the very
Elect; that is, they would deceive the very best Men, but that they are guarded
by Sincerity, and by the Grace of God; and these words plainly intimate, that
this would be the Touchstone to distinguish Persons truly and solidly good,
from all others, that notwithstanding the fair colors that would be put upon
wicked Practices and Errors, they would persevere in the ways of Truth and
Godliness.

And now that we may not be misled by Offenses, but keep our selves unspotted
from this present World, and escape the Corruptions that are in the World
through Lust, let us take these few following Rules along with us.

1. Let that which is on all sides acknowledged to be the Word of God, be of
more power and force with us than all Humane Authorities whatsoever; which
Rule, as it is most reasonable, so it is a safe Rule upon this account, that if
it be followed, it will secure us from the greatest Offenses, as those Opinions
and Practices are, which are evidently contrary to God's Word.

2. Let us keep close to the Ancient Creeds, which our Church faithfully
delivers; for no Man has yet been so bold as to offer the least doubt against
that; nay, all that we are challenged for, is, that we do not receive those
additions to the Creed, which in comparison were but of Yesterday. These
Ancient Forms of confessing the Faith, show what Articles of mere Belief were
thought by the Primitive Church necessary to be known and held by all: And
because the Faith was at once delivered to the Saints, no more can be necessary
now than was then. Now, if we observe that the Profession of this Faith is
sufficient to make a Christian, or a Member of the Church; we shall be the
better guarded against all erroneous Doctrines which are propounded to us by
any Party, under the Notion of Necessary Truths. For whilst we are sure we
profess all that was thought necessary at first, we shall be at ease, and feel
no disturbance in examining what is moreover propounded, and determining to
receive it, if it has Authority from the Scriptures, and to reject it, if it
has none; much more if it be contrary thereunto. Which Rule, I hope, you
perceive is to take place in judging what you are to believe, not in judging
whatsoever is to be done; for even in the Worship of God there are several
things of an indifferent Nature, for which there is no particular Precept in
the Scripture, and in which we may be, and ought to be concluded by the Custom
of our Church, and the Will of our Superiors. And he cannot miscarry greatly,
but is in great measure secured from the mischief of Offenses, who in matters
of Faith will be determined by nothing less than Divine Authority; and who in
matters of external Order, which are no way determined by the Authority of the
Scriptures, is still ready to be concluded by the Authority of Man. But then,

3. Let us keep our selves always in the proper disposition and preparation to
judge and conclude aright for our selves (i. e.) by Sincerity, which consists
chiefly in a vehement desire to understand the Truth, and to do our Duty: We
must lay our Hands upon this, that we will be honest and good, and then we
shall use all good Rules well; to be sure we shall not be a whit the more
inclined to embrace Doctrines for our Belief or Practice, because they make for
our worldly and carnal Interests. And this goes a great way to enable men to
distinguish between Truth and Error, Good and Evil. Offenses from without would
not stumble us, if we were not weakened and blinded by the Offense of a vicious
disposition within our selves. And therefore our Savior having given warning
against the former in the words of the Text, does in the very next words
proceed to direct us how to secure our selves against them, and that by
preventing the latter; Wherefore (says he) if thy right hand or foot offend
thee, cut them off: And if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it
from thee. That is, subdue thy dearest Lusts, and if there be any one that is
harder to part with than the rest, and is grown a part of thy self, though it
cost thee as much pain to divide thy self from it, as it would to cut off thine
hand, or pull out thine eye, for that very reason do thou mortify it in the
first place: For when the World will be full of Offenses, (i. e.)
encouragements to Sin, and of deceitful Errors, if thou also art an Offense to
thy self, for want of a sincere and honest heart, and purifying thy mind from
worldly and carnal Lusts, thou will not be able to withstand the Arts and Force
of outward Temptations. Now the way to gain this Honest Mind, is to fix our
thoughts steadfastly upon the Life to come, which is the means our Savior
directs to the use of in this place too: And if thine eye offend thee, pluck it
out, for it is better for thee to enter into life with one eye, rather than to
be cast into Hellfire.

Lastly, Let all our other care be begun, continued, and ended in earnest
Prayer to God, that he would enlighten the eyes of our minds, and purify our
intentions, and lead us in the right way, and keep us in it by his Grace; For
the effectual fervent Prayer of a righteous man avails much for another, but
much more for himself, and most of all, when he asks the best things, when he
asks those things that please God best; a Mind purified from worldly Lusts,
and an Understanding enlightened with the knowledge of the Truth: He that does
these things, shall never fall.

The Fourth Sermon.
MATTHEW. XXVI. 41. Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation: The spirit
indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak.


IN these words are contained an Exhortation to watch and pray, that we enter
not into temptation, and a Reason upon which the Exhortation is made, The
spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak.

In the Exhortation we may observe a Direction to the use of means, watch and
pray; and then the end, why we should do so, That we enter not into temptation.

As to the means, watching and praying, the use of them both supposes a great
concern for the event: For if I am not only to be careful my self, but to get
all the help I can; nay, if I am to go to the God of Heaven and Earth for his
help, and to seek it constantly, to be sure as the end I aim at ought not to be
in it self trivial, so neither ought I to be trivially affected with it: A
great concern for the end is supposed in the use of such means, as Watchfulness
and Prayer. But more particularly, as to watching; That signifies such a care
of our selves as supposes danger, and that was the case of the Disciples, to
whom the Exhortation was immediately given: Our Savior was now preparing them
for his approaching Passion, he would therefore have them consider beforehand
what a terrible Temptation it would be, to see their own Master forsaken, and
contemned, and almost every body ashamed, or afraid to own him; he would have
them reflect upon their own Infirmities, and examine their own Hearts; and to
consider whether they were likely to hold out against such a Temptation as was
coming upon them. He would have them furnish their minds with all the Powers of
Faith, with all the Reasons of Constancy, which they might infer from the Holy
Doctrine he had taught them; they were now to consider the value of their
Souls, the vanity of the World, the promise of Everlasting Life, and whatever
they had learnt from Jesus, which was proper to confirm them in that good mind
they were in at present; he would have them to resolve well, and to fix their
Resolution not upon a sudden heat only, not merely upon the general disposition
of an Honest Mind, but upon a deliberate Judgment, what they must lose, and
what they should get by doing as became them. Finally, he would have them to
maintain a constant sense of these things upon their minds, that they might not
be at a loss, and be found unprovided on the sudden. All this is implied in
watching, a Work which the Disciples were bidden more strictly to attend,
because the Lord had told them, that the hour was at hand, when a terrible
Trial would befall them, and therefore upon their neglect to do accordingly, he
justly upbraided them afterward, What, could ye not watch with me one hour? And
all this was to be drawn into consequence, for the Instruction of all his
Disciples to the end of the World, not only upon extraordinary Occasions, but
in the ordinary course of their Lives; that is, that we should be possessed
with a sense of God and our Duty, of the danger we are in by the Temptations of
the World, the Flesh, and the Devil; of the fearful consequence of yielding to
these Temptations; and that we should maintain a lively sense of these things
upon our Minds, by being conversant in the Word of God, and by making the main
Principles of Religion present to our Minds by a frequent consideration of
them. This, I say, is incumbent upon us all, since our Savior thought it
needful for all; for, says he, What I say unto you, I say to all, Watch, Mark
13.37.

But to Watchfulness our Lord Commands us to add Prayer; Watch and Pray.

And Prayer implies these two things,

1. A just sense of our own insufficiency, that if God he absent from us, our
Purposes are uncertain, our Resolutions wavering and inconstant, and our wills
and Affections alterable by every blast of Temptation, though we may be
provided with very good Reasons of Constancy in doing well. God has not left
us merely to depend upon the strength of Arguments and Motives, though they are
necessary, but has promised moreover, the supernatural help of his Grace; and
we are not to depend merely upon the former, but knowing that we need farther
assistance, we should daily apply our selves to him by Prayer for it.

2. It implies not only a consciousness of our inability to do the thing that
God requires, but moreover a steady belief of, and trust in the grace of God
which he has promised, that it is sufficient for us, and that he will give the
holy Spirit to them that ask him; that he who is good to all, will be ready to
help them especially that call upon him in sincerity, and will not suffer them
to be tempted above what they are able. Such is the meaning of that part of the
Exhortation, which concerns the means, Watch and Pray. Now,

2. The end of Watchfulness and Prayer is, that we may not enter into
Temptation. The meaning of which Phrase is plainly this, that we may not fall
by Temptation; not, as the words at first hearing seem to import, that no
Temptation may befall us; for as to that Temptation, which required the
Vigilance and Devotion of our Lord's Disciples at this time, he plainly told
them, it would happen, and therefore by entering into temptation, must be meant
falling into that sin, to which the Temptation is an inducement; and so the
Exhortation runs, as if our Savior had said, You are very confident, that you
shall do as you ought, as if it were one of the easiest things in the World;
but I tell you beforehand, that this Confidence of yours is a dangerous
Presumption, and you will find your selves deceived, when it comes to the
Trial, if you take no more care than you are now disposed to take. I Advise you
therefore to consider what will happen, better than you have done, and to call
together all those Instructions you have heard from me, and make them present
to your minds, and be so affected with them, as to betake your selves to
Prayer, that being thus armed, not with an hasty, but a prudent Resolution, and
with dependence upon God, you may overcome the Temptation when it happens. This
seems to be the Natural meaning of the Exhortation, Watch and pray, that ye
enter not into temptation.

I proceed next to explain the Reason which our Savior adds to enforce the
Exhortation: The spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak. And now I
doubt, when we hear or read these words, we are too apt to interpret them, as
if Jesus had meant to excuse the sluggishness of his Disciples, and had indeed
spoken to them in this manner. It were well if you would Watch and Pray, that
you may not fall by Temptation; but the truth is, though you are willing so to
do, yet you are not very much to be blamed, but in some part to be excused, if
you do not, and that because of the frailty and weakness of Humane Nature. But
I beseech you not to be fond of this way of expounding these words, for it is
by no means true, nor in the least worthy of our Savior's Wisdom, nor
agreeable to the scope of his Doctrine: Let us not think so meanly of our Lord,
as if he gave his Disciples necessary Directions, and in the same breath
excused them, whether they fulfilled his Directions or not. These words, I say,
do not contain an excuse of their neglect to watch and pray, but a Reason why
they should do both, and such a Reason too as left them without all Excuse, if
they failed in either: For thus they may be supposed to run. Watch and Pray,
that ye enter not into Temptation, for though the Spirit is willing, yet the
Flesh is weak, and so it is absolutely necessary that ye Watch and Pray. Which
Interpretation, as it holds forth a worthy and excellent meaning of it self, so
it is clearly warranted by the circumstances and scope of the place, and by the
condition of those Persons at present, to whom these words were used, and by
what befell them afterward. And this will be very evident, if we examine the
meaning of the words by these Rules: For then you will see,

1. That by a willing spirit, we are not to understand a forwardness to Watch
and Pray, but a present Resolution to overcome Temptations, and that a sincere
Resolution too; such a Resolution as is accompanied with a strong persuasion,
that we shall do so; and that was the case of the Disciples: For if we look
back in this Chapter, we shall find, that upon their Master's fore-warning them
what occasion of Offense they would meet with that very Night, St. Peter
briskly steps forward in the Name of all the rest of the Apostles, all agreeing
to what he said, v. 33. Though all men (says he) shall be offended because of
thee, yet will I never be offended. Thus the willingness of the Spirit showed
it self; that is, a forwardness to do all that became him in the hardest
Circumstances. But our Savior, willing to prove him farther, answered, v. 34.
Verily I say unto thee, that this night before the Cock crow, thou shall deny
me thrice; which was so far from taking down, that it rather raised his
assurance, for he replied, v. 35. Though I should die with thee, yet will I not
deny thee: Likewise also said all the Disciples. There the Spirit showed it
self willing again, and, which is to be observed, they were all at this time
heartily disposed to do as they said; all, but the Traitor Judas; for which
reason about this time, Jesus acknowledged, that they were all sincere and
honest Persons, excepting Judas only, John 13.10, 11. Ye are clean, but not
all; For he knew who should betray him, therefore said he, Ye are not all
clean. i. e. Ye are not all honest Men, but ye are all so but one; all but one
mean as you say, and intend to be as good as your word, and do believe that you
shall. So that if we explain these words, The Spirit indeed is willing, by the
condition of the Persons to whom they were spoken, and by their present
disposition and persuasion, as we ought to do; the meaning is plainly this, as
if our Savior had said, I know ye are Men of sincere and honest dispositions,
and do intend very well, and say no more than what you resolve to make good by
performance, and I see that you believe you shall be as good as your word. Now
therefore,

2. By the weakness of the Flesh we are plainly led to understand those
Imperfections and Passions, which honest men are not wholly free from, and
which will make Temptations dangerous even to the sincerest Persons, especially
if they trust to a present good disposition of mind, and think that they are
not in danger, because they are now well resolved. The Apostles, when our Lord
told them beforehand of the Temptation that would happen, were conscious to
themselves of their own sincerity, and were so strongly possessed with an
assurance of it, that being men hitherto but of little Experience, they did not
apprehend, or so much as feel their own weakness, because the Temptation, which
would make them feel it, was not present; but their Master was aware of those
Imperfections and Passions in them, which now indeed gave them no disturbance,
but within a little time would do so; that is, when the Temptation should be
present upon them: They did not consider how the Passion of Fear would work,
when it was once plain, that it would be the most dangerous thing in the World
to own their Master; they were not sufficiently sensible of the uncertainty of
Humane Resolutions, under strong inducements to Inconstancy, and how very
possible it is even for sincere men to be staggered, nay, and to be overcome by
Temptations, which they think themselves sufficiently guarded against by their
Integrity. But our Savior knew all this, and therefore told them of it
beforehand, and used the consideration of the weakness of the Flesh as an
Argument to persuade them to Watch and to Pray, and not to trust merely to a
willing mind, or a sincere disposition; he produces this Argument, I say, to
make them abate of their confidence, and use more diligence, that they might be
prepared by their own care, and by the grace of God to answer the occasion that
was at hand.

But to confirm this plain Interpretation, As the willingness of the Spirit, or
the sincerity of these men expressed it self in their forward undertaking and
promising to do as they ought, so the weakness of the Flesh discovered it self
in their failing to perform what they promised, whereby they made good the
Prediction of our Savior, that they would be all offended because of him that
night. And what was the Reason, why the Flesh prevailed against the Spirit? Why
did these honest Undertakers fail of performance? Even because they did not
follow their Master's Advice, they did not Watch and Pray; for had they used
this means, they had not failed of the end, since Jesus himself directed them
to use this Method, and therefore we may be sure it would have been sufficient.
Wherefore you may well conclude, that these words, The Spirit indeed is
willing, but the Flesh is weak, were not intended here for an excuse of their
not watching and praying, but as a reason why they ought to do so, and
consequently as an aggravation of their fault in not doing it; for since there
was so much need of Vigilance and Devotion, they were the more to blame, that
they neglected it.

And thus I have given you, as I am persuaded, the natural and genuine sense of
this place.

Now there are two Points of Instruction which I shall from hence commend to
your serious thoughts.

1. That we look well to it, that we be sincere and honest, and have that
willing Spirit, which our Savior acknowledged and commended in his Apostles.

2. That we do not altogether trust to our present sincerity and best purposes,
but because of the weakness of the Flesh, that we watch and pray, and thereby
guard our selves against all Temptations.

1. That we be very well assured of our own sincerity, and the honesty of our
purposes, which for the present any man may be easily assured of, if he be
sincere; that is, if he be honestly resolved to do his Duty under all
circumstances of Temptation; for what can a man ever arrive to an assurance of,
if not of his own present intentions? Now the Argument whereby I am to persuade
you to look well to this matter, is of very great force, and it is so plainly
offered by the circumstances of this Relation, that there is no avoiding it;
and it is this. That if we are for the present sincerely and honestly disposed,
we have some Title to the special grace and savor of God; whereas Hypocrites
and insincere Persons have none at all: For this was that, for which our
Savior valued his Disciples, that they had a willing Spirit; and, as I shall
show more particularly by and by, that was the reason why he watched over them,
why he continually instructed them, why he explained things to them, why he
took care to rectify their mistakes, and to correct their faults, and to give
them all the ways of improvement, because they were honest men, and ever
intended to behave themselves like honest men: They were all but Judas men of
great plainness and simplicity, teachable and willing to be informed of the
Truth, open and free in their behavior, not addicted to any notorious Vice, of
a Religious temper and disposition, and every way fit to be trained up to the
perfection of Virtue in the School of Christ; and therefore our Savior took a
particular care of them, and bore with all their Infirmities, Mistakes, and
Follies, till he had brought them to perfection. Whereas Judas, whom he
excepted out of this Commendation, Ye are clean, was a man false and close,
covetous and treacherous, and for the compassing of his ends, ready for any
mischief; he was a Thief, and kept himself a follower of Jesus longer in all
likelihood than he would have done otherwise, because he bore the bag: He
seemed to have become his Disciple at first for no other reason, but because he
expected to have been some great Man in the World under Jesus, whose Miracles
had convinced him that he was the Christ; but when by the constant tenor of
Christ's Doctrine, and by his Example, he found he was likely to be deceived in
that expectation of worldly Greatness, he was resolved to make the best he
could of his being one of our Lord's Disciples, and that by making use of the
Opportunity he had, to get both Money and Favor from the Rulers by betraying
him. This was the Character of Judas, whom our Lord knew full well before he
betrayed him; and he being such a vicious Hypocrite, so great a Villain as he
was, Jesus seemed not to regard him at all, nor to take any particular care of
him, but did e'ne let him go from one wickedness to another, till he came to
utter Ruin; and for what reason should we think, but because he had nothing at
all of a Spirit of Honesty in him, and was therefore incapable of being
improved in any degree of Virtue.

This, I say, is the Argument, whereby I would recommend to all men that
simplicity and honesty of Spirit which was discernible in the rest of the
Apostles, whilst though they were but very imperfect in Religion and Virtue,
in comparison to what they were afterward, yet our Savior did not cast them
off for every fault they were guilty of, for every mistake they were under, but
rather was very tender of them, and took all Opportunities to set them right
when they were wrong, and to lead them from one degree of Virtue and Goodness
to another, till at length they became Teachers of Truth, and Examples of Piety
to all the World. And this I believe verily is the meaning of those words of
our Savior that occur in the Sixth Chapter of St. John, and in other places,
that Jesus would not cast away those that the Father had given him, (i. e.) Men
of honest Minds, and sincere Dispositions; these words alluding to what is
commonly seen amongst us, of a Father's committing a Child of probity and a
towardly Disposition, to a skilful Master, to be Educated and Improved by him,
and his expecting a good account of him at last: And therefore said our
Savior, John 17.12. Of those thou have given me, or committed to my care, I
have lost none, but the Son of perdition, (i. e.) Judas had utterly fallen off,
and miscarried, because he was a man of a Reprobate disposition; but of those
that God had committed to him, (i. e.) men of teachable and willing Spirits, he
had lost none, although they had a great many failings, and were often in very
great danger.

But I am to make out this Point from the circumstances of the story in this
Chapter and elsewhere, which affords a remarkable instance of it in St. Peter,
to wit, how great is the care of God over a sincere man to save him from utter
miscarrying, notwithstanding many blameable defects. And I the rather shall
instance in St. Peter, because upon every notable Occasion of instructing the
rest of his Disciples, our Savior still addressed himself to St. Peter; not
that the rest were unconcerned, but that he was most of all concerned, because
he most of all needed his Instructions and Admonitions, as you will plainly
see. It Is true, he had many notable good Qualities, wherein he excelled the
rest; for in quickness of Apprehension, in boldness of Spirit, in concern for
his Master, in Activity and Industry, in forward Undertaking, and in contempt
of Danger, he seemed to outdo all his Brethren. But this forward, vigorous,
and active Man made more falls, as far as we can find, than any other of the
Apostles did; but being also sincere and honest, he was therefore more watched,
and particularly instructed than the rest. And I cannot but observe this by the
way, that the reason why our Savior addressed himself in particular to Peter,
so much oftener, than to the rest of the Apostles, was not that he gave him a
more singular Power and Authority than he did the rest, but because being a man
of a more forward and active Spirit, than all the rest, in doing well, he
commonly did better; in doing ill, he mostly did worse than the rest, which is
a sufficient account of that particular application of our Savior to him,
either in commending or reproving him. And thus when Peter's forwardness of
Spirit led him to speak well, before any of his Brethren were ready, as when he
confessed that Jesus was the Son of the living God, that being what they all
assented to, Jesus in commending him, commended all, in encouraging him, he
encouraged all; and though he alluded to his Name in particular, by saying,
Thou art Peter, yet that which followed, and upon this Rock will I build my
Church, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it, was equally a
commendation and encouragement of the Faith of the rest, and of their
professing that Faith, upon which the Church was to be founded so surely, that
it should never be destroyed. So likewise when he rebuked his Master, for
foretelling what he must suffer, and had that severe Reprimand from him, Get
thee behind me, Satan, for thou savourest not the things that be of God, etc.
Neither was this spoken so particularly to him, as not to extend to the rest;
it was said also for their Reproof and Instruction, who were as unwilling as
Peter, that Jesus should die an ignominious Death; and as ignorant as he, what
wise and good ends Divine Providence would bring about by it.

Wherefore I mention Peter rather than any one of the rest of the Disciples, as
an Instance, how a good and honest Heart, a sincere Mind, or (as it is called
in the Text) a willing Spirit; how this, I say, puts a man under the special
Care and Protection of Divine Grace, because this very Admonition of the Text,
though intended to all, was particularly directed to Peter; and it is very
remarkable how our Savior, like a watchful and prudent Guide, took all
Opportunities to set him right. For,

1. It is plain that Peter was one who presumed more than enough upon the
strength of his own Resolutions: He it was, that upon our Lord's foretelling
the dangerous Temptation that was near, did with some confidence in himself
make this boast, Though all men should be offended because of thee, yet will I
never be offended; and though I should die with thee, yet will I not deny thee.
Which was no doubt spoken also with a very honest intent and purpose, as it was
by the rest of the Apostles, who followed his Example; he was no Hypocrite, or
Villain in what he said, as Judas was, but meant all that he promised, and at
that time verily believed, that he should be as good as his word, whilst Judas
was at that Minute bent to betray him. But this honest Man wanted experience of
himself, and presumed too fast upon his own Ability, and therefore our Lord
took this Occasion to lay a Foundation in him, of a better understanding of
himself, for he said unto him, Will thou lay down thy life for my sake? Verily
I say unto thee, the Cock shall not crow, till thou have denied me thrice. A
seasonable intimation it was, that his Master in the very height of his
confidence, should tell him, That he would thrice deny him, before the next day
was well begun: And this forewarning, together with the experience of his own
infirmity afterward, no doubt served to make him ever after a more considerate
and watchful man, and tended to add modesty and humility to his other good
qualities.

2. If we go a little farther, we find him sleeping with the rest of the
Disciples, though our Lord had left them to pray that they might not enter into
temptation: And that when Jesus came and found them asleep, he said unto Peter
who had undertaken so much before, What could ye not watch with me one hour:
watch and pray that ye enter not into temptation; the spirit indeed is willing,
but the flesh is weak. By which words he gave him fully to understand, that he
was not acquainted with his own Infirmities, and had not that sense of the
necessity of watchfulness and prayer, which he ought to have had at that time.

3. It was but a little while after, that Judas conducted the Officers and
Soldiers, that were sent by the High Priest to take Jesus; and when they had
laid hands on him, Peter's forward spirit led him into another mistake: He drew
his sword and struck a Servant of the High Priest, and smote off his ear: Which
though well meant in zeal for his Master, was yet an undutiful resistance of
Authority, and betrayed a rash anger. But neither did our Savior leave him
here without that admonition, which was necessary to make him wiser and better.
Then said Jesus unto him, Put up thy sword again into its place, for all they
that take the sword, shall perish by the sword: think thou, that I cannot
now pray to my Father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve Legions
of Angels? But how then will the Scripture be fulfilled, that thus it must be?

4. That trial of him, that followed immediately, almost, at the High-Priest's
Hall, showed him to be as yet a very imperfect man, and one that wanted that
resolution which he thought himself a Master of. Indeed, he showed a little
more courage than the rest of his Brethren, inasmuch as they fled upon their
Master's being apprehended, but he followed at a distance to observe the event;
but this served only to entangle him in a more shameful fault than theirs, that
ran clear away, even to the denying of his Lord thrice, and the last time with
imprecations; he that had so forwardly confessed in the Name of the rest, that
Jesus was the Son of God; he that but a few hours before had so vehemently
declared, that he would rather die with his Master, than deny him, when now he
saw him brought like a Criminal into the High-Priest's Hall, altered from what
he was before, and his Faith began to fail. It is not improbable, that he had
some hope his Master would deliver himself out of their hands by some Miracle,
because he sat among the servants, to see the end: But yet the danger was so
apparent, that he wanted courage to own him till the end was come, and so
denied him: And while he spoke his last words of denial, the Cock crew: And the
Lord turned and looked upon Peter, Luke 22.61. Not throwing off all farther
care of him, notwithstanding so foul a miscarriage: And Peter remembered the
words of the Lord, how he had said to him, Before the Cock crow, thou shall
deny me thrice: And he went out, and wept bitterly.

That which I have been driving at all this time, is to show a notable example
of the weakness of the flesh, in a man very apt to be confident of himself, and
withal, of the watchful care of our Savior to correct him, and set him right,
and that because he had a willing spirit, an honest and sincere disposition,
void of malice and falsehood, and was ever desirous to know the truth, and to do
his duty. Therefore said our Savior to him, just before his last conflict,
Luke 22.31, 32. Simon, Simon, behold Satan has desired to have you, that he
may fifth you as wheat; but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not. For
the Tempter understood Peter's composition, how much chaff was mingled with the
wheat, and what were the inconveniences of his temper, and desired nothing more
than full liberty to make use of them, for the overturning of all his good
qualities: But said Jesus, I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not; and
when thou art converted, streng then thy brethren: (i. e.) When thou art
satisfied what a great many things are to be mended in thy self, and that those
infirmities of thine, which at present thou art not aware of, had like to have
been thy utter ruin, but withal that thou have escaped through the Grace of
God; when thou art grown wiser, and more established in all kind of goodness,
then do thou strengthen thy Brethren, be careful of all sincere persons that
labor under Infirmities, as I have been of thee, take care to improve that
which is good in them, and to secure them all thou can, against all their
Infirmities.

Thus much concerning the great advantage of sincerity, that it does entitle a
man to the special favor and protection of God; and so what we are to learn by
all, is to lay this Foundation of well-doing, which our Savior acknowledged
and commended in his Apostles; that is, a willing mind, and an honest
disposition; for then we are in a condition to be watched over by the Divine
Grace.

But having shown how valuable in the sight of God is a willing spirit, and an
honest mind, I proceed in the

Second place, to urge our Savior's exhortation; and that is, notwithstanding
this to watch and to pray, that we enter not into temptation; for though the
spirit be willing, yet the flesh is weak: For if sincerity could of it self
support a man without any farther care and help, we had never heard of the
drunkenness of Noah and Lot, the murder and adultery of David, and the fall of
Peter; we had never met with any instances of the weakness of human Nature in
men very honestly disposed, whose examples show us the necessity of
watchfulness and prayer, the means we are directed by our Savior to use; and
if we do use these means, if we do set the advantage of care and prayer against
the inconvenience of human frailty, we shall never fall. For it was not only
for the instruction of St. Peter, that our Lord gave the exhortation of the
Text, to watch and pray, but for the instruction of all the rest of the
Apostles; and not for their instruction only, but it was for ours also in all
Ages, that he left this direction with them. They were not always to expect,
that the special Grace of God would attend them, and either keep them from
great faults, or set them right again after their miscarryings, while they
neglected to acquaint themselves with their own hearts, and to take care of
their actions, and to seek the assistance of God's Spirit: And we much less,
who have been longer under the guidance of God's Grace, than they had been,
even from our infancy, ever since we were baptized, and taken into the Covenant
of Grace, who have also had the instructions of their examples, and the use and
benefit of our Lord's admonitions to them, and have been guilty of more
neglects and miscarryings, than they were, who moreover have been educated to a
more perfect understanding of the Doctrine and Nature of Christianity, than as
yet they had attained to; under these circumstances we are not to expect the
watchful care of God's Spirit over us, to lead us out of temptation, and to
deliver us from evil, if we do not watch our selves, and to watchfulness add
prayer, that we enter not into temptation: We are not to trust to our general
good purposes, and honest ways, but to remember the weakness of our flesh, (i.
e.) the unsteadiness of our purposes, the mutability of our affections, the
deceitfulness of our hearts, and therefore to supply all our defects with what
diligence and circumspection we can, and in doing all this, to be very earnest
in our Prayers, that God would crown all with his Grace: This is the way to be
strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. And we are undoubtedly safe,
if we continually keep our selves under the wings of his Grace, and put our
selves under his protection by watchfulness and prayer; For the effectual
fervent Prayer of a righteous man avails much: It avails much for another,
much more for himself; it avails much for the procuring of temporal
blessings, much more for spiritual and eternal: God does not always crown the
industry of a man in his laboring for the good things of this World, with
desired success; and sometimes he sends them to the lazy, and bestows them upon
those that never pray: But the most necessary things, a good mind, the best
wisdom, the improvements of the Soul, he ever gives to the diligent, and to
those that depend upon him by Prayer, and never otherwise: And this is a plain
conviction, that if we are barren and unfruitful in the knowledge of God, if we
make no progress in Virtue, nor move at all toward Perfection, it is our own
fault, who have so ready a way to gain that help from God, which will not fail
to better our Natures, and to strengthen us in every good work, and to deliver
us from temptation. I have already told you, how vain a thing it is to plead
frailty and infirmity, for not watching and praying, since for that very reason
our Savior directs us to watchfulness and prayer, because although the spirit is
willing, yet the flesh is weak: And it is to as little purpose to make the same
plea for those miscarriages, that are the effects of our infirmity, since there
is this to make them the effects of wilfulness too, that we have neglected to
consider our own weakness, and to go to God for help: And what should be more
easy and natural, than for a frail Creature to have recourse to the Fountain
of his being, and the Author of all good, the God of Power and Mercy, for a
supply of his own defects? We are not therefore excusable, if we do it not
constantly and earnestly, when so much depends upon it.

I have but one Motive more to lay before you, but that methinks a very
prevailing one; and that is, that our blessed Master himself, in whom there was
no sin, nor sinful infirmity, he, I say, himself, who so little needed any
other strength but his own, practiced that Advice which he gave to his
Disciples, he watched and prayed when the hour of temptation was coming on,
whilst his Disciples threw away their time, and we see the different effects of
their different behavior: Our Lord witnessed a good Confession, but his
slothful Disciples fled away shamefully; and Peter the most forward of all a
little before, miscarryed the most shamefully of all, and denied his Master: A
very instructing example to show us, how much depends upon Prayer, and how
unreasonable a thing it is to complain of the Infirmities of our Natures, and
the difficulty of standing against temptations, when we have so ready, but
withal so necessary a means of relief, that Jesus himself made use of it. And
surely one main reason why he he did so, was that we might be instructed by his
examples, how we ought to fortify our selves against the temptations of the
World: He was tempted for us, because we also were to be tempted, and he prayed
under his temptation for our sakes too, that we might learn of him the way to
overcome temptations, and to be always prepared against them. Let us therefore
(my Brethren) remember the words of our Lord Jesus, Watch and pray, that ye
enter not into temptation: let us also remember the example of our Lord, who
himself watched and prayed, though he of all men that ever lived, least needed
any assistance against temptation: Let us enter into the Church, and frequent
the Public Prayers, and let us enter into our Closets, and never omit our
Prayers to God in secret: For by every such omission, we loose an opportunity
for our Souls, we weaken our dependence upon God, we lie more open to danger
from within and from without, and have made one step more backward, and are
farther from the Grace of God.

In a word, let us purge our selves from all insincerity and hypocrisy, and be
sure that we do not suffer the guilt of any wilful sin to lie upon us, and ever
keep our selves from presumptuous sin; and to this general habit of honesty,
let us add a jealousy over our selves, doing like those that depend upon the
Grace and Providence of God; for if we continue thus doing we shall not fall,
and that because God is our help, who is not wanting to prevent us by his
Grace, and will therefore never fail to follow us with it, whilst we walk in
his ways, and study to please him in all things, and humbly depend upon him for
our Safety in this World, and our Salvation in the World to come.

The Fifth Sermon.
MATTHEW. IV. 10. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve.


HERE are two Rules to be observed: I. To worship and serve God. II. To worship
and to serve him only.


And these are Rules of both Testaments, and in truth Laws of Nature, and
therefore they that violate them are without excuse.

My design is, to lay before you some of the principal Duties prescribed in
these Rules, with the sins that are opposed to them.

Now in the first place, to worship God is to honor him as God, which consists
chiefly in two things, viz. In a right esteem of him, and in the expression of
it.

1. In the esteem, (i. e.) in believing God to be the Sovereign Being, infinite
in all perfections, in duration, in wisdom and in power, and above all in
goodness; from hence it is, that affections suitable to such an esteem of God
are also Worship, because they are the most real acknowledgments of the Divine
Attributes: He that trusts in the wisdom and power of God, more than in all the
world besides, ascribes to him the honor of infinite wisdom and power; he that
fears his displeasure and trembles at his word, gives him the honor of his
infinite holiness; he that loves him above all things, does thereby effectually
confess his infinite goodness: By such apprehensions of God, and disposition
toward him, we worship him in our Hearts and Souls.

2. As to the outward worship of god, it consists in such actions, as either by
God himself, or by the common consent of Mankind, or by the nature of the
thing, are made expressions of Divine Honor, and of the worship of the Heart.
Sacrifices have been ever esteemed marks of Divine Honor, given to that Being
to whom they were offered; and God appropriated them to himself in the Covenant
he made with his own People, He that sacrifices unto any God, save unto the
Lord only, he shall be utterly destroyed, Exodus 22.20. Whether Sin Offerings,
or Thank-offerings, they were testimonies and declarations of God's
Sovereignty, that he was Lord of all, and the Giver of all, to whom all praise
and obedience was due. For this reason the Christian Worship, which knows no
Sacrifice for Sin, but that which was never to be offered but once, and which
has taken away the slaying of Beasts, and the killing of Birds; the Christian
Worship it self, I say, is called a Sacrifice: By him, says the Apostle, (i.
e.) by Christ, let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, Heb.
13.15. For though the gross Sacrifices were left off, yet there was an
incommunicable Worship of God that remained, viz. the more spiritual Sacrifices
of Prayer and Thanksgiving, which were the true meaning of the Sacrifices
before Christianity, and therefore a more excellent Worship than they: For
Sacrifices were but the Rites and Ceremonies of Prayer and Thanksgiving; a
Sacrifice for Sin, was but the outward Rite of calling upon God for Mercy; a
Sacrifice of Praise, was but the outwaid Rite of offering Praise; and therefore
Prayer and Thanksgiving are proper expressions of Divine Honor, inasmuch as
they are in effect the same with Sacrifices; and indeed a more excellent
Worship, than what was anciently called by that name. And there are these two
things, which make them to be proper expressions of honoring God, as God.

1. The matter of Religious Invocation, which is either to pray to God; of to
give him thanks for those things which he only can give, and for every thing
which we either need, or have received, and this makes Prayer and Thanksgiving
to be an acknowledgment of God's Omnipotence, Sovereignty, and Infinite
Goodness.

2. Our calling upon him at all times, and in all places, which is a clear
acknowledgment of his Omnipresence, and Infinite Knowledge. And hence it is
that hearing of Prayer is one of those Titles, wherewith the Psalmist addressed
himself to God, Psalm 65.2. And thou that hear Prayer, unto thee shall all
flesh come. For when we speak to an invisible Being, we can have no assurance
that we are heard, but only this assurance, that the Being is everywhere
present, and therefore though we see him not, yet we know that he is with us,
and our Prayer is not lost.

And they are these two things, each of which distinguishes that which in
Religion we call Prayer and Thanksgiving, from asking benefits of one another,
and giving thanks for benefits received; that the latter supposes a limited
power, the former an absolute power over all things, and is expressed very
often by desiring such things of God, as he only can bestow. And again when we
ask fit things of one another, it is within the lines of civil communication,
by speaking, if present, by messages, if absent; but when we speak to God, we
speak to an invisible Being, whom we therefore acknowledge to be everywhere
present.

And in these two things, that is, in Prayer and Thanksgiving, or to include
both in one expression, in Religious Invocation, the Substance of Divine
Worship consists, and all other instances of it may be reduced to this:

Thus it is an Act of Divine Worship, to dedicate, or set apart Places for
Prayer and Thanksgiving; for the erecting of Houses for the Service of an
invisible Being, is an acknowledgment of his Omnipresence, no less then calling
upon him there. Thus bodily Adoration, Bowing, Kneeling, or Prostrating, are
Acts of Divine Worship also, when they are paid to an invisible Being, because
they too suppose the presence of it everywhere, to receive those outward
Honors, and to take notice of them.

And all this together, is that which we call the immediate Worship of God;
because it is all an address or application to him: This is what we commonly
mean by Religious Worship, though in a larger sense all Piety may be so called,
and he that obeys God in all things, worships him, because he makes an
effectual acknowledgment of all the Divine Attributes.

2. Since we know what it is to worship God, nothing should be more easy, than
to understand that other Rule, mainly intended in the words of the Text, That
God only is to be worshipped: Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him ONLY
shall thou serve: (i. e.) Infinite Perfection is to be attributed to him only,
Infinite Knowledge, or Power, or Goodness, or Presence, or Dominion is to be
ascribed to him only; he only is to be loved and reverenced and trusted in
above all things, and to be absolutely obeyed; to him alone we are to perform
those Acts of Worship, which imply any part of that acknowledgment; and
therefore to none but him are Religious Supplications, and Intercessions with
Thanksgivings to be offered; besides him no other invisible Being ought to be
addressed unto by us: To him only we are to pay those bodily Adorations of
Kneeling, Bowing, and Falling-down, which are properly Religious; that is,
which accompany and go along with Prayer or Thanksgiving, or any acknowledgment
of a Divine Perfection; we are to give to no other Being in the World that
outward Worship, which by all the circumstances of it, is Religious, or a
signification of the least Divine Honor.

Upon these grounds I intend to build, and now I shall proceed to show what
those sins are, which manifestly oppose and contradict these Rules; and they
may, I think, be reduced to these two, Atheism, and Idolatry.

First, Atheism, of which there are two sorts properly so called: Either,

I. Not believing that there is a God: Or,

II. Not worshipping him.

1. Not believing a God; that is, an invisible Spiritual Being, which is the
cause of all things; and this is that which is commonly understood by Atheism,
to deny the very Being of a God, which as it is the highest stupidity, and the
greatest corruption imaginable of a Man's Understanding, so it is fundamentally
opposite to all pretenses of Religion and Worship, which supposes the Being of
God; of God I say, that is, of a spiritual and invisible Being, which knows and
understands, which can do all things, and upon which all other things depend.
But

2. There is another sort of Atheism truly so called, which consists with a
Belief of the being of God; or at least does not stand in a direct denial of
his Being, and that is, not worshipping him: He that does not worship God
before Men, is an Atheist to the World; and he that worships him not at all, is
an Atheist before the World, and in the sight of God too: and there is no
reason to question, but he that is the one, is the other too. Every wicked Man
though he professes Religion, and worships God, may indeed be called a
Practical Atheist, because he lives, as if there were no God. But he that is
grown to that degree of impiety, as to make no acknowledgment of him by
appearing in his Worship, is much more so, and does in effect renounce his
Maker before the World, and it cannot be more truly said of any one, than of
such a Man, that he lives without God in the World. And therefore, although the
Epicurean Sect acknowledged the Being of a God, yet because they denied his
Providence, and took away all the Foundations of worshipping him, they were by
all men of sense called Atheists: This however is also directly opposite to the
Rule we are upon, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God. But

2. Idolatry is opposed to it likewise, and this is that impiety, which the
Rule was chiefly designed against, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him
only shall thou serve. Idolatry is a Term in Religion or Divinity, to which we
must give that sense in which the Scripture uses it, and I think all are
agreed, this to be the sense of it there, That it is the giving of any Divine
Worship to a Creature: (i. e.) any part of that Worship which is due to God
only; and therefore these words are a Rule against all Idolatry whatsoever,
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, etc.

Now, 1. All honor which is done to any invisible Being, besides God, by
formal Invocation of it, or calling upon it, must therefore necessarily be
Idolatry, because it ascribes in the very Nature of the Act Omnipresence to it,
which is a Divine Perfection.

2. All the external Honors done to any such Beings, which refer to that
Service are also Idolatrous, because they are significations of Divine Honor
also, and therefore Dedicating Churches and Altars to them, Bowing, Kneeling,
Prostrating, burning Incense, and the like Religious Rites performed to them,
are Idolatry.

3. Any Service paid to a created Being, that is either visible or invisible,
seen or not seen, present or absent, which Service does imply that thing to be
God, or ascribes any Divine Attribute to it, or much more that Service, which
in all circumstances is the very same with what is given to God himself; this
also must necessarily be an Idolatrous Service.

4. The Worship of an Image, or any visible Representation of any thing
whatsoever, must be Idolatrous; for if it be worshipped as the Representation
of a Creature, it cannot 'scape being so, if there were no more in it, than
that Religious Worship is not to be given to the Original: But if it be the
pretended Image of the Deity, the Worship of it is Idolatrous Worship; and the
reason is plain, because it is set there to receive that external Worship at
least, which is due to that invisible Being, whom it is said to represent. But
the Worship of God is to be given to him, and to none but him: I pass by two
material things; one is, That the Image Worship of the People is known to be
attended with expectation of receiving benefit from the Image itself, which
makes the Idolatry to be very gross in them; but inasmuch as Images are made
the Object of outward Acts of Divine Honor, by all that worship them, they
give to the Image that Worship which is to be paid to God only. Another is
this, That to pretend to make an Image of God is one of the grossest dishonours
that can be possibly done to him, because that supposes the Godhead to be like
unto wood, or to stone, and the work of men's hands, and tends to corrupt the
Notion of God in all that are made to believe that they are his Images or
Representations; but I do not place Idolatry in that, though it be a great
aggravation of it, but in the actual worshipping of it; and that because we are
to worship the Lord our God, and serve him only: but to worship Images, is not
to worship him; for God is one thing, and a pretended Image of him is another.
All this I make bold to lay down peremptorily, being well assured that these
kinds of Worship are prohibited in this Rule of serving God only, and that
these prohibited Worships are in the Scripture called Idolatry, which I shall
now more particularly prove, against a certain pretense, That the true and only
Notion of Idolatry is this, and that it is neither more nor less than this,
viz. The Worship of the heavenly Bodies, the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, or
any other visible and corporeal Deity, as the Supreme God, so as to exclude all
sense and apprehension of a spiritual and invisible Godhead. The plain English
of which is this: That no Man can be an Idolater; that is, not such a Sot, as
to take something, which he knows can neither understand any thing, nor choose
one thing before another, to be the Supreme God, and as such, to worship it; as
for instance, he must take something, which has no more of a spiritual Nature
in it, than a piece of stone, or a log of wood, and exclude all reference that
it can have to any thing that has a spiritual nature, and he must fall down
upon his knees to it, and speak to it, and desire it to bless him, and believe
that it will do so, and he must withal take it for his Supreme Deity, and then
he shall be allowed to pass for an Idolater; nay more, for one that is not fit
to live upon the Earth, but to be cut off from the People; as those Israelites
were once to be served, who enticed their Brethren away to serve other Gods.
Now for my own part, I do not think, that even these kinds of Worshippers, if
there are any such to be found in the World, as I believe there are not, ought
to be thus served; for it were barbarous Inhumanity, to kill those, who ought
to be taken care for in an Hospital proper for them: For what greater madness
can be imagined, than for a Man at the same time to worship a senseless thing
as the Supreme God, and to believe that it is a senseless thing, as he must do,
if he excludes all apprehension of an invisible and spiritual Godhead? For by
the Supreme God, all Men understand something that is able to help or to
hinder, and that knows when to do the one, and when the other, and is willing
to do accordingly: And therefore to worship either Sun, Moon, or Stars, or any
visible or corporeal Deity, and at the same time to exclude all sense and
apprehension of a spiritual and invisible Godhead, is to worship a thing,
because I am sure it knows something, while I am as sure at the same time, that
it knows nothing at all; for that which has nothing of a spiritual and
invisible nature, has no knowledge of any thing, no more than a block has; and
if to worship such a thing, knowing it to be such, be all the Idolatry that
ever was in the World, I do believe you will all grant, that there never was an
Idolater in the World, who might not have been easily persuaded to fall down
upon his knees to a Tree, to believe it to be his Father, and to ask it
blessing; only there is this difference in the case, that such a distempered
Man might possibly believe that Tree capable of blessing him, but it seems the
Idolater must be more mad than so, for he must at the same time believe that
what he worships, knows nothing of him, and is not, and cannot be concerned
about him, because he excludes all sense and apprehension of a spiritual and
invisible Godhead in his corporeal Deity. But if the Maker of this Notion did
really think, that his Idolater was a Man in his Wits, then he has really made
the Idolater to be the very same with the Atheist, whereas they are two
Persons. This Rule of the Text has two parts, as I have shown; one, that we
are to worship God, which he that does not, is an Atheist; another, to worship
God only, which he that does not, is an Idolater? But now he that has no sense
and apprehension of a spiritual Godhead, and yet worships for the Supreme God,
senseless matter, does not, if he be in his Wits, believe that there is any God
at all, and if he pretends to worship the Sun, or the Moon, or Leeks and
Onyons, without any reference to any thing, that can see or hear, help or
hinder, understand or choose any thing, it is manifestly in derision of all
pretense to Religion and Worship whatsoever: So that the true and only Notion
of Idolatry, is only at last a true Notion of Atheism, very odly represented,
and so, as an ingenious Atheist would have done it much better for himself. We
are therefore to look upon this True and Only Notion of Idolatry, to be an
overstrained repetition of what has been to much better advantage pretended by
those of the Roman Communion: viz. That a Man cannot be an Idolater, who does
firmly believe there is one God, the Maker of Heaven and Earth, and who does
worship him as the Supreme God and Lord of all. This indeed is something, that
is, it is what we understand, but then this is very false, as I shall
demonstrate by plain testimony of Scripture.

And in the first place, the Text seems to give clear evidence against it, Thou
shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only, etc. For they all say, that this
speaks of Divine Worship, and at other times they grant, that to give Divine
Worship to any thing that is not God, is Idolatry: But now the Text supposes,
not only that a Man ought to give Divine Worship to God, but it expressly says,
that he should give it to him only; it is therefore possible to give Divine
Worship to God, and to give Divine Worship to something else too, which is not
God, and to do that, they themselves confess to be Idolatry, and therefore it
is possible to acknowledge and to worship one God, the Maker of Heaven and
Earth, and yet to be guilty of Idolatry; which is a point that I think fit to
insist upon something more particularly, because I perceive there are many,
that are very loath to have it believed.

And first I shall insist upon that instance, which was the occasion of these
words: The Devil promised our Savior, That he would give him all the Kingdoms
of the World, and the glory of them, if he would fall down and worship him. Now
I think there is no question, but that to worship the Devil is Idolatry; but
the Question is, Whether the Devil was so arrogant, as to desire to be
worshipped, so, as to exclude the belief, and the worshipping of God, who is
the Supreme Lord of all: But indeed, it ought not to be questioned, that he did
not desire any such thing, but that himself acknowledged the Being of God: For
in his very first Temptation he said, If thou be the Son of God, etc. which was
a plain acknowledgment of the Being of God; and so in his second Temptation, If
thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down, for it is written he shall give his
Angels charge over thee, etc. So that he did not only acknowledge the Being of
God, but he acknowledged also the Truth of the Scripture: Nay, when he promised
to Jesus the Kingdoms of the World, and the glory of them, if he would fall
down and worship him: it appears by St. Luke, that he did by no means pretend
to be the Supreme Disposer and Governor of the World, (i. e.) to be the
Supreme God, but acknowledged him that was truly so; for thus it is said, Luke
4.6. And the Devil said unto him, All this power will I give thee, for it is
delivered to me, and to whomsoever I will I give it. Now here the Devil plainly
acknowledged, that this Power was but delivered to him, and not originally in
him, and this was as plain a signification as could possibly be given, that he
did not design to draw our Savior to worship him as the Supreme Deity, since
he confessed a Superior. Whereas therefore our Savior answered him, Get thee
behind me Satan, for it is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, etc.
It seems very evident, that Divine Worship may be given to that which is not
God, by one that acknowledges and worships the true God; for otherwise I am
sure it had not been Idolatry to worship the Devil in these circumstances, who
did by no means require our Savior to worship him as the Supreme God, or not
to worship him, who really is so. And here I cannot but observe how instructing
our Savior's Answer was; for when the Devil tempted him to worship him, Jesus
might have refused it justly enough upon another score, that no Honor was to
be given to that Enemy of God and Man; but when omitting that consideration he
spoke to the point in this manner, It is written, Thou shall worship, etc. he
laid down a Rule to serve his Disciples in all like cases, even where they
might be called not to worship a Devil but a Saint, not a bad Angel, but a good
one. Thou shall worship, etc. If it be pretended in the behalf of Saints, that
they have great power with God in Heaven, and of Angels, that they are his
ministering Spirits, and therefore they are to be honored with Invocations, and
bodily Worship by us upon Earth, we are to remember, that when the Devil
pretended to have the Power of the Earth delivered into his hands, and promised
that upon the desire of Jesus, and a little prostration to him, he would give
it to him; our Lord did not give him that answer which was peculiar to the
particular case, as that he was a lying and wicked Spirit, and therefore no
such acknowledgment was to be paid to him; but such an Answer as supposed it
Idolatry to pay the same respect to any other created Being: Thou shall worship
the Lord thy God, etc.

But because the Notion of Idolatry was of necessity the same under the Gospel,
that it was under the Law, since without any new Notions of it, the Apostles,
who were Jews, Preached against Idolatry, we cannot go a better way to work to
confute this pretense, That they who acknowledge one Supreme God, cannot be
guilty of Idolatry; than by observing what was counted Idolatry under the Law.

1. Now we read 1 King. 11. that Solomon in his old age turned away his heart,
and worshipped other Gods, viz. Ashtoreth and Milcom, and Chemosh, and Molech:
These were the Idols of the Nations round about the Israelites; and all the
World knows, that the Service of Idols is Idolatry. But now, did Solomon
renounce the God of Heaven and Earth, the Supreme Governor of the World, the
God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob? So he must have done according to the modern
Notion of Idolatry, or else he could not be guilty of it: But if we may believe
plain Scripture, so he did not; for mark, what is said v. 4. His Wives turned
away his heart after other Gods, and his heart was not perfect with the Lord
his God, as was the heart of David his Father. It seems then that his heart was
not quite turned away from the Lord his God, but it was not perfectly with him,
and that because he did not worship the Lord his God only, but served other
Gods besides. Again, v. 5, 6. Solomon went after Ashtoreth the Goddess of the
Zidonians, and after Milcom the abomination of the Amonites: and Solomon did
evil in the sight of the Lord, and went not fully after the Lord, as did David
his Father. Now can that be said of one that utterly renounceth the Belief, and
worship of the Supreme Lord, that his heart does not go fully after the Lord?
These things are so plain, that they need no illustration. To be short, in the
old Testament these Worships were esteemed and condemned as Idolatry.

1. To worship other Beings with the True God, which was the case of Solomon
now mentioned, and of the Samaritans, 2 Kings 17.41. Who feared the Lord, and
served their graven Images: their own Gods.

2. To worship Idols only, which seemed to be the case of Ahab and Manasseh,
who had given over the Service of the God of Israel, but yet were not without
all sense and apprehension of him; but for all that they addicted themselves
wholly to the Service of false Gods.

3. The worshipping of the True God by a material Image or Representation of
him; such, for instance, was the Idolatry of the Golden Calf, which the
Israelites intended for a Representation of that God which had brought them out
of the Land of Egypt; as it evidently appears from the Proclamation, Exodus 32.
These are thy Gods, or this is thy God, O Israel, which brought thee up out of
the Land of Egypt: and Aaron built an Altar before it, and made a Proclamation,
and said, To morrow is a Feast to Jehovah, or to the Lord. In vain it is said,
that the Israelites fell to the Egyptian Idolatry; thus much I am willing to
grant, that the Israelites missing Moses, took that very Representation of the
Supreme God, which they had seen in Egypt; for it is a foolish thing to imagine
that the Egyptians themselves were without any sense or apprehension of the
Supreme God; but that the Israelites fell to downright Egyptian Superstition,
and copied all that they had learnt in Egypt, is undeniably false from this one
argument, that the Israelites offered Burnt-offerings, and brought
Peace Offerings unto the Image they had set up, and as Jeroboam did afterward,
they offered Bullocks and Rams to the Idol, which Beasts being amongst the
Egyptians held Sacred, were never sacrificed to their Idols; and for that very
reason God commanded them to be offered to him; so that the Israelites in their
Sacrificing, followed their Rule which they had received from God only; but
missing Moses, they would have a visible Representation of the True God to go
along with them; and for worshipping it they were called Idolaters, and
punished as such. The instance of the Calves of Dan and Bethel, which Jeroboam
did set up, the worshipping of which is called Idolatry, is to the same
purpose; for all he pretended was, that it was too much for the Israelites to
go up to Jerusalem to worship: Behold, says he, thy Gods, O Israel, which
brought thee up out of the land of Egypt, 1 Kings 12.28. He did not forsake the
God of Israel to follow other Gods, but he set up material Images or
Representations of the True God, and it was his Idolatry to worship them: Hence
the Prophets whom God raised up in Israel, did not charge the Worshippers of
this sort for Deserters of the God of Israel, though they inveighed against
their Altars: But when Ahab fell to worship other Gods, it was particularly
noted of him, that he did therein what Jeroboam did not do; this latter sort of
Idolatry was laid to Ahab's charge, 1 Kin. 16.31. to wit, That, as if it had
been a small thing for him to walk in the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, he
went and served Baal, and worshipped him.

From all this it is plain, that whereas in the New Testament, the Apostles bid
us beware of Idolatry, my dearly beloved flee from Idolatry: Little children
keep your selves from Idols: and the like. They being Jews must necessarily by
Idolatry mean the worshipping of the true God by Images, or giving any Divine
Worship whatsoever, any Honor due to God only, giving that I say, to any other
Being how excellent soever, although they that do so, do believe and worship
the Supreme God, the Maker of Heaven and Earth, all the while: For by Idolatry
they could understand nothing but what went for Idolatry under the Law, seeing
the Notion of it was not in the least altered, but it continued just the same
that it was before, as these very words do witness, Thou shall worship the Lord
thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

But as I entered upon this Argument by distinguishing between Atheism and
Idolatry, so I shall now close it, by comparing them together. Idolatry is
indeed a very heinous sin, because it gives away the Glory of God to another;
but Atheism is a worse, because that is a renouncing of the Lord of Heaven and
Earth, the Creator of the World; they who do not serve the Lord, only, are
guilty of great impiety; but they who do not serve and worship him at all, are
guilty of a greater impiety. To worship God, and to worship Angels, to pray to
God, and to pray to Saints, to adore Jesus Christ, and to adore the Virgin, is
in part to forsake God and our Savior; but neither to worship or pray to
Saints and Angels, no nor to God himself, this is utterly to forsake him, and
to live without God in the World: Which I do not say to extenuate the Crime of
Idolatry, but to give every thing its due, and to leave this impression upon
our mind, that by how much more we inveigh against the Idolatry of others,
because it is no less than giving some of God's Glory to his Creature, by so
much the more we oblige our selves to be constant and devout, and in very good
earnest in the Worship of the only true God, least by degrees we fall into a
Spirit of Irreligion and Atheism, and be wholly estranged from God, which is a
worse case than Solomon's was, who falling into the Idolatry of his Neighbors,
fell under this Character, That his heart was not perfect with the Lord, and he
went not fully after him.

To conclude, since through the Grace of God it is our Happiness to worship the
Lord our God, and to serve him only, let us have a care that we go on to
worship God only, and to be sure let us remember, that we worship him, that we
be not slothful in Religion, but earnest and fervent, least we forsake God by a
Spirit of Irreligion, which is every whit as damnable as Idolatry. Let it
appear by our whole Conversation, that we do indeed worship the God that made
Heaven and Earth, who only has power to bless us, to protect and keep us in
this Life, and to reward us with the enjoyment of himself forever.

The Sixth Sermon.
GENESIS XXII. 12. Now I know that thou fear God, seeing thou have not
withheld thy son, thine only son from me.


IN these words we may observe two things.

I. God's Testimony concerning Abraham, Now I know that thou fear God. II.
The Fact upon which this Testimony of God concerning him was grounded, which
was his offering his Son Isaac to God, Because thou have not withheld thy son,
thine only son from me.
1. The Testimony of God concerning him, I know that thou fear God; this I
say was God's Testimony concerning him: For whereas it is said, That the Angel
of the Lord called to him out of Heaven; it seems plain that the Angel of the
Lord, was no other than the Angel of the Covenant, the Son of God himself, who
did sometimes appear to the Patriarchs, for the words are, Seeing thou have not
withheld thy son, thine only son from me, (i. e.) from God; it was God that
spoke to him, and who said, Now I know that thou fear God. The matter God
testified of him, was, That he feared God; that is, that he believed in God,
that he was fully persuaded of his Infinite Power, Wisdom, Justice, and
Goodness, and all his Infinite Perfections, and that he was affected sutably
thereunto: This is the meaning of the Fear of God in the Scripture, which is a
phrase used to comprehend all pious Affections toward him, and is therefore of
the same latitude with Faith, the Praise whereof is ascribed to Abraham by the
Author to the Hehrews. The only thing to be added is this: That we must
remember, that to fear God, is to fear him as God; that is, before and above
all other things, and consequently to love him, and to trust in him, and to
rely upon him incomparably and infinitely more than upon all the World besides,
inasmuch as the perfections of all others are finite, God only is infinite in
all perfections: Now this was that which God testified of Abraham, in saying of
him, that he feared God; and in the understanding of this, there is no
difficulty at all. But it may seem strange that God should give this testimony
of him in that manner, wherein we find he did: Now know I that thou fear
God: Now, (i. e.) now thou have not withheld thy son, thine only son from me:
For did not God know the integrity of Abraham's heart before? Is not God the
searcher of hearts, and does he need our outward actions, that he may judge of
our tempers and intentions by them? It is true, we have no other way to come to
the understanding of one another thoughts, but by our words and deeds: But
has God no other way? Yes, without all doubt, he that knows our thoughts
afar off, even before they are born within us, cannot be ignorant of them when
they are: But why then does he say, Now I know that thou fear God? I answer,
that this is one of those sayings of God, by which he is pleased to condescend
to the manner of our speaking and conversing with one another. For we with
great propriety use such expressions as these, upon such extraordinary
occasions: If from my Friend, that has always professed great kindness to me,
I receive some notable benefit in my distress, not without hazard to himself,
it is very proper for me to say, Now I know that he loves me: Now I know he is
indeed a faithful and sincere Friend, though I had great reason to make no
doubt of it before; yet this is so great a confirmation and strengthening of my
belief, that in comparison thereto, I might be said to know little or nothing
of it before: In allusion to such expressions it is, that God uses these
words, Now I know that thou fear God: Not in intimation of his having now
gained greater assurance of Abraham's integrity, than he had before. Abraham
had been for a long time the Servant of God, and had made an open profession of
worshipping and obeying him, and God saw all along that he was an upright man,
and this no less before he was bidden to offer his Son Isaac, than after he had
stretched forth his hand to slay him upon the Altar; and therefore the meaning
of these words is this, and no more: The thing is now plain and undeniable to
all, that thou fear God. But why would God have Abraham's Faith made so
plain and unquestionable? Why must such a trial as this be made, since it could
not be to let God into a more thorough knowledge of Abraham, than he had
before? I answer, it must be either for the sake of Abraham himself, or for the
sake of others, or for both.

Let us first see what advantage the success of this trial was to Abraham
himself. And

1. I think we need not doubt, that he was a most excellent Man all along, yet
even this Noble Act of Faith, which is the subject of this Chapter, made him
yet a greater and a better Man than he was before: For so it is, that as by bad
actions, bad Men grow worse, so by good ones, good Men grow better, and by
exceeding and extraordinary acts of Faith and Virtue they grow much better.

2. Abraham was indeed conscious before of his own Integrity, yet when God put
him upon so severe a trial as this was, the performance of his Duty, though it
did not add to God's assured knowledge of Abraham's Integrity, yet it added to
the assurance which Abraham had of himself: For though there are no degrees of
certainty in God, yet there are in men: And though Abraham was well assured
before, that he feared God, yet his quitting himself so well upon so
extraordinary an occasion, could not but add to his assurance: And that is one
advantage that all good men have by those particular trials of their Faith,
which do not happen commonly, that how hard soever they are to Flesh and Blood,
yet if they behave themselves as they ought, they gain this satisfaction by it,
to be more certainly persuaded of their own sincerity; and doubtless Abraham
left no ordinary satisfaction of mind in the Conscience of having obeyed God,
requiring so hard a thing, especially since God did not leave him to gather the
comfort of his sincerity, from his obedience in the way of reasoning, but did
also add a particular Revelation to give him the highest assurance that could
be had: I know, says he, that thou fear God: And so he had the assurance of
so concerning a point from God himself, not only for the increase of his Joy,
but that this example might yield good instruction to others, who are not to
expect such immediate Revelations: And this brings me to the

Second Answer, That although this trial of Abraham's Faith could add nothing
to the knowledge which God had of his sincerity, yet it was very beneficial to
others, that he should be so tried, and that upon his good and worthy carriage
under it, God should so plainly and particularly testify his integrity; we are
therefore to mind attentively the instruction, that Abraham's example, and
God's approving his sincerity affords to the World: And the

First point of Instruction I shall name is this: That that Faith in God, which
will gain his approbation and reward, is a lively and working Faith. When we
consider, that God himself vouchsafed upon so eminent an act of Faith, as that
of Abraham's offering up his Son, when I say himself was pleased to condescend
to such an expression as this, Now know I that thou fear me; as if the
matter hitherto had been uncertain to him, what can we make less of it, than
that God took this opportunity, nay that God made this opportunity to declare
to the World, that he who should not bring forth the proper Fruits of Faith in
God, and fear of God, shall be reckoned of by him, as one that has no Faith at
all, no fear of God at all; and what is thus true of the fear of God, is true
of Trust in God too; I have already noted, that what is here called the fear of
God, is by the Author of the Hebrews called Faith; and therefore if our fear of
God, our apprehension of his Almightiness, his justice, and wisdom, holiness,
and sovereignty, will not be at all regarded or owned by him, unless it does
produce a conformity of our actions to his will, but we shall on the contrary
be looked upon, as if we did not fear him at all, the argument is very strong,
that our faith separated from the performance of that which God requires and
expects from us, will not be looked upon as Faith, it will not be the Faith by
which a Man is justified. For I beseech you Brethren, is not the fear of God, a
belief of his justice, and his power, and his holiness, and his infinite
perfections, and something more than a bare belief of them, viz. such a belief
as is accompanied with some awe, dread, and reverence of God? But if Faith
working by inward Fear, and yet failing to produce the performance of what God
expects from us, will not be owned as the fear of God, when we come to stand or
fall by his Sentence, then how much less shall mere Faith or Persuasion be
reckoned as any thing worth, when separated from the fruits of it in Life and
Action? Since upon Abraham's offering up his Son according to God's Command,
God was pleased to say, Now I know that thou fear God: We cannot imagine
what could have been said on the other side, if he had refused to hearken to
God's Voice, but this, Now I know that thou do not fear God. I will not
therefore dispute, nay I need not dispute, whether a Man, who upon the trial of
his Obedience, departs from his Duty, whether he (I say) may not yet be said to
believe in God, and to fear God, and to stand in some awe of his Justice and
Power; for whether this may be truly said or not, yet it is all one, as to his
acceptance with God: God will not own that to be Faith, or Fear, or Trust, or
Love, or Dependence upon God, which does not produce the doing of his Will, and
the fulfilling of his Commands, when he is pleased to try our Obedience in any
notable instance; wherefore those words, wherein God condescends to our manner
of speaking, Now I know that thou fear God, are a natural intimation of this
great Truth, that nothing will pass with him for the fear of God, but that
which produces a conformable Practice and Obedience, in all the trials of our
submission to his Will: for undoubtedly God knew the Integrity of Abraham's
Heart before, and therefore since he would not give this Testimony to him, till
he had made it plain by this eminent act of Obedience, and since he gave this
Testimony, as if he had but now been assured of it, what instruction does this
yield more readily, than that no Man shall be acknowledged by God, to be one
that fears him, but he that upon trial does what God requires; and therefore
that we should not presume upon the goodness of our Hearts and Intentions
toward God, when our Actions contradict our Pretenses: It is true, God sees
the Qualities and Dispositions of our Minds with an Infallible Judgment, but we
not so certainly; it is hard for us to tell what degree of Faith or Fear is
proper to God's Children, is justifying, or saving: But if in the hardest
trials of thy Obedience, thou do keep God's Commandments, then thou art sure
that thou fear God; and because God would have thee try thy self by this
Rule, he was pleased to testify his own knowledge, that Abraham feared him,
upon Abraham's ready Obedience, as if he had not known it before.

2. Another point of Instruction, and of good use in all Ages of the World is
this, That God has some Servants, and Worshippers, who are not hired to the
Profession of serving him, by the worldly ease, profit, and security, that
Religion brings, and who, when that expectation fails them, will not turn their
backs upon him, to choose another Master. The Devil insinuated against Job, That
he served God, because God had made an hedge about him, and about his House,
and all that he had on every side, because he had blessed the work of his
hands, and increased his substance in the land: but if God would put forth his
hand, and touch all that he had, then he would curse him to his face: (i. e.)
That then he would be as prosane, as he was before godly in outward appearance:
But upon trial it proved otherwise, and he retained his Integrity, saying,
shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil, Job
2.10. Such another instance of this kind was Abraham, God had blessed him with
great Increase and Prosperity upon the leaving of his Country, and there was
nothing wanting to complete his Desires, but an Heir to his Blessings, which
God had a long time denied him, and at length gave him. But it might be
hitherto objected against the sincerity of Abraham's fear of God, and
dependence upon him, that he perceiving how much for the better it was, that he
left his Country at the Call of God, and finding now that all things went well
with him, did therefore make profession of serving the only true God, because
he found that it was the way to compass all that his heart could desire in the
World: How therefore should it appear that he behaved himself Religiously out
of Conscience of his Duty, in an absolute and entire dependence upon God's
Sovereign Power, Wisdom, and Goodness? And that was a thing very necessary to
be made out, for the Credit of Religion in the World, and to demonstrate the
ingenuity and sincerity of the Righteous. There could be no other way so
effectual, no demonstration so clear as this, that Abraham without murmuring
and disputing should let go the dearest of all his Possessions, in obedience to
the Command of God; and this was the trial God made of his sincerity. There was
nothing that he held more dear to him than his only Son; for whose sake it was,
that he did set a value upon all the rest of his Possessions; well therefore
might be said upon his ready compliance with this severe Command, Now I know
that thou fear God: This being as much as to say, Now thy sincerity is put
beyond all question, and all Men must acknowledge, that thou art in good
earnest, what thou have all along pretended to be, one that truly fear God,
and who therefore do that which is good, not for worldly and mercinary Ends,
but because thou art absolutely resolved to depend upon God's Wisdom and
Goodness, in doing every thing that he requires. And we must not think,
Brethren, that this Testimony of Abraham's Faith and Sincerity was given him
only for his own sake, but for the sake of all good Men, that should in any Age
of the World tread in the steps of Abraham's Faith, viz. That all Religious Men
are what they are, not for worldly Respects, but for Conscience toward God.
And therefore the trial of Abraham's Faith did not only vindicate him, but all
God's faithful Servants to the end of the World from the charge of Hypocrisy,
and pretending Religion for worldly Ends: Indeed he was tried in the most
extraordinary instance that could be well thought of, and there was this reason
for it, because he was to be the Father of the Faithful, the great Example of
Faith and Religion: And it well became him, who was to have so great an Honor
conferred upon him in all Ages, to undergo such a trial of his Faith, as might
not only be a standing Example of our Duty, but a means to vindicate our
Sincerity, against the Reproaches of the World, though we be not tried as
Abraham was. For if Religion in the general be charged with the Hypocrisy of
compassing worldly Advantages, under a pretext of Conscience, we desire them to
look to the Example of our Father Abraham, and to consider the proof that he
gave of his Sincerity, and God's Testimony concerning him, Now I know that thou
fear God. And this is the temper and disposition of all Abraham's Children,
that they depend upon God's Providence, not because they have a good Estate,
that they are righteous and just; not because it is the way to thrive, that
they serve God; not because he makes an hedge about all they have; and observe
the Rules of Religion, not merely because they are under no unusual temptations
to the contrary, and the like, but because believing in God, and fearing and
loving him in good earnest, they are persuaded they ought so to demean
themselves in expectation of his Favor, which is better than Life, and of his
Rewards in a better World. In short, Abraham the Father of the Faithful was
therefore tried in this manner, that there might be in him an undeniable
instance of the sincerity, and ingenuity of true Believers to the end of the
World, who live in all good Conscience, not expecting the profit of this World
in recompense of their Piety and Justice, and that Religion will secure their
Bodies from Sickness, their Goods from Rapine, their Names from Reproach, their
Persons from Affronts, and their course of Life from common, or from unusual
Troubles and Afflictions: Abraham and his Children do not traffic with Heaven
by their Prayers and Charity, to secure or increase their Possessions on Earth:
And though God has often blessed good Men, as he did Abraham, with strange
prosperity in this World, yet this was not their end, nor the reason of their
dependence upon God, and doing his Will; but they were such as they were, by
Faith: By faith they wrought righteousness, Heb. 11.33. (i. e.) They did that
thing which God required, because they expected an heavenly Country, and
believed God to be a rewarder of them that diligently seek him, though not
always with the prosperity of this Life, yet without fail with those pure and
ravishing Joys of a better World, which will shortly begin and never end. To
conclude this point, it has been very often the Charge of the World upon all
the Professors of Piety, that in their Hearts they are as bad as others,
whatever their appearance be, that they are as much in love with the Wealth and
Pleasures of this Life, as those that profess to make them their end; and
therefore to vindicate the sincerity of his Servants, God does sometimes make
them undeniable demonstrations of the falsehood of this Charge. These are the
principal points of Instruction, that are contained in the Testimony God gave
to Abraham. I pass on to the Second General in the Text, viz.

II. The Fact upon which this Testimony of God concerning Abraham was grounded,
which was his offering up his Son Isaac to God, according to that Command which
he had received, Because thou have not withheld thy son, thine only son from
me. And here I shall briefly consider, 1. The Nature of the Fact: And 2. The
Nature of the Trial, which the Fact supposes.


1. The Nature of the Fact, which was, his stretching forth his hand to slay
his son upon the altar: And all I shall say, as to this matter, is, that God in
that case did not command Murder, which is a thing that he had absolutely
forbidden; for the Command of God made it not to be Murder, if it had been
effected, as it was fully designed on Abraham's part. God is the absolute Lord
of Life and Death, and can without doing any wrong take away Life at his
pleasure, and he may do it which way he pleases, by commanding Abraham to kill
his Son, as well as by commanding a Fever to do it: If Abraham had not had that
Command, his Intention had been wicked; such slaying were murderous, not
commanded; but the Command of God, who has an absolute Right to dispose of
every Man's Life, made it not to be Murder, if it had been effected indeed.
This is enough for the Nature of the Fact considered in itself. But

2. We are to consider it, as it was a trial of Abraham's Faith, and submission
to God, and procured that Testimony, Now I know that thou fear God. And here
there are these two things very remarkable:

1. That God singled out his beloved Possession to be offered forthwith for a
Sacrifice to himself, Take now thy son, thine only son Isaac whom thou love,
and get thee into the land of Moriah, and offer him there for a burnt-offering,
upon one of the mountains, which I will tell thee of. God laid before him all
the stings of so hard an Injunction, Take thy son, and that thine only son, I
know thou love him dearly, but yet he must be a Sacrifice to me, and a
Sacrifice offered by thine own hand. This was such a saying, as that of Jesus
teaching the height of sincere Religion: He that will be my disciple must deny
himself: He that loves father or mother, or children, or houses or lands, or
his own life, more than me, is not worthy of me: For we cannot think that he
who would give up such a Possession to God, to wit, his only Son, would deny
him any thing: had all his Flocks and his Herds, his whole Wealth and
Possessions, nay had himself been called for, to become a Sacrifice to God, he
that denied not to God his only Son, would not have denied him these. Here was
an example indeed of absolute Resignation to God, of Universal Acquiescence in
his Will: Here was indeed the Spirit of true Religion, that Abraham counted
nothing too dear for his Maker; for this Command was in effect, as if God had
said, Take now all that thou have, without exception of any thing, be thou as
naked as when thou came into the World, strip thy self of every thing, and
lay it before me, to be disposed of, as I please: And had this been demanded,
had all been required, he that offered his only Son, would with the same
readiness have parted with all his Possessions. Herein therefore consisted the
trial of Abraham's Faith and Obedience, which the Fact supposes, that when the
Question was, Whether he loved God above all things, and feared him above all
things, and trusted in him above all things? this one single act was a
demonstration that he did: Which ought to put us in mind, that God requires an
entire Obedience to, and Dependence upon himself, and the giving up our most
desirable Possessions to him, when his Word, or his Providence calls for them,
and that thus we are to be disposed, if we be the Children of Abraham, who was
the Father of the Faithful.

It is farther remarkable under this head, that God required Abraham to do this
forthwith, without disputing and delaying, and therefore the Command was not
only a trial of what Abraham would do in an extreme hard case, but also how he
was constantly provided and prepared to do, as became God's Servant in such a
case: It had not been so notable a trial of the goodness of the Man, if he had
had a Week, or a Month's time allowed him to lay all things together, and to
reason out the case, and to bring himself to a willingness by such arguments,
as the matter would bear; for then it had been supposed, that Abraham had not
duly weighed these things before, nor lived in a constant and habitual sense of
his Duty, which was to obey universally, but in some extraordinary trial of his
Obedience, must have time allowed him to prepare himself for it. But this trial
coming of a sudden, and the Command being to be executed forthwith, as it was,
plainly demonstrated, that Abraham was always ready to offer up his Son, and
could never have been taken unprovided to do the Will of God in the most
difficult case: And therefore his example does not only instruct us, that God
is to be entirely submitted to, but that we are to be always ready, and
prepared in heart and mind to do well, upon the trial of our Faith and
Obedience, that when it happens in any notable instance, we may in some measure
come up to that perfection in Self-resignation to God, which Abraham, as far as
it appears by the History of him, was a Pattern of: For he did set himself to
part with his All without murmuring, and expostulating, and disputing; for some
such thing seems to be intimated in that saying, That he rose early in the
morning, and immediately went about the execution of God's Command: Though
without doubt a man of his humane and tender affections could not but feel pain
in receiving this Command of God, and an uneasy struggling between his Faith in
God, and his Affection to his Child; yet it does not appear, that this delayed
his resolution, to do what God required, or raised in him any dispute, what to
conclude upon: But though it was grievous to do it, yet because it was God's
pleasure, he forthwith set himself to obey. This perfection of Obedience is
what we should aim at, for the greater Glory of God, and for our own greater
security; and I will add for our ease too: For he that submits to God with the
least disputing, when the trial is great, does it with the least pain; but it
will be accepted by God, if we prevail at last, and do the thing that God
expects, in quitting all, to secure an Interest in him, although not with the
same readiness that Abraham did, though not without complaint, and some
disputing; for God will pardon our Infirmities, if there be a prevailing
sincerity at the bottom, that overcomes the reluctance of Flesh and Blood. But
we should labor to come up to the perfection of Abraham's example, and
consider well with our selves, that it is our constant profession and pretense,
as well as it was Abraham's, to love the Lord our God with all our hearts, and
to hold nothing too dear for him; and withal, that there is nothing which God
can require us to quit voluntarily, but he has an absolute Right to dispose of
it, and has absolute Power to deprive us of it, whether we will or not: When
therefore God requires, that we should freely resign that to him, which he can
take away if he pleases, it is evident that he requires this, not for his own
good, but for ours: If he had needed Isaac, and it had been beneficial to
himself that Isaac should be killed, what need of Abraham to do it? And surely
it is a mighty reason without delay to put God's Will and Command in execution,
when we know beforehand, that all is meant for our good, not that God is the
better, for that which we quit, but because we are the better for doing it
freely and voluntarily.

2. The other remarkable is, That God required of Abraham to offer up that his
only Son, in whom his seed should be called, through whom all those great
Promises were to be fulfilled, which he had made to him before; and herein
consisted the nobleness of Abraham's Faith, that though God seemed to require
that, which would destroy all the hope he had by those Promises, which hitherto
he had firmly believed, yet he believed still, and submitted to do that, which
in all appearance was utterly inconsistent with the truth of those Promises
that had been made to him; so that he against hope, believed in hope: And this
is that which the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews lays an Emphasis upon,
chap. 11. By faith Abraham when he was tried, offered up Isaac, and he that had
received the promises, offered up his only begotten son, his only Son, through
whom those Promises were to be fulfilled. Now, though he could in obedience to
God get over the difficulty, that Natural Affection laid in his way, yet here
was the hard point, how he should get over that temptation to unbelief, which
struck at the very Root of his Faith: God had promised before, that in Isaac
his seed should be called. If he believed him now, how did it not appear that
he was deceived before? If he was not deceived before, in trusting to that
Promise, how could he be obliged to do that, which would take away all reason
to believe that Promise any longer? But yet without any of this disputing and
contending, he went speedily about the matter, he rose up early in the morning,
and takes his Son along with him to that place where he was to offer him up.
Now if you ask how it was possible for him to believe in God, notwithstanding
this Command; mark what the Apostle says, By faith he that received the
promises, offered up his only begotten son, of whom it was said, That in Isaac
shall thy seed be called; accounting that God was able to raise him up even
from the dead, from whence also he received him in a figure. That is to say, he
so fully believed all God's Promises made to him before, that his Faith was not
staggered with the seeming inconsistancy of this Command of God, with his
former Promises; but concluded, if there was no other way, God would raise up
Isaac from the dead; for he accounted, that is, he was fully persuaded, that
God was able to raise him from the dead, as in a sort he did, by stopping his
hand, when he was about to slay him: And now if upon the former consideration
Abraham's sincerity deserved so high a testimony, much more upon this; for it
is the highest praise of Faith, to trust that God will make good all his
Promises, even when the way he takes so to do, seems to be utterly inconsistent
with them: Well therefore might God upon this high act of Obedience renew his
Covenant with Abraham, in saying, By my self have I sworn, that because thou
have done this thing, and have not withheld thy son, thine only son from me,
that in blessing I will bless thee, and in thy seed shall all the Nations of
the earth be blessed. And observe here I beseech you, how highly God was
pleased with this Noble Act of Faith, and how fitly the Promise wherewith God
immediately rewarded him, agreed to what Abraham had done: By my self have I
sworn, that because thou have done this thing, in blessing I will bless thee:
Words cannot express a greater delight than these do: One would think that
Abraham had done some singular kindness to his God, and if God were to be
judged of, as we judge of Man, that God had received an extraordinary favor
and benefit from him. But such is the infinite and pure Charity of God, that
when we do what is good for our selves, it is no less pleasing to him, than if
it were beneficial to himself: But because Abraham had conquered the greatest
Temptation of all to Disobedience, viz. That the thing commanded seemed to
destroy all the Promises he had made of a Blessed Posterity, that should
descend from him by Isaac; God now rewarded his Faith with repeated Assurances:
By my self have I sworn, that in thy seed shall all the Nations of the earth be
blessed: And so well might the Jews in their Peace Offerings, when they
thankfully acknowledged the goodness of God, in giving them the possession of
so good a Land, call to mind the offering of Isaac, as the Great Foundation of
all those Temporal Blessings, which they, as the Seed of Abraham enjoyed.

And after such a demonstration as this, well may we trust God in all
Conditions, if we resolve to do as Abraham did, if we count none of his
Commandments grievous, if we do not repine at his Providence, if we go on to
serve him, and to depend upon him, though when we must hope against hope; for
then God will not fail to show, that we have wisely trusted in him, and cast
our selves upon him, he will show himself as much pleased with our Faith, as he
was with Abraham's, and will reward it as effectually.

To sum up all: The Testimony of God to Abraham's Faith, was not given merely
for his own sake, but for the instruction and encouragement of all true
Believers to the World's end, who when they deny themselves, and do the hardest
Duties, and are never offended with the Will of God, have, I say, a Title to
the Testimony God gave to Abraham: Now I know that thou fear God. Certainly
it would be no mean encouragement to us, it would raise up our minds to very
great degrees of Joy and Triumph, to have God say that to us, that he did to
Abraham; but we are to remember that it was said to him once for all, in behalf
of all his Children, that should tread in the steps of his Faith: This was not
an Honor given to Abraham only, though to him principally, and in the first
place; it was done him also for the Credit of Religion in all Ages of the
World, and for the comfort and Joy of all Religious and Holy Men and Women to
the end of the World.

Wherefore, my Brethren, that we may come in for some share in the Praise and
Reward of Abraham's Faith, let there be in none of us an evil heart of
unbelief, in departing from the living God: The evil heart of unbelief, is the
evil heart that causes unbelief, (i. e.) some corrupt Inclination, some
unmortified Lust, some carnal Interest or other. Do thou therefore in the first
place, when thou have an eye upon the example of Abraham, conceive how much
thou art obliged to take thy sin, thy dearly beloved sin, whatever it be, and
slay it, that is the first Sacrifice thou can offer to God, to wit, a broken
and contrite heart, an heart clean from worldly and sinful lusts. Do this, and
thou will find nothing too dear for God, thy Faith will then make thee to be
entirely at the disposal of his Will and Pleasure, it will justify and support
thee in so doing, and the God of Abraham will be thine exceeding great reward.

The Seventh Sermon.
MATTHEW. XV. 1, 2, 3. Then came to Jesus Scribes and Pharisees, which were of
Jerusalem, saying, Why do thy Disciples transgress the Tradition of the Elders,
for they wash not their hands when they eat bread? But he answered and said
unto them, Why do ye also transgress the Commandment of God by your Tradition?


THough never Man was so unreproveable in his Doctrine and Example, as our Lord
Jesus, yet never was Man more opposed or cavilled at, as the Evangelists do
abundantly testify, that History of him, which they have written for us, being
upon the matter made up of the Holy Doctrines which he delivered, the good
works in which he was always employed, and the contradictions which he
continually met with: And it was very necessary that some instances of the last
should be recorded for our sakes, that they who profess the Truth as it is in
Jesus, should not think it strange, if they happened to meet with such
opposition as their Master did; and likewise, that by his Answers to the Cavils
of his Adversaries, they might be instructed how they should defend themselves
afterward against the like Objections. One instance whereof we have in the
Text, I have now chosen to speak to; Then came to Jesus Scribes and Pharisees,
which were of Jerusalem, etc.

As to which words, I shall not need to say much concerning the Persons, that
our Savior had to deal withal, because their Character is so well known to
all, that diligently read the Gospels. The Scribes were the Men that professed
to teach the Law, and expected to have all their Interpretations received as
Oracles. The Pharisees were the most subtle and prevailing Sect amongst the
Scribes; for though as things were in that Age, and for some time before, the
Scribes generally agreed in corrupting the Law, and deceiving the People, yet
they had their Parties and Factions among themselves, the Pharisees in our
Savior's time being a Sect of the greatest power in the Council, and of the
greatest Reputation with the People, and whereas it is said, that they were the
Scribes and Pharisees, or the Scribes of the Pharisaical Party, which were of
Jerusalem, that came to Jesus; the meaning is, that they were such as kept
their Schools in the City of Jerusalem, and were therefore of the first rank
amongst the Pharisees. And now I shall discourse to you of these two things:
First, Of the Objection which these Men made against Jesus and his Disciples.
Secondly, Of the Answer which our Savior made to the Charge that was laid
against them.


I. Of the Objection, which these Men made against Jesus and his Disciples: Why
do thy Disciples transgress the Tradition of the Elders? for they wash not
their hands when they eat bread. A Charge laid with as much confidence as
anger, and therefore they scorned to put any of his Disciples to answer it, and
thought fit to challenge the Master himself about it. Now the first thing that
is proper to be considered here, is,

1. The nature of the Charge, which seems to be a general one illustrated by
one particular instance: The general Charge was, that the Disciples of Jesus
transgressed the Tradition of the Elders: The particular instance was, that
they transgressed such Tradition, in not washing their hands before meat.

As to the general Charge, they had transgressed the Tradition of the Elders.
But what was the Tradition of the Elders? The Tradition of the Elders, was the
Doctrine that had been delivered, and the Rules that had been laid down by wise
and great Men, and universally received in former Ages. One would think
therefore, that the Laws of Moses, and the Rules of the Prophets, and
whatsoever was commanded in the Scriptures, had been the Tradition of the
Elders, for all these things had been delivered down by an uncontrollable
Tradition from hand to hand, for near two thousand years. But there was no such
meaning under these words, as they used them. By the Tradition of the Elders,
or by the ancient Tradition of wise and great Men, they meant no Doctrines or
Rules for Faith or Practice, that were expressed in the Writings of Moses and
the Prophets, but such Doctrines as not being written in the Law, were
delivered down by word of Mouth, and by constant usage from Father to Son, and
so from one Age to another. And thus Josephus tells us, Antiq. 13.13. That the
first and main Principle of the Pharisees was, that they denied all those things
to be written, which concerned Religion. The Fundamental Rule of their Sect was
this, that there was a double Law, an Oral Law, and a Written Law: A Law
delivered from Age to Age by word of Mouth, as well as a Law delivered in such
Books, as had Authority from Moses and the Prophets. To gain reverence to these
Traditions, they persuaded the People, that though they were not written in the
Law, yet they were delivered to Moses by God himself, to Joshua by Moses, to
the Prophets by Joshua, to Esdras by the Prophets, and thence to the Masters of
the Schools, of whom they were the Successors: And they being the Guardians of
these unwritten Traditions, which were to be had in equal, or rather superior
regard to that which the Scriptures were to be held in, claimed also an
absolute Obedience from the People, insomuch, that it was a saying amongst
them: If the Scribes say, that the right hand is the left, or the left hand the
right, you are to believe them. Now the Charge of the Pharisees upon our
Savior's Disciples, was not, that they had transgressed any Tradition that
appeared to have a Divine Original, by the Books of Moses and the Prophets, but
that they had transgressed the Tradition of the Elders, as they used to call
them, such Traditions for which they had no other pretense, than that they were
conveyed down by word of mouth from Father to Son, amongst the wise Men, and
the Masters, and the Scribes.

The particular instance to explain the general Charge was this, that the
Disciples did not wash their hands, before they eat bread. For one of those
many Traditionary Doctrines, for which they were so zealous, was this, that if
a Stranger, or an uncircumcised Person should but touch a Jew, the Jew was
forthwith defiled, or if he had but touched any thing, that a Jew afterward
touched, he was unclean; and if the Jew should in that state take any Meat to
eat, that Meat was rendered unclean, and would defile his mind; for the
preventing of which danger, it was a part of Religion to wash before eating;
and thus for an idle fancy they invented an idle relief, and placed so much
Religion in it, that says one of them, He that eats bread with unwashen hands,
sins as much as if he had lain with a Whore: And says another, It is the
highest point of holiness for a man to separate himself from the vulgar, and
that he does not touch them, nor so much as eat or drink with them; and the
next to this, is to wash away the impurity that is contracted thereby: You may
see a more particular account of this senceless Superstition of theirs, in Mark
7. The Pharisees, and all the Jews, except they wash their hands often, eat not,
holding the Tradition of the Elders. And when they come from the market, except
they wash, they eat not: And many other things there be, which they have
received to hold, as the washing of cups, and pots, brazen vessels, and of
tables: that is, they did not only wash their own hands, least they should have
touched some stranger, or one less pure than themselves, but least some
stranger should have touched the Cup, in which they drank, or the Dish in which
their Meat was, or the Tables upon which the Cups were to stand; these were
washed with all care, not for cleanliness, for that would not serve the turn;
but for holiness-sake, as if their Minds were made pure, by washing their Hands
and Cups, and all things of this sort. This was one kind of their Traditionary
Doctrines, for transgressing of which the Disciples of Jesus were accused by
the Pharisees.

II. We may observe these two things employed in the Charge:

1. The concern which the Scribes had for their Traditions. And,

2. The reverence in which the People held them.

1. The concern of the Scribes and Pharisees to have them observed: It was so
great, that a Man might with less danger from them, break a plain Law of God,
than transgress one of their Traditions, and they would sooner call him to an
account for this latter, than for the former; if they could have charged our
Lord's Disciples with breaking the Fifth Commandment, as Jesus charged them
with it presently after, of this they would have said nothing: But they were
not able to bear the neglect of the Disciples to wash before eating, for
Conscience Sake: And when he had given the Multitude a plain account of this
neglect, neither could they bear that, but were offended at him, v. 12. Hence
in their Talmud, a Book that pretends to have gathered up their Oral
Traditions, it is said, That there is more in the words of the Scribes, than in
the words of the Law: And we are not to think that the written Law is the
Foundation, but the unwritten; and the words of the Elders are of more
Authority and weight, than the words of the Prophets: So blind was their Zeal
for their Traditions, that one of the Rabbis being once cast into Prison, and
Water being given him to wash, and to drink, and the greater part of it being
spilt, he rather chose to wash his hands, than to drink, saying, It Is better to
die, than to transgress the Tradition of the Elders. And no wonder that they
were thus concerned, when it was by these Doctrines that they kept up an
absolute Authority over the People; for if the People would be made to believe,
that the unwritten Law was of greater consequence than the written, and that
the Scribes were the Guardians and Oracles of the unwritten Law, nothing could
be better contrived, to keep them in an absolute dependence upon the Scribes.

2. The Charge does likewise imply an universal regard of these Traditions in
the People: Why do thy disciples transgress the traditions? (i. e.) Why do they
only do it: And we heard from St. Mark, that the Pharisees, and all the Jews,
except they wash their hands often, eat not: Whatever became of the Commandments
of God, here was very good care taken, that the Traditions of the Church should
be kept. Nay, it was so fixed in the minds of our Lord's Disciples themselves,
that they were to be kept, that it was not easy to set them right in these
things presently; for after our Savior had told them, Not that which goes
into the mouth defiles the man, but that which comes out of the mouth, v. 11.
Peter asked him, v. 15. to declare the meaning of the Parable, or as he thought
it, hard saying: And Jesus said, v. 16. Are ye also yet without understanding?
And so he goes on, showing that he spoke of cleanness of mind, which was
defiled by evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, etc. They had not yet got rid of
those Superstitious Fancies that reigned amongst the People, and were so
prejudiced by them, that they could hardly understand the plain truth on the
other side. Nay, when after this, he had occasion to say to them, as you find
in the next Chapter, ver. 6. Take heed and beware of the leaven of the
Pharisees, and of the Sadduces: How do we think they understood this saying? And
they reasoned among themselves, saying, it is because we have taken no bread.
Which showed, they were not yet cured of this Pharisaical Superstition;
inasmuch as they understood our Savior, as if he had forbidden them to eat any
bread which the Pharisees had touched, as the Pharisees would eat nothing that
had been touched by a Gentile; when all that our Savior meant, was, that they
should beware of their Doctrine. And no wonder that these Traditionary
Inventions had taken such root in the minds of men, when they did not serve
more for the Authority of the Guides, than for the ease and liberty of the
People that followed them: For though it was something a nice and elaborate
business to observe all the Traditions, yet this was much more grateful, not
only to fancy, but to flesh and blood, than to observe the Rules of true Piety,
by keeping the Commandments of God: For instance, though it was something
troublesome to be washing at every turn, yet if this would keep a man's mind
clean, it was a much easier care, than to keep the heart pure, v. 19. from evil
thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false-witnessings, and
evil speakings, which according to our Savior's Doctrine, were the things that
defile the man, v. 20. How was it possible, but that People should be fond of
believing such a conclusion as this, whosoever lives in the Land of Israel, and
eats his Meat in cleanness, and speaks in the Holy Tongue, and Morning and
Evening says over his Phylacteries, let him never doubt, but he shall obtain
Life in the World to come. This was the Doctrine of the Masters, and certainly
they must be very unreasonable People, that could not be content to go to
Heaven upon such terms as these, if they could be made such Fools as to believe
it: And truly Men are very apt to hearken to such Follies, because they save
them the labor of being truly good. No wonder therefore that the Scribes were
so universally believed and obeyed by the People, inasmuch as they undertook to
carry them all to Heaven infallibly, by such slight and cheap performances, as
were required by their Tradition: And in such a case as this, it would cost
more than ordinary pains to undeceive them; our Savior himself being
constrained to repeat his Instructions over and over again to his Disciples, to
get these Fancies out of their heads. And thus much concerning the nature of
that Charge, which the Pharisees laid against our Lord's Disciples, and
concerning that which is employed in it, the zeal of the Priests, and the
Scribes for their Traditions, and the fondness of the People that were addicted
to them. I proceed now to the

2. Point: And that is the Answer which our Savior made to this Charge, viz.
Why do ye also transgress the Commandment of God by your Tradition? Which does
of itself appear to be a plain and wise way of answering their bold Question,
because it turned the difficulty upon them, and that a thousand times a greater
difficulty, to say, if they could, by what Authority they advanced their
Traditions against the Law of God, and since they thought it was so heinous a
fault in the Disciples, not to observe their Traditions, to purge themselves if
they were able, of a notorious fault in keeping their Traditions, and teaching
them to others; inasmuch as their Traditions could not be kept without
transgressing the commandment of God. Which general Charge our Savior makes
good also, by one particular inference so plain, that there was no fencing
against it: For God, says he, commanded, saying, Honor thy Father and thy
Mother: and he that curses Father or Mother, let him die the death: But ye
say, whosoever shall say to his Father, or his Mother, it is a gift, by
whatsoever thou might be profited by me, and honor not his Father and his
Mother, he shall be free: thus have you made the Commandment of God of none
effect, by your Tradition. The Tradition was this, that if a man had vowed
never to relieve, or to give any thing to such or such a Person, though it were
his Father or his Mother, he was held by his Vow, and if afterward he should
change his mind, and be willing to relieve his Parents, and in order thereunto,
go to the Priests to be dispensed with, and absolved of his Vow, the Priests
should challenge all that he now designed to relieve his Parents withal, but of
his Vow he could not be released, and the Money was put into the Treasury of
the Temple; so that if his Father or Mother came afterward to him, and asked
an Alms of him, he might say, It is Corban, or devoted to the Service of the
Temple, whatsoever I can have a mind to give thee; and in St. Mark our Savior
concludes, And ye suffer him no more to do ought for his Father, or his Mother:
For they held him to his Vow, and whatever Money he could be willing to give
them afterward, being under the Religion of a Vow, it became Sacred, and was
to go to the Temple: In which most wicked Tradition they had their Ends; for
the Wealth of the Treasury being partly employed in the Reparation of the
Temple, partly for the Relief of the Poor, partly for the enriching of the
Priests and Levites, the Pharisees who were no small part of the Priests, had
their share in all, that was brought into the Treasury. By this Traditionary
Doctrine and Practice, they had eluded a Law of God not of lesser moment, but
of great moment, that the transgression of it was capital, and such a Law too,
as the light of Nature shows no less, than the written word of God; and
therefore well might our Savior Conclude, Thus have ye made the Commandment of
God of none effect by your Tradition: But if it be now asked, why our Savior
did not keep to that instance which the Pharisees produced, and answer to that,
but rather chose another instance? The account of this I think very easy, viz.
That he saw it was necessary to run them down by one of the most undeniable
instances that could be imagined, of their contradicting the Law of God by
their Traditions; for the boldness of the Pharisees and Priests was so
excessive, and the fondness of the People about these Traditions was so hard to
be broken, that it was necessary to make way for their conviction by such an
argument, as must needs make some impression upon them: And when he had made an
end of that, he did not forget to speak directly to the point they had begun
withal; for ver. 10. we find that he called the multitude, and said unto them,
Hear and understand, not that which goes into the mouth defiles a Man, but
that which comes out of the Mouth defiles a Man; that is, do not suffer your
selves to be deluded by these confident Men, who use their Authority to that
degree, as to carry you under a pretense of keeping their Traditions, to the
transgression of the plainest Commandments of God, as I have evidently shown in
the case of the Fifth Commandment; and now be willing to be instructed in that
other point of pretended Tradition, which they blame my Disciples for not
observing, and know that no Food whatsoever is unclean, or unlawful in its own
nature to be used, nor can any Man's touch make it so, nor can any of these
things defile a Man's Conscience; but a Man's Conscience is defiled by that
which comes from his heart, by evil thoughts, by evil words, and by actions
contrary to the Command of God, such as murders, and adulteries, etc. These are
the things that defile a man, but to eat with unwashen hands, defiles not a
man: (i. e.) does not by any means affect his Soul, or his Conscience, for in
this respect he is neither better for washing, nor worse for letting it alone;
and to think otherwise is a Superstition hurtful to your selves, and
dishonorable to God, and of very bad consequence, though it be not so impudent
and notorious an abuse, as the making void of God's Law, by the other lewd
Tradition that I mentioned before: It is to this purpose that we are to
understand the method and design of our Savior's Discourse in this place, in
answer to the Objection of the Pharisees brought against the Disciples.

From which answer there are some things to be gathered well worth our
observation.

1. That it is sufficient to overthrow the Authority of a pretended Tradition,
that it is contrary to the Commandment of God.

2. That if there be one Traditionary Doctrine, that notoriously contradicts
the Law of God, that one instance is sufficient to overturn the credit of that
Tradition, which pretends to deliver unwritten Doctrines, of equal Authority
with those that are written.

3. That the universal consent of some one Age or more, that such and such
Doctrines were delivered by word of mouth many Ages before, is no argument that
they were so delivered.

4. That we have a great reason to stick to the word of God delivered to us in
the Scriptures; and to examine all Doctrines and Rules which are said to be
necessary to Salvation, by that Rule, and to reject the Authority of unwritten
Traditions.

1. That it is sufficient to overthrow the Authority of a pretended Tradition,
that it is contrary to the Commandment of God: For if when Tradition is
pretended for any Doctrine or Practice, it be not enough to show, that the same
Doctrine or Practice is inconsistent with what is plainly required in the
Scriptures, which are acknowledged by all to contain the word of God; I say, if
this be not enough, then our Savior used an insufficient Argument against the
pretended Tradition of not suffering the Son that was under a Vow of the
contrary, to relieve his Father or Mother, that it made void the Commandment of
God. But doubtless our Savior was so far from using a bad Argument, that he
used the best and most convincing of all: And truly if we did not in this case
consider our Savior's Authority, yet it must be a monstrous prejudice, that
keeps any Man from discerning the strength of this Argument, against the
Authority of any unwritten Doctrine, that it is contrary to what is written;
for nothing is more certain, than that Contradictions cannot be true, and yet
they must be true, if that Doctrine for which unwritten Tradition is pretended,
can be of God, though it contradicts the written Tradition, which is by all
acknowledged to be Divine. But as plain as this argument is, yet it is very
well for us that we find our blessed Savior giving such Authority to it;
because there are Christians in the World, bearing up themselves upon the
Tradition of the Church, that are loath to admit this Argument; which we have no
cause to be amazed at, because it is an utter Confutation of all their
pretenses. We charge them with having brought into the Church new Articles of
Faith, and new Doctrines of Worship, which are not only very different from
what was taught at first by Christ and his Apostles, but some of them contrary
thereunto, as we can show them out of the Scriptures. But this way of
proceeding does by no means content them, and they insist upon it, that the
Cause may be tried otherwise. For say they, You acknowledge that our Church was
once a pure Church, and taught the Gospel sincerely; but if, as you say, she
departed from the pure Faith and Worship which the Apostles left, it is
impossible but this must have been very notorious, because it could not have
been done without opposition and resistance from some that must needs observe
it: Tell us therefore, when were these new and false Doctrines introduced? Who
were the Men that brought them in? Who were the first that made the discovery?
What Council condemned them, after they were discovered? For if none of these
things can be shown, it is absurd to think, that any such alteration should
have been, as you say. Which reasoning amounts to thus much, that it is
impossible we can be sure that in the compass of a thousand Years, there was a
great alteration happened in the state of Religion, unless withal we can tell
how it came about, and just when it came about, the precise time, and the
punctual manner and circumstances thereof, which is just as if a Man almost
desperately sick of a Disease, that had been for some Years growing upon him,
should prove to his Friend, that he is as well as ever he was in his Life; for
says he, You know I was well once, and if I am now so ill, as you say, pray
show me the time when this Disease first happened, the manner how, and what
Physicians were called about me; which kind of arguing would certainly prove no
more, than that the Disease had taken his head. When the Servants came and told
their Lord, that the tares came up with the wheat, it was excusable in them to
say, We sowed good seed, whence has it these tares? But when their Master told
them, An enemy has done this, if they had disputed, and told him, It was
impossible there should be any Tares at all, because he could not tell
punctually that very Night when they were sown, and who the Persons were, that
took the malicious pains to sow them; then they had been very inexcusable thus
to renounce their own certain knowledge, for the sake of a vain Speculation.
Now we are very sure that the Apostles did at first sow nothing in the Church,
but good and true Doctrine: Our Fathers that lived about fourteen hundred Years
after, found quite another sort of Doctrine gotten into the Church, and some of
them contrary to what the Apostles taught, as the Scriptures manifestly show;
and yet there have been a long time, and still there are certain Disputers,
that go about to stagger others, with such like questions as we have been
speaking of, and teach them to defy all reasoning out of the Scriptures, till
these questions are satisfied; What Age, What Year of our Lord, were these
Errors brought into the Church? Who were they that brought them in, and who
first complained of them? Now although a very reasonable account both may be,
and has been given of the Persons, the Time, and the Manner, and the Degrees,
by which such Corruptions got into the Church, yet it is very unreasonable to
expect that every Christian should be able to answer these Questions
punctually, because it requires more Labor and Reading, than generally they
have either leisure or ability to go through with; but withal it is very
needless, because there is a shorter and a surer way to determine this matter,
and that by comparing those Doctrines and Practices with the Scriptures: For
the Scriptures have a more certain Tradition, than any of those Histories that
give an account of the Revolutions of Church Affairs since the beginning; and
now what matter is it, if I am assured that such and such Corruptions were
brought into the Church, sometime or other after the Apostles, because they are
contrary to what the Apostles taught and left in their Writings, though I
cannot tell just the Year when, or the Person by whom they first crept into the
Church. I would very fain know of any Man, that when our Savior set himself to
overthrow that wicked Tradition, which we were speaking of before, whether he
could not, if he had pleased, have given an exact account of the Persons that
began it in the Jewish Church, and of the time when it began, and of every
circumstance that attended its entrance into the World, and its growth and
increase afterward. But did he go this way to work? It is certain that the
Pharisees pretended the Traditions which they taught the People, were delivered
from God to Moses, and that through several Ages they were conveyed down to
them successively by word of mouth. And I grant that if our Lord had with many
words shown them, that they were such and such men who first brought them in,
this had been a confutation of their pretense; but for all that, he was pleased
to use a better and a shorter argument against them, and told them what the
commandment was in the Law, which their pretended Tradition made void, and this
was instead of a thousand arguments, that their Doctrine never came from Moses,
but was invented some time afterward: And I beseech you let none of us be
ashamed to use that kind of argument, which our Savior thought fit to confute
those People withal, and which we have reason to think he used, that he might
show us the best way to secure our selves from being imposed upon by unwritten
Traditions, and by a pretense of having received such Doctrines from the
Apostles, as they never delivered. When therefore we are asked, If
Transubstantiation be an Error, and not an Article of Faith, when did it come
in? If Service in an Unknown Tongue be an Innocation, when did it come in? If
the Sacrifice of the Mass be a Corruption, when did it come in? Let us account
it sufficient to answer, for so our Savior thought it in the like case, That
Transubstantiation makes void those places of Scripture, which expressly affirm,
that by eating of Bread we show forth the Death of Christ, and are made
partakers of his Body: That Service in an Unknown Tongue makes void the
Fourteenth Chapter of the First Epistle to the Corinthians: And that the
Sacrifice of the Mass makes void the Seventh and the Tenth Chapters of the
Epistle to the Hebrews, which expressly tell us, that Christ can be offered no
more, and that there remains no more Sacrifice for Sins; and therefore we are
very well assured, that they did come in sometime or other, since the Apostles,
but whether they came in sooner or later, is nothing to the purpose, for
certainly nothing ought ever to have come in, that makes void any part of the
Word of God; but if any such thing has got in, there is all the reason in the
World that it should be thrown out again. They may well be ashamed, that cannot
bear this sort of arguing, but most certainly we have no reason to be ashamed
to use it, since our blessed Savior has used it before us; for when he set
himself to overthrow the credit of these Doctrines, for which they pretended a
constant Tradition in the Church, he thought it sufficient for his purpose, to
show, that they voided the Commandments of God, and made his word of none
effect.

2. If there be one Traditionary Doctrine that notoriously contradicts the
written Word of God, it is enough to overthrow the whole Credit of that
Tradition which pretends to bring down unwritten Doctrines, that are necessary
to be received. For thus we find, that our Savior by the single instance of
that Tradition, which voided the Fifth Commandment, overthrew the Objection of
the Pharisees against his Disciples: Why do thy Disciples transgress the
Tradition of the Elders? (i. e.) their unwritten Traditions: which was as much
as to say, that they ought all of them to be Religiously observed, because they
had all the same Authority: Our Savior therefore produces an instance of their
Traditions, that takes away all Authority, inasmuch as it was a plain
contradiction to the Law of God; if therefore amongst their unwritten Doctrines
and Rules, there were any that had some kind of goodness and usefulness, they
were to be regarded upon their own account, and not upon the Authority of
Tradition. But when he had utterly overthrown all that pretended Authority by
an undeniable argument, he then speaks to the case, which themselves had
propounded, and lays down the truth concerning it. They had a vast number of
Superstitions, for which they pretended Tradition, and they tax our Savior's
Disciples for not observing one of them. Now he with admirable wisdom first
breaks the Authority of their Tradition, showing that one of them was plainly
against the Law of God, and then he shows how superstitious and foolish they
were in the case which themselves chose to speak to. In this also our Lord has
set us an example, that if we are pressed by a pretense to Tradition in favor of
unwritten Doctrines and Articles, we should in the first place show that one or
more of these is contrary to the Word of God; and therefore that there is no
reason to pretend Tradition for any of them, since they are all said to have
come down together: Which being done in the first place, it will be then
seasonable to show, what is to be thought of the rest, if they are judged of by
the general Rules of Reason and Scripture.

3. The Universal consent of some one or two Ages, that such and such Doctrines
were delivered by word of mouth many Ages before, is no argument that they were
so delivered. The Pharisees did pretend that their Doctrines and Interpretations
of the Law had been conveyed down from Moses by Oral Tradition to that Age in
which they lived, and there were several of these Traditions universally
believed in that Age to have been so conveyed, and the Practice of the People
was universally governed by them: For instance, that of Religious Washing
before Meat, and the washing of Cups and Pots, as a thing in it self good and
holy, was universally received and practiced, as St. Mark tells us. Now I would
fain know whether they might not have reasoned in this fashion: We in this Age
received this Doctrine and Rule from our Forefathers, who professed they
received it from theirs, and if they had not received it from theirs, then they
all agreed together to cheat us, as their Forefathers agreed to cheat them, if
they had not received it from theirs, and so this Tradition must have come
originally from Moses, or else there was one Age that agreed to cheat the next
in things concerning the Service of God, and the Salvation of Men's Souls. But
after all the prettiness of this demonstration, I think, we have more reason to
believe, that this Superstition never came from Moses, because our Savior
exposed it as a vain and foolish Doctrine, than to believe that it did, because
the Jews ever since the Pharisees time, who were a Sect of full three hundred
years standing were taught to pretend Tradition for the Innovations of the
Pharisees, and for this amongst the rest. And therefore it is a vain thing to
pretend, that because such and such Traditionary Doctrines were in such an Age
taught without control, as necessary to Salvation, they must needs have been
taught so from the very first.

4. That we have great reason to stick to the word of God delivered to us in
the Holy Scriptures, and to examine all Doctrines and Pretenses by this Rule.
For the Holy Scriptures are indeed the Rule whereby we are to try that
pretense, that there is another Rule, viz. of unwritten Tradition; and if that
other pretended Rule does in any thing contradict the Scriptures, most
certainly it is but a pretended Rule, and to be rejected. To deal plainly, this
same Oral Tradition was never pretended for any good, either by Jews or
Christians; nor made use of but to advance and protect some Doctrines or
Practices, that stand condemned by the Scriptures: And therefore after so long
experience had of the mischief, as well as vanity of this pretense, it were
perhaps not unreasonable for any Christian to reject the Argument of unwritten
Tradition without any more ado, and to entertain no Doctrine or Practice
necessary to Salvation, which cannot be proved out of the Scriptures, nor to
entertain any thing at all, that is contrary thereunto, let Men talk of
Tradition, or any other Authority, as long as they please.

And now I question not, but this Discourse will be acknowledged to be very
plain and convincing; but for all that, it is not certain, that the Argument of
it self will secure us from being deceived by the Sophistry of others, if we do
not take heed to the main thing of all, and that is, to lead such Lives as the
Scriptures direct us to lead, for there is no such temptation in the world to
be fond of Traditionary Doctrines, as to live in that manner, that if the
Traditionary Doctrines be not true, we can have no hope of Salvation. If we
will live according to the Scriptures, we shall have no temptation, and I am
sure we have no reason to believe otherwise, than according to the Scriptures:
Let us often think that here we have no continuing place, we must not always
live here, but that in a very little time, we are to go into another World, and
to appear before our Judge: Let us remember, that this is the great argument,
by which the Scriptures engage us to live a sober, righteous and godly life,
and let us consider that it is the strongest Argument in the World, and be
persuaded by it to do accordingly, and this will above all things establish us
in the Truth. It is something hard to keep that man from being deceived, who
needs the comfort of false Principles: For Men are very apt to be running for
comfort, where it is to be had, though they cheat themselves for it.

Brethren, the Holy Scriptures are God's Book, and they are acknowledged to be
so, by all Christians in the World, therefore I say it again and again, stick
to the Scriptures, live according to the Scriptures, and believe according to
the Scriptures: Make the Scriptures the Rule of your Practice, and then you
will need no more arguments to make them the Rule of your Faith: And as many,
as walk according to this Rule, Peace will be upon them.

The Eighth Sermon.
1 COR. XI. 19. For there must be Heresies also amongst you, that they which
are approved may be made manifest among you.


THE word Heresy did at first indifferently signify any party distinguished
from others by Opinions and Practices peculiar to it self, whether those
Opinions were true or false, those Practices good or bad; insomuch that
Christianity it self was called a Sect or Heresy for some time. But in time it
came to be used in the worser sense, and was restrained to those, that
distinguished themselves by the profession of false Doctrines, or by
unjustifiable Practices: Which use of the word began soon after Christianity,
as far as I can find; and there was this reason for it, that Christianity
having established one Form of Doctrine, which was to be universally received,
there were now to be no Heresies or Sects, that is, no departure from the Unity
of that Doctrine; and every new Sect from that time forward must necessarily be
in the wrong: Thus also the word Schism or Division came in a little time to be
restrained to that side or party, by whose fault the breach of Christian
Communion and Concord was made; and although, when a dissension, and breach of
Unity happens, they that are not in the fault are at the same distance from
those that are, that the faulty are from the innocent, yet the faulty were only
said to be in Schism or Division: Moreover, it seems that Heresy and Schism
were words at first used indifferently to signify the same fault of discord
and contention, because breach of Charity and Communion, was for the most part
made by departing from Unity of Doctrine, though in process of time, Heresy
was restrained to signify an Error about the Faith, and Schism a breach of
Order, and Christian Communion. St. Paul does in this place seem to mean the
same thing by both words, for in the foregoing verse, says he, I hear that
there be Divisions or Schisms among you, and I partly believe it; that is, I
believe it of some of you. And there he adds, For there must be also Heresies
among you; that is, Sects and Parties distinguished from one another by their
peculiar Doctrines and Practices.

The matter about which there was a disagreement in the Church of Corinth, was
no less, than that of the Administration of the Holy Communion, that having
happened so early, which in the latter Ages of the Church has obtained in a
much higher degree, that the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, which was in great
part instituted to unite the Faithful in one Body, was perverted into an
occasion of dividing them from one another: Upon which observation St. Paul
inserted this memorable saying:

There must be also Heresies among you, that they which are approved may be
made manifest.

There must be Heresies, (i. e.) Parties that will contend for false Doctrines
and unlawful Practices, that will either take away from the Faith, or add to
the Faith, that will either dispense with the Commandments of God, or teach for
doctrines the commandments of men.

There must be Heresies among you; that is, this must happen in the Church it
self: Men should arise from among themselves speaking perverse things: And thus
also St. Peter foretold, There shall be false teachers among you, who privily
shall bring in damnable heresies, 2 Pet. 2.1. But it was impossible they should
do it privily or slily, if they were not of the Church, and had not thereby an
opportunity, under a pretense of Piety, and care of Christian Truth, to slip
their Innovations into the Church by degrees: Whereas it is added, That they
which are approved may be made manifest; the meaning is, that honest men may
more and more appear to be what they are.

So that in the words of the Text, there are these two things observable.

I. The unavoidableness of Heresies in the Church, There must be Heresies among
you. II. The reason why God is pleased to permit Heresies, that they who are
approved may be made manifest.
1. The unavoidableness of Heresies in the Church, There must be Heresies among
you. By which we are not to understand an absolute necessity, that Heresies
should arise: For this is inconsistent with that liberty of humane Nature,
which Religion, and God's dealing with Mankind in giving us Laws, and making us
to expect a Day of Judgment, do necessarily suppose: But the meaning is this,
that all things considered, it was in it self highly probable that Heresies
would be brought into the Church, and that God certainly foresaw that they
would come in, men being left to that liberty, which is capable of being
abused, and under that Grace that may be resisted. All therefore, that is
needful to be considered under this head, will be this, what are the grounds of
that probability of the coming in of Heresies, which the Text supposes, of
Heresies (I say) which God saw would certainly come to pass, if he interposed
not his irresistible power to prevent it.

Now it was not to be expected, but that Heresies would be, if we consider on
the one side the revelation of Christian Truth, and on the other, the Temper
and Circumstances of Mankind.

1. As to the Revelation of Christian Truth, we are to consider the tendency
and design of the Doctrine it self, and the evidence we have that God has
revealed it.

1. The spirit and design of the Doctrine of Christianity, which is plainly to
rectify the ill Manners, and the corrupt Affections of Mankind, to restrain
them from Liberties, which most Men desire, how unreasonable and hurtful soever
they are, and to tie them up to Rules, that are not grateful to flesh and
blood. Moreover, the Doctrine of Christianity truly represented, is equally for
the Interest of all Mankind, and is by no means framed to serve the designs of
Ambition, and to advance one part of the Church, to the prejudice and slavery
of all the rest. Lastly, It teaches a Worship of great simplicity, that has but
very few Mysteries, and nothing of that Pomp and Ceremony, which is so pleasing
to the Senses and the Fancies of Men, and will not suffer them to place the
weight of Religion in any outward Shows and Performances, but in loving the
Lord our God with all our heart; and our neighbors as our selves: And to such
a course of life and temper of mind it obliges us by all that it teaches
concerning God and Christ, and a life to come, our Creed serving no other turn,
but to make it necessary for us to live a sober, righteous, and godly life. But
then

2. The evidence we have for the truth of this Doctrine, and that God has
revealed it, is not so irresistible, as to overruled all contradiction and
perverseness, though it be sufficient to satisfy a wise and honest Man; nor is
the manner wherein these things are testified and declared to us, so
inlightning, as to make it absolutely impossible for a Man to mistake about
them, or for those that wilfully pervert them, to delude others with putting
false colors upon them; although it is so plain, that we must be
extraordinarily to blame, if we run into any Error against sound Faith or good
Life. One would think the Doctrine of the Resurrection had been plainly enough
delivered, first by our Savior, then by his Apostles, and that the Institution
of the Lord's Supper, and the Order which the Apostles observed in the
Administration of it was also plain enough, and yet in this very Church of
Corinth, there were diverse foully mistaken as to the one, and still wanted
instruction as to the other. One would think that those words, This is my body,
were sufficiently plain, and that there was not the least need for our Lord to
have added presently after that saying, But take notice that I mean, This is my
body by deputation or representation, or in a figurative sense, any more then
to have so explained himself, when he said, I am the door, I am the vine, etc.
But yet because he did not think fit to leave an express caution against the
literal sense of these words, we know it has been insisted upon against plain
evidence of Scripture, Sense, and Reason. Again, let a Man consider the
Institution of the Holy Communion, and have no prejudice upon his mind, and he
will never desire that it should have been more plainly expressed, that the Cup
be administered to all, than it is, especially since it is said of the Cup,
Drink ye All of this, and they All drank of it: But yet because these words
were not added, or the like, And let no man ever presume to administer the
Bread without administering the Cup to the same Person, the Cup has been taken
away from the People, for the greater reverence of Administration. When St.
Paul said, that he that understands not the Language in which Prayer, or giving
of Thanks is made, is not edified, it could hardly have been thought necessary
to have added this, Let therefore all Forms of Public Prayer and
Administration of Sacraments in all Ages of the Church be made in the Tongue,
that the People understand: And yet for want of some such conclusion Public
Prayers have been made in a Language, that the People understand not, and the
Practice maintained as confidently, as if the fourth Chapter of the first
Epistle to the Corinthians were itself in a Language, that we could not
understand. There is no question but God could have added such explications and
cautions in the Scripture, as would have made it a great deal more difficult
and troublesome to bring in those Errors, than it has been, and perhaps
utterly impossible to maintain them amongst Christians without destroying the
Bible out of the World: But then by the same reason that such cautions had been
necessary, thousand times as many more had been necessary too: For so many
Additions by way of caution must have been made, as there are ways of eluding,
and perverting a Rule; which are so many, that to have provided expressly
against them all, would have made the Bible a more voluminous Book than any is
in the World; not to say the most odd and uncouth Book that ever was seen. For
whoever wrote or spoke in that manner, as to provide against all possible ways
of being mistaken, or having his words perverted? According to this rate, a man
must not expect to make an end of a sentence in an hour, and when he has done
all he can, his explications may be perverted too: And therefore we are not to
wonder, if God has not provided express Cautions against all possible Mistakes
and Abuses of this nature, but thought good to leave a Rule of Faith, and
Manners, and Worship, which would be sufficient to guide all honest persons,
and lovers of Truth, though not sufficient to exclude all Cavil and Abuse.

For this reason it was, that our Savior did not pretend, that all who saw his
Works, and heard his Doctrines must necessarily believe in him; but he required
constantly a certain temper of mind, consisting of Humility, Sincerity, love of
the Truth, and in a word, A good and honest Heart, in order to a man's being
his true Disciple: Common Sense and Reason was not sufficient for this purpose,
but there must be also a peculiar Probity, or teachable Spirit, a Mind ready to
believe all Truth, and to do all Duty: These were the Sheep that would hear his
Voice, and the Ground that would receive his Seed, and bring forth Fruit: Such
were the Men that would hear, and understand, and know of the Doctrine whether
it were of God. But as for others, they would make a shift to reject it with
some color for so doing, or to pervert it, if they once admitted it.

This was the first thing to be considered, the temper and design of the
Gospel, which delivers Truth, that does by no means gratify the Lusts of Men,
or please their Imaginations, or serve the Interest of particular persons, to
the disadvantage of all others; and then that this Truth was delivered in that
way, which though it be apt to instruct and convince all honest men, yet will
not infallibly bear down a spirit of Contradiction. Now to this we must add,

2. The consideration of the general temper of mankind, for whose sake the
Gospel was made known, viz. that it is very corrupt and exceedingly prone to
Sin, and therefore to Error, impatient of true Virtue and Piety, and therefore
of true Doctrine; Humane nature does affect a lawless Liberty, and cannot well
bear to be confined, and it is so diseased, that it does not take it well to be
healed; it is therefore no wonder if the Remedy which God has provided, has
been so tampered withal by Men, as to make it ineffectual for that purpose, for
which he has sent it to us; and Doctrines have been taught, which give that
liberty that Truth denies: It was not to be expected, but that if the Doctrine
of Christianity should not effectually overcome those Lusts that reign in the
World, those Lusts would corrupt and pervert that Doctrine, and bring in
Heresies: Ambition and Covetousness would bring in Heresies for the
establishing of a worldly Power and Dominion in the Name of Christ;
Licenciousness would bring in Heresies for making void the Commandments of God:
Pride would bring in Heresies, though for nothing else but a man's satisfaction
and glory in drawing many people into a Party, and becoming the Head of it; and
when they were brought in, the natural inconstancy and wavering of some would
carry them away from the Truth, the natural stiffness and inflexibility of
others would detain them in Error; the very desire and love of Novelty would at
first help to bring in some, and in process of time, the pretense of Antiquity
would be every day more and more able to gain others: Finally, the
unwillingness of most men to take pains in the search of Truth, and the greater
ease of depending upon the absolute Authority of others would give a farther
advantage to Error, which fears nothing more than an Examination, and
therefore discourages all persons from giving themselves so needless a trouble,
since they have the word of those for their security, who cannot possibly
mislead them, considering the diseases of Humane Nature, which the Doctrine of
Christ does not cure miraculously and irresistibly, it could not be expected,
but there would be Factions and Heresies against the Truth. If therefore it be
thought strange that the Apostle should say, There must be Heresies: Let us
consider, that this is no more than if he had said, after all the care that God
has taken to restore mankind, there will be Pride and Ambition, there will be
Covetousness and Injustice, and the love of this World, there will be Luxury
and Licenciousness, there will be both Inconstancy and Stiffneckedness, there
will be Laziness and Slothfulness, and Unaptness for Instruction, and therefore
there must be Heresies; for God has provided no infallible Remedies against
Sin and Wickedness, and as certainly as the Vices of the World would break out
in the Church, so certainly would Errors get into it by degrees, and usurp the
Name and Authority of Truth. It Is true, that God, if he pleased could
absolutely have hindered it by his overruling Power: But in this saying it is
implied, that he would not do so, and Experience has shown, that he has not
done so, and we have no reason to wonder at it, since he is not pleased to make
all men good by an irresistible Grace; for there was less reason to expect that
he should make all men Orthodox by an irresistible Illumination.

And so I come to the second point: Which concerns the reason assigned why God
is pleased to permit Heresies. That they which are approved may be made
manifest, (i. e.) that it may most evidently appear who are sincere and honest,
and who are not so; for opposition to the Truth, and the ways that are taken to
advance Error, do prove what men are at the bottom, and distinguish between
those that would appear all alike, if the same Truth were equally professed by
all: The great difference that breaks out, is that between the probity of some
men on the one side, and the falseness and hypocrisy of others on the other
side, which appears in these instances:

1. In a more diligent search after Truth, which is the effect Heresies have
upon honest and godly men, while they give occasion to Hypocrites to consider
what is most for their ease, their safety, their advantage in this World;
whilst the several parties of Christians are each of them eagerly contending
for their own ways, men of honesty and sincerity find themselves obliged to
examine their own persuasions more narrowly, and to compare one thing with
another more carefully, so that if they apprehend a mistake in themselves, they
quit it without any more to do, and come to establish themselves in the Truth
upon better grounds than they had before, and are better able to lead others
into it.

2. By this means also the constancy of sincere persons in the profession of
the Truth is manifested: For where there is no opposition, there can be no
trial of that Love to the Truth, which will not suffer a man to forsake it; and
this not only because a man's stedfastness cannot be proved, but by opposition
and temptation, but likewise because they are but few good men in comparison,
who would be at the pains of a diligent Examination of their own persuasions,
if contrary Doctrines were not advanced, they would rely mostly upon the
Consent and Authority of others, instead of believing Truth upon its proper
Grounds and Arguments; but if, as I said in the first instance, the spreading
of Heresies puts them upon a diligent search after the reasons of Truth, their
stedfastness in it afterward is manifested to be the true Virtue of Constancy,
which does not consist in an obstinate resolution not to change our Opinion,
let what will be produced against it, but in adhering to that which appears to
be true, after the most diligent examination of all that can be said against
it. And thus Heresies make good men more constant in the Truth, by giving them
an opportunity of confirming themselves in it by better Arguments, and clearer
Evidence, and they manifest their constancy to the World, inasmuch, as the
Adversaries of Truth are never wanting to shake the dfastness of true Believers
by all ways of temptation imaginable.

3. Their Charity to others is manifested also by means of Heresies and
Opposition to the Truth; for here is occasion given to show their care of one
another in satisfying the doubtful, in instructing the ignorant, in giving
caution to the confident, and encouragement to the weak, all which are noble
instances of Christian Charity: But this is not all, since their care to
recover others from the way of Error, to reduce those that are gone aside,
together with their enduring contradiction, their instructing in much patience,
their meekness toward those that oppose themselves, are likewise manifested
upon all such occasions.

4. Their sincerity does likewise appear in another respect, viz. of defending
Truth with Truth only, and a good cause by Innocence and honest means, without
making use of Frauds, of Lies, of false Accusations, of false Principles, of
unconcluding Arguments, of any disingenious Arts, without making advantage of
the weakness and mistakes of others; which one thing makes a vast difference
between those that are honest, and those that are not: All which instances do
express the truth of that reason, for which God has still suffered Heresies to
be in the Church, That they which are approved may be made manifest, (i. e.)
that their love of the Truth, and their diligence in enquiring after it, that
their constancy in professing it, that their charity to those that are, and to
those that are not misled, and their sincerity and ingenuity in asserting
Truth, and appearing for it by none, but lawful methods, and just arguments,
may appear to the World; which as it is for the praise of good men, so there
are other benefits arising from it; for instance,

1. That the belief of true Doctrine comes hereby to be established upon better
and firmer grounds, than in all likelihood had been discovered, if Opposition
had not obliged honest men to dig the deeper for them; and this we have noted
already.

2. That by the way many profitable Truths come to be discovered, which had
otherwise lain hid: The Scriptures come to be better understood, and the more
obscure passages of it to be reasonably well interpreted, all which is for the
advantage of the Church of God. Opposition whets the Industry, and sets an edge
upon the Wit of all men good and bad; and whilst bad men are concerned to find
out all the ways of supporting Error, the good and honest are no less employed
to arm themselves with all the advantages of Truth, and therefore cannot fail
of arriving at greater Skill in the things of God, and a greater compass of
understanding in Divine matters, than if they had not been constrained to
countermine the approaches of Error.

Lastly, the Duty that is incumbent upon all men of Honesty and Sincerity, to
maintain the Profession of the pure Doctrine of the Gospel against all Heresies
whatsoever, shows them also the necessity of recommending true Opinions to the
World by more Orthodox lives, by walking more warily, and circumspectly, by
setting better Examples of all kinds of Virtue and Piety, by showing the force
and efficacy of true Doctrine, to make men live soberly, righteously, and godly
in this present World: And when God suffers Heresies to prevail most in the
Church, it is a loud call to all that are Friends of Truth and Goodness, to
justify his Cause by the strongest Arguments, and the best Lives.

And now he is something to blame, that will not acknowledge these two things
to follow from what has been said.

1. That Heresies and Schisms are no objection against the Providence of God.

2. That they are no objection against the Truth and Goodness of a Church.

1. That they are no objection against the Providence of God, since they have
their good use and consequence, for which he is pleased to permit them, and
this especially to try the Honesty of Men, and to show what they are to the
World, which will in the end make extremely for the advantage of Truth; and
commonly the more Heresies there are, the more certainly is this Trial made: In
the mean while it is not to be dissembled, that yet diversity of Sects and
Parties has its manifold mischiefs and miseries attending upon it; it breeds
scandal to the World, it is the diversion of Atheists and Unbelievers, it
nourishes Discords and Animosities, it removes the Contentious farther from the
knowledge of the Truth, it makes the Study of good Manners, and the Practice of
Holiness and Virtue to be in a great measure forgotten, it lessens the
Reverence of Authority, it produces Fraud and Force, Unfaithfulness and
Cruelty, and has made Men, and which is worse Christians, Foxes and Wolves to
one another; so that it is not to be denied but Heresies are in themselves, and
in their consequences very great Evils; but then they are such Evils, as the
Providence of God permits for wise and good Ends, such as I have already
mentioned: They have their good consequences as well as their bad ones, and the
good that is wrought out of them is weighty enough to overballance the Evil;
for the greatest mischief that is discernable in them is but this, that they do
effectually draw forth that wickedness, which otherwise would have lain more
undiscovered in the Hearts of Men; but then also they manifest more clearly
that Integrity, that Piety, that Diligence, and Constancy, and Virtue, and
Charity of good Men, which otherwise had not so much appeared. Bad Men do by
means of Heresies grow worse, and the Good grow better by them, according to
that saying in Daniel, Chap. 12.10. The wicked shall do wickedly, and shall not
understand, but the wise shall understand. They are hardened, and these are
purified, and the difference between Virtue and Sincerity on the one side, and
Hypocrisy and Vice on the other is so clearly seen, that the good Examples
will at last prevail against the scandal of those that are Evil, and the
indirect ways of supporting Error will show the Simplicity and Virtue of the
Children of Truth to more advantage, than it could possibly have had without
the Comparison; so that it will be much more easy for People of honest tempers
and dispositions, to discern which is the true Flock of Christ, and to what
Communion they are to betake themselves. When our blessed Savior, and his
Apostles planted the Church, things were not so ordered, as to make Proselites
of all sorts of Men, however they were qualified, but rather to gather together
the Children of God that were scattered abroad, that is, all that were of pious
and honest Dispositions, and though the mighty Evidence wherewith the Gospel
was preached, drew in some that were none of the best; yet either Persecutions
or Schisms soon purged the Church of them again; and Heresies seem to have been
permitted ever since to carry on the same design of distinguishing between the
Good and Bad, and making it appear more evidently, who are the faithful
followers of Christ: And it can by no means be unworthy of the Providence of
God, to suffer those Evils to happen, which he makes to work for the same good
end, which was designed by that manner, wherein the Gospel was at first
revealed.

2. Neither are Schisms and Heresies any objections against the Truth and
Goodness of a Church, unless it were always a disparagement to be opposed, and
forsaken, which certainly it is not; for otherwise Christianity it self, as it
was taught by Christ and his Apostles, must needs have been a false Religion,
and the Church which they founded, a false Church; for thence came the
Gnostics and Valentinians, and I know not how many Heresies more, and the
Apostle told the Elders at Miletum, Acts 20.30. That from themselves would
arise men teaching perverse things, that would draw disciples after them: It is
certainly for want of better Arguments, that the Reformation is to be objected
against, upon the account of those Parties, into which it is divided; and this
Church of England for the sake of those Parties, that have broken off from the
Communion of it. For as to the latter, it is either no mark of a true Church to
hold fast all that were once of it, or else the Church of Christ was not that
true Church, since many went off from it, and which perhaps they that make this
Objection will be more concerned to consider; they from whom so many Nations
have broken off, cannot escape their own Censure. As for the Unity of those
that keep together in one Profession and Communion, this is no certain mark of
Truth, for as Men may be united in Truth, so they may be united in Error: And
all parties have this mark common to them, that so far, as they do not differ,
they agree together; and if this be an Argument of Truth, those Parties equally
have it, that are most contrary to one another: But it is one of the most silly
Objections in the World against a common Cause, that is maintained by People
that cannot agree in many things, that therefore that Cause is naughty and
erroneous; this I say is intolerably vain and impertinent, since this is to
make the reason of Truth and Error to depend upon the uncertain Passions, and
the Interests of Men. For by this means it is in the power of ill disposed
Persons, that for whatever reason may bring in a new Heresy, to make all that
Truth which they professed before, to be Truth no longer: And if it be a good
Argument against us, it is as good an Argument against Christianity in the
general in the Mouth of a Turk, or a Jew: Christians are so far from being
agreed what is true Christianity, that they are fallen into Parties, that have
no Religious Communion with one another, and therefore Christianity is a false
Religion; nay, it is still a stronger Argument in the Mouth of an Atheist again
all Religion whatsoever, since Christianity, Mahometanism, Judaism, and
Paganism are at so great a distance from one another. But there needs no other
answer to this Objection, than that which the Text affords; by which we see
that Heresies and Parties were unavoidable, and so far from being an Argument
against the Truth of Christianity, that God was pleased to permit them, even
for the advantage of the Truth: And therefore those that are so offended at the
Divisions of the Church, as to take occasion from thence either to throw off
the Profession of Religion, till all Parties are agreed about it, or to take up
with that which pretends to most Unity, without any farther Examination, are
hereby demonstrated to be insincere and vicious Persons; for as Heresies are
permitted by Providence, That they which are approved, so they are permitted,
that they which are reprobate, and cannot bear a Trial, may be also made
manifest; and it is no loss to the Truth, if she be not found by those that
love her not: In the mean time, they that are of God will hear his Word, and
Wisdom will be justified of her Children: And that we may be found in that
number, we are to make it our first and principal Care to avoid the greatest
Heresy of all, and the cause of the rest, and that is the Heresy of a wicked
Life, and vicious Affections: Then we shall be more and more built up in our
most Holy Faith, and confirmed, and established in the Truth, as it is in
Jesus. For as evil Deeds make Men hate the Light, so if our Deeds be good, and
our Consciences pure, we shall love the Light, and rejoice in it; we shall buy
the Truth, and not sell it; we shall buy it with being at the pains of
impartial Enquiry and Consideration, and we shall not sell it for either
comfortable, or gainful Errors.

To conclude, God has in that manner revealed the Truth, which concerns our
Salvation, that they may easily be deceived, who are willing to be deceived,
but that they who seek it sincerely, shall be sure to find it.

The Ninth Sermon.
2 PET. I. 19. We have also a more sure word of prophecy, whereunto ye do well
that ye take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place, until the day
dawn, and the star arise in your hearts.


IN these words St. Peter commends Believers, for taking heed, or carefully
attending to the Scriptures; and moreover expresses a weighty reason, why in
doing so they did well, because they were the word of prophecy, and a light
shining in a dark place, till the day dawned, and the day star arose in their
hearts.

I shall first endeavor to explain this reason for the diligent reading of the
Scriptures, and shall try to remove those Prejudices and Objections, which some
Men have thought fit to produce against it; and lastly, recommend it to your
Care and Conscience by earnest Exhortation.

First, as to the reason itself, we may observe that the Apostle had in the
foregoing Verses mentioned that Testimony which had been given to Jesus by a
Voice from Heaven: But, says he, we have also a more sure word of Prophecy, (i.
e.) we have yet a more convincing Testimony of God, that Jesus is the Christ,
viz. The word of Prophecy: Again it is said in the following Verses, That no
Prophecy of the Scripture is of private Interpretation, or rather of the
Prophets own skill and motion, for so the Original will bear, and the following
words require, For Prophecy came not of old time by the Will of Man, but Holy
Men spoke, as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. From hence it is plain, that
which the Apostle speaks of that Testimony, the Prophesies of the Old Testament
give to Jesus, by having foretold those things concerning the Messiah, which
were fulfilled in Jesus, and in him only. So that St. Peter commends the
Disciples of Christ for their diligent study of Moses and the Prophets, because
their Writings did abound with those Predictions concerning Christ, which had
raised an Expectation of him in the World, before he came, which would clearly
demonstrate him to the World, when he should come, and which now were a most
convincing Testimony that he was come, and that Jesus, in whom all those
Predictions were fulfilled, was he: And that this is the sum of the Apostle's
Argument, will appear by considering these particulars of the Text.

I. That the Old Testament is said to be the word of Prophecy. II. A light
shining in a dark place, till the day dawned, and the day star arose in their
hearts. III. A sure Word. IV. A more sure word of Prophecy.
1. That the Old Testament is said to be the Word of Prophecy: The Writings of
Moses, and the Prophets do indeed contain other Matters, and particularly
Histories of things past, as well as Predictions of things that were to come;
and yet they are called the Word of Prophecy. This implies, that the main
design and business of those Holy Books, was to foretell Christ, by those
Characters of his Person and Circumstances of his Appearance, that should
demonstrate him afterward: And though upon other Accounts, the Prophets had
their several Arguments of Writing; yet in this they all conspired, as St.
Peter told Cornelius, and his Company: To him give all the Prophets witness,
that whosoever believes in him should receive remission of Sins, Acts 8.43.
And this might in great part be made good by producing the clearest Prophecies
of all concerning Christ; those which speak directly of him, and of nothing
else but those Circumstances, by which he should be known: Of this sort was
that Prediction of Jacob, that he should come before the final Subversion of
the Jewish State: The Scepter shall not depart from Judah till Shiloh come; And
that of Daniel's 70 weeks, which punctually sixeth the time of his
Manifestation and Sufferings from the Persian King's decree for the rebuilding
the Walls of Jerasalem. But besides such Prophecies as these, there is a great
abundance of another sort, such namely, as are mixed with some things, which
the Prophets spoke of themselves, or others, of which kind that seems to be one
instance, which St. Peter with good success alleged to the Jews, Acts 2.25.
David speaks concerning him, the Lord is on my right hand, that I should not
be moved; therefore did my heart rejoice, and my tongue was glad; moreover also
my flesh shall rest in hope, because thou will not leave my Soul in hell,
neither will thou suffer thine holy one to see corruption. Now the former
Expressions, and indeed the rest of the Psalm might well be applied to David
himself, but the latter were too magnificent to be true of him in any good
sense; and therefore St. Peter argued from hence in this manner, Men and
Brethren, let me freely speak unto you of the Patriach David, that he is both
dead and buried, and his Sepulcher is with us unto this day; therefore being a
Prophet, and knowing that God had sworn with an Oath unto him, that of the
Fruit of his Loins according to the Flesh he would raise up Christ to sit upon
his Throne: He seeing this before spoke of the Resurrection of Christ, that his
Soul was not left in Hell, neither did his Flesh see Corruption. Now it is no
disparagement to these Prophecies, that some passages they are joined with,
were meant of other Persons, as well as of Christ, since it seems to me an
Argument of the care of Divine Providence to fill the Holy Books with
Predictions concerning Christ, that are not only diverse Prophecies, which
speak entirely of him, and of him only, but upon all fit occasions the spirit
of Prophecy broke out into those things which concerned him, and though other
matters were begun with, yet if there was any congruity in the subject, it
perpetually diverted into this. Hereunto we may add those passages, which in
their first meaning signified some things past or present, and yet were
designed to presignifie Christ too, such as these, Out of Egypt have I called
my Son, and a Bone of him shall not be broken, the former being first meant of
the Children of Israel, the latter of the Paschal Lamb, both afterward
fulfilled in Christ again, the true Son of God, the true Paschal Lamb. Nay, the
Omission of Melchisedeck's Descent, Birth, and Death, did at length appear to
hint this signification, that Christ, whose Type he was, had neither beginning
of days, nor end of life: So truly is the Old Testament the word of Prophecy,
that the very Omission of this thing was Prophetical. To conclude this point,
the most Illustrious Persons of the Old Testament, as Moses and Aaron, and
Joshua and David, and Solomon were designed by Divine Providence to represent
beforehand by lively resemblances, what the Messiah should be, and what he
should do afterward, and the most memorable passages of the History of the
Israelites, together with the presence of God in the Tabernacle, and in the
Temple, and the whole frame of the Levititical Service were clear and natural
Types of the Messiah, and of a more perfect state of things under him,
foretelling in Things, as other Prophecies did in Words. The sum of all is
this, That there is a vast plenty of Predictions in the Old Testament
concerning Christ, and if we will take the pains to examine the Truth of these
general heads by more particular Enquiries, we shall find that the Affairs of
the Jewish Nation, and the writing of the Holy Books were so overruled by the
Divine Spirit, that when we come to look into them, we cannot lightly turn our
selves any way, but we shall be encountered with some or other prophetic
passages concerning Christ. All which was designed of God for the confirmation
of our Faith, that when he should come, in whom not only the plainest and most
unquestionable Prophecies, but all other Types, and the more obscure
prefigurations of the Messiah would be fulfilled, we might without the least
doubt believe, and follow him.

2. This word of Prophecy is said to be a light shining in a dark place, the
reason of which Expression is plain enough, if we consider, that the Prophecies
were nothing so easy to be understood by themselves, as they were afterward
made by the Events which they foretold, and therefore till the Events made all
plain, the World was very much in the dark about the meaning of them, as to
most particulars; but yet some of them were so express and full, that they had
raised an Expectation, not only in the Jews, but amongst the Gentiles also, of
that extraordinary Person, whom God would send into the World for their relief.
And therefore they might very well be compared to a light shining in a dark
place: For such a Light, though it does not make a particular discovery of
those things, that lie round about it, is yet apt to draw the Eyes of all
toward it, that are within distance; and the Predictions concerning Christ
were so remarkable, that they awakened the Gentiles themselves to take notice
of them, and were therefore a light shining in a dark place to Jews and
Gentiles, not indeed, clearly revealing the Truth to them at present, but
preparing them to receive it, when it should be clearly revealed in the
accomplishment of all that had been foretold.

And whereas this light was said to shine till the day dawned, and the daystar
arose in their hearts: The plain meaning seems to be that from the beginning of
the World, to the appearance of Christ; the Prophecies concerning him, grew
still more express clear and particular, as the time drew on, that they were to
be accomplished. The whole word of Prophecy was a light shining in a dark
place; but the latter Prophecies, such as in Isaiah, Daniel, and Malachi were
like the dawning of the day, before the Sun of Righteousness himself appeared.
By such degrees did God prepare mankind for the belief of the Gospel, every Age
contributing something beforehand, to undermine the Prejudices of the Natural
Man against it. That God should send his Son into the World to be a Sacrifice
for Sin, was a Mystery so far above the reach of worldly Wisdom, and natural
Reason, that considering our weakness, it would hardly have born being revealed
all at once, and therefore God chose to let mankind into the knowledge of it by
degrees, and by the growing Light of Types and Prophecies, to prepare them for
that stronger Light of the plain and clear Truth, which in due time was to be
revealed: And by this way God also provided a sure foundation for their Faith,
who should afterward believe; only we must do what St. Peter commends the
Christians of his time for doing, we must (...), we must give heed unto, and
bend our Minds to consider the word of Prophecy, and we must attend to it, as
to a light shineing in a dark place, till the day dawns, that is, we must not
content our selves to try any one single Prediction only, to compare it with
the History of Jesus, and then if that does not give full satisfaction to try
no more. But as God, by every new Prediction added more Light to the word of
Prophecy, so we should consider what Evidence is given to the Gospel by the
Prophecies of the Old Testament, taken altogether from the first to the last.
And this was the Method which our Savior took to instruct the two Disciples
going to Emmaus: They were not unacquainted with the Prophecies of the Old
Testament, and yet they were mightily staggered at the shameful Death of their
Master: We trusted, say they, that this had been he, which should have redeemed
Israel, but now they know not what to think of it. Then said Jesus unto them, O
fools and slow of heart, to believe all that the Prophets have spoken! Ought
not Christ to have suffered these things and to enter into his Glory? But what
course did he take to convince them, did he take some one notable Prediction by
itself, and lay all the stress upon that? No, but beginning at Moses, and all
the Prophets, he expounded to them in all the Scriptures, the things concerning
himself. It was this that made the day star arise in their hearts, it was this
that cleared all their doubts, and enlightened their understandings so
perfectly, that they afterward said one to another, Did not our hearts burn
within us, while he talked with us by the way, and while he opened to us the
Scriptures, Luke 24.

3. The word of Prophecy is said to be sure, that is, it is a plain Testimony of
God, to make us sure that Jesus is the Christ. For,

1. It is absurd to ascribe the Prediction of these events to any cause, less
than Divine Omniscience; or as St. Peter says, Prophecy came not by the will
of man; but holy men spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, and no
Prophecy of the Scripture is of private interpretation. (i. e.) Not, as some
would make us believe, no Prophecy of Scripture is to be meditated upon, and
read by private men; but the Prophets did not utter their Predictions by the
private Spirit, but by the Spirit of God; therefore if at vast distances of
time from the event, it was foretold in several Ages, that one in whom all the
Nations of the Earth should be Blessed, would come into the world, of such a
Nation, of such a Family, at such a Time and Place, with several public and
notorious Characters, by which he should be known, Then certainly he in whom
all these Predictions have been fulfilled, is by the Testimony of God's
Omniscience declared to be that great Prophet, who was to come into the World.
Or, shall we say, that these things were the effects of Policy, or Combination,
or Chance? Could the most politic Statesmen foresee the rise of Empires not
yet begun? how much less could they fix their periods, as the Prophets did in
their Predictions concerning Christ and his Kingdom? And can we think that they
could at the distance of many Ages with their utmost skill foresee so many
particular events, as were foretold by the Prophets, and accomplished in Christ
Jesus? Or shall we say, that there was a confederacy between Moses and Jesus,
between the Prophets and Jesus, so many hundreds of years after they were dead,
and before he was born? Or, are these Predictions and their events to be
imputed to Chance? It is possible, indeed, that some one thing may be foretold,
and happen accordingly; but that so vast a number of particulars should be
foretold concerning one Person at all adventures, and by strange luck come to
pass afterward, is fit for them only to believe, that can believe that the
World was made by a casual hit of Atoms. To name these things, is enough to
confute them.

2. All that can be farther desired, is to be well assured, that these
Prophecies were not forged by the followers of Jesus, but that they were indeed
contained in the Ancient Writings, that had been delivered down to the Jews of
our Savior's time, by their Ancestors; and the constant testimony of the Jews
themselves, who were most bitter enemies to Jesus and to his Doctrine, were
enough to satisfy us in this point.

4ly, And Lastly, Whereas these Predictions are said to be a more sure word of
Prophecy, the meaning is this, that they are a more convincing Testimony to
Jesus, than any other taken by its self; they are indeed a more permanent
Testimony, and withal less liable to Cavil and Objection. I cannot stand to
show this by making particular comparisons, but shall only observe, That
Prophecy includes all other Testimonies, and adds strength to every one of
them: It comprehends the Miracles of Jesus and of his Apostles, his
resurrection and ascension, the descent of the Holy Ghost, and the excellency
of his Doctrine, because these were all foretold: It includes all other proofs,
as well as the thing proved; and those proofs are the more convincing, because
they also had been foretold by the Prophets.

From all this it follows, That allowing the Scripture that Tradition, which
other good Histories have, and which they have more of than any other Ancient
Writings in the world, then the Prophecies of the Old Testament, and the
accomplishment of them in the New, do prove the Divine Authority of the
Scriptures, and this without the help of the Churches Authority; and well is it
for the Christian Religion, that the Scriptures may be proved without the
Authority of the Church, for otherwise Christianity must never look an Infidel
in the face, since the Church has no Authority at all, till we are assured of
the truth of the Scriptures themselves. And I will make bold to add, That when
all those objections against the Authority of the Old Testament, from the time
wherein it was put into this form of Books, from the light oversights of
Transcribers, from various readings, and all the cavils upon any part of it,
are put together, the word of Prophecy which runs through it all, will bear all
this reckoning, and still remain an invincible argument, that the first Authors
were inspired; that the Prophecy came not in Old time by the will of man, but
that holy men of God spoke, as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.

Well therefore might St. Peter commend the Jewish Converts for taking heed to
the Word of Prophecy, since this was the way to come to a well-grounded Faith
indeed, and to grow every day to greater assurance and stedfastness therein;
and for the same reason, let us, I beseech you, be exhorted to like diligence
in conversing with the Holy Scriptures, that our minds may be more enlightened
with the knowledge of Divine truth, and that every doubt, if any there be, that
shakes our Faith, may be removed.

And this Exhortation is so needful, that I shall show, that there is no good
reason in their objection against it, who have taken a great deal of pains to
exclude all but the Clergy, and those that have special license from reading
the Scriptures; the sum of what they say is this, That the promiscuous Liberty
of reading the Scriptures leads the People into pride and self-conceit, makes
them insolent and ungovernable, and ready to throw off all Respect to their
lawful Guides. That almost all Heresies have proceeded from Misinterpretation
of Scripture; and that there are so many obscure and difficult places in the
Old and New Testament, that to translate the Bible into Vulgar Tongues, and to
encourage the People to read it, is to betray them into the danger of infinite
errors, which they are likely enough to fall into, by mistaking the sense of
the holy Text, which therefore is to be kept out of the hands of the Laity, as
we would keep Children from meddling with edged Tools, and lay Swords out of
madmen's way.

Now if this charge be true, the Bible is a very dangerous Book; if it be not
true, there is some other reason doubtless, why they that pretend this, have no
kindness for the Bible. I shall omit several advantages that may be taken
against this flourish, because I think it may be shown very briefly, that it
pretends things that do by no means hang well together; that it takes things
for granted that are not true; and that it concludes as strongly against the
Scriptures being read by the Clergy, as by the Laity.

It pretends some things that do not hang well together. On the one side they
tell us that the liberty of reading the Bible is apt to make the People throw
off all dependence upon the Priest, as to instruction: on the other side, that
there are obscure and difficult passages in it, by mistaking the true sense of
which they will be led into Heresy, and consequently into the way of
Damnation. Now indeed the Scriptures say this of themselves, that there are
diverse things hard to be understood in them, which ignorant and unstable men
have wrested to their own destruction. But if this be true, the best way to
keep the People in modest dependence upon the instruction of their Spiritual
Guides, is to lay the Bible before them, and not to keep it from them; since
there cannot be a more convincing Argument of the necessity of attending to
their Pastors in order to farther Instruction, than the several difficulties
that occur in the Scriptures, and the warnings that the Scriptures themselves
have given of the danger that unlearned and unstable men are in, of wresting
them to their own destruction. If it be said, that experience shows the
contrary; and that neither this nor any other argument can make People modest,
if they are geneally permitted to have the Scriptures; I add,

2. That this arguing takes things for granted, which are not true in point of
fact; all the Faithful anciently had the Scriptures, but we find little
complaint by the Bishops and Clergy then of the Wantonness and Insolence of the
People; so little in comparison of the frequent and earnest exhortations, that
all would diligently Read the Scriptures, that it may be said to be none at
all. Christian People that had been trained up in the first Rudiments of the
Faith were not only allowed then, but required to Read the Bible; and yet they
modestly attended upon their Spiritual Guides, for farther Instruction out of
the Bible. And therefore if some men in later Ages have grossly Misinterpreted
the Scriptures, and would not be set right by those, that had more skill to
Interpret them; this does not prove, that the reading of the Scriptures makes
the People ungovernable, for then it must always have been so, which is
notoriously false. And whereas it is said, that almost all Heresies have come
of Mis-interpreting Scripture, this does not prove that Christian People must
not read the Scriptures, for it cannot be denied, that those Heresies which
have given any considerable disturbance to the Church of God, were begun, not
by Laics or illiterate Persons; but by such men as the objectors do allow to
have a right of reading and studying the Scriptures, (i. e.) by Bishops or
Priests. Wherefore.

In the last place, The Arguing of these men against the common use of the
Bible, concludes against the Priest, as strongly as against the People. For if
to prevent Heresy, the Scriptures are to be kept from Lay men, who may bring
Heresy into the Church by Misinterpreting the Scriptures, then for the same
reason men in Orders should not be suffered to read them, since they have
actually been the founders of Heresy; Nay, the reason is something stronger,
since the wresting of the Holy Text by men of Office or Learning, will be of
greater Authority and do more mischief, than the mistakes of private and
unlearned Persons. But if the danger of perverting difficult places, be a good
reason to deprive men of all use of the Bible; this reason has a particular
force upon some men, that they should never look upon a Bible more. For the
best way to Judge how the Scriptures are likely to be used by any sort of men,
is to consider how they have constantly used them heretofore; and let any
indifferent man judge of them by these following instances; Because God said,
Let us make man after our own Image, therefore it is lawful to fall down before
an Image of Wood, or Stone. Because Christ said to Peter; Feed my sheep,
Therefore his pretended Successors have power to depose Heretical Princes.
Because Peter said to Christ, Lord here are two Swords, therefore they have a
Temporal, as well as a Spiritual jurisdiction. Because Jacob in Blessing
Ephraim and Manasses; prayed that his Name might be Named on them, Therefore it
is lawful to pray to Saints. Because it is said, the Disciples met together to
break Bread, therefore the Laity may be deprived of the Cup. Because St. Paul
says of him that prays in a Tongue not understood by others, Thou verily
give thanks well, but the other is not edified; therefore it is in it self
good to appoint public Prayers in a Language unknown to the People; that is,
Because he that understands what himself says, does well for himself because he
understands, therefore he does well for others that understand not a word, and
are therefore not edified. Because the Apostle says, we must Glorify God with
one mouth; therefore in all public Offices of Liturgy, there is to be but one,
and that the Latin Tongue in all places of Christendom. Because that many
Languages at Babel caused confusion, therefore for God to be served in the many
Vulgar Tongues of Christian Nations, would breed Schisms in the Church. Because
the Beast that touched the Mountain was to die; and because Christ said, Give
not that which is Holy to Dogs; therefore ordinary People are not to have the
Bible. These expositions are not invented, but there are good Authorities for
them, and for a great many more of the like sort.

I know not what can farther be objected but this, That if Priests and Learned
men have been so foully mistaken in the Interpretation of Scripture, how much
more are the Unlearned in danger of falling into mistakes, which though perhaps
will never come to be Heresies in the Church, may yet prove damnable to
themselves, as St. Peter plainly says?

To which I answer, That St. Peter's Unlearned Men were such as had not yet
attained to the knowledge of the necessary Doctrine of Faith and good Life, as
appears by his calling them unstable, not yet fixed in a persuasion of the plain
truths, and great ends of the Gospel; and such as those, whether they were men
of good parts or not, were likely enough to Interpret the hard places of St.
Paul's Epistles to a sense conttary to the plain and open truths of the Gospel.
But if a man be instructed in the necessary and plain Doctrine of Christianity,
and moreover furnished with Modesty and a sincere Love of the Truth, and
willingness to learn, qualities that ought to be common to all, he shall be as
far from wresting the difficult Scriptures to his own destruction, as one that
has vastly greater abilities. Nay, I will add one thing, which if it be true,
there is no force at all in the objection, and that is this, That the service
of a Cause, and espousing the Interest of a by-Party, does more fatally lead to
Misinterpretation of the Scripture, than bare weakness of understanding; and
there is this plain reason for it, because Modesty and Love of the truth will
secure a man of no great abilities, from rash concluding upon the difficult
Places of Scripture; but Partiality, and the service of a by cause, shall
engage a man of parts and learning, to trouble the clearest, and to pervert the
plainest Texts, as the forementioned instances evidently show. So that either
the danger of Misinterpreting Scripture is no sufficient reason to prohibit the
Laity from reading it; or else it were better that no Order of Men were trusted
with it at all; and if that be true, I think it will follow, that it had better
never have been written at all, which no man will say, whatever he thinks.

But to speak to the thing; the Scriptures were written for an universal good,
and in order thereunto, for common use: Here are all Divine truths, and reasons
of Christian Faith and Practice, that are necessary to be known of every man,
plainly expressed for the use of the meanest Capacities. Here are also
difficulties and mysteries of several sizes, fit to employ the Industry of the
Learned according to the several degrees of their abilities, and to exercise
the Modesty, the Humility, and the Reverence of all. But still we confess, that
they may be perverted and abused; and if this be a sufficient reason to
Interdict the general use of them, then farewell at once to all the Comforts of
this Life, and to all the means of grace in order to a better, with every one
of which men in their folly and wickedness may and very often have hurt
themselves and others. St. Peter was aware of this, that some men wrested those
hard things in St. Paul's Epistles, and in other Scriptures, to their own
destruction; but did he therefore dissuade the Faithful from reading them? No,
but in the very same Epistle, he commends them all for taking heed to the words
of Prophecy of the Old Testament, in which there were some things as hard, to
be sure, as any are in St. Paul's Writings: and I hope, St. Peter was as Wise a
Man in this point, as any that have come after him.

And now, I beseech you, let us not say, That we are believers already, and
therefore we need not trouble our selves with constant reading of the Bible.
Were not they so to whom St. Peter wrote? Nay the Apostles were then alive to
instruct them by Word, as well as by Writing, and moreover daily Miracles were
wrought for confirmation of the Faith, yet they did well in taking diligent
heed to the Scriptures; And shall not we do so too, who can find Apostles and
Miracles no where but there? We believe already, but have we all of us that
steadfast Faith, which the Gospel requires, which is not grounded merely upon
education, and the custom of our Country, but upon the Demonstration of the
Spirit and of Power? Have we that Faith, which will bear examination, and
encounter opposition? If we have, a very little exhortation will serve the
turn, to make us persevere in reading God's Book, whereby we shall be yet more
strongly built up in our most Holy Faith. But if not, our want of Faith will
not be admitted at the last day, for an excuse of the badness of our Lives,
when we had the Scriptures laid before us, the Holy Scriptures, I say, which if
they had been diligently and honestly read by us, would have furnished us with
such an immovable ground of our Christian belief, as would have supported us
in the Day of Temptation. Nay, if our Faith was grown never so strong; yet the
Reading of the Scriptures would be necessary for us, to make the precepts and
rules of the Christian Life, and the Motives and Reasons of practicing them,
daily present in our minds. For the Temptations to sin are always present; the
snares of Hell are still round about us; we are ever in some danger, and
therefore we ought always to be strong in the Lord; by having a constant sense
of those Divine Truths upon our minds, which are our great defense and
security. And I see not how this can be, if we neglect to have recourse unto
that ever necessary Treasure of Divine truth, the Holy Word of God. St.
Chrysostom therefore doubted not to say, and I wish we may all well consider,
that earnest saying of so Wise and Holy a Man as he was; It cannot be, says he,
It cannot possibly be, that a man should attain Salvation, unless he be
diligently conversant in Spiritual Reading. Himself was so excellent and
constant a Preacher, that if any one man, not extraordinarily inspired, could
have made it needless for his hearers to Read the Scriptures at home; he, I
should reckon, was the man; and yet I observe, he often complains to them, that
the reason why most of them gained little profit by what he said, either as to
improvement of knowledge, or good practice, was because they did not read the
Scriptures he explained to them, either before or after his Sermons: and says
he, it is the neglect of this reading, that causes all Heresy, and Corrupt
Life.

Now I beseech you, how much time do we spend in other things of little concern
to us, either as to our Health, or Wealth, or our Worldly Callings? And what a
shame, and a sin is it for us to find so little time as generally we do, to
furnish our selves with the knowledge of God's Truth, and with pious affections
toward the doing of his will, out of God's Holy Book? What a great matter were
it, if we borrowed some time for this purpose from our Recreations, or even
from our ordinary business? For what is this Life to Life Everlasting? What is
the Wealth and Pleasure of this World, to our Salvation in the World to come?
And therefore the forementioned excellent Person argued with his hearers in
this manner: Perhaps some may say, That they are otherwise employed in their
worldly callings; and others, that they have not money to spare to buy the
Scriptures; but, says he, what a ridiculous thing would it be for a man of a
Secular employment, to neglect it upon pretense, that he has not time for it,
or that he has not wherewhithal to purchase the necessary Tools of his Calling?
These things are seldom or never pleaded, but by Idle Persons: And do you not
all know, that you are professed Christians, and called to the hope of Eternal
Life, and that diligent reading and hearing the Holy Scriptures is as necessary
to your Christian Calling, as any thing can be, to the successful management of
your Secular professions?

I shall add this one thing, That besides that improvement in knowledge and
virtue, which is naturally consequent upon much conversing with God's Book,
they that do so, have a peculiar title to God's supernatural Blessing; who is
wont to reward a pious and reverent use of Holy things with greater measures of
his grace. In one word, by other studies we may grow wise for this world, but
if we add this to the rest, we shall yet grow wiser for this world, by taking
heed to those incomparable instructions, that the Holy Bible abounds with; and
which is something more, we shall grow wise unto Salvation.

The Tenth Sermon.
1 Cor. XII. 13. For by one spirit are we all baptized into one body, whether
we be Jews or Gentiles; whether we be bond or free; and have been all made to
drink into one spirit.


AFTER the descent of the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles, there was a continual
Communication of Supernatural and Extraordinary Gifts to other believers for a
long time. To one was given by the Spirit the Word of Wisdom; To another the
Word of Knowledge by the same Spirit; To another Faith by the same Spirit; To
another the gifts of Healing by the same Spirie; To another working of
Miracles, To another Discerning of Spirits; To another Diverse kinds of Tongues;
To another the Interpretation of Tongues; But all these works that one and
the self-same Spirit, dividing to every man severally as he will. And this
manisestation of the Spirit was given to every man to profit withal; (i. e.) to
profit the whole Body, whereof himself was a Member. For though that one
Spirit, which distributed his wonderful gifts amongst the Faithful, could have
given them all to the same man, so as that one and the same Person should have
had the Word of Wisdom, and the Gifts of Healing, and the Working of Miracles,
and a Prophetic Power, and Discerning of Spirits, and Diverse kinds of Tongues;
yet to maintain a mutual dependence and a Charitable serviceableness of the
Members, one amongst another, he gave to one one gift; to another, another;
dividing severally to every man; for by this means one would stand in need of
another, and each Member would be obliged to take care of the rest, knowing
that he also wanted the supply of that assistance, which the rest were able to
give him; whereas if one man had all gifts, he would not be under so sensible
an obligation of consulting for the common good, wanting no assistance from any
others. But God ordered the state of the Church, like that of the Natural Body;
to which the Apostle elegantly compares the Body of Christ: The eye cannot say
unto the hand, I have no need of thee; nor again the head to the feet, I have
no need of you, v. 21.

Now it being the Apostle's design in this Chapter to press the Christians to
Charity and Unity, and mutual serviceableness one to another as Members of the
same Body, he assures them in the Words of the Text, which I have chosen, That
they were indeed Members of one Body, and he tells them what it was that made
them so. For by one spirit, says he, we are all baptized into one body; whether
we be Jews or Gentiles; and have been made to drink into one spirit; That is,
by being Baptized, they were made Members of the Body of Christ, and united one
to another under him the Head; and this, whether they were Jews or Gentiles;
bond or free (i. e.) whatever worldly circumstances made any distinction
between them, yet all they were one in Christ, who professed his Faith, and
were by Baptism admitted into his Church. And this Union of one to another
under Christ, was testified and declared by their Communion in the Table of the
Lord.

And whereas he says, that by one Spirit they were baptized into this one Body,
and were all made to drink into one Spirit; the meaning is, that the Grace of
the Holy Spirit was given in Baptism, and in the Lords Supper, to all the
Faithful: who do not receive unprofitable signs, but one as well as another
receives the quickening Grace of God, to make them living Members of that one
Body.

So that although there was a diversity and an equality in the Spiritual Gifts
that were distributed among the Faithful in those days, yet they were all
equally Members of the same Body of Christ, in as much as they were all
Baptized into his Body; and were all equally Partakers of his Table.

And thus I have explained the meaning of the Text with the relation it has to
the design of the Apostle in this Chapter. That which remains, is to speak to
the particular design of the Text, which is to show that Christians are one
Body or Society of Men, and wherein the Unity of the Church consists, and what
our part is to maintain it: and how we may in this divided state of
Christianity be satisfied, that we are within that Unity. Before I enter upon
which, I may well make two observations upon the Text in behalf of the Doctrine
and Practice of this our Church of England.

1. That St. Paul thought the observation of the two institutions of our
Savior, viz. Baptism, and the Communion of the Holy Table, was a sufficient
proof, that believers were one Body: And we have reason to believe, that if he
had known there were other Sacraments, or outward badges of Christian
profession instituted by Christ for the Church, which is his Body; he would not
have omitted the mention of them here, where he proves the Unity of the Church
by Baptism, and Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ. We know that the
Evangelists mention no other outward signs, and visible tokens of our
profession, and God's Grace, but Baptism, and the Lord's Supper: And it is
something to our purpose, that St. Paul owns no more than these; where he
industriously proves, that Christians are one Body by these.

2. I observe, that the Communion of the Lords Table is described by drinking
into one Spirit (i. e.) by one part of the Sacrament, as sometimes it is by the
other of breaking of bread. But then nothing can be more plain from such
expressions, than that one part or kind is as necessary as the other; because
sometimes one, sometims the other is put for both; which had been against all
rules of speaking, if it had been allowable to separate the one from the other.
But as to that of Drinking the Cup, it is most evident that it belonged to all;
for says St. Paul, We have all been made to drink into one Spirit. All who? All
the Priests of the Christian Church only? No: all that belong to the Body of
Christ, whether Jews or Gentiles, bond or free. But now if St Paul had known,
that it was not necessary for the Christian People to drink of the Cup in the
Communion, but that it was sufficient for them to have received the Bread only;
Can we think, that he would have described their receiving the Sacrament, by
receiving a part of it, which did not necessarily belong to them, and not
rather by that which did? I do not make this observation to prove only, that
the People did at first universally receive the Cup; for that is not denied by
any, but by those who have disputed themselves out of all Modesty, and even
these may be convinced beyond all doubt by this very place, that all the
Faithful in St. Paul's days received the Cup; for otherwise how could he with
truth have said, that they had been all made to drink into one Spirit. But that
which I chiefly observe is this, That though the Faithful did in those days
drink as well as eat at the Lord's Table, yet if the Apostle had known, and
surely he knew it, if it was true, that however it was the practice then, yet
it might without injury be altered in after times, he would not have used an
argument to satisfy the Faithful of his time, that they all belonged to the
Body of Christ, which might afterward be quite out of doors, viz. when the
Church should please to alter the Institution of our Savior in this matter;
but he would rather have insisted upon receiving in that kind, which could not
be justly taken away from them, and have said that all had been Baptized into
the Body of Christ, or made Members of his Church by Baptism; and all that are
of his Body may claim to eat of that one Bread. This by the bye.

I now address my self to the main business I propounded, which is to state the
notion of the Unity of the Church, to show what is meant by it, and to make
some Inferences from it for our farther instruction.

And in the first place, it is evident, that St. Paul here speaks not of any
one particular Church, but of the Society of all Christians whatsoever, that
are Baptized, and have a right to the Holy Communion, whether they be Jews or
Gentiles: And it is concerning the Unity of this Church that we are to enquire,
or what that is which makes it one Body, as the Apostle here calls it.

To which purpose we are to consider distinctly, what are the several grounds
or notions of Unity, which are laid down in the New Testament, or what those
things are that belong in common to all Christians, as their Duty or their
Privilege, and in respect of their joint performance of the former of which,
and their enjoyment of the latter, they may be said to be One.

1. Therefore all Christians do unite in their profession to submit to one
Head, who is our Lord Jesus Christ, which is so necessary a duty incumbent on
all, that he who makes not this profession, is in no respect within the Unity
of the Church; this being the ground of all other reasons of Unity whatsoever;
and therefore the Apostle makes this to be one principal foundation of the
Unity of the Church, that it professes subjection to one Lord; Ephesians. 4.5. And
in the third verse of this Chapter he lays down this mark of distinction
between the impulse of the Spirit of God, and the impulse of an evil Spirit;
That whosoever is led by the former, does say that Jesus is the Lord.

They are also One in professing the Common Faith, that was at first delivered
to the Saints; which began to be Preached when the Holy Ghost descended upon
the Apostles, and has ever since been contained in the Holy Scriptures, and
summarily expressed in the Ancient Creeds: And therefore to one Lord, the
Apostle does in the forementioned place add one Faith: Thus we find in Romans
6.17. That one Form of Doctrine was delivered to Christians, and that they are
to stand fast in one Spirit; and with one mind, striving together for the Faith
of the Gospel, Phil. 1.27. Thus St Paul charged Timothy; That if any man taught
otherwise, and consented not to wholesome Words, the words of our Lord Jesns
Christ, and to the Doctrine which is according to Godliness, he should from
such withdraw himself, 1 Timothy 6.3. not looking upon them any longer as
Christians, or as such conversiing with them; which together with many other
like passages manifestly shows, that he who in any point departed from the
common faith of Christians, that was received from the Apostles, was broken off
from the Unity of the Church, which is One by a Common profession of certain
points of Grand importance taught at first by the Holy Spirit. For which reason
St. Cyprian doubted not to say, He cannot seem a Christian, who does not
persist in the Unity of Christ's Gospel and Faith.

3. There is an Unity of Sacraments in the Christian Church; One Baptism, by
which we are all admitted into the same state of Duties and Privileges
undertaking the conditions of the New Covenant, and gaining a right to the
promises thereof; and therefore the Apostle adds also One Baptism. And here in
the Text he expressly affirms, that by one Spirit we are Baptized into one Body;
into one Body of People, professing one Common Faith, and claiming the
Privileges belonging to such a profession. The like Unity is inferred from the
other Sacrament, since we are all made to drink into one Spirit. And in the
10th Chapter of this Epistle, v. 16, 17. he says: The Cup of blessing, which
we bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ? The bread which we
break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ: For we being many are one
Bread, and one Body; for we are all partakers of that one Bread.

4. There is also an Unity of Obedience to the same Laws and Institutions: For
to all Christians it equally belongs to govern themselves effectually by the
will of their Lord Jesus Christ, to observe his Ordinances and Commands; by the
doing of which they declare themselves to be of his Flock, in that they hear
his voice; and of his Kingdom, in that they live by his Laws; and that as there
is one and the same obligation, so there is one and the same correspondent
practice, one and the same Spirit of Obedience that runs through all.

5. There is also an Unity of Affection, or mutual Charity prescribed to the
Church. Thus says our Savior: By this shall all men know that ye are my
disciples, if ye love one another. Thus says the Apostle in this Chapter; The
Members should have the same care one for another; and whether one member
suffer, all the members suffer with it; or one member be honored, all the
members rejoice with it: which kind of Unity appeared most visibly after the
Church was begun, on the day of Pentecost; for it is observed presently, that
the multitude of them that believed, were of one heart, and of one Soul. Acts
4.32.

6. There is also an Unity of Communion in the Service and Worship of God, in
joining together in the same Acts of Piety and Devotion, according to the Rules
of the Gospel, in Prayers and in Sacraments; and in glorifying God with one
mouth; moreover in the common defense of the same Truth; and in the joint
opposition of every dangerous error, in propagating and promoting the same
Faith of the Gospel, and striving together for the interest of it.

7. There is also an Unity of Discipline or Government, which is to be
maintained by every Member's keeping in his Place and Order in the Church; the
People of Christ receiving the Mysteries of Christianity from their Pastors;
and these confederating one with another for the maintenance of common
Christianity, without invading each others Liberty and Jurisdiction, and
accommodating as near as may be, all Rites of Discipline and Worship to one
another, and assisting each other by Advice and Correspondence, and giving no
occasion to breach of Charity and Christian Communion, by abusing a lawful, or
by claiming an undue Authority.

Other more particular Instances might be mentioned, but I shall content my
self with these, believing that upon these Grounds of Unity, which I have
noted, it will not be difficult to satisfy those scruples which have been
thrown into some men's minds concerning the necessity of being of that one
Church, which is the Body of Christ, and they are chiefly two.

1. That there must be one Church; which is the only Church of Christ,
exclusively to all the rest, that are not in Communion with her.

2. That where there is most Unity, there of necessity must be the true Church.

1. That there is but one Society or Communion, which is the Body of Christ,
exclusively to all other Communions whatsoever. For thus they argue; The
Apostle here, and the New Testament elsewhere affirms, That the disciples of
Christ are one Body. If therefore there be, as there are several Bodies of
Christians in this divided state of Christendom, that are not United in
Communion, in Worship, in Government, no nor in Doctrine neither; these cannot
all be the Body of Christ, which is but one, and therefore there must be but
one of them which is that Body of Christ, or the true Church: And from hence
they proceed farther; since we grant that they are a Church, we do in effect
grant that we are not so much as a part of the true Church our selves, because
we are not in Communion with them, and we and they are not Members of one
another, as all the Members of the Church are.

Which kind of reasoning, how likely soever it may be to confound and amuse a
Man, is by no means fit to unsettle a prudent, nor so much as an honest Person,
if he will give himself leave to consider.

The plain Answer to these harangues is this, That Christians are not United
into one Body or Church in all respects, but in some they are. There is the
Unity of one Lord, and one Faith, and one Baptism, which makes them one Body:
But then alas, they are not always one Body in respect of Unity and Affection,
and good will toward one another, nor in respect of Unity of Communion in the
Service of God, or of Discipline and Government as they ought to be. But now
the profession of the same Faith which was once delivered to the Saints; and
Admission into the state of Christian Duties and Privileges by Baptism, is
that which makes a Christian, and which Unites all Christian Societies into one
Body. They indeed who are defective in this, are no Christians; and they who
come thus far, are so; because we are all Baptized into one Body. But then we
grant, there ought to be a farther Unity, and in particular an Unity of
Communion; for the uniting of the Members of this Body more strictly to one
another: But though there be not Unity of Communion, they do not therefore
cease to be Members of one Body; but all that can be truly said is, that some
of the Members are contentious, and either give just cause of offense, or take
offense when none is given; which is indeed contrary to the duty of the Members
of the Church, but not utterly inconsistent with their being Members of it: And
for this, we have the Authority of St. Paul in the two verses, next but one to
the Text. If the foot shall say, Because I am not the hand, I am not of the
Body, is it therefore not of the Body? That is, if the Members of the Body of
Christ do contrary to their duty in some respect, it does not follow presently
that they are no longer parts of the Church; and if one Church will have no
Communion with another, but upon most unjust and unreasonable Terms, it is very
certain that Unity of Communion is not likely to last between them. But so long
as there is an Unity of Faith (i. e.) a consent in professing the necessary
Articles of Chistianity, they are yet one Body, though one part of it does not
perform the duty incumbent on it, as it is a part of the Church, but will
perhaps be the whole or nothing; and is not content to profess the first Faith,
but moreover adds new Doctrines thereto, contrary to the Scriptures, and would
impose them upon the rest of the Christian World. We may therefore in respect
of Faith and Baptism grant, That Church which would be all in all, to be within
the Unity of the Catholic Church, though we are not in Communion with it; but
then in respect of Unity of Affection and Charity, and Unity of Communion in
the Service of God, and in opposing all dangerous errors; and Unity of
Government in these respects, I say, she is not within the Unity of the Body,
in as much as she does contrary to her Duty in all these respects. So that
though the Church be one in respect of Baptism, and the principal Articles of
Christianity, yet because it is not one in other respects, I am by no means
startled at that charge, You and we are two Churches, because we are of
opposite Communions, and therefore if you grant us to be a True Church, you
must conclude your self not to be so. For I have this to answer, That Faith
which you profess with us, That Baptism which you administer, and receive with
us, is that which makes you to be of the Church, and thus far you are one with
us; It Is true indeed there ought to be Unity in maintaining Communion in all
Christian Offices, and to that end no false Doctrines are to be added to the
profession of the Faith, nor any unlawful practices to be brought into Gods
worship; but this is that which we cannot help, though you can; and by such
things as these, you have departed from the Unity that ought to be in the
Church, but we have not. To make which answer more plain, let it be remembered,
That one instance of that Unity, which ought to be in the Church, is keeping
all the Commandments of God. Now all unholy Persons professing Christianity, do
depart from this Unity; yet inasmuch as they are Baptized, and profess the
Creed, we own that they are visible parts of the Church: But now because they
are so, if they should charge all those that take not the same liberties they
do, with being out of the Church, because the Church is one Body, and they are
granted to be of it; I think nothing could be more ridiculous; and it is little
better that they say, who under the Protection of this Principle, That the
Church is but One, would exclude all from being Parts of the Church who do not
run into the same enormities about Doctrine, Worship, and Government with
themselves. In a Word; the Church is one in respect of the Common Faith, which
is professed every where amongst Christians, and it ought to be one; but is not
in respect of Purity of Profession, and of Worship and Government: But it does
not from hence follow, that they, who are in the right, must go over to those
that are in the wrong, in order to being a part of the Church, for that they
are already; but they that are in the wrong should learn to do their duty
better, that they may become a purer part of the Church, which yet they are not.

2. We are born in hand also, That where there is most Unity, there must of
necessity be the True Church; and this, because there is but One Body:
Concerning which I say, That if by Unity be meant Agreement in all points of
any great consequence, they that advance this Principle, have advanced it
against themselves; for it must be a very uncomfortable one to those, that in
many matters differ notoriously amongst themselves. But,

1. The Principle it self is false; for there may be Unity in Error, as well as
in Truth, and there has been so. The False Prophets in Elias his Time were at
Unity, so were the Scribes and Pharisees, that consented to our Savior's
Death; no, nor is Satan divided against himself: It is not merely Unity, that
is a mark of a True Church, unless it be Unity in the True Faith; nor is Unity
the mark of a Pure Church, unless it be upon Terms of Obedience to God, of
Charity to one another, of keeping the Faith unmixed with Errors and
Innovations, and the Worship of God free from material defects and forbidden
Practices. Unity in Error and Sin is to be broken; Unity only in Faith and
Goodness is to be preserved.

2. It is possible that where there are discords, there may be yet more truth
professed, than where there are none; and that for the former reason, Because
there may be Unity in the worst Errors. Besides the Common Faith that is
professed by all Christians, one part of the Church may maintain the Purity of
that Profession against another that has superadded New and False Doctrines to
it, and yet the Reformed part may labor under discords, that affect their very
Communion, while the other does not. There may be on the one side disobedience
to Authority, overvaluing of questions of no great moment, a greater stress
laid upon Opinions or Practices, than the Cause will bear, and this shall be
sufficient to break Christian Communion; and at the same time, whilst gross
Errors are maintained on the other side with one consent, the differences that
happen by the bye may be so overruled by Authority, by Force and Power, and by
the sensible Interests of this World, that how wide so ever they are, they
shall not yet rend Communion. But in such a case, it were the fondest thing in
the World to choose a Doctrine by the mark of Unity among those that profess it.
Therefore in this divided State of Christendom, it is easy to see, what
Christians are to do, to preserve the Unity of the Body of Christ, as much as
in them lies, and to be sure that they are within the Unity of the Church in
all respects.

1. I need not say, that they are to stand fast in the Faith which was first
delivered to the Saints, in the Common Faith of Christians; for without this,
they could not so much as continue in that Body, into which they were Baptized;
only I may add, That they are to lay it up in their hearts, and to value it as
the greatest Treasure, and to proclaim their esteem of it, and to acknowledge
all that profess it, to be of the same Body with them. This being that Faith
which Christ came down from Heaven to establish in the World, and which he sent
the Holy Ghost to inspire his Apostles withal, to reveal it to us, and to
confirm it for us, by the Writings, and by the Miracles of inspired Persons;
It Is by this Faith and this Profession therefore, which includes Baptism, that
they are Christians, who will not allow us to be of the Church.

2. Let them keep themselves from entertaining any corrupt or false Doctrines,
not only any, that are contrary to the Scriptures, but any as necessary to
Salvation, which are not to be proved by the Scriptures; for thus they will be
sure to keep themselves from any dangerous errors, and continue not only true,
but pure believers; and they sure are not the less, but the more in the Unity
of the Church, who receive nothing as necessary to be believed in order to
Salvation, but what by the undoubted Records of our Christian Faith, appears to
have been taught by Christ and his Apostles.

3. Let every private Christian be most careful to observe the Commands of our
Lord Jesus in the Government of all his Affections, and all his Actions; for
Unity in this thing ought to be amongst all Christians, since without
obedience, no man, how qualified soever he may be in the Church upon other
accounts, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; not every one that says,
Lord, Lord; Without this, it is not the being of the one Church, it is not the
professing of the One Faith, no nor the being of a pure Profession, and a pure
Communion, that will unite us really and effectually to our Lord Jesus, the
Head of the Church; but we shall be cut off from him, as Branches that bring
forth no fruit.

4. Let him maintain an Universal Charity to all Christians, Good will to those
that are misled and seduced, in endeavoring to reduce them, as he has
opportunity, in Praying for them, readiness to be beneficial to all his
Brethren, to forgive injuries, and to overcome evil with good; compassion to
the miserable, pleasure in that which is for the particular good of any one of
his brethren, and much more in what is for the general good of all: Thus he
shall preserve himself in the other Unity, which is the Duty of the Church, the
Unity of Charity and Good will.

5. Let him live in strict Communion with the particular Church whereof he is a
Member, in subjection to the Authority of it, in observing the Rules of it, for
the guidance of Religious Assemblies, for the ordering of all things that fall
under human Authority, (i.e.) the Authority of the Lawful Guides of the Church,
in order to the Edification and well Governing of it: Thus he shall maintain an
Unity of Communion with his Brethren and his Guides; and so in effect with the
whole Christian Church, where the Parts of it do as they ought to do; and most
undoubtedly we are not to be united to any of them in things wherein they do as
they ought not.

The Sum of this Advice is easy to be understood, and to a good man as easy
to be practiced. There is no need for him to trouble his own mind with nice and
intricate Questions about Unity, because he will maintain his part, in order to
the Unity of the Church, by doing his plain Duty, by sticking to the Faith
which is professed by all Christians, the Faith into which we were Baptized; by
rejecting whatsoever is contrary to the Scriptures, and making them the Rule of
his Religious Persuasions, which all Christians ought to do; by observing the
Rules of the Gospel for the Government of his Life and Actions; in which yet
undoubtedly all Churches, and every Member of every Church ought to conspire;
though this part of Unity is hardly remembered, when men talk of the Church; by
bearing Christian Affection toward all that name the name of Christ, whereby
he performs the duty of Unity toward them, (which, whether they do or not,
they ought to perform too). Finally, By frequenting the Service of God in
Public Prayers and Exhortations, in the Administration of Sacraments,
according to the Order of the Church, whereof in particular, the Grace and
Providence of God has made him a Member, and which observes the Institutions
of our Lord Jesus in all the Public Offices of Religion: For thus he performs
his part of Unity toward the whole Church, with respect to Communion; nor is
he, nor can be to blame, if others will not be persuaded to it.

It is a fond thing to think of seeking a True Church, that is the only Church
in opposition to all others, or to be scandalized at the divided State of the
Church, which we cannot help, and under a pretense of seeking for Unity, to
mind nothing else. We are to preserve our selves in the Unity of the Church, by
professing true Doctrine, and by leading good lives; by a Charitable Spirit and
Behavior toward all Christians; by frequenting Prayers and Sacraments, and
submitting to the Authority of our Lawful Guides in all things of Indifference
and Prudence; and then we may be sure, that whatever others do, we keep the
unity of the spirit in the bond of peace: And though after all, the Church is
not that One Body which it would be, if all men did their Duty, yet that we our
selves are such Members of that One Body, as we ought to be, and as all others
ought to be likewise.

The Eleventh Sermon.
Genesis XV. 16. But in the fourth generation, they shall come hither again; for
the iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full.


ABRAHAM was now in the Land of Canaan, and this was the third time God had
appeared to him, and promised him, That his Seed should possess that Land. In
which repetition of the Promise, there is this remarkable Circumstance, That
God told him how long it would be, before they should possess it; and likewise
mentioned one reason why they should possess it no sooner: it should be Four
hundred years before his Seed should come hither, and not sooner, because the
iniquity of the Amorites was not yet full. This was the case; That the Seed of
Abraham could not possess the Land of Canaan, otherwise than by dispossessing
the Canaanites: So that the Bounty of God to the Israelites was likely to prove
a terrible Judgment upon the Canaanites: But these were not grown to that
height of Ungodliness and Vice, which God usually punishes by Destruction in
this world; but God foreseeing that in Four Hundred Years more their sins would
be ripe for vengeance, determined to reprieve them so long; and in the mean
time, to dispose of the Seed of Abraham otherwise.

That which I intend to discourse upon, is, the long sufferance of God in
bearing with Mankind, till their Wickedness grows intolerable; of which this is
a most remarkable Instance, That although he might justly have destroyed the
Amorites Four hundred Years before they were destroyed, yet he gave them so
long time, and bore with them all the while. Before I proceed to this, I shall
Premise Two Enquiries:

1. What the Iniquity of the Amorits was?

2. Whether the only Reason why God would not yet put them out of Possession,
was, That their iniquity was not yet full?

1. What was the Iniquity of the Amorites? I answer, That they were guilty of
Idolatry, of Violence, and Abominable Uncleanness; for they were for these Sins
cut off by the Children of Israel, when they were grown to that height, to
which they came in Four hundred Years time. And it is not improbable, that the
Amorites were at that time, when God appeared to Abram, the worst of all the
Canaanites, in all these respects; and therefore that God mentioned them,
rather than any of the rest, as they were afterward one of the first Nations
that were destroyed, as we read in Numb. 21. and that with this particular
Remark, That their spirits were hardened, and their heart obstinate; as you may
find, Deuteronomy. 2.30.

2. We must not say, That the only Reason why God deferred the Punishment of
the Amorites Four hundred years, was, because their iniquity was not yet full;
and that because there were other Ends of Providence to be brought about in the
time, some of which are mentioned in this place, viz. That the Seed of Abraham
might in the mean while be proved and tried by many hardships they were to
undergo, and thereby instructed in their Duty, and prepared for the Land of
Promise: For thus we find God said to Abraham, v. 13. Know of a surety, that
thy seed shall be a stranger in a land that is not theirs, and shall serve
them, and they shall afflict them four hundred years; i. e. before the Four
hundred Years are expired; and also that nation whom they shall serve, will I
judge; and afterward they shall come out with great substance: and in the
fourth generation they shall come hither again, for the iniquity of the
Amorites is not yet full. Where you see, there are more ends than one, for
which God would not put the Seed of Abraham into a present Possession of the
Promised Land; nor do it in haste neither, partly, because God would still bear
with the Canaanites; partly, because the Israelites yet to be born, were to be
instructed by the variety of Conditions through which they were to go, and be
prepared by the discipline of Divine Providence, for the obtaining of that
Promise which was made to Abraham and his Seed: And this is the admirable way
of God's Providence in governing and disposing all things, that by the same
means he brings about several ends, fitting and accommodating things to one
another in that manner, that every event seemed to be his particular and only
care, while all the rest were as particularly aimed at, and the means directed
to it as certainly as to any one of them. These things seemed needful to be
premised, for the better understanding of this place. And now I proceed to the
main points of Instruction, which are suggested in the Text, and they are these
two.

1. The Patience of God, in bearing so long as he does with the Provocations of
his Justice from wicked men. And,

2. His untaxable Justice, in bringing upon them that Punishment, at last,
which their Incurable Obstinacy deserves.

For both these Observations are clearly suggested by the Text: The seed of
Abraham should not come Four hundred Years, because the iniquity of the
Amorites was not yet full; but then they should come; the former being, as I
said, a great Demonstration,

1. Of the Patience of God; for the Amorites were already fallen into the sins
for which they were at last cut off; only they were not come to that
intolerable height of wickedness, to which they were grown in process of time;
now all the while they were Examples of God's Patience, because he might justly
have appeared against them to destroy them, even at that very time, when he
determined to give them yet Four hundred Years to repent and escape: No sooner
is Sin committed, but Punishment is presently due; and therefore it is Goodness
to forbear the inflicting of it the very next moment; but to forbear so long a
time, is properly Patience and Long-sufferance; and it is such Patience, as is
proper only to him, who is God, and not Man: For the Illustration of which, I
have two Things to commend to your Consideration, which will, I doubt not, be
useful to assist us in framing worthy and honorable Apprehensions of God, with
respect to this matter. The First is,

1. That God never wants Power and Means and Opportunities to be avenged of
wicked men.

2. That he has always the same displeasure against, and hatred of sin; for
these things put together, do clearly show, That the Patience of God is indeed
a Divine Perfection, and infinitely to be praised above all that we can imagine
of the like quality amongst men. For,

1. God never wants Power and Means to punish his Enemies; and therefore it is
in him always Goodness to reprieve; and his deferring the Punishment, is
properly the Patience, which is worthy of Praise. When men forbear revenging
the Affronts and Injuries that they have received, it is very often, because
they wait for an opportunity, which yet they want; they are forced to be
content for a while, because they have not Power to Revenge; and for the most
part they would not tarry, if they had present means to ease their minds; for
this reason, we magnify the patience of men most of all, when they forgive,
whilst it seems that it is in their power, without hurting themselves, to
punish the Person that has done them wrong; and we do in some measure commend
those that frame themselves to Patience, when they have no other help: But this
is the peculiar Character of the Patience of God, That it is as easy for him
to Punish at first, as at last; and it is never otherwise. We can never say he
forbears sudden Vengeance, because it would be dangerous, or he wants Power to
take it; and we must therefore resolve his Patience into other Causes, which
are for the Honor of his Goodness. It is happy for men in their Concerns with
one another, when they, who have most Goodness, have greatest Power; and the
great Security of Mankind is this, That he only has Almighty Power, who is
infinitely good: and this is that which Sinners should acknowledge to the Praise
of God, That there is no other Being in Heaven or Earth, that can absolutely
and irresistably overwhelm them, but he only, to whose Justice they are most
liable, and of whose Goodness alone it is, that they are not consumed: If God
with his Omnipotence were as Man, and subject to the Passions of men; or if Man
with his passions were in this respect, as God is, and could follow his anger
with effect, the race of mankind had long since been extinguished; and why it
is not so, the reason is this, Because God only has Infinite Power, he who is
Infinitely Good, and delights not in Punishment, and does not willingly
grieve and afflict the Children of men. This is the first way of apprehending
the perfect Goodness of the Divine Patience, that he does not respite and delay
the punishment of Sinners at any time for want of Power to take Vengeance of
them; for with God all things are possible; and therefore his forbearance to
Punish, is always because it is his Will to forbear.

2. God has always the same displeasure against Sin, and hates it at one time,
as much as at another; and this is also a Remarkable Illustration of his
Patience, and shows, that his Forbearance to Punish, is purely from his
Goodness. If we are grieved and offended, the sense of the Injury we have
received, is commonly very smart at first, but it lessens by degrees; and if
the wrong-doer escapes our anger, while it is hot within us, he is not in so
much danger of us afterward; we are led by passion to retaliate evil; and as
that cools, we are less forward to do it; and in such cases our forbearance is
not properly Patience, because feeling no grief our selves, we are not so
desirous, that he who once provoked us, should feel it now. But it is not so
with God; he is not disturbed with our uneven passions, he abhors sin, not as
if he was a revengeful, but because he is a most holy Being; and because he is
the same Holy God to day, that ever he was; time does not lessen his Sense, nor
abate his Hatred of the evil Actions of men: And therefore in him it is all the
Goodness of Patience to forbear the deserved inflicting of those Punishments,
which he could inflict every moment; for he bears with that baseness, which he
always hates.

Now since it is neither want of Power, nor want of Holiness, or hatred of Sin,
that withholds the Vengeance of Divine Justice from falling upon men, till
their provocations are grown insufferable; it must be the Wise Goodness of God,
that causes his Patience and Long-sufferance. And there are several good
effects to which it tends indeed; many Reasons that seem to require it.

1. If sentence were speedily executed against an evil work, and if it seldom
happened that a notorious wickedness was not forthwith made remarkable by a
following vengeance, there would be a little space left for Repentance: But God
would have all men to repent, and to come to the knowledge of the truth. And he
is long-suffering to usward, not willing that any should perish, but that all
should come to repentance. God's forbearance is necessary, that there might be
room for other proper means to bring us to amendment; he does not cut us off,
even when we provoke him daily, because he would prevent that last Sentence by
other remedies, by gentle Admonitions, and sometimes by sharp Corrections, or
by making others, that are grown incurable, the examples of his Justice, and by
variety of instructing Providence, if by any means we can be persuaded to our
duty. Should God proceed to destroy, upon every grievous sin that is committed,
as in Justice he might, then alas! our Eternal Salvation, which depends upon
what we do in this short Life, would by one single act become almost desperate,
and we should have but one trial in this life, in order to our Everlasting
State: But how many have we had! and here is the Goodness of God, that although by
wretched men he is provoked day after day, yet he bears with them day after
day, not being willing that they should perish; for he is the Lord, the Lord
God gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great compassion.

2. If God were always sudden in his Justice, and should crush every wickedness
with his hand, as soon as ever it appeared in the world; this proceeding would
bear something hard upon the Liberty of Human Nature, and be too great a force
upon us; and it would not be easily seen, whether we choose to do what God
commands freely and heartily, or merely upon the constraint of a servile Fear.
God made us to serve him upon ingenuous and manly Principles, and has
therefore given us a sense of his Presence, and of his Providence, with the
Knowledge of his Will, and the Expectation of being rewarded or punished
hereafter: But if upon every notorious offense the Malefactor was made an
example of notable Vengeance, the perpetual observation of this would be like a
Flaming Sword hanging over every man's head, and keeping him in a perpetual
Apprehension of present Destruction, if he should step aside; which would
indeed be a way to keep men from being very bad, but not to make them truly
Good; their avoiding Vice, would be like the Honesty of a Man, that does not
Steal, because his hands are always manacled.

3. If God does not suffer men to Degenerate exceedingly in their Principles
and Practices, and to grow from bad to worse, but still crushed all Impostures;
and discountenanced all Villainy and Hypocrisy at it is first setting out in the
World, where would be the Patience and Faith of the Saints, of those that
believe in God, and take his Word for their Rule and their Comfort, and live in
the Expectation of his Promises? But when Iniquity grows and thrives, and can
plead Prescription, and Authority; when it has stood long enough to have some
Color for Antiquity, and has obtained interest enough to pretend to a kind of
Universality, then it will be seen, who they are that love God, and Truth, and
Goodness, that are not willing to be deceived, that will take pains to be
rightly informed; That prefer Truth before Glorious Names, and a good
Conscience before Applause and Flattery, and Eternal Life before the Ease and
Pleasures of this World. God bears long with all the Provocations of Mankind,
for the same reason, that he permits Heresies, which is, that they, who are
approved, may be made manifest.

For these, and such like reasons as these, God in his Wisdom and Goodness
bears with Infinite Patience those Provocations for a long time together, which
he could be avenged of in a Moment, and which he utterly abominates; which was
the first Observation upon the Text.

2. The second was, That God is so much the more just in the final destruction
of Incurable and Obstinate Sinners, when their iniquity is full and ripe for
Vengeance: For as there was the Patience of God seen for four hundred Years
together, while the Iniquity of the Amorites was growing from bad to worse; so
at the end of that Period, the Justice of God was seen, when their Iniquity was
full. To grow worse for the forbearance of God, is the most Criminal
Presumption in the World; and when men are come to that pass, as quite to
forget, that there is a God, or believing him to be; to persuade themselves,
That he either approves, or at least connives at their Impieties; then the same
Wisdom, and Goodness, which hitherto had kept off their Punishments, will bring
them on swiftly and suddenly; for as on the one side, if the degeneracy, and
the impudence of Sinners should not be suffered to Flourish long, there will be
no Trial of the Faith of Honest men; so if it should be suffered to last
always, the Temptation would at length grow too hard for them. God exercises
his own Patience, that Good men might exercise theirs; at length he shows his
justice, to reward their Patience: The Patience of God is a forbearance guided
by Wisdom and Goodness; and the Justice of God is a Severity, that is also
guided by Wisdom and Goodness: And neither the one, nor the other, has any
mixture of that Selfishness, and Passion, which is for the most part the
reason, why we sometimes are, and sometimes are not, severe with those that
have offended us. This is the true Justice of Punishment, to respect the Evil
that is committed, and to Punish for that reason; and this appears in no
instances more, than when God Punishes after long sparing; For if he had been a
Selfish, or a Passionate Being, he had never suffered men to go on so long
together in the most Provoking ways of Wickedness, because he had it in his
Power to Punish them long before, as he Punishes them at last; And therefore
that he Punishes them at last, is an effect of his Wisdom and Goodness, and a
Demonstration, that the Common good required it: And as there are several good
ends, to which God's Patience tends, in bearing with general Impieties, so long
as he often does; so there are as many to which his Justice tends in taking
Vengeance of them at last: For,

1. This is a Demonstration that his Providence was not asleep before.

2. It is a clear instruction, that men ought not to presume upon God's Favor,
merely because they Prosper in their ways; but that they should measure his
Love, or his Anger, by what they do, and not by what happens to them; since
they who do the same wicked things, may go Unpunished from one Generation to
Another; and in this World, but one Generation may suffer for them.

3. That we should not forget to call our past Sins to remembrance, and to
humble our selves before God for them; since if God Punishes the sins of the
Fathers upon the Children in this Life, the like cause have we to fear, that he
will Punish the Sins of our Youth, and our Riper Years, at the Latter end of
our Life.

4. That we should make use of the Patience and long suffering of God to our
selves, to prevent his Anger from Flaming out against us, because otherwise we
Treasure up Wrath against the day of Wrath, and revelation of the righteous
Judgment of God.

The truth is, these are the uses we ought to make of both those Considerations
that I laid before you from the Text, which I shall therefore inculcate again.
And,

1. We have no reason to question either the watchfulness of God's Providence,
or to be cast into perplexities and doubts, whether the way of Truth, and the
way of Error, the way of Virtue and Piety, and the way of Hypocrisy and
Wickedness are so different from one another, as is pretended in Religion; we
have, I say, no reason to perplex our selves about these things, because for
many Generations God has suffered Deceit and Violence to prevail, to spread
and to flourish in the World; for God is not as a man, his ways are above our
ways, and his thoughts above our thoughts: when we look abroad into the World,
and look back upon so many past Ages, wherein Religion has been made a formal
Pretense for the Establishing of a Worldly Greatness and Dominion upon Gross
and Palpable Errors, supported by Fraud and Force, it is foolishly done of us
to disquiet our selves with doubts whether we are in the way of the Truth or
not, since it pleased God for so long a Time to suffer the contrary to prevail
mightily in the World, and for some Ages to baffle all opposition. For this is
to suppose God to be such a one as our selves, impatient of high Indignities
and great Provocations, ready to kindle upon any notable affront, or however
unable to bear repeated, and long continued injuries. No doubt if our opinion
had been asked, the Luxury of the old World should have been mortified by some
amazing Judgments, and the Flood should have been spared, the Idolatry of the
new Race of Mankind had been prevented, or at least by some Irresistible
Evidence of God's displeasure banished, long before the Coming of Christ; and
Mahomet should either have never appeared, or he should have Glared only like a
Comet, and so gone out, instead of founding so vast, and so long an Empire, as
it seems he has done. But let us leave God to rule the World, and be content
that he should Rule us; we are too Angry, and too Passionate to say, how things
should have been, and never more foolish, than when we would from God's
Providence make conclusions contrary to his Word. It is not for us to say,
what the God of Wisdom, the God of Patience, the God of Justice, and of
Goodness, and of Infinite Power, should do. It is the least Honor we can give
him, to allow every thing to be best, which he does in the World; every thing
to be born with Patience, that he permits; every thing to be done with Faith,
and confidence in him, that he commands; and that, as we cannot mend his
Word, so neither can we mend his Works, but be content, as we have just reason,
to do the one, and submit to the other.

2. No Sinner has reason to presume upon the Patience of God, or to conclude,
That the wrath of God does not abide upon him, because he has prospered long
in an Evil way, and no great Evil has happened to him. He ought to remember,
That God is not subject to the Passions of men, and does not serve us, as we
are too apt to serve one another; and as we do, when upon every great
Provocation we express a sharp Resentment: God's Punishments are not less
certain, because they are more slow, than ours. They are not the less certain,
because they are not inflicted in Passion, but the more certain: He that
Punishes, when Wisdom and Goodness requires severity, Punishes more certainly,
than he that Punishes but only as he is led by Sudden and Passionate Anger. If
therefore thou art Conscious to thy self of deeds highly Worthy of Punishment,
think of God's Patience, and let the Thought of his Patience work a more
reasonable effect in thee, than what is the common effect of it; let not his
Patience make thee secure, but let it make thee Fear, and go away, and Humble
thy self before him, if peradventure thy Repentance may keep off that
Punishment for the Future, which his Patience has kept off hitherto. For,

3. That which we have been speaking of being considered, there is very great
reason for us to humble our selves before God for our sins, that have been long
since committed; and that the more, if God has not yet thought fit to chastise
us for them; for there is the more cause to apprehend that he will do so. I
have already observed that God's thoughts are not as our thoughts are; and
there is this notable instance of it, wherein we are nearly concerned: When we
commit any wickedness, the thought of it is Troublesome and Grievous to us for
the present, unless we have cast off all sense of God, and care of our own
Souls; but by degrees it wears off; and that which a few days since lay heavy
upon our minds, is now grown so light that we do not feel it; and so the next
Sin that wounds our Conscience is felt, perhaps, as the former was, and
forgotten at last, as it was too; and thus we are naturally disposed, not to
have the same sense of Sins long ago committed, as of guilt we have lately
contracted: But this is an infirmity that is to be corrected by Reason, and a
right Knowledge of God: For it is not so with God; the Evil which thou did
Twenty Years ago, is as fresh in his Remembrance, and lies before him as much
to thy disadvantage, as that which was done but Yesterday. God's displeasure
does not wear off, as our Trouble does, though because we are not affected with
the Vile Actions that were done a great while since, we are apt to flatter our
selves, that neither is he so angry with us, as he was: We behave our selves
too often, as if we were accountable for none but the last Sins we committed;
we do evil things, and cry God Mercy; and then we do them again, and go on in
this way, as if nothing were upon the score against us, but what troubles us
for the present. But we should argue quite contrary. God has all our Wicked
Actions in order before him, and therefore we should set them before our own
Eyes, and remember, that if we have had our profits without Losses; and our
Pleasures without Pains, our Sins without Punishments, there is the more
behind; and that we are as much in danger of the Sins of our Youth, and all the
ills we have done since, as of the latest of all; for which reason we should
say, Spare us good Lord; and from the bottom of our Hearts should confess and
be sorry for our former offenses, and fear and tremble to add new ones to them:
And that is the conclusion we are to make of the whole matter; to wit,

4. To use the Patience and Long-suffering of God for the Preventing of his
Anger from Flaming out against us, either in this World, or in the World to
come; and that by bringing forth fruits meet for repentance, and doing
remarkably well in all those kinds, wherein we have formerly done Evil;
remembering those words of the Apostle, Romans 2.4. Despisest thou the riches of
his goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering, not knowing that the
Goodness of God leads thee to repentance. Where the Apostle seems to
intimate, that this is a matter which men are ignorant of, or at least, that
they mind it not, viz. that the goodness of God leads them to repentance, (i.
e.) the goodness of his Forbearance and Long-suffering. We are all of us
sensible, that his threatenings do naturally lead men to thoughts of amendment;
but we are not so well aware, that his forbearance was designed for the same
end; though when we come to consider, it is what we shall not be able to deny:
For as the reason why God threatens, is because he would have the Punishment
avoided, since he that threatens beforehand, does it, that there may be no
occasion of Punishment; so the reason why the threatening is not inflicted
presently, is the very same, especially when it is declared expressly, that
Repentance will be admitted: I say the reason of the forbearance is the very
same, viz. That we might have time to Repent, and means to escape: Which use of
God's forbearance, as it is necessary for our Salvation in the World to come,
so it is the best means of our escaping in this; although that be a concern for
which we ought not in any measure to be so Solicitous, as for the other. When
bad men grow worse and worse, it is a sign that God will visit the World, and
no longer bear the Indignities that are done to his Holy Name: and therefore
the security of good men must lie in the growing better and better. When God's
Patience and Forbearance is extended to all alike, and some are incurable, and
grow hardened by it, and others frame themselves to Piety, and Charity, and
Dependence upon God more than ever they did before, it is highly probable, that
when he finds so great a difference, he will make as great a difference; and
for a general instruction, make it plain on both sides, that he will neither
fail to Punish the Wicked, nor to Protect the Righteous.

Brethren, let us remember our Profession, which is to believe in God, and
consequently to believe, that we are not made safe by Wealth, or by Favor, by
Worldly Power, or by Worldly Policy; but that God is more to us, than all these
things; and that we depend entirely upon him; that by forsaking him, we forsake
our strength and defense; that by adhering to him, we have that Power for our
Security, and that Goodness for our Security, which made the World, and which
Governs the World. Let us then in this our day consider the things that belong
to our peace, and seek the Lord while he may be found, and call upon him while
he is near, that he may be near unto us in all our Troubles and Adversities,
whenever they oppress us, and be found of us at the hour of Death, and the
day of Judgment; that God of Mercy and Love, which in himself he always is, and
which he desires to show himself to be to us all. Let therefore the unrighteous
man forsake his ways, and the wicked man his thoughts; and turn unto the Lord,
for he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will abundantly Pardon.
To the God of Infinite Goodness let us ascribe all Honor and Glory, now and
for ever. Amen.

The Twelfth Sermon.
Luke XIII. 5. I tell you, Nay: but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise
perish.


CONCERNING the Galileans, whose Blood Pilate mingled with their Sacrifices,
and the Eighteen Jews upon whom the Tower in Siloam fell and slew them, our
Savior's discourse to those that were present was this. Suppose ye, that these
Galileans, and these Jews were Sinners above all the Galileans, because they
suffered such things; and above all men that dwelt at Jerusalem? I tell you,
Nay: but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.

From which words taken in Connection with what went before, there are two kinds
of Observations that may be laid down: The former are rather supposed than
expressed; and they are these Two,

1. That God is Just in the Punishments that he inflicts upon Sinners.

2. That by what means soever, evil happens to men, the Providence of God is
concerned in it.

The Second Kind are intended more directly, viz.

1. That they who suffer very great Evils, are not always greater Sinners than
those who in the mean time suffer nothing.

2. That one Reason why such evils do not befall all Persons at the same time,
who are equally Sinners, is, That while some are visited with the Rod, others
may take warning by it. And

3. That if they do not take warning, they shall not escape.

These are all profitable Instructions, and such as this Place naturally
yields; which I shall therefore pursue, without taking much pains to show how
they are contained in it.

Something I shall say, but very briefly, of the Two First, because they are
supposed in these Sayings of our Lord, though not the main Things intended:

The First is, That Punishment is due to Sin; which is the Ground of all that
our Savior discourses here, concerning the ends of those unhappy men; he knew
that his Hearers would be apt to pass an hard Censure upon them, and he took
care to prevent it; but they would never have been in danger of running into
that extreme, if it had not been fixed in all of them, That Punishment was due
to Sin; and this our Savior was far from correcting, but rather confirmed them
in it, by concluding, That they also should perish, except they repented. The
truth is, this is one of those things, that men know by Nature; and it is well
that they do; for if notwithstanding this sense, the World is so bad, how much
worse would it have been, if these apprehensions could have been extinguished?
Hence it is, that the Conscience of well-doing inspires a man with assurance;
and that Guilt makes him a Coward; That the disasters of others expose them to
be hardly thought of; and that our own Afflictions bring our own Sins to
remembrance. The Natives of Melita, though they were Barbarians, yet when they
saw a Viper fasten upon St. Paul's hand, presently concluded, That he was a
murderer, whom though he had escaped the Sea, yet vengeance would not suffer to
live, Acts 28. There the natural Sense of Punishment being due to Sin, wrought,
though they carried it too far: But with something better reason did Joseph's
Brethren, when he had brought them into distress, argue with one another,
Verily, we are guilty concerning our Brother, therefore this distress is come
upon us, Genesis 42.21. It is this natural belief, that supported many Mysteries
of Religion every where, in all Ages of the world, whether those Mysteries were
of God's appointing, or of Man's inventing. A good part of the Sacrifices and
Rites of the Heathens, and the Jews, in their Worship, was to make expiation of
Sin; and the Beast was killed, to confess that Punishment was due to that man
for whom it was offered: It is this Sense that disposes men to believe strange
Delusions; that there is virtue in little things, which seem to be no better
than Charms to take away the guilt of Sin, and to prevent the Punishment of it:
When people wear Habits, and go Pilgrimages, and touch Relics, and apply Holy
Water, and twenty other such Remedies to themselves, for the ease of their
minds, tho they take a silly way to their end, yet the Principle is good at the
bottom, That Sin and Punishment are linked together, and that one naturally
draws on the other, if some method be not used to break the chain; which belief
is so troublesome to a guilty mind, that for this reason, the generality of men
are naturally disposed to like a Religion so much the more, for having great
variety of Reliefs for an uneasy Conscience; which is the true reason why
mankind, if good care be not taken, are ready to run into a thousand
Superstitions: To prevent which, and to bring us into the way of Salvation, God
sent his own Son into the World to be a Sacrifice for us, that we having so
great an assurance of the expiation of our sins, should cheerfully set our
selves to the Reformation of our Hearts and Lives, and serve God without fear,
in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our life. This is the
first Observation, That the Principle upon which all this Discourse proceeds,
is a natural Truth, viz. That Punishment is due to Sin:

2. That by what means soever evils befall men, it still comes by the Providence
of God, either directly sending it, or at least knowingly permitting it, and
for wise and good Reasons determining to permit it: This also is evidently
presumed in this Discourse; for upon the relation of those disasters, the minds
of the Hearers presently turned to this Conclusion, That they were very great
Sinners that suffered such things, and consequently, that the evil was sent by
a Just and Wise Providence: Now this our Savior did not go about to correct
neither, but rather confirmed them in it, that God's hand was in all that
happened, as themselves should find it too, if they repented not: So that
whether evil comes by the free will of others, as it did upon the Galileans,
whose blood Pilate mingled with their Sacrifices, or by such means as seem to
be merely casual, as it did upon the eighteen upon whom the Tower in Siloam
fell; in both cases, the Providence of God does interpose, attending the whole
Affair, regulating, and ordering, and with exact knowledge of each circumstance,
permitting that which happens, and the means by which it happens: A very
instructing Consideration, which we should lay up in our minds, heartily
believing it, and frequently entertaining our selves with it, that we may be
directed by it in our Prosperity, and comforted with it in our Adversity; for
it will give us in our better state, the best direction how to secure it; and
to all other methods and ways which we use to keep off evil, it will make us
add that which is best of all, to secure by well-doing an Interest in the
Favor of God. It is a great defect of Wisdom, as well as of True Religion, to
be so nice as we often are, in weighing the means of our welfare, with the
causes of danger; and this with respect only to second causes; forgetting all
the while, that which ought in the first and chiefest place to be remembered,
the Supreme Mover and Orderer even of those Causes, and of the whole matter.
But if we laid to heart what we all believe, that it is an unseen hand that
governs all, undoubtedly we should be more afraid of our sins, than of all
other miseries; and more concerned to be strong in the Favor of God, than in
the Arm of Flesh. This Consideration is equally good to comfort us under
Adversity, if that happens, because God sends it; for tho there may be good
reason to take evil in evil part, from men who seldom mean well to us, when
they trouble and grieve us; yet there is this to make us patient, that it is of
God's sending too, who means us no harm, and will convert it to good, which is
the true reason of that excellent saying of Job, chapter 2. v. 10. Shall we receive
good from the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil? For the Emphasis lies
in these Words, From the hand of God. For we rank him in effect with men, if we
cannot be pleased with him, but when he gives us what we desire: When good
comes to us, it is welcome from what hand soever it comes; but this is one part
of the singular Worship we pay to God, that from him we can receive evil too,
without suspecting either the Goodness of his Intention, or the Wisdom of his
Counsel.

These are the Two Points which lie at the bottom of this Discourse of our
Savior, viz. That Punishment belongs to Sin; and, That the Evils which happen
in this World, do not happen without the Providence of God attending upon all
the Circumstances thereof.

I proceed now to those Points which are the direct purpose of this place;
whereof the

1. Is, That they who suffer very great Evils, are not always greater Sinners
than those who in the mean time suffer nothing: That is the plain Doctrine of
our Savior, expressed in these Questions, Suppose ye that these were greater
sinners, than all the Galileans? and these, than all that dwell at Jerusalem?
They indeed that heard him, being Jews, were ready enough so to suppose; but
this was that Error of theirs, which he in the first place designed to correct;
and it was necessary for them to be set right in this matter by some great
Authority, because it was an Error so easy for them to slide into, by reason
of the Temper and Constitution of their Law, which to them that kept it,
promised all the good things of this Life, and threatened all the evils of Life
to them that broke it: But the time was now coming, when these Considerations
should not be so much regarded, and God would establish a Covenant upon
promises of an higher nature than those of the Law of Moses, and upon more
terrible penalties than were threatened by that Law: And therefore this plain
Doctrine of our Savior, which no doubt was something surprising to his
Hearers, was very seasonable to be delivered, just when that Law was expiring,
and a better was to take place: The time was coming when all that would live
godly in Christ Jesus should suffer Persecution; when his Disciples should be
hated of all men for his names sake, and delivered up to be beaten and
scourged, and put to death; Which when they should see, they would have reason
to remember that he had told them, upon a particular occasion, that they were
not to call them the greatest Sinners, who suffered such things, as so many
together never endured before; but there was a notorious Provocation of Divine
Justice to deserve it. Now there were greater designs in hand, than to keep a
small Nation, in comparison, to the observation of a Law, that required
abundance of Ceremony, and was content with the outward work, which served to
an happy Life in this World. The true rules of Righteousness and Charity were
now to be laid down, and men were to learn to live above the World, and to be
brought to the Practice of Piety, by the promises of Immortality in a future
State; to reward them for any thing they should lose or suffer for it, in this:
It would therefore be expedient, that the power of this Faith should be
sometimes demonstrated, to the Glory of God, and the Instruction of Man, and
that by examples of constancy in suffering for Righteousness; it would also be
expedient, that the Profession of so holy a Faith should not be dishonored by
the continual scandals of men, whose Conversation is quite contrary to their
Profession; and therefore that God should purify his Church in the Furnace of
Affliction, and sometimes separate the Sincere from the Hypocrite, by bringing
them to the Test of Persecution, that those who hang loosely upon the Christian
Communion, might be shaken off, and none but good examples left in it, to bring
greater Credit to the Gospel, and more Proselytes to it, than it had before.
Since therefore the Time was coming, when men should suffer not at all, as
Sinners or Evil doers, but for a good Cause, and with a good Conscience, most
certainly it was a seasonable Instruction, that the greatest Sufferers were not
to be accounted the greatest Sinners.

But this, I confess, is a Reason that does not reach the full intention of our
Savior, in the Doctrine he laid down upon this occasion mentioned in the Text;
for his true Disciples in suffering for their Faith and Profession, cannot be
said to suffer for their Sins; but his words considered with all the
circumstances wherewith they are to be taken, do suppose that when men suffer
for their sins, they are not to be accounted greater sinners merely for that
reason, than those who at the same time escape, and suffer nothing; for when he
said, that neither should they escape that heard him, unless they repented; it
was implied, or at least not denied, that those things happened to the
aforesaid Galileans and Jews as a Punishment of their Sins; and a plain case it
is, that in this Life where the Tares and the Wheat grow together, that by the
same Afflictions, God punishes the Sins of some, while he manifests the
Sincerity of others; and in this case it remains true, that those who are
punished, are not to be accounted greater sinners than all those that escape;
of which we need not desire any other proof than our Savior's word for it: But
in some cases we have very evident and sensible demonstration of it: For
sometimes God punishes the sins of some men by the hands of others that are
worse than they, whom he reserves for far greater Punishments in Life, as the
Histories of the Church do abundantly testify: Now by the same reason, that it
must not be concluded of those that suffer under the oppressions of others,
that they are worse than those that oppress them, it ought not neither to be
concluded of those that do not suffer by them, that they are better than those
that do; for the former observation is an evident proof that they do not suffer
first, who deserve it most. Which is a Doctrine that our Savior thought fit to
deliver in his days, and will be of constant use, while the World lasts, to
keep Christians at the greatest distance from that Jewish Error, That men may
discern God's Love and Hatred by what befalls them in this World. I will
therefore never suffer my self to be run into an ill opinion of any man, or any
people, by any adversity, how great soever it be, which happens to them before
my eyes; much less will I enter into comparisons; I will not conclude from the
Affliction I see, that there must needs be some great sin at the bottom, which
Vengeance has found out: And when I see the sin, and cannot forbear
acknowledging the justice of God, I will not go on to suppose, there is
something more than I do see, and make him to be a worse man than he seems to
be; nor will I conclude, that he is worse than those, that do not suffer such
things: And what construction I will forbear to make of a single Person, I will
much more forbear to make of Multitudes: Because I know the reasons of God's
Proceedings with Peoples and Nations, and great bodies of men, are by me
unsearcheable, and that time discovers that Wisdom of his Counsels, which my
reason cannot fathom: In a word, I will conclude ill of none, because they
suffer, but rather well of them, if I know no cause to the contrary, because it
is often God's method to afflict his own best Servants, and when he Punishes
for Sin, to begin with those that do not most of all deserve it. Shall I
conclude, for instance, that the French Protestants have been the greatest
Sinners of all the Protestants in Europe, or greater than our selves, because
they have suffered such things? God forbid! I speak not of those, who to their
Glory in this World, but alas, that is little worth, it becomes me to say, and
you to hear it, who to their Praise with God, and to the increase of their
reward hereafter in a better Life, have suffered the loss of all things, to
keep a good Conscience: but of those whom the Terrors of this World have
prevailed with, more than the Terrors of the Lord; in whom the desire of ease
here, has been too hard for the desire of Salvation hereafter; I will not say,
and we must not say, that even these were greater Sinners than our selves, who
have not fallen into their Temptations. Such instances as these, Brethren, do
best explain the intention of our Savior in these words, and will affect us
with the true sense of them; and the more that we look abroad into the World,
and consider the unsearchableness of God's Judgments, and that his ways are
past finding out, as we cannot but do, if we ask our selves the reason why this
and that happens; the more sensibly we shall acknowledge the Truth of our
Savior's Doctrine in this place, and shall forbear passing Judgment upon the
unhappy, merely because they are so. But yet to take notice of what God does of
this kind in the World, is not an unprofitable observation, and that because
the second point of the three, which I have mentioned, is as true as the first,
and that is this.

2. That one reason, why the Evils of this Life do not befall all Persons at
the same time, who are equally Sinners, is, That while some are visited with
the Rod of God, others may take warning by it: This Proposition I lay down with
great confidence, not only of the Truth of it in general, but also of the
pertinence of it to the Text: For you may observe, that our Savior upon
mention made of the former of the Two Tragical Stories, observes the latter
himself, and takes occasion from thence to divert his hearers from censuring
those miserable Persons, as they were ready to do, and to employ them in
reflecting upon themselves: I tell you, Nay: but except ye repent, ye shall all
likewise perish: he employed them in reflecting upon their own sins; for says
he, except ye repent; and upon their own danger, except ye repent, ye shall all
likewise perish. And now I am sure it will be granted, that our Savior did not
wander from the true intent of God's Providence in the things that happened to
those persons, nor make an application of them, which was not to the purpose;
and therefore since he gave warning by their examples, it remains true, as I
said, that one reason why the Evils of this Life do not befall all Persons at
the same time who equally deserve them, and I will add, who equally need them,
is this, That while some are corrected, others may be instructed: I rather keep
to the case of Punishing Sin, than trying Virtue, because that is the case of
the Text; though I might say too, That the reason why all that can bear a
trial, are not tried at the same time is, because the trials of some righteous
men are not only profitable to themselves, but the examples of them also are
profitable to other good men to encourage and fortify them. But when God
punishes, he does not at one and the same Time, punish all that deserve it
equally, but he punishes some, that the rest may take warning; For if the
sufferings of a Few in comparison, would instruct all the rest, God's end is
gained, which is, that we should learn righteousness, when his judgments are
abroad in the Earth: And this is one of those arguments which may convince us,
that God does not willingly afflict and grieve the Children of Men; for if he
took pleasure in that, then without question where there was the same cause,
there would be the same effect of his displeasure; and where the same need
appeared, the same remedy would be used; but if where all might justly be
punished, he uses his Prerogative to punish some only, and for the time spares
the rest, to prove and try them whether the examples of his Justice upon others
will bring them to Repentance; in this case it plainly appears, that he
delights not in that which is grievous to us, but would bring us to Repentance
at the same time, by showing his Justice upon some, and his Patience toward
others. We can indeed give no account why God begins to afflict this man, and
not that; this People, and not another; but the general point is very obvious
(i. e.) why all are not made to suffer together, where there is the same
Provocation of Divine Justice, and the same need of being awakened to
Repentance; for the reason of it, is this, That the Punishment of some is a
sufficient warning to others; and God does not afflict all at once, because he
does not willingly afflict the Children of Men: For mark our Savior's arguing
in this place: There were among the Galileans as great Sinners, as those whose
Blood Pilate mingled with their Sacrifices; There were among the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem, as great Sinners, as those were upon whom the Tower of Siloam fell;
and yet those calamities happened but to a few; The use that he would have the
rest make of those Examples, was this, That they should repent; which he urged
by this threatening, except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish: Now he that
threatens to punish and has power to do it, does plainly show, that he takes no
delight in Punishing, but would prevent the fault that deserves it; especially,
when he threatens and shows Examples of Justice at the same time, and might
have made those Examples of his Justice too, whom he threatens. And so I
proceed to the third Proposition, which is,

3. That if those who escape from the Punishment, do not take warning by those
that suffer, themselves shall not always Escape; and this is the direct purport
of the Words, I tell you, Nay: but except ye repent ye shall all likewise
perish; and that by Perishing here, our Lord meant the Punishments of this
Life, is plain from hence, that he threatened such like destruction, as happened
to those few Galileans, and those few upon whom the Tower of Siloam fell. Ye
shall all likewise Perish, (i. e.) much after the same manner, as indeed it
happened, and that to admiration; For as the Blood of those Galileans was
mingled with their Sacrifices; so was the Blood of the Jews mingled with the
Blood of those Paschal Sacrifices, which they came to offer just before the
Roman Army hemmed them in; and as those eighteen were killed by the fall of the
Tower of Siloam, so were the Inhabitants of Jerusalem destroyed in the
destruction of Jerusalem it self. Although the Covenant of the Gospel was
established upon better promises, and with more frightful Penalties, than those
of this World; yet the Providence of God does not neglect the bringing men to
Repentance by the Good and Evil of this Life; nay it is necessary to the
maintaining a sense of God, and a World to come, even amongst Christians, That
his displeasure should be seen, where his goodness does not lead to repentance;
and it is his goodness, that by his Judgments he does awaken us, when nothing
else is able to do it. And therefore although the great motives of Christianity
are those that concern another Life; yet when these do not prevail, the only
remedy that is left, is to instruct us by present corrections, and to touch us
in those things, of which we are most sensible, viz. The present concerns of
this World. If therefore, after he has made some examples to others, these do
not Repent, it is still more necessary that they should not escape, because
they have abused the long-suffering of God toward themselves, and taken no
warning by those, whom God Chastened, while he spared them: For if their
obstinacy should go without Punishment, the example of their Impunity would do
more hurt to succeeding Generations, than if there had been no warnings given
at all; and for this reason, the sufferings of those Sinners that were made the
first examples, are commonly less than theirs, that would learn no instruction
by them, as it happened to the Jews 40 years after this warning that our Savior
gave them, upon so instructing an ocasion.

The use we are to make of these considerations, is, To do the same thing,
which we should certainly do, if God's Judgments were upon us, as they are upon
others, that we also perish not: For if we would judge our selves, we should
not be judged; and if the warning that God gives us by others, has the same
effect, that Correction it self would have upon us, God, who does not willingly
grieve the Children of Men, would spare us, and not enter into Judgment with
us. It is but considering how we should be disposed by great affliction and
bringing our minds to that temper without it, and then the great design of
Divine Corrections and Punishments is attained without Punishment. And how are
men wrought upon by Calamities? excepting some few, who are such wretches as
Ahab was, who in his distress sinned yet more and more. These are the common
effects: In general, they begin then to call their sins to mind, and their
Consciences bring forth the guilt, that has been for the most part quiet, and
do set their evil ways in order before them: Nay, then they are very willing to
acknowledge, that what they suffer, is no more than what they deserve, but a
great deal less: Thus as I insinuated at first, Joseph's Brethren, when they
felt the anguish of mind, that their present distress cast them into, could
then say, Verily we were guilty concerning our Brother, in that we saw the
anguish of his soul, and would not hear him. It is not to be thought but that
after so Treacherous and Villainous a part, as the selling of Joseph was, their
Consciences had pulled every one of them for it at certain times; but it is
likely they made a shift to forget it, as much as they could from time to time,
till they fell into that perplexity, which their Brother cast them in; and then
they talked to one another about their Sin freely and sorrowfully, as if they
had all long dissembled their sense of it to one another before; Verily we were
guilty concerning our Brother. This is one end of God's Chastisements, to bring
those to an effectual acknowledgment of their evil ways, who till then had
smothered the Conviction of their Guilt; and that is one end too of God's
warnings, When some are made examples of his justice, and he spares others to
prove them, whether they will be warned by such examples. Again, when we feel
anguish our selves, we remember how we have for a long time abused the Patience
of God, and turned his Grace into Wantonness; then our Luxury and Intemperance,
whilst we had plenty of all things for this Life, and our neglect of
Instruction and Admonition under all means of Grace for a better Life; then I
say these things come to mind: And if God spares us, whilst he smites others,
it is that we may not need any thing more, than such a warning, to make us
reflect upon these things as we ought to do. Thus also God's Corrections
dispose men to Charity and Consideration of one another; they cure us of that
stifness and wantonness, which, whilst all things go well with us, carries on
Contention and Hatred: And therefore that we may not make it necessary for
Providence to teach us Wisdom and Charity by withdrawing those bounties of his,
which we abuse to the pampering of Pride and Obstinacy, we should learn to be
Wise by Examples, before we are made Examples our selves.

To conclude this matter, Who can be Ignorant that Affliction drives those men
to Prayer, and other Duties of Piety, who were very careless of them before? In
their distress they will seek God early, though in their Prosperity they were
so backward to any thing of Religion, and for the most part felt very faint and
ineffectual dispositions to it, rather complying with custom, than with
Inclination and Conscience; and Honoring God with their lips, while their
hearts are far from him: and this is the great danger of a Prosperous State, To
be full and to forget God. But if nothing else will cure this Sloathfulness in
Religion, and this indifference and coldness in the Service of God, yet at
least Affliction does it, which makes us to feel our Dependence upon God, and
shows us, that we have no hope left but in him, and then we abound in Prayers,
and we attend willingly to instruction; we apply our selves to God in good
earnest, and to all the Comforts of Religion; we make many Vows and Promises,
and we set our selves immediately to perform them: This is the Natural effect
of sufferings, when we feel them our selves; and if we are wise, it should be
the effect of all those warnings that God has given us by the sufferings of
others: Since therefore we cannot look abroad into the World, but we shall see
the Judgments of God in the Earth, let us learn Righteousness, let us not be
high-minded but fear; let us not judge others, but judge our selves, and often
consider, what our Savior replied to the supposition of their being Sinners
above all others, who suffered such things, as others had not suffered; I tell
you, Nay; but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.

The Thirteenth Sermon.
Luke XVIII. 8. Nevertheless, when the Son of man comes, shall he find faith
on the Earth?


FOR the understanding of these words of our Savior, two things are to be
considered.

1. What is here meant by the Coming of the Son of Man. And,

2. What is meant by his not finding Faith upon the Earth.

1. How we are to understand those words, when the Son of Man comes? I answer,
The meaning is, when he comes to Execute Judgment upon the ungodly, and to
deliver his Faithful People out of their Hands: For after our Savior had
spoken the Parable of the Unjust Judge, that was wearied by the Widows
importunity to do justice for her against her adversaries, he argued thus v. 7.
And shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry day and night to him, though
he bear long with them? or rather, as it might have been translated, and will
he bear long in their cause? I tell you, that he will avenge them speedily: And
then follow these words, Nevertheless, when the Son of Man comes (i. e.) when
he comes to do that which was spoken of before, viz. to avenge the cause of
his elect, or to Punish their Enemies and Oppressors, and to deliver them out
of their hands.

Now of the Coming of Christ for this purpose, there is also a Twofold
Signification in the New Testament, whereof one is manifestly the Principal,
and much more considerable than the other, and that is, his second coming in
Person to Judge the Quick and the Dead, which will not be till the end of the
World: Thus the Coming of the Day of the Lord, 2 Pet. 3.10. is called his
coming, v. 4. and the Coming of the Lord Jesus Christ, with all his Saints, 1
These. 3.13. and in many other places. And this is all the coming of Christ
properly so called, that the New Testament mentions after his First, because
this only is to be his Second Personal Appearance. But then,

2. There was another notion of the Coming of Christ after his first, which is
also plainly enough intimated in the New Testament, and that was his Coming to
destroy the Jews, and to deliver the Christians out of their hands, which
happened 40. Years after his death: And of this the 24th. Chapter of St.
Matthew is an undeniable Testimony, where a Description of the Destruction of
Jerusalem, and a Description of the Day of Judgment are so interwoven one with
the other, that it is a matter of some difficulty to know punctually and fully,
what is proper to the one, and what to the other: But plain it is, that the one
as well as the other is called the Coming of the Son of Man, as appears by
Verses 27, and 37. The Destruction of Jerusalem was made as it were a Type or
Figure of the Day of Judgment; and therefore these words are there, Verily I
say unto You, this Generation shall not pass away, till all these things be
fulfilled, v. 34. (i.e.) till they are accomplished in that part of the meaning
which respects the Destruction of Jerusalem, which was destroyed before that
Generation passed away. Of this it seems plain that St. James speaks, C. 5. v.
6, 7. where speaking to the Jews, says he, Ye have condemned and killed the
Just; and to the Christians, Be patient therefore, Brethren, unto the Coming of
the Lord; and v. 8. Be ye also Patient, stablish your hearts, for the Coming of
the Lord draws nigh; and some other places there are, where the Phrase is to
be Interpreted thus; Particularly that, Let your moderation be known unto all
men, The Lord is at hand, Phil. 4.5. (i.e.) let all men see by your Meekness
and Patience under those Oppressions, which you suffer, that you believe those
Predictions, which we have delivered to you from Christ, that he is at hand to
deliver you; And although properly the end of all things will not be till the
last day, when the Earth shall be burnt up, and all the works that are therein;
yet because this notable revolution of the destruction of the Jews was in some
degree like unto it, therefore it was also called the end of all things,
meaning the end of the Jewish State and Religion, which was to be accompanied
with manifest Tokens of God's Favor to the Christians, and of his indignation
at their Enemies. And thus we are to understand that passage in St. Peter, The
end of all things is at hand, be ye therefore sober and watch unto Prayer, 1
Pet. 4.7. Not that this was in a strict and proper sense the Coming of Christ,
because he did not come in Person, as he will do at the last day; but in some
sense it might be so called, because he Appeared by his Power and Providence to
do the same work in part, which will with incomparably greater perfection be
done at the last, (i. e.) to take Vengeance of the ungodly, and to save his own
People: For the Incorrigibleness of the Jewish Nation, and their incurable
hatred of the Truth, and obstinate Persecution of it, was dreadfully punished
in the destruction of Jerusalem; and the Christians had not only all escaped
out of it, before the Roman Army came against it, but by the destruction of it,
they gained also a very considerable rest from Persecution for some time after.

And now the reason why this wonderful Providence was called the coming of
Christ, seems plainly to be this, That after his Ascension into Heaven, he set
down at the right hand of God, and had all Power put into his hands; and
therefore because it is he that Governs the World as well as the Church; such
remarkable revolutions, as that was, for the destruction of his enemies, and
the saving of his Servants, are called the coming of Christ; God has given him
to be head over all things to the Church, and therefore such passages, as that
was, are called his coming, to signify, that they are the effects of his
Providence and government for the good of his Church, no less, than if he had
come in Person to order them, as he will do at the end of the World, to order
all things then.

And for this reason, though in the proper sense of his coming, he will come
but once at the end of the World, yet in this improper sense of it, his
appeaance to destroy his enemies, and to save his People, that trust in him,
nothing hinders, but that he may be said to come often before the end of World,
(i. e.) as often as his Providence does signally and remarkably appear for this
purpose: And thus we are to understand the coming of the Lord in 2 These. 2.8.
where it is said of the Man of Sin, that Wicked one, That the Lord shall
consume him with the Spirit of his mouth, and destroy him with the brightness
of his coming; which being to be done, before the Personal coming of Christ to
Judgment, the meaning must be, that his destruction shall be so remarkably the
work of a Divine Providence, that all shall confess it was not the effect of
Worldly Policy, but no less the doing of the Lord, than if himself had come in
Person to destroy him. And whenever the Kingdoms of the World become the
Kingdoms of the Lord; when the knowledge of God covers the earth as the waters
cover the Sea; when those magnificent predictions are fulfilled concerning the
universal prevalence of Truth and Goodness amongst men, with which the Old and
New Testament are plentifully furnished, and which are to be fulfilled, before
the coming of Christ to the last Judgment; then also is it true, that the Lord
comes, (i. e.) by the Power of his Spirit and Providence to renew and reform a
degenerate World, that was running headlong into perdition.

And thus much concerning the sense of these words, when the Son of man comes,
which I have shown do principally signify that great and amazing revolution,
when he shall come by coming in his own Person at the last day to judge the
World, but in a secondary sense do also signify the remarkable works of his
Providence, in Punishing some, and saving others even in this Life. Now,

2. How are we to understand that other clause, will he find Faith upon the
earth? The meaning of the question is plainly this; That he will not find Faith
on the earth, or very little in comparison. But what is here meant by Faith? I
answer, that is easily discerned by the Parable and the Application of it, that
went before. The design of both which, was to infer the conclusion in the
foregoing verse, And shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry day and
night unto him, though he bear long with them? I tell you he will avenge them
speedily: That is to say, God would hear the Prayers of Righteous men, and in a
little time take their cause into his own hand; and then says our Savior,
Nevertheless, when the Son of man comes, shall he find faith on the earth? (i.
e.) notwithstanding the Promises of God to hear the Pravers of good men, and to
interpose for them that depend upon him, there will be but little Faith in
these Promises found upon the Earth, even when the Son of Man comes to fulfill
them: The greatest part will not be found to believe any thing at all of them,
and so will be surprised with that day, without any preparation for it, or
expectation of it. Many will yield to the Temptations of this present World,
and throwing off their dependence upon God, will think to secure themselves by
Flattery and Hypocrisy from the Violence of Wicked men; others will despair of
any better state of things; And very few will lay to heart the promises which
God has made to hear the Prayers of his Servants, and to save them: Few will
strengthen themselves in God by crying to him day and night, and by putting
their whole trust and confidence in him; and this notwithstanding the clear and
strong reasons they have from his word, so to do. Nevertheless, when the Son of
man comes, shall he find faith on the earth? And thus we may from other places
of Scripture observe, that immediately before the Day of judgment, there will
be a great falling away from Christian Piety and Charity; nay, and the World
should begin once more to depart from the Purity of Faith; many false Prophets
shall arise, and shall deceive many; and because Iniquity shall abound, the
love of many shall wax cold. But, says our Savior, he that endures to the end,
shall be saved; thereby intimating, that it would be some matter of difficulty
to endure to the end. Thus also St. Peter tells us, that there shall come in
the last days scoffers, walking after their own lusts, and saying, Where is the
promise of his coming? which is plainly meant of the Day of Judgment, before
which according to the Revelation of St. John, Satan was to be loosed for a
little time, and to go out, and to deceive the nations, and to gather them
together against the City of God. And therefore it will be remarkably true at
the day of Judgment, that when the Son of Man comes, he will find but little
Faith in the Earth; The World will be in a careless Posture, as it was before,
that the Flood came and took them all away: And for the same reason there is
but little Faith in the earth when God enters into Judgment with the world for
the violence and iniquities of Men, and asserts the cause of innocence and
righteousness against them; for in all such cases the temptations to unbelief
and apostasy, are very great, and likely to prevail upon many of those that
believe; so that this is the meaning, That in such a wicked Age, as calls for
the coming of the Son of man, the open enemies of God, which are the greater
number, will be void of all regard whatsoever to his word and to his
Providence, or if they take any notice of it, it is that of the Scoffers
mentioned by St. Peter, who will say, Where is the promise of his coming? Many
of his professed Servants will be weary of depending upon him, and give way to
Temptations, and depend more upon the arm of Flesh, than upon the promise of
God; and the Faith of many good men will be very much weakened and abated; so
that when he comes, he will find but little Faith upon the Earth.

And thus I persuade my self to have given you a true illustration of these
remarkable Words of our Blessed Savior, and that upon the two significations
of the Son of man's Coming, which seem to be both intended in this Text; and
indeed it is very hard to know which was principally intended, the Day of the
General Judgment, or the Destruction of Jerusalem: The Day of General Judgment
is in it self the principal meaning of Christ's Coming, and therefore ought not
to be excluded; but yet the Parable, with the Application of it, being
manifestly intended to stir up that Generation to pray to God, and not to
faint, and to give a firm Faith to the Promises of God, notwithstanding the
great troubles they were like to meet with from the unbelieving Jews: therefore
neither could the Coming of the Son of man to be avenged of these his enemies,
and to deliver his Servants, be excluded, but was as directly intended, as the
other.

And now I proceed to observe the two main Points which the Text supposes,
besides those which it affirms; and the considering of them will not a little
contribute to a more perfect understanding of this Place.

1. It is supposed manifestly, that after the first Coming of Christ to call
the World to Repentance, and to be offered up for our sins, there would yet be
degenerate Ages sometimes, and a most corrupt state of things, before his
Second Personal Coming to Judge the World.

2. It is also supposed, that his Providence would then appear to set all
things right, when there was the greatest need to interpose in behalf of his
Church.

1. That his first coming would not infallibly prevent the degeneracy and
corruption of future Ages: For notwithstanding that evidence of Truth, which he
taught, many false Prophets would arise, and deceive many; and notwithstanding
the Power of his Doctrine, iniquity would abound, and the love of many would
wax cold; and notwithstanding both these advantages, yet his own servants would
sometimes be reduced to that state, that it should be needful to them to cry
unto God day and night; which is a matter that may cause some wonder, if we do
not consider the reason of it: That the Principles and Manners of men were so
often, and so generally corrupted, before the Coming of the Son of God into the
World, is that, which might not appear strange at all, to those that consider
the weakness and folly of mankind: That after the Creation, the Earth should so
abound with Luxury and Violence, that God swept all mankind away with the
Flood, but Eight Persons: That after Noah's Family had peopled the Earth again,
men should fall into Idolatry so universally, that God called Abraham out of
his own Country, and entered into a particular Covenant with him for the
maintaining of the true Worship in his Family and Posterity: That Pharaoh
should oppress the Israelites after his Country had been saved by them: That
the Israelites should fall to Worship other Gods, after that the True God had
wrought so many miraculous Deliverances for them: That when, not without much
ado, they were cured of Idolatry, they should fall into scandalous ways of
Hypocrisy and Immorality. These and the like things, perhaps, are not so much
to be wondered at, because God had not as yet used the last means to instruct
mankind, and to oblige them to Piety and Virtue; but that there should be Times
as bad as the worst of those, after Christ himself had appeared in the world to
die for sinners, and to bring the Doctrine of Salvation to mankind with the
most convincing Evidence that could be desired, and with the most powerful
Motives that could be thought of; that notwithanding all this, Oppression,
Violence, Fraud, Hypocrisy, Error, Superstition, Idolatry, and scandalous
Examples, should for some Ages reign no less than before the Times of Christ,
and to that degree, as to shake the Faith even of good men; and if it were
possible, to deceive the very best of all; this seems to be an amazing
Consideration; and tho the noble Examples of Christian Piety and Virtue that
have appeared in the World, and the affured expectation of a larger Progress
that Christianity will make in the earth, and of better effects that it will
produce, may answer the Objection; yet that the World, that the Church, should
be so bad under the last means, is what may raise some Admiration: But you are
to consider, That when our Lord first came into the world, he came not to
establish a Religion, which should either by its Truth Convince, or by its
Power Reform Mankind whether they would or no; but what was sufficient for both
purposes, if they would be wise and honest, and suffer the concernments of
Eternal Life to prevail with them above their worldly Interests; and therefore
there was as much reason to expect an Universal Reformation, as to expect that
men would not resist the evidence of Truth in matters of the greatest concern
to them in the whole world; but to bring them to this the Gospel was furnished
with no irresistible means, but left them under the natural liberty they had
before, with a provision of grace, that might be resisted; and therefore it was
in it self likely that the Truth would be opposed by some, and corrupted by
others, and by many held in unrighteousness; that several to whom it was
propounded, would not believe it, and several that believed it, would not obey
it; and in time, that it would be mixed with Errors and Superstitions, and
framed to the designs of Ambition and Covetousness; nay, the better and more
Divine a Religion that of the Gospel is, the more violently it would be opposed
by some, and the more certainly corrupted by others: So that if we consider the
Excellency of the Gospel, with the Purpose of God not to overbear the World
into the Faith and Obedience of it, by forcing the natural Liberty of men, it
had rather been much more strange, if it had escaped opposition and corruption,
than to have been both opposed and corrupted as it has: Thus our Blessed
Savior himself, and his Apostles, foretold that it would be; Take heed lest no
man deceive you; for many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ, and shall
deceive many; many false Prophets shall arise, and deceive many; and if any one
shall say unto you, Lo here is Christ, and there is Christ, believe it not; for
there shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall show great signs
and wonders, insomuch, that if it were possible, they should deceive the very
elect: Behold I have told you before. Thus he foretold how Christianity should
be corrupted by Impostures and Frauds: Again, says he, they shall deliver you
up to be afflicted and killed, and ye shall be hated of all nations for my
names sake; and then shall many be offended, and shall betray one another, and
shall hate one another. Thus he foretold the violence that should be used to
extinguish the profession of the Truth. Again, says St. Paul, 2 These. 2. There
shall be a falling away, and the man of sin shall come with all deceivableness
of unrighteousness in them that perish, because they received not the Love of
the Truth, that they might be saved. And for this cause God shall send them
strong delusion, that they should believe a lie, that they might all be damned,
who believed not the Truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. There he
foretells a fearful Apostasy from the Purity and Simplicity of the Christian
Profession. Again, says he, 2 Timothy 3.1, 2. This know, that in the last days
perilous times shall come; For men shall be lovers of their own selves,
covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful,
unholy, without natural affection, trucebreakers, false accusers, incontinent,
fierce, despisers of those that are good, traitors, heady, highminded, lovers
of pleasure more than lovers of God: There he foretells a terrible corruption of
manners: And again 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3. The Spirit speaks expressly, says he,
that in the latter times some shall depart from the Faith, giving heed to
seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils, speaking lies in hypocrisy, having
their conscience seared with an hot iron, forbidding to marry, and commanding
to abstain from meats, which God has created to be received with thanskgiving
of them which believe and know the Truth. Now lay all these things together,
and here is as plain warning, as can possibly be given, of most corrupt and
degenerate Times even after Christ's first coming; and so that is expressly
foretold, which the Text evidently supposes: For here would be glorious
pretenses to deceive, violence to compel, and wicked examples to offend the
Disciples of Christ. And what provision has our Lord left to secure them from
being misled, where there is so much danger? They are to attend to the
Doctrine, which he delivered us at first by his Holy Apostles, to secure
themselves from being deceived; they must lay to heart the Promises of the
Gospel to arm themselves against the Temptations of the World, and the power of
Evil Examples; and they are to consider, that all these things were foretold by
our Lord himself, and his Apostles, that they might not be scandalized, when
they should happen, nor be tempted to suspect, that either Christianity was not
of God from the first; or at least, that our Lord has neglected all care of it
since, because it does so little good, as yet, in the world; because it runs
out into so many Errors, and because the Truth of it is so vehemently opposed;
for, says our Savior, Behold, I have told you before: But still it is in their
power, whether they will take warning by such Predictions, and whether they
will guard themselves against Errors and Evil Examples; and therefore a very
corrupt state of things in the Christian World will in all likelihood shake the
Faith of many believers, and cause some to turn from the holy commandment
delivered to them, not regarding the admonitions of Christ and his Apostles
beforehand: and so when Christ comes, he will find but little Faith upon the
Earth; And this is the observation which in the first place is unavoidable from
the Text; That even after Christ, there would be degenerate Ages; for this is
plainly supposed, as the cause why there would be but little Faith found, when
he should come to visit the earth, for the iniquities and offenses it abounds
with. The

2. Supposition is, That the Providence of our Lord would then appear to set
things right, when there was the greatest need to interpose in behalf of his
Church: For whereas it is said, When the Son of man comes, shall he find faith
on the earth? it is intimated manifestly, that his coming is then to be
expected, when little Faith is to be found amongst men; and consequently, when
scandals and temptations are so strong, that it is an hard matter to bear up
against them. I have said already, that the evidence of Christianity does not
make all men receive it; and that the Power of Christianity does not make all
that receive it, wise and good men; and it is not to be denied, but that
amongst Christians themselves, there are as monstrous Errors, and lewd
examples, as ever there were in the World before Christianity, or as there are
now where Christianity is not at all professed. Now at this rate, should the
Lord of the Church, our Lord Jesus Christ, let things go as they would, it
would in time come to pass, that nothing of Christianity would remain in the
World, but the name of it, and that for no other purpose but to do more hurt
with it, than could be done without it. But how is it, that Divine Providence
will interpose, or according to the expression of the Text, that the Son of man
will come, and will make good his Promise of being with his Church to the end
of the World; which is never more remarkably fulfilled, than when he interposes
in those circumstances, which make men think, that he will not interpose, and
that he is not at all concerned, what becomes of the State of Religion, or the
affairs of the Church? Because our Lord has not made the Gospel an
irresistible means of convincing unbelievers, and reforming wicked men,
therefore it would in time be needful that in order to the keeping up of true
Religion, and making Christians such as they ought to be, that he, I say,
should by his Providence correct his own Disciples, and reduce wretched mankind
into an unavoidable necessity of consideration, that Truth and Righteousness
should not utterly fail from among the Children of men. When there is the
greatest danger of losing the true profession of Christianity, our Lord will
not be wanting to maintain it: When all Flesh had corrupted their ways, God
came and swept away mankind with a Flood, and saved Noah to be the Father of a
new and better Generation; When their prosperity had corrupted their ways, he
called Abraham forth to preserve True Religion in him, and in his Family; and
these, and the like Providence are pledges of the same care to interpose in
behalf of Truth and righteousness when the Faithful seem to fail from among the
Children of men. While God seems to let the World alone, and to suffer all men
to go on in their own ways, as if he took no notice of them, nor were at all
concerned, what they did, he is all the while trying and proving what they are,
not indeed for his own Information, for he knows all things; but for the
instruction of those that are to come after. If he at every turn should
interpose, when we think it needful, we should very seldom know, who are
sincere, and who are Hypocrites; It is very fit, that it should be sometimes
seen, whether men are what they pretend to be, whether indeed they are
concerned for that Truth, for which they have once pretended a mighty zeal;
whether they are Governed by Conscience, as they say, or by mere Worldly and
Politic considerations; for such discoveries as these are very instructing,
and serve for the bringing about of much good in the World, and in the Church;
which we may reasonably presume to be one cause, why when the Son of Man comes,
he will find but little Faith upon the Earth, because while he suffers the
World to go on, as if he minded it not, he is trying those that pretend to
Faith, and upon the Trial many are discovered not to have it. In short, Divine
Providence is so far from being regardless of the affairs of men, that it then
most of all shows it self, when men are Tempted to think, that it regards
nothing (i. e.) when there is but little Faith to be found in the Earth; and
this will be abundantly demonstrated at the close of all things, that is, at
the Day of Judgment, which will be the most convincing act of Providence, that
ever was in the World, and one forerunner of it, will be that Question, Where
is the promise of his coming?

And now the use of all ought to be that, which is the declared intention of
our Savior in the beginning of the Parable: And he spoke a parable to them, to
the end, that men ought always to pray, and not to faint: For the true Ground
of Prayer is Faith in the Providence, and Promises of God; and if there be no
time, when these fail, then ought men always to pray, and not to faint (i. e.)
they ought always to depend upon God's Providence, they ought always to believe
his Promises, they ought always to be certain that their Prayers are heard, and
will turn to good account for them; that God is gracious to all, and much more
to them that love and serve him; and if they do all this, then they will always
pray, and not faint (i. e.) and not be discouraged: And if they ought always to
pray, then also, when they are most apt to be discouraged, and when there is
but little Faith to be found upon the Earth; nay, then most of all, because
when Temptations to unbelief are greatest, we should the most of all strengthen
our selves by recourse to God, and dependence upon him.

To this Instance in Prayer, there are two things must go.

1. A Steadfast resolution to walk in all the ways of God, and not to be
diverted out of them by any Worldly Interest whatsoever: For he can have no
Faith to go to God, who thinks of taking care for himself without regard to his
Duty to God: A man is not in a condition to seek the Favor of God, or to
commend his case to him, that contrives how to shift for himself without him.

2. A perfect resignation of himself to the Will of God; for by this also it
is, that a man entitles himself to his Favor and Blessing. The most effectual
way to obtain the particular Blessings we pray for at any time, if they are
such things as may prove evil as well as good for us, is to leave the matter,
after all, to the disposal of Divine Providence; for then if we obtain them, we
get his Blessing with them too; if we do not, we are sure to get his Blessing
without them, which is the general thing we pray for always: With these
dispositions we are in a fit case to present our Prayers to God for Spiritual
Blessings for our selves, and for the Church of Christ, which will assuredly
come accompanied with Temporal ones too, if it be best for us, and if God sees
that it is better for his Church to be prosperous, than to be afflicted in this
world; and then it is better so to be, when men are sufficiently prepared for
it, by God's Correction, and their own Repentance. Men ought therefore always
to pray, and not to faint; for their Prayers thus qualified, will not fail of
obtaining what they ask; which our Savior thought good to illustrate by an
example in the Parable delivered before the Text, viz of an unjust Judge, that
neither feared God, nor regarded man; who nevertheless upon the importunity of
a Widow, did what was right in her case; much more shall God hear the Prayers
of his faithful Servants: For,

1. He is the Just God, and is of himself ready to right those that do at any
time suffer wrong.

2. He is also the Merciful God that regards men; and when we desire things
of him that are needful, he is of himself ready to grant what we ask, or at
least, that which is more needful than what we ask.

3. Whereas the Judge in the Parable seemed to contemn the Poverty and Meanness
of that Person, that sued to him for Justice; for which reason she is
represented here to be a Widow, one of a destitute Condition, that wanted a
Patron to assert her Right; God, who is Just and Good to all, is particularly
Gracious to his servants, and esteems them highly, and no circumstances of
meanness and distress, which he suffers them to fall into, can alter his favor
toward them; for all which Reasons, if the Judge in the Parable granted the
Widows suit, merely because she lay upon him, and was troublesome to him, much
more will God, to whom we are never troublesome, when we make our requests
known to him, grant what we ask, because he is Righteous and Gracious, and
loves and pitieth us, as a father does his children.

The Fourteenth Sermon.
AN ASSIZE-SERMON, PREACHED at St. Mary's in Bury, 1678.
LEVIT. XIX. 12. Ye shall not swear by my name falsely.


THE Religious Use of an Oath, depends chiefly upon the Matter, and the
Discharge. The Matter must be worthy of that Obligation which an Oath implies;
in promising, it must not be unlawful; that we may Swear in Righteousness, it
must not be impossible, it must not be trivial; and in affirming, it must be
some Fact proveable by our own Testimony, that we may Swear in Judgment: All
which implies, That we are not to swear indeliberately, passionately, or
commonly. The Discharge of an oath must be answerable to the Obligation, which
is to Sincerity of Intention, Fidelity of Performance, and the giving of
Testimony exactly according to knowledge; and then we Swear in Truth.

All which conditions of using an Oath religiously, are put together by the
Prophet Jeremiah, c. 4. v. 2. And thou shall swear, The Lord lives, in truth,
in judgment, and in righteousness. In Righteousness, not profaning an Oath, by
making it the bond of Iniquity; in Judgment, not exposing it to Contempt, by
using it rashly and improperly; and in Truth, not violating the bond of an
Oath, by breaking Promise, or giving Testimony to a Falsehood.

Swearing in Truth, is that part of the Religion of an Oath, which I shall at
this time press upon you, omitting the Consideration of what things an Oath may
be conversant about; and that the rather, because I shall apply what I have to
say upon the former Point, either to such Oaths as fasten any Duty upon us,
required by the Laws; or to Swearing in Courts of Judicature, where the end of
Swearing, viz. the Judicial deciding of Controversies, does always make the
matter enquired into, worthy of so high a Testimony.

Therefore have I chosen these Words of God for my Subject, Ye shall not swear
by my name falsely: A Law which, if any, is written upon the very hearts of men;
and yet it pleased God, that it should be written in our Bibles too: I would to
God there were no occasion given by the present age, to urge it in our Sermons,
at least in the way of Complaint and Reproof. But since Perjury, Perjury I say,
that monstrous sin, which strikes even at the Majesty of God, and betrays the
Throne of the King; which undermines the very Foundations of Religion and
Justice; which does most sensibly grieve the hearts of all good Christians, and
threatens the safety of every good Subject; which does not only work mischief
to the Innocent, but also damns the Guilty, almost without remedy. If Perjury,
as it is commonly said, be grown the crying Sin of our Land, and it appears that
the Penalties of the Law are not terrible enough to prevail against it; we are
then bound in Allegiance to God, in Loyalty to the King, in Love to our
Country, in Charity to the souls of men, to bring in all the assistance we can
from Religion, to expel this Fatal Mischief, and to remove this foul scandal
from among us, by instructing plainly, by reproving impartially, by exhorting
and persuading most vehemently. In contribution to which good end, I beg your
Patience while I endeavor to show,

First of all, Wherein lies the peculiar Obligation of an Oath.

Secondly, What are the several ways of Violating this Obligation, or incurring
the Crime of Perjury.

Thirdly, What are the usual Temptations and Inducements thereunto.

Lastly, Some of the Fearful Aggravations that belong to the sin.

That an Oath induces the utmost obligation to speak the Truth, is confessed by
general Practice, which has made, or rather received it to be the end of
Controversy: For if a man could be obliged yet more deeply than by swearing,
surely the final resort would not be had to an Oath; if any thing could confirm
a Testimony more assuredly, which is in our Power, this should not be the last
Confirmation: Therefore let it be considered, that the very end of an Oath
implies a peculiar obligation to discharge it truly; for the greater that trust
is, which I cause another to repose in me, the greater treachery I am guily of,
if I then deceive him. But if the end of an Oath obliges men not to swear
falsely, much more does the nature of it. With very good reason may an Oath be
rested in as the highest security that men can offer for their Honesty and
Truth: For the nature of an Oath consists in this, That it is an appeal to God
as to the Witness of Truth, and the Avenger of Falsehood, for the Confirmation
of our own Testimony.

1. God is appealed to as a Witness; he who is the God of Truth and Knowledge,
the faithful and infallible Witness of every thought and action; he whose
Testimony alone, needs not to be confirmed by any other, since for him only it
is naturally and eternally impossible to deceive or to be deceived: I ought
never to lie or dissemble, or break my Word, because I know my self always to
be in the Presence of God: This ought to restrain me from being guilty of
Falsehood at any time, that I am within the sight and hearing of the God of
Truth: But most of all am I bound to be sincere, when I have appealed to him as
present, for the confirmation of what I say. It is a grief to a good man to
hear a lie told to his face; but if the liar should call him to witness his
falsehood, this he would take in foul scorn, and with greatest indignation: And
what an height of impudence must it needs be, to put the like affront upon God
himself, by appealing to his knowledge for our unrighteousness, in a matter
wherein we deal falsely? What is this, but to impute our own baseness and
falsehood, to his most Holy Majesty; and to do what is in us, to make him a liar
like unto our selves?

2. God is not only called upon as the Witness of Truth when we swear, but also
as the Avenger of Falsehood: And indeed it is the adding of this which makes an
Appeal to God's Testimony by Invocation, a most forcible Obligation to Truth,
and the utmost Security which we can offer for the same. When we pretend that
there is a man present who knows that to be true which we affirm, it would be
superfluous to wish that he were revenged of us, if it be not true, because he
may be called forth openly to attest the Truth, or discover the Falsehood of
what we say. Where the Witness is visible, and the Testimony credible, it is
sufficient to appeal to his knowledge only. But when God is taken to witness by
us, there is no voice or sensible appearance, by which he does either confirm
or disown the matter. What is it then which makes an appeal to God, the silent
and invisible Witness, to be of greater force to oblige our selves, and confirm
others, that we speak the truth? What is it but this, that we do appeal to his
Justice, as well as his Knowledge, and call the Vengeance of the Almighty down
upon our heads, if he discerns any Falsehood and deceit in our Testimony? And
it is impossible that any obligation to speak the truth, or to discharge a
trust, should be greater than this, That if we are now guilty of lying or
unfaithfulness, we do not only consent, but desire that the Indignation and
Curse of God may fall upon us. I do not think that the invoking of Divine
Vengeance, if we swerve from the Truth, is only consequent upon Swearing,
according to the Opinion of some Learned men, but also that it belongs to the
very Essence of an Oath; for that should seem to be essential to it, which if
it were removed, the fear of Perjury would be taken away with it: But no man
doubts that appealing to God as a Judge, is implied in appealing to him as a
Witness: Hence it is, that the Septuagint sometimes uses (...), a Curse, for
(...) an Oath. Said Abraham to his Servant, Genesis 24.41. Thou shall be free from
this my Oath: But the Septuagint render it, (...), thou shall be free from this
my Curse. And this is that meaning of an Oath, which is well expressed both by
the Forms and Rites of Swearing used amongst us, the common Form being this, So
help ye God; to which the Party Sworn, gives his Assent by laying his Hand upon
the Holy Gospel, and kissing it; all which is as much as if he had said, If I
falsify, let me have no part in the Grace and Mercy of God, and in the Blood of
Christ; may I be accursed in this World, and let my name be blotted out of the
Book of Life. And is there not good reason then, why an Oath should be, as the
Apostle speaks of it, the end of Controversy, since of all other Obligations
to Truth, this plainly is the strongest; and if a man's Conscience will not be
held by this, it will be held by nothing.

Thus much concerning the Sacred Obligation of an Oath. I proceed to show how
many ways it may be violated, and the Guilt of Perjury incurred. It is usually
said, That an Oath is either Promissory, or Assertory; but I think, that in
strictness, every Oath includes a Promise, even the Assertory Oath, by which a
man binds himself to declare what he knows concerning some matter of Fact, past
or present; for this Oath includes a Promise of declaring the truth concerning
it, only the Promise and Performance are so close to each other, that they can
hardly be distinguished; whereas the Obligation of those Oaths we call
Promissery, continues for some considerable time to come. These Oaths are
mostly taken out of Courts of Judicature, such as the Oaths of subordinate
Magistrates, to execute the Laws honestly, and to administer Justice
impartially; of the Members of a Society or Corporation, to observe the Rules,
and vindicate the Rights of the same; of inferior Officers, such as
Churchwardens and Constables, to present Offenders, and execute their Offices
according to Law; finally, of Subjects, to vield true Allegiance, and Faithful
Subjection to the King. Such Oaths as these, are directly violated two ways.
First, If there be not an honest Intention at the time of Swearing. 2. If there
be not a faithful Performance afterward: For a Promise has a double aspect,
both upon the present Intention, and the future Performance; he that makes a
Promise, which at the same time he intends not to perform, is guilty of lying;
and though he intends at first, yet if he willingly neglects the Performance
afterward, he has broken his Word; therefore if the Promise was made under
Oath, he is forsworn in either case; and if he was false in both, he is guilty
of a double act of Perjury; nay, though the Oath were but one, yet his
Perjuries may be many; for so long as those Circumstances remain, in which the
Oath binds him, every wilful omission of performing the tenor of his Promise,
is contrary to his Oath, and consequently a new violation of it; so often as he
fails, so often he is forsworn, as truly so often, as if he had every time
before each guilty Failure, taken the same Oath which he bound himself withal
at first. Thou may be sworn once for all the year, or for all thy life; but
there is no such matter as being forsworn once for all, as vain people talk;
for by disobeying thy Superior, suppose thou have done contrary to thy Oath
yesterday, that was one perjury; and should thou do the like to morrow, that
would be another. If thou art under a Promise confirmed by Oath, but not under
the restraint of the Fear of God, thou may bind one Curse fast upon thy Head
with another, and seal them with a third, and go on to treasure up Wrath
against the Day of Wrath.

In Courts of Judicature, Perjury is incurred, when false Witness is given in
upon Oath; i. e. either when a man swears that to be true, which he knows to be
false; or that he is certain of a matter, whereof he is uncertain; or that he
declares the utmost of his knowledge concerning a Fact, when yet he conceals any
part thereof. In this last case, the Witness is forsworn as plainly, as in the
two former; for his Oath is to give in Evidence not only the Truth, and nothing
but the Truth; but likewise the whole Truth, in answer to such Questions as the
Court shall put to him; therefore the Witness is not clear from Perjury, merely
by saying nothing but what is true, touching the matter in question, if in
favor to either side he conceals so much as any one Circumstance in his
Answers and Depositions, which he knows would alter the Case: What can be
plainer? He that swears to declare the whole Truth, is forsworn if he does it
not; and he surely does it not, who declares it in part only. Moreover, a
Witness may incur the guilt of Perjury, by endeavoring to blind the Evidence
with deceitful shuffling answers, instead of declaring what he knows, in
plainness and simplicity of speaking; for tho the Court by multiplying
questions, may screw out the Truth at last, yet he has not discharged his Oath,
which obliged him not only to an actual and final discovery of the Truth, but
to an honest intention of so doing; and it is very plain, that he intends not
the Truth should be discovered, who darkens and hides it as much as he can.
Much less can his Oath be discharged by the help of Equivocation, and Mental
Reservations, which being of no force to save a Lie, are much less able to
excuse from Perjury.

The Oath of the Jury being a Promissory Oath, to bring in a Verdict according
to Evidence, their Oath may be doubly violated, as was now observed, by not
intending so to do, and by not doing of it. If any one of the Jury be
prepossessed in favor of one side, intending, be the evidence what it will, to
use all his interest with the rest, in favor of that; that man, I say, is
Perjured as soon as ever he is sworn; he has sworn falsely, though perhaps he be
overruled, and an honest Verdict be brought in at last. Again, if any of them
intend honestly at first, but are afterward wrought to conspire in a Verdict
contrary to the Evidence, they have violated their Oath at last. Nay, a corrupt
Jury is guilty of perjury in another respect, since they swear against that
very temptation which misleads them; they are to bring in a Verdict according
to the proof of the fact; whereas they make it according as they are inclined
to the Parties; and yet they are sworn, not to swerve from the Truth, for Fear,
Hatred, Favor, or Affection.

But farther; one man may be guilty of the violation of another man's Oath; he
that suborns a false Witness, is before God, guilty of his Perjury; yea, if he
does so much as tempt a Witness to be false; for tho he himself is not actually
sworn, yet he designs that an Oath should be broken. God has said, Thou shall
swear in truth; he in effect says, Thou shall not do so; and therefore if he
prevails, he is at once guilty of the false Witness, his breaking that Law of
God, and likewise of his own contradicting it, which is every whit as bad; and
there is this Circumstance rendering the Perjury more displeasing to God, That
two men are guilty of violating one Oath.

The case is the same in tampering with Juries, to possess them beforehand with
favor or disaffection to either of the Parties; for what is this, but to
persuade them to Perjury? that is, to give their Verdict with respect to
persons, and not with regard to the Evidence.

And I do not see, but they who are to Impannel Juries, are likewise guilty of
the Violation of other men's Oaths, if in any Case depending, they return Jurors
whose Interest and Affection they believe will carry them to favor the side
befriended by their own wishes; for though they may choose whether they will be
forsworn, yet he that returns 'em had a mind that they should, rather than the
Cause should miscarry on that side to which he is partial himself.

Lastly, Whoever in behalf of a Client, puts words into the mouth of a slow
Country Witness, while he is giving his Testimony, by which the Witness means
one thing, and he another, by this means perverting the Evidence, while the
poor man perceives it not; he does not only directly offend against the end of
swearing, which is the discovery of the Truth, but before God he is as guilty
of the Violation of an Oath as the honest Witness would have been, had he
knowingly used the same subtilty in giving Testimony, which was indeed but
practiced upon him.

And thus much concerning the usual ways, direct or indirect, by which an Oath
may be violated; it being requisite to touch upon them at least, that what
remains to be said, may find us prepared for particular Application.

As to the Inducements to Perjury, which was the Third Subject propounded,
there is no doubt but every sin which preys upon the Conscience, does form the
mind more or less into some disposition to this, the blackest of them all;
every thing enclines to it, which lessens the Sense of Religion, and the Fear
of offending God: The prevalency of any lust, especially of Ambition and
Revengefulness, animates men to break loose from all the most sacred bonds that
should restrain them from gratifying their inordinate appetites. Again,
Partiality grounded upon Prejudice and Interest, upon Envy and Covetousness,
has been the cause of many Perjuries; in most questions concerning Rents and
Tithes, every body is ready to say how the Case is like to go.

But when all is said, there is nothing in this our Age has made such foul work
in swearing, as Faction has done; that combination of Covetousness, Pride and
Ambition, of Envy, Hatred and Malice, united and made fast together, under
Hypocrisy. Any one of these singly by it self, leads to Perjury; but when they
all conspire they drive on to it, without opposition.

Another inlet to the violation of Oaths, is the Practice of Common Swearing;
he that will call God to witness Trifles, by degrees loses the Reverence of an
Oath, and is within a little of calling him to witness falsehood, I mean upon
Solemn Oath; for it is not to be doubted, that the Customary Oaths of
Conversation, make the Swearer guilty of frequent Perjuries, when he thinks not
of it; but if he swears in truth, before a Court of Judicature, against his
Interest or Affection, we are to thank his Generosity for it, and not the
respect he has for an Oath. Otherwise, he that Swears commonly and rashly, will
upon any considerable Temptation Swear falsely with deliberation.

In a word, such are the Inducements and Occasions of Perjury, that perhaps it
were to be wished that the manner of administering Oaths, were in all places a
little more awful, and solemn than it is, to strike into those men some
reverence of an Oath, and fear of Perjury, who bring nothing of it along with
them. Indeed, the most effectual way to prevent false Swearing, would be to
consider the heinous Aggravations of the Sin, some of which in the last place I
shall now represent.

We know that sincerity in speaking of the Truth, and keeping ones Promise, is
every man's Duty, whether he be Sworn or not. The natural Obligation we lie
under to be true and faithful to our Word, is so strong and so sensible, that
every Man is ashamed to be found in a lie. But whoever is known to be a common
falsifier of his Word, and so given to Deceit, that he is not to be trusted,
let him be endued with never so many considerable and useful Parts besides,
that shall be sure to ruin his Reputation. Insincerity is so foul a Stain, that
no good quality can wipe it out; and this shows that there is a strong
Obligation to trust, common to all Mankind; wherefore this must needs be one
heinous Circumstance of Perjury, That when the sacred Bond of an Oath, is once
violated, the perjured Person is guilty of breaking that Faith and Truth, which
was a natural Duty before.

But sincerity is still more a Duty, when my Testimony is required in order to
public Peace and Justice. All Men have right to be truly dealt with, much more
the Magistate, by whom I am protected most of all, when he requires it in order
to the doing of Justice, or the securing of Government. It is then my Duty to
the Magistrate, it is my Duty to my Neighbor, it is my Duty to my Country, to
speak the Truth clearly and honestly; and if I promise any thing, to discharge
it faithfully. The discharge of thy Office which thou art Sworn to execute, is
both requisite for the public Good, and required by just Authority; if thou
had not so much as promised it, thou had been still obliged to the same, in
obedience to thy Superior, in Love to thy Country. If thou had been barely
required to give thy Testimony in Court; yet, even without Oath or Promise,
thou were greatly bound to Truth; because the telling of a lie in this Case,
were impudent undutifulness to the Judge, and manifestly injurious to thy
Neighbor. In like manner, a Verdict should be according to the Evidence, if it
were only for this, that a Controversy might be righteously decided, instead of
establishing some instance of Iniquity by a Law. This therefore is a farther
Aggravation of the Sin of Perjury in all these Cases, That the Oath which is
violated, did not only bind to that sincerity, which is the Duty of all Men
every where; but to that Truth, which was particularly demanded by the
Magistrate, which was to be an instrument of Justice and public Security,
which was necessary for the preventing of Wars, and the doing of right.

But these are light Aggravations in Comparison to those that arise from the
nature and particular Obligation of an Oath it self. At least, they will
receive great weight from these, as you shall see presently.

It Is an excess of impious boldness, to worship God with a lie at the Tongues
end; but Swearing is an act of Worship. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God,
and swear by his Name. Swearing is a direct acknowledgment of the Divine
Attributes; and to Swear falsely, must needs be as bad as making long Prayers
to devour Widows houses. But he that Swears, does not barely worship God, he
takes him to witness in his behalf too, so the forsworn Man calls him to attest
a Lie. To imagine the wickedness of this, what would you think of a Man, who
should appeal to some worthy Person, for the truth of a matter, which he is
sure the Gentleman knows to be a lie? Farther, what if he should dare to appeal
to the Judge himself, or to the whole Court of Judicature, tho he knew that
every one there would utterly deny it; however, that they would not confess it
without being Liars like unto himself? But this is a shameless insolence, that
no Man ever ventured upon. What think you then of him that Appeals to God's
Testimony for the credit of a Lie? To the Testimony of God, I say, who is
infinitely greater, and to be had in more Reverence, than the most venerable
Assemblies of Men. When we are guilty of other Sins, we sneak away from the
thoughts of God. The Drunkard, and the Adulterer, and the Thief, are ashamed
and afraid to think there is so great a Witness of their Crimes; and in
Comparison to the false Swearer, they retire with some sort of Modesty from his
Presence, hiding him from themselves at least, tho they cannot hide themselves
from him. It Is only the forsworn Wretch, that must of necessity Sin without any
shamefacedness; that tells a Lie to the very Face of God, and desires him to
observe it, and be the witness of his own dishonor.

And yet a more desperate degree of Wickedness is implied in Perjury than this,
and that because an Oath is an Appeal to God's Justice. For the Swearer by
consenting to fall under the Rigor of Justice, unless he deals uprightly, as
far as in him lies, he calls himself off by Perjury from any Appeal to Mercy
afterward. By other Sins we make an ill use of the Mercy of God; but by this,
we set it at defiance. The perjured Man deprives himself, as much as he can, of
the last hope of Sinners, who though they put many affronts upon the rest of
God's Attributes, yet study to keep a reserve in his Goodness and Compassion;
but he throws himself, according to his own Will and Consent, into the hands of
Divine Justice, and its utmost Severity.

Yet farther, through all these Obstacles does the false Swearer make his way,
that he may come to pervert Justice and Equity. A Man should be horribly afraid
at the thought of so much Impiety, if his end were to help the Fatherless and
Widow, and to save the Poor from wrong, or to secure his Country out of danger;
but how much more, when he hunts for the precious Life, when he betrays the
Simple, and protects the Crafty, or serves the designs of Faction or
Oppression? For I should guess that Forswearing is never practiced, but upon
the Wrong side, at least, that it is called in very rarely, in comparison, to
assist the Right. It Is the unjust Man that seeks to defend himself by
artificial delays, by indirect Proceedings, and at a dead lift by downright
Perjuries; while the Righteous trusts to the Honesty of his Cause, and the
Wisdom of the Judge, and the Providence of God. But if I should be mistaken in
this, if Forswearing should be more ordinary then I imagine, even on the Right
side; surely it must be, because it is so common on the Wrong, that nothing is
believed to be safe without it. Behold then, what horrible Confusion it makes
in the World, while it confounds Right and Wrong, Truth and Falsehood, Justice
and Injustice, blotting out the clearest Characters, by which they can be
distinguished from one another in Courts of Judgment. It Is this, which levels an
Honest Cause with the Unjust one that is advanced against it; nay, which
creates Confidence of Success in the Oppressor, and fills the good Man, who
dares not be damned, with Mistrust and Fear. It is this, which makes the
fortune of Verdicts as uncertain, as that of Arms; and gives Courage to the
Villain to wage Law with the Innocent; it robs Virtue of much of its Defense
and Security in this World, and puts Power into the hands of the Malicious, and
affords Protection to the Murderer, and the Traitor. The detestable Effects
thereof in the present Life, cannot be described, but by the Cries of the
Oppressed, the Sighs of Orphans, the Tears of Widows, the Ruin of Families, and
the Shedding of innocent Blood. And tho every man that dares be Forsworn, has
not arrived thus far in doing mischief, yet he only wants a gainful
Opportunity, or an unlucky Provocation, and then a Devil to put it into his
head.

To conclude, What should I say farther, to enkindle your Zeal against a Sin
already swelled into so vast a bigness, but this, That so far as it prevails,
it is always likely to intercept between us, and the most happy Influence of
the Honorable Judges, when they come to us full of the invaluable Blessings of
Government; they in whom good Subjects, and wronged Innocents expect to meet
with powerful Patrons, while none but the Criminal and Seditious shrinks away
with Shame and Fear; who to the State bring along with them Peace, by deciding
our Controversies; and Plenty, and Honor, and Safety, by enforcing Obedience
to the Laws: Who to the Church bring the Securities of her Patrimony and
Rights, making the Benefits of their Justice to bear good proportion with the
Authority of their Commission, which they have received not only from the King,
but by him from God, who are the faithful Dispensers of the Justice of the
King, and the most welcome Messengers of his Love and Care for the People: Who
from the Sovereign convey Life and Spirit, through the whole Body of the
Nation, returning the same in grateful Loyalty and Duty from his Subjects, and
in their Blessings and Prayers for the Establishment of the Throne. Should we
not all conspire to remove every hindrance of such Advantages as these, which
being rightly considered, seem to be no less desirable, necessary and
universal, than the refreshing showers, and the return of fruitful Seaons. But
than Perjury, nothing does more fatally intercept the Communication of those
excellent Benefits; than Perjury, I say, which can obstruct Justice in its very
Course, and baffle the most solemn Preparation for it, even when the Judge is
present, when the Court is set, when the matter is opened, when all things are
ready for impartial Proceedings, when the Injured is arrived to the height of
his hopes, and the evil Doer is almost fallen into the hands of Justice. To sum
up all; The man who dares be Forsworn, is one whom neither a natural Sense of
Good and Evil, nor Duty to the Magistrate, nor Love to his Country, nor Justice
to his Neighbor, nor Compassion to the Miserable, nor the Presence of the
Judge, nor the Presence of God, nor an Appeal to his Knowledge, nor an Appeal to
his Justice, and the fear of damning himself by his own Sentence, can retain
from Lying, and breach of his Word.

We can hardly think that such a Wretch as this, is fit to live upon the face
of the Earth. But shall he then ever ascend into God's holy hill? Shall he ever
come into the Portion of the Righteous? How tender are thy Mercies, O God, who
art yet willing to accept even of his Repentance; who have yet suspended the
most deserved Execution of his own Sentence against himself, and left him under
some possibility of Forgiveness. In conformity to which great Example we pray,
that he may be snatched as a Brand out of the Fire, and through a great
Repentance, escape the Damnation of Hell.

Now to the most Gracious and Sacred Majesty of the infinite Good God, be
ascribed all Honor and Blessing for evermore.

The Fifteenth Sermon.
A SERMON Preached at WINDSOR, Before the PRINCESS of Denmark.
GENESIS V. 24. And Enoch walked with God, and he was not, for God took him.


IN these words there are two things expressed.

1. The Character of Enoch, that he walked with God.

2. The manner of his end in this World, that he was not, for God took him.
Both which points I intend to consider, and then to show how we may make such
Considerations profitable to our selves.

1. Concerning his Character; we may observe, that it was given to none of his
Predecessors; from which we must not conclude that none of them were good men,
but only that he excelled the rest. In so very short an account of the
Patriarchs before the Flood, as we have in this History, wherein little more is
reported of them, but their Names and their Age, to have it said of one them,
that he walked with God, and but of one, is a reasonable intimation, that he
excelled in Godliness and Virtue; And this appears farther, in that God
translated him, which of it self implies that he had arrived to great
perfection. But to walk with God is the Character of all Persons, that are
truly Holy and Good, though it agrees more eminently to some than to others; as
it did to Enoch, more than to all his Predecessors. As for the expression, it
is figurative, but yet very plain; for Walking does in this place, as in many
more, signify the general Course and Tenor of a man's Life; and therefore
walking with God is a lively expression of his doing those things, which are
well pleasing to God; as if in every step of his passage through this World, he
had God so present with him, as to see him with his bodily eyes: which Meaning
may be more distinctly explained by these two Particulars.

1. That Piety, or Faith in God, is the overruling Principle of his Actions.

2. That because he is Governed by such a Principle, he lives in the constant
Practice of all other Virtue and Duty.

1. That Piety, or Faith in God, is the overruling Principle of his Actions; a
Reason, that prevails with him, above all other reasons and motives whatsoever:
He is therefore said to walk with God, because it is a sense of God that runs
through his Conversation, and takes place against all other considerations; and
leaves a mark of it self upon all his behavior: A sense of God, I say, that
is, of God's Infinite Wisdom, Power and Goodness, of the Absolute right which
he has to be obeyed by his Creatures, and of their absolute dependence upon
him; A sense of his presence every where, beholding the evil and the good; A
sense of his Justice, that will not suffer the wicked to go unpunished; and of
his Faithfulness, that will not suffer the Righteous to be unrewarded: It is
this sense of God, that Governs his Conversation, that restrains him, that
puts him forward, that sets bounds to his desire, and to his use of pleasures;
that prescribes to him how to get, and how to use his wealth; that has to do
in all his affairs, and admits no reason from Flesh and Blood, or from worldly
interest, to be heard, but in subordination to it self: And surely he that is
thus affected, that believes in God, that stands in Awe of him, that Loves him,
and puts his Trust in him, may well be said to walk with God, since he does so
steddily walk in his ways, as if God took him by the Hand, and led him through
every doubtful passage of his Life; for it is in effect the same thing, that he
having God still before his eyes, or rather a lively sense of him in his heart,
and knowing what his will and pleasure is, regards nothing in comparison, but
the doing of that which will please him; and whatever reasons of action do, as
he goes thorough the World, mix themselves with this; This is still the supreme
and prevailing Reason, by which all others are either allowed or rejected.
This, I say, That what God will be pleased with, must be done; and what will
displease him must be let alone. And this is that Faith by which the just have
lived in all Ages, That Faith therefore, which the 11th to the Hebrews so
highly extols; Those worthies recorded there, believed that God is, and that he
is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him.

2. To this we must add, That because he that is said to walk with God, lives
by Faith, therefore he lives also in the Practice of all other Virtue and Duty:
For Faith leads a man to all, which no other Principle that we know of will do,
though other Principles there are of good use too. To walk with God, is
something more than to cherish, and keep alive the good inclinations that came
into the world with us; for it is to correct and amend the bad ones: some men
are by Nature framed to many Virtues, as I believe all are to some or other;
but no man is naturally disposed to all; and most certainly every one has a
share of corrupted nature; but he that walks with God, is Ruled by a Principle,
that does not only improve what is good in his Nature, but mends what is bad in
it.

It is also a great deal more, than to observe Humane Laws; since the Laws of
men can do no more, than restrain People from being intolerably bad, and such
as Humane Society cannot bear. He that believes in God, submits to just
Authority for Conscience sake; but the case has often happened, when for the
same Conscience sake, such a one has done his Duty, by refusing to do what the
Law of man required; which is a plain argument, that Humane Authority is not
the Rule of Perfection; and that we must Live by an higher Principle, than that
of Obedience to Man, if we live in all respects, as we ought to do.

It is something more, than to govern our intentions and actions by doing well
for our selves in this World: For although integrity and well-doing in all
kinds of duty is generally the best way to prosperity in this Life; yet
sometimes the contrary happens, and more is to be got by Flattery and Falsehood,
than by Honesty and Sincerity; nay it is the inordinate desire of the
Prosperity of this world, that still makes men do base and wicked things; and
therefore the regard of our ease and advantage here, cannot be the true
Principle of Virtue. And if we should bring every other reason of doing what we
ought to do, to the Trial, every other reason besides that of Faith, will be
found very defective and insufficient, and such as will lead a man to evil as
well as to good, as it happens. But a sense of God, with the belief of all his
Perfections, and all his Promises and Threatenings, makes a man every way, and
in every respect, what he ought to be, because it shows him all his Duty, and
obliges him to all his Duty; and while he is under the Power of his Faith, he
is steady in the right way, not to be moved out of it by any Temptation; but
whether it be opportunity invites, or danger threatens, what Temptation soever
sets upon him, he will say with Joseph, How can I do this great wickedness, and
sin against God? Setting aside Faith, it may bear dispute, whether it be
advisable or no, in such or such a case, to do what becomes a Righteous and
Virtuous man; but let a man Live by Faith in God, and there can be no dispute
about it. Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth, and walk in the sight of thine
eyes, and the imagination of thy Heart; that is, were there nothing else to be
considered but Pleasure, nothing but Wealth and Greatness, but the Splendour of
this World, and the gratifying of a lust, this liberty might possibly be made
to appear not so very unreasonable. But know, that for all these things God
will bring thee to Judgment. That to be sure turns the case, and answers every
objection against our Duty, and every argument for any Sin; and therefore he
that walks with God, does all his Duty otherwise, is good in all kinds, and in
every place where his business lies, or where his Temptations lie; For God is
in all his thoughts, in all his affairs, in all his company, and in his
retirement from Company; God's word is with him, that word of God which shows
him his Duty upon all occasions, and which shows him the rewards of doing what
is commanded, and the Punishments of Disobedience; and the sense of his
Presence is with him, that sense which fills him with Life and Joy in
well-doing, especially where the Temptation to Sin is very great, and which
would dismay him, and make him a burden to himself, if he should act contrary
to his clear and settled Judgment of what he ought to do. In short, to walk with
God, is to be universally good and righteous, which no man can be, but he who
lives by Faith; Hence it is, that we find God himself encouraging the Father of
the Faithful to go on in his way of Piety and Virtue, as hitherto he had done;
Walk before me, and be thou perfect, chap. 17. v. 1. that is, Be thou still
Ruled by my Word, still believe my Promises, and Trust my Providence, and in
all that thou do, be mindful of this, that I am with thee, and then shall
thou be perfect. An example to all Generations of Virtue as well as of Piety,
and of all good works, no less than of a firm Faith: Hence it is, that the wise
man tells us, that by the fear of the Lord men depart from evil, Prove. 16.6.
and that the Fear of the Lord is a fountain of life to depart from the snares
of Death, Prove. 14.27. And St. John, This is the victory that overcomes the
world, even our Faith. 1 John. 5.4.

I have thus shown, what is meant by the Character of Enoch, when it is said
that he walked with God, viz. That his regard to God was the over-ruing
Principle of all his actions, and that because he was Governed by Faith, he
lived also in the constant Practice of his Duty in all relations whatsoever;
this being the only Principle that makes a man in every respect, what he ought
to be. I proceed,

2. To say something concerning the end he made in this World: He was not, for
God took him; which place is thus explained by the Author to the Hebrews, chap.
11. v. 5. That Enoch was translated; that he should not see death, and was not
found, because God had translated him (i.e.) he died not, but was Translated
alive into Heaven; and it was a strange surprise to the Age in which he Lived;
who by his sudden removal from them, and their hearing no more of him, were
convinced, that it was God who had taken him to a better Life. Now that which
we are in this place to consider, is the instruction so Singular an act of
Providence afforded to the world; and there are these two ends to which it
manifestly served, viz. That that Age might be awakened into the consideration
of another Life, by so surprising a Testimony thereof, as this was; and
withal, that they might by so sensible an Argument be led to consider, that
the true reward of Piety and Integrity, was not in this World, but in a better.

1. There was this instruction in the Transtation of Enoch, which the World
could not but take notice of, That there was undoubtedly another life after
this, to which he was taken, Soul and Body, having left no part of himself
behind him here, as other Mortals did. And by this time, such an instruction
was grown very needful; For the World, tho it was yet in its Youth and Vigor,
was grown old enough for men to forget their Creator, and to abandon themselves
for the most part to a Voluptuous and Dissolute Life: And that this is no
uncertain Conjecture, appears from hence; that Enoch was Translated but 69
years before Noah was Born, in whose time Mankind was grown to such an
intolerable degree of Licentiousness, That God sent the Flood to sweep all
away, but eight Persons. Now it is not to be thought, that the World was
overspread with such Monstrous Vices all of a sudden, but that after the manner
of all Humane Degeneracy, Corruption of manners, and of Principles too, came on
by degrees, and consequently that in Enoch's time, who was Translated little
less than a Thousnnd Years after the Creation, there was a very great decay of
Piety and Virtue every where; that men were generally bewitched with the
Pleasures of the beautiful and charming Place, which the Earth was before the
Flood, and forgot their Creator, and had lost the Sense of that infinitely
better World, which Adam and the Religious Patriarchs had by revelation from
God given them assurance of: In such an Age as this, when for the reason now
mentioned, it is evident, that the generality of Mankind were sunk into
Debauchery, and perhaps into Infidelity too; Enoch was a steady Pattern of
Piety and Virtue; and whilst most Men walked after their own Lusts, and the
best were much to blame, he walked with God, and Lived above the pleasures and
enjoyments of this Life, having God before his eyes, and another Life, and a
better Life in his hopes. It is therefore very reasonable to conceive, that God
intended by this surprising Testimony of Translating Enoch alive into a better
World, to convince the unbelieving, to awaken the inconsiderate, and to call
off that Voluptuous Age from these brutish debaucheries, to mind better things,
and to prepare for a better Life; especially since in the second place,

2. This was a very instructing admonition, That God who is a rewarder of them
that diligently seek him, as the Epistle to the Hebrews says upon this very
example of Enoch; that God, I say, rewarded his Piety, not with giving him a
longer Life in that pleasant World, but in another, which was therefore a place
more happy and desirable than the Earth was, even in that delicious state and
condition of it, before the Flood had made as strange an alteration in that, as
it made in the Age of man's Life: That God, I say, should take him alive out of
this World, when it abounded with all manner of delights and pleasures; and
this at the Age of 365 Years, when he was but a young man, as the World was
then, younger in proportion, than we are now at 30; when he was in full vigor
and capacity for all the entertainments of sense, which the Earth afforded,
even to Luxury, and this according to the course of Nature to last for some
hundreds of Years to come; That God should Translate him under these
circumstances to another Life, after he had served him with a constant Piety in
his Younger Years, and lived among men with an unreprovable Innocence and
Virtue; this, I say, was a demonstration to all that would consider it, That
that World to which he was Translated, was a better World than that from which
he was taken; and that they might be sure to understand this instruction, God
took him not away by the common means of mortality; since if he had died, that
Vicious Age would have imputed that change to any thing, rather than to a
Divine Providence, rewarding so excellent a Man with so early a removal to a
better Life; and therefore he was taken away alive, that they might not be able
to question the power that did it, or to mistake the reason, why it was done,
that they might know Enoch had obtained a reward from God, suitable to that
Life that he had lived here, and to that Faith by which he had lived, and in
which he had wrought righteousness; being removed from hence to pleasures more
pure and ravishing, than all this World can afford. In a word, they might have
seen, and for some time it is like they acknowledged it, though they soon fell
back again, That the great business of mankind here, is to live in all
Godliness and Honesty; and that God does not reward them that do so, with the
Pleasures and Glories of this World, but with the enjoyments of a better.

And now having said thus much concerning the extraordinary character of Enoch,
and the singular end it pleased God to make with him in this World, I have yet
more to do by way of application; and that

1. To propound the example of Enoch, and such as he was, who walked with God,
to our imitation. And

2. To propound, though not the manner, yet the substance of his reward, for
our encouragement to walk as he walked.

1. To propound his example, as an example that is of it self worthy of our
imitation, and is withal an imitable example, an example that is worthy to be
followed, and an example not too hard to follow; that it is worthy of our
imitation, appears both from that Life to which his Faith led him, and from the
Nature of that Principle it self by which he lived. As to the Life whereunto it
leads, it is made up of whatsoever things are Just, Honest, Lovely, of good
report, if there be any Virtue, Praise; of Justice, Faithfulness, Temperance,
Government of Passions, Wisdom and Fortitude, which are the Glory of Humane
Nature, and things acceptable to God, and approved of men. These things are
enough to recommend the Principle from whence they come: And yet (2.) it is in
it self the best, whether we consider (1.) our concernment in those things
which we believe. For if there be a God, what is our dependence upon this
World, to our dependence upon him? And if we shall endure beyond this Life, and
that for ever, what are our Fortunes till we die, to our Eternal state after
death? It is not our mere Nature, but our Relation to God, that makes us
considerable; and we are very abject Creatures, if we have nothing to do but
Eat and Drink, and to Live a sensual Life for a little time, and then to Vanish
into nothing. Or (2.) whether we consider Faith as a persuasion grounded upon
rational evidence, that is, such evidence, as requires a Free and Unprejudiced
and clear Judgment to perceive, but which not bearing upon the Senses of Men,
distinguishes between the Wise and the Honest on one side, and unteachable
Persons on the other: A Believer does of all men make the most proper use of
his reason, because he assents to the Principles of Religion; For instance,
That there is a God; not upon immediate bodily Sight, but upon a means of
Conviction suited to a reasonable nature: Or (3.) Whether we consider Faith, as
a means to secure an happy Enjoyment of our selves in this World, of which I
need to say no more; that it is the only true support of Man's mind, under all
the Afflictions and Calamities of Life; and that which can make us easy under
them, will make us happy in every condition; That the Example of these Men, who
have lived by Faith, and walked with God, is worthy of our Imitation, is a
Subject that might be spoken to without end. But let us consider it,

2. As an imitable Example: For that it is so, the Pattern mentioned in the
Text, does abundantly prove; Enoch lived in a World that was full of
Temptation, and those as dangerous as Temptations can possibly be, the
Temptations of Luxury, which in their kind are inferior to none; and as to
their degree, when Enoch lived, they were at the height; and as I have shown
already, he had bad Examples enough, and probably but very few that were good.
So that Piety lay under great disadvantage in the common Opinion, and likely
enough it was a matter of some reproach to observe Rules: for that Generation
of Men was now began, of whom we find in the next Chapter, that God saw that
the wickedness of men was great in the earth, and that every imagination of the
thoughts of his heart, were only evil continually: They set themselves at no
time to do any good; all their Business was to follow their brutish Appetites
from one day to another, without restraint; the World was hastening apace to
that Condition, when Enoch lived; and yet he lived so piously, set so good an
Example, as if he had never seen any but good ones himself; and whilst almost
all Men were busy to fill themselves with the excess of sensual Pleasures, his
only business, in comparison, was to please God; he looked up every day to his
Maker, out of whose hands so lately came that beautiful Fabric, which was made
for Man; and instead of surfeiting himself with those delightful entertainments
of Sense that were round about him, he raised his mind above them to the
Contemplation of the Power, Wisdom, and Goodness of God; he offered to the
Creator of all things, the Sacrifices of Praise and Thankfulness; he resigned
himself wholly to his Will and Pleasure; he believed his Promise of a better
World; and in that Faith he wrought righteousness. And what can be said, why
we, who cannot reasonably count our Temptations greater than those he was
under; why we, I say, should not also live as he did? Why should the Government
of our Passions, and the ordering of our Conversation by the Rules of Religion,
be harder to us, than it was to him? What should hinder us from adoring and
praising our Maker every day, and from offering our Prayers and Supplications
to him? Why should not we consider, that God is present with us every where,
and sees us in all that we do, that we may always behave our selves, as in his
Presence? May we not with as much advantage, as he possibly could have, look
beyond this World, and compare it with immortality in a far better state of
things than this; and set our affections upon things above, and not upon things
on the earth? Especially, since we have not here a continuing place; I mean,
since we do not expect to live hardly the tenth part of that time upon Earth,
which the Patriarchs did before the Flood; but all our days are few and evil,
and our Life short and troublesome; and therefore does of it self admonish us
to look after another, and to provide better for our selves hereafter, than we
can possibly do here.

Let no man say, That the baits of Pleasure, and the cares of Life, and the
multiplicity of his worldly Affairs; that the evil manners of others, and the
snares of Conversation, and his unavoidable Engagements in the World, will not
permit that Justice and Purity, that Devotion and Sobriety, which Religion
requires; nor that consideration of God and another Life, which is necessary to
keep us unspotted from this present world. That for this purpose, we must
retire out of the World, and live in Cells, or in Houses where there is nothing
else to do, but to Watch and Pray; where the cares of Life cannot follow them;
where evil Examples, and where Temptations cannot find them out: All this is
but unreasonable, and vain pretense: For, I beseech you, what was Enoch, and
his Profession and Order of Life in the World? Was he shut up from any part of
common Conversation, or eased from any part of the common Cares of this Life?
No, by no means; he in all respects of Secular Conversation, and civil
Relation, was in the very same condition that other Men were, as you will
confess, if you look back to verse 21. and so on till you come to the Text: And
Enoch lived sixty and five years, and begat Methusaleh: And Enoch walked with
God after he begat Methusaleh three hundred years, and begat Sons and
Daughters: and all the days of Enoch were three hundred sixty and five years;
And Enoch walked with God, etc. By which you may see, that Enoch, who had this
Testimony, was a married Man, and for that Reason engaged as much in the
necessary Affairs of Civil Conversation, as any other; and we do not find, that
after he begat Methusaleh, his eldest Son, he left his Wife, and his Family,
and betook himself to any retirement, and was from that time forward, under
Vows of single Life; it is expressly said, that Enoch walked with God, after he
begat Methusaleh, three hundred years, and begat Sons and Daughters. So that
all this time, viz. for three hundred years, of which it is said, that he
walked with God, Enoch was the Husband of a Wife, the Father of Children, the
Master of a numerous Family; nay, he was a Prince in his Generation, the
Seventh from Adam, in the Line of Seth; the eldest Son by descent, from the
eldest house of Seth; one therefore, who in his time made no little Figure in
the World, and was deeply engaged in the Affairs of Government, beyond all
others, excepting his Father and Grandfather, and the Patriarchs, that were yet
alive. Enoch then differed not from other Men, in any respect of Civil Affairs;
he had such Relations, and common Engagements, as other Men had; and in some
respect more, being descended from Seth in the Patriarchal Line, which some
believe was the Regal Line too, in one Division of Mankind. But tho in these
Circumstances he differed not from other Men, otherwise than that his Affairs
might be more Cumbersom than those of ordinary Persons; yet with respect to
Religion and Virtue, to Faith in God, and an holy Life, he differed very much
from the generality of Mankind; for in the midst of all that Business and
Conversation, which his place in the World engaged him in; he walked with God,
he was a perfect man, and grew to that height of Piety and Righteousness, that
God thought fit to reward so eminent a Person, with translating him alive from
Earth to Heaven; a plain demonstration against the Pretenses of the Roman
Church, That retirement in Monasteries, and a single life, are not necessary to
the highest degree of Piety; that the best part of Religion is not to be cooped
up in a Cloister, but to be seen in the World, and in the ordinary conversation
of Men; That the most Excellent part of Devotion, that the best, and noblest
degrees of Faith and Virtue, may be attained and exercised, and improved in a
state of Worldly Relations and Engagements; and that these things therefore
ought not to be pretended in our excuse for not walking with God, as Enoch did.
Let me therefore add in the

2. Place, That we have the hope of the same reward to influence us, which
Enoch had, though not of being translated alive into a better World, yet of
going thither by the common passage of death, which as to the substance of the
reward is the same thing; the other circumstance, so singular in the case of
Enoch, being not altogether so much for his own sake, as for the instruction of
others. There were but two Persons that went thus into a better World, Enoch
one; For the instruction of a declining and degenerate age, almost wholly sunk
into a worldly Life; Elias another, for an admonition to a very corrupt age
too; the former when all things were running into licentiousness, and disorder
amongst the Patriarchs before the Law; the latter, when the time was as bad
under the Law, and both these to maintain a sense of God, and another World;
while yet the revelation of a Future life, was not so clear and public as it
was made by our Lord Jesus Christ, who brought life and immortality to light:
And since he by his Doctrine, and by his Resurrection, and his Ascension into
Heaven, has given us such evidence and notice of a life to come, that a more
clear evidence could not have been reasonably desired, there is no need that
the world under the Gospel, should be admonished by such extraordinary methods
any more: Our blessed Lord himself was not translated into Heaven, till after
his death, and Resurrection; he in all things going before us, showing us by
his example, not only what our duty is, but what, and in what manner our reward
shall be confered: we must die, and rise again, and then ascend to the Heaven
of Heavens, for the consummation of our reward; And having this hope, Let us
purify our selves, as he is pure; Having these promises, dearly beloved, let us
cleanse our selves from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, perfecting holiness
in the fear of God.

To conclude, We have the same God to serve and obey, that Enoch had; the same
promises, and those more publicly and solemnly made, and more strongly
confirmed to us, than ever they were to the Fathers; we have, I say, the same
promises to excite us, that he had; and all the same advantages that he had,
and in many respects much greater, through the Revelation of the Gospel by our
Lord Jesus; and we are under no greater temptations and discouragements, than
he met with; or if we were, the grace of God is sufficient for us: and
therefore let us walk with God, as he walked with him; that when that time
comes, of which Enoch prophesied, as Saint Jude reports, v. 14. That the
Lord shall come with ten thousands of his Saints, to execute judgment upon all,
and to convince all that are ungodly among them, of all their ungodly deeds,
which they have committed, and of all their hard Speeches which they have
spoken against him; we may lift up our heads with joy, and find mercy in that
day.

The Sixteenth Sermon.
JOB 11.10. Shall we receive Good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive
Evil.


THIS was part of Job's answer to that saying of his Wife in the former verse,
Do thou still retain thy integrity? Curse God and dye. She pretended that his
Piety and Virtue were now discerned to be unprofitable, and that it was all one
whether he blessed or cursed ^ God; for if he cursed him, he could but dye, and
it was better to dye than to live in such misery. To which he answered, Thou
speak as one of the foolish Women speaks. What, shall we receive good at
the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil? The Idumean Women, it is
likely, were wont to rail at their Gods, when any great adversity befell them;
and Job told his Wife, that she spoke like one of them, but not like one that
knew and worshipped the true God: From whom it is reasonable that we should
take all in good part, not only the good, but likewise the evil things of this
life.

There are two things intimated in the Text, besides what the words express,
and they are these.

1. Our life here is a mixture of Good and Evil. No man is wholly deprived of
the comforts, nor any man perfectly exempted from the troubles of it. There is
indeed a great variety in the mixture; The afflictions of some being as
inconsiderable as the Enjoyments of others. But in some proportion all receive
Good and Evil; nor is any Man's condition at a perfect stay: we change often
for the better or the worse. Sometimes from the bottom of adversity we rise to
great happiness; and at other times we fall as low; which was the case of Job
beyond ordinary examples. All which is true, as well of Families and Nations,
as of particular Persons.

2. The Good we enjoy, and the Evil we suffer, are both from the hand of God.
For his Providence always attends the working of second causes, either
disposing them or permitting them to produce those things that happen in the
World. When the Air is healthy or infectious; when the Seasons are Fruitful or
unkindly; when the wind makes a Shipwreck, or when it brings the Ship safe into
the Harbor; when we suffer by the malice and passions of others, or when they
are taken in their own net and we escape; we are in all these and the like
events to look farther then the immediate causes of the Good or the Evil, and
to acknowledge the overruling Providence of God. Thus although they were the
Sabeans and the Caldeans that slew Job's Servants, and carried away his Cattle,
though his Sheep were destroyed by Lightning, and his Children by a Tempest
that blew down the house upon them; yet he omitting, or not so much regarding
the influence of these second causes, applied himself to the consideration of
that Providence under which they all concurred to reduce him to this sad state;
and he fell down upon the ground and worshipped, and said, Naked came I out of
my Mothers Womb, and naked shall I return thither; The Lord gave, and the Lord
has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord. These are the two points
intimated in the Text; That this present life is a state of Good and of Evil,
and that both are from the hand of God. But

3. The main scope of the words is, That we are to take all in good part from
Divine Providence, and to receive Evil from God's hand as well as Good. Which
is a duty necessary to be understood, and necessary to be practiced by every
one of us, both for the discharge of a good conscience, and likewise for our
own ease and comfort in this uncertain and miserable World. I shall therefore
in the first place illustrate the sense of this passage, and show what is meant
by receiving evil at the hand of God; and then I shall propound to your
consideration some of those many reasons why we should effectually persuade our
selves so to do.

As to the first, The manner of bearing Evil from the hand of God, is that
which is meant by receiving it at his hand. Particularly,

1. We are to receive Evil with the same honorable thoughts of God, wherewith
we are to receive Good from him. We must abate nothing of our esteem of his
Righteousness, or of our belief of his Wisdom and Goodness. The sense of misery
is indeed apt to breed hard thoughts of all those by whose means it comes, if
they have knowingly contributed toward it, and designed what we suffer. But
let us remember, Brethren, that this is a case always to be excepted. God knows
and sees all the troubles that befall us, nay and it is his Will that they
should happen to us, and yet we must not think the worse of him for it. And
though we take it ill of any man that can easily help us when we are in
distress, and yet refuses to do it; yet we ought not to be so affected toward
God; and whilst we complain of that grief from which, it is true, he could
deliver us in one moment; we must at no hand complain of him, nor entertain the
least unworthy thought of him, for seeing us in pain and suffering us to
continue under it.

2. We are to receive Evil with the same constancy of serveing and obeying him,
as if we received nothing but good. We are not to grow weary of Religion, nor
to give over Praying, nor to depart from Justice or Charity, or any duty
incumbent on us. The truth is, they must be great strangers to the spirit and
design of Christianity who can be tempted to count their Prayers and their
Repentance and Righteousness unprofitable, when they do not save them from the
calamities of this World. Under the Law, indeed, the promises whereof were
Temporal, we may observe, the temptation prevailed upon some good Men. Verily,
said Asaph, I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in Innocence.
For all the day long have I been plagued, and chastned every morning, Psalm.
73.13, 14. But then he recovered a better mind, ver. 21, 22. Thus my heart was
grieved, and I was pricked in my Reins; so foolish was I and ignorant, I was as
a beast before thee. It was this that Job's Wife bad him do, i.e. to throw off
all pretense to serve God, who had thus forsaken him; said she, Curse God and
dye; scorn to serve him any longer, and make an end of thy life. But said he,
Thou speak as one of the foolish Women speaks; what, shall we receive Good
at the hand of God, and shall we not receive Evil? Nay,

3. We are to receive evil from God with thankfulness for the good things we
have enjoyed, for those which remain, and for those which we expect; and above
all, for the hope of Eternal Life. We must thank him for the care he takes of
us, and therefore for all his dealings with us, for sending us that which he
sees is most expedient for us; yea, for those very Trials and Chastisements
which we complain of, though for the present they are grievous. And thus Job
received Evil. The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away; Blessed be the name
of the Lord.

These, I confess, seem to be hard lessons, but they are such as we must learn;
and how hard soever they may be, yet let us be assured, that they are not
unreasonable; and that is the second point I was to show; and what I chiefly
designed to insist upon at present. Therefore,

1. We should consider, that we have not deserved the Good that we receive from
the hand of God; but the Evil which we receive, that we have abundantly
deserved. All, indeed, do not deserve Evil from God equally; but all deserve it
more or less. And as for meriting good from him, that no man must pretend to,
how Righteous and Godly soever he be. For if God should be severe to mark what
is amiss, who could stand before him? If he should enter into Judgment with his
Servants, no flesh living would be justified. Now if Job who was a perfect and
upright Man, a Man of extraordinary Piety and Virtue, received Evil from God as
he ought, how much more should we do so, that fall short of his perfection?
When we suffer affliction, our hearts must justify God in all, because they
condemn us in so many things. Our own Consciences are enough to stop our
mouths, or rather to make us confess, that we have sinned, but that God is
Righteous: Especially since all the good that we ever enjoyed, and do now
enjoy, is from a holy and just God, who is of purer eyes than to behold
iniquity. For if we who are obnoxious to his Purity and Justice, have yet
received innumerable benefits from him, it is hard and unreasonable to complain
of him, though but in our thoughts, that he sometimes lets us feel a little of
his anger, and puts us in mind of our sins, and of his own Justice; and that as
he is a gracious and a bountiful, so he is withal a Holy God. Which
consideration should prevail the more, because

2. God has absolute Authority over us, and so is every way just in correcting
us for our offenses; not only because we have done that which deserves
Punishment, but because also he has a just and rightful Power to punish us for
it. Tho a Man knows that he has done ill, yet every body must not take upon him
to give him correction. A Servant will submit to his Master, and a Child to his
Father, and a Subject to the Magistrate, when they will not bear Punishment
from every hand, as there is no reason that they should. How much more should
we submit to the Chastisement of the Almighty, who is the Father of Spirits,
and our Sovereign Lord, upon whom we absolutely depend, because he made us out
of nothing, and sustains us every moment that we live? When we were born, we
brought nothing with us into the World, but have lived ever since upon the good
things, which God of his bounty has lent us for our use. And if he for good
reasons takes them away, he does us no wrong, for they are not ours, otherwise
than by his continual Gift. Which consideration disposed Job to submit, when he
was divested of all. Naked came I out of my Mothers Womb, and naked shall I
return thither. To the Earth from whence I was taken. The Lord gave, etc. Let
us remember that no Lord has that right over his Servant, nor Parent in his
Child, which God has in us all; and that since there is no obligation like to
that which we have to God that made us, nor any Authority that one can have
over another, equal to that which he has over us; there is great Reason why we
should meekly submit to his Chastisements, and be content to receive not only
that good which we have not deserved, but that evil also which we have deserved
at his Hand. But this is not all: For,

3. To confess the Truth, when the Evils of this Life happen, they are for the
most part very necessary, and may be always very profitable to us.

They make us to reflect upon our Sins, and they dispose us to Repentance. For
a great truth it is, and we may happily know it by experience, That it is our
way to do many things in our Prosperity, which trouble as in our Adversity.
When Joseph's Brethren were brought into Distress themselves, then they could
say, Verily, we are guilty concerning our Brother; -- and therefore is this
distress come upon us. Our faults do not much trouble us when we have nothing
else to give us disturbance, and in this case affliction does well to bring us
to a sense of them.

Again, We are not so apt to feel our need of dependence upon God, when all
things that we can desire are round about us. We must confess to our shame,
that Piety and Prosperity are seldom found together in a great degree both of
the one and the other. When we are full, we are apt to forget God; but in our
affliction we seek him early. Not but that a man may grow more impious under
the chastisement of God, as Ahab did. But then this was left as a mark of
infamy upon him, that in his distress he waxed worse and worse. This is that
King Ahab.

We should consider also, that the troubles of this life teach us patience, a
quality very necessary for us in this World. It is undoubtedly true, that
continual ease and fullness, and enjoying all that we would have, incline us to
be soft, and hard to be pleased. Every little thing almost is enough to put us
into a passion; and if God should always let us alone, we should make great
troubles to our selves, out of the smallest disappointments. And when
afflictions happen to us in good earnest, our very impatience is an argument
that we needed them to bring us to Wisdom and a good temper. God's trials make
us able to bear what once we could not; they correct the Intemperance of our
desires, and give us a firmness of Mind; they bring our contentment within a
narrow compass, and make it more easy for us to be happy than it was before;
and therefore says St. Paul, We glory in tribulation, knowing that tribulation
works Patience, Romans 5.3.

By the same reason they disengage our affections from worldly things, more
than we are well able to do it without them. For it is indulgence that makes us
fond of the Pleasures of this World; but when any one of them is taken away, we
must learn to be content without it; and by satisfying our selves when we have
lost one, we learn to moderate our desires about the rest, which is a good that
recompenses all the grief we endure in the way to it.

Especially since it leads to another good thing, which is the moderating of
our Love to this Life it self; which when we feel to be made up of Care and
Trouble, as well as Mirth and Pleasure, we grow more reconciled to the thoughts
of Death, which puts an end as well to the Troubles as to the Delights of this
World,

All which things tend to the greatest good of all, even our Eternal Salvation;
to which we should add, That whatever Duties are necessary to this great end,
we shall perform them most carefully; For when by experience we are convinced
how foolish a thing it is, to think of finding a complete Happiness in this
World, or indeed any thing that deserves the Name of Happiness; we shall seek
for a more solid and enduring substance. For we must needs be more sollicitous
to secure that Rest and Happiness, which God has Promised in a better Life,
when we are satisfied that no such thing is to be obtained here: we are not so
deeply affected with the danger of worldly enjoyments as with the uncertainty
of them; They are indeed apt to corrupt our minds, but we do not use to be
jealous of them upon that account; but when we lose them, we are easily
senfible that they are not to be trusted, and that if we would be wise for our
selves, we must take off our minds from these perishing things, and grow wise
to Salvation.

To conclude this Point, The evils of Life do not only offer good
considerations to our minds, but they are proper means to put us into a
considering Temper, and to make us capable of understanding the full weight of
them. They cure us of the Levity and Easiness of Mind, which grows out of Ease
and Luxury, and indisposes us to dwell for any long time upon wise and
profitable thoughts.

Finally, The Patience and the Godly manner of bearing Evils, and the good use
we make of them, works the increase of our reward, especially if we endure
grief, suffering wrongfully, and most of all if we suffer for righteousness
sake. This is that which St. Peter makes no doubt to say is thank worthy; and
it turns so greatly to our account, that instead of mentioning it as a thing
fit to discourage and deject his Disciples, our Savior bid them to rejoice,
and to be exceeding glad, for, says he, great is your reward in heaven.

4. As the Evils of this Life are for our good, so God means and designs them
for our good too. There is not any one good use which may be made of them but
God intends it, when he sends them; and it is our own fault if we do not grow
the better for them. David found by experience that it was good for him that he
was afflicted; and he confessed that God in very faithfulness had afflicted
him, (i. e.) meaning all the advantage to him which he had gained. For that
reason it is said, God does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of
men; not merely to make us feel Pain and Trouble, but because our good requires
it. Physic is sometimes as necessary for us as Food; and tho it be bitter, we
do not think the worse of him that Administers it, because it is administered for
our Health, either for the cure or for the prevention of a Disease. And should
we take it in ill part from God, when for the health and improvement of our
Souls, he gives us wholesome, though sharp Medicines? He gives us Food,
Raiment, Plenty, Peace and Health, that we might in the midst of these good
things serve him with thankfulness; and the greatest cause we have to rejoice
in them, is that they are of his sending, who intended them not for Snares, but
for Blessings to us. When therefore he takes any of them away, he does it with
the same good meaning either to correct what is bad, or to perfect that which
is good in us; the best reason of our rejoicing continues still, which is, that
God still exercises a Paternal care over us, as a Father corrects the Faults of
his Child because he loves him, and would have him do better for the time to
come. We are therefore to take all in good part, the evil as well as good, that
comes from God's Hand, because it is all meant in good part to us. Especially if
we consider,

5. That he is not, and cannot be mistaken in judging what kind of Evil, or
what degree of Evil is expedient for our good. Let that which happens, be of
what kind it will, and how great soever it be in the kind, yet from his
Infinite Wisdom we ought to conclude against all objections, That all things
considered, it is the best for us. We perhaps do not see how it should be so,
but we have not the less reason to believe it. God's thoughts are above ours,
and his ways above our ways; and we are not to argue as if we understood our
selves as well as God understands us. Our business is to submit to him
patiently, and to depend upon him entirely, and to thank him from our hearts
for his continual Providence over us; Acknowledging that we are not fit to be
humored in all our desires, neither to enjoy Pleasure longer than he sees it is
for our good, nor to say with what pain we should be chastised, or with what
Trouble we should be exercised; we are not wise enough to be our own chusers;
and we cannot be better than by being in God's Hands.

6. We should take Evil at God's hand in good part, because he is not wanting
to supply us with strength to bear it, and to support us with comforts of a
better kind than those he takes away. If he makes us more conformable to his
will, we get a better Conscience than we had before, and that will of it self
enable us to go through many and great Troubles of this Life. If he lessens our
Love of this World, and increases our Faith and Hope of a better Life, and
fixes our thoughts upon Heaven more than they were wont to be; if he inspires
us with a greater sense of his Love, and gives us more and more of his Holy
Spirit; then although here are Worldly Evils to be born, yet there are also
such Spiritual consolatives to support us under them, that we have more reason
to be thankful than to complain. God will not suffer us to be tempted above
what we are able, but will with the temptation, etc. so the Apostle assured the
Christians, and were themselves examples of it; none ever went through greater
Troubles and Persecutions than they, but they do not speak of themselves as
objects of Pity. He says they were strengthened with all might according to
God's Glorious Power, unto all Patience and Long-suffering with joyfulness,
Col. 1.11. They were indeed troubled on every side, yet not distressed;
perplexed, but not in despair; Persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not
destroyed; sorrowful, yet always rejoicing, 1 Cor. iv. 8. vi. 10.

7. We are to consider that the Troubles of this Life are not always
Punishments, but sometimes Trials. In which case they admit of great comforts;
and therefore St. James says, My Brethren, count it joy, when ye fall into
diverse temptations, James 1.2. where by temptations he understands those
Troubles that from time to time befell the Christians, for their profession,
and proved their sincerity; for so it is explained in the following words,
knowing this, that the trial of your Faith works patience. Such were the
afflictions of Job, as we see by the circumstances of his story. God had given
this testimony to him, That he was a perfect and an upright man, one that
feared God, and eschewed evil. But Satan answered, Does Job fear God for
naught? Have thou not made an hedge about him, and about his house, and about
all that he has on every side? Thou have blessed the work of his hands, and
his substance is increased in the land. But put forth thy hand now, and touch
all that he has, and he will curse thee to thy face. Thus the Devil charged
Job, and in him all Religious men, That his pretense to Piety was mere
flattery, not proceeding from a hearty love to God, but from the Love of
Worldly prosperity. Now though the event showed the falseness of the Devils
suggestion; yet thus far he was in the right, That affliction tries whether a
man be a mere mercenary pretender to Religion, or whether he be an upright man,
fearing God, and eschewing evil. For he that pretends Religion, pretends to
serve God, and to depend upon him in all conditions of Life, and that God is
more to him than all the World besides. But the reality of this can never be so
well seen as when we do his will, and bless his name, even when he deprives us
of the good things, and sends us the afflictions of this Life. We should
therefore receive evil from God's hand as well as good, though we were as
perfect as Job was, in fearing God and eschewing evil; because though it does
not befall us in such a case as a Punishment, yet it comes as a trial, and
there are weighty reasons for Patience under it; For (1.) it is exceedingly for
the Honor of God and Religion, if we acquit our selves well in bearing it.
This shows the sincerity and the power of our Faith; and that Religion is a
Principle of the truest Fortitude and Fidelity, when no worldly loss, nor
outward pain can hinder us from blessing God, and persevering in our Duty; the
World will see that we are very sure we serve a good Master, and one whom we
believe nothing ought to deter or discourage us from obeying, not death it
self, nor vexations worse than death. Hereby we declare that without all this
Worlds good, he alone is sufficient for our reward; that there is no evil like
losing his favor, no good like keeping it. (2.) It will make also for our own
Comfort; for although without this, a good man may have reasonable assurance of
his own integrity, i. e. by an equal Care to do his Duty in all respects, while
God makes an hedge about him on every side; yet it cannot be denied that he must
needs have yet a more comfortable assurance of it, when be goes on to depend
upon God under the hardest pressures of affliction. For this is the highest
Point of Religion, and therefore proves our sincerity in all the rest. Upon
this trial we cannot doubt but that it was for God's sake, that we abstained
from Drunkenness and Theft, and hard dealing, and Lust and Uncleanness; that in
pure Conscience and with Pious affections we offered up our daily Prayers, and
Blessed God for all his gifts, and observed his Laws. For no other Principle
can make a man persevere in Religious dependence upon him, when he is not
bribed with the Prosperity of this World. The Truth is, that all the Virtues
that are exercised while every thing goes well with us as heart can wish, are
something necessary for our welfare in this World, if we go wisely to work for
it. A liar will not be believed, a false man will not be trusted, drunkards
will hardly thrive, a malicious and hard-hearted man will be hated, and he that
does not Worship God shall be reproached. The Vices and impieties of humane
Life are enemies to our well-doing in this World; affecting either our Bodies
or our Estates, or our Quiet, or our Reputation; so that the very Love of this
World will teach a wise man to Live well and Religiously in appearance, that he
may fare the better for it here. But when God sends those evils that our Piety
is so far from hindering, that is does expose us to them, and yet we go on to
Bless and Serve him, this puts it out of all question, that we are really and
in earnest what we seem to be, the Faithful Servants of God, as God speaking
after the manner of men, said to Abraham, when he offered up his Son Isaac, Now
I know that thou fear God, because thou have not withheld thy Son, thy only
Son from me.

Thus I have laid down some Considerations very useful, I am persuaded, to
prepare us for all the Portion of Evil which God may think fit to send upon any
of us in this World; that whenever any of it happens, we may follow the example
of Job, and receive evil from God's hand, as well as good.

But then, Brethren, we must remember that such things as these are to be
thought of very much before, or we shall be little better for them when once
adversity happens. For it is not barely knowing nor hearing them, but it is much
considering them, that must make them Principles within us, and fortify us
against all surprises.

It is a great mistake that these thoughts must make us melancholy, and spoil
that reasonable comfort we should take in the good things which God lends us
for our use. For while we enjoy them without overvaluing them, we have all that
they are good for; and they are not the less pleasant, because we know of
greater Blessings than they are; our part is to use them thankfully, while they
are ours, for our use; and by all Prudent means, as far as lawfully we can, to
keep off Adversity; because then we may be sure that those evils which befall
us without our own faults, are most properly of Gods sending. And so we shall
feel our selves under the Power of all those reasons why we should with
submission and thankfulness receive not only good, but evil also at the hand of
God.

The Seventeenth Sermon.
ROMANS VIII. Part of 34, and 35. v. It is God that justifies: who is he that
condemns?


THESE words signify one of these things; Either that when God justifies, no
man will condemn, but that when we are sure of pleasing him, we are sure of
pleasing all too; or else that if he approves and justifies, it is no great
matter, nor should we be much concerned by whom we are accused or condemned.

But the first cannot be the meaning, that no man condemns whom God justifies:
For the Disciples of Christ were used in that manner, that St. Paul applied
this saying to their case, v, 36. For thy sake are we killed all the day long,
we are appointed as sheep for the slaughter.

He means therefore That if God justifies, it is not considerable who condemns.
They were brought before the Tribunals of men, where grievous things were laid
to their charge; yet because God saw their Innocence, says the Apostle, who
shall lay any thing to the charge of God's elect? They were dealt with as
Malefactors, yet says he, Who is he that condemns? so that he supposes them
to be condemned by no body, in comparison, because while they were condemned by
men, God Justified them.

Which offers two Points to be considered.

1. That men do sometimes condemn those whom God justifies. (2.) That they whom
God justifies have no cause to be dejected when they are condemned by men.

1. That men do sometimes condemn those whom God justifies; and they condemn
them too for the sake of those things which he approves, and lay that to their
charge which he is now pleased with, and will hereafter reward. It was such a
case which our Savior prepared his Disciples for, when he said, Blessed are ye
when men shall revile you and persecute you, and lay all manner of evil falsely
against you for my sake: Which began to be fulfilled as soon as ever the World
took notice of them. And here let us briefly consider what kind of Persons they
then were, and how they were used.

The Apostles, and those that were in fellowship with them, professed the
sincere and uncorrupted Truth of the Gospel, teaching all Purity and Virtue,
and whatever they received in Command from our Lord Jesus. Nor will any
Christian of what other Name soever, pretend that there was too much or too
little, in their Doctrine. All are agreed, not only that Christianity is worthy
of all acceptance; but also that it was by them professed entirely and without
mixture. As to their manners, they were Persons of the greatest simplicity,
easy to be known what they were, given to no deceit, desiring to Live in
quiet, because there was nothing in their Doctrine, or in their way of Life, to
create jealousies in others. It was a very great part of their Religion to deny
themselves, and to do good to their Neighbors. They did not aim at Worldly
power and greatness, but instead of using that interest they had in the People
to save themselves by Violence from Persecution; they urged subjection to Laws
and Government upon Principles of Conscience. They were such kind of men, and
we doubt not but God justified them.

Let us therefore see how they were used by men, by Jews and Gentiles. As for
the Jews, it was not indeed very likely that they should be treated much better
than their Master had been before. And so the event showed; it is true they made
many Converts, and a great part of the People cleaved to their Doctrine and
fellowship; but this enraged their enemies so much the more; and the more
numerous that Christians grew, there were so many more to be hated and reviled,
and persecuted: For

1. They were charged with Heresy, and represented as a Sect that subsisted
upon the Profession of new and false Doctrines. For thus we find St. Paul
obliged to apologize for himself before Foelix, against the accusations of the
Jews; They cannot, says he, prove the things whereof they now accuse me. But
this I confess unto thee, That after the way which they call heresy, so
worship I the God of my fathers, believing all things which are written in the
law, and in the prophets (Acts 24.14.). And have hope toward God, which they
themselves allow, That there shall be a resurrection of the dead. And herein do
I exercise my self, to have always a conscience void of offense toward God and
men. St. Paul, and such as he, believed all things that were written in the Law
and the Prophets, those very writings which the Jews themselves acknowledged to
be Divine; and tho to this Faith, they added the Doctrine and Practice of a
good life, yet they were esteemed Heretics, because they undertook to see with
their own eyes, and to judge for themselves, instead of submitting to the
Authority of the Council that had betrayed and murdered the Lord Jesus.

2. They were accused of Sedition too, as if they designed to make Stirs and
Commotions, and to alienate the people from their Governors. Thus when Paul
and Silas had converted a multitude of Devout Greeks, and not a few of the
Chief Women at Thessalonica, the Jews who believed not, moved with Envy, took
unto 'em certain lewd fellows of the baser sort, and drew some of the Brethren
to the Rulers, crying, These that have turned the world upside down, are come
hither also, who do contrary to the decrees of Coesar, saying, That there is
another King, one Jesus, Acts 17.5, 6. And yet they never made one step by word
or deed, toward deposing Princes, and changing Governments. Jesus, indeed, who
had commanded them to pay Tribute unto Caesar, had also forbidden them to be of
the Religion which Caesar was then of; and this was drawn into an accusation of
Faction and Disloyalty. Thus also the same St. Paul being brought before Foelix
at Jerusalem, the Jews complained by Tertullian their Orator, That they had
found him a pestilent fellow, and a mover of sedition among all the Jews
throughout the world, and a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes, Acts 24.5.

3. They concluded them under a sentence of Damnation, as far as they could do
it. Indeed they would have it thought so impossible for a Christian to be
saved, that some of them after being converted to Christianity, were strongly
persuaded, that they still ought to keep the Law of Moses, and would have
mingled Judaism and Christianity together; as if there was no hope of Salvation
out of the Synagogue: Except ye be circumcised after the manner of Moses, ye
cannot be saved, Acts 15.1.

4. As it is usual in such cases, to damn first, and then to kill, they
delivered the Disciples of Christ to death, and pretended the service of God
for it. For which we may take those remarkable words of St. Paul, describing
the temper of the Jews then, and what his own once was. Says he, I was taught
according to the perfect manner of the law of the fathers, and was zealous
toward God, as ye are at this day. And I persecuted them even unto the death,
binding and delivering into prisons both men and women, Acts 22.3, 4. And in
chap. 26. v. 10, 11. he declares, That he persecuted them often in every
synagogue, and compelled them to blaspheme; and being exceedingly mad against
them, he persecuted them even into strange cities.

Such was the entertainment they had from the Jews, to whom the Word of
Salvation was first delivered: But when it was carried amongst the Gentiles,
they condemned it too. For,

1. It was run down, as if it had brought Irreligion and Atheism into the
World; Insomuch that the Ancient Apologists were fain in good earnest to set
themselves against this absurd accusation, and to show that it was not all one
to serve God at all, and not to serve many Gods; That there might be devotion
without bowing down to Images; and Religion and Worship without Idolatry; and
better a great deal without these things than with them.

2. It was exclaimed against as a late upstart Religion, that began but
yesterday, and was fitter to be hissed than argued out of the World. They used
to ask the Christians what sort of men they could name, either Greeks or
Barbarians, that made their Profession, and had their Rites and Worship, before
Jesus appeared. You have forsaken, say they, the Customs of the Fathers, that
had been observed of Old time in all Cities and Countries; you have revolted
from a Worship, which has had the Tradition of all Ages; and the approbation of
Kings and People, Law makers and Philosophers, and by almost all the World,
till such as you appeared, who are but of yesterday.

3. They try to overwhelm it with the most gross and palpable untruths; they
gave it out that the Christians were worshippers of the Sun; nay, that they
adored an Asses-head, and sometimes a Cross: They did not stick to say, That in
their solemn Assemblies they killed a Child, and committed Incest. They also
upon no occasion in the world, disarmed them as a seditious and disloyal
People, and accused them of Treason, tho none ever set better examples of
Fidelity to their Governors.

To conclude: Our Predecessors of the Primitive Church, were now and then
condemned to several sorts of deaths; and it was often a great deal more safe
to be some notorious Malefactor, than to be a Christian.

In a word: The Gospel met with that Opposition, which no Religion ever did
before. The Gods of other Nations, new Gods every day were admitted into a
Temple at Rome with some Formality, and without Trouble. But when the Disciples
of Jesus came to call men to the Worship of the only true God, and Jesus Christ
whom he had sent; Jews and Gentiles conspired to extinguish their Religion, and
to blot out their name for ever; insomuch that the Jews at Rome could tell St.
Paul, As concerning this sect, we know that it is every where spoken against.
Those therefore whom God justifies, have been, and may be condemned by men:
Which will not seem strange to any of us, if we consider what the Causes of it
are. For instance;

1. That hatred of truth which reigns in a great part of mankind. They cannot
bear sound Doctrine, nor can they therefore bear those that profess and
practice it; truth is against them, and therefore they will be against the
truth, and all that follow it. So long as Pride, Lust, Avarice, Revenge,
Luxury, and such things remain, there will be so many causes of condemning that
which God approves. To which we must add,

2. The inflexibleness of true Doctrine, and of those that maintain it, to the
designs of worldly men. Christianity was said to be a perfect Scheme of
Religion, that would suffer no additions or alterations. It was stiff, and
would not bend to the pleasure of Priests or of Statesmen; as all that would,
which the Heathens called Religion among themselves. Whilst it was kept in wise
and honest hands and truly represented, there was no room for Cheating, no
Allowances for Pious Frauds, no place for convenient Inventions: Innovatious
could not be brought into the Faith of Christians, or the Substance of their
Worship but they would be corruptions of both; without tampering with it, it
could not serve the ambition of a few, to the prejudice of all others. And
therefore while it was pure, they could not bear it, whose gain was their
Godliness, and who had been used to tell lies in hypocrifie.

3. The proneness of mankind to Superstition, is another cause of disapproving
what God approves. The true Disciples of Christ are, according to their
Religion, for a plain Faith, a pure and simple Worship, and for a few
Mysteries, no more than God has made; and for making Charity and Purity the end
of all these. But generally speaking, people are for being saved by a multitude
of Ceremonies, with a Priest to administer them. They love to be amused, and to
have their imaginations entertained with Mysteries that they do not understand,
and then to believe that their Souls have received a great deal of good by it.
On the other side, Christianity does very little gratify the Fancy, and
labors very much to inform the Understanding; and therefore has been thought a
Religion fit only for Philosophers, being not accommodated enough to the
vulgar, unless it were dressed out with more Mystery and Pageantry. But then
the Ancient Fathers made no doubt to call it a Philosophy, and such a one as
was designed to make Plowmen and vulgar Persons, Philosophers, i. e. to cure
them of Superstition, and to inform their minds with the knowledge of the most
profitable Truths. This is the true business of Christian Priests, not to make
gain to themselves by deceiving people that were to be deceived, nor to get
power and dependencies by those Doctrines whereby the people get ease, and
liberty, and ignorance; but instead of nourishing and encouraging, to repress
and correct the proneness of mankind to Superstition.

4. These two opposite infirmities, a fondness of any thing that is new on the
one hand, and a passionate zeal for that which has some Antiquity on the other,
do by turns promote this mischief. Some Errors have very successfully taken
place at first, when they were entertainments to those that loved Novelty; and
the same Errors in process of time, are hugged by others, because they have the
appearance of great Antiquity. They are few in comparison, that had not rather
be told what is Late, and what is Ancient, than what is True. To which we may
add,

6. The vast influence that prejudice and prepossession has upon men's
understandings; which is very often so great, that it will not allow any thing
to be said on the other side, and so Condemns him that offers Truth before he
is heard; or if a hearing cannot be avoided, it is able sometimes to divert the
attention; or if attention be given, it can corrupt the Judgment. Men in those
circumstances are but ill Judges, whatever their natural abilities are. They
love one side of the Question, they hate the other; and they Judge accordingly.

6. In many Persons, the impatience of considering and weighing things, and the
ease of letting others Judge for them, without examining particulars, is the
cause of false Judgment. For the ease that a man gets this way, inclines him to
believe that there are Judges who cannot Err, and will be sure to tell him
nothing but Truth; and this disposition is a mighty friend to those that
pretend to so high an Authority, because it gives them an ^pportunity to say
what they list, and to determine what they please. Whoever therefore comes with
truth on the other hand, against an Authority that must not be thought capable
of mistaking, it is like to be welcome neither to those that teach, nor to those
that are taught; for in effect he comes to the former to tell them that they
must quit their power, and to the latter that they must quit their ease.

These are some of the causes of men's condemning those whom God justifies; by
which it appears that it is an Evil which comes of Evil. And the conclusion we
are to make of them, it is this: That we do by no means square our professions
and our actions, by so false a rule as that of pleasing men, and gaining the
favor and good words of men; for they may and they often have, and I doubt not
but they often will condemn those whom God justifies; and by the same reason
they will Justify those whom God Condemns. To get Favor, and to avoid
Disgrace, is a happiness which he that scorns, is not wise; but it is no rule
for a man to Live by; and he that makes it so, cannot be honest. Man may
Condemn those whom God justifies, That is the first Point. The second is this,

2. That to be condemned by man, is tolerable, if God Justifies. A Truth so
clear, That more words cannot make it clearer, but they may serve to fasten it
more upon our Minds. Let us consider such things as these,

1. The Infinite disproportion between God and man; St. Paul's meaning was,
that God Justifies, and man Condemns; and to show that in comparison no body
condemned in this case, he puts his meaning into the form of a Question; It is
God that Justifies, who is he that condemns? A wise man will not be much
troubled to be railed at by a Slave, if he be honored by a King.

2. We can certainly tell how to please God, because we know what profession,
and what practice he approves; for he has told us what they are, and we may
believe him. We are secure also that what will please him to day, will do so to
morrow; and that what he accounts good service now, he will always reckon to be
so. For God changes not, and can by no means contradict himself; He conceals no
part of our Duty from us, and therefore to gain his Favor, we need not go
forward and backward, nor contradict our selves neither. If we study to approve
our selves to God, as we have but one Lord to please, so he is ever constant to
himself; our way is one, and plain; and our rule the same yesterday, to day and
for ever.

3. God knows the very secrets of our hearts, and the springs of all our
actions; and therefore they whom God justifies, are truly worthy. He that can
bear the allseeing Eye of God, is in reality all that he appears to be; he is
that Just, Faithful and Unbiassed man, and he has that pure and clear mind,
which if we could see with our Bodily Eyes, we should, as Plato fancied, be
ready to fall down and Worship it. Man justifies only by the outward
appearance, and sometimes happens to be pleased with profession and service,
where nothing is meant of that which is so well taken. A Knave and a Hypocrite
may win thanks from man; but where God Justifies, there is Faithfulness and
Integrity; and whoever Condemns such a one, disgraces himself more than him.

4. If God justifies us, our own hearts do at the same time acquit and absolve
us; says St. John, If our hearts condemn us not, then have we confidence
toward God. And it is true on the other side, that if God condemns us not, then
have we confidence of our selves. By doing those things that please him, we are
sure to please our selves: By making him our Friend, we shall infallibly make
one Friend more, and that is our own Consciences, which is infinitely more to
us, than the opinion of the World. It Is a plain case, that we approve our
selves to God by following Truth and Goodness; and this we know will put us
upon struggling with our own Judgment, and straining points against our clear
knowledge of what we ought to do. All the while we are gaining his Favor, we
are sure we do well; and when we have done it, we shall thank our selves,
instead of being plagued with a fad and black remembrance of the way we took to
get it. Acquaint now thy self with God and be at peace with him, and so shall
good come unto thy Soul.

5. There lies no Flattery, nor false Accusation, nor outward accident against
us, to put us out of God's Favor, or to make us lose what we have wrought, to
turn his mind, or to blot our services out of his remembrance. No change of
Fortune shall bring us into disgrace; which consideration St. Paul laid great
strength upon in pursuance of the Text. Who shall separate us from the love of
Christ? shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or
nakedness, or peril, or sword? v. 35. I am persuaded, says he, that neither
death, norlife, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present,
nor things to come; nor height nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able
to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, v. 38.
Nay says the Apostle, in all these things we are more than Conquerors; that is,
we get by being Condemned by others, because by that we are made more dear to
God, who will consider not only, that we served him, but under what
discouragements from the World, we did so. Lastly.

6. Whom God justifies, them he also glorifies. For whom he did foreknow he
also did predestinate to be conformed to the Image of his Son; that he might be
the firstborn among many brethren, v. 29, 30. i.e. Those whom he foreknew to
be his most faithful servants, he did before time decree, that by suffering for
righteousness, they should follow so glorious a Pattern as their Elder Brother
the Lord Jesus. Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he also called, (i.
e.) he brought them to the profession of the truth in a hazardous time, that
they should show their Integrity; and wh^m he called, them he also justified;
and whom he justified, them he also glorified. Which is so sure, that the
Apostle mentions it as if it were done already. Then he proceeds in the
following verses, What shall we say to these things? If God be for us, who can
be against us? He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all,
how shall he not with him freely give us all things? who shall lay any thing to
the charge of God's elect? It is God that justifies, who is he that condemns?
It is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again, who is even at the
right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us. The conclusion is this,
That whoever Condemns, we are not to be discouraged, if God justi^ies.

But it may be said, That all this is very true indeed, but it serves the turn
of all Parties, even of those who are most severely Condemned by each other,
while each of them pretends to have God and Truth on their side: And therefore
that this Subject might have been more usefully pursued, by showing
particularly what that Faith and that Practice is, with which they must be
qualified whom God justifies; and how we are assured of it. Now I considered
all this at first; but then I knew that I was to speak to persons who are
neither ignorant of the Doctrine of this Church, nor of the evidence whereby it
appears to be the very Truth of Christianity; by which, whoever Governs himself
in Worshipping God, in behaving himself to others, and in all his ways, shall
be assuredly Justified of God, though all the World should Condemn him for it.
But I considered also, that of all things which are apt to shake the constancy
of modest Persons, nothing is more likely to do it, than the mighty confidence
wherewith they of the Roman Church Condemn us, and Exclaim against us. For to
those who are acquainted with the History of the World, and of the Church, it
must needs be a surprise, that men who are said to be Learned, and known to be
Zealous, do pronounce against us with no less severity than if we were mere
Infidels; One would think there must be some deep reason for it, when they make
us nothing at all, and themselves all in all. For thus they will not allow that
we are a Church, or that we have any certainty so much as of that True Doctine
we profess; for they know us better than we do our selves, and as for our
Salvation they are as sure it belongs not to us, till we are converted to them,
as if they kept the Keys of Heaven. Nor do they sink us more than they raise
themselves, who are not only a Church, but the whole Church, and not only not
deceived, but even Infallible. They talk as if there were no safety with us,
and no danger with them; which may raise such doubts in weaker minds, that I
thought it not unseasonable to bring to your remembrance how violently the
Apostles and their Christian Brethren were Condemned by men, of whom yet these
men will grant that they were justified of God.

If it shall be said, This is a commonplace Argument, of which all men serve
themselves. I Answer, That the Argument is so much the stronger. For if these
men themselves will tell you, that confidence is not to be trusted, you will, I
hope, make this application, That neither is their confidence to be trusted;
and therefore that you ought to consider what they are, before you believe them
to be what they call themselves; and examine what they teach, before you think
the worse of your selves, for what they call you: And this is all that we
desire of you, That you would weigh the reasons of things, and not mind
swelling words.

Brethren, it is by no means a new Artifice, to talk in a very high strain,
when Argument runs very low: Thus Jews and Gentiles exclaimed against our
Fathers the Apostles, and the Primitive Believers, condemning them for going
against Antiquity, Universality, Authority, Tradition, Philosophers,
Lawmakers, Kings and Nations. And yet when all was done, all this was but
empty noise, and vain pretense, and the Cause of Christianity was the Cause of
God. Foul Errors have been dressed with glorious appearances of Truth, and Truth
has been opposed with Confidence; and God suffers it to be so, to try the
Sincerity of men, that while they who are willing to be deluded, fall by the
Temptation, men of Probity, and lovers of Truth, should upon diligent
examination hold it faster than otherwise they would have done. This is one of
the great Advantages to which that opposition tends, which Truth has met with
in the World. And therefore the more lofty those pretenses are, by which the
other Church would bring us to an entire submission to her Authority in every
point of Religion, so much greater reason there is to examine every one of her
particulars; and if I find that she is mistaken in any of them, I am verysure
that she is not infallible in all. And if she will not allow me to make a
Judgment of the Particulars, it is just as if a man should try to hinder me from
castingup my own Accounts, by going about to prove that he cannot possibly
mistake in doing it; he might indeed show some Wit in working his
Demonstration, but I should show a great deal more folly in trusting him.

To conclude: We have a Rule whereby to try the Doctrine, I will not only say
of a Church, or a Pope, or a Council, but even of an Angel from Heaven, if an
Angel should come and Preach to us; and that Rule is the Holy Scripture;
especially the Writings of the Evangelists and Apostles. These are by all
Christians acknowledged to be the undoubted, and the most ancient Records of
our Holy Religion; and they have had a Tradition so uncontrollable, as no Books
in the World ever had the like. Whoever therefore is our Guide, it is very
reasonable that this should be our Rule. And of all Churches in the World, I
will never trust my self to her discretion, that will not trust me with the
Knowledge and Study of this Rule.

Here we may, if we please, make our selves very sure, that we are of those
whom God will justify; for here we may discern what kind of persons St. Paul
and the Christians of whom he speaks in this place, and what all the Apostles,
and Primitive Disciples of our Lord, were. For those Books which acquaint us
with their Names, and which were written by some of themselves, do also
discover to us what Faith they professed, what Doctrine they taught, and what
Lives they led. Now if we profess that very Faith, and teach no other Doctrine,
and frame our practice by their Rules and good Examples, then without all
question, we are such kind of Christians as they were; and then although we should
be used by the world, as they were too, yet the encouragement and comfort which
they had, will also belong to us; and we too may say, Who shall lay any thing
to the charge of God's elect? it is God that justifies, who is he that
condemns? it is Christ that died, yea rather, that is risen again.

Having therefore the Infallible Rule of God's Word, whereby to guide our
selves, We beseech you, Brethren, and exhort you by the Lord Jesus, that as ye
have received of us, how you ought to walk, and to please God, so ye would
abound more and more; that while evil men and seducers shall wax worse and
worse, deceiving and being deceived, ye may continue in the things which ye
have learned, knowing of whom ye have learned them, even from the Sayings of
our Lord Jesus, and his holy Apostles, delievered to us in the Scriptures,
which are able to make us wise unto salvation, through says which is in Christ
Jesus. Let us remember, that it had been better for us, not to have known the
way of righteousness, than after we have known it, to turn from the holy
commandment delivered to us; not forgetting by any means, that it is a way of
righteousness we have been made to know, and an holy Commandment that has been
delivered to us, from which therefore we may depart as damnably by an impure
Conversation, as by letting go our pure Profession; in which case we are so far
from being justified, that we shall be the more condemned by our Faith: We have
no false Principles to save our hearts from condemning us, if we allow our
selves in any way of wickedness; and God is greater than our hearts, and
knows all things: Whoever else condemns us, that is more than recompense
enough; if God justifies. But who is he that shall justify us, if God
condemns?

FINIS.
THE SUM OF A CONFERENCE On Feb. 21. 1686. BETWEEN Dr. Clagett, and Father
Gooden, About the Point of TRANSVBSTANTIATION.

LONDON: Printed for William Rogers, at the Sun over against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleetstreet. MDCLXXXIX.

The SUM of a CONFERENCE On Feb. 21. 1686. BETWEEN Dr. Clagett, and Father
Gooden, About the POINT of TRANSUBSTANTIATION.
Introduction.
IT will perhaps appear to some a little strange, that I do not say almost
Incredible, that there should have passed a Conference above two years since,
in which Mr. Gooden was concerned, and the World yet to learn the Substance of
it. The Vanity of that Gentleman to thrust himself upon all Occasions into
Disputes with the most Learned Men of our Church first, and then to boast of
his own Performances in them, was fogreat, that there is scarce a Coffee-house
in the Town that has not been filled with the Noise of his Impertinent Vapors.
And if those of the Other Communion have been always remarkable for an
Assurance becoming the pretended Infallibility of their Church; I may venture
to say, that next to Father P -- the Jesuit, and his friend Mr. M --, I scarce
know any among them that have ever talked so loud, or made such Heroical
Defiances of the Champions and Armies of our Israel, in all Places, and upon
all Occasions, as Mr. Gooden these late Years has done among us. But thus
shallow Waters always run with the Greatest Noise and Violence; and little
Sophisters, who either want Capacity to see into their own Fallacies, or think
they have forehead enough to carry that off with Clamor and Confidence which
they cannot do by Reason and Argument, delight to expose themselves and their
Religion to the most dangerous Trials; whilst Men of Learning and Judgment are
modest and ingenuous, and know it to be neither for the Honor of their Church,
nor their own Reputation, to challenge all Mankind to answer Paradoxes, and to
show that not to be Demonstration, which when brought to the Trial is hardly
sense. See Mr. G's. Pap. p. 10.


I hope this will not be thought too severe a Reflection on the late Pretenders
of this kind among us, which I speak out of a just respect to the more Learned
and Charitable Persons of the Church of Rome; who have been no less Scandalized
at these forward Zealots, than our selves; and to whom I ought to give this
Testimony, That during a long acquaintance with many of them, I never met with
any thing of the Vanity of those I have before mentioned. Our Differences in
matters of Religion, made no Disturbance either in our Friendship or
Conversation with One Another. If the discourse at any time led to a
Controversy of Faith, we argued it upon the same Principles, and with the same
Calmness, that we did any other Subject whatsoever; by Arguments drawn from the
Authority of the Holy Scriptures, or from the Testimonies of the Ancient
Fathers, as the Nature of the thing required us to do. If these did not
Convince, they never flew off to the Commonplace Topic's of the Authority and
Infallibility of the Church; much less to that Exploded refuge of Oral
Tradition; but the Controversy Ended. And when all was done, they were content
to hope well of those of our Church, who being sincere in their Enquiries, and
willing to be led by Truth wherever it was, still continued to differ from
them. Instead of calling Us Heretics or Schismatics, or Thundering out
Damnation against Us as such, a mutual Charity concluded the discourse. We
hoped and prayed for the Conviction of the Erring Party, which ever it was; but
made no question, but that the same Heaven might receive us All, tho we should
continue to disagree to the last.

But this was not the Temper of Mr. Gooden, and the rest of the little Herd of
that Church, who gave so much Trouble and Disturbance to their own and the
Nations repose; and have contributed what in them lies by their Heat and Folly,
to ruin both themselves and us.

As for the Occasion of the present Conference, it was this. A Gentlewoman of a
Goood Estate, and intimately acquainted with diverse R. Cs. was by a frequent
Conversation with them, wrought up by degrees into an Extraordinary Opinion of
the advantages of a Recluse Life, for the better performing the Exercises of
Religion; Insomuch that the desire she began to have for such a sort of
retirement, made her almost willing to leave our Church, and go over to the
Roman Communion; but that she still looked upon their Doctrine, in those points
wherein they differ from us, to be False, and Dangerous, and to one so
persuaded as she was, Destructive of Salvation.

Being thus prepared for their Seduction; they let slip no Opportunity to
finish their work, and gain their Proselyte. For which purpose, care was taken,
first by one of Her Acquaintance, to represent to Her all the Popular Pretenses
of that Church, by which many are Prejudiced in Favor of it; and the
Advantages it Had, in point of Antiquity, Unity, Universality, Infallibility,
and what not, beyond Ours; and them, in the next place, to get Father Gooden
brought to Her, as one that would give Her a fuller satisfaction in all these
matters, if she would but afford him the Opportunity of Discoursing with Her.
And to the End his Arguments might make the deeper Impression upon Her, it was
thought fit to set forth the Priest to Her, not in the Glorious Idea of the
Great Master of Demonstration, one who had devoured all Mr. I. Ss. Principles,
and was thereby become such a Mighty Man of Controversy, that none of our
Divines durst Cope with him; He in whose hands the Dean of Paul's himself was
nothing, who had a certain Paper that in a few lines, baffled all that could be
said or written in favor of the Reformation (which was a greater thing than
the Representer's answering in a few sheets all the Books and Sermons that had
ever been published or preached against them); But in the humble Character of a
Country Priest, a little, inconsiderable man amongst them; and his Dress was
accommodated to h^s Character, that so under this disguise he might talk with
the greater Advantage to ^er.

But Mr. Gooden forgetting the person he had put on, presently fell into his
usual strain. He began to talk of nothing but Infallibility; Antiquity,
Demonstration: That all the Fathers and Councils were on their side: That he
had baffled our most considerable Divines, and particularly the Dean of Paul's;
who had in truth all of them so little to say for themselves when he came
amongst them, that he desired nothing more to convince her of the Truth of
their Doctrines, than that she would pitch upon some Point, and bring one of
our Men to meet him, and she should see what work he would make with him.

Such a noise as this from one of the little, inconsiderable Priests of the
Church of Rome, amazed the poor Lady: and had he prudently contented himself
with the Boast of the Victories he had already gained, without aspiring after
the Honor of adding one more for the increasing his Triumph, he might possibly
have saved himself from the shame of that discovery the following Conference
made of his Abilities, and have gained his Proselyte. But as great Wits are too
often a little inconsiderate; and, before they are aware, run themselves into
difficulties, out of which they cannot tell afterward how to extricate
themselves; so it fell out with Mr. Gooden on this Occasion. For the Lady
presently took hold on his Offer, and applied her self to Dr. Clagett; and the
Time, and Place, and Subject being fixed, Mr. Gooden and the Doctor met
accordingly at Gray's Inn, Feb. 21. 1686.

I shall say nothing of the Menage of the Conference its self, but that it was
with much Noise on Mr. Gooden's side; who in Discourse let fall some very
extraordinary things, and which might have passed into the Abstract too, had
not another Person who was with him, and seemed much more modest and
understanding than himself, observed what passed, and corrected his Blunders.

After the Dispute was ended, which lasted about Four or Five Hours, a new
Discourse arose about the Paper which Mr. Gooden made such Boasts of about the
Town, and had so often represented to the Lady and others, as unanswerable. He
was very unwilling a great while to let the Doctor have a Copy of it, tho he
promised to give him an Answer to it; till at last it was declared, That if he
refused to let him have it, the Company would look upon it as an idle Paper,
that had nothing in it, and that therefore he durst not trust him with it. Upon
this he gave him a Copy of it, and the Doctor in pursuance of his Promise, the
next day sent him the following Answer to it.

For what concerns the Sum of the Conference here Published, it was taken in
Writing, and signed by both Parties upon the place; so that there can be no
cause for any one to question the sincerity of it: And tho the Abstract be very
short, yet I am persuaded it is enough to satisfy every impartial Reader, why
Mr. Gooden did not care to make any boasts of it. And those who were present at
the Meeting, and heard all that passed between them, as well as the Lady for
whose sake they met, were very well satisfied that he would not force them to
publish the History of it.

But tho the Doctor was willing to let this matter die, and showed himself as
careful of Mr. Gooden's Reputation after the Conference, as he was of the
Ladies Conviction in it; yet being now by the Providence of God removed from
us, I thought it a just debt to his Memory, to subjoin here a true Copy of
these Papers, there being several of them abroad, both to prevent an imperfect
Edition from some other hand; and least Mr. Gooden and his Friends, who were so
silent in his Lifetime, should take occasion to raise any false Reports of
this Encounter, if they thought they could not be disproved now he is dead. And
if the great Esteem I had for that Excellent Person, and most useful Instrument
of God's Service, in our late dangerous and critical Times, does not render me
a very incompetent judge of whatever comes from his hand, the Reader will find
even in these short Notes, enough to reward his Pains, and to keep him from
thinking the time lost that he shall please to spend in the perusal of them.

W. W.

A Private Conference BETWEEN Dr. Clagett, and Father Gooden, ABOUT
Transubstantiation, etc.
FAther Gooden Proposed the Rule of Faith, to be the Subject of the Conference;
but upon the Request of the Lady, for whose sake they met, the Question of
Transubstantiation was taken.

And the Father desiring that the Doctor would be the Opponent, the Question
was Stated on both Sides.

Dr. That the Doctrine of Transubstantiation is salse Doctrine; and, That the
Natural Body of Christ is not in the Sacrament, but in Heaven.

Fa. That after the Words of Consecration, the true Body and Blood of Christ
are in the Holy Eucharist, and that the manner is well expressed by
Transubstantiation.


Dr. This is not all the Doctrine of Transubstantiation in the Church of Rome.
The Doctrine of the Church of Rome is this, That the Substance of the Bread is
changed into the Substance of Christ's Body: and the Substance of the Wine is
changed into the Substance of Christ's Blood; which Change the Church of Rome
does conveniently call Transubstantiation.

Now against this I thus argue, If the Substance of Bread remains in the
Eucharist, then it is not changed into the Substance of Christ's Body; But the
Substance of Bread remains in the Eucharist: Therefore the Substance of Bread
is not changed into the Substance of Christ's Body.



Fath. I deny the Minor (viz) that the substance of Bread does remain.


Dr. If Bread remains, the substance of bread remains.

But Bread remains.

Therefore the substance of bread remains.


Fath. If the Nature of Bread remains, Bread remains; but if only the Name of
Bread and Species remain, then Bread does not remain.


Dr. That Bread which is properly Natural Bread, remains in the Eucharist, is
proved from 1 Cor. 11.26. As often as ye eat this Bread and drink this Cup, ye
do show forth the Lord's death till he come. 1 Cor. 10.16. The Bread which we
break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? Now from hence we argue
thus: If that which is here said to be Broken, and to be the Communion of the
Body of Christ, be properly natural Bread, then that which is properly natural
Bread, remains in the Eucharist.


Fath. I grant the Major.


Dr. But that which is here said to be broken, and to be the Communion of the
Body of Christ, is properly natural Bread,

Ergo: Properly natural Bread remains in the Eucharist.


Fath. I deny the Minor.


Dr. The Bread of which Saint Paul speaks, is Bread that may be broken, and
therefore it is truly and properly natural Bread.


Fath. I distinguish the Antecedent; as to the Accidents and Appearance of
Bread it may be broken; as to the Nature of Bread it cannot, because it is not
there.


Dr. This is to beg the Question; for the Question is, whether Bread be there
or not? and the Argument to prove that it is there, is, Because Saint Paul
speaks of Bread that might be, and was broken; but it is no sufficient Answer
to this, to say that the Accidents of Bread may be broken, because the Bread is
not there it self, which is the thing that was disproved.


Fath. The Question to be proved was, that the Nature of Bread was there;
therefore it is not a begging of the Question, according to the Distinction
given, to say that the Nature of Bread is not there, and consequently could not
be broken: For the Bread there spoken of, is not meant of Natural Bread, but of
Bread which came down from Heaven, and which is the flesh of Christ, John.
6.41. I am the bread which came down from Heaven. John 6.48. I am the bread of
Life, Ver. 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 58. From whence I infer my Answer to be
good; that though the H. Eucharist be called Bread, and broken as to the
Species of Bread; yet it is not natural Bread, but only in appearance, of which
St. Paul spoke; for the same St. Paul, 1 Cor. 11. speaking of the same bread,
says, He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks Damnation to
himself, not discerning the body of our Lord. Christ also speaking of the same
bread, says, Take, eat, this is my Body, Matt. 26.26. Also Luke 22.19.
speaking of the same Eucharist, This is my Body which is given for you.


Dr. The Answerer forgetting the Part of a Disputant, has pretended to prove
largely by the sixth Chap. of St. John, and other places of Scripture, That St.
Paul in the aforementioned places, did not speak of Bread properly so called,
although he spoke of Bread that was to be broken. All which places, when it is
my turn to Answer, I will consider particularly.

But if that which is here said is to go for an Answer, the force of it lies in
this, That by the Bread which St. Paul spoke of, we are to understand the Bread
which St. John spoke of, namely, the bread which came down from Heaven; by
which the Answerer understands the Natural and proper flesh of Christ.

But that the Bread which St. Paul speaks of cannot be the natural flesh of
Christ, I prove thus; The Bread which St. Paul speaks of, was broken. But the
Natural Body of Christ cannot be broken. Ergo. The Bread which St. Paul speaks
of cannot be the Natural body of Christ.



Fath. As to the Species and Appearance of Bread it was broken, I grant it; as
to any Nature contained under those Species of Bread, I deny it.


Dr. This Distinction does not avoid the Argument, because if the Bread in St.
Paul and the Bread in St. John are really and properly the same, and the Bread
in St. John be really and properly the flesh of Christ, then what is affirmed
of the one, must be true of the other, and therefore if the Bread be broken in
St. Paul, then the Natural body of Christ must be broken too; which cannot be.

I add further, That if by breaking of Bread St. Paul means breaking the
Accidents of Bread only and if the Bread that is broken be really that which
is spoken of in St. John as aforesaid; it follows also that the Accidents of
Bread are properly the body of Christ.


Fath. That which St. Paul calls Bread, had in it both the Accidents of Bread
and the substance of Christ's body. As to the Accidents of Bread, it might be
broken; as to the substance of Christ's body which is mentioned in St. John, it
is not broken, unless you mean as Christ's Body was broken upon the Cross.

And if the bread which is broken be really that which is spoken of in St. John
as aforesaid, both as to the Accidents and nature of Bread, I grant, that the
Accidents of Bread would be the Body of Christ, and if it be not the same, both
as to the Nature and Accidents, I deny it.

This I profess not to understand.


Fath. As to the Doctors Argument it includes a Sophism, as will appear when
brought into form, because it involves 4 Terms; because he supposes in one
Proposition for the Accidents of Bread and in the other for the Nature.


Dr. In the Argument I used, I went upon this Supposition, That the Accidents
of Bread were only to be understood, as the Answerer supposes, and therefore I
have not confounded the Nature and the Accidents of Bread together. Besides,
the Distinction between the Nature of Bread and the Accidents of Bread, was not
to be remembered any more by the Answerer, because I proceed upon his
Supposition, That the Accidents only are broken.

Now if St. Paul speaks of nothing but what is broken, and Accidents only are
broken, and yet if he speaks of the very flesh of Christ too, then the
Accidents of the Bread are the very flesh of Christ.

And whereas the Answerer by his last Answer, means the Nature of Christ's
Body, as he says, I understood him of the Nature of Bread. And now once more I
desire him to show me where the four Terms are.


Fath. The Text of St. Paul, the Dr. takes for his Medium, and argues from a
double Supposition, as first, taking it for the Accidents of Bread which were
broken, and afterward for the substance of Christ's Body under the Accidents,
in which latter sense it signifies the same that is meant by our Savior in St.
John.


Dr. I observe the Answerer will allow nothing to be broken but Accidents; I
observe also, that nothing is said to be the Body of Christ, or the Communion
of the Body of Christ, but what is broken; If therefore nothing is broken but
Accidents, then Accidents are either, according to the Answerer's long proof,
the very Body of Christ; or according to the Apostle, the Communion of the Body
of Christ.

But neither are the Accidents of Bread, the Body of Christ, nor the Communion
of the Body of Christ. And this, I say, is not answered, and believe will not
be answered by any man that maintains, that St. Paul does not here speak
properly of Bread.


Fath. All along in my Discourse I have supposed, that when St. Paul speaks of
this bread, he spoke of the H. Eucharist, in which were contained both the
Accidents of Bread, and the true body of Christ. How the Dr. has disproved this
Doctrine so clearly as to justify the Reformation, I understand not; Because,
I conceive no private Persons, or particular Church, ought to pretend a
Reformation, without clear evidence, whether the Dr. has given such I leave to
the consideration of the Readers. And whether, having broken off from the great
body of the Universal Church, and its testimony, he can possibly have any
certain Rule to arrive at Christian Faith? If Scripture be pretended,
interpreted by a fallible Authority, how Certainty can be obtained, or why a
Socinian, following Scripture for his Rule of Faith, is not to be believed as
well as any other Reformer following the same Rule, I see not.


Signed W. Clagett. Peter Gooden.


Dr. CLAGETT's Answer TO A PAPER Delivered to Him by Father GOODEN.
The Paper
ARticles of Christian Faith are Truths; Truths are Impossible to be False;
Therefore Articles of Christian Faith are Impossible to be False; Therefore
those who obtain Articles of the Christian Faith, must have some Rule to
Acquire them by, which cannot deceive them: To a Parliamentary Protestant, the
Ancient Fathers cannot be such a Rule, because they are accounted Fallible; Nor
Councels, because they also are accounted Fallible; Nor Scriptures sensed by a
Fallible Authority, because all such Interpretations may be False; And
therefore Faith cannot be Obtained by any such means. For that which is
Doubtful can only Create Opinion, which is also Doubtful; And He that doubts
in Faith, ( the Apostle says) is Infidelis; And a Company of Doubters are not a
Church of Faithful, but a Society of such as the Apostle calls Infidels.

Signed Peter Gooden.

The Answer.
Pap. Articles of Christian Faith are Truths.

Ans. The Design of the Disputer is to prove, that we are Doubters and
therefore Infidels; But never did any man begin a business more unluckily, for
at the very first dash he takes it for granted, that we do undoubtedly believe
Articles of Christan Faith to be Truths; for otherwise he ought to have proved
that they are so. But there is another Misfortune he is fallen into, no less than
that; for his Argument to prove that we must needs be Doubters, is, that we
want an Infallible Rule. Now if he is sure that we want an Infallible Rule, and
that without such a Rule there can be no Faith, I am sure he does notoriously
contradict himself, by supposing that we believe all Articles of Christian
Faith to be Truths, though we have no such Rule. This is a very hopeful Paper,
and like to make wise Converts, which ends in making us Infidels, and begins to
prove it by an Argument; that manifestly supposes Us to be Believers; which
also pretends that we have no Infallible Rule, and therefore can be sure of no
Point of Faith; but yet manifestly supposes Us to be Assured of Some without
it; which shows the Paper to be a trifling Paper, and worth no more
Consideration. But because the Disputer is said to boast so much of the
Argument Contained in it, I will go on with every Clause of it to Convince him,
(if he does not already know it,) that there is not a Line in it, but is either
false, or nothing to the purpose.

Pap. Truths are Impossible to be False.

Ans. By Truths, the Disputer means, the Truth of Things, or of Propositions,
and therefore this is a vain and fulsome saying, which does not Advance his
Reasoning one jot farther than it was before: For this is no more than to say,
That which is true, is true, and it cannot possibly be, but truths must be
truths. I think he applies himself to us, as if we wanted not only Christian
Faith, but Common sense.

Pap. Therefore Articles of Christian Faith are Impossible to be False.

Ans. There is no doubt of this, supposing that they are Truths. So that the
Argument he begins with being put into the right order, and into other words,
is this; It is Impossible but truths must be truths, but Articles of Christian
Faith are Truths; Therefore it is Impossible but they must be Truths. The
Ancient Fathers had made wise work with Christianity, if they had gone this way
to work to Convert Infidels.

Pap. Therefore those who obtain the Articles of the Christian Faith, must have
some Rule to acquire them by, which cannot deceive them.

Ans. This is an obscure saying, and I must make the best of it. By obtaining
Articles of the Christian Faith, I suppose he means believing them, and by a
Rule by which to acquire them, He must understand a Rule, or means whereby to
know what the Articles of the Christian Faith are; and then his meaning is,
That those who believe the Articles of the Christian Faith, must be provided of
some such Rule or Means, to know what they are, as cannot deceive them. Now
whether this be in it self true or false, it does not at all follow from what
he had laid down before; For though the Truth of Things or Propositions is so
sure, that (as he wisely says) it is Impossible they should be false, yet it
does by no means follow, that the Reasons upon which I believe these things
must necessarily be as sure as the Truth of the Things themselves. And this I
make no doubt the Disputer was well aware of; But because I am sensible who
they are whom he designs to pervert by this Paper, and for whose sake I Answer
it, I will explain this matter by an Instance that will bring it down to all
Capacities: If there was such a man as Henry the 8th, It is certainly
Impossible that there should be no such man; but my Belief that there was such
a Man, is grounded upon such Reasons as do not imply an absolute Impossibility
of the Contrary, because it is grounded upon the Testimony of Fallible men: And
yet I should be very little better then a madman if I should entertain the
least doubt that there was such a man: which plainly shows, that I may have
sufficient Reason to believe a thing without any Evidence of the Impossibility
of the contrary; and this is enough to overthrow his Consequence. I shall now
inquire what truth there is in the Conclusion it self; To which end I observe,
That there are two things which may be understood by those words, cannot
deceive them, either first, that the Rule it self is so plain and certain, that
no man who uses it can be deceived by the Rule; or secondly that it is
Impossible any man should be mistaken in the Use of it. If he means the former,
then I shall show him presently, that we have such a Rule as he speaks of, and
that he has said nothing to make us ashamed of it. If he means the latter,
then I say it is absolutely false, That those who without doubting believe the
Articles of the Christian Faith, must have such a Rule to know what they are,
as that they cannot possibly mistake in the Use of it. To make which plain to
every bodies understanding, I shall add another Instance easy to be Applied; If
a man skilful in Arithmetic has a great many Numbers before him, and desires
to know what Sum they make when they are put together; he has the Rule of
Addition to do it by, which Rule cannot deceive him. Now there are these two
things to be observed farther, which I think the Disputer himself will not
deny; first, that it is in the Nature of the thing Possible, that this man may
be mistaken every time that he puts these several Numbers together, to bring
them all into one Sum; but secondly, that notwithstanding this Possibility of
being mistaken, yet after he has tried it over and over again, he may be sure
without the least doubt that he has done his work right. Even so we may have a
Rule of Faith that cannot deceive us, and though it is not Absolutely
Impossible, that we should be mistaken in the use of it; yet we may for all
that be Assured, and believe without the least doubting, that we have learned
what the true Faith is by that Rule; For all the World knows, that it is no
sufficient Reason to Doubt of any thing, that the Contrary is barely Possible.

Pap. To a Parliamentary Protestant, the Ancient Fathers cannot be such a Rule,
because they are Accounted fallible.

Ans. We never said they were such a Rule. This therefore is Impertinent.

Pap. Nor Counsels because they also are accounted fallible.

Ans. This is Impertinent also: for we never said they were our Rule of Faith.
But we have better Reasons to give, why Fathers and Councils cannot be our Rule
of Faith, than this that the Disputer has made for us. And one is this, That we
cannot make them the Rule of our Faith, but by so doing, we must depart from
the Primitive Fathers, and the ancient Councils; in as much as all agree, That
the Holy Scriptures are the Rule of Faith, and they made it theirs.

Pap. Nor Scriptures senced by a fallible Authority, because all such
Interpretations may be false.

Ans. This is the Place, where I shall tell the Disputer, what we believe, and
why we believe it. And when I have done, I shall consider whether he has said
any thing in this clause, to shake our Assurance. We firmly believe all the
Articles of the Creed, into the Profession whereof, we have been Baptized. We
moreover believe all other Doctrine, that is Revealed in Holy Scriptures.

The Grounds of this our Faith, are these, That in the Holy Scriptures are
Recorded, those Testimonies of Divine Revelation, by which the Doctrines
therein contained, are confirmed. That these Testimonies were too notorious and
Public to be gainsaid; in so much that the Doctrine, built upon them, could
not be overthrown by the Powers of the world engaged against it. That the holy
Books were written by the Inspired Preachers of that Doctrine, which they
contain; And that for this we have the Testimony of Universal and
uncontrollable Tradition, which is a thing credible of it self. This is the Sum
of that External Evidence, upon which our Faith is grounded. In assigning of
which, I do by no means exclude that Internal Evidence, that arises from the
Excellent Goodness of the Doctrines themselves, which shows them to be worthy
of God.

Now whereas this Disputer says, That these Scriptures cannot be an Infallible
Rule to us, because they are sensed by a fallible Authority, that is, because
we, who are fallible, understand them as well as we can.

I answer, That no man needs to be Infallible, in order to the understanding of
plain Scripture. I who do not pretend to Infallibility, am yet certain which is
enough for me, That I do find the Articles of the Creed in the Scriptures, and
many other Doctrines besides, which I do understand. I am sure that I know what
these words of St. John signify, 1 John 2.25. And Chap. 5.3.
This is the Promise that he has promised us, even eternal life, And, this is
the love of God that we keep his Commandments; and the like. The Ancient
Fathers thought the Scriptures to be so plain, that they argued out of them,
without pretending to an Infallible Authority of Interpretation, as I will show
this Disputer when he pleases. If nothing less then Infallibility will serve to
understand, or as he says, to sense words, why does this Disputer put into my
hands, this Paper of his; which is none of the plainest neither? I am sure he
does not take me to be Infallible, and yet I am confident he would be angry, if
I should say his Paper was not to be understood without an Infallible
Interpreter; let him answer this if he can.

The Reason he gives, why Scripture sensed by a fallible Authority, cannot be
the Rule of Faith, is, because, all such Interpretations may be false, That is
to say, because, there is a bare Possibility of any fallible man's mistaking
the sense of plain Texts. Which kind of Reasoning makes impossible, that every
man should come to be a Believer, unless himself be first Infallible. And this
I shall Demonstrate so plainly, that no man who has any share of Understanding
and modesty shall be able to deny it.

There is no possible way, for any sort of Christians, to make known either the
Articles or Reasons of Faith, to those that are yet Ignorant of them, but by
words, or sentences, written or spoken. He who hears or reads the words and
Sentences, cannot tell either what is to believe, or why he should believe,
till he understands or (in the Disputers Phrase) till he Senses those words and
Sentences; but as yet his Authority is but fallible; and words sensed by a
Fallible Authority can never give a man certainty, either of the Rule, or of
the Reason of his Faith; If this Disputer be in the Right, therefore it is
impossible to make him a Believer, unless you can make him Infallible first,
that it may not be Possible for him, to be mistaken, in Sensing the words which
he hears or reads. And thus farewell, to all Advantage that any man can have by
the Infallibility of Popes and Councils, or Oral Tradition, as well as by the
Scriptures; Nay, and to all Possible means of arriving to certainty in any
matter of Faith unless every body be Infallible first; so that upon supposition
that God would have all men to be saved, and therefore to believe; it
inavoidably follows from the wild Reasoning of this man, that God has made
every Man Infallible. But if it be evident; that men are fallible Creatures,
then this Disputer has Advanced a Principle the most destructive to all
certainty of Faith, that ever was heard of in the world. But the comfort is,
that it is so very absurd that no body, well in his wits, can be misled by it.

Pap. And therefore Faith cannot be obtained by any such means.

Ans. Which is as much as to say, that Faith cannot be obtained, till a man
have the gift of Infallibility; And if every man has it before he can be taught
to any purpose, what need can there be of an Infallible Interpreter to teach
him? But, as I observed before; it is impossible to make Believers of those that
are not Infallible, unless the Disputer, or his Church, has a way to make known
the Doctrines and Reasons of Christian Faith, without words.

Pap. For that which is doubtful can only create opinion, which is also
doubtful.

Ans. Therefore since all words are doubtful to him that has but a fallible
Authority to sense them, as no man has more, before he believes; it is
impossible for the Disputers Church to create any thing more than opinion,
(which is also doubtful) in those whom she teaches, unless as I have already
said, she can make them Infallible first, and teach them afterward. And even
then there would be no need of teaching them at all, because they are now
Infallible themselves. Of all the Papers that ever I read, I never met with any
thing more absurd, and contradictious than the Reasoning of this; In which the
Disputer, out of a vehement desire to overthrow our Faith, and the Grounds of
it, has laid down Principles that do effectually overthrow all ways of making
men sure of any thing; and in particular, the use of those very methods by
which his own Church pretends to lead men to Faith.

Pap. And he that doubts in Faith (the Apostle says) is Infidelis, and a
company of Doubters are not a Church of Faithful, but a society of such as the
Apostle calls Infidels.

Ans. What Apostle says this? if the Disputer refers to Romans 14.23. as I think
he does, he has shown his skill in the Interpretation of Scripture, to be equal
to his mastery in Reasoning. If in the Infallible Church they can Interpret
Scripture no better than thus, give me the honesty and industry of a Fallible
Church, before it.

The Conclusion.
AND now after all, this Paper is as absurd in the design, as it is in the
management; for the business of it is to prove, That Protestants have no Faith,
but are Infidels; and that by this Argument they are and must be doubters: Now
whether I doubt; or do not doubt, is a Question concerning a matter of Fact
that I have more reason to know the truth of, than the Disputer can possibly
have; and if I know that I do not doubt, and he can yet prove that I do doubt,
he is an extraordinary man indeed. For then I am sure he can prove, That Truth
not only may be, but is false, which perhaps such a man as he can Reconcile
with what he said at first, That truths are impossible to be false.

And this alone had been a sufficient Answer to his Paper; for nothing can be
more frivolous, than to go about to prove to a man by fine Reasoning, that he
does doubt of a thing, when he is as sure, that he does not doubt of it, as he
can be of any thing in the World. But the design of this Paper seems to be as
Impious, as it is Absurd. And that is, to bring weak Persons to Infidelity
first, that they may afterward be settled upon Romish Grounds. I do acknowledge
it is a very proper way, to bring us over to the Church of Rome, to make us
Infidels first; But this they will not find so easy a matter; for we trust,
that we are not of those who draw back to Perdition, but of those that believe
to the saving the Soul. I have omitted nothing in the whole Paper, but to take
notice of that little and mean Reflection, in calling the Protestant, a
Parliamentary Protestant. I have told this Disputer, the Reason and Ground of
our Faith: If we moreover are Protected in the Profession of it, by the Laws of
the Land, I suppose it is no more then what he would desire, for the Profession
of Popery; and he would think never the worse of himself, for being a
Parliamentary Papist.

Thus I have Answered this Paper through every clause of it. And I am confident
destroyed all that little Appearance of Reasoning that it made. Let the
Disputer build it up again if he can, I promise him, by God's Grace, that I Will
pull it down again.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and are to be Sold by William Rogers.
BIshop Wilkins's Fifteen Sermons. 8o Dr. Tillotson's Sermons and Discourses.
The Third Volume. 8o Dr. Wallis's two Sermons of Regeneration. 4o -- His
Defense of the Royal Society. 4o Mr. Hodges Sermon of the Necessity, Dignity,
and Duty of Gospel Ministers. 4o -- His Treatise of the lawfulness of the
Marriage of the Clergy. 8o The Peaceable Christian. A Sermon. 4o. Bap. Nani's
History of the Republic of Venice. fol. Sterry's Freedom of the Will. Fol.
Lord North's Light in the Way to Paradise. 8o Molins of the Muscles: With Sir
Charles Scarborough's Syllabus Musculorum. 8o A Collection of Letters of
Gallantry. 12o A new and easy Method to learn to Sing by Book, 8o Erasmus's
Manual for a Christian Soldier. 12o A Book of Ciphers, or Letters Reverst. 8o
Leonard's Reports, in Four Parts. The Second Edition. Fol. Bulstrode's Reports,
in Three Parts. The Second Edition Corrected, with the addition of thousands of
References, 1688. Fol. The Complete Clerk, containing the best Forms of all
sorts of Presidents. 4o Sir Simon Deggs Parsons Counselor, with the Law of
Tithes, and Tithing, in two Books. The Fourth Edition. 8o The Hind and Panther
transvers'd. 4o Mr. Gilbert's Answer to the Bishop of Condom, with Reflections
on his Pastoral Letter. 4o The Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome
truly represented, etc. By the Reverend Dr. Stillingfleet, Dean of St. Paul's.
4o An Answer to a Discourse entitled, Papists Protesting against Protestant
Popery. 4o An Answer to the Amicable Accommodation of the Differences between
the Representer and the Answerer. 4o A Sermon Preached at the Funeral of Dr.
Calamy. These Three by the Reverend Dr. Sherlock, Master of the Temple. 4o A
View of the whole Controversy between the Representer and the Answerer. By Dr.
Clagett. 4o The Authority of Councils, and the Rule of Faith: With an Answer to
the Eight Theses laid down for the Trial of the English Reformation. The First
Part about Councils, by -- Hutchinson, Esquire; the rest by Dr. Clagett. 4o An
Answer to the eighth Chapter of the Representers Second Part, in the first
Dialogue between him and his Lay-Friend. 4o The Doctrine of the Trinity and
Transubstantiation compared, as to Scripture, Reason, and Tradition. In a new
Dialogue between a Protestant and a Papist. Two Parts, by the Reverend Dr.
Stillingfleet, Dean of St. Paul's. 4o The State of the Church of Rome, when the
Church of England began, as it appears by two Advices given to Paul 3. and
Julius 3. By Dr. Glaget. 4o The School of the Eucharist, Translated and
Published, with an excellent Preface, by Dr. Clagett. Price 4o 1 s. in 8o 6 d.
The absolute Impossibility of Transubstantiation demonstrated. By Mr. Samuel
Johnson. 4o A Letter to a Friend, reflecting on some passages in a Letter to
the D. of P. in answer to the arguing part of his first Letter to Mr. G. 4o The
Reflecters Defense of his Letter to a Friend, against the furious Assaults of
Mr. J. S. in his Second Catholic Letter. In four Dialogues. 4o The Protestant
Resolved: Or, a Discourse showing the unreasonableness of his turning Roman
Catholic for Salvation. 4o These Three by the Reverend Mr. Clement Elis. Some
Dialogues between Mr. G. and others: With Reflections on a Book called Pax
Vobis. By Mr. Linford. 8o Francis Brocard, (Secretary to Pope Clement the
Eighth) his Alarm to all Protestant Princes: With a Discovery of Popish Plots,
and Conspiracies, after his Conversion from Popery to the Protestant Religion.
4o
Books lately Printed for William Rogers.
A Persuasive to Frequent Communion in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.
Price 3 d. 8o. A Discourse against Transubstantiation. 8o Price 3 d. A Sermon
Preached at Lincolns-Inn-Chappel, on the 31st of Jan. 1688: Being the Day
appointed for a Public Thanksgiving to Almighty God, for having made his
Highness the Prince of Orange, the Glorious Instrument of the Great Deliverance
of this Kingdom from Popery and Arbitrary Power. 4o. A Sermon Preached before
the Queen, at White Hall, March the 8th, 1689. 4o A Sermon Preached before the
King and Queen, at Hampton Court, April the 14th, 1689. 4o All Five by the
Reverend Dr. Tillotson, Dean of Canterbury. The Practical Believer: Or, the
Articles of the Apostles Creed, drawn out to form a True Christian's Heart and
Practice. In Two Parts. 8o A Vindication of some Protestant Principles of
Church-Unity and Catholick-Communion, from the Charge of Agreement with the
Church of Rome. 4o. A Preservative against Popery: Being some plain Directions
to unlearned Protestants, how to Dispute with Romish Priests. Part I. The Fifth
Edition. 4o The Second Part of the Preservative against Popery: Showing how
contrary Popery is to the True Ends of the Christian Religion. Fitted for the
Instruction of unlearned Protestants. Second Edition. 4o A Vindication of Both
Parts of the Preservative against Popery. In answer to the Cavils of Lewis
Sabran, Jesuit. 4o A Discourse concerning the Nature, Unity, and Communion of
the Catholic Church: Wherein most of the Controversies relating to the Church
are briefly and plainly stated. Part I. 4o A Sermon Preached before the Right
Honorable the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the City of London, at
Guild-Hall-Chappel, November. 4. 1688. All six by the Reverend Dr. Sherlock,
Master of the Temple. A Letter to the Superiors (whether Bishops or Priests)
which Approve or License the Popish Books in England, particularly to those of
the Jesuits Order, concerning Lewis Sabran a Jesuit. By Mr. Gee. 4o A Letter of
Enquiry to the Reverend Fathers of the Society of Jesus. Written in the Person
of a dissatisfied Roman Catholic. By J. Tailor, Gent. 4o The History of the
Persecutions of the Protestants by the French King, in the Principality of
Orange, from the Year 1660, to the Year 1687. 4o The Art of Spelling. By J. P.
M. A. A Sermon Preached before the King and Queen, at Hampton Court, May the
12th, 1689. By Robert Brograve, M. A. 4o A Discourse concerning the Nature of
Idolatry, in which a late Author's ( viz. the Bishop of Oxford's) True and Only
Notion of Idolatry, is considered and confuted. 4o An Exhortation to mutual
Charity and Unity among Protestants. In a Sermon Preached before the King and
Queen, at Hampton Court, May 20. 1689. A Sermon Preached before the Honorable
House of Commons, at St. Margaret's Westminster, June 5. 1689. being the
Fast Day. 4o These Three by the Reverend Mr. Wake. Dr. Clagett's Seventeen
Sermons: With the Sum of a Conference between him and Father Gooden, about
Transubstantiation. 8o

