A Brief and Pithy TREATISE ABOUT COMFORT, Which Gods Children have or at least
earnestly desire, and long after whilst they are in this World:

Together with the Observations of Comfort, and the Removal of them.

By John Clark, Master of Arts, sometime Rector of Cotgrave in Nottingham-Shire.

LONDON, Printed by E. T. and R. H. for William Miller, at the Gilded Acron in
St. Paul's Churchyard, near the Little North Door, 1670.

The Contents of the several Sections.
1 OF comfort in general. 2. The hindrances of comfort. 3. Other hindrances of
a Christians comfort. 4. The Authors of a Christians trouble. 5. Of the
connection between Grace, and comfort. 6. The sum of what remains. 7. Of
Conversion. 8. Of sorrow for sin. 9. Of the pardonableness of sin. 10. Of the
sin unto death. 11. Of the day of grace: the time of visitation, or the
accepted time.
SECT. 1. Of Comfort, in General.
IT ill becomes Christians to conceive of God, as of an Egyptian Taskmaster,
who only requires from his servants, the performance of their task, without
respect to their comfort, and refreshment. Surely it is the entertainment of
some such like thoughts, which discourageth many from entering upon the service
of God, and that which for a long time makes it tedious to many, who having
engaged themselves already in his service, do proceed very heavily, and yet are
so far convinced of the necessity of continuing therein, that they dare not
entertain any thoughts of going back.

This no doubt is a very great injury to him, who is justly styled, the God of
all consolation; and who has by the Gospel so infinitely remitted the burden
of that task, which was required of man, when he was sufficiently able to
undergo it: yea, and has from age to age, been remitting it, till at length,
the Yoke be easy, and the burden light; to all those who do impartially judge
of it, and in the bearing of it do not make it grievous to themselves.

Far be it therefore from any that own themselves for the servants of the most
high, to cast such an imputation upon their Lord and Master, and to disgrace
his service by misrepresenting it to themselves, or others; as a yoke which
neither themselves nor their Forefathers have been able to bear; although of
necessity they have been constrained to bear it, only lest they purchase his
displeasure, and so run themselves inevitably upon the ruin both of their
souls, and bodies.

We cannot but receive the word of God, as a systeme of truths, the least title
whereof will not admit of any appearance, or shadow of falsehood, and if we are
conversant therein, we meet with thousands of places, wherein it is not only
attested by credible and unsuspected witnesses, that God is the God of peace,
joy, and consolation, but demonstrated also by those gracious, and precious
promises, which he has made for our comfort and encouragement in the ways of
holiness; and the many historical reports, of those who have professed
themselves to have received the abundant consolations of Christ, in their
subjection to the Gospel, though called thereby to passive duties, which of all
others are the hardest, and heaviest.

But because it is matter of undeniable Experience that many of Gods true, and
faithful servants complain of that small portion of these consolations, which
they are made partakers of, which rather support them under the yoke of Christ's
service, than enable them to bear the burden with cheerfulness and delight: It
will not be amiss to enquire whence this comes to pass, that afterward we may
the more effectually apply the remedy.

SECT. 2. The hindrances of comfort.
As the barrenness of land, where there is no defect on the husbandmans part,
does commonly proceed from one of the two contrary extremes of wet, and
drought; so likewise the want of comfort in the souls of believers.

For on Gods part there is no defect, he being truly styled, (as was said
before) the God of all consolation, and Christ the Prince of peace, and the
Holy Ghost, the comforter, and the Gospel glad tidings to all that receive it
in faith. But there are two extremes, into which believers do commonly plunge
themselves, if not to the total loss, yet to the very great abatement of those
consolations, which they might otherwise in a very large measure be partakers
of. For either they seek for, and expect comfort independent on duty, or else
they wholly suspend their comforts on the performance thereof.

1. Sometimes a Child of God may grow careless, and slothful in the performance
of duties, so that if he omit not that part which consists in bodily exercise,
as praying, hearing, reading, etc. yet he is not careful to exercise those
graces, which are the very life, and soul of duty, and which indeed do give
them the denomination of duty in the sight of God: And then no wonder if God
withhold from him those consolations, which in this spiritual distemper might
rather encourage him in his sloth, than quicken him to a more effectual
endeavor to walk closely with God. Now therefore for such an one to expect an
infusion of spiritual consolation in the way of his sloth and carnality, is
altogether vain; because he does thereby but invite God to encourage him in an
evil way, which the holy God will never do.

How much less then have they any reason, to expect a share in these
consolations, who not only neglect the internal exercise of grace, but also in
a very great measure, through a greater prevalency of this spiritual sloth, do
frequently omit the external performance of required duties?

Yea, so great sometimes is the deceit of a Christians heart, in this
particular, that they are apt to say, I cannot do duties; I have no heart to go
to ordinances, for I have no comfort in my heart, when I am about them, I have
no smiles of Gods countenance upon my soul: if the Lord would but bestow some
comfort upon me, then I could do duties cheerfully, I could go to ordinances
willingly; but while I am without comfort I can do nothing.

Thus some by an error on the left hand, do in vain, seek for comfort, before
and out of a way of duty.

2. Others sometimes fall as much short of their desired comfort, by an extreme
on the right hand: for they are indeed very painful, and diligent in the
performance of every known duty, and do not only mind the outside of duty, but
do also very seriously engage their hearts to accompany their outward
performances, by the exercise of every suitable and necessary grace, to the
utmost of their power: but then they suspend their comfort on such an
exquisiteness, and perfection of performance, as is either very rarely, or not
at all attainable on this side heaven.

This, according to the best of my observation, is that spring of trouble,
which feeds the minds, of many of Gods dear servants with a perpetuity of
disconsolateness, drawing out their distempers to months, and years, and
sometimes to the end of their lives. As they grow more diligent and serious in
the performance of duties, they still discover more and more of their own
imperfections, and weakness; so that, though they do in good earnest make a
progress in grace and holiness, yet their defects coming more to their sight
and view, they think they do believe, whereby their troubles increase upon them
daily, and their expected comfort flies further and faster, from them.

It fares with them herein, as with a man that sails by a rock, which seems to
move from him, and the faster he sails, the more the rock seems to mend its
pace flying from him, though in truth the rock neither mends its pace, nor
moves, but the ship in which the man is carried. So these persons, the swifter
they row in the ship of duty to overtake comfort, the faster comfort seems to
fly from them, when as in truth, it is not comfort that flies from them, but
they fly from their comforts, while they place sincerity in a certain degree of
perfection; and therefore will not own, nor receive those comforts, which the
Gospel holds out to their sincerity, till they have attained that degree of
their self-limited perfection. To clear this by an instance.

A Child of God being convinced of the evil of sin in general, or of some sin
in particular, knows that there is no hope of pardon without Godly sorrow, and
repentance; and that every kind, or degree of sorrow is not sufficient.
Therefore in order to his own practice, he lays down these two rules. First,
that his sorrow must be true, and unfeigned. Seondly, That his sorrow must be
proportionable to the evil of his sin.

Hereupon he sets himself seriously by praying, reading, etc. to discover the
evil of his sin in the several aggravations thereof, that so the sense thereof
may excite in him a proportionable sorrow.

Now the issue hereof is this: the more he searches, and sees into the nature,
and evil of his sin, the more unproportionable he still finds his sorrow to be
to the hainousness of his sin; so that his sorrow in comparison thereof seems
to be no sorrow, and much less, that true and right sorrow, whereto the
promises of pardon are made; and therefore while he lies under this
apprehension, he utterly refuses and puts away all that comfort, which in
the promises is held out to the penitent sinner.

This may suffice to discover the second hindrance of a Christians comfort; but
what a poor soul is to do in such a case, shall (God willing) be showed
afterward in its proper place, when I come to speak of the remedy of these
Evils.

SECT. 3. Some other hindrances of a Christians comfort.
BEside those forementioned most usual lets of a Christians comfort, there are
yet two other, which are of no less malignant influence upon the soul, for the
disturbance of the peace thereof, and powerful for the exclusion of that joy,
which would make a course of holiness sweet to a believer, and render his
Religion the more amiable in the sight of the bystanders.

1. The first is a suspicion of the defect of Grace, as to the being, truth, or
necessary degree thereof. And what comfort can any one take, who is but serious
about the things that concern his everlasting welfare, who apprehends himself
to be wholly void of grace; or looks upon his grace but as common, not saving
grace; or if it seem to be saving grace; yet is so small, weak, and altogether
unproportionable to the time, and means, he has enjoyed, that he seems rather
to have less than he once had, which one thing is enough to make him suspect
the truth of it, because true grace is a growing grace.

But the trouble arising upon this account, is not at all times, nor in all
persons alike: for sometimes it is more fixed and Chronical'd, and sometimes
more volatile and transient.

1. Sometimes this suspicion of the want of true grace, is rooted upon some
mistaken notions, which through the want of means of better information, or
being pertinaciously retained, do long grow, and bring forth this uncomfortable
fruit in the soul.

So some looking upon conversion as a very great, and manifest change wrought
by the spirit of God, upon the whole man; because they are not sensible of any
such manifest change wrought in them at any particular time, they lie long
under the suspicion, that then sure they were never converted, and therefore
have no true grace.

Or, although the signs whereby they prosecute the discovery of grace, be
proper, yet through misapapplication, or weakness in the application, they are
not able by the use of them to discover that grace which they seek after.

There are not many that have that skill, and dexterity; in the application of
signs, thereby to attain any probable and comfortable evidence of their state;
and sometimes the signs they make use of, are such, that though if they could
find those signs in themselves they might conclude grace, yet they find it no
less difficult to find the reality of those signs than of that grace, which by
them they seek for. Hereupon they are necessitated to seek for the signs of
those signs, and then for the reality of those subordinate signs, etc. till
they have lost themselves in a maze of signs upon signs, and find it next to an
impossibility to attain any clear discovery of grace, by the use of them: by
which means it comes to pass that they lie long without that comfort, which
some good probable evidence of the being and truth of grace might afford them.
For instance, It is a true sign of grace, when we can find in our hearts an
universal hatred of sin, as sin: It is not any kind of hatred of sin, but the
hatred of sin, as sin: so that though we do find in our hearts, an hatred of
sin, yet there is need of other signs whereby we may know whether we hate sin,
as sin. Again,

Where there is true grace, there is a concatenation of all graces. Now before
we can conclude from this sign, we must have the evidence of every particular
grace, before we can come to the evidence of grace in general.

So when any one shall go about to seek for grace by its prevailing degree; it
requires many signs, long observation, and much experience, before they can
possibly know whether they have grace in a prevailing degree, or no.

2. Sometimes this suspicion of the want of grace is but occasional and
accidental: and then commonly it is of no long continuance. This many times
happens to those, who for the most part have such a probable evidence of the
truth of heir grace, as does quiet heir hearts, and enable them comfortably to
press on toward a further measure of grace, and a fuller assurance of their
interest in the heavenly inheritance. But occasionally in reading, or hearing,
they meet with some such signs of true grace, or necessary properties of a
child of God, which, because at present they do not easily discern in
themselves, it raises some doubts and fears in them, which eclipse their
former comfort, and disturb their peace, till by looking again over their
former evidences, they find no cause of continuing those new raised jealousies.
But the notes of difference that are assigned, between true and counterfeit,
saving and common grace, a child of God and an hypocrite, do not seldom raise
these jealousies, which sometimes may be occasion of long discomfort, yet (I
say) they are but of short continuance.

2. An other grand hindrance of comfort, is a suspicion of the unpardonableness
of their sins or at least of some particular sin, which they imagine was
committed with such aggravating circumstances, as do exclude them from the
benefit of the promises, viz. that it was committed wilfully, against their own
light, and knowledge, and against the checks, and reluctance of their own
conscience, etc.

This cloud, though sometimes at first appearance it seems but small, yet in
process of time it so overspreads, and darkens the soul, that it becomes the
principle of dismal trouble and confusion, specially when it grows (as
frequently it does) to an imagination that they have sinned against the Holy
Ghost. Then they throw off all offers of comfort from scripture and promises,
as easily as Sampson broke the new cords wherewith he was bound. They give
themselves up for reprobates, and account the scriptures and blood of Christ to
signify no more to them, than to the damned in hell.

This is a sad condition indeed, and commonly proves to be such a stuborn and
untractable distemper, that the means applied for cure, seems rather to
increase than abate the distemper; and indeed many times is not perfectly and
thoroughly cured, till in the end of their days, God bring them within sight of
heaven.

3. Sometimes poor Christians, though they look not upon their sins, as in
themselves unpardonable, yet they think that their day of grace, and the
accepted time for them is already past, and therefore that there is no room
left them for hope.

This proceeds from the review of time past, wherein they see how many tenders,
offers, and opportunities they have neglected, and how unprofitable, and barren
they have been under the plentiful means of Grace, that they formerly have
enjoyed, especially if God seem now to have deprived them of those means and
opportunities: whence they conclude that God will wait upon them no longer, but
has concluded them in a state of unbelief, and reprobation, and that therefore
it is a vain thing for them to strive and hope any longer, seeing that time
past cannot be called again, nor neglected opportunities be redeemed.

4. To these may be added another froward distemper of mind, wherein the heart
refuses and slighteth all comfort, which comes not in by the way of assurance.
Hence it comes to pass that so long as they find not their corruptions so
perfectly subdued, and their graces heigthened to that degree as may be to them
a sufficient ground of full assurance, they are to themselves the authors of a
very disconsolate condition, which many times, as it needs must, proves to be
of long continuance.

For conclusion of this part of my discourse, I shall only add, that outward
troubles, and a melancholy disposition of body and mind, are sometimes, if not
the primary inlets of disconsolateess, yet they are at least efectuall
obstructors and excluders of that comfort, which otherwise might be asweet
refreshing to their souls.

For although God bestow upon some, such a cheerful lightsome disposition, as
easily admits every beam of comfort, and goes more lightly under the burden of
afflictions; yet are the souls of others so grossly darkened with that black
distemper of melancholy, and so deeply pierced by the dint even of light
afflictions, that no indifferent cause of comfort will suffice to expel the
blackness of the one, or heal the wounds which are made by the other.

Thus I have briefly discovered what those things are, which do not only hinder
comfort, but also produce, augment, and continue those inward troubles which
many of Gods people fall into, and so rob them of those sweet consolations
which are their present portion, which their heavenly father has assigned them
for their support, in the midst of those many discouragements, which they meet
withal in their holy pilgrimage toward the heavenly Jerusalem.

SECT. IV. The Authors of a Christians trouble.
HAving now spoken of the immediate causes of a Christians trouble, it will be
very useful to say something, before we pass any further, concerning the
Authors of these troubles.

1. It appears in the forementioned particulars, how much the blame lies upon
themselves, either through ignorance not knowing where to seek comfort, or
through error going in a wrong way, or through weakness though the way be plain
before them yet cannot they walk therein, or else through wilfulness when they,
with the Psalmist, refuse to be comforted, although there be sufficient ground
whereupon to stay their souls: So that if they enjoy not that refreshing and
reviving light of Gods counnance, they may in a great measure thank themselves
as authors of that evil.

Neither may we excuse the Devil, who no doubt has an hand to the utmost of
his power in all the troubles and discomforts that befall any of Gods people.

Questionless his implacable malice does drive him on with utmost fury, to
endeavor the destruction of Gods people, and therefore it is not to be
doubted, but that if he cannot turn them out of the way to happiness, yet he
will make it as uncomfortable to them as he can. If he cannot separate them
from the love of God in Christ Jesus, yet he will interpose betwixt their souls
and the light of Gods countenance, as much as he can.

This he attempteth either by temptation, whereby he endeavors to draw them
to the commission of those sins, whereby he knows that God will be provoked to
withdraw his comforts from them; or else by casting in suspicions, and blowing
upon the fuel of their own homebred misconceived jealousies concerning their
state, that thereby he may bring them to put from them those comforts, that do
of right belong to them, and are held out by God in his word to them.

3. But is there any evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it? Surely in
these, as well as in all other afflictions, God also has his hand, though in a
far different kind from our selves, and the Devil we foolishly, the Devil
maliciously, but God most righteously, and wisely, yea, and compassionately
too. Yet may we for the most part thank our selves for Gods having any hand in
our discomforts, so far forth as they are evil and afflictive; for he does not
willingly grieve the children of men; but, we by our security, presumption,
sloth, worldliness, or some other particular sin, do provoke God to hide his
face from us, and to let loose our enemies upon us, yea and to deliver us up to
our own jealousies, and suspicions to be our tormentors; and then no wonder if
we be troubled, until we return to meet the living spring of our comforts
again.

SECT. V. Of the connection between grace, and comfort.
I shall now pass on toward the remedy of these evils, and so to make enquiry
after that true comfort which all believers desire, but not many attain unto,
at least in that degree and measure which they might, were it not for some or
other of the forementioned hindrances. In order hereunto I shall lay down some
preparatory propositions, concerning the connection between grace, and comfort,
the want of knowing, or believing whereof is sometimes matter of ill
consequence to the people of God, in respect of their comfort.

1. Prop. Wheresoever there is true grace, in how weak and small a degree
soever it be, there is a foundation for solid comfort, yea even for assurance,
and the comforts that do naturally flow there from.

Many have proved sufficiently against the Arminians, that whosoever has true
grace, shall certainly be saved, because it is impossible (respecting the
decrees and promises) that a truly sanctified person should totally and
finally fall from grace, and so be damned. This is said, not of any certain
degree of grace, but of the truth of grace, how small soever the degree be; for
grace in the smallest degree is as truly grace as in the greatest degree. Now
the consequence is undeniably good, that if they, who have the least degree of
true saving grace, shall certainly be saved, then the least degree of that
grace is a foundation in it self, sufficient for comfort and assurance; For
assurance of salvation, and the comforts thence arising do naturally flow from
the assured knowledge of the truth of grace, and there is none that has true
grace, in what degree soever, but he is in a capacity of knowing that he has
that grace. I know that the comfort of assurance is not an ordinary companion
of the weakest grace: however sometimes at first conversion, when we may
reasonably suppose grace to be in the smallest degree, it pleases God to make
the infusion of grace so manifest, to the converted person, as that they have
thereby the comfortable assurance of their salvation; although that assurance
do continue sometimes but a very short while, and is seldom of long continuance
before it be darkened again by temptation. However if there were not a
sufficient foundation for assurance, there could not be any true comfort upon
that account, no not for a moment.

2. Prop. The smaller degrees of grace are very hardly discernable. This comes
to pass in some by reason of the many lusts and corruptions, which upon the
first entrance of grace are not all at once expelled, or subdued, but continue
opposing themselves, and making head against grace, for the rooting of it out
again; which though they cannot effect, yet do they often prevail against grace
(yet in its infancy) and by their strength and multitude do so overwhelm, and
as it were, bury that small grace, that the poor soul is not able certainly to
say whether there be any such thing or no.

In other some, a good natural disposition, specially if meliorated, and
mended by civil or religious education, does bear so near a resemblance to
true grace, that it is no easy matter to discern the one from the other; so
that the sincere soul being ever suspicious of it self, does not dare to
conclude that there is any thing at all better in it than moral virtue. And
then, beside all this, the grand enemy of our comfort and salvation will be
sure to take advantage of these, and all other occasions of suspicion, and by
his temptations and suggestions to improve them to the utmost disadvantage to
the soul, whereby (if possible) to hinder it from the comfortable evidence of
the truth of Grace.

3. Prop. There is no degree of grace so large, evident, and conspicuous, but
that it may sometimes disappear: Even the Sun it self has suffered an Eclipse,
when the Sun of righteousness in his desertion cried out, my God my God, why
have thou forsaken me? How much less then can any of the stars, though of the
first and greatest magnitude, be secure from being obscured sometimes by a
thick cloud? Great graces do not absolutely secure the owners thereof from
great falls, and no wonder then if great falls bring an Eclipse upon greatest
graces, and so obscure the elearest evidences, and brightest comforts, that
might flow from them. Remember Adam, Noah, Lot, David, Peter, etc. and let him
that stands take heed lest he fall; and when thy mountain does stand strongest,
know that possibly God may hide his face, and leave thee under the power of
troubles.

These three propositions I have laid down as a ground work whereupon to build,
and they are useful to the production of these three corollaries.

1. That there are none of Gods people excluded from comfort, how weak and
small soever their graces may be, that none may reject their own mercies, and
say, comfort belongs not to me, because I have not yet attained to such a
degree of grace: formuch as every child of God is, though not equally capable,
yet capable of equal comforts with others, the weakest with the strongest, and
the middle size with both.

Yea, God is pleased sometimes to impart those comforts to infant-grace, which
he may deny to others throughout their whole course, though they may arrive to
good seize in grace; unto whom that speech of Christ may fitly be
applied, that the first are last, and the last are first.

2. That degree of grace which constitutes the middle size, and so includes the
generality of true Christians, though in it self it render persons more capable
of solid comfort than the former, yet is more liable to fears, doubts, and
troubles, than any other; which will not seem strange, if we consider this
threefold ground thereof.

1. That, that peace, and comfort which they have, is commonly rather negative
than positive, consisting rather in the absence of trouble, than in the
sureness, and solidity, of the grounds, whereupon they build. For, alas! it is
too common even with those that have true grace to content themselves with
common probabilities, and such hopes as spring therefrom, without frequent
renewing the ingrafting, and justifying acts of faith, or rifling into their
evidences to find out those of them that are unerring, and will not fail them
when they come to a pinch: Like a man that has been long in possession of an
estate, though he have good writings for it in his box, yet contents himself
with his present quiet possession, and is not able on the sudden to prove the
firmness and goodness of his title, when it comes to be questioned.

2. Hence it comes to pass that when their peace comes to be disturbed, they
are not able so clearly to discern and make out the truth of their graces, as
to shut out and repel the assault of temptations and fears. They have then
their indubitable evidences to seek, and as it often falls out in other things,
when we are most in have, we least of all know where to seek or find the thing
we want; so when the sudden onset of temptations constrains us to make good our
title to Christ, and the love and favor of God, in that hurley burley and
confusion, which is raised in the soul thereby, we know no more for the present
how to make good our title, than if we never had any.

3. We may yet assign this higher reason, that it pleases God to restrain
Satan from assaulting the infant-grace of his little ones, that they may not be
discouraged from a way and course of holiness, before they are hardened and
habituated thereunto. As a Captain will not set his fresh water Soldiers to
bear the brunt of the day, lest he discourage them for ever after. But when God
has for a certain time trained up his servants in their postures of grace and
holiness, he then leads them forth to the trial, to see how they can endure
the shock of temptations.

3. None can promise themselves an uninterrupted course of peace and comfort,
how high degrees of grace soever they may possibly have attained unto. Nay,
many times God suffers his strongest servants to encounter with the strongest
interruptions; so that although there be no true comfort, nor can be, where
there is no true grace, yet the several degrees of comfort do not necessarily
and constantly accompany and flow from proportionable degrees of grace.

SECT. VI. The Sum of what remains to be done.
HAving now laid the groundwork, I pass on to the superstructure: yet I must
premise thus much, that those troubles and disquietments of mind, which many
times befall the people of God, are for the most part grounded upon some
mistakes and misapprehensions, which if once rectifyed, there would need but
little, if any thing more, to reduce them to a quiet and comfortable state and
posture of spirit. Therefore the remainder of my present task will stand in two
attempts:

1. To lay down some propositions, for the rectifying of those mistakes, and
the answering of all objections that are grounded thereupon.

2. To give some plain, easy, and brief directions for the attaining of true,
solid peace and comfort, so grounded, as that it may be less liable to the
common assaults, or more easily recoverable, if at any time it be overclouded.

SECT. VII. Of conversion.
I Shall begin with those propositions, which relate to conversion, because it
is the first saving work upon the soul; and therefore some sound believers
being in the dark concerning that first necessary work, they are much tempted
to suspect all their evidences of after-grace.

The substance of this work consists in that real change, which is wrought in
the whole man, whereby he is turned from sin and Satan unto God, and is brought
out of a state of nature into a state of grace.

But those doubts and fears, which arise many times in the hearts of Gods
children, are not about the nature, and notion of conversion, but spring from
mistakes about the circumstances thereof; concerning which therefore I shall
lay down these following propositions.

1. Prop. A man may be converted, or in a state of grace, yet not know it. And
this either,

1. For some time immediately after conversion: as in all probability an
infant, for some time after its birth, does not put forth any of those reflex
acts, whereby it judges it self to be alive. Though I may not say, that a new
convert is, like an infant, incapable of exerting such reflex acts, yet
certainly many do not, or if they make attempts, yet sometimes the reality of
their conversion is too obscure for them to discern, in that infant-state.

2. This also may be the condition of a true believer in his adult or grown
state, to be ignorant of his conversion, and that either from the beginning of
the work of grace in his heart, or by some after-occasionall darknings. I do
not mean, that a man may know he has true grace, and yet not know whether ever
he were converted or no, but taking conversion for the first entrance into a
state of true grace, whosoever doubts or is ignorant of his being in a state of
grace, by what means soever it comes to pass, must needs also be equally in
doubt of his conversion; except with the Arminians, Socinians, etc. he think
that true grace may be totally lost: which is an error of very dangerous
consequence, and therefore of necessity to be rectifyed.

2. Prop. A man may be in a state of grace, and yet not know the time of his
conversion: nay, he may have good evidence that he is in a state of grace, and
from thence conclude, that for certain there was a particular time of his
conversion, and yet not know when that time was.

Indeed when he is once come to that conclusion, that he is in a state of
grace, he may probably conclude that such a particular time was the time of his
passing from death to life, but yet some cannot go so far in conjecturing at
the particular time, that work having been wrought in them while they were very
young; or otherwise wrought by such gentle and graduall means (as good
education, or the like) that it was not possible for them almost, to discern
when they passed from the utmost bounds of common grace, into a state of
special grace. And this I take to be a common case among many believers now
adays.

3. Prop. That change which is wrought in conversion is more in the inward,
than in the outward man. I speak now in respect of reality, and not in respect
of outward appearance; although it be true also, that many times that change
which is wrought by conversion has so great an influence upon the outward man,
in point of action and conversation, that the change is very manifest and
visible: yet I say that the radical and principal change is in the inward man.

This is manifest by the word, by which repentance is generally expressed in the
new Testament, a a member of conversion: as in that remarkable conjunction of
repentance, (...).
and conversion in Act. 3.19.

Repent and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out. The word which we
translate [repent] signifyes a changing of the mind, which is the primary act
of repentance, and part of conversion; although secondarily, there be diverse
other things that pertain thereto.

This is also manifest in that other expression, whereby Christ recommended the
same thing to Nicodemus, under the name of regeneration, or a new birth. For it
is evident that the body is not born again (which was Nicodemus's gross
apprehension at the first) neither is the soul, as to the being or substance
thereof born again, yet no doubt but some very great change and remarkable
alteration is noted to us by such an expression.

It remains therefore that this grand alteration must needs be in the moral
principles, dispositions, and affections of the soul, which also has a
suitable influence upon the external actions and conversation, producing a
greater or lesser change in them, according as there is need, in respect of the
greater or lesser preceding depravation of them, by custom in sinning, or
otherwise.

4. Prop. There may be a great change wrought in the outward man, without true
conversion.

Many faults may be reformed, many sins forsaken, many duties taken up, with a
profession of religion, and yet such an one come short of true conversion;
because all this may be done upon such grounds and reasons as are far inferior
to that of true conversion; such as are carnal fear or hope, gripes of
conscience, the outward inconveniences and discommodities of their sinful
courses, as diseases, poverty, disgrace, and the like.

5. Prop. On the other side, there may be (...) conversion where the change of
the outward man is but small. A good disposition may restrain a man much from
the commission of many gross sins, and the fear of penal laws may do
something; but religious education, or an hypocritical profession of religion
may carry men far, not only in avoiding all open sins, but also in putting them
forward to the performance of all visible duties, yea, and of many secret
duties also, so that there may be little wanting to the making up of the whole
carcass, and outside of religion. Yea, they may go so far herein, that their
outward conversation may be more commendably religious, than the conversations
of some truly converted persons: there may be nothing manifestly wanting, but
an inward principle of holiness, to make their actions and conversations truly
holy. Then when it once pleases God, by his renewing grace to convert them, i.
e. to work in them an inward principle of holiness, this makes little, or no
alteration in the outward man, but only actuates and informs their wonted
actions and conversations anew, whereby that which before was evil and
displeasing to God, not in the matter of it, but in the principle from whence
it flowed, now becomes acceptable to God, and truly holy. As an army of rebels
may be good Soldiers and have good military discipline among them, but their
only fault is, that they follow the conduct of a rebel general: and these only
by accepting a new General, and owning their true Lord and King may become
saithful Soldiers and loyal subjects, without new moulding their army, or
changing armor or discipline.

When God first formed man out of the earth, he fashioned his body complete in
all the parts and proportions thereof, yet was it not a man while it was
without a soul, but when God breathed the the breath of life into it, there was
no alteration made in the body, but by the only addition of a soul it became a
living man. In like manner by the common workings of the spirit there may be
the outward form and lineaments of a Christian, without the truth and life of
Christianity, till the same spirit by his special operation actuate that
carcass of Christianity with a new inward principle of spiritual life and
holiness; and then there is a Christian indeed, although little alteration
appear in the outward conversation and visible part of Christianity.

6. Prop. If any through evil education, example, custom, disposition, or
gross ignorance, have lived a loose, vicious, debauched, profane life, have
been a contemner or opposer of the ways of God, or a neglecter of the common
known duties of Christianity, (I say) if ever such an one be converted,
certainly they pass under a very great change, not only inwardly in their mind
and affections, but also outwardly in all the visible parts of their
conversations. As is to be seen in the instances of Zacheus, Mary Magdalen,
Paul, and the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11.

I have purposely forborne any formal answer to objections, because whatever
scruples do ordinarily arise in the doubting soul concerning this business of
conversion, the answer to them, I think, may be easily gathered, out of the
foregoing propositions, and therefore I may save my self that labor. As for
instance,

If any one think that if ever they were truly converted, they must needs know
the time or at least the thing it self, and are therefore ready to conclude,
that the work was never wrought in them, because they know it not: to this they
may have satisfaction from the first, and second propositions. Or if they doubt
of their conversion, because they never knew of any such remarkable change in
themselves, as conversion is ordinary supposed to import: to this they may
receive an answer from the fifth proposition; and so of others. And this method
I have thought most convenient, and therefore shall observe it in the following
part of this discourse.

SECT. VIII. Of sorrow for sin.
1. Prop. TRue godly sorrow for sin may be occasioned at first by something
else than the sense of the evil of sin in its own nature. Sickness, losses,
disgrace, and the like, may be the first exciting cause of sorrow; but by these
streams of affliction God may, and many times does, (by the conduct of his
word) lead the sinner to the fountain of sin; so as that which at first
appeared evil and hateful to him only in the sad effects thereof, may now at
last be found by him to be much more evil and loathsome in its own nature, and
in those more dreadful effects which it produces in spiritual respects; as,
the loss of Gods favor, the debasing of the soul here, and the damnation both
of soul and body hereafter. Thus that sorrow which at first was but carnal,
may by this means come to be swallowed up of that which is more spiritual, and
so become an holy, and godly sorrow. Yet it may be that all carnal sorrow may
not hereby be so swallowed up, as that nothing thereof shall remain: so that
the mourning sinner is not therefore to judge all his sorrow to be carnal,
because there are some mixtures of carnality in it; forasmuch as this grace, as
well as all other graces, is but imperfect in this our state of flesh and
imperfection; but rather judge it to be true, because there is a manifest
appearance of some mixture of godly sorrow. Yet must you strive daily to refine
it from the dross of carnality, it being the perfection of a Christian on this
side heaven, to be daily perfecting by degrees those graces whose perfection
(or abolition) is reserved for heaven.

2. Prop. There is no sorrow of what nature, or in what degree soever, that
bears a legal proportion to any, though the least, sin.

By a legal proportion, I mean, that which the law requires, which is no
other, nor less than will make satisfaction for the breach of the law: so that
if any kind or degree of sorrow bear a legal proportion to any sin, it is
satisfactory to justice, and so meritorious of pardon. Whether therefore any
one should suspend their comfort upon such a kind or proportion of sorrow for
sin, may without difficulty be rightly determined by any one but a Papist or a
like principled. So then, while the troubled soul rakes in its own sores to
find a sorrow proportionable to the sins they stand guilty of, they too much
justify that doctrine, which in their principles they will most fearlesly deny;
and while through this error they seek righteously by the law, they do
unwittingly keep themselves under the curse, at least as to their own sense,
and lose the benefit of the Gospel, at least as to the present comfort of it.
Gal. 3.10, 21.

3. Prop. Every degree of true godly sorrow bears a Gospel proportion to every
sin: that is, it is that sorrow which the Gospel requires, not by way of
satisfaction, as the law does, but to put the sinner into a preparative
capacity to receive Christ and pardon through him. For this is not the
difference between the law and the Gospel in requiring the same thing; that the
law requires a greater degree, and the Gospel is content with a less degree;
but the true difference consists in this, that what the law requires, it
requires in perfection, in order to justification immediately; but what the
Gospel requires, it requires in sincerity with reference to Christ and life by
him.

But what then? Is the least degree of this or any other grace in sincerity and
truth, the most that the Gospel requires?

No verily: for the Gospel call s for perfection, yea and a greater perfection
than the law it self does; but this is the indulgence of the Gospel, that the
first and least degree of grace in truth and sincerity, puts the person into a
respective capacity, of partaking of the promises and benefits of the Gospel,
it allowing him and requiring him all the remainder of the days of his life, to
be perfecting his graces, and thereby to be growing up in Christ, his head,
when he comes to be fully and perfectly united to Christ, he may in him be
perfect in holiness, and happiness together.

4. Prop. That is true sorrow, which produces a willingness to be delivered
from the power of all sin: a real willingness, though the flesh may gainsay
and be unwilling. For it is no strange thing for such contradictions to be
found in Gods children, so long as they have flesh as well as spirit, the flesh
will be lusting against the spirit as well as the spirit against the flesh, and
these two are contrary.

I choose to note out sorrow by its effects rather than by describing it in its
nature, because it is much more discernable in its effects than in its nature,
and the truth of it in this effect, as much, if not more than in any other
effect thereof.

5. Prop. That is godly sorrow which produces a sight of our need of Christ,
and a willingness to close with him on the terms of the Gospel. For whereas the
tenor of the Gospel is comprehended in those two words repent and believe,
such a repentance is spoken of, as prepares and leads a man to Jesus Christ,
and that is the repentance which God requires, and in the Gospel calls for.

I need not precisely distinguish between godly sorrow and true repentance,
which are frequently used as terms of the same import in scripture, although it
do distinguish them also, but so as that godly sorrow does certainly produce
repentance to salvation; and therefore whether mediately or immediately, it
matters not; but certainly that sorrow is according to God and the Gospel,
which prepares the heart to receive Christ by faith; and then it is easy to
judge whether that sorrow for sin, which brings a man to see an absolute
necessity of Christ, and produces a willingness to close with him upon the
terms of the Gospel, be a godly sorrow or no.

6. Prop. The fear of Hell and damnation is no unlawful or ungospel ingredient
of godly sorrow. It is matter of great perplexity to the souls of many of Gods
Children to find upon serious consideration, that the fear of being
everlastingly damned, has a great influence upon that sorrow for sin, and fear
of sinning which they really find in themselves, judging all such sorrow to be
carnal, because it proceeds not purely from a principle of love to God. Indeed
I cannot but look upon it, at least as a piece of great inconsiderateness in
some, who teach, that godly sorrow for sin does purely respect God and his
goodness, and that, that which respects the safety of the soul from damnation
is legal, and carnal; which is a doctrine that is contrary both to the
principles of nature, and the word of God, and Gospel of Jesus Christ. Whoever
thought it unlawful to fear the plague, sword, famine, poison, or the like,
upon this very account, because they are destructive to the body? or to sorrow
for those outward evils when present, as well as to fear them, when they are
yet but imminent? and that for the bodies sake, the being whereof is endangered
thereby? And if it be lawful to fear and grieve, for the sake of the body,
those evils, which threaten the ruin thereof, how much more consentaneous to
reason is it, to fear and grieve for sin, and its consequents, upon the souls
account, which is thereby endangered to be lost for ever.

But to let pass such argumentations. Has not God also in his word both
permitted and commanded that we should have so much respect to our own immortal
souls, as well as to his pleasure and honor, as for the sake of them, and
their safety to fear sin, hell, and damnation, yea, and God himself too because
of his power to destroy, Heb. 4.1. Mat. 10.28. And if to fear sin, upon that
account, so as to avoid the commission of it, then also upon the same account
to grieve and sorrow for sin, when committed; and if we may fear God because of
his power to destroy, then may we also sorrow for sin, through fear of Gods
displeasure, and the displaying of that his power for the everlasting
destruction both of the soul and body of the sinner.

I say not, but that sorrow for sinners arising from a principle of love to
God, may be esteemed the more childlike disposition, and an higher attainment,
and therefore to be labored after: yet this I say also, that it is not at all
alien from the property of a good Son to grieve for an offense committed
against his father, for fear of the effects of his fathers displeasure.

These propositions may be so applied, as to resolve all doubts and scruples
that may arise concerning the occasion, measure, truth, or Gospel rectitude of
sorrow for sin, whereby it may be distinguished from legal and carnal, or
defective, which are usually the matter of the troubled souls perplexities
about this point.

SECT. IX. Of the pardonableness of sin.
AS the assurance of the pardon of sin cannot but be matter of great joy to the
people of God, and is that which in all their troubles their hearts pant after;
so also to be assured that their sins are pardonable, is matter, at least, of
negative comfort: But to lie under the sense of sin as unpardoned, and to
apprehend it as unpardonable too, cannot not but be matter of great horror to
the soul.

But these apprehensions do proceed many times, partly from the violence of
temptation, and partly also from some mistakes about the pardonableness of sin;
and therefore obviating the one, and removing the other, I shall lay down these
following propositions.

1. Prop. All sin how great or small soever is unpardonable after death, i. e.
if it be unpardoned at death. For death does absolutely fix every one in that
condition, wherein they die; so that if sin were then pardoned, it is pardoned
for ever, but if it were then unpardoned, it is not only unpardoned, but also
unpardonable for ever.

2. Prop. All the sins of an unregenerate person are unpardonable, while he is
such. But this is not such a fixed unalterable unpardonableness as the former,
but only in relation to that state; so that those sins, which to an
unregenerate person are altogether unpardonable, while he continues in that
state, are all pardonable, yea, and actually pardoned, as soon as ever his
state is changed from unregeneracy, to regeneracy. Therefore says the Apostle,
Repent and be converted, that your sins may be blatted out.

3. Prop. All the sins of every one of Gods children are pardonable, by virtue
of their state, as being in Christ, and so reconciled to God; although the
actual application of that pardon be suspended upon their actual repentance
and faith for the most part. However all those that are once engrafted into
Christ by faith, are so provided for by him, that as they cannot sin any sin
that is in it self unpardonable, so neither can they commit any sin with such
circumstances, as that eventually it should prove unpardonable to them, but
shall sooner or later be certainly pardoned upon their certain performance of
the condition of pardon through Christ.

4. Prop. All sins are in themselves pardonable, except the sin unto death.

For God has not, by any peremptory decree, made known unto us in his word, so
forestalled the pardon of any particular sin, whether we consider it in the
horridness of its nature, or in the hainousness of its circumstances, but that
upon the terms of repentance, and faith, it is pardonable, except that sin
which is called the sin unto death.

Of this also (I suppose) we cannot properly say, that it is unpardonable,
although the person guilty thereof should repent and believe; but it is a sin
of that nature, that does absolutely bind up the heart of the sinner from
repenting and believing, so that his repenting and believing are as impossible
as his being pardoned.

SECT. X. Of the sin unto death.
I Hinted before, that the troubled souls apprehensions of the unpardonableness
of their sins does sometimes rise so high, as to an imagination that they have
sinned against the Holy Ghost; and then we may easily conceive, what
unspeakable horror is consequent thereupon, and how incurable this distemper
must needs be, till that conceit be removed; because the scripture has so
expressly said of this sin, that it shall never be forgiven, neither in this
world, nor in the world to come.

But what this sin is? Wherein it does consist? Whether there be but one, or
more of this nature? Whether it be any particular act? Or whether any sin may
become a sin unto death, or the sin against the Holy Ghost, by reason of such
circumstances as may attend it? These are matters of controversy, wherein I
will not now undertake, to be an umpire between the differing parties; because
I suppose it would little conduce to the healing of that distemper, which I
have now in hand, in regard that when I have said all I can, these things will
be matter of controversy still: and besides something else may be said of this
matter which will not be matter of dispute, and yet may be more effectual for
curing the forementioned distemper.

1. Observe therefore that there are but four places found (at least that are
commonly taken notice of) in the new Testament, which make any mention of an
unpardonable sin, two whereof give us only the names without any description,
and the other two give us descriptions without any names.

The first of those two places where such a sin is named, is Matt. 22.31, 32.
where it is called, the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost.

The other place is 1 John 5.16. where it is called, the sin unto death.

Whether these two names express to us one and the same thing, it matters
nothing to the present purpose (though I incline to think they are but the
same) but this is out of question that both these expressions note out to us an
unpardonable sin. For of the first Christ says expressly, that it shall never
be forgiven: and of the other, and it is employed in the very name, that it
obliges the sinner inevitably to death.

Yet in these places there are no clear descriptions of the sin so named
although in the first, the occasion of Christ's speech may give some hint what
his meaning is, but not without some obscurity.

But if the attributing of those miracles which Christ did by the power of the
Holy Ghost which he had without measure, to a Diabolical art or power, be that
sin (as seems most plain from the place) then I suppose there will hardly be
any troubled soul found, which can with any show of truth, charge this sin upon
it self.

2. But if this fact of the Scribes and Pharisees for which Christ charge
them with the Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, be but one particular branch of
the sin against the Holy Ghost, we shall hardly know what other branches fall
under this head, except we find them in Heb. 4.5, 6. and Heb. 10.26, 29. which
are those other two places, wherein we find an unpardonable sin described
without any special name.

And indeed it is the received opinion, that these places do describe to us the
sin against the Holy Ghost, which wants not its probability, because it is
apparent that these places describe to us an unpardonable sin, and Christ in
the other places seems to tell us, that there is no other sin unpardonable, but
only the sin against the Holy Ghost. But however, whether it be the sin against
the Holy Ghost or not, which the Apostle describes in those passages to the
Hebrews, yet this I have observed, that those who in the trouble of their souls
do charge themselves with the commission of the sin against the Holy Ghost, do
generally ground, and build their charge upon this notion, that the sin there
described, is the sin against the Holy Ghost, and they conceive that they have
committed some sins like unto those there described: And therefore it will be
most pertinent to the case in hand, to clear the meaning of those places.

It would be but little satisfaction to the troubled soul to say (with some)
that the Apostles [it is impossible to renew them again to repentance] does not
speak of an absolute impossibility, but of a very great difficulty; as when
Christ seemed to make it an impossible thing for a rich man to be saved, yet
that it was not impossible with God.

I will not take upon me to disprove that interpretation, but that which will
be most satisfactory, is to suppose the worst (as to be sure the troubled soul
will do) and so to look upon it as real impossibility for such an one, as the
Apostle there speaks of, to be renewed again to repentance.

And then I shall first lay down these unquestionable propositions by way of
premisall.

1. Prop. It is certain that those, who have not only received some
enlightnings, and common graces of the Spirit, but are also really and truly
sanctified, may through temptation and infirmity, do those things, which they
know to be sin: as no doubt but David knew murder and adultery to be sins; and
Peter could not but know it to be a sin to deny Christ; and to common
experience will bear witness to the same.

2. Prop. It is as certain that the will may consent to the commission of known
sins. David was not constrained to the commission of the forementioned sins.

3. Prop. And it is no less certain that such may be renewed again to
repentance: as David and Peter were. Yet no doubt but such circumstances do
render the sin more than ordinary heinous.

From hence we conclude, that except we make the doctrine all and historical
parts of Scripture absolutely repugnant, and contrary to each other; yea one
doctrinall part to another, we may safely say, that a person who has been
enlightened, and received the knowledge of the truth, has tasted the heavenly
gift, been made partaker of the Holy Ghost, and tasted of the good word of God,
and of the powers of the world to come, may with external evident compulsion
commit great and known sins, without being sealed up under impenitency, or his
sin necessarily acquiring the black and horrid die of unpardonableness thereby.

But then as touching the meaning of the Apostle in the forementioned places,
to me it seems plain to any considerative and impartial eye, that the Apostle
speaks only of total Apostasy, and pronounces that dreadful doom only
against Apostates, i. e. those who having received and owned the truth of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, do afterward without any compulsion, or other seeming
necessity, wholly renounce Jesus Christ, and all the truths of the Gospel, and
become open and professed enemies thereunto.

This is apparent in the former place, where the Apostle says not, if such
shall fall into sin, but if such shall fall away, that is, wholly turn away
from Christ and the Gospel, utterly renouncing them as fables and impostures.
And for the other place, it is as apparent that the Apostle speaks not of every
wilful sin, or sin against knowledge, but such wilful sinning, as whereby a
man declares himself an adversary and professed enemy to Christ and the Gospel,
as it were, trampling upon Christ, in that he makes no more account of his
blood, than of the common blood of a malefactor; and doing despite to the
spirit of grace, by whom he had before been brought so far onward in
Christianity, as to own Christ, and to acknowledge the truth of the Gospel, and
make a profession of religion.

For further satisfaction, I refer you to Dr. Gouge upon these places, in his
Comment on the Epistle to the Hebrews.

But these things are so clear, that whether we look upon these places as
containing a description of the sin against the Holy Ghost or not, yet it is
manifest that howsoever the troubled soul may apprehend it self guilty of sins
aggravated with wilfulness, or other like heinous circumstances, yet if they
come short of total apostasy from Christ, and open renouncing of the Gospel,
they cannot reasonably conclude from these places that there sins are
unpardonable, and themselves sealed up under a state of impenitency, and there
fore they are to look upon these thoughts as temptations cast in by the Devil,
for the hindrance of them from returning to Christ for the cure of their
spiritual distempers, and the recovery of the joys of their salvation.

SECT. XI. Of the day of grace, the time of visitation, or the accepted time.
IT is certain that there is nothing so irrecoverable, or irrevocable as time
when it is once past and gone, so that if any ones salvation do depend upon any
certain particular, or limited time, it is as impossible for such an one to be
saved, if they overslip that time or opportunity, as it it to call time back
again. Hence it arises that unspeakable horror, which sometimes seizes upon
the soul, by apprehending that the day of grace is past and gone, equal with
that which arises from the apprehension of having committed the sin against
the Holy Ghost; because it is equally impossible to recall that time, which God
has fixed by a firm decree; as to obtain the pardon of that sin, which God
has absolutely pronounced unpardonable.

Now therefore for extricating the troubled soul out of this Labyrinth, it will
be necessary to enquire, whether there be any such fixed or limited time? which
it is? and how it may be discovered?

There are three expressions in scripture which are commonly looked upon, as
pointing out to us such a limited time. In Luke 19.44. it is called the time of
visitation. In 2 Cor. 6.2. there is mention of the accepted time, and the day
of salvation.

It will be necessary to premise something for explication of these
expressions, that the way for resolving the doubts hence arising may be the
more clear.

We must observe that the time, or day of visitation, is used very variously in
Scripture. For sometimes there is mention of a visitation in a way of
judgment, and sometimes in a way of mercy. And indeed in the old Testament it
is most frequently used for the time of Gods Punishing or destroying a people
for their sins, as in Jer. 10.15. Jer. 50.27. Isa. 26.14. And in Numb. 16.29.
it is used to signify an unusual and strange kind of death and destruction.
This kind of visitation is desirable to none.

But otherwhile it is used to signify Gods merciful providence to a person or
people. By his common providence of mercy he is said to visit, as Psa. 8.4.
and Psa. 65.9. But in the new Testament the word is most commonly used to
signify more special blessings.

1. As the great and general blessing of sending Christ into the world to
redeem his people Luke 1.68.78. Luke 7.16. And the particular time of this
visitation is over to all, not to the prejudice, but to the general benefit of
the world.

2. It is used to signify all means of grace and offers of mercy by Christ in
the Gospel, Luke 19.44. How the time of this visitation is past away, shall be
showed anon.

3. It is used to signify the effectual blessing of the means of grace to the
conversion of the persons so visited, as 1 Pet 2.12. Now happy are those
blessed souls, whose day of visitation in this sense is past, that can say,
that the day and time is past, wherein the Lord did effectually visit them with
offers of Christ and grace, to their acceptance and conversion.

As for the accepted time and the day of salvation, they signify one and the
same thing, which is no other, but the time, wherein means of grace are
afforded, and offers of Christ, and life by him are made to the soul. This is
called the accepted time, because it is the time wherein, if we close with the
offers that are made, and make a right improvement of the means that are
afforded, God will accept of us in Christ. And it is called the day of
salvation, because the means of grace and offers of Christ, are means and
offers of salvation by Jesus Christ. So that the sense of these two latter
expressions falls in with the second sense of the day of visitation in mercy.

So then the meaning of those expressions in reference to the present case is
this, viz. that there is a time wherein God does mercifully visit a person or
people with the means of grace, and offers of life, and salvation by Jesus
Christ, wherewith if they shall close by unfeigned repentance and saving faith,
God will accept of them in Christ, according to the tenor of the Gospel.

Now for the clearing of such doubts and difficulties as may arise, concerning
this day of visitation, and the accepted time, I shall lay down these following
propositions.

1. Prop. In reference to Gods decree, the accepted time can no more be past
now or another time, than it was from all eternity.

For the decrees were made from all eternity, and do remain unchangeable to all
eternity.

But whatsoever there is in these decrees, which concerns the salvation or
damnation of any particular persons is altogether secret, God having no where
written them, nor any way made them known, nor made them possible to be
searched into, any further than the event does declare them. And therefore for
any one to conclude himself, either from the beginning, or from any particular
time or day past, to be in an unalterable state of reprobation, is no better
than an horrid presumption proceeding from the Devil and a deluded heart, and
not any way from the word or spirit of God.

2. Prop. The time of a Nations or Peoples visitation in general may evidently
expire, and be visibly past. The Gospel may be removed, and ordinances taken
away from them, or so overwhelmed in a deluge of ignorance and error, that it
may be truly said, that the accepted time and day of salvation is ceased unto
them.

Yet this neither bars offers of grace, from being made to particular persons
in that nation, nor makes them void to such, as are willing to accept and close
with them. It is evident that there was such a cessation of the day of
salvation to the Nation of the Jews, upon their rejection of Christ, Matt.
23.37, 38. Luke 19.42, 44. And upon their rejection of the doctrine of the
Gospel published by the Apostles, Act. 13.46, 51. Act. 18.6. Act. 28.25. etc.
28. So that they became no Church, no peculiar people in that special relation
to God wherein they had stood for many ages before. Yet we know that there were
many particular persons of that nation, yea some thousands at that time and
afterward, that, accepting of the Gospel-offers of grace, were accepted of
God, added to the Church and made partakers of Gospel salvation, Act. 2.41, 47.
Three thousand at one time were added to the Church, and no less than five
thousand at another time, Act. 4.4. besides those that came in daily in smaller
numbers.

3. Prop. The day of grace cannot be said to be past to any particular person,
so long as they continue under the general call of the Gospel, and have any
desire to close therewith. And this is to be understood, not only of such calls
as may or shall be made afterward for time to come; but whosoever has at any
time received, a call by the general publication of the Gospel, though they
have hitherto rejected and made light of all those invitations, yet if at any
time while they live, they shall have an hearty desire, to come to Christ for
life, and to close with him upon the terms of the Gospel, then is the accepted
time, then is the day of salvation; they shall in no wise be cast off.

4. Prop. Yet without question it is very dangerous to put off invitations, and
to make excuses, and delay the time of our closure with Christ. For while we
are delaying and rest in good purposes for the future, death may come at
unawares, and put an end indeed to the time of our visitation, and put us past
a capacity of accepting, if we would.

Besides, by continuance in sin, the heart is hardened through the
deceitfulness thereof, and becomes more, and more unfitted, and unwilling to be
brought in subjection to the Government of Christ, and the terms of the Gospel.

And moreover, by delays and excuses, the spirit of God is grieved, and may
withold his motions, and cease to stir up desires in the heart after Christ
any more. Therefore it is good, to take the spirits advice, to day if ye will
hear his voice, harden not your hearts; take Christ, and grace, and life, while
they are to be had; for if we delay, though it be but to another call, or
another day, we know not what a day may bring forth to our eternal prejudice.

5. Prop. If after all this, we could suppose that the time of any particular
persons visitation could be past while he lives, yet without all doubt it
leaves him under that stupidity and obduracy in sin, that he is altogether
senseless of his condition, and the misery of it: so far is he from bewailing
the loss of his opportunities, and wishing in that respect, that time past
could be called back again.

So that I never desire a more sure evidence, that any ones particular day of
grace is not past, than to find him mourning under the fears of it, bewailing
his sins and want of grace, and thirsting after Christ and his righteousness.

To this head I shall only add one word by way of explication of that
expression of the Apostle Paul, now is the accepted time, now is the day of
salvation.

This word [Now] is not to be understood so restrictively, as if the Apostle
limited the accepted time to that day or hour, wherein he spoke or writ, but
now, that is, now that the partition wall betwixt Jew and Gentile is broken
down, the limits of the Church enlarged, the Messiah revealed, the Gospel
preached, and all indifferently called to faith and repentance; now is the time
wherein all without distinction may come in for a share, in the benefits
purchased by Jesus Christ, and whosoever comes and closes with Christ upon the
terms of the Gospel, shall be accepted and saved.

FINIS.
^urteous Reader, be pleased to take notice that these Books following are
Printed for, and sold by, William Miller, at the gilded Acorn in St. Paul's
Churchyard, near the little North-Door.
JVvenall with Cutts by Sir Robert Stapylton Knight. F. l. Cradocks Harmony of
the Evangelists. F. -- Principles Octavo. Clarks lives of Worthies, Quarto. --
Christian good fellowship, or love and good works, Quarto. -- An Antidote
against immoderate mourning for the dead. Quarto. -- Description of Germany.
Quarto. -- Ministers dues. Quarto. -- Golden Apples. Octavo. Fettiplace the
souls narrow search for sin. Octavo. Archee's banquet of jests, Octavo.
Clark about Comfort.


