AN ANSWER TO Richard Allen's Essay, Vindication and Appendix, WHEREIN He
endeavors to prove, that, Singing of Psalms with Conjoined Voices is a
Christian Duty.

By R. C.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1697.

TO THOSE Christian Friends, Who were CONTRIBUTORS TOWARD Mr. Claridge's BOOK.
Beloved in our Lord Jesus Christ,
BEing desired by some Worthy Brethren in London, to signify unto you, That
whereas there has been a Mode of Singing set up and practiced (of late) by
some of our Brethren, by such limited and prestinted Forms and Tunes invented
by Men; wherein all the People join together, both Saints and Sinners, young
and old, holy and profane, under the specious pre^ence of a Church-Ordinance
and Gospel-Duty, without any foundation from the Word of Christ for their so
doing. Diverse of us have endeavored to stem that current of Innovation, and
repair that Breach made in the Church of Christ, lest it should deluge all
those of our Profession by the Impetuosity of its Innundation; and we hope our
Labors herein have been of use to many, for their Satisfaction, although others
have turned the Deaf Ear upon us, and persisted in their way of Common Popular
Singing.

This is therefore to acquaint you, that whereas Mr. Richard Claridge, (one
whom I highly esteem and honor for his Parts and Learning) was pleased above
twelve Months since (of his own Accord) to write a Treatise in Answer to Mr.
Richard Allen's Essay, Vindication and Appendix; he did communicate the same,
either in part or in whole, to Mr. William Kiffin, Mr. Robert Steed, and Mr.
Isaac Marlow, and my self; and we were of Opinion the printing of it would be
of use; upon which (...) Specimen being printed, Notice was given to Diverse
Friends both in City and Country* some of which did willingly contribute toward
its furtherance, and we hoped it might have bee^ completed before now.

But after Eight Sheets had been printed off it was discerned that the Author
had mad^ some Alteration in the Copy, which we could not consent unto, because
it appeared to u^ to be different from those common principles o^ Christianity
we profess, by which we should have been rendered incapable to have recommended
(...) to your Perusal. And because he would n^ be prevailed upon to obliterate
the same, an^ suffer it to be printed according to that Cop^ which he read to
those Brethren abovementioned; which would have amounted unto about twenty
Sheets, you must now be contented with these Eight Sheets only. It cannot be
imagined that I (above all Men) should have the least thought of Prejudice
against the Author, because he has (without any request of mine) been pleased
to Vindicate me from those Reflections R. A. has cast upon me: For which I do
hereby return him thanks. And by what you may see in these few sheets, where
any Occasion has occurred, you may be able to make a true Judgment of the
rest. Had I therefore preferred my private Interest to the Honor of Truth, I
should for that Reason have desired the publication of the whole. But through
the Grace of God I am made willing to sacrifice all my own private Interest to
the Honor of Christ, whenever his Service shall call for it.

As to what you are here presented with, I have carefully perused it, and so
far as I can discern, it is (in the general) Sound and Orthodox, and fit to be
considered by all such who desire Information about this Controversy. For,

1. He has sufficiently discovered his Antagonists pretense, that Singing of
Psalms (as they practice it) is a Christian Duty, from the pretended Morality
of it; and added five Arguments to prove, that according to R. A's. own
reasoning, it is no Christian Duty.

2dly. He proves, that singing of Psalm^ (as aforesaid) is not the Duty of
every Christian, from the Example of Christ, as R. A* pretends; because it is
not certain that Christ and his Disciples did then sing vocally together.

3dly. He proves, that the Greek Word (...), does not in it is primary
Signification denote Singing; but it is first and simple Signification is to
Praise, and that without Singing: And that it is not restrained to God (a^ R.
A. pretends) but is spoken of Men, and other things also.

The Primary Signification of this Wor^ (...), he proves from several
Authorities.

1. From Heathen Writers, of very great Antiquity.

2. From the Septuagint and Apocrypha^

3. From the best Greek Lexicographers.

4. From many Learned Translators of, an^ Commentators upon Mat. 26.30. and
Act^ 16.25. together with a most Learned an^ Elaborate Account of the
Signification of the Greek Word, (...), and shows R. A. his Mistakes about it.

By all which it will evidently appear to an^ Unbiased Person, that all their
pretenses from the Etimology, and principal Signification o^ those Words,
Hymneo and Hymnos, [tha^ Ptaising God without Singing does fully answer all
that they can pretend to from thos^ Words, according to the prime Signification
known, approved, and constant use thereof, and has been so understood by the
Learned, and was so rendered in their Old Translations of the Bible, until
another mode of praising God, viz. Singing in Rhyme, came to be in use in the
last Century: After which they were pleased, for the Credit of their own
invented Form, to add the Word Sing, in diverse places of Holy Scripture: By
which an Advantage has been taken to impose upon, and deceive the Ignorant and
Unwary Reader.

Our Brethren have invented different ways to support their Tottering Cause. As,

First, By telling us it is a Christian Duty, because it is a Moral Duty, and so
the Duty of all Men, being taught them by the Dictates of the Light of Nature:
Although it is to be remembered, that at the same time they went to a
Singing-Master to be taught it, which (in my Opinion) confuted all those
pretenses without any further Trouble. But I would desire our Brethren to
consider, whether such a ^osition may not induce some to turn Deists, when they
are told, that they may attain such ^nowledge of their Duties as they speak of,
in a ^reat measure without Revelation; in case they should believe what they
say to be true. For ^esides what our Author has said upon it, ^he late
Reverend Doctor Manton, in his Xth. Sermon upon Heb. 11. v. 3. says thus, That
Reason is not the Judge of Controversies in Religion, and the Doubts that do
arise about the Matters of God are not to be determined by the Dictates of
Nature. If then we leave the Written Word, and follow the Guidance of our own
Reason, we shall but puzzle our selves with impertinent Scruples, and leave our
selves under a Dissatisfaction. This is the Inlet of all Atheism and
Profaneness, when Men set up Reason as the highest Tribunal.

Secondly, When this will not do, Then they say, we must Sing as they did under
the Law, and that there is no other way prescribed how we should sing: But when
we have showed them, that there was no such Singing practiced under the Law, as
they now use: And that the Psalms of David, etc. were not originally written in
Rhyme, nor sung in their manner: Then,

Thirdly, They tell us they have Apostolical Injunction for it, and the Example
of Christ and his Apostles. And when they have been forced to confess they
cannot prove their Mode of singing from thence: Then,

Fourthly, As their Ultimum Refugium, They tell us, that Christian Churches
have Liberty to order such accidental Modes and Circumstances of Divine Worship
as are not particularly prescribed in the Word, as they shall judge most for
Edification. And these External Modes and Circumstances of Worship, they take
to be in the power of the Major Part of a Church, so far, as to warrant their
own practice therein. Now if we should be no wiser than to follow such
Direction, it might lead us to Rome, as well as to Geneva; where their practice
of Singing was at first Erected.

But this has been sufficiently answered by Mr. Isaac Marlow, in his Clear
Confutation of R. A. and his five Commendators, even from their own
Confessions, etc. to which I refer you.

I shall only add a few Passages out of Mr. Mather's late Book, called a
Discussion, etc. where he says, in page 132, 133. etc. No Difficulty or
Severity of the Times can alter the Rule given by Christ unto his Church. And
speaking of what some suppose may be done in point of Prudence, besides that
Rule, He says, Prudence has its Scope only in such things in Church-worship,
as are no part of the Worship, but only Circumstances thereof related to
Worship, not as it is Worship, but as an Action performed by Men, all whose
Actions must have Time and Place for them: But when Place and Time come under
an Institution, there Prudence may not alter them; nor may we swerve from the
Rule, for they (then) become Parts of Worship.

Now if our Brethrens practice as to their manner of Singing, is not a part of
Divine Instituted Worship, but only an External, Accidental Mode and
Circumstance thereof, as they themselves are pleased to tell us, then why do
they impose it upon their Churches, as if it were the highest part of Divine
Worship; surely they have No New Commission from Christ to exercise a
Legislative Power, by the Major part of the Members of their Churches, who can
never (by their Vote) make an External and Accidental Mode of performing an
Outward Action, a part of Divine Worship, if God has not appointed it; for
none can alter the Nature of things but God alone. But I have no leisure at
this time to enlarge upon this Subject, but shall beg of God to give you
Understanding in this and all other parts of his Revealed Will; and Subscribe
my self,

Your Servant for Christ's sake, William Russel.
From my House in Barbican, December 22. 1697.
AN ANSWER TO Richard Allen's Essay, Vindication, and Appendix, WHEREIN He
endeavors to prove, that, Singing of Psalms with Conjoined Voices is a
Christian Duty.
Animadversions on some Passages in R. A's Introduction.
^ntroduc.
THE only way for us to Glorify God, and to make our Passage through this Vale
of Tears, in any measure comfortable, is to pray and labor for more of those
beautifying Graces of Charity, Meekness, and mutual Forbearance; that so far as
we have attained, we may walk together by the same Rule, and wherein we yet
differ, humbly wait upon God for a more complete discovery of his Mind to us.
p. 2.

Animadv. Charity, Meekness, and Forbearan^^ are beautifying Graces indeed, and
were never more wanting, than in this Censorious and Lit^gious Age; for the
Contentions that have been rai^ed, through the differing Opinions which some Me^
have imbibed from those of their Brethren, abo^^ Religious Matters, are
fomented to that degree^ that what were but small Sparks at the first, a^ now
increased into Violent Flames, which threate^ Ruin and Desolation on every
Side.

As the Presence and Vigor of the fore-ment^oned Graces make Religion lovely,
and Christian Society comfortable; so the Absence or Deca^ thereof renders the
one unamiable, and the oth^ irksom and uneasy: How delightful and invitin^ is
it on the one hand, to behold, Brethren dwelli^ together in Unity, and
forbearing one another in Lov^ and how uncomfortable is that Prospect on the
^ther, wherein little else save Strife and Conten^on are presented to our View!
It therefore great^ concerns all those, who would be accounted t^ Sons of
Peace, and Well-wishers to the Prospe^^ty of Sion, to Pray and Labor indeed
for more (...) those cooling, as well as beautifying Graces of Ch^rity,
Meekness and Forbearance, for the quenchi^ those Flames, which the contrary
Vices have kindle^ and removal of those Causes of Uneasiness, whi^ have thereby
been introduced.

He adds, That so far as we have attained, we man walk together by the same
Rule, and wherein we y^ differ, humbly wait upon God for a more comple^
discovery of his Mind to us. An Excellent End! the stronger, who have arrived
to higher Attai^ments, Bear with their weaker Brethren, and n^ Impose a Snare
or Yoke upon their Consciences.

Introduc. It Is too well known to be conceal^ that such different Apprehensions
there are b^tween us, and some of our Dear Brethren, abo^ singing of Psalms;
which we are fully persuaded, with the Generality of the Reformed Churches, is
an Eminent Part of Christian Worship; but diverse of our Brethren are of a
different Persuasion. page 2.

Animadv. But then, the Question is what kind Vocal Singing is so? I answer,
Not Conjoint Sing^g of a precomposed Form, either in Prose or ^etre with many
Voices together, whether of Believ^s or Unbelievers, in an Artificial Tune;
which is ^eaded for by this Author. But such a Vocal ^nging of one Person at a
time, as is a Special Gift the Holy Spirit; i. e. When a Person Sings by
^^spiration of God, without all help of Humane ^t or Skill, having the Psalm,
Hymn, or Spiri^al Song, dictated for the Matter, and directed ^t the Manner,
immediately from above: Others ^no are present, and have their Souls touched by
^e same Holy Spirit, keeping silence with the ex^rnal Voice, but making Melody
in their Hearts ^to the Lord.

Now, though the Generality of the Reformed ^hurches, (as he styles them) are for
Set-form Sing^g with United Voices in an Artificial Tune; will ^eir
Unwarrantable Practice make such Singing Justi^ble and Authentic? Universality
and Consent are ^ good Arguments, where the Point under Debate made a Case of
Religion, and cannot be defended (...) Scripture Authority: This Instance is
brought (...) his great Disadvantage, if I had a mind to im^ove it against him.
For are not the Generality (...) the Reformed Churches, partly for Prelatical,
^d partly for Presbyterian Government? Some ^r Set-forms of Public Prayer, and
Most for In^nt-Baptism? I would therefore ask him, what ^e thinks of this
Generality? Are there not a great ^any Relics of Rome yet standing, and does
not ^e Reformation it self, (as it is called) cry aloud for a Reformation,
especially the Major part?

But diverse of our Brethren (says he) are (...) a different Persuasion: And
it is hoped, they w^ be enabled by the Grace of God so to continue; (...) cause
your Persuasion about singing after the Common, Popular Way, does not appear by
any thi^ yet that I have seen written in Favor of it, (...) have the least
Foundation in Scripture.

Introduc. So far as I can apprehend the No^ons of our Brethren, they
themselves are of d^ferent Judgments about this Practice.

Animadv. What Cause then have we to Pr^ that God would be pleased to send
forth his L^ and his Truth, that we may all come to the Kno^ledge of his Will,
Have no (...) visions among us, but be (...), a word that signifies, the
restoring of things out of order into their proper places again.
perf^ly joined together in the same m^ and in the same judgment, 1 (...) 1.10.
and that all those w^ are so much for Humane ^cency and Order in the Worship of
God, may the Vanity of such Attempts, and return to C^^ the Apostle and High
Priest of our Profession, (...) to his own Appointments, as they are in their
Na^ Simplicity and Beauty, without the adventit^ Garnish of Man.

Introduc. Some seem to think, that singing (...) a part of the Worship
peculiar to the J^ Church, and that therefore it is abolished u^ the New
Testament. Others seem to allow of s^ing still, but suppose it to consist only
in Joyful^ of Heart, and that it should not be Vocal. Ag^ others seem to allow
of Vocal Singing, but any the warrantableness of Conjoint Singing, (...) many
Voices together. Some Scruples arise a^ the Matter, and others about the Manner
of Singing.

Animadv. The whole Controversy is reducib^ t^ese two Heads, viz. The Matter
and Manner of ^^nging; and therefore the Enumeration of the ^^her particular
Differences is unnecessarily pre^^sed. But seeing they are mentioned, as the
se^^al Opinions of Brethren about Singing, I can^^t omit the Misrepresentation
given of the two for^^r of them. For they who think that Conjoint ^^ging with
many Voices together, was a part of ^^e Worship peculiar to the Jewish Church,
do ^^t think that all Singing is abolished under the ^^w Testament; though it is
their Opinion, that uni^ Vocal Singing is. Nor do I know of any who ^ so for
silent Singing, as to allow of none that is ^cal. That Vocal Singing which, I
conceive, they ^cept against, is by a Set-form of Words, either of ^e Single
Voice, or with Plurality of Voices, and ^une taught and learned by Art.

Introduc. "That therefore I may in some measure, (...) possible, convince the
Opposers of this our Pra^tice, satisfy those that are doubting, confirm those
that are wavering, and defend it from the ^eavy Charge which some bring against
it, of ^eing a groundless and superstitious Innovation, (...) shall endeavor
to clear these five things.

1. "That singing the Praises of God is a Chri^tian Duty, and not peculiar to
the Jewish Church.

2. "What singing is; That it is properly an Acti^n of the Voice, and not of the
Heart only.

3. "That Conjoint Singing of many Voices together is warrantable.

^. "What we are to sing.

5. "How we are to sing.

"And under each of these, I shall endeavor to ^emove all the Scruples of our
Brethren that dissent from us, so far as they come to my Mind.

Animadv. How well this Author has acquitted ^self in the Task he has
undertaken, will be ^ in the Examination of his Book; my Design is to follow
him according to his own Metho^ and to weigh all that he offers as Argumentati^
for his Opinion, in the Balance of the Sanctuar^ Whereby the Impartial Reader
may judge, wheth^ or no the Truth lies on his side the Scale, or ou^ He tells
us in the Introduction, That he can tru^ appeal to God, that it is only a
sincere love to Tru^ has prevailed upon him at this time, to off his thoughts
about this Matter; and he hearti^ desires that herein he may be guided by the
Wo^ and Spirit of God. page 2, 3.

And in the Epistle Dedicatory, he acquaints t^ Members of that Church of
Christ, to which he ^ most immediately related, That he lays befo^ them, what
he judges to be the Counsel of G^ in this Matter; and as to the Fundamental
Pro^ of Conjoint Singing with many Voices togethe^ which he calls a Religious
Practice, and where^ he expects the acquiescence of their Judgmen^ and
Consciences, he therein depends only up^ the Authority of God's Word, and Sound
Arg^ments deduced from thence. And I have so mu^ Charity to hope, that he is
sincere in his Appe^ and writes what he apprehends to be true. B^ as he
acknowledges in the beginning of his Int^duction, That the best here know but
in pa^ and that different Sentiments, even in Religion Concerns, are every
where found among so^ of the wisest and most serious Christians. Pa^ 1. So I
the less wonder, that he himself shou^ in this Controversy pursue a Shadow
instead of t^ Substance, and wander in a dark and crooked Pat^ who had a clear
and strait one to walk in. B^ thus it has fallen out, through a Mistake of the
Poi^ he has endeavored to manage, and the Opini^ by him defended has proved
a strengthening of ^ Opposers, and still lies under the heavy Charge^ being a
groundless and superstitious Innovation.

CHAP. I. Wherein R. A's. first way of proving Singing of Psalms a Christian
Duty, viz. From it is Morality, is considered and disproved.
Richard Allen having laid down this Position, viz. That singing the Praises of
God is a Christian Duty, and that it was not peculiar to the Jewish
Dispensation; endeavors to prove it these three ways, 1. "From it is being a
Moral Duty. 2. "From the Example of our Lord Jesus herein. 3. "From the
Apostolical Injunctions thereof.


I shall consider his several ways of Proof in their Place and Order, and in
this Chapter begin with his first; viz. The Morality of singing of Psalms. He
and others who are for common, popular Singing, lay great stress upon the
Morality of their Practice; I have often heard it urged as their Achildean
Argument. For when they have been beaten from other Holds, they have run to
this as their impregnable Fort. Therefore let us attend to what R. A. says
about the Moral Nature of it, and the immutable Obligation, wherewith it binds
all Mankind to the performance thereof.

Singing the Praises of God ( says he, Essay, p. 6.) is not a mere Positive
Duty, but a Moral One, and consequently the Duty of all Men. This I deny, and
shall give my Reasons for it, when I have examined 1. His Explication of this
Thesis. And 2. His five Considerations to prove it.


Sect. 1. First, I shall examine his Explication of this Thesis, wherein though
he has spoken well concerning the Nature of mere positive Duties, as being
such as have no intrinsic Goodness in them, but derive all their Virtue and
Obligation from God's positive Command and Legislature; yet I cannot receive
his Notion about Moral Duties of Religion; Namely, That they were originally
written in the Heart of Man by Nature, and may still in a great measure be
discerned by serious Attention and Consideration, without any special
Revelation; Essay, p. 7.

To discover the Unsoundness of this Assertion, Man may be considered both in
his Innocential and Lapsed Estate; and so Nature it self according to this
twofold State of Man, admits of a double Signification.

In Man's Estate of Innocence, it could not possibly be Nature, as the word is
commonly taken, but the God of Nature, who originally wrote the Moral Duties of
Religion in the Heart of Man. And God said, let us make Man in our Image, after
our Likeness: So God created Man in his own Image, in the Image of God created
he him, Genesis 1.26, 27. And the Apostle shows wherein this consisted; Namely, In
Knowledge, Righteousness and Holiness, Col. 3.10. Ephesians. 4.24. From the comparing
of which Scriptures, it plainly appears, 'twas God himself, and not Nature,
that insculp'd them upon the Heart of Man.

Again, Nature in the Fall is totally depraved as well as Man, and therefore
stands in equal need of Redemption. And this being the Case, how can that which
is universally corrupted, exert an Operation peculiar to a most Pure and Holy
Principle, as is the writing of Moral Duties of Religion upon the Heart of Man?
I know it is a received Opinion with many, that the Light of Nature does
discover those Moral Duties unto Men, which are incumbent on them as Creatures.
But if they are asked what they mean by the Light of Nature? we find them
divided in their Answers: Some tell us it is Natural Conscience; but that
springing from the Natural Powers of the Reasonable Soul, which is defiled in
the Fall, cannot do the Work assigned it: Others say, it is a Relick of that
Light which Man lost by his Fall, or a Remainder of the Law written in the
Heart of Man in his first Creation, which is not, says Zanchius, wholly Partim
expuncta, partim obliterata. Zanc. Tom. 4. l. 1. cap. 10. p. 190.
erased by the Fall. But how can this be? seeing Omnes homines per
inobedientiam Adae injusti effecti, totique quanti sunt, animo and corpore
corrupti, etc. Tom. 6. Com. in Ephesians. p. 82.
he, and Baptist's Confess. of Faith, Chap. 6. Sect. 2, 4. Westminster Confess.
Chap. ibid.
others acknowledge, that Man by the Fall is dead in Sin, and wholly defiled in
all the Faculties and Parts of Soul and Body. Is utterly indisposed, disabled,
and made opposite to all Good, and wholly inclined to all Evil. If Man lost all
Spiritual Life, Light and Power, by the Fall, then it is impossible in that
Estate, he should have any such Relick or Remainder left in him, for the
discovery of his Duty to God.

Against this it is Objected, That the Gentiles were not only directed, but
also enabled by the Light of Nature, to do the Duties of the Moral Law. For
when the Gentiles which have not the Law, do by Nature the things contained in
the Law, these having not the Law, are a Law unto themselves, Romans 2.14.

The Answer hereunto is obvious, if it be considered what Nature the Apostle
intends in this place; if that Divine and Spiritual Nature, which is derived
from the Lord Jesus Christ, then the Objection vanishes; but if that Corrupt
and Depraved Nature we derive from Old Adam, then it is utterly impossible, that
any by that Nature should do the things contained in the Law, whose Commands
are Holy, Just and Good. And therefore Estius and Toletus in Pool's Synopsis
Criticorum, do understand by Nature, that which is per Gratiam reparata,
repaired or restored by Grace.

From whence it is evident, whether we consider Man before, or after the Fall,
neither the Law of God it self, nor Moral Duties of Religion arising therefrom,
were written originally in the Heart of Man by Nature; but by the God of Nature
alone, to whom the Inscription is peculiar; as being not only a Special Branch
of his Royal Prerogative, but also of his Gracious Promise to his People, I
will put my Law in their inward Parts, and write it in their Hearts, Jer. 31.33.

Sect. 2. The Term [Moral] (which R. A. much insists upon) being ambiguous,
would require some Explication, but that by applying of it here to the Worship
of God, and opposing it to mere Positive and Instituted Duties, he has given
us his Sense of its signification. Only let the Reader take Notice, that he
seems to comprehend the whole of Religious Duties under these two Heads, Moral
and Positive; and in saying, those of the first sort, may still in a great
measure be discerned by serious Attention and Consideration, without any
special Revelation. To me he plainly intimates, we are not much obliged to
Divine Revelation for any thing, save those of the second sort, viz. mere
Positive Duties, such as Baptism and the Lord's Supper, which have no real
intrinsic Value in them* but receive (as he says) all their Force, whereby we
are obliged to observe them, from the Declaration of God's Will and Pleasure by
his Word.

The serious Attention and Consideration he speaks of, are surely too dim a
Light of themselves, to make the great discoveries he ascribes to them. For he
does not speak of some particular Duties only that are discernable thereby, but
Moral Duties Indefinitely, and those not darkly neither, but in a great
Measure, and such as do oblige a Christian. Now though it should be supposed,
(but not granted) that some such discoveries may be made, as he mentions, by
serious Attention and Consideration, without any special Revelation; I would
then fain know of him, how the Stoics, Platonists and Peripateticks, Men
destitute (I suppose in his Opinion) of special Revelation, and yet many of
them very serious for Attention and Consideration, came to be so divided De
natura summi Boni, about the Nature of the chiefest Good, some placing it in
the Habit, others in the Action of Virtue, and some in the Union of the Soul
with God? Whence it came to pass, that those great Contemplative Moralists did
spend so much of their time in Disputes, about the Nature of Virtue in general,
the Offices of it, and the measures of Practice conform thereunto? If Attention
and Consideration would have directed them in those Enquiries, it is strange how
such Studious and Speculative Men, should be at so great an Uncertainty about
them.

Again, If special Revelation be not necessary to guide Men in their
Disquisitions about the Moral Duties of Religion, but serious Attention and
Consideration, exclusive of such Revelation, will still in a great Measure
direct them; I demand the Reason of that universal Ignorance, which possesses
the Minds of the Wisest Men of all Nations, who have not (I conceive in his
Judgment) special Revelation, about these two great Duties of Religion, viz.
the Worshipping of Christ as God, and the Believing that Salvation is to be had
through him alone; since it is demonstrable from his Hypothesis, who divides
Religious Duties into Moral and merely Positive, that neither of these
beforementioned can be merely positive, but must of necessity have something
Moral; because they have an intrinsic Goodness in them, and flow from that
relation we have to Christ as Creatures; for he is our Creator, no less than
our Mediator; For by him were all things created that are in Heaven, and that
are in Earth; all things were created by him, and for him; and he is before all
things, and by him all things consist; Col. 1.16, 17. All things were made by
him, and without him was not any thing made that was made, John 1.3.

Once more: If Moral Duties of Religion, may still in a great Measure be
discerned by serious Attention and Consideration, without any special
Revelation, then it will follow, that the contrary Vices are discernable by the
same way: For that which directs Men to the Knowledge and Practice of Virtue,
directs them also to the Knowledge and shunning of Vice. Now if Moral Evil is
still in a great Measure to be discerned by serious Attention and
Consideration, without any special Revelation, then surely it was so in former
Ages. And if so, whence was it, that some of those Moralists, that had the
greatest Reputation for Humane Wisdom, were so mistaken about the Nature of
Moral Evil? Will R. A. say, they were not Men of serious Attention and
Consideration? I suppose he will not. What thinks he then of Dixit omnia
peccata esse paria; nec minus delinquere eum, qui Gallum gallinaceum, cum opus
non fuerit, quam eum qui Patrem suffocaverit. Tul. Orat. 23. pro Muraena.
Zeno, who made no difference between one Sin and another, but accounted him as
great an Offender, who killed a Cock, no necessity requiring it, as he that
slew his Father. If any Credit may be given to Tully, who writes his Character
in short, he was a very great Man.

And Justitiae primum munus est, ut ne cui quis noceat, nisi lacessitus
injuria. De Offic. l. 1.
Tully himself, one of the chief of his Age both for Philosophy and Eloquence,
a Man of profound Study and Speculation, expressly allows of Revenge in case of
Injury: And commends Nonnunquaem mortem sibi ipsi consciscere alius debet,
Catoni autem, etc. moriendum potius quam Tyranni vultus aspiciendus fuit. De
Offic. l. 1.
Self-murder in some Persons, at some times, and particularly in M. Cato, who
chose rather to be his own Executioner, than to see the Face of Caesar.

'Twere easy to multiply See Tailor 's Ductor Dubit. l. 2. c. 1. r. 1. n. 33,
46. p. 176, 180.
Instances of this kind, and to show that some Men of great Attention and
Consideration, have been so very confused in their thoughts about Moral Good
and Evil, that they have perverted the distinction of both, making that Duty
which is Sin to do, and that Vice which is a Duty to practice.

And it is no wonder these Men of Consideration were at so great a Loss; for
they expected more from themselves as to these Matters, than they did from God.
The Philosopher, says (...). Enchirid. cap. 71.
Epictetus, expects all from himself. Our Life, says Deorum immortalium munus
est quod vivimus; Philosophiae quod been vivimus: Itaque tanto plus nos debere
huic quam Dijs, quanto majus beneficium est bona Vita, quam Vita. Epist. 90.
Seneca, is from God; but that which is greater than Life, our Virtue, is from
Philosophy. Therefore we owe so much the more to Philosophy, than we do to God;
by how much Virtue is better than Life.

And Virtutem nemo unquam acceptam Deo retulit, Cic. de Not. Deorum.
another has this strange Expression; No Man (says he) ever thought himself
obliged to God for being Virtuous. These were Men of great Attention and
Consideration; but while they scorned to acknowledge Moral Virtue Rem
beneficiariam, a Benefit collated by Heaven, but Illam sibi quisque debet, non
ab alio petitur. Sen. Epist. 90.
owed it wholly to themselves: How was it possible they should ever attain to
distinct and certain Notices of Good and Evil? or to use R. A's. Words, discern
in a great Measure Moral Duties of Religion? For such knowledge is from God,
which they proudly disowned. They did understand many Truths, and were eminent
for many Parts of Morality; but if serious Attention and Consideration were
their alone Guide, how came the chiefest of them to be so misguided in several
important Duties, wherein it is not improbable they used equal Exactness and
Care in their Disquisitions?

For my part, I cannot conceive what is intended by this Assertion of R. A.
wherein so much is attributed to serious Attention and Consideration, unless he
would depreciate Divine Revelation, and if not set up Theism, or Natural
Religion in it is Room, yet at least place them upon equal Ground; or what is
very near of kin to Theism, raise the long buried Pelagian Notion out of it is
Grave.

Sect. 3. From the Explication of his Thesis, viz. That Singing the Praises of
God, is not a mere Positive Duty, but a Moral one; and consequently the Duty of
all Men, thus examined: I proceed in the second place to his five
Considerations which he brings to prove it.

1. His first Consideration is, That it is a moral Duty for Men to praise God,
with all the Faculties wherewith he has endowed them. To 1 Cor. 6.19, 20.
glorify him, not only with the Faculties of their Souls, but also with all
the Members of their Bodies. Essay, p. 8.

Answ. The Apostle makes it a pure Evangelical Duty, and argues not from our
Creation, but from our Redemption; Ye are bought with a price, therefore
glorify God in your Body, and in your Spirit, which are God's; 1 Cor. 6.20. I
do not deny it to be a Moral Duty, to praise God with all the Faculties of
Soul, and Members of the Body; but in the place quoted, the Apostle presses
the Corinthians, to glorify God from a pure Evangelical Principle; Christ has
given himself a Ransom for Soul and Body, and therefore with both ye are
obliged to glorify him.

And what is this to Singing? Yes, says R. A. It Is certain that Men have not
only a Faculty to praise God in their Hearts, by an inward acknowledgment of
his Goodness and Excellency, but also with their Mouths; and this not only by
Speaking, but also by Singing his Praise.

Answ. It Is certain all Men ought to praise God with all the Faculties of their
Souls; but it is not certain that all Men have a Faculty to praise God by
Singing Vocally: Whether he understands by Faculty, some connate power of the
Soul, in which sense the Understanding, Will, and Appetite are Faculties; or as
the Word in it is true Origination imports, Facilitas agendi, (says Calep.) an
Easiness to do a thing. For if he takes it in the first Sense, then it is
essential to the Soul, and ought to be reckoned among the concreated Faculties,
which none of those who treat of the Soul, have done that I have read of. If he
understands it in the second Acceptance, viz. an Easiness to do a thing; then
common Experience will oppugn him; for how few among the vast multitudes of
Mortals, have attained such a Faculty?

However, he proceeds to this Conclusion, whether his Premises will bear it or
no; That it is a Moral Duty, and suitable to the Dictates of right Reason, for
Men to praise God by Singing. And takes it to be a clear Demonstration.

Answ. Saying and Proving are two things. Pythagoras had indeed obtained so
great an Authority among his Scholars, that his (...), his bare Assertion
passed without Contradiction. But Implicit Faith has long since been abandoned
by the sincere Disciples of Jesus, and nothing short of Evident Proof should be
admitted for Demonstration; which is here wholly wanting. If to praise God by
Singing be suitable (as he says) to the Dictates of right Reason, then those
who are not of his Opinion in this matter, have either wilfully rejected that
Guide, or are Metamorphosed into Irrational Beings; either of which would be
too uncharitale to suppose, seeing those who dissent from him, do believe with
the Apostle, that Religion is (...), their Reasonable Service.

Sect. 4. 2. His Second Consideration to prove, that Singing the Praises of God
is a Moral Duty, is this;

Singing the Praises of God, says R. A. was a Duty performed to him by the
Heavenly Angels, at the Discovery of his Glorious Perfections in the Creation.
Which I think evidently shows it to be the Duty of reasonable Creatures, as
such, and consequently a Moral Duty. Essay, p. 9.

Answ. First, It is a Question whether the Heavenly Angels sang vocally or no;
because where the Scriptures are silent, as they are in this matter, we may
very well Query about it.

Secondly, If that Opinion o^ the Camero. Praelect. Tom. 2. p. 440, 441.
Schoolmen be true, tha^ Angelical Beings express their Minds to one another,
Sola Voluntate, by the Will ^y, then how can they be said to Sing in a Vocal
^anner? When Angels have appeared, and spoke ^ Men in assumed Bodies, for the
Execution of at present Service Almighty God was pleased to ^ploy them in, they
spoke by the Mediation and ^nistry of the Organs of those assumed Bodies: But
^gels considered merely as Spirits, have no Instru^nts for the sensible and
orderly Articulation of ^^nds, which is properly Note the Speech here spoken
of, is that which Philosophers term (...), Speech uttered or pronounced.
Ex^nal Speech; and consequently ^nnot modulate the Outward ^ice without
assumed Bodies; ^ause such an Action is proper a Rational Agent, acting by ^
Ministry of Corporeal Organs.

Thirdly, It Is not evident to me, that an Ex^ple of the Angels, as such, is a
sufficient Ground ^ the Foundation of a Moral Duty to Men. For ^ Glorious and
High-exalted Station they are in, ^ the different Administration they and we
are ^er, make it improbable, that they should be ^ule or Standard for our
Obedience: Jesus Christ ^ Head of his Church, having not taken upon ^ the
Nature of Angels, but the Seed of Abraham; ^ any where referred us to them, but
to him^ for Direction, in all the parts of Duty: ^erefore says Christ, Mat.
4.19. and John 1.43.
Follow ^ and the Apostle called ^n the Corinthians, to be 1 Cor. 11.1.
^owers of him, as he was of Christ. ^e Heavenly Angels are Glorious Creatures,
Mi^ring Spirits to the Heirs of Salvation, and ex^te the Will of God in
Perfection. But as ex^ent Beings as they are, it is not said in the Ho^
Scriptures; Be ye holy, for the Angels are holy: ^, Be ye perfect, as the
Angels are perfect: But, Levit. 11.44. and 1 Pet. 1.16.
be ye holy, says the Lo^ for I am holy; and Mat. 5.48.
be ye perfe^ says Christ, even as your Fat^ which is in Heaven is perfect. ^
ought all to Pray, that the Will of God may ^ done in Earth, as it is in
Heaven: But how ^ the Angels, of whom there is no Evidence, nor much as
Probability of their Singing Vocally in H^ven, be a Rule or Precedent of such a
Practice h^ below? This is a dark Region our Souls are now ^ and we know but
very little of the State and E^ployment of the Heavenly Angels; that they ^
Glorious Spirits, and do continually Adore ^ Magnify God, the Holy Scriptures
inform us; ^ that they praise him by Vocal Singing, the Sac^ Records are not
only silent, but it is also W^ incompetent to Spirits, as such, who are Incor^
real Beings, and so incapable through the Defec^ proper external Organs, of a
Vocal Celebration of Adorable Perfections. In a word, the Celestial An^ are
pure Intellectual Substances, separated from Matter, and therefore cannot be
supposed to S^ in R. A's. Sense, that is, with the External Voice

But he proceeds to prove the Point asserted, ^ the Reader may see that he has
Ground for w^ he says; his Proof is, That the Angels did ^ praise God by
singing, he himself testifies, Job 7. When the Morning Stars sang together, and
the ^ of God shouted for joy. That by the Morning S^ here, cannot be meant the
Material Stars in ^ Firmament, to me seems plain, in that they ^ at his laying
the Foundat^ of the Earth, which Genesis 1.1.
wa^ the first day of the Creat^ whereas the Material S^ were not made till the
fourth day. Ver. 19.
And theref^ by the Morning Stars we are to understand ^ the best Expositors,
the Holy Angels, called in the following Words, The Sons of God, (as also Chap.
1.6.) And they are fitly called Stars in the same sense, in which they are
elsewhere called 2 Cor. 11.14.
Angels of Light. Essay, p. 9, 10.

Answ. I do not think, notwithstanding the Assurance he speaks with, that by
the Morning Stars we are to understand the Holy Angels; and ^ know all the best
Expositors do not conclude with him. Vid. Crit. Sacr. in loc.
Rabbi Abenezra understands the Planets; the Learned Drusius and Grotius,
Material Stars; with whom also accord the LXXII Interpreters, who make a plain
Distinction between the Morning Stars and the Sons of God; ^eading (...), Stars
simply, and (...), Angels, or the Sons of God. So Synop. Critic.
Mercer, Lyra, Meno^bius, Tirinus, Cartwright, and sundry other Learned Men, do
not take the Morning Stars figuratively, but properly. Crit. Sacr. ubi supra
Drusius explains ^his place by Psalm. 19.1. The Heavens declare the Glory of
God, that is, says he, By their perpetual Motion, and curious Structure; and so
do the Stars sing his Praises, there being a parity of Reason in both. And
whereas our English Version of the Bible reads [Sang,] Bib. sacr. Ar. Mont.
Hierom, a great Master of the Hebrew, translates ^t. Laudarent, [Praised,] and
so does Crit. Sacr. ibid.
Grotius. Coverdale's Translation, Dedicated to Henry 8. and Printed Anno 1535.
has it thus, When the Morning-Stars gave me praise. And three other Editions,
Anno 1540. 1585, and 1591. with Cran^er's Preface to them, render it, When the
morning Stars praised me together: And thus to me it appears, we are not to
understand by the Morning Stars, the Holy Angels, with R. A. but the Material
Stars in the Firmament, who Praise their Creator in their kind; i. e.
Objectively, though not Actively.

But R. A. says, The Material Stars in the Firmament cannot be here meant, in
that they sang at God's laying the Foundations of the Earth, which was on the
first day of the Creation, whereas the Material Stars were not made till the
fourth day. Let us first examine the Text, and then try his Argument. The Text
in Job is best explained by the Context, which lies thus; in Chapter 31. Job
makes a Protestation of his Integrity in sundry Instances, and wishes some
Indifferent Person had the Hearing of the Cause between God and himself. O that
one would hear me? behold my Desire is, that the Almighty would answer me; v.
35. I would declare unto him the number of my steps, v. 37. I would give him (
as Clark paraphraseth upon his Words) a just Account of my Life past, to see
what he can accuse me for. Whereupon, after Elihu's Discourse, which takes up
the 32, 33, 34* 35, 36, and 37 Chapters, from v. 6. of the 32. the Lord is
pleased himself to answer Job out of the Whirlwind, Chap. 38.1. Who is this
that darkneth Counsel, by words without knowledge? v. 2. that seek^ to justify
himself, and misrepresent the Wisdom and Justice of my Proceedings. Gird up now
thy Loins like a man; for I will demand of thee, and answe^ thou me; v. 3.
Where wast thou, when I laid the Foundations of the Earth? declare if thou have
understanding v. 4. Now mark the Connection that R. A. make of the Seventh Verse
with the Fourth, as though they respected one and the same Moment of Time; which
is I conceive a Mistake in him, and that which Logicians call, Fallacia
Compositionis, a Fallacy of Composition, in connecting and joining together
thos^ things, which are and ought to be divided. For the Seventh Verse does not
seem to have relation to the same Time mentioned in the Fourth, but to another.
Therefore the Old Versions of the Bible, before taken notice of, begin the
Seventh Verse, with a Repetition of the Question in the Fourth, Where wast thou
when the Morning Stars, etc.? making two distinct Questions of the two Verses,
relating to two different Times, and the Seventh not to be, either a Member, or
Exegetical of the Fourth. Which is also observed by Simon Patrick, in his
Paraphrase upon the place, Where wast thou, when the bright Stars first
appeared, to proclaim my praise with one consent? And by Beza, in his
Exposition of Job, Dedicated to Queen Elizabeth, sup. loc. So that the Context
runs very smoothly, and agreeably to the Scope of the Place, thus, Where wast
thou when I laid the Foundations of the Earth? and, Where wast thou, when the
Morning Stars sang together, and all the Sons of God ^houted for Joy?

Now let us come to the Trial of R. A's. Argument, and see what Strength it
carries. The Material Stars, (says he) in the Firmament cannot be here meant;
but why so? because the Stars ^ere expressed, Sang at God's laying the
Foundations of the Earth, which was on the first day of the Creation, whereas
the Material Stars were not made till the fourth Day.

Answ. It Is a mere Begging of the Question; for deny the Morning Stars, (which
I apprehend to be Material Stars, and not the Holy Angels) Sang at ^od's laying
the Foundations of the Earth, which he ^akes for granted, and demand of him
better Proof: ^or the Hebrew Word (...), Ranan, does not necessarily ^fer that
Signification here; Singing not being it is ^rimary and General Sense, as R. A.
himself confesses, Essay, p. 30. The main Stress of his Argument lies upon
these three Suppositions, which I think are Erroneous;

1. That the Morning Stars here mentioned, ar^ not the Material Stars in the
Firmament, but the Holy Angels.

2. That the Angels were created on the First Day; and,

3. Sang at the laying the Foundations of the Earth which was then.

The First not only makes a needless Tautology in the Text, but is als^ a
Andrew's Sermon on 1 Cor. 11.16.
Wringing of the Scriptures, ^strain that out of them which (...) not in them.
The Third, If A^gels are to be understood by the Sons of God, (...) confuted by
the Text, which says, The Sons of G^ Shouted, not Sang; and all know, Shouting
is a diff^rent Sound or Noise from that of Vocal Singing.

As to the Second, I desire him to read an Auth^cited by him, p. 79, 112. in
Favo^ of Rythmical Singing. Edward's Excel. and Perfect. of the H. Scriptures,
Vol. 3. cap. 7. p. 324.
So^ (says he) refer the Creati^ of Angels to this first da^ work, by reducing
them the word Heaven in the first Verse, but the verse is a general Account of
the whole Cr^tion, and not of any particular days productio^ (or else by Heaven
and Earth there is meant ^ first matter, or rude Draught of both) the fore no
such thing can be inferred thence. N^ are we to think, that the Angelick Order
comprehended under Light, (as I find some i^gine, because they read of An Angel
of Lig^^ 2 Cor. 11.14.) for it is material Light only t^ is the product of the
first days work. I ^ther think, that Moses designed not to incl^ Angels in any
part of that Account, which gives of the Creation; for he makes it his ^siness
to speak of those Works of God which were Visible and Sensible; and therefore
it is no wonder that the Angelick Spirits are not mentioned, for they come not
within the Compass of his Undertaking.

Sect. 5. The Third Consideration he brings to ^rove Singing the Praises of God
to be a Moral ^uty is, that

"Whatsoever was practiced in the Church of God, and approved by him, before
the giving of the Law at Mount Sinai, and never after declared to be Typical,
is a Moral Duty. I know no Exception can be made against this Assertion. ^ssay,
p. 10.

Answ. I suppose he means, whatsoever was ^ractis'd in the Assemblies of the
People of God, ^ a Part of his Worship, and approved by ^^m; that is, Commanded
or Instituted by him, ^fore the Promulgation of the Decalogue, and ^ver
afterward declared to be Typical, is a ^oral Duty; or else this Assertion may
be justly ^cepted against. For all Uncommanded Worship ^ forbidden, and
therefore Unlawful Worship. neither can any thing be properly a Moral Duty, ^
be performed in the Church of God, as a Part ^ his Worship, which has not the
Stamp of Di^ne Authority upon it. For the Agreeableness of Practice to (that
which is called) Right Rea^^n, or the Light of Nature, is no sufficient Ground
^ a Church Observation, except it be also com^nded by God. I do not in the
least Question, but ^^ the True Church of God in all Ages, was guid^^ by his
Holy Spirit in the Worship they per^^^med, and he accepted; or else I know not
how ^^y could be the True Church, or perform ac^^ptable Service to him. For the
True Church has ^^d Christ all along for it is Head of Government and
Influence; to suppose it at any Time to be wit^ out him for it is Legislator and
Guide, were to ma^^ it cease it is very Being. For the Being of the Tr^^ Church
consists in it is Union with, and special R^lation to Christ, as it is Head. And
for the Servic^ which it performs to God, they must be of his Pr^paring, and
not the Issues of our own Priva^^ Studies and Contrivances. F^^ Reynold's on
Hos. 14.1, 2.
nothing can go to God, i. ^ meet with Acceptance at h^^ Hands, but what first
com^ from him.

From whence it does apparently follow, the whatsoever was practiced in the
True Church of Go^ and approved by him, as a Part of his Worship, eve^ before
the Giving the Sinai Law, had his Comman^ for it; because it could not
otherwise be acceptab^^ Worship to him: For he accepts of none, but wha^ he has
Appointed.

To this it may perhaps be Objected, that before the Giving of the Law at Mount
Sinai, there wa^ no written Law, and so no Command for the Churches Direction
in Worship: But Moral D^ties of Religion were written in Men's Hearts b^ Nature,
and by serious Attention thereunto the could discern what they were, without
any speci^^ Revelation, and so perform true and acceptab^^ Worship to Almighty
God.

Answ. This Objection is in part answered alread^ where I have shown, that
Moral Duties of Religion are not written in Men's Hearts by Nature, b^^ by the
God of Nature; and that serious Attentio^ alone is Morally Impossible to make
the great Di^coveries, which are attributed to it; for Man^ Natural Condition
in the Fa^^ being as the Holy Scriptures d^clare, Acts 26.18. Ephesians. 5.8. Col.
1.13. 1 These. 5.5.
Darkness; how is ^ possible for him to see his M^ral Duty to God, and to
perform it with Acceptance, without special Revelation? for he must needs fail,
who has not this Unerring Guide to direct him.

And though there was no written Law before the giving of that at Sinai, and so
no written Precept for Direction in Church-Worship, yet this Defect was
supplied by Divine Revelation; Ushers's Body of Divinity. p. 6.
In the beginning of the World, says one, God delivered his Word by
Revelation. And a little after, Ibid. p. 7.
From the Creation, until the time of Moses, for the space of 2513. years, God
immediately by his Voice and Prophets sent from him, taught the Church his
Truth, Heb. 1.1. Taylor's Ductor Dubit. l. 2. c. 1. r. 1. n. 44. p. 180.
Another has this excellent Saying, Christ is called by Peter and the Greek
Fathers, (...), the Word of the Father and the Law; and it is remarkable, this
Word or Law of the Father, was the Instrument of teaching Mankind in all
Periods of the World. And See Baxter's More Reasons for the Christian Religion,
p. 94, 95.
a Third makes no doubt, but the Eternal (...), or Word, that had undertaken
Man's Redemption, and thereupon was our Lord Redeemer, gave even to Socrates,
Plato, Cicero, Seneca, Antonine, Epictetus, Plutarch, etc. what Light and Mercy
they had, though they understood not well from whom, or upon what Grounds they
had them.

Sect. 6. Many Learned Men do tell us of the Seven Precepts, (which passed from
one to another by Oral Tradition) Six whereof were first given to the Sons of
Adam, and the Seventh super-added to the Sons of Noah, and altogether by the
Rabbis styled the Seven Precepts of the Sons of Noah, which the Church of God
had before the Sinaical Promulgation, and the same in Substance with the
Decalogue. They are set down in this Order by a great Hammond's Annot. on Act.
15. d.
Critic.

1. The First, (...), of Strange Worship, or of renouncing the Idolatry of the
Heathens, the not Worshipping other Gods.

2. The Second (...), of the Benediction, (that is, the Worship) of the Name,
that is, the true God.

3. The Third (...), of Judgment, or Administration of Justice.

4. The Fourth (...), of disclosing Nakedness, that is, of Abstaining from all
Uncleanness, and interdicted Marriages within those Degrees which are set down
Lev. 18.

5. The Fifth (...), of shedding of Blood, or against Homicides.

6. The Sixth (...), of Theft or Rapine, and doing as they would be done to by
others.

7. The Seventh (...), a Member of any living Creature, or that they should not
cat the Flesh of any Creature with the Blood in it.

See also Synopsis Critic. in Act. 15.20. Schindler in Pentaglot. p. 1530.
Curcell. Rel. Christ. Institut. lib. 4. c. 11. Sect. 3.

Though this Discourse may seem a Digression, to those who conceive the Church of
God was chiefly directed in Matters of Worship by mere Rational Principles,
before the giving of the Law at Mount Sinai; yet to others who Believe Divine
Revelation was her only Guide, it will appear very necessary for the clearing
of the Truth, to all such as are imposed upon by the Asserters of Natural
Worship, as though that as such, were Acceptable to God.

Unless therefore R. A. be understood, according to the Explication before
given; I think, there is sufficient Reason to except against his Consideration,
which he proceeds to prove thus,

That singing the Praises of God was thus practiced, ( viz. In the Church of
God, and approved by him before the giving of the Law at Mount Sinai, and never
afterward declared Typical) is evident, ( Exodus 15.1.) Then sang Moses and the
Children of Israel, this Song to the Lord; Essay, p. 10. Sect. 7. Answ. If this
Text does not prove Conjoint Singing with Plurality of External Voices, which
is the Point he contends for, he has then lost one main Proof of the Morality
of it; and that this Instance does not prove it, the following Considerations
(I hope) will evince.

First, It is altogether improbable, that Moses and the Children of Israel all
Sang Vocally together. For if we consider the vast Body of Men that came out of
Egypt, about six hundred Thousand, Exodus 12.37. all which (for any thing that
appears to the contrary) were present at this Solemn Gratulation to God, for
their Miraculous Deliverance from their Enemies; nothing is more unlikely, than
that they should Sing Conjunctly, and with Audible Voices. For if they all so
Sang, either

1. They were all Extraordinarily Inspired for the Performance of that Action:
Or,

2. They had Learned to Sing in an Ordinary Way. Or,

3. They all Sang Naturally: But neither of these carry any show of Probability
with them.

1. It Is not reasonable to suppose they were all Extraordinarily Inspired,
unless we make a Miracle of the whole Action; and then that would do R. A.
little Service: For though a Moral Duty may Miraculously be performed, yet a
Miraculous Action is no Safe Ground to build a Moral Duty upon.

2. It Is not probable they had all Learnt to Sin^ in an Ordinary Way, for if
so; then there mu^^ have been some Body to Learn from, and that eith^^ while
they were in Egypt, or between their coming out thence and immediate Arrival on
the oth^^ side the Red Sea. But neither of these can we be supposed, if we
consider, either the total Silenc^ of Moses about any such Instructers, or the
afflicte^ State of that People in Egyp^ who Exodus 6.5, 9.
groaned for Anguish of Spirit under the Exodus 5.6, -- 19.
Cruel Tyranny (...) Pharaoh, and his Taskmasters A very unlikely time to
learn Artificial Singing in Or, their Murmuring at Pihahiroth, when they we^^
in Fear of being cut off by Ph^raoh, and said unto Moses, Exodus 14.11.
Because there were no Graves in Egyp^ have thou taken us away to die in the
Wilderness Or, the little Time after for Learning it betwee^ Pihahiroth, and
the other side the Red Sea.

3. There is as little Probability they should a^^ be naturally qualified for
Harmonious Vocal Singing. For Experience tells us, though there is a nat^tural
Aptitude in some to it, yet others are wholl^ inept thereunto, and can never
attain to it all the^^ Days.

Secondly, Nothing can be gathered certainly from this Text, to prove that
Moses or the Children (...) Israel Sang vocally together at this precise Time
as is conceived they did. For the Hebrew Wor^ (...), Jashir, translated Sang i^
the Perfect Tense, is a Vatab. and Grot. in Syn. Crit.
F^ture in Hiphil: And therefore Lex. Heb. Lat. p. 197.
Leusden renders (...), Jashir^ They shall sing, in the Future, and not in the
Perfect Tense; as it is also rendered, Psalm. 65.14* Heb. and 138.5. So that the
true Reading according to the Original, is, [Then shall Mo^^s Sing,] and not [
Then Sang Moses.] And ^^uly it puts me at a Stand to consider, that the ^^me
Verb, and of the same Future, should be either ^^e Future or Preterperfect
Tense, as Translators ^^ease. For they have here rendered (...), Jashir, ^^ng,
and (...), Ashira, I will Sing. The one in ^^e Future, and the other in the
Preterperfect Tense, ^^d yet both Futures in Hiphil.

But in Answer to this, Crit. Sacr.
^^me tell us from Abenezra, ^^at the Particle (...), Az, joined with a Verb of
^^e Future Tense, has in the Arabic Tongue ^peculiar Property: Namely, to
convert it is Sig^^fication into the Preterperfect, which the Hebrews ^^so
sometimes observe, as in Deuteronomy. 4.41. Jos. ^.12.

To which I reply, I see no absolute Necessity of ^^ceding from the Future
Signification in those Pla^^s; and besides, the last is so rendered by Pagnine.
have also taken Notice, that in other Places, where ^^at Particle is joined
with a Verb of the Future ^ense, as Psalm. 2.5. and 51.21. Heb. the Verb is
^^anslated in the Future. But,

Thirdly, Should the common Reading be allowed, Then Sang Moses and the
Children of Israel,] yet (...) will not follow, that they all Sang Vocally
to^^ther, any more than that The three Thousand, Acts (...) 42. or The five
Thousand, Acts 4.24, 31. Prayed ^^cally together. It Is said of the Three
Thousand, ^^at They continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine, ^^d
Fellowship, and in breaking of Bread and in Pray^^; and of the other, that They
lifted up their Voice (...) God with one Accord. And yet surely there was no
^^njunction of External Voices in these Solemn Acts, ^^ey did not all Pray
Vocally at once; but an Unity of ^eart and Spirit in the whole, One whereof
pray^^ Audibly, and the Rest kept Silence the while. So in this Eucharistical
Song of Moses, it is most probable, that Moses Sang alone with the Outward
Voice, and the other were silent; but joined with him in Spirit, and so might
as properly be said to Sing with Moses; as the vast Multitude of Believers in
the Acts are said to Pray together, when one Person performed that Office
Audibly in the Congregation. And I am the more confirmed in this Opinion,
because there are some things in this Song, that seem peculiar to Moses as a
Prophet, as v. 14, -- 17. and others, which I cannot conceive, could be truly
spoken by every Individual in that Numerous Assembly: For there were many
Murmurers among them, as appears Chap. 14. 10, 11, 12. and 16. 2, 3. Persons of
an unbelieving Heart; and how incongruous is it then, to apply unto such the
Personal Experiences and Living Sensible Evidences of so Eminent a Believer as
Moses was? How could an Unbeliever say, The Lord is my Strength and Song, and
he is become my Salvation, he is my God, and I will prepare him an Habitation;
my Fathers God, and I will exalt him; v. 2. But,

Sect. 8. R. A. proceeds to obviate an Objection which he foresaw would be made
against his Argument, drawn from Exodus 15.1. his Words ar^ these, Nor will it
follow from this Argument (as may be objected) that praising God b^ Musical
Instruments is also a Moral Duty, seein^ they are also mentioned in the same
Chapter v. 20. For this does not appear as Singing doe^ to be the practice of
the Church as such. Essay p. 10, 11.

Answ. Whether he intends by Singing, that, tha^ which is performed by
Plurality of External Voices or by one single Voice, is a Moral Duty; forasmuch
a Musical Instruments are coetaneous with Vocal Singing; i. e. of the same Date
and Original, it (...) necessary for R. A. to produce a Word of Institution,
before the Giving of the Law at Mount Sinai, to prove Praising of God by
Musical Instruments to be a mere Positive Duty, which he has not yet done; or
it will unavoidably follow, that Praising of God by Instrumental Music is as
much a Moral Duty, as by Vocal. The Reason is obvious, for both take Date and
Commence together, and there is not the least Intimation given at their
Commencement, that the one is Moral, and the other is Ceremonial; or, that the
one was the Practice of the Church, as such, in those Days, and not the other.
But seeing he refers to speak more fully of this Subject in his last Chapter,
we shall wave the further Prosecution till he comes thither.

Only, because he says, Whatsoever was practiced in the Church of God, and
approved by him, before the giving of the Law at Mount Sinai, and never
afterward declared to be Typical, is a Moral Duty. I would desire him to tell
me, where the Praising of God with Musical Instruments, used Exodus 15.20. by
Miriam and the Women, was ever afterward declared to be Typical? Every Type he
knows must have it is Antitype, and that not such an Idea, as we give an
Existence to in our own Imaginations; but it ought to stand clear upon Record
in the Holy Scriptures, as in the Case of Circumcision, the Paschal Lamb,
Brazen Serpent, Tabernacle, Temple, Mercy-Seat, Levitical Priesthood, Altar and
Sacrifices, or else it is no Type properly. Now if the Praising of God by
Musical Instruments has no Antitype declared in the Scriptures, as it has
not; then it is not Typical, but according to his Conclusion it must be Moral;
and if so, then it is a Duty of equal Obligation with his Vocal Singing, and the
Omission of it a Sin of Ignorance or Voluntary Neglect. This Inference, though it
be the plain Consequence of his Assertion, yet I disclaim all Interest in it,
so as to be any Part of my Opinion.

In this Assertion he intimates, That there are no Duties of a Middle Nature,
between Moral and Typical; but I think there are some Duties incumbent upon us,
which are not at all Typical, and yet somewhat more than merely Moral. He says,
Moral Duties of Religion were originally written in the Heart of Man by Nature:
These now are Duties of Religion, To love our Enemies, to bless them that curse
us, to do good to them that hate us, and pray for them which despitefully use
us and persecute us, Mat. 5.44. and have nothing at all Typical in them,
neither are they merely Moral; for no Man finds them in his Heart by Nature:
But they are such Duties, which have undoubtedly something in them, that soars
above the Sphere of mere Morality.

To give him another Instance; the Special Graces of the Holy Spirit, as Faith,
Hope and Charity, called, also Duties; though they contain Morality in them, and
are conversant about it; yet are they not merely Moral, according to R. A's.
Sense of the Word; or Typical, but wholly of Supernatural Extraction.

Again, Because He is so positive, that no Exception can be made against this
Assertion, viz. That whatsoever was practiced in the Church of God, approved of
him, before the Giving of the Law at Mount- Sinai, and never afterward declared
to be Typical, is a Moral Duty. I demand, what he thinks about the Admission of
Infants into Church Membership? for that was practiced in the Church of God,
and approved by him, before the Giving of the Law at Mount Sinai, and never
afterward declared (that I read of) to be Typical. If his Position be
unexceptionably true, then 'twill follow, that the Admission of Infants into
Church-Mem^^rship was a Moral Duty; and if so, then it ought (...) be practiced
now; and consequent^^ both he, and the five Jos. Masters, William Collins,
Joseph Stennett, John Piggott, Tho. Harrison.
Brethren who subscribed two Commendatory ^^^faces; One to his Essay, and
Ano^^er to his Vindication and Appendix) ^^ve given away the Cause of
An^adobaptism, (which has been, and is so strenu^^sly contended for) and put
an Unanswerable Ar^^ment into the Hands of those, who argue for the ^^ght of
Infants to Water Baptism, and Visible ^hurch-Membership in Gospel-days.

And here I cannot but think it both necessary and ^^asonable, to remark
briefly upon ^^^s Notion of the Essay, p. 8, 14, 40.
Universal ^^d Immutable Obligation of a Mo^^ Duty, without making any
Exception, 'till he ^^mes to page 106. (where he tells us of the Old
^^stinction, between the Obligation of Affirmative ^^d Negative Precepts of the
Moral Law; In that (...) latter not only bind always, but also to all times;
^^^reas the Former, though they bind always, yet not to (...) Times.) "But if God
can alter the Law of Nature, and disanul the Obligation, by taking away the
Matter of the Law; or the Necessity, or the Reasonableness, or the Obligation,
(and all this he can do, ^^th Duct. Dubit. l. 2. c. 1. r. 1. n. 49. p. 181.
Jer. Tailor, one Way ^or other) then the Duty a^^ng from the Law can oblige
(...) longer, than the Law it self obliges. For the ^^w of Nature has in
several Instances, respect to ^^rticular States, and so becomes in those
Instances, changeable, as the States themselves. Whereupon the * Casuist before
cited, Ibid.
^^ndemns Grotius of an Unwary Expres^^^, in saying, that God cannot change the
Law of Nature: For as Paul said of the Priesthood, being changed, there must of
necessity be a change of the Law: So it is in the Law of Nature; Matter of it
being changed, there must of Nece^ty also be a Change of the Law.

This may seem New, and indeed is Unus^ in the manner of speaking, but the Case
is E^dent and Empirically certain: For when ^ commanded Abraham to kill his
Son; the Israe^ to rob the Egyptians, and to run away with the Goods, he gave
them a Command to break Instance of the Natural Law, and he made necessary that
Cain should marry with his Sist^ and all those Laws of Nature, which did s^pose
Liberty and Indistinction of Possessions, ^ wholly altered, when Dominion and
Servitu^ and Propriety came into the World. Tay^ Ibid. n. 48.

Of the same Mind is Tho^ Aquinas, who Sum. Theol. 12 ae. q. 94. Art. 5.
says, T^ Law of Nature may be ch^ged two Ways.

1. By Adding something to it, profitable Humane Life, which it did not
primarily ^quire.

2. By Substracting from it, in some particular ^stances, whereby the
Obligation cease, as to the Instances, for certain special Reasons imped^ the
Observation.

Sect. 9. His Fourth Consideration, whereby endeavors to prove Singing the
Praises of ^ a Moral Duty, is,

Whatsoever is enjoined upon all Men, of Nations, is a Moral Duty. Essay, p. 11.

Answ. This Position being laid down, with any Limitation or Exception, I deny
for the two Reasons:

1. Because there are some Duties of Universal ^unction upon Mankind, which I
have Chap. 1. Sect. 8. p. 32.
shown before, are of a ^ddle Nature between Moral ^d Typical: One Instance is,
about Loving our ^mies, Blessing them that curse us, etc. which are Typical,
for they have no Antitype, nor meer-Positive, for they are Intrinsically good:
Nor ^^ly, merely Moral; for though they contain that ^ch is Moral in them, yet
they are not written Men's Hearts by Nature; for Depraved Nature ^holly bent the
contrary way; Men naturally ^cluding it highly reasonable, To repel Force by
^ce, and to take Revenge upon their Enemies.

^. Because there are some other Duties, which acknowledges to be merely
Positive; and yet, ^ppose, he thinks they are enjoined upon all ^, of all
Nations: For though he is pleased to ask Question, "Where do we ever find
Circumcision, ^ any other mere Positive and Ceremonial Duty ^us enjoined? He
might have answered it him^ if he had not Industriously or Inadvertently ^ted
it. For though Circum^n was a Genesis 17.10, 11, 12, 13. Exodus 12.48.
Limited, and ^emporary Rite; yet I con^e he has other Thoughts ^hese two
Positive Duties, Acts 15.10, 24. Gal. 5.2.
^ Baptism and the Lord's Supper; Essay, p. 6. if he believes them to be
Ordinances remain^d Force, he cannot tell how to avoid the Uni^ity of their
Injunction.

^aving given my Reasons for denying his Posi^ I proceed now to an Examination
of Psalm. ^. 100.1, 2. and 47.7. Texts cited by him, love, "That Singing the
Praises of God is joined upon all Men, of all Nations. All ^th are so clearly
and fully spoken to by Russel, in his Brief Animadversions upon R. A's. Essay,
p. 35, 36, 37. that R. A. seeming to be a Loss for a solid Reply, charges the
Learned A^madverter, with an Endeavo Brief Vindication, p. 23.
to evade the Force of t^ Texts alleged, by restra^ing those general
Expressio^ to the Israelites only; and then leaves the Is^ to the Judgment of
the Indifferent Reader.

And I must confess, that W. R's. Exposition those Texts, has given me so much
Satisfacti^ that had I seen it before my own thoughts w^ digested into an
Answer, I should have superse^ much of the following Meditations.

1. The first Text R. A. brings for his purpo^ is, Psalm. 98.4. Make a joyful
Noise unto the Lo^ all the Earth; make a loud noise, and rejoice, and ^ praise.

Answ. If by (...), Col-Haaretz, All ^ Earth, we are to understand, All Men of
all ^tions, and that Indefinitely; I do not see

1. How this Interpretation can consist with Practice of the Jewish Church; for
we find ^ David appointed a particular Number and O^ of Men for Song in the
House of the Lord. ^ having computed the Number of the Levites, (f^ the Age of
thirty years and upward) which mounted to thirty and eight thousand; of the
Twenty and four Thousand were to set forward Work of the House of the Lord, and
six thousand ^ Officers and Judges. Moreover, four thousand were ^ters, and
four thousand praised the Lord with the ^struments, which I made (says David)
to p^ therewith, 1 Chronicles. 23.4, 5. and it does not pear, that either he
himself, or any else, but t^ who were particularly appointed thereunto, ^
Vocally or Instrumentally, in the Public Asbly.

2. If this Phrase, All the Earth, intend, All ^ of all Nations, indefinitely,
then the Wicked are the Subjects of Divine Praises, as well as the Godly; but
this is inconsistent with the Nature of God, and the Duty to be performed to
him: He is an Holy God, and the Duty an Holy Duty, and therefore a Wicked Man
or Woman cannot perform ^t aright.

In Psalm. 149. we read, that The praise of God is ^n the Congregation of
Saints, v 1. that The Children ^f Zion are the proper Subjects of Praise, v. 2,
3. that The Lord takes pleasure in his people, v. 4. And ^s high praises are
in their Mouths, v. 6. and in Psalm. ^3. the Righteous are exhorted, to Rejoice
in the Lord, for praise is comely for the upright, v. 1. and ^hey Offer up
spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable to God by jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2.5. For the
Eyes of the Lord ^re over the righteous, and his Ears are open to their
^rayers, 3.12. But the Case is otherwise with the ^ngodly, for being Enemies by
wicked Works, Col. ^.21. and Dead in their Trespasses and Sins, and ^ Nature
Children of Wrath, Ephesians. 2.1, 3. How can ^ch as these be said to celebrate the
Praises of ^od, who live a Life of Alienation from him? and whose Sacrifices
are so far from Acceptance, ^at God declares they are, An Abomination to ^im,
Prove. 15.8. Their Praises he rejects as Dung, and looks upon their most
seemingly Solemn Servi^es, as the Cutting off a Dogs Neck, the Offering of
^ines-Blood, and the Blessing of an Idol, Isa. 66.3. ^or unto the Wicked God
says, what have thou to do ^ declare my Statutes, or that thou should take
my ^ovenant into thy Mouth? Seeing thou hate Instru^ion, and castest my Words
behind thee, Psalm. 50.^6, 17. Peter says, The Face ^ or Knatchbul's Animad.
verse. in Acts 3.18, 19, 20, 21.
Anger) of the Lord, as ^e Word sometimes signifies, ^ against them that do
evil, 1 Ep. ^.3. ver, 12. But if we are to understand by All the Earth, the
Good or Righteous only, who are Go^ Royal Priesthood, to offer up Spiritual
Sacrifices him acceptable by Jesus Christ; then the force of A's. Position will
be utterly enervated, unless a Pa^ be equal to the Whole, and of the same
Latitu^^ and Extent. It Is impossible that that should enjoined upon all Men, of
all Nations, which y^ is enjoined but upon some; and those only, w^ are
specially moved thereunto by the Holy Spir^^ according to the Order set down by
the Apost^^^ 1 Cor. 14.

And then for Singing with the Outward Voi^ this Text ( Psalm. 98.4.) does no
more enjoin upon all Men, of all Nations, then it does Instr^mental Music,
such as the Harp, Trumpets, a Cornet, which are mentioned in the 5th. and 6th.
v^^ses following: For the Phrase, All the Earth, expr^^sed in the 4th. verse,
is not confined to that, b^ has a necessary Connection with, and Relation to t^
two immediately subsequent Verses also. And I should leave this Text, but that
it may be nee^ful to remind R. A. that (...), Vezammeru, re^dred, Sing Praise,
is translat^ by the Septuagint, (...), and Hierom, Tremellius and Juni^
Psallite; which word (...) est proprie Fidibus canere, Crit. Sacr. in Jac. 5.13.
Grot^ says, properly signifies Fidi^ canere, i. e. To play upon t^ Harp or
Lute, as Thesau. Ling. Romans and Brit.

(...), proprie leviter chordas and nervum tango, sive arcus intendendi causa,
sive sonus Mufici excitandi. Josua Barnes in Euripidis Jon. v. 173.

(...), manu arcuum pulsant nervos. Euripidis Bacchae, v. 782, 783.


Cooper e^pounds the Phrase out of Qui^tilian. And Calep. in verbo Psallo.
Budaeus interpr^ that of Gellius, Et Qui ps^lerent, by Citharam pulsare^ They
played upon the Harp. (...) are Horace, 2 Epist. 1. and C^cero in Catil. taken
by Ibid.
C^lepine to understand Psallimus a^ Psallere. The primary Sig^^fication then
of the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin Word, is such a Singing as is performed by the
Harp, Lute, or some such Musical Instrument; and ^hen it is used to Sing with
the Voice, then it must be understood secondarily, and improperly; for the
proper Meaning of it is, to play upon a Musical Instrument, as before is
declared. So that whether we consider the Extent of the Injunction, ( Psalm.
98.4.) or the primary and proper Signifi^ation of the Word, I cannot see any
Advantage ^ccruing to the Opinion endeavored to be supported from thence.

2. The next Place is Psalm. 100.1, 2. Make a ^oyful Noise unto the Lord, all ye
Lands, serve the Lord with gladness, come before his Presence with sing^^g;
(...), Col-Haaretz, All ye Lands, or, All ^he Earth, has been spoken to
before. Make joyful Noise, Heb. (...), Hariu, is rendered by Hierom, Jubilate;
by Tremellius and Junius, Clan^ite, Sound a Trumpet, alluding to the Custom ^f
the Priests on the Day of Jubilee, who then ^ounded Trumpets or Ramshorns. But
this not ^eing the Word he insists upon, let us see what (...), Birnanah,
translated with Singing will do. The Septuagint have (...), Hierom in
Ex^ratione, Montanus in Ovatione, in Exultation and Triumph, which does not
necessarily imply sing^g; because we may rejoice in, or before the Lord,
without a Musical Voice. The Root is (...), Ranan, and in Piel (...), Rinnen,
He cried aloud; in which Sense the Substantive is used in Psalm. 17.1. 8.2.
106.44. 119.169. and 142.6. and rendered ^ry by our Translators. In 1 Kings
22.36. It is ^ranslated Proclamation, (...), Vaijaabor Harinna, and transivit
Clamor, (says Lenic. Heb.
Buxtorf) and there went a Proclamation, according to our Bibles, Therefore
though it is applied to Vocal Singing, yet that is by a Metonymy; the most proper
Si^nification being to Cry aloud, which may be do without Melodious Tuning of
the Voice.

3. His Third and last Text, and on which seems to lay the greatest Stress, is
Psalm 47.7. when from this General Reason, that God is the King all the Earth,
(and not of Judea only) he say it is required that every one that has
Unde^standing should sing Praises to him, Page 1* But this Text will do him no
more Service the the former, for here the Word is (...), Zamm^ru again; (...),
Septuagint Psallite, Hierom, T^mellius and Junius, Play upon the Harp or Lut^
and not primarily to sing with the Voice, as ha been already manifested. But if
we should grant, the Singing with the Voice is here intended, against whi^^
there is a stronger Probability than for it, yet t^^ general Reason alleged,
can possibly infer no mo than an Injunction upon some, Namely, the Saints; f^
the Wicked neither can, nor have they (remaini^ such) any thing to do to Speak
or Sing the Prais^ of God, as Acts of Spiritual Worship; for t^^ Children of
Zion, as was said before, are the prop^ Subjects of Divine Praises. Yea, the
general Reason that God is the King of all the Earth, as has an Aspect upon
Gospel days, where the who Worship of God is to be resolved into the in^
mediate Authority of Christ, must be interpret^^ by and regulated according to
that Authority. An^ how, and with what Ceremonies soever Singin^ was performed
under the Old-Testament-Dispenstion, when many Carnal Ordinances were in u^till
the Times of Reformation; yet now we a^ to eye, both in the Discharge of that
and all oth^ parts of Worship, the Sovereign Appointment an^ Direction of Jesus
Christ. But more of this who we come to R. A's. New Testament Proofs for Common
Singing, which shall be spoken to as the ye in the way.

Sect. 10. His Fifth Consideration, to prove Singing the Praises of God a Moral
Duty, is,

Whatever is preferred before the most Excellent Parts of Ceremonial Worship,
as more pleasing to God, is a Moral Duty. Thus to know God, and to love him
above all; to love our Neighbor as our selves; to do Justice and Judgment, to
be merciful to the miserable: These Duties are preferred before the most Prove.
21.3. Mar. 12.33. Hos. 6.6.
Excellent Sacrifices, which were the chief Parts of the Ceremonial Worship.
And why? But because the former are Moral Duties, and good in themselves,
whereas the latter were only Positive Duties, and good because commanded. And
that singing to the Praise of God is a Duty of the same Nature with the former
of these, I conclude, because it is, like the, preferred before the most
Excellent Sacrifices, as being more pleasing to God. Thus the Psalm. 69.30, 31.
Psalmist tells us, That to Sing to the Praise of God, or (which is the same)
to Praise him with a Song, is more pleasing to him than (to Sacrifice) an Ox or
a Bullock. Essay, p. 12, 13.

Answ. In this Paragraph we are told,

1. That whatever is preferred before the most Excellent Parts of Ceremonial
Worship, as more pleasing to God, is a Moral Duty.

2. The Reason, why Moral Duties are thus preferred, as more pleasing to God;
because they are good in themselves.

3. That Singing to the Praise of God is such a Moral Duty, and so preferred as
more pleasing to God.

The First is not universally true, because there are some Duties which are
preferred before the chiefest Parts of Ceremonial Worship, as more pleasing to
God, and yet are not Moral in R. A's. Sense, i. e. Moral by Nature. There are
some Heroical Acts of Charity, (says Taylor's Ductor Dubit. l. 2. c. 2. r. 6.
n. 77. p. 283.
one) commanded by Christ, the Observation of which, though it be not Moral, or
of prime Natural Necessity; yet because they are commanded by Christ, whose Law
is to oblige us as long as the Sun and Moon endure; to us Christians, and to
all to whom the Notice of them does arrive; it is all one in respect of our
Duty, and has no real difference in the Event of things.

Secondly, I cannot approve of the Reason R. A. gives, for the Preference of
Moral Duties, to the most Excellent Parts of Ceremonial Worship, and as being
more pleasing to God, viz. because they are good in themselves; for then their
Intrinsic Goodness will be the Formal Reason of their Acceptance with God,
which cannot but sound harsh in the Ears of Humble Believers, who look upon
their best Duties, in and of themselves, to have no such Goodness or
Worthiness, as to recommend them to the Divine Acceptance. For both we and our
Duties are accepted, in and for Christ alone, and upon no other Account
whatsoever: First our Persons, and then our Performances; but not as done in
our own Strength, or as having a Natural or Moral Bonity in them, to render
them more pleasing unto God; but as issuing from, and wrought by the Spirit of
Christ in us, who alone makes them acceptable.

If Moral Duties, because of their Intrinsic Goodness, are more pleasing than
those that are positive, then that Intrinsic Goodness is some way or other
Meritorious; either in respect of Co-meetness or Co-worthiness; for else why
should God be more pleased with them than with the other? but because he sees
in them something that is more suitable to, and worthy of himself than in the
other. Which if admitted, would make the Acceptance of Moral Duties depend upon
Duties, and not upon Christ. The Texts cited in the Margent, Prove. 21.33. Mar.
12.33. Hos. 6.6. are not so much to his purpose, as they seem to be. For though
Justice and Judgment, and the loving of God above all, and our Neighbor as our
selves, and being merciful to the miserable, are more pleasing to God than all
Sacrifices and Burnt-Offerings; as Samuel told Saul, To obey is better than
Sacrifice, and to he arken than the fat of Rams, 1 Samuel 15.22. yet these Duties
do not recommend themselves to God by their own Intrinsic Goodness, and so
become more pleasing to him than Sacrifices; but it is the Goodness of God through
Faith in Jesus Christ, who by his Spirit alone, enable; us to perform, that
which is well-pleasing in his Sight.

To the Third, That Singing to the Praise of God is such a Moral Duty, and
preferred before the most Excellent Sacrifices, as more pleasing to God.

I Answer, It is one thing to Praise God, and another to praise him with a
Song: And though Praising of God and Singing are joined together in Psalm. 69.30.
yet the Preference mentioned v. 31. does not respect Singing as a Moral Duty,
but Praise and Thanksgiving (whereof Singing either with the Voice or
Instruments, then in use, was only a Modal Concomitant) as will appear by
considering the Text impartially, and comparing it with other Places: The Words
are these, I will praise the Name of God with a Song, and will magnify him
with Thanksgiving: This also shall please the Lord better than an Ox or
Bullock, that has horns and hoofs. The Antecedent here to this, (which is a
Supplement, for it is not expressed in the Hebrew Text) is And so Trem. and
Junius understand it, who thus render the Words, Laudabo nomen Del cantico, and
magnificabo eum gratiarum action, quae melior videbitur, etc.
Thansgiving: For Singing is not of the Essence of Praise, for Praise may be
performed acceptably without it. And therefore Singing is omitted, Psalm. 50.14.
Offer unto God Thanksgiving, (...), Todah, without any Musical Mixtures or
Additions: By which Omission it appears, Songs, as such, were of no better
Account with God than Sacrifices or Burnt-Offerings, which are there mentioned,
as things he little regarded of themselves, though he had commanded them, and
required the Performance of them. And in Amos 5.22, 23. God tells Israel by his
Prophet, that he not only disregards their Offerings, but also bids them take
away from him, the Noise of their Songs. Where the Word is (...), Shirecha,
from (...), Shur, the same Root, from whence (...), Beshir, with a Song, Psalm.
69.30. is derived.

So that from the whole, I think we may reasonably infer this Conclusion, viz.
That forasmuch as the Hebrew Word is the same in both places, and Songs are
rankt in the same Class with Sacrifices, the chief Parts of Ceremonial Worship;
Songs have no more of that which R. A. calls Moral in them, that is, Moral by
Nature, (for so he is to be understood, if he be Essay, p. 7.
consistent with himself) than the Jewish Sacrifices had.

And though this Interpretation differ from that given by W. R. yet I cannot but
think his Brief Animadv. p. 39, 40.
Exposition worthy of our Serious Consideration. It Is charged by R. A. with
Brief Vindicat. p. 23, 24.
Novelty, as being an Exposition not to be met with among the Learned Pool's
Collections, viz. that it is not Praising the Name of God with a Song, etc.
which the Psalmist prefers to Sacrifices, but the Sacrifice of Christ. And with
a Solecism, in making the Hebrew Word for (...),
Sacrifice, which is of the Masculine Gender, to agree with the (...), Br.
Vindicat. p. 24. Marg.
Verb here used of the Feminine Gender.

As to the first Part of the Charge, if the Exposition be new, yet the Reply is
no Solid Refutation of it; for what if it is not to be met with in Synopsis
Criticorum? Is that Author the only standard to interpret Scripture by? The
Sole Test of a true or false Exposition? His Collections I own are Learned and
Elaborate, but as all is not Gold that is there, for he recites many strange
Opinions of Commentators; so all is not to be rejected as Dross, which is not
contained in those Volumes: Whatsoever Interpretation of Scripture is agreeable
to the Scope of the Place, and conform to the Analogy of Faith, I think, stands
upon Equal Ground with any Exposition in the Synopsis.

And as to the Solecism, that is easily answered; for W. R. uses no Hebrew Word
in all his Exposition of Psalm 69.30, 31. and therefore cannot be guilty of the
false Concord laid to his Charge: But give me leave to put R. A. in
remembrance, that though (...), Zebach, Sacrifice, be of the Masculine Gender,
yet (...), Zibcha, is of the Feminine, which signifies the same, Hosea 4.19.
and would very well accord with (...), Vethitab, This also shall please, a Verb
of the Feminine Gender; were not good English industriously turned into bad
Hebrew. After which Rate, the Vindicator may make his Opponent write Solecisms
when he pleases.

Another Passage wherein R. A. is pleased to Criticize upon W. R. is in Brief
Vindication, p. 10. Nor will his Raileries the more affect any, because written
by a Mand-Doctor in Physic of the Famous University of Cambridge, or (as he
elsewhere expresses it in his own peculiar Latin) by William Russel, Medicinae
Doctor Academiae Cantabrigiensis.

Answ. First, Methinks R. A. speaks too diminutively both of the Doctor, and of
the University; for the Dr. must be acknowledged to be a Scholar, and the
University Famous for Humane Literature: And therefore R. A. had done well to
have omitted these Expressions, viz. A Mand-Doctor in Physic, Vindicat. p. 10.
The Cambrige-Doctor, p. 45. Her Doctor, p. 17. This Master of Sense and
Grammar, p. 28. Famous University of Cambridge, p. 10, 17, 34, 48. Our Authors
own University, p. 20. and his Famous University, p. 24, 26. For being no
University-Man himself, his often Repetition of those Epithets, and especially
if the Mode of Expressing himself be observed, plainly intimates Diminution or
Contempt.

Secondly, Medicinae Doctor Academiae Cantabrigiensis, is not prefixed to the
Book R. A. pretends to Answer; and therefore, though it was a Slip of the Pen in
another Treatise, yet to me it seems to be inopportunely remembered here.
However, an Enallage Casus, Academiae Cantabrigiensis, for Ex Academia
Cantabrigiensi, will easily mend it, and make it really, what he Ironically
terms it, peculiar Latin. But since R. A. has taken upon him the Office of
Censor, if he has Leisure to examine Latin Authors, he may These are his own
Words, Br. Vindicat. p. 32.
Find abundant Matter to exercise his Criticizing Faculty upon. And that I may
invite Ibid. p. 26.
this Learned Critic to his pretty way of Criticizing, I shall here present
him with a Few Instances out of some of the chief of them.

Justitiaene prius mirer, belline laborum? Virg. Aeneid. l. 11. v. 126. --
Define mollium Tandem querelarum. Hor. Car. l. 2. Od. 9. Et qua pauper aquae
Daunus, agrestium Regnavit populorum. Hor. ibid. l. 3. Od. 30. O Tandem
placidus favensque Desine irarum. Buchan. Psalm. 90. v. 13. Vos O Patricius
Sanguis, Pers. Sat. 1. v. 61. Omnium triumphorum lauream adepte majorem, Plin.
l. 7. c. 29. Multis sibi quisque imperium petentibus. Sallust. in Ascham's
Schoolmaster, p. 66.
Where it is utterly unaccountable, that the Nom. Quisque should be put without
any Verb, among so many Oblique Cases. And yet I observe, the same things are
marked for Barbarisms in one Author, that pass for Elegancys in Another.

It Is no strange thing for a Learned Man to be at a Loss, even about a trivial
Point of Grammar: A Remarkable Instance hereof we have in Ad Attic. l. 7. Ep.
3. in Ascham ubi supra.
Cicero himself, who at sixty Years of Age wrote to his Friend Atticus, to
resolve him, whether he should write ad Piraeea, in Piraea, or in Piraeem, or
Piraeeum sine Praepositione; adding, that the Resolution of this Question would
free him from a great Perplexity his Mind was then under.

The Insertion of this Defense, I hope will offend none, No, not R. A. himself;
for as I would not by any means undervalue his Learning, though it were but of
yesterdays Acquiring; so his apparent Attempt to diminish the Doctor's, which I
conceive is no way inferior to his, shall be my Apology for this Vindication.

Sect. 11. Having fairly Examined R. A's. Explication of this Thesis, viz. That
Singing the Praises of God is not a mere Positive Duty, but a Moral One, and
consequently the Duty of all Men; and also his Five Considerations, whereby he
endeavors to prove the said Thesis, and shown wherein he has failed: I come
now according to my Promise, p. 7. to give my Reasons for denying, that Singing
the praises of God is a Moral Duty, i. e. Moral by Nature. And therefore the
Reader is to be reminded, that when I say, p. 15. I do not deny it to be a
Moral Duty, to Praise God with all the Faculties of Soul, and Members of the
Body. That I may not be thought to Interfere with my self, I understand there
by Moral, not that which is written in the Heart of Man by Nature, but that
Inscription promised Jer. 31.33.

My Reasons are summed up in the following Arguments.

Arg. 1. Moral Duties of Religion (says Essay, p. 7.
R. A.) are written in the Heart of Man by Nature.

But Singing the Praises of God is not written in the Heart of Man by Nature;
therefore,

Singing the Praises of God is not a Moral Duty.

The Major is his own, and the Minor I prove thus,

If Man's Natural Condition in the Fall, is, as the Holy Scriptures declare,
Acts 26.18. Ephesians. 5.8. Col. 1.13. 1 These 5.5.
Darkness, and he is Baptists Confess. of Faith Chap. 6. Sect. 2, 4.
dead in Sin, and wholly defiled in all the Faculties and Parts of Soul and
Body; and utterly indisposed, disabled, and made opposite to all Good* and
wholly inclined to all Evil: Then Singing the Praises of God is not written in
the Heart of Man by Nature.

But Man's Natural Condition in the Fall, is as the Holy Scriptures declare,
Darkness, etc. therefor,

Singing the Praises of God, is not written in the Heart of Man by Nature.

The Sequel of the Major is plain; for an ^ct proper to one Spiritually
Quickened and Illu^inated, and Extraordinarily Influenced, cannot ^e performed
by One Dead, Dark, and without ^ch Extraordinary Influence. Now Singing the
^raises of God, considered as a Part of God's own Worship, is such an Act; and
therefore if Man's ^atural Condition in the Fall be such, as is before
^escribed, Singing the Praises of God is not writ^en in his Heart by Nature.

If the Minor be denied, not only the Texts and ^onfession of Faith cited in
the Margin, but the ^hole Current of Holy Scripture will abundantly ^rove it.

Arg. 2. "That is the Duty (says Essay, p. 9.
R. A.) of Reasonable Creatures, as such, and consequently a Moral Duty, which
the Heavenly Angels performed to God, at the Discovery of his Glorious
Perfections in the Creation;

But the Heavenly Angels Sang not, at the Dis^very of God's Glorious
Perfections in the Crea^on: Therefore,

Singing is not the Duty of Reasonable Crea^res, as such, and consequently not
a Moral Duty. The Substance of the Major is his own, and the ^inor is clearly
proved, Job 38.7. where it is ex^esly said, The Sons of God, or Heavenly Angels,
^outed (not Sang) for Joy. But of this see more ^om p. 16, to 23. in Chap. 1.
Sect. 4. of this Reply.

Arg. 3. That is a Moral Duty, (says Essay, p. 11.
R. A.) which is enjoined upon all Men of all Nations;

But Singing the Praises of God is not injoin'^ upon all Men of all Nations:
Therefore,

Singing the Praises of God is not a Moral Duty

The Major is again his own, and the Minor i^ proved by this Argument:

Whatsoever is morally impossible for all Men (...) all Nations, is not
enjoined upon all Men of a^^ Nations;

But Singing the Praises of God is morally impossible for all Men of all
Nations:

Therefore Singing the Praises of God is not enjoined upon all Men of all
Nations.

The Major is (...), self-evident; for Go^ does not require Duty, where he does
not giv^ Ability. To whom he gives, from them he expects Performance.

The Minor I prove thus,

If all Men of all Nations have not a Faculty t^ Sing, then Singing the Praises
of God is moral impossible for all Men of all Nations;

But all Men of all Nations have not a Facult^ to Sing: Therefore, etc.

I know of no Exception against the Consequen^^ of the Major, and for the Proof
of the Minor, refer the Enquirer to p. 15. of this Reply.

Arg. 4. Whatsoever is ranked in the same Cla^ with, and no more accounted of
by God himself than Sacrifices, the chief Parts of Ceremoni^^ Worship, is no
Moral Duty;

But Songs are so ranked, etc. Amos 5.22, 2^ and therefore are not Moral Duties.

Arg. 5. Whatsoever is founded upon Prime Reason, such as appears so to all
Discerning Person is a Moral Duty;

But Singing the Praises of God is not founde^ upon Prime Reason, such as
appears so to all discerning Persons: Therefore,

Singing the Praises of God is not a Moral Duty.

The Taylor's Duct. Dubit. l. 2. c. 2. r. 6. n. 67. p. 280.
Major I suppose R. A. will not deny, and the Minor is evident; for Singing the
Praises of God does not appear to many discerning Persons, to be founded upon
Prime Reason.

CHAP. II. Contains a Refutation of R. A's. Second Way of Proving, Singing of
Psalms the Duty of every Christian, viz. From the Example of Christ, with a
Reply to his Answer to the First Objection thereunto, which affirms, that the
Word Sung, is not in the Original Text.
THat which can be proved to be the Duty of all Men, must necessarily be the
Duty of every Christian; and therefore R. A. foreseeeing, what Advantage from
such ^oof, (if it could be had) would accrue to his ^ause, lays the Groundwork
of his Essay in the ^orality of Singing; which he conceives is so well ^^ed,
that no contrary Attempts can shake it. Hear ^ow assuredly he speaks in the
Close of his first ^^ction, not as One that has newly put on the ^^arness, but
obtained the Victory! From these Considerations (says he) laid together, I
dou^ not but it is clear (beyond all reasonable Exce^tion) that singing the
Praises of God is no le^ than a Moral Duty, and therefore the Duty ^ all Men,
and consequently of every Christian* But whether there be Cause for such a
Triu^phant Conclusion, I refer to the Arbitrament ^ the Impartial and
Judicious; and shall attend ^ further Proof, which he fetches from the Example
of Christ.

R. A. begins his Second Section thus, I sha^^ prove, that Singing to the
Praise of God, is t^ Duty of every Christian, from the Example ^ Christ. That
this was his Practice in Religion Worship, is recorded Mat. 26.30. Mar. 14.2^
Essay, p. 14.

Sect. 1. Answ. The Example Christ (says Dippers Dipped, p. 41.
Featley) or Apostles, without a Precept, d^ not necessarily bind the Church. ^
have but one Great Example, Ductor Dubit. l. 2. c. 2. r. 7. n. 33, 34, 35. p.
292.
(sai^ * Tailor) Jesus Christ; who liv^ in perfect Obedience to his Father, ^
also give us perfect Instruction, how we should do too, in our Proportion. --
In whatsoever he gave ^ Commandment, in that only we are bound to imit him. And
a little after, We are to look upon Ch^ as imitable, just as his Life was
measured by the La^ he gave us. But R. A. is of another Opinion, shall be seen
by and by. And as to what (he sait^ is recorded Mat. 26.30. Mar. 14.26. to have
be^ the Practice of Christ in Religious Worship, shall be spoken to, in my
Reply to his Answer the two Objections, made against his Argument Singing,
drawn from those Texts.

R. A. That every Christian is bound follow the Example of Christ, none can
doub^ except only in three kinds of Works, viz. his Miraculous Ones, which he
did by a special Exertion of his Divine Power, wherein we cannot imitate him:
Or else those that were peculiar to him, as Mediator, as to institute
Ordinances in his Church, to make reconciliation for sin, and other such like
Works, wherein we have neither Ability nor Authority to imitate him: Or,
Thirdly, Those which he did only, as a Member of the Jewish Church, as in being
circumcised, keeping the Passover, etc. wherein we ought not to imitate him,
Essay, p. 14, 15.

Answ. Under which of these three Exceptions will he bring Christ's Washing his
Disciples feet before his Supper, administering of it at Night, to ^welve Men
only, and no Women, and after another Meal? I suppose, he will grant that some
of these (if not all) were practiced by Christ in Religious Worship; and if
they were none of his Miraculous Works, nor Part of his Mediatory Office, nor
of those Acts which he did only as a Member of the Jewish Church, then
according to R. A. they are in Force now. For in all other Cases (says he) I
suppose it is, and must be universally granted, that the Example of our Savior
has the Force of a Precept to every Christian. Essay, p. 15. And if they are
in Force now, there is nothing, if he be faithful to his own Rule, can acquit
him of Sin, in neglecting the Observation of them, unless his Et caetera will
relieve him in this Case, which I conceive will fail him: For some of the
Instances before given, viz. Christ's administration of the Supper at Night,
and to twelve Men only, and no Women, and after another Meal, were Parts of the
New Celebration, and not of the Old Paschal Solemnity. Wherefore, I think he
has missed it, in saying, In all other Cases, but the three Exceptions, it
must be universally granted, that the Example of our Savior has the Force of
a Precept to every Christian. For here are some Examples of Christ (among
others) which fall not under either of thos^ Exceptions; and yet do not, as I
think, Bind ever^ Christian. Let this then be received as a standing Rul^ by
all Christians, That not the Example alone, but the Command of Christ
accompanying his Example, is that onl^ which obliges the Saints to Imitation
and Obedience.

R. A. And that our Savior's Singing Hymn with his Disciples, comes under
either o^ those three forementioned Exceptions, I can se^ no Reason to imagine:
And therefore thenc^ conclude, that it is the Duty of every Christian according
to his Example to sing, to the Prai^ of God.

Answ. But what falls not within the Sphere o^ his Imagination, ought not to be
the Rule of another Man's Thoughts, or a Bar to his Liberty For Thoughts are
free, (especially in Problem^tical Points, which are, as Augustine says,
Quaest^onum non Fidei, Matters of Controversy and not (...) Faith) and some
Men think truer and more reg^larly than others. He seems by his Sudden an^
Peremptory Conclusion, to be (methinks) some what Opinionative and Dogmatical;
for he cannon but know, by the Acquaintance he seems to have with Authors,
that many Learned Men are (...) Opinion, that the Hymn sung by our Savior
((...) he did Sing at all, which is hereafter to be enqu^red into) did
peculiarly belong to the Jewish Pa^sover. And therefore in a Disputable Case,
an^ where the Hinge of the Controversy mainly tur^ upon the Signification of a
Greek Word, as does here; the Modesty (...) Ep. 7.28.157. and Retract. l. 1. c.
1. de Genesis ad Lit. 10. and de Anima.
Augustine's Hesitation, touc^ing the Original of the Sou^ whether by Creation
or Traduc^^on, who would not conclu^ either way, had been more Eligible and
Imitable; than a Positive Determination, which too often occurs throughout the
whole Essay.

Having made his Conclusion from Christ's Example, (as he says) that it is the
Duty of every Christian to Sing to the Praise of God; though it is not certain
from the Greek Word (...), Hymnesantes, they Hymned; that either Christ himself
Sang alone, or with his Disciples; (or if he did Sing an Hymn, is it evident
from the Context, whether it belonged to the Jewish Passover, or was a New Hymn
suitable to the New Solemnity;) nor to be admitted, that the Example of our
Savior without his Command requiring our Obedience, has the Obligation of a
Precept upon us: R. A. proceeds to answer Objections raised against his
Deduction from Christ's Example.

I know there are two Objections made against this Argument, that require some
Answer.

1. It is affirmed, that the Word Sung in the Original Text.

2. That supposing our Savior did indeed Sing, yet it is presumed, that the
Hymn which he sang might appertain to the Jewish Passover; and so be no more
Obligatory upon Christians, from the Example of Christ, than the Passoever it
self.

Object. 1. It is affirmed, that the Word Sung is not in the Original, but
added by the Translators; and that consequently all that assert Singing from
these and the like Scriptures, Deceive others, and do very ill in Justifying
the Translators in Adding to the Word of God.

Answ. A bold Presumption indeed! for any, and especially such as know not a
Word of the Original Text, thus to arraign our Bibles: And such as (should it
be believed) would leave all English Readers in perplexing Doubts, when they
rea^ the Mind of God in their Bibles; and when, in stead thereof they read the
Additions of Men. An^ for any to Print or Publish against their own Teachers
and Brethren, such a heavy Charge as this is, o^ being Deceivers of others in
the Matters of God and Justifying Additions to his Word, every on^ surely must
needs look upon to be a very ras^ and unchristian Practice. Essay, p. 15, 16.

Sect. 2. Repl. His Answer to this Objection discovers some Disorder of Spirit,
contrary to thos^ Beautifying Graces of Charity, Meekness, and Mutual
Forbearance, recommended by him in his Introduction, p. 2. Such Language as
Bold Presumption, Heavy Charge, Very rash and unchristian Practice and what he
adds p. 17. Bold and Groundless Presumption, has nothing of Argument to
convince the Judgment, or to reason any Sober Enquirer into a Favorable
Opinion of himself, or his Undertaking: Perit judicium eum res transit in
affectum* When the Passions have taken possession of an Opinion, they quickly
turn the Judgment out of Doors.

But why is the Affirming, that the Word Sun^ is not in the Original, but added
by the Translators, such a Bold Presumption? Is it not as Bold to affirm it is
there, where at best it is but by his Conjecture? may not another take the same
Liberty that R. A. does? Or will he walk at large, and put all others under
Restraint? Oh! but 'ti^ a Bold Presumption for any, and especially suc^ as know
not a Word of the Original Text, thus to arraign our Bibles. But wherefore this
Censorious Exclamation? Our English Bibles ar^ only Translations of the
Original, and not to b^ received any further than they accord with the Hebrew
and Greek. The Sess. 4. de Edit. and Usu Sacr. Librorum.
Council of Trent has made the Vulgar Latin Edition of the Bible, the only
Authentic Text, and thereby (says Du Moulin 's Novelty of Popery, p. 34.
one) Authorized a thousand Depravations of the true Original. And the said
Sess. 4. Ibid.
Council Decrees, That it be used in Public Lectures, Disputations, Sermons
and Expositions, and that no one presume to reject it under any Pretense. And
R. A. seems to imply no less in the behalf of our English Bibles, which neither
Learned nor Unlearned may (it seems) arraign without the Guilt of a Bold
Presumption: And yet he himself so far acknowledges, That perhaps our
Translation might in some Instances be mended, and made to express the Sense of
the Original more clearly. Br. Animad. p. 26. But for my part, I see no danger
at all in arraigning of them for their Errors, and correcting the same,
concordant to the Hebrew and Greek Text.

Translations are compared by Tom. 2. Epist. ad Marcellam. Ult. istius Tom.
Hierom, to Muddy Streams, and Originals to the Pure Fountain.

And therefore, we acknowledge (says Whitak. in Controv. de Script. Qu. 2. c.
7.
one) no Edition [of the Bible] Authentic, [or of Divine Authority] but the
Hebrew in the Old, and the Greek in the New Testament. As for Translations, we
approve of them, if they agree, [i. e. with the Originals] if they disagree, we
reject them.

No Translation (says Featley's Dippers Dipped p. 1.
another) is simply Authentical, or the undoubted Word of God: In the Undoubted
Word of God there can be no Error, but in Translations there may be, and are
Errors. The Bible translated therefore is no^ the undoubted Word of God, but so
far onl^ as it agrees with the Original.

Nulla est, sive nostrorum, sive aliorum hominum, cui vel nos ipsos, vel alios
addicere velimus. Eas omnes, etc. Chamier. Panstrat. Tom. 1. l. 12. c. 2.. 3, 5.
There is no [Translation] whether of our own, o^ of other Men, to which w^
would tie our selves or other^ For all of them, of what Standing, Name or
Reputation so ever they be, with what Diligence, Sincerity and Learning soever
they were made, are only so far certain, as they accord with the first Context;
^ mean, as far as they express that Sense, which is certainly manifest to be
the Sense of the Hebrew and Greek Words: But if they depart never so little
from thence, that Sense which the^ give or express, we judge neither to be
Divine nor Authentic, nor Canonical; but only Human^ Upon Examination it will
be found, says Jessey that in the Ancient; as well as latter Versions, a^ many
considerable Errata's. See his Life, p. 45 Many things, even in this Newest and
Best Translat^on, do cry aloud for Correction, as the Learne^ may easily
observe, by comparing it with the Or^ginal; and others may quickly find, by
looking into Expositors and Commentators, Ibid. p. 52.

If this now be the Case of Translations, wh^ should it be such a Bold
Presumption to arraign ou^ English Bibles, which are but a Translation, an^ do
in many things differ from the Original? 'T^ true, in the Great and Substantial
Points of Religion Matters of prime Necessity to be Believed, or t^ be
Practiced, they are translated with more Exac^ness according to the Hebrew and
Greek, than i^ some less Necessary Things; on which the Transl^tors laid too
much Stress, being Men devoted t^ Ceremonies; where is not that Accordance with
the Original, that should have been observed; as were this a convenient Place,
might in many In^tances be demonstrated.

Learned Men have taken the Liberty in their Commentaries and Expositions, to
amend our English Translation; where they have found it disagreeing with the
Original, and that without any Censure upon them. And though the Unlearned cannot
search into Originals themselves; yet I hope, ^hey may speak from the Learned,
who are thought capable of judging in those Matters. There is certainly
Judicium Discretionis, a Judgment of Discre^ion, to be allowed, even to the
Unlearned, that know nothing of the Original Text themselves; or else their
Case would be as bad among us, as that of the poor Papists in Spain and Italy,
from whom the Priests not only lock the Scriptures up ^n an unknown Tongue; but
also deny them any ^nterpretation, save what their pretended Church is pleased
to give them. Council. Trident. Sess. 4.

Nor does it look in my Apprehension, like a Rash and Unchristian Practice, for
any to print or publish against their own Teachers and Brethren, such a heavy
Charge as this, of being Deeceivers of others in the Matters of God, and
Justifying Additions to his Word; if there be just Occasion for it, as there is
in the present Matter under Debate. For the Greek Word does Primarily signify,
to Praise, and so it is rendered in several Places in our Old Translations, and
here in Mat. 26.30. To Say Grace, which is Simply to Praise, and not to Sing
Praise; for every one knows, Saying and Singing are two distinct Acts.

But it looks very like a Reviving of Papal-Usurpation over the Conscience,
when any Teachers shall Impose their own Exposition of Scripture upon their
Brethren, and Expect their quiet Reception thereof, without Syllogisms or
Disputations, though better Reasons may be offered again^ the Sense Imposed, than
are or can be given f^ the Imposing of it. What is this in Effect, b^ to assume
to themselves a Despotical Power or I^fallible Chair, and as much as in them
lies, brin^ the Consciences of their Proselytes under the intolerable Yoke of
Blind and Implicit Obedience?

R. A. But let not any Christian be startle at this Bold Presumption; for I
assure you, it is a^ groundless as it is bold. The Original Word used in these
Text not only signifying to Praise God, (...),
(^ is pretended) but also to do it by Singing: The is attested by the
concurrent Evidence of the most Learned in the Greek Tongue. Essay, p. 1^

Though this be true, that this Word Hymneo (...) not limited only to Songs (...)
Praise, it will not prove (wh^ this I. Marlow's Controv. of Singing brought to
an End, p. 15.
Author affirms) that is Properly used, or signifi^ Simply to Praise: For it is
possible the Word man sometimes signify in a large Sense, Simply (...) Praise,
and yet the Primary and Proper Signification of it may be to Sing Songs of
Praise. -- Singing of Praise is the Primary, and so the Prop^ Signification
thereof, and the other [Significations^ are but as Consequent and Figurative
Senses of i^ Appendix, in Answer to I. Marlow, p. 59, 60.

Sect. 3. Answ. And he seems to be so well a^sured, that to Sing Praise is the
Primary and Prope^ Signification of Hymneo, that he asserts it severa^ times
over, Appendix, p. 62, 63, 64. But it is no^ good to be so very confident; for
though He tha^ is first in his own Cause may seem just, yet his Neighbor comes
and searches him, Prove. 18.17. How ever, I promise him a very fair Trial of
the Controversy between us; and having examined his Evidence, and produced
mine own, I shall leave the Issue to the Verdict of those who are capable of
giving Judgment. For the Dispute (as to this Part of it) is about the Primary
and Proper Signification of a Greek Word, whereof the Learned in that Language
are the only competent Arbiters.

But before I enter upon this, the former Part of his Paragraph obliges me to
take Notice of two Significations of Hymneo there mentioned; the first whereof
is, that it signifies to Praise God, and the Second, that it denotes a
Praising of him by Singing; neither of which Senses are truly given. For,

First, The Primary and Proper Signification of the Word, is, (as I. M. has
shown) Simply to Praise; and it no more includes God in it is Prime and Simple
Signification, than Aineo, Eulogeo, and Doxazo; and therefore when Greek
Writers apply Hymneo to God, either the Case of the Object is expressed, as
it is by the Seventy two Translators, Isa. 12.4, 5. and by Luke, Acts 16.25. or,
understood by an Ellipsis, or Suppression, which Figure is frequent among the
Penmen of Holy Scripture, as well as other Writers. Had the Word Hymneo been
of peculiar Ascription to God, there might then have been some Color for what
R. A. has affirmed: But no such Appropriation of it do I meet with in any
Greek Authors, Ancient or Modern, but the contrary: For I find it is spoken of
Hymn. in Apol. v. 190.
Gifts, and the Ibid. in Sol. v. 1.
Sun, by Homer: of Oper. and Dier. l. 2. v. 280.
Navigation, and the Theogon. v. 100, 101.
Famous Exploits of Ancient Heroes, by Hesiod: of De Bell. Pelop. l. 1. p. 19.
Edit. Francofurti 1594.
Navies and Ibid. l. 2. p. 126.
Cities by Thucydides: of Idyl. 17. v. 7, 8.
Men, Idyl. 22. v. 219, 220.
Ships, and Battles by Theocritus: of Chabotij Praelect. in Hor. Poem. Tom. 1.
p. 6.
Husbandry by Xenophon: of Prove. 1.20. and 8.3.
Wisdom, and 2 Chronicles. 23.13.
King Joash by the LXX. not to mention any more: For these are sufficient to
show the Word is not appropriated to God, and therefore does not in it is
Primary Signification denote to Praise God. Which is a plain Confirmation of
that Passage quoted by Truth soberly defended, p. 131.
l. M. ou^ of Gr. Lexicon. The same says Phavorinus, (...).
Constantine, Neque solum de Dijs, ut quidam tradunt, dicitur, sed etiam de
Hominibus, and alijs rebus It is not only spoken of God, as some deliver, but
of men and other things also. If the Case of the Object be neither expressed
nor understood, it Primarily signifies Simply to Praise.

Secondly, As Hymneo does not signify to Prais^ God, unless the Case of the
Object be expressed or understood; so it does not signify to Praise God by
Singing. I confess, sometimes it is used in ascribing Praise to God, and that by
Singing of it too; but this is no more, than what Aineo, and several other
Words are used to do: And therefore it does not follow, that because the Word
is sometimes so used, it must needs have so complex and large a Signification;
for it does not of it self Primarily and Properly signify any more, than
Simply to Praise, notwithstanding R. A's. Pretense to the contrary. And this, I
hope, I shall make out so fully and clearly, that even they who are of a
contrary Persuasion at present, will see Cause sufficient to alter their
Opinion; or at least be so far convinced, as to be left without Excuse. Which
leads me first to the Examination of the Evidence which he has brought for the
Sense he has given of the Word Hymneo, and then to produce mine own
Testimonies; several whereof especially in this Controversy, are more to be
regarded, (because far more Ancient, and also Native Greeks, and so best in all
Probability understood their own Language,) than any Authorities alleged or
pretended to by R. A. though, he says, he has the Essay, p. 17.
Concurrent Evidence of the most Learned in the Greek Tongue, or a Cloud of
Witnesses, cited in my Essay, as his Phrase is in another Br. Vindication, p.
25.
Place, and in whose Good Company he seems to account it some kind of Ibid.
Safety to Err.

First, Then his Evidence shall be examined; and that I may the more orderly
proceed in the Trial thereof, I shall begin with those that are mentioned in
his Essay, and then pass to those in his Appendix, which he produces for his
Sense of the Verb Hymneo; where also his Account of the Substantive Hymnos,
shall be brought to the Test. The Evidence produced in his Essay, to prove his
Sense of the Verb Hymneo, are, Scapula, Stephanus, Pasor, cited in the Margin,
p. 17. Our own Translators, Calvin, Beza, Piscator, the French Translators, and
many others mentioned by the Learned Pool, in Synops. Crit. These are quoted p.
18. and all these put together would make but a very little Cloud of Witnesses,
were it not for [the Many others] he says are mentioned in Pool's Synopsis:
Which Expression is little else but a Flourish, for the Many others are but
Seven, viz. Erasmus, Illyricus, the Version of Pagnine, that of Tigurum or
Zurich, Vatablus, Brugensis, and Hammond: And two of them, viz. Erasmus and
Brugensis ( Synops. Ctit. in Mat 26.30.
Pool tells us) render Hymnesantes, they said or recited Praise, adding, Neque
enim constat eos cecinisse, It Is not certain that they Sang. And he likewise
gives us that Interpretation, both in his Notes upon Mat. 26.30. and Mar.
14.26. in the first Place, as the most proper Rendering, from Tremellius and
Castalio.

The Quotation out of Scapula's Lexicon, if be taken together, and not divided
on purpo^^ to serve a Turn, will not answer the End for whi^ R. A. brings it.
For though Hymneo be the sa^ with Hydo or Hydeo, and sometimes signifies, Praise
in Verse, I Report, or Speak often (as Thom^sius renders the Word Decanto) in
Hymns ^ Praises; yet Hymneo being a Derivative from Hy^ or Hydeo, which is
generally taken to be the P^^mitive Verb, and by Scapula said to be of the sa^
Signification; upon Enquiry we find, that the Fi^ and Proper Sense which he
gives thereof, is, C^lebro, I Praise, and quotes for his Authority H^sychius,
and the Greek Etymology. After Ce^bro, I Praise, he puts indeed Cano, I Sing,
a^ Dico, I Say: But he presently adds, Hymno, A^ (...), Lego, to let us know
what he intends by Hy^ and Hymno; viz. Celebro, I Praise, by Ado, I Sin^ and by
Lego, I Say; Which are the Distinct a^ Proper Significations of those several
Greek Word This is the true Representation of this Author, a^ though he says
Hymneo is properly spoken of Poets, a^ such as recite Verses; yet he says
again, it sign^fies Simply to Praise; that is, in Prose, as Stephan^ tells us,
whose larger Work was Epitomized (...) Scapula. And now let the Judicious
Reader to me, whether there be any thing in this Autho^ that makes for R. A.
yea, whether there be ^ much as one Passage, that proves Hymneo, eith^
signifies to Praise God, or to Praise him by Singing There is no such thing to
be found in Him, being truly and impartially Represented.

Stephanus is the next Author mentioned by R. ^ but since he only names him, I
shall also dismi^ him, without any Examination or Remarks in the Place.

Pasor, in his Lexicon of the Words in the Gre^ Testament, running the New Rote
of some M^dern Interpreters, renders Hymneo, I do confess, by Hymnum cano, I
Sing Praise, or as some others ^re pleased to have it, an Hymn, though this
Rendering of his is capable of another Sense. For Canere in Sallust, as These.
Ling. Romans and Britan.
Cooper quotes him, signifies to Praise; ^hus Canere aliquem, or Lauds
^licujus, is put for Celebrare and Laudare, to Praise or Extol greatly, and
that without Singing. It Is also sometimes used for the ^imple Uttering or
Pronouncing of ^ thing, as we are informed by Dictionar.
Calepine: And then Hymnum ^no may be properly translated here, I Utter, or
Pronounce Praise. But suppose we should admit of Pasor's Novel Exposition, that
cannot (were ^e of such Reputation among the Learned, as to ^ass for an Author,
which I think he hardly does) ^lter the Primary Meaning of the Word, nor ^rip
it of it is Ancient Signification, wherewith it is Originally clothed.

As for our last Translators of the Bible, it is well ^nown they have their
Errata, as well as former Versions; and though they have extended the Sense of
the Word to Singing, which is at best but a Se^ondary and Improper Rendering;
yet they had no good Authority, as I conceive, for that Interpre^ation: But
being Men zealous for Common, Set-^orm Singing, they adven^ured so to translate
it, ^ho' it is a manifest Devia^ion from the Original, ^s the Cyprian, Hierom,
Interp. Chrysostom. Interp. Theophilac. A Lapide, Tremellius, Castalio, Tyndal,
Coverdale, Montanus, Lorinus, Novarinus, Eman. Sa, Maldonat. Marlorat. Aretius.
Authors in the ^argin testify, whose Words shall be cited at ^arge hereafter.

Calvin, Beza, and Piscator, were Men who in ma^y things did worthily in their
Days, but here they missed it, and stretched the Signification (...) Hymneo
farther than e^ther the Vid. Maldonat. Marlorat. Musculus, and L. Brugensis, in
Mat. 26.30.
Word it sel^ or Context does Certainly and Necessarily evince*

The French Translators have split upon the sam^ Rock, with those before
mentioned, and their Work, as I have been lately informed, is so Vncorrect,
that there are Proposals on Foot for (...) New Version, more Exact and
Agreeable, to the Original. And I heartily Wish this of Our's, i^ all those
Places where it is Erroneously done, were Faithfully Amended, according to the
Hebrew an^ Greek.

Sect. 4. Having thus Examined R. A's. Evidence cited in his Essay for the
Sense he there gives of Hymneo, viz. That it signifies not only to Praise Go^
but also to do it by Singing; and cannot find, tho^ they have Stretched the
Word beyond it is Prim^ and Genuine Signification, namely, to Singing; tha^ the
Sense R. A. ascribes to it, is so done b^ those very Authors; viz. That they
use it, either to Praise God, or to Praise him by Singing; as tho^ the Word
necessarily included [God] in its Signification.

I proceed in the next Place, to the Trial o^ the Rest of his Evidence,
produced in his Page 60, 61.
Appendix, concerning the Signification of Hymne^ Where,

First, In Answer to I. M's. Controversy of Singing brought to an End; He
seems to Hesitat^ a little about the Sense of the Word; Appendix, p. 60.
It Is possible, says he the Word may sometimes Signify in a large Sense,
Simply to Praise, and ye^ the Primary and Proper Signification of it may be to
Sing Songs of Praise. Here he speaks only of (...) May be, or mere Possibility,
that the Word may have this or the other Sense, but positively Determines
neither. We know a Word may have various Significations, Primary and Secondary,
Proper and Improper; but the main Skill lies, in fixing the Primary and Proper
Signification of the Word in Controversy. Therefore,

Secondly, He undertakes to prove, that Singing of Praise is the Primary, and
so the Proper Signification thereof; and that from several of those very
Authors which I. M. cites, to prove, that the Word Properly is used Simply to
Praise.

R. A. Leigh tells us in his Critica Sacra, that [(...)] a Hymn, is a Song to
be uttered with the Voice only; and that Hymneo, signifies Primarily [Hymnum
cano] to Sing a Hymn; and in the Margin he tells us, [Canere est, and Lauds
Deo ad Aras dicere] it is to Sing, and to Sing Praises to God at his Altar. This
he gives us as the proper Signification of the Word, though he after mentions
others as less proper Acceptations of it. Append. p. 60.

Answer.

1. Leigh does not tell us, that Hymneo signifies Primarily Hymnum cano, to
Sing an Hymn; the Word Primarily being R. A's. Addition, to help his Cause, and
not the Author's.

2. He does not give us this as the Proper Signification of the Word, and
others as less Proper Acceptations of it. For this is not to be found in his
Critics, and therefore to be looked upon as the Comment of the Essayer. For
Leigh determines not the Matter, whether to Sing an Hymn, or Simply to Praise,
be the Proper Signification of the Word; but if any thing can be concluded,
touching his Sense about the Primary and Proper Signification of it, it is most
Probable he understood it to be, Simply to Praise, or give Thanks, (as I. M.
has it, Controv. of Singing, etc. p. 15.) because he not only renders it
himself by Laudare, Gratias agere, Hymnum dicere, to Praise, to give Thanks, to
speak, Praise; but also quotes the Hymno dicto, Praise being spoken.
Vulgar Latin, the Laudem dederunt, they gave Praise.
Arabic Version, Dixissent lauds, they had spoken Praises.
Novarinus, and the Dictis laudibus, Praises being spoken.
to corroborate that Interpretation.

The Signification of (...), Hymnus, shall be spoken to hereafter. And as for
the Marginal Citation in Leigh's Critics, Canere est, and lauds, etc. This
may serve for an Answer; he vouches no Authority for it, as he does for the
other Rendrings.

R. A. Symson in his Lexicon, puts down as the Primary, and so the Proper
Signification, [Hymnum, Hymnos cano] to Sing an Hymn, or Hymns. Appendix, ibid.

Answ. He puts down Hymnum, Hymnos cano, I Sing an Hymn, or Hymns; but does not
say, as the Primary Signification: For he has also Hymnum dicto, I speak an
Hymn, and Speaking is surely prior to Singing; for there must be Speech, before
there can be an Artificial Modulation of it. And Laudo, I Praise; and when he
sets down the Greek Words, to Sing, he puts (...), Ado, Psallo; not (...),
Hymneo.

R. A. Constantine also, in his Greek, Lexicon, sets down as the Primary and
Proper Signification of this Word, [Dico Hymnum, Hymnos canto] to Sing an Hymn,
or Hymns, and thence derives [(...), Cantator, Poeta] a Singer, or Poet.
Appendix, ibid.

Answer,

1. Dico Hymnum, is not truly and properly translated, to Sing an Hymn; for
Dicere Hymnum, is properly to Say an Hymn, or Praise; unless it be used
Metonymically and Improperly; but then it can no ways be serviceable to R. A.
for it is the Primary and Proper Signification which he would contend for; but
this is Secondary and Improper, which he here gives us.

2. Constantine thence derives [(...), Hymnesis, Laudatio] a Praising, and
[(...), Hymnetes, Laudator] a Praiser; and not [Cantator, Poeta] a Singer, a
Poet.

He likewise has (...), Hydo, Hymno, Laudo, I Praise, before he sets down
Cano, I Sing. And Herodot. in Constant. Lex.
(...), Celebrati sunt, they were Praised. And Gaza de Senectute, ibid.
(...), De meis viribus praedico, I Praise mine own Strength.

The Author of the Reflections on I. M's. Appendix to his Treatise, Entitled [
Prelimited Forms, etc.] at the End of B. Keach's Book, concerning Singing, and
referred to by R. A. Essay, p. 18. acknowledges a Difference between Singing,
and Saying or Pronouncing an Hymn, according to Constantine, not Confounding
(as R. A. does) Dico Hymnum, and Hymnum canto. And the Reason which he gives,
why (...), Hymneo, is used for Saying or Pronouncing an Hymn, contributes more
than probably he was aware of, to the clearing up of it is Primary
Signification. The Reason may be, says he, because Saying or Pronouncing is
necessarily included in Singing; for Singing is but a particular Mode of Saying
or Pronouncing: Reflect. p. 50. For if it be so, then it will necessarily
follow, seeing Hymneo is used both to Say or Pronounce, and to Sing an Hymn,
(which latter Rendering he sets down first, and the other last, inverting the
Order which Constantine uses in placing of the Words) that to Say or Pronounce
an Hymn, is the First and Proper Signification, because the Thing it self is
before the particular Mode thereof; and therefore if Singing be ( as he says)
but a particular Mode of Saying or Pronouncing; to Say or Pronounce an Hymn,
must needs be in Order of Time as well as Nature, precedent to Singing. And if
it was not thus, ( as it appears plainly it is) I might say, by Retortion of
his own Remark, it is the common Fate of all Words to be stretched beyond their
Prime and most Proper Signification; and who can help it, seeing that the Wit
and Fancy of Men are such luxuriant things, that will make bold sometimes, not
only with Words, but Persons too? Reflect. ibid.

R. A. The Learned Ainsworth does not translate the Word (as our Author
represents him) Simply Praise, (as if it signified no more) but he tells us,
(on Psalm. 3.) that There be three kinds of Songs mentioned in this Book, of
which one (he tells us) is called Tehillah, in Greek, Hymnos, a Hymn or Praise.
Appendix, p. 61.

Answ. To this I. M. has very well replied in his last little Clear
Confutation, etc. p. 4, 5.
Tract, and thither I refer the Reader. But forasmuch as R. A. concludes with
Ainsworth, that one of the three Kinds of Songs, mentioned in the Book of
Psalms, is called Tehillah, and in Greek Hymnos, an Hymn or Praise, I entreat
him to tell us, which of the Psalms it is that is so called? for I have made a
diligent Search into the Septuagint, but cannot find any Psalm with that
Inscription, viz. Hymnos, an Hymn or Praise. I find indeed (...),
Tehillah often translated, Hymnos as Psalm. 40.3.65.1.100.4.119.171. and
148.14. and (...).
Hymnesis, Psalm. 71.6. Simply Praise; but this is in the Text, and not any
where in the Titles. It Is true (...).
En Hymnois, is in the Title of Psalm. 6.54.55.61.67.76. but Hymnos is not the
Title it self, neither is it used by the LXX. in any of those Places to
signify Praise, or an Hymn; but a Musical Instrument, called (...),
Neginath, which comes from the Root (...),
Nagan, Robertson. Concord. Lex. Hebraeo-Chald. Bythner Lyra Prophet.
to Play with the Hand upon such an Instrument.

(...), Hymnoi, is also used by the LXX. in the last Verse of Psalm. 72. but
there it is rendered by Trem. and Junius, Orationes, and so by Lex. Heb. in voce
(...).
Buxtorf, and several Aethiop. Verse. Piscator, Montanus, Gejerus, Chald.
Paraph. Grotius, in Synop. Crit.
Others; and Supplicationes, Preces by Lyra Prophet. n. 178.
Bythner, and Prayers, both by our Translators and Ainsworth himself: The
Hebrew Word being there (...), Tephilloth from Buxtorf. Lex. Heb.
(...), He judged, he prayed; and not (...), Tehillah, Praise, from (...),
Halal, Laudare, to Praise.

The Word is likewise used, Psalm. 137.3. for which there is nothing in Trem.
and Junius's Translation, but in They that wasted us, required of us Mirth.
Ours and They that threw us on heaps, [asked of us] Mirth.
Ainsworth's it is Mirth: which is the true Rendering of the Heb. (...),
Laetitia; See Montanus, Schindler, Mercer, Buxtorf, Bythner, Robertson.
Simchah. The LXX. do there express Song, by (...).
Ode, and not by Hymnos, to make a Distinction between them; for whereas Our
Translation has it, Required of us a Song, the Heb. is (...).
Dibre-shir, and the Greek (...).
Logous Odon, the Words of Songs; and when the Heb. expresses simply Mirth, v.
3. or Joy, v. 6. It does it by Simchah, and the Greek by Hymnos, and Euphrosyne.

Ainsworth indeed puts the Word Hymn, in the Title of Psalm. 145. but without
any good Authority for so doing; for there the LXX. have (...),
Ainesis, Trem. Junius.
Laudatio, or Gejerus, Muis, Montanus.
Laus, Praise. The Hebrew Word, I grant, is Tehillah but what then? the
Septuagint have not rendered it by Hymnos, but by Ainesis So that neither this,
nor any other Psalm, is therefore a Song from the Title; for some of them have
in Heb. (...).
Tephillah, in Greek, (...),
Proseuche, a Prayer, as Psalm. 17, 86.90.102. Some in Heb. (...),
Michtam, a Golden Jewel, in Greek, (...),
Stelographia, as Psalm. 16. or (...),
Eis Stelographian, an Inscription upon a Pillar, as Psalm. 56, 57, 58, 59, 60
Some in Heb. (...).
Maschil, in Greek (...),
Synesis, Understanding or Instruction, as Psalm. 32, 41 44, 45, 53, 54, 55, 74,
78, 88 One ut supra.
Maschil and ut supra.
Proseuche, Instruction and Prayer, as Psalm. 142. and several Others (...).
Allelonia, according to the Septuagint, as Psalm. 105, 106, 107, 111, 112, 113,
114 116, 117, 118, 119, 135, 136, and 146. to the End Now if because the Psalms
were Songs, used i^ Temple-Worship, the Words in their several Titles must
therefore signify Singing, what a Confusion shall we make of Words, when those
very Words which are of a different Signification must yet be used
promiscuously, and that merely to please some Persons, in an unaccountable
Notion, and a groundless Practice? Whatever becomes of their Mistaken, though
Darling Conceptions, we must either keep to the Distinction and Propriety of
Words, or we shall soon loose the Propriety of Things, and so inevitably slide
into an Indistinction of Duties.

R. A. In like manner the Learned Dr. Owen (on Heb. 2.12.) teaches us, that the
Primary and Proper Sense of the Word Hymneo, is to Sing Praise; and adds, that
though the Hebrew Word [(...)] Psalm. 22.24. be rendered Simply to Praise, yet it is
most frequent use, when it respects God as it is Object, is to Praise by Hymns
or Psalms, as the Apostle here, [(...), tibi Hymnos canam] I will Sing Hymns
unto thee, or [te Hymnis Celebrabo] I will Praise thee with Hymns, which was
the principal Way of Setting forth God's Praise under the Old Testament. And
seeing this Reverend Author tells us, that this was the principal Way of
setting forth God's Praise under the Old Testament, it is unreasonable to
imagine, that he in the least designed to exclude this Way of Doing it under
the New; especially seeing himself, and the People under his Care, were in the
constant Practice of this Duty. It Is true, the Doctor understands this
Expression, In the midst of the Church will I sing Praise to thee, to
comprehend all those Ways, whereby the Mediator glorified God as well as
Singing, but he in no wise interprets it so, as to exclude Singing to be a part
of his Work. Appendix, p. 61, 62.

Sect. 5. Answ. This being the same for Substance with what B. Keach in his
Answer to I. Marlow's Appendix, and the Author of the Reflections
beforementioned, p. 69. have already replied; I desire the Reader impartially
to peruse what I. M. has said in those useful Appendix to Prelimited Forms, p.
3, 4, 5, 6. Truth soberly defended, p. 127, 128, 129. The Controversy of
Singing brought to an End, p. 16.
Treatises which he has written about Singing. The Dr. (on Heb. 2.12.) does
fully prove the Point for which I. M. quoted him, viz. The Controversy, etc.
Ibid. ubi supra.
That though he reads the Word Hymneo, to Sing Praise, ( following therein the
last English Translation, which has departed from the Genuine Sense of the
Word) in accommodation to the Old Testament Temple-Worship, yet he does no^
limit the Signification of it to Songs of Praise. For he there tells us, Owen
on Heb. 2.12.
It is a fond Imagination which some have fallen upon, that God is no^ praised
in the Church for the Work of Redemption, unless it be done by Words and Hymns*
particularly expressing it. Yea, The Dr. further says, that the Original
Hebrew, Psalm. 22.22. is expressly rendered Simply to Praise; and though he adds,
that it is most frequent Use, when it respects God as the Object, is to Praise
by Psalms, or Hymns, yet Lex.
Scapula tells us, the Word Hymnos is used so but Interdum.
Sometimes, and the Ubi supra.
Dr. himself explain^ his own Meaning of that Expression in two Particulars.

1. Observing to us what Christ undertakes to do, and that is to Praise God.

2. The Cheerfulness and Alacrity of the Spirit of Christ in this Work, he
would do it [as] with Joy and Singing; with such a frame of Heart a^ was
required in them, who were to Sing the Praise^ of God in the great Assembly in
the Temple.

So that in all the Dr. says, in that Place, there not so much as One Word of
Intimation, that ^e Primary and Proper Sense of Hymneo, is to Sing ^raise, or
of Christ's Singing Praise, in the Vulgar ^cceptation of the Words; any
otherways than (...) Setting forth the Love, Grace, Goodness and ^ercy of God,
(which he also calls the Declaring (...) his Name) with such Cheerfulness and
Alacri^, [as] with Joy and Singing; but not formally ^ith that Kind of Singing
which consists in a Me^dious Tuning of the Voice. And therefore what^er was the
Practice of the Dr. and the People under his Care, that can signify little in
the Matter; ^r it is neither his Judgment, nor his Practice, as to
^ommon-singing, that I. M. insists upon; but the ^r's. Sense of the Word
Hymneo, in his Exposition ^n Heb. 2.12. which B. Keach's Learned Hand, (...)
Author of the Reflections pre-cited] and R. A. ^mself have mistaken. For though
"the Dr. understands this Expression, In the midst of the Church will I Sing
Praise to thee, to comprehend all those Ways, whereby the Mediator Glorified
God, as well as Singing; yet he in no wise so expounds it, as to ^ccasion us to
believe, he took the Primary and Pro^^r Sense of Hymneo to be, to Sing Praise.
For he neither finds fault with the English Version of Psalm. 22.^2. where the
Heb. Word [(...)] is rendered Sim^y to Praise; and the LXX. have (...), Hymne^
se; I will Praise thee: Nor does he say Abso^^tely, It Is most frequent Use is
to Praise by Hymns (...) Psalms; but Comparatively only, viz. When it ^espects
God as it is Object: Nor that it includes God] in its Signification, but plainly
intimates ^y this Expression, When it respects God as it is Object, that the
Object [God] must either be Expressed ^r Understood.

Besides, the Dr. being a Man of very great Learn^ng, could not, I suppose, but
know that the Heb. Word [(...)] Hillel, when it respects God as (...) Object,
is more frequently translated by the LXX. [(...)], Aineo, Laudo, I Praise, than
by Hymn Hymnos cano, I S^^^ Hymns; which though be sometimes used in the Extended
and Impro^ Sense, yet in (...), They praised their God.
Jud^ 16.24. (...), Praised the Lord.
2 Chronicles. ^ 21. (...), Will I praise thee.
Psalm. 22.22. (...), Praise the Lord.
Isa. 12.4. and (...), I will praise thy Name.
25. it is used Simply to Prais^

Object. But to this R. A. perhaps, or some oth^^ may Object, that the H^ Word
is (...), Hodu, Confitemini.
Jadah, in (...) 12.4. and (...), Odeh, Confitebor.
25.1. (...), Zammeru, Psallite.
Z^mer in Isa 12.5. a^ 1 Chronicles. (...), Jashiru, Canent.
16.9. and (...) Shur in Psalm. 65.13. (...) First of which signifies to
Confess, the Second Play upon the Harp, and the Third to Sing; which the LXX.
have translated by Hymneo; a^ therefore Hymneo signifies Primarily, to Sing.

Answ. I have shown before that p. 61, 62, 63, etc.
Hymneo, Primarily and P^^perly signifies Simply to Prai^^ and I further
Answer, that t^ the LXX. or any other Writers, have extended Sense, and applied
it to Singing; yet their Figu^^tive Application destroys not it is Primary
Sign^^^cation. The Learned also know, that the LX^ have not only extended the
Sense of this Word, b^ of several others: For Instance, (...).
Sa^ Pneuma, Rhema, Kyrios, are Wor^ which Primarily and Properly signif^
Flesh, Wind, Word, Lord or Maste^ yet they often use the First, someti^^ for
Man himself, sometimes for Humane Nature, and sometimes for the Infirmity and
Vitiosity thereof; ^he Second for Spirit, the Third for Thing or Bu^ness, and
the Last for Jehovah. Now as the lat^er Use of these, and the like Words, does
not di^est them of their Prime and Genuine Sense; (...) so is in the Case
before us: The Lax and Extended ^se of Hymneo, wherein it is applied to Singing,
^oth not alter its Strict and Primary Sense, which (...) Simply to Praise.

And as to Heb. 2.12. have consulted several Printed in the Years 1535. 1540,
1541, 1585, 1591.
^ncient Bibles upon it, ^l which unanimously render Hymneso se, Will I ^raise
thee, exactly according to the Hebrew, in ^sal. 22. from whence it is ^ken; See
also Nov. Test. Vol. Polyglot.
Hutter, Robertson, Nov. Test. Heb.
the Transl. Sir. ab Imman. Trem. (...), ashabbechach, Celebrabo te, I will
praise thee.
Syriac ^ersion and Tremellius, ^here the Propriety of ^e Word is preserved.

" R. A. As to his Citation out of Marlorate, who tells us, that the Word
Hymnesantes, [Non necessario evincit, quod cecinerint] does not necessarily
evince that they Sang: I have not that Author by me, and therefore cannot see
whether he has more largely explained himself, but if he has not, I doubt not
to reject his Interpretation; because the Primary and Proper Sense of the Word
being to Sing Praise, it therefore (being used in these Texts) does necessarily
evince that they did Sing, unless any necessary Reason could be alleged to
prove they did not. Appendix, p. 62.

Answ. Marlorate is truly cited by I. M. and ^eing R. A. had not the Author by
him, to see whether he more largely explained himself, I ha^ therefore strictly
examined his Ecclesiastical Exposit^^^ of Mat. 26.30. and do assure R. A. he
has n^* For having told us from Paulus Burgensis, that 'tw^^ the Custom of the
Jews, after they had eaten (...) Paschal Lamb, to Sing, from Psalm. 112. to the
11^ and that the said Burgensis thought this was (...) Hymn which Christ Sang
with his Disciples; a having also conclud^ from Paulus Burgensis was a
Christian Jew, and lived about the Year 1415. I find most Commentatours take
their Quotations of the Jews Singing at the Passover from him: The Institution
mentions no such thing, and therefore, the Singing Burgensis speaks of, was a
Humane Addition to the Passover.
him, that as (...) as the Jews Celebrat^ the Passover, they we wont to Sing an
Hym^ he seems presently (...) recollect himself, as the he had gone too far, a^
adds, Incertum tam videtur, quibus hie V^bis Deum laudarint, and an cecinerint
hanc laud an simpliciter dixerint: Graecum Verbum Laud quidem, maxim quae
Deo debetur, includit, n^ autem Necessario, evincit quod cecinerint.
Nev^^theless it seems uncertain, with wh^ words [ viz. Christ and his
Disciples]*
they here Praised Go^ and whether they Sang this Prai^^ or Simply Spoke it:
The Gre^^ Word indeed includes Praise, epsecially such as due to God, but it
does not Necessarily Evince, that the Sang. And this is all he delivers about
t^ Sense of this Word, without the least Addition (...) way of Explanation or
Qualification. But t^^ Excellently Learned August^ Marlorate, as Ecclesiast.
History, p. 893. Vol. 3.
Bulkley, (t^ Continuator of Fox's Acts a^ Monuments of Martyrs,) from that
Famous French Historian Thuanus, styles him, a^ who suffered Martyrdom at
Rouan, in the Cause Christ, An. 1562. is of so small Account with R. ^. that he
doubts not to reject his Interpretation, though he had not seen his Book Indicta
causa damnare, This is in effect to condemn him unheard.
. An Indiscretion surely in R. A. that had I not seen it in Print, I could
hardly have thought him guilty of it!

The Reason R. A. gives, for rejecting Marlorate's Interpretation, is Plausible
indeed, but it is Precarious; for he takes it for granted, that the Primary and
Proper Sense of Hymneo is to Sing Praise, which he ought first (were such a
thing possible) to have proved. And whereas he says, It therefore (being used
in these Mat. 26.30. Mar. 14.26.
Texts) does necessarily evince that they did Sing, unless any Necessary Reason
could be alleged to prove they did not: I think this is one sufficient Reason
to prove they did not Sing, especially against him; in that he so confidently
rejects what he is not able to Answer, and flies to mere Evasions, under
Pretext of Arguments. But in slighting Marlorate's Interpretation, R. A.
contemns not him alone; for he is not the only Man that was of that Opinion:
Neque enim constat eos cecinisse, It is not certain that they Sang. Synops.
Crit. in Mat. 26.30.
Erasmus, Graecum Verbum -- non necessario evincit, quod cecinerint. The Greek
Word does not necessarily evince, that they Sang. Com. in Mat. 26.30. Tom. 3.
Musculus, An cecinerint non satis constat, Whether they sang is not
sufficiently certain. Super loc.
Maldonate, and Non necessario evincit Vox Graeca, quod cecinerint, The Greek
Word does not necessarily evince, that they Sang. Sup. loc.
Lucas Brugensis, (as before ^s Noted, page 63, 66.) were of the same Mind,
whose Words I have set down in the Margin, for ^he Satisfaction and Benefit of
the Meanest Reader.

Sect. 6. Having thus considered R. A's. Evidences, both in his Essay and
Appendix, which, he says, prov^ that the Primary and Proper Signification of
the Verb Hymneo, is to Sing Praise; and made it man^fest, that it is Simply to
Praise: The next thing i^ Order to be brought to the Test, is the Account h^
gives us of the Substantive Hymnos.

R. A. And they (that is, the Learned) d^ yet more particularly assure us, that
a Hymn does n^cessarily includ^ these Hymni lauds sunt Dei cum cantico, hymni
cantus sunt continentes laudem Dei. Si sit laus and non sit Dei, non est
hymnus. Si fit laus and Dei laus, and non cantetur, non est hymnus. Oportet
ergo ut, fi fit hymnus habeat haec tria, and laudem, and Dei, and canticum.
Aug. in Psalm. 72. And thus also the Learned and Pious Dr. Du Veil tells us, out
of Ruffinus, on Acts 16.25. Hymnus est cantilena continens laudem Dei. Minsh.
Hymnus est cantio qua lauds Dei decantantur. Pasoris Lex. You may see this
more fully proved to be the Sense of the Word (...), by a Learned Minister of
Christ, in a short Discourse at the End of B. Keach's Book concerning Singing.
thre^ things: 1. Tha^ the Matter of i^ be Praise. 2* That it be t^ God, as the
O^ject of it. An^ 3. That it b^ Sung. And (...) either of these be wanting,
'ti^ not properl^ an Hymn. Essay, p. 17, 18.

Answ. It will be a difficult thing, I suppose, so R. A. to reconcile this
Passage in his Essay, an^ what he has delivered in his Appendix; for there p.
59, 60. he grants that the Word Hymneo is no limited only to Songs of Praise,
and that it is poss^ble it may sometimes signify in a large Sense, Si^ply to
Praise. But here he quotes Angustine, D^ Veil out of Ruffinus, Minshew, Pasor,
and a Learn Minister of Christ, to prove the Restriction (...) Hymnos to Songs
of Praise, and God the Sole O^ject thereof: This I desire may be particularly
N^ted, because he who in one Book allows of a large Signification, yet in this
brings the pre-mentione Authors to give us a particular Assurance of it is
Restriction.

I have a great Respect for the Name of Augustine, so far as he Embraced and
Adhered to the Truth; but he was not so Wise a Master Builder, as to lay no
Chaff upon the Good Foundation. This great Man was not free from great
Mistakes. Enchirid. ad Laurentium, cap. 43.
He says, That Water Baptism Washed away all That is, the Guilt, though not the
Infirmity, as he says, Lib. 3. contra duas Epist. Pelag. cap. 3.
Sin, both in Young and Old that were Baptized. Epist. 107. and Lib. 28. de
Civ. Dei, and saepe alibi.
He Condemned Infants dead without Water Baptism, to the Torment of Eternal
Fire. Lib. 4. de Genesi ad Literam.
He held, That the World was created, not in Six Days, as Moses relates, but
in a Moment: Enchirid. ad Laurent. cap. 109.
That the Souls of the Dead are kept ^n certain hidden Receptacles, until the
last Resurrection: Ibid. cap. 110.
And That the Good Works of the Liv^ng are profitable to the Dead, who in their
Lifetime ^ave Merited this Benefit. These, and sundry other Naevi, or Errors,
Augustine had; and therefore ^s he was liable to Mistakes about Things, it is no
Wonder if he Erred about Words. His Testimony ^hen is to be considered
according to what it is, and not merely according to the Name he carries; ^or
that is no Ingredient in the Constitution of Truth.

1. He says, Hymni lauds sunt Dei cum Can^co, Hymni Cantus sunt continentes
lauds Dei. (...) sit laus and non sit Dei, non est Hymnus. Hymns ^re Praises
of God with a Song, Hymns are Songs ^^ntaining the Praises of God. If it be
Praise, and ^^n of God, it is not an Hymn.

Answ. The Restriction of an Hymn to God only, (...) contrary to the whole
Current of the Ancients, viz. Homer, Hesiod, Thucydides, Theocritus, Xenophon^
the LXX. Phavorinus, as has been shown, p. 61, 62* to Plato, Plutarch, and
Herodian, as shall be manifested hereafter, all which lived long before
Augustine, and Wrote in Greek; for Augustin^ flourished about the latter End of
the Fourth and Beginning of the Fifth Centuries, and wa^ One of the Latin
Fathers; but Homer lived abov^ Thirteen, and Herodian above One Hundred Year
before him.

This Limitation is also contradicted by Prude^tius, who was a Learned Latin
Poet, Contemporar^ with Augustine, and Wrote several Hymns, in Vario^^ Sorts of
Verse: See his Book of Hymns, Entitule^ (...), Of Crowns; there, Hymn 1. Is to
Hemiterius and Chelidonius of Calaguri^ 2. To Laurentius, Archdeacon. 3. To
the Virgin Eulalia. 4. To 18 Martyrs of Saragossa. 5. To Vincentius, Martyr. 6.
To Fructuosus, Bp. of Arragon, and Auguri^ and Eulogius, Deacons. 7. To
Quirinus, Martyr and Bp. of Siscia. 8. To the Baptisterium, or Baptizing-Place,
when two Martyrs suffered. 9. To Cassianus, Martyr.


Now these Hymns are not Lauds Dei, Prais^ of God, but of the Persons who are
the Subjects of them; as they who are inquisitive man soon inform themselves.
And least R. A. should Reply; True indeed, the Martyrs are the Subjec^ of these
Hymns, but God is the Object; for a^ their Encomiums are directed to his Glory.
Thi^ I think, will be sufficient to Obviate so Wea^ an Effort, in that they are
not only Praises of but also to the Martyrs themselves; for they an Hymns to
such and such: Yea, in some of them, the Poet advances too high, even to
Praying to the Martyrs, which is Idolatry. Thus he Prays to Audi benignus
supplicem
Christi reum Prudentium,
Et servientem corpori,
Absolve vinclis Seculi.

Laurentius, Hymn 2. To the 18 Nos pio fletu, date, perluamus
Marmorum Sulcos, quibus est operta
Spes, ut absolvam retinaculorum Vincla meorum.

Martyrs, Hymn 4. and to Adesto nunc, and percipe
Voces precan^um supplices,
Nostri reatus efficax
Orator ad Thronum Patris.

Vincentius, Hymn 5. Yea, ^his Blind and Superstitious Zeal, Hymn 3. misled him
to think Sic venerarier ossa libet,
Ossibus Altar and impositum.

Eulali^'s Bones ought to be Worshipped, and an Altar built upon them.

Eustathius, a Man eminently skilled in the Greek Tongue, as appears by his
Learned Commentaries upon Homer, tells us, in his Notes upon the two last
Verses of Dionysius's Description of the World, that (...).
Hymnos is not only spoken of Divine Praise, but also of other things; whereof
he gives Instances from se^eral Ancient Greek Pindar, Aeschylus, Hesiod and
Euripides.
Poets.

Gr. Lex.
Constantine is also of the same Judgment, as I have before Noted. p. 62.

And Scapula, as is alrea^y hinted, p. 74. says, Hym^os is Interdum
peculiariter dicitur carmen in honorem Dei. Lex.
Sometimes pecu^iarly called a Verse, or ^oem, in the Honor of God: And if but
some^imes so used, then it does not necessarily include God for it is Object.

And thus the first Part of R. A's. Testimony ^ut of Augustine, is sufficiently
Answered, and made so plain to every Indifferent Eye, that he that runs may
read it. And Augustine being refuted Du Veil, Ruffinus, Minshew, and Pasor, who
have Erred with him, are jointly and severally comprehended in his Refutation.

But R. A. informs us, We may see this more fully proved to be the Sense of the
Word (...) by a Learned Minister of Christ, in the End o^ B. Keach's Book
concerning Singing.

Answ. Most of that Learned Minister's Quotations, viz. from Leigh,
Constantine, Ainsworth, an^ Dr. Owen, have been Answered already, p. 67, -- 7^
in my Reply to R. A's. Appendix, p. 60, 61. an^ the Proof from thence is found
to fall short (...) what is pretended. And though that Learned Man has labored
without Succes^ to prove that Hymnos, most Pr^perly denotes a Reflections, p.
49.
Song of Prais^ and Ibid. p. 50.
Primarily and Chiefly sign^fies an Hymn or Copy of Verses made to Praise; yet
(...) contends not for it is Restriction to Singing of Praise God only; but
grants, Ibid.
The Object an Hymn or Hymning, according to the Usage in Profane Authors, ha^^
been extended both to Men and Things; a^ cites Scapula, as I have done,
rendering the Wo^^ Irrestrictively, and saying, Ibid. p. 51.
Som^times It peculiarly signifies Verse composed for the Honor of God: A^^
therefore I cannot Imagine why R. A. should ^^fer us to this Author for a more
full Proof, the an Hymn necessarily includes God, as the Obje^^ seeing he is so
far from Limiting the Use of (...) to God, that he expressly acknowledges it is
E^tension both to Men and Things.

The Literal Faults in this Learned Minist^^ Reflections, and such as respect
the right Pointi^^ or Accenting of the Greek, I can easily place among the
Errata of the Press, as [(...) for (...), Sibi for Tibi, p. 48. (...) for
(...), five times over, p. 49, 50, 51, 52. (...) for (...), p. 50. (...) for
(...), Carnem for Carmen, p. 52.] but how can we ascribe this Passage to the
Printer's Oversight? But such as took the Radix, (...), have translated the
Words otherwise, as Jun. and Trem. Note this is the Translation of Montanus,
Psalm. 78.63. and not of Jun. and Trem.
Non Epithalamio celebratae sunt, i. e. were not honored with a Wedding-Song,
p. 52. When their Translation is, Non laudarentur, were not Praised; Or what
shall we say to this? On Ver. 20. he gives an Account out of Josephus, of the
Jews manner in Eating the Passover, and closing item with an Hymn, consisting
of Psalm. 113. and the five immediately following, which the Jews call their
Magnum Hallelujah, their great Song of Praise to God, p. 53.

For there is no such Account out of Josephus, as I can find, either in Leigh's
Critics, or in Beza's Notes upon the Place; and they are the Author's he
refers to. All which Mistakes, both Literal, Punctual and Verbal, committed in
the Compass of Nine Octavo Pages, (for the Reflections consist of no more,)
considered by any Indifferent Arbiter, cannot but incline him to think the
Erroneous Translation of Marlorate, p. 55. Non autem necessario evincit, but
undoubtedly it does evince, for It does not necessarily evince, was rather the
Oversight of the Reflecter, than Printed by a Mistake of the Overseer of the
Press, as he Apologizes for himself, in his Epistle at the End of R. A's.
Animadversions and Appendix.

2. Augustine says, Si sit laus, and Dei laus, and non cantetur, non est
Hymnus, If it be Praise, and of God, and be not Sung, it is not an Hymn.

Answ. This being an Assertion without Proof, and contrary to the Primary and
Proper Signification of the Word, which is Simply Praise, let us see how R. A.
endeavors to make it out.

R. A. Though some render it, (viz. Hymnesantes) an Hymn being said, yet this is
so far from contradicting ours, (viz. Our Translation) which tells us they Sang
it, that it indeed implies the same thing, a Hymn necessarily including
Singing, as has been proved. And though some o^ our Old Translations render it,
they said Grace or They Praised God, yet none of them tell us, they did it not
by Singing. Essay, p. 18, 19.

But supposing these Translators intended so to Intimate, (which is not likely,
they being themselves in the Practice of Singing, as a part of Divine Worship)
it will only follow, that they have mistaken the Sense of the Words, Those
ancient Translations being not made so much from the Original, as from some
other Latin Versions, as the Learned Bishop Wilkins tells us, in his Gift of
Preaching, (p. 48.) and they might take the Latin Version [Hymno dicto] in the
Vulgar, and Montanus, to signify no more than a Hymn being said, whereas
indeed it properly signifies, a Hymn being Sung, for so this Word [Dicere]
generally signifies in the best Latin Authors, when used with a Word that
signifies any Poetical Composure. Thus Dicere Versus, in Virgil, [Eclog. 5.
line 2.] is To Sing Verses; and Dicere Carmen, in the same Author, [ Eclog. 5.
line 50, 51.] is To Sing a Song; and Dicere Lauds, in Horace, [ Carmen
seculare, line 76.] is To Sing Praises: In all which, and many other Places,
where it is used in such Phrases, it is rendered [Canere] to Sing; by those very
Learned Expositors of these Authors, [in Vsunt Delphini] for the Use of the
Dauphin. Appendix, p. 63.

Answ. There are many that render Hymnesantes, Hymno dicto, an Hymn or Praise
being said, as Hierom, Beda, and the Latins generally, 'til Erasmus undertook
to Correct the Vulgar Latin, and changed Hymno dicto, an Hymn or Praise being
said, into Cum Hymnum cecinissent, when they had sung an Hymn or Praise;
thereby stretching the Greek Word beyond it is Native and Proper Signification,
to One Adventitious and Improper. And what though there is no Contradicton
between Saying and Singing an Hymn? It does not follow that the former implys
the latter; for how many Thousand Synonymous Words and Identical Propositions,
should we have more than there are, if things not Contradictory implied the
same? Were this True, as undoubtedly it is not, there would be no Distinction,
but where there is a Contradiction; and then Dipping and Sprinkling, Preaching
and Praying, would not differ; for these are not Contradictory Terms or Acts,
and therefore according to R. A. imply the same thing. Nay, if Saying an Hymn
implies Singing, then it seems, if a Man should Say an Hymn of Prudentius, or
One of his own Composure, and not use any such Modulation of the Voice, as is
called Singing, he implicitly Sings it. But surely R. A. will dismiss this
Notion upon better Thoughts, especially, if he thinks he spoke properly, Essay,
p. 29. where he describes Singing, to be an Expression and Modulation of the
Voice, different from mere Speaking, and all other Expressions of it: For if
this Description of Singing be stood to, Saying cannot possibly imply Singing,
which he himself makes so vastly different from. When I compared what he says,
Essay, p. 19. with p. 29. I could not see how he could reconcile them, unless
he had imbibed this Notion, that Two Contradictory Propositions are Equipollent
or Convertible; and that it is no Absurdity to Affirm, and Deny the same thing
of the same Subject, (...), in the same respect, as the Logicians speak. But
though R. A. is pleased one while to Confound Saying and Singing, and another
while to distinguish them; yet in all English Authors to the best of my
Observation, they are constantly distinguished. If he can produce one Example
to the contrary, I desire him to do it: I will give him a few Instances for the
present to prove their Distinction, which the Compilers of the
Common Prayer Book, (out of which I have Collected them) do constantly observe
in the Rubricks.

Then shall be Morn. Prayer.
Said or Sung this Psalm following.

Then shall be Ibid.
Said or Sung in English, the Hymn called, Te Deum laudamus.

Then shall be Ibid.
Sung or Said the Apostles Creed by the Minister.

Then shall be Even. Prayer.
Said or Sung the Psalms in Order as they are appointed. Then a Lesson out of
the Old Testament, as is appointed; and after that, Magnificat, (or the Song of
the Blessed Virgin Mary) in English.

Then shall be Ibid.
Said or Sung the Apostles Creed by the Minister and the People standing.

The like Direction is given about the Litany, the Athanasian and Nicene
Creeds. And in the Order for the Burial of the Dead, The Priests and Clerks
meeting the Corpse at the Entrance of the Churchyard, and Going before it,
either into the Church, or toward the Grave, shall Say or Sing, I am the
Resurrection and the Life, etc.

While the Corpse is made ready to be laid into the Earth, the Priest shall Say,
or the Priest and Clerks shall Sing, Man that is born of a Woman, has but a
short time to live, etc.

And while the Earth shall be cast upon the Body, the Priest shall Say,
Forasmuch as it has pleased Almighty God of his great Mercy, to take unto
himself the Soul of our Dear Brother [or Sister] here departed, etc. And after
this it is added, Then shall be Said or Sung, I heard a Voice from Heaven,
saying unto me Write, from henceforth Blessed are the Dead, etc. And in all
these Places the Distinction is observed both in the Latin and Greeks
Translations of the Common Prayer Book.

But R. A. proceeds, Though some of our Old Translations render it, They said
Grace, or They Praised God, yet none of them tell us, they did it not by
Singing. What then? because they do not tell us, they did it not by Singing, is
it good Logic to infer they did it by Singing? Suppose ^ Paedo-baptist, to
prove the Lawfulness of Sprink^ing, or Pouring Water upon Infants or Adult
Persons, should use this Medium, viz. Though the Scriptures tell us, that Adult
Persons were Baptized, yet they do not say, that any were not Baptized by
Sprinkling or Pouring; for this the Scriptures do not say in Express Terms: Or
a Papist, to prove the Corporal and Carnal Presence of Christ ^n the Eucharist,
should argue, that when Christ took Bread, and said, This is my Body, he did
not tell ^is Disciples, there was no Conversion of the Bread unto his Body:
Would R. A. grant either of them their Argument, upon so Weak a Bottom as this
^ind of Plea must be acknowledged to be? I suppose he would not; and yet his
own Medium to ^rove Singing by, is sufficient to Justify either of their Ways
of Proof.

The next Thing I take Notice of, is his Attempt to Invalidate our Old
Translations in general, As being not made so much from the Original, as from
other Latin Versions; for which he cites Wilkins, in his Gift of Preaching, p.
48. And because he thinks to Effect his Design under this Man's Name, it will
be needful to Consider, what Wilkins says about the Latin Versions: For if our
Old Translations were made more from the Latin than the Original, yet if the
Latin were made from the Original, then our Old Translations made from the
Latin, where they exactly agree with the Original, are still to be acknowledged
to be o^ good Authority. Now Wilkins mentions five Chief Translations of the
Bible into Latin.

"1. The Vulgar, commonly ascribed to Hierom

2. Pagnine's Translation, which is of good Antiquity and Esteem, Published An.
Dom^ 1523. altered by Arias Montanus in the interlineary Bible.

3. The Tigurine Translation, begun by Leo Juda^ and finished by other Reformed
Divines, An. Dom^ 1543. Published by Robert Stephens, 1557. wit^ Notes annexed,
which he ascribes to Vatablus.

4. The Translation of Sebastian Castalio, which is for the most part very
Elaborate and Subtle but not without too much Affectation of Elegance
Published first Anno Dom. 1551.

5. The Latin Version, which is in most common use amongst us, being performed
by those Learned Men, Fran. Junius, and Eman. Tremellius, wit^ very great
Diligence and Judgment.

The Latin Translations [of the New Testament^ are chiefly of three Kinds;
Namely, 1. The V^gar. 2. Erasmus. 3. Bez^ Which are all commonl^ known, and in
their sever^^ kinds of good Repute Gift of Preaching, p. 35. Edit. 4.
.

Now the Vulgar Latin translates Hymnesantes by Hymno dicto, an Hymn or Praise
being said; which R. A. does not at first seem much to except against, nor
Essay, p. 19.
Those of our Old Translations, which render it, They said Grace, or They
Praised God. And the Reason is plain, He has an Art to make Saying and Singing
of an Hymn Identical Phrases, and would persuade us, that Saying of Grace, or
Praising God, was performed by Singing; because those Old Translations do not
tell us, nor so much as intimate the contrary. But supposing our Old
Translators intended to intimate the contrary, then the Appendix, p. 63.
Old Translations in General are presently censured, as having mistaken the
Sense of ^he Words, and that Censure backed with the Authori^y of Wilkins, and
all to avoid the Force of that Rendering, which he cannot but know makes
directly against him. But now Wilkins does not charge all our Old Translations
as R. A. does; his Words are these, For the Translations of the Bible into our
own Vulgar Tongue, there are some of these so Ancient as Henry the 8th. his
Time, by Tindal and Matthews; but these Translations were not so much from the
Original Hebrew and Greek, as from some other Latin Version Gift of Preaching,
p. 36. Edit. 4.
: Where ob^erve, this Author speaks but ^f two Translations, viz. of Tindal and
Matthews, ^o made, though R. A. brings the Old Translations ^n General under that
Imputation. I have no De^ign in this Discourse to plead for the Old
Tran^ations, any further than they accord with the Ori^inal; where they do so
accord, as I apprehend ^hey do in the Rendering of Mat. 26.30. I think they
ought so far to be defended against all Assailants.

Lastly, R. A. tells us, that Hymno Dicto, which the Old Translators might take
to signify no more than an Hymn being said, does indeed properly signify an
Hymn being Sung; which I cannot let pa^ without a Remark, because though Dicere,
to Say, o^ Speak, when used with a Word that signify Poetical Composure, may
sometimes signify to Sing as the Dauphin Interpreters of Virgil and Horac^ and
before them, Notae Variorum inform us: Yet the Use of the Word is Metonymical
and Improper and not Proper, nor General, as R. A. Affirms. For

1. I do not find in Cooper, Littleton, or the Cambridge-Dictionary, that
Dicere has any such Signif^cation at all. We well know the Liberty that Poe^
often use, in extending the Signification both o^ Words and Phrases; thus
Agmen, a Troop or Brigad^ joined with Aquarum, is put for a Violent Shower
Glomerare, to VVind round as Thread upon a bottom joined with Tempestatem,
signifies to Gather a Storm [Virg. Georg. l. 1. v. 322, 323.] Ludus, Play or
P^stime, put for War, [Hor. Carm. l. 1. Ode 2. v. 37. Deterere, to Bruise or
Beat out as in Threshing, joyne^ with Lauds, signifies to Diminish ones
Praises. [Ibi^ Od. 6. v. 11, 12.] Sacramentum, a Military Oath, pu^ for a
Soldier. [Juven. Sat. 16. v. 36.] but then w^ must not from this Poetical
Liberty infer a Pro^priety of their Signification.

2. As Dicere, when used with a Word that signifies Poetical Composure, does
not properly signify to Sing; so it is not generally so used. For the General
Use is to Say, Speak, Describe, Pr^nounce, Rehearse, Thus Dicere Facta in
Virgi^ [Eclog. 4. v. 54. and 8. v. 8.] is to Write the H^story of ones Acts, as
Cooper expounds it. Dicere Pugnas, [Georg. l. 3. v. 46.] is to Proclaim Wars, a
Ogilby translates it. Dicere Spectacula, Duces, More^ Studia, Populos, Praelia,
[Georg. l. 4. v. 3, 4, 5.] i^ to Speak of, or Describe Shows, Generals,
Manners* Studies, People, Battles. Novissima Verba dicere [Aeneid, l. 6. v.
231.] to utter the last Words. Dicere Bella, Acies, [Aeneid. l. 7. v. 41, 42.]
is to speak of Wars, Armies. Dicere Carmen, [Hor. Carmen Seculare, lib. Epod.
v. 8.] is to Pronounce Verse, vid. Littleton's Dictionary. Dicere lauds [Hor.
ibid. v. the last] is to Praise, Bromes Hor. Eng. So Dicere versus in Cooper is
to Speak Verses, Precantia verba dicere, to entreat. And Carmina dicere tacita
voce, [Ovid. Metam. l. 9. v. 301, 302.] is to Speak Charms or Verses with a
still or low voice. Multitudes of Examples more might be produced, if there
were Occasion, to show, that Dicere, when used in Poetical Composure, does not
properly, nor generally signify to Sing, as R. A. pretends: But these
Instances, I hope, may be satisfactory. But suppose they should not be so, the
Citations out of Virgil and Horace by R. A. will not help him at all in his
rendering Hymno dicto, an Hymn being Sung; unless he could prove Christ used
Poetical Composure, Mat. 26.30. which will be hard for him there to do, except
the Words were set down wherewith Christ Praised his Father, which are not by
the Evangelists.

R. A. They [that is, the Translators] are much less guilty of Contradicting
the Text, by rendering the Words, they Sung, instead of they Lamented, as is
ignorantly (to say no worse) intimated by a late Querist. I have searched all
Places where this (...).
Word is used by the Seventy, and can find nothing in them for this Suggestion:
And though any Instance should be found in profane Writers of it is being thus
used, by way of Antithesis, yet I think it would be very unreasonable therefore
to take it in such a strained Sense in the Scripture. Essay, p. 19, 20.

I grant, the Word may possibly be used in that Sense, in some Profane
Writers, by way of Antithesis, or if he had rather Antiphras^ (that I may
escape the Correction he threate^ me with) but yet being never so used by t^
LXX, whom the New Testament Writers g^nerally follow in the use of Words, I
cannot b^ conclude it groundless, to fancy such a Sense (...) it in the
Evangelists. Vindication, p. 27.

Answ. It Is well R. A. has upon second Though^ corrected himself, for
Antithesis is either the pu^ting of one Letter for another, as Ollis for Illis:
As* Igneus est ollis vigor and coelestis Origo. Virg. Aeneid. l. 6. v. 730.

Or the Mutual Opposition of Contraries in ^ Sentence; as, Parvula (nam Exemplo
est) magni formica labori Hor. Sermon. l. 1. Sat. 1. v. 33.

But Antiphrasis is, when a Word has a contrary Meaning to the Original Sense
of it; as, Parc^ quod nemini parcant, Calep. Diction.

And it had been no less commendable for hi^ to have withdrawn his Charge of
Ignorance against the late Querist: For the Querist only asks, Whether the Term
The Axe at the Root of the Innovation of Singing. p. 8.
Hymnesantes does no^ as strongly imply, that the Lamented, as that they Sung
and Rejoiced? An^ the Reasons of the Query are these; Greek Written do sometimes
use the Word by Antiphrasis, to Mour^ or Lament, as Suidas, Eustathius,
Stephanus, Scapul^ Constantine and Sylburgius tell us: And the Improbability of
the Disciples being in a Singing Frame a^ this Time, for their Hearts were
greatly troubled when Christ told them, that One of them should bett^ him, Mat.
26.21. and this was at Supper, just before he broke Bread with them, and not
long before he was betrayed: So that if the Word should be taken here for
Mourning or Lamenting, I see no Inconvenience or Absurdity that will ensue
thereupon: Nor will it follow, that Acts 16.25. and Heb. 2.12. are so to be
taken, though the Word is the same: For we do not read, that Paul and Silas were
in a sorrowful Frame; but the Text says expressly, that the Disciples were, Mat.
26.22. And Dr. Owen applies Heb. 2.12. to Christ's Rejoicing after his Passion;
He no sooner was delivered (says he) from his Sufferings, but as he lands upon
the Shore from that Tempest wherein he was tossed in his Passion, he cries out,
I will declare thy Name unto my Brethren, in the midst of the Congregation will
I Sing Praises unto thee. See his Expos. upon the Place.

Nor does R. A's. Reply to Dr. Russel, Vindicat. ^. 27. and Appendix, p. 65.
take off the Force of the Dr's Answer: For he himself grants, after Christ's
^owerful Arguments, contained in the 14th. 15th. and 16th. Chapters of John,
and his most ravishing ^rayer, Chap. 17. to Comfort and Revive the Disci^les
Minds, that some of them, were after again seized with Sorrow, when they beheld
him in his dismal ^gony, Luke 22.45. Appendix, p. 65. Where, though ^e would
insinuate that the Disciples were raised to Frame of Singing, sometime between
Christ's say^g to them at Supper, One of you shall Betray me, and ^is Bloody
Agony; yet there is not one Circumstance (...) all the Context but mere
Conjecture, to ground ^is Insinuation upon: And I think it is a safer Way (...)
draw such Inferences from Scripture, both with ^espect to Doctrine and
Practice, as the Context ^ill bear; than to lay down positive Conclusions ^rst,
and then strive for Proof, not from express ^cripture, or any Certain and
Necessary Consequences therefrom; but an Ambiguous and Contingent
Interpretation thereof.

That the LXX use not Hymneo to Mourn or L^ment, and the New Testament Writers
general follow them in the use of Words, will make little against the Querist
or the Dr. For there are man Words in the New Testament that are neither use in
the LXX, nor are of Greek Extraction, but ar^ Latin Words, clothed in Greek
Characters, wit^ some little Variation to sui^ them to that Language, as (...).
So^darion, Simicinthion, Acts 19.12* Kensos, Mat. 22.17. Denarion^ Mat. 20.13.
Kodrantes, Mat. 5* 26. Koustodia, Mat. 27.65. Pra^torion, v. 27. Makellon, 1
Cor* 10.25. Legeon, Mar. 5.9. Lention, John 13.4. wit^ several more. And there
are some used, both b^ the LXX, and the Writers of the N. Testament and yet are
sometimes used by the Former in a Sens^ much different from the Latter. For
Example, (...),
Hypostasi^ which in the N. Testament signifies Substance, Person, Confidence,
Confident Boasting, is used by the LXX. for a Burden, Deuteronomy 1.12. for a
Garrison, 1 Samuel 14.4. for Age, Psalm 39.5. and for Standing, Psalm. 69.2* So
(...),
Psyche, which in the N. Testamen^ signifies the Life, Soul, Mind, Heart, i^
used by the LXX. for a Dead Body Numb. 9.6, 7, 10. And (...).
Baptizo, which signifies to Dip or Plung, is used by the LXX. to Affright,
Isa. 21.4. And therefore though Hymneo should not be used by the Seventy to Mourn
or Lament; and the Writers of the N. Testament do generally follow them in the
Use of Words: Yet for as much as we see they do not always so, there is room
enough left for an Exception, in this no-less than i^ the Instances given, all
Circumstances being considered; unless the N. Testament Writers did constantly
tread in their Track.

But says R. A. When They tell us, that (Hymneo) signifies to Lament and
Complain, it has been also before evidenced, that they intend not all kind of
Lamenting and Complaining, but only that which is expressed by Lamenting and
Complaining Songs; and so this Lamenting and Complaining is not opposed to, but
inclusive of Singing. Appendix, p. 64.

Answ. If R. A. would stand to the Determination of the Lexicographers, which
he refers to in ^he Relative [They], there would soon be an End of the Dispute:
For it is manifest from them, that Authors do also use the Word to express
Lamenting and Complaining, without Singing. Thus Lex.
Scapula and Constantine tell us it is used by Plato and Sophocles, as (...),
Plat. Epist. 7.
Hymnein tauta, to Lament these things, and (...), Sophoc. Trag. Electra.
Hymneseis kaka, thou shall Lament thy Miseries. He that thinks these Authors
^ntend such a Lamenting, as is only expressed by Lamenting and Complaining
Songs, may easily, by consulting of them, satisfy himself of the contrary.

Sect. 7. I come now to the remaining Part of ^y Undertaking, motioned p. 61,
62. which is to produce my Testimonies, to Prove the Primary and Proper
Signification of Hymneo, to be Simply to Praise. And though this may seem Actum
agere, to be a doing again of that which is done already, in the Examination
and Confutation of R. A's. Evidence for the contrary Sense of the Word: Yet the
former Sections being spent, mostly (...), in demolishing of his Mistaken
Structure, the present Work will appear both Necessary and Orderly. And that we
may not labor in the dark R. A. and those of his Party have done, a few thi^
shall be premised, in Order to set the Controv^^sie in a clear Light; and by
which as certain Rul^ or Tests of Probation, we may both Distinguish a Judge
aright.

Our Opponents strenuously maintain, that ^wor^ Word signifies Primarily and
Properly to Sing Prai^ We say, though the Word is so used sometimes; y^ this is
only a Secondary and Improper Signification of and the Primary and Proper is
Simply to Praise. (...) which Senses of the Word, as it is pleaded for both
Sides Pro and Con, each Party c^te Testim^nies out of Authors: Now there must
be so^ Rules to Distinguish and Determine, which Se^ is Primary and Proper, and
which Secondary a Improper; or there may be a continual Allegati^ of
Authorities, One aganist Another; seeing t^ Word is used sometimes to Sing
Praise, as well Simply to Praise. I therefore propose these follo^ing Rules to
Consideration:

Rule 1. If a Word has both a Simple and Co^pound Signification, it is most
Reasonable to Conclude, that the Simple is P imary and Proper, a^ the Compound
Secondary and Improper; and the R^^son is, because all Compounds, whether in
Natu^ or Art, necessarily arise from Simples. Thus Natural Philosophy, Corpora
simplicia sunt prio^ Mixtis, Simple Bodies are before Mixed; the Element as
Earth, Air, Fire and Water, are before tho Bodies that are made out of them.
And in Gra^mar; Letters, which are as Simples, or Elements that Art, are first,
and then Syllables, Words, Se^tences.

Rule 2. It being generally acknowledged, the no Words signify Naturally, but
by Imposition an^ Institution; therefore the Usage of Authors, the are most
Ancient and Well-approved, are most likely to lead us to the First Institution,
and consequently to the Primary and Proper Sense of them.

These are the Rules I Propose to Consideration; against which, I think, there
can ly no just Exception; and therefore shall see how applicable they are to
the Matter in Hand.

1. It Is most Rational to conclude, that the Primary and Proper Signification
of Hymneo is Simply to Praise, or to Praise without Singings; because, to
Praise is a Simple Signification, but to Sing Praise is Mixed and Compounded;
which must therefore be Secondary, in respect of the other.

2. Seeing no Words signify Naturally, but by Imposition and Institution, and
that the Usage of Authors that are most Ancient and Well-approved, is most
likely to lead us to the First Institution, and so to the Primary and Proper
Sense of them; I shall therefore prove the Primary and Proper Signification of
Hymneo, is Simply to Praise:

1. From Ancient Heathen Greek Writers.

2. From the Septuagint and Apocrypha.

3. From the best Greek Lexicographers, both Ancient and Modern.

4. From many Learned Translators of, and Commentators upon Mat. 26.30. and
Acts 16.25.

First, From Ancient Heathen Greek, Writers; viz. Homer, Hesiod, Herodotus,
Thucydides, Isocrates, Xenophon, Plato, Plutarch, Herodian.

1. Homer is very Ancient; Tuscul. Quaest.
Cicero makes him contemporary with Lycurgus, and Great Histor. Geograph. and
Poet. Diction.
Hierom places him at the Year of the World 3179. De Poet. Graec.
Vossius at 3039. and Tab. Chronolog.
Littleton at 3000. According to which last Account, he was 948 Years before
the Birth of Christ, and about the Time of the Prophets Elijah and Elisha. In
his Book, Entitled, (...), Hynmno^ Hymns, or Praises, it does plainly appear,
tha^ Hymneo does Primarily and Properly signify Simply (...) Praise. For,

1. He uses other Words to express the Act of Singing by, as (...),
Aedo, (...),
Ado, (...),
Melpomai; but Hymne^ is all along used to Praise.

2. Where ever I find the Word Hymneo used b^ Homer, it is rendered by the Latin
Translator, La^do, Celebro, I Praise Simply: See (...), Quomodo enim te laudabo?

(...), Apollinem laudaverint.

(...), Laudans argentiarcum.

(...). Laudant utique Deorum Dona immortalia, and Hominum aerumnas.

(...), Quo pacto igitur te laudabo?


Hymn. in Apo^ v. 19, 158, 178, 190, 19 207. (...), Mercurium lauda Musa.
In Mercur. v. ^ (...), Dianam laudat Musa.
In Dian. v. 1. (...), Laudat Musa.
Matrem Deor. v. 2. (...), Celebrant autem Deos beatos, and longum Olympum.
In Pan. v. 27. (...), Solemn laudare.
In Sc^ v. 1.

3. He sometimes ^seth (...),
Ode, (...),
Mope, and frequently (...),
Aoide, for Cantio, Cantus, Cantilena, Siniging, o^ Song: But (...).
Hymn^ for Laus, Praise; where of many Instances might be produced. I sha^ give
one that will clea^ the Matter beyond Exception. In the 8t^ Book of his Odysse^
where he relates the Story of Vlysses's Reception by Alcinous and the
Phaeacians; among other Directions that Alcinous gives his Queen Arete^ about
the Entertainment, he orders that Vlyss^^ be treated with a Banquet and
Singing: The Words are these, (...). Odyss. l. 8. v. 429.


Et Convivio oblectetur, and Cantilenae laudem audiens.
Let him be Delighted with a Banquet, and hear the Praise of a Song.
And what this Laudatory Song was, Homer tells us a little after, viz. a Song
in Praise of the Trojan Horse, and the Greeks Destruction of Troy: Which does
not at all suit with R. A's. Notion of Hymnos, for he restrains it to God,
Essay, p. 17, 18. but here it is otherwise applied. Again, what an Absurdity
would it be, to Render [Aoides Hymnos] according to the Style of him and his
Brethren, a Song of Praise of a Song? and yet so it ought to be read, if their
Opinion were true; which would be such an insipid Tautology, as would not, I
suppose, be very well relished.

Upon the whole matter then we may conclude, that Hymneo, as used by Homer,
signifies Primarily and Properly, Simply to Praise; and Hymnos is Simply,
Praise. For though he uses both these Words in his Verses, and applies them
sometimes to Singing, yet neither the one is used by him to Sing Praise, nor
the other for a Song of Praise; but as other Words importing Singing are either
joined with them, or so interwoven in the Texture of the Poetry as to help out
that Signification. And if any should pretend, that [Aoides Hymnos] is a
Phraseological or Figurative Expression; yet that will do no Service, unless
they could prove that Aoides is a Super-numerary Word, and of no Signification;
which will be hard to do, since it is so frequently used by Homer and other
Poets, but never insignificantly.

2. Hesiod is also very Ancient; Philostratus, Velleius Paterculus, and M.
Varro, make him Contemporary with Homer; but Porphyrius places him 100, and
Solinus 130 Years after: See Phillips' Theatrum Poetarum.

Hesiod makes the same Distinction that we have before observed in Homer: For
he expresses the Act of Singing by Theogon. v. 1, 34, 75.
Aeido, and Ibid. v. 66.
Melpomai, and a Song by Ibid. v. 22, 44, 60, 83, 104.
Aeide; but the Act o^ Praising by Op. and Dier. l. 1. v. 2.
Hymneo. And that Primary and Proper Sense of Hymneo is Simply to Praise he
has given us his Mind a^ clearly, as though he had been chosen Umpire in the
Controversy. I will recit^ his Words at large, that every one may make a^
Estimate for himself.

-- (...)
(...). Theogon v. 47, 48.
-- Jovem Deorum Patrem atque etiam Hominum
Incipientesque laudant Deae, and cessantes a Cantu.
-- The Muses both beginning [to Sing] and ceasing from Singing, Praise
Jupiter, etc.
Here he makes a manifest Difference between Singing of Praise, and Simple
Praising: For though he ascribes Singing of Praise to the Muses, which is
expressed v. 44. by (...), Celebrant Cantilena.
Kleiousin^ Aoide, They Praise with a Song; yet he does not here necessarily
comprehend it in the Word Hymneo; for in saying they Praise, when they cease
from Singing, nothing can be more plain than that Hymning does not necessarily
include Singing; and consequently, Singing of Praise is not it is Pimary and
Proper Signification.

3. Herodotus, an Ancient Greek Writer in Prose, whom Tully calls the Father of
History, and placed by Tabula Chronolog.
Littleton at the Year of the World 3508 about 440 Years before the Birth of
Christ, uses the Word Hymneo in the Sense we contend for. Thus Lex,
Constantine (as we have noted before, p. 69.) renders (...), Hymneatai, from
him, Celebrati sunt, They were ^raised: Which according to Stephanus, is in
Prose Simply so.

4. Thucydides, who wrote the History of the Peloponnesian War, in Greek Prose,
lived about the Year of the World Littleton Tab. Chronolog.
3519. about 429 Years before the Birth of Christ, and was contemporary with
the Prophets Haggai and Zachary, gives us the same Signification of the Word
that Herodotus does. Thus De Bello Peloponn. l. 1. p. 15. G. L. ex Interpret.
Laur. Vallae, Edit. Francofurti, 1594.
(...), Hym^kasi peri auton, is translated by Laurentius Valla, Celebrarunt
^eas, They have praised them. And Ibid. l. 2. p. 126.
(...), Hai gar ten polin hymnesa, hai ton de, kai ton toionde aretai
ekosmesan. Nam istorum, and his similium [Virorum] Virtutes civitatem [rebus
illis] ornarunt, quas ego jam laudavi; The Virtues or Valor of these and such
like Men, adorned the City with those things which I have already Praised. That
is, the Historian himself Praised them without Singing. So that his Use of the
Word Hymneo apparently denotes the Simple Act of Praising, and consequently
it is Primary and Proper Signification, according to Rule 1.

5. Isocrates, one of the most Famous Orators of Greece, born at Athens and
flourished Littleton ubi supra, and Helvic. Chronol.
An. Mundi, 3554. before the Birth of Christ 394. about the Time of Chap. 7.
Ezara's going to Jerusalem, is another punctual Evidence for us: Thus speaking
of Hercules, he faith, (...). Orat. ad Philip.
Hoi men alloi te^ andrian hymnountes anton kaitous athlous aparithmountes
d^atelousi, There are some wh^ continually Praise his Valor, and Reckon up his
Labors. So mentioning the Troja^ War, he says, (...). Evagoras.
Hypo panto^ anthropon hymnoumenon, It was Celebrated or Praised of all Men So
speaking of the Adulteries of the feigned Heathen-Goddesses he says, (...).
Helenae Laudatio.
Hos kalon onton to^ pepragmenon, hymneisthai mallon e siopasthai peri auto^
eboulethesan. They chose rather to have them Praised as things well done, than
to be suppressed in Silence. And of the Greeks, who conquered Troy, and of
Minos, Rhadamanthus, and Aeacus, (contemporary with Hercules and Theseus, he
says, (...). Panathenaicus.
Hymnoumenon ep^tais aretais tautauis, They were Praised for these Virtues. Now
that the Word Hymneo is used by Isocrates, Simply to Praise, is evident not
only from the Context; but also from his indifferent Acceptance of it for
(...), Evagoras.
Enkomiazo, and (...), Ibid.
Epaineo, both which are well known not to signify Primarily to Sing Praise,
but Simply to Praise.

6. Xenophon, a Native of Athens, and who lived Helvic. Theat. Histor. and
Chronolog.
An. Mundi, 3561. (about the Time that Chap. 2.
Nehemiah came to Jerusalem) 387 Years before the Nativity of Christ, uses the
Word Simply to Praise; an Example whereof Chabotij Praelect. in Hor. Poem. Tom.
1. p. 6.
Gaza, in Cato Major produces out of Xenophon's Which Book Columella says,
Cicero turned into Latin. Vid. Calep. I find these Words, in Cic. de Senectute,
Quam copiose ab eo agricultura laudatur?
Oeconomicus, (...) Hoson oun philotimos pros autou georgia hymneitai; Quam
igitur studiose ab ipso celebratur agricultura? How studiously does he Praise
or Commend Husbandry? From whence who can but conclude, that the Simple, and so
the Primary and Proper Signification is to Praise without Singing?

7. Plato, born also Athens, and flourished An. Mundi, Helvic. ubi supra.
3582. before Christ was born 366 Years, is a clear Evidence in the present
Case: For speaking of Temperance, he says, De Repub. l. 2.
(...), Pantes ex henos stomatos hymnousin hos kalon; Omnes uno Ore celebrant
ut bonum, All Men Commend or Praise it as good.

8. Plutarch of Chaeronea (who lived An. Christi 104. as Ubi supra.
Helvicus and others inform us) uses the Word to Praise Simply, or without
Singing: In his Precepts for the preserving of Health, he has two Passages
very express and full to our Purpose; the One is this,

As Plato was wont to ask himself after the Miscarriage of other Men he had
been with, Am not I also such an One? So ought a Man to take Care by his
Neighbors misfortunes, and diligently to beware that he do not fall into them,
and being forced to keep his Bed (...), Hymnesei pothon ten polytimeton
hygieian, there Praise and Commend precious Health above all things, wishing
and desiring it again.

The Other as follows, The declining of all Business, though never so
honorable, signified nothing to Epicurus and his Followers, (...), Pros ten
hymnoumenen sarkos eustatheian, as to that so much Praised or Commended good
Habit of Body.

9. Herodian, a Grammarian and Historian of Alexandria, and who lived (says
Ibid.
Helvicus) An. Christi, 224. delivers the same Sense of the Word which the
forementioned Authors do; (...), Lib. 1. Sect. 43.
Ton men kolakon eis andreias doxan auta hymnounton; Angelus Politianus Interp.
Ob quae Studia adulatores eum fortitudinis gloria celebrabant, For which
Studies (speaking of Commodus the Roman Emperor) his Parasites Fraised or
Extolled him with the Glory of Fortitude.

If now R. A. should reply, that all these Testimonies import only the
Consequent and Figurative Sense of the Word, and not the Primary and Proper
Signification; I suppose his bare Assertion will be taken for no Answer by any,
who understand the Greek Tongue, and are both capable of Judging when a Word is
used Properly, and when Improperly by an Author, and will be Impartial in
delivering their Opinion. For the Simple Signification of all Words (as was
said before) must necessarily be the Primary and Proper Sense thereof.

Secondly, As we have the Testimony of these Ancient Heathen Greek Writers,
that the Primary and Proper Signification of Hymneo is Simply to Praise; so we
have the Concurrence of the Septuagint, a Name commonly given to the Seventy
two Learned Jews, who translated the Old Testament out of Hebrew into Greek, at
the Request of Ptolemy Philadelphus, the Son of Lagus King of Egypt, An. Mundi
3698 (as Tab. Chronolog.
Littleton), 3699. (as Thesaur. Chronolog.
Alstedius tells us) about 250 Years before the Birth of Christ. See their
Testimonies cited, and the Objection against them fully Answered, p. 76. as
also those Places in the Old Testament, where Hymnos is rendered by our
Translators, Simply Praise, p. 70, 71.

Consentaneous hereunto are also the Books called Apocrypha, who though not
received by the Jews into the Canon of the Bible, nor allowed to be read in
their Public Synagogues or Temple by the Priests; yet they may (I hope) as
well be alleged as any other Authorities, to prove the Sense of a Word; for
which, and no other End, they are here cited. The first Instance I shall give
is in the Song of the three Children, from v. 27. to the End; where Hymneo is
used above thirty times Simply to Praise. For in all the Places where the Word
occurs, both Montanus and Junius have rendered it by Lando, and our Translators
to Praise. Which makes me admire, why these last should call it a Song, when
the Title in Greek is [ Apocrypha at the End of the LXX. Printed at Cambridge
in the Year 1665.
(...), Ton trion paidon Ainesis,] The Praise or Thanksgiving of the three
Children; and there is not any thing to countenance it, either from Hym^^o so
often there used, or from the Version of it by themselves, or the Latin
Translators. Another is in Ecclesiasticus 39.35. where the Propriety of the
Word is expressed by Montanus and Junius, and our English Version, Simply to
Praise. See also Wisd. 10.20. and 1 Mac. 4.33. And to show us also that Hymnos
does not Primarily and Properly signify a Song of Praise, nor is restrained to
God as the Object; the Title of the 44th. Chap. of Ecclesiasticus, is [
Apocrypha, Ibid.
(...), Pateron hymnos], the Praise of the Fathers. And our Translation gives
the Contents of the Chap. agreeably thereunto, viz. The Praise of certain holy
Men, of Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; The Praise Simply, not a Song of
Praise: For the Chapter is a brief Recital of their Praises, without any Word
or Words importing the Singing of them, as is manifest from the whole, and
particularly the first and seventh Verses; Let us now Praise Famous Men, and
our Fathers that begat us. There be of them that have left a Name behind them,
that their Praises might be reported.

If it should be Objected, that the Words Hymneo and Hymnos are also otherwise
used in Judith 16.13. Eccles. 47.8. 1 Mac. 13.47, 51. 2 Mac. 10.7, 38. and
there imply Praising, or the Praise of God by Singing; I readily Answer they
do, and therefore was not willing to pass them over in Silence, as though these
or the like Instances made against us, and so be thought to conceal them on
purpose from the Unlearned Reader. For they do not in the least either
Strengthen R. A's. Sense of them, or Weaken mine; for it is the Primary and
Proper Signification that I plead for, which is Simply to Praise, or Praise,
not denying them that Secondary and Improper Sense, which R. A. without any
good Ground or Evidence, would fain set up as their Primary and Proper Sense.
For this Rule is unexceptionably true, The Simple Signification is always prior
to the Mixed and Compound.

Thirdly, We have the best Greek Lexicographers, both Ancient and Modern,
atttesting to the Truth of our Signification of the Word, viz. Phavorinus,
Hesychius, Suidas, Budaeus, Stephanus, Scapula, Constantine.

1. Phavorinus, who lived An. Christi 101. (as we are told by Ubi supra.
Helvicus) has these (...). Lex.
Words, Hymnein legetai to euphemein kai exairein, kai epi theion kai
anthropinon tithemenon. Legetai hymnein kai to adein. To Hymn is said to Praise
and Extol, and is applied to things Divine and Humane. To Hymn is said also to
Sing. This, I think, is as full an Evidence that the Primary and Proper
Signification of Hymneo is Simply to Praise, as can be desired. For though the
Order of Words does not always prove the Priority and Propriety of their
Signification; yet here it must be acknowledged so to do, because the Author
manifestly ascribes Simple Praising to Hymneo, as it is First and Proper Sense,
and then adds, It is also said to Sing: Thereby expressly showing, that to Sing
is the Secondary and Figurative Acceptance of it.

2. Hesychius; there were several of this Name, and some make it uncertain at
what Time he lived; but Ubi supra.
Helvicus and Littleton place him at the Year of Christ 499. He in his Lexicon
says but a little of this Word, yet so much as is sufficient to inform us, that
it is Primary and Proper Signification is Simply to Praise. For the First Sense
he gives of (...). Lex.
Hymnei, He Hymneth, is Eulogei, He Blesses or Praises, and after this
Interpretation, he adds, Adei, H^ Sings. And in an Ancient Gree^ and Latin
Lexicon, at the End of some of In Philoxeni Lex. Graeco. Lat. Vet. cum Notis
Vulcanij.
Cyril's Works, (...), Laudifico.
Hymno is rendered Simply I Praise.

3. Suidas, whom Chartophylax Eccles.
Cave places at the Year of Christ, 1081. and De Histor. Graecis.
Vossius at the Year 1090. has several Instances to our Purpose, as they are
rendered in Latin by Vid. Lex. pro sequent.
Aemilius Portus Cretensis. Thus (...) Celebrare.
Hymnein is translated to Praise; (...), Te celebrat.
Hymnei se, He Praises thee; (...). Ut in luce opera, Domine, te opificem
omniumque rerum Creatorem celebrent.
Hos en photitae erga hymnei se kyrie ton demiourgon; That in thy Light, O
Lord, thy Works Praise thee, the Cr^tor of all things. (...), Celebrabis.
Hymneseis, Thou shall Praise: And (...).
Hymneito, Let him Glorify or Praise.

4. Budaeus, who is placed by Ubi supra.
Helvicus and Littleton at the Year of Christ, 1532. sets down in his Lexicon
the Various Acceptations of Hymneo, and for the First puts Dico hymnum, I Say
an Hymn or Praise; and then Hymnos canto, cano vel dico Lauds, I Sing or Say
Hymns or Praises. And that to Say an Hymn or Praise, and not to Sing it, is the
Primary and Proper Signification, we have Reason to Conclude was his Judgment;
both from his placing the Words, and the Examples he brings from See his Words,
p. 105.
Plato, and (...), to Praise Husbandry. (...), to Praise a City. Thucyd.
Others, to Confirm the First Acceptance, and not giving so much as one
Instance for the Second.

5. Henricus Stephanus, who was born at Paris, in the 16th. Century, and is
placed at the Year 1563. by Helv. and Littleton, Famous for his Lexicon,
Entitled, Thesaurus Graecae Linguae, The Treasure the of the Greek Tongue,
Printed in three Volumes in Folio, says, Hymneo is the same with (...),
Hydo or (...), Thesaur. Graec. Ling.
Hydeo; and the First Sense he gives of Hydo is Celebro, I Celebrate or Praise.
He further tells us, that Hymneo is wont to be taken in Prose Simply, for
Praedico, Laudibus Celebro, Laudo, I Praise, as the Words signify; and then
quotes Plato and Herodian, whose Testimonies are set down, p. 105, 106.

6. Scapula, who has abridged Stephanus's Thesaurus, and lived An. Christi,
1579. as appears by the Date of his Epistle to the Magistrates of Bern, need
here be cited at large; because his Testimony is the same. See also p. 64.
where I have cleared Scapula's Sense of Hymneo, from R. A's. Mistaken
Representation.

7. Constantine, a Native of Caen in France, Contemporary with Stephanus and
Scapula, in giving the Signification of Hymneo, follows Budaeus, (...), step by
step; and therefore I refer the Reader to Budaeus himself just before, and to
the Account given of Constantine, p. 69. And so I pass in the

Fourth and last Place, to the Testimonies of several Learned Translators of,
and Commentators upon Mat. 26.30. and Acts 16.25. which I shall draw into as
narrow a Compass as is possible, because much has been spoken already to
Satisfy the Doubting, Inform the Ignorant, and Convince the Contrary Minded,
(if not Pertinacious of Error) about the Primary and Proper Signification of
Hymneo, viz. that it is Simply to Praise.

Mat. 26.30 (...), Hymnesantes.

Hierom, Beda, Montanus, and the Latins generally.
Hymno dicto, an Hymn or Praise being said.

Sir. Translat.
Lauds dixerunt, they Said or spoke Praise.

Arab. Verse. in a Lapide.
Laudem dederunt, they gave Praise.

Interpr. Theophilac. a Lapide.
Cum hymnum dixissent, when they had said an Hymn or Praise.

Novarinus.
Quum dixissent Lauds, when they had spoken Praises.

Interpr. Euthymij, Castalio.
Dictis Laudibus, Praises being spoken.

Eman. Sa. Tirinus.
Gratijs Deo actis, Thanks being given to God.

Pers. Verse. in Pool's Synops. Crit.
Et Lauds dixerunt, and they spoke Praise.

Tindal's Bible, with Coverdales, and some more.
When they had said Grace,

Bible with Cranmer's Preface to it. Printed 1585. and 1591.
And when they had Praised God.

Acts 16.25. (...), Hymnoun ton Theon.

Interpr. Chrysostomi. Montan. Castalio, Lorinus. Marlorat. Aretius, Leusden.
Laudabant Deum, they Praised God.

Beda,
Adorantes Deum, Hymnum dicebant, Praying to God, they spoke an Hymn.

Tremel. e Syra Translatione.
Glorificabant Deum, they Glorified God.

In locum.
Lorinus tells us, that Cyprian expounds it, by Gratias agere, to give Thanks;
and Non puto modulato nunc hymno usos Apostolos, and (...) est simpliciter
lauds praedicare, etiam sine cantu. Lorinus ibid.
thinks that Paul and Silas did not Sing at this Time; and says, that Hymnein
is Simply to Praise, even without Singing.

Hymnein generally signifies (says (...) in genere significant laudare,
Gratias agere, hymnum dicere. Harm. Evang. de Pass. etc. Christi. p. 3.
Gerhard) to Praise, to give Tanks, to Say an Hymn or Praise. And concludes,
speaking of Christ's Praising the Father, Mar. 14. 26. Non potest ex eo fimiter
probari, quod Christus hymnum illum decantarent. Gerhard ibid.
It cannot be firmly proved from the Word, that Christ Sang that Hymn or Praise.

The same for Substance say Marlorat. Erasmus, Musculus, Maldonat. and L.
Brugensis, upon Mat. 26.30. For which, see p. 78, 79. where their Words are set
down at large.

And thus, according to my Promise, p. 60. have I given R. A. a very Fair Trial
about the Primary and Proper Signification of the Greek Words (...), Hymneo,
and (...), Hymnos; wherein I have abundantly proved, that the One does
Primarily and Properly signify, Simply to Praise; and the Other Simply Praise.
I should not have alleged so many Authors, (the Search into which has been
attended with no small Travel and Difficulty) nor spent so many Pages to clear
the Signification of these two Words, from the Dust cast upon them; but that R.
A. gave Occasion to this Trouble, by asserting, without good Grounds, and
consequently without Success, that his Interpretation is attested by the
concurrent Evidence of the most Learned in the Greek Tongue; which upon Inquiry
manifestly appears to be otherwise.

CHAP. III. Is a Reply to R. A's. Answer, to the Second Objection against his
Argument for Singing, from the Example of Christ, Mat. 26.30.
THE First Objection (to R. A's. Argument, to prove, That Viz. With the Outward
Voice: For he allows of No Singing properly without the Extension of the Voice.
Essay, p. 30.
Singing to the Praise of God, is the Duty of every Christian, from the Example
of Christ,) which is, That the Word Sung is not in the Original, but added by
the Translators, I have largely defended in the foregoing Chapter, against all
that carries the Semblance of an Answer; and come now to Consider and Reply, to
what he has returned to the Second Objection.

Sect. 1. R. A. It Is further Objected, Tha^ though it should be granted, (as it
must) that our Lord indeed Sang a Hymn; yet it is presumed that it might
peculiarly belong to the Passover and so be no more Obligatory upon us, from
the Example of Christ, than the Passover it self.

Answ. To clear this doubt, seriously weig^ these following Things.

1. That both the Passover and the Lord's Supper had a Special and Peculiar
Respect to the Sufferings of Christ for our Redemption. Tha^ the Passover had
such a peculiar respect there to, appears, in that the Apostl^ hereupon 1 Cor.
5.7.
calls Christ our Passover sacrificed for us. And that the Lord's Supper has
so, is manifest, in that we are commanded therein constantly 1 Cor. 11.26.
To show forth the Lord's Death. And it being thus, I can see no necessity to
determine, that this Hymn was Sung by our Savior, upon the Occasion of either
of these, exclusive of the other: Being both, as respecting the Glorious Work
of our Redemption, matter of the highest Praise and Rejoicing. Essay, p. 21,
22.

Reply 1. in the Objection he has inserted a Parenthesis, with these Words,
(as it must) intimating, it must be granted that our Lord indeed Sang an Hymn;
which I think he is too positive in, for these Reasons.

1. Because the Word Hymneo does Primarily and Properly signify Simply I
Praise, as is fully proved in the last Chapter, from Ancient Heathen Greek
Writers; from the Septuagint and Apocrypha; from the best Greeks
Lexicographers, both Ancient and Modern; and from many Learned Translators of,
and Commentators upon Mat. 26.30. and Acts 16.25. and therefore does not
certainly or necessarily infer, that our Lord indeed Sang an Hymn.

2. Because, there are some Circumstances related by the Evangelists, both of
the Disciples and Christ himself, which import, they were not in a Singing
Frame at this Time: For while they were at Supper, it is said of the Disciples,
(...)
Lupoumenoi sphodra, Contristati vehementer, they were exceeding sorrowful,
Mat. 26.22. (...).
Erxanto lupeist thai, ceperunt contristari, They to be sorrowful, Mark 14.19.
And the very same Night not long after Supper, it is said of Christ himself,
(...);
Erxato lupeisthai, coepit contristari, he began to be sorrowful, Mat. 26.37.
(...),
Erxato ekthambeisthai, coepit expavescere, he began to be sore amazed, Mar.
14.33. (...).
Kai ademonein, Et gravissime angi, And to be very heavy, say both. And My Soul
is exceeding sorrowful, Mat. 26.38. Mar. 14.34. The Greek Word is (...).
Perilupos, Vndiquaque tristis, Sad on every side; thereby signifying, that his
Soul with all the Faculties thereof, was surrounded with Grief and Sorrow: All
which Circumstances, and the Primary Signification of Hymneo, laid together, do
render it very unlikely that they Sang.

But if it should be Rejoined, that though the Disciples were Overwhelmed with
Sorrow at Supper, just before Christ's Breaking of Bread; yet he himself was
not: For the Evangelists say, it was after Supper that Christ began to be
Sorrowful and sore Amazed.

I Answer, That Christ being a Merciful and Faithful High Priest in things
pertaining to God, and Touched with the Feeling of our Infirmities, Heb. 2.17.
and 4.15. it is hard to think, when he saw his poor Disciples exceeding
Sorrowful, that he should not Sympathize with them, who has by his Apostle
commanded us, To weep with them that weep, Romans 12.15. And as to those Places
in the Evangelists, which say, He began to be sorrowful and sore amazed, though
they are mentioned after Supper was ended, yet 'twas not long after Supper: Nor
do they purport any more, than some Gradual Increase of his Sorrow, the nearer
he was to his Bloody Passion; which is plainly intimated by Mark, He began to
be sore amazed, that is, He was under Sorrow before; but now the Waves began to
rise higher, and beat more violently upon him. And if we more closely consider
Mat. 26.21, 22, 23, 24. and Mar. 14.18, 19, 20, 21. we shall find there is a
greater Probability of Christ's being in a Sorrowful, than a Joyful Frame at
Supper. The Context lies thus; When Jesus and his Twelve Disciples were Sat,
and Eating of the Passover, he tells them that One of them should betray him:
This struck them with a Panick Fear, and they Began to be sorrowful, and to say
unto him One by One, is it I? His Answer was, It is one of the Twelve, that
dippeth with me in the Dish; and then adds, The Son of Man goes, as it is
written of him, but Woe to that Man by whom the Son of Man is betrayed. Now
whether this Woe was spoken in Anger or Pity, or in both; viz. in Anger against
the Treason, and in Pity to the Soul of the Traitor, for both these Passions
appeared in Christ, and the latter most Eminently; I cannot conceive how it
could be uttered without Sorrow. For we read, that he was grieved for the
hardness of the Pharisees Hearts, at the same time that he beheld them with
Anger, Mar. 3.5. And when he foretold the Dreadful Calamities that were then
coming (and did afterward come) upon Jerusalem, for not knowing the Time of
her Visitation, with what melting Pity, with what Bowels of Compassion did he
Weep over her? If thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the
things which belong unto thy Peace! but now they are hid from thine Eyes, Luke
19.41, 42. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest
them which are sent unto thee; how often would I have gathered thy Children
together, even as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her Wings, and ye would
not? Behold your House is left unto you desolate, Mat. 23.37, 38. Now he who
was grieved for the Hardened Pharisees, and Melted into Tears over Unbelieving
Jerusalem, cannot surely be thought to have no Bowels for an Apostatizing
Disciple; who though he fell by Transgression, yet once was near and dear to
Christ; he eat of his Bread and drank of his Cup, and was not only numbered with
the Apostles, but also had obtained Part of the same Ministry. If then either
the Sorrow of his Disciples, or the Woe denounced against the Man that should
betray him, may be conceived to move Pity and Compassion in Jesus; there is a
greater Likelihood that he Mourned with the One, and for the Other; than Sung
when the One Mourned, and the Other was running into Eternal Perdition. And if
Christ did not Sing with his Disciples at this time; which is far more
probable, than that he did: Then R. A's First Answer to the Objection carries
no Solution in it. For if the Hymn or Praise was not Sung, but Simply Said or
Spoke; it is no matter whether it appertained to the Passover, or the Lord's
Supper, or both.

3. Methinks he is too positive in Saying, It must be granted, that our Lord
indeed Sang an Hymn; because many Learned Men, who were for Common Singing, did
yet Hesitate about Christ's Singing an Hymn with his Disciples; telling us, It
is not Certain, and the Greek Word does not necessarily Evince it, as is before
taken Notice of more particularly. And the Objection it self does not grant
that Christ Sang, though R. A. would have us believe it does, by his Words (as it
must) in the Parenthesis; but supposes if that should be granted, it would
yield no Advantage to his Cause, presuming it did peculiarly belong to the
Passover, and so was no part of the New Celebration.

The Special and Peculiar Respect of the Passover and the Lord's Supper, to the
Sufferings of Christ for our Redemption, does not prove that this Hymn or
Praise was Sung at all, or upon occasion of either of them. But if for Argument
sake, we should suppose, it was Sung, it is more probable, it was upon the
Account of the Passover, than of the Lord's Supper, because the Jews had such a
Custom at the Celebration of the Passover, as Learned Men tell us; and our
Savior who was a Member of the Jewish Church, was Circumcised, Luke 2.21.
Brought to Jerusalem, and presented to the Lord, v. 22. and kept the Passover
with his Disciples, Mat. 26.18, 19, etc. And though the Jews Custom of Singing of
an Hymn was not of Divine Appointment, yet forasmuch as he was present at the
Feast of Dedication, which was ordained by the Jews themselves, 1 Mac. 4.59. 2
Mac. 10.8. in Remembrance of the New Consecration of the Altar, after it had
been Profaned by Antiochus; we may suppose, that if he did Sing at this Time,
it was peculiarly and only with respect to the Passover.

Sect. 2. R. A. But, 2. To suppose that it was Sung only upon the Occasion of
the Passover, is altogether groundless; for had it been so, what reason can be
rendered why it should not be Sung immediately after it? as it is plain it was
not. Essay, p. 22.

Reply 2. I only allow of the Supposition for Argument sake, and upon no other
Account; for, I think, there is Authority enough alleged in the former
Chapter, to induce us to conclude the Hymn was not Sung. And when he can give a
Reason, why 26.29.
Matthew and 14.25.
Mark place those Words of Christ, I will not drink henceforth of the Fruit of
the Vine, etc. immediately after the Cup of the Lord's Supper; and 22.18.
Luke places them immediately after the Cup of the Passover as appertaining
thereunto? He may with Ease resolve the Difficulty. In the mean time, I desire
him to remember, that there is a Figure called Trajectio, very frequently used
in Scripture, whereby Words and Sentences are Transposed. For which let him
consult Annotat. in N. Test.
Beza, Philolog. Sac.
Glassius, Animadv. in Lib. N. Test.
Knatchbull and Synops. Crit. in plurimis Locis.
Pool. And I observe, that not only Words and Sentences are often Transposed, but
also Psalms, Chapters, and whole Books of Holy Scripture.

For Psalms, the 52d. should be before the 3d. for we read of Doeg the Edomite,
1 Samuel 21. and 22. who is mentioned in the Title of the 52d. to have told Saul,
that David was come to the House of Ahimelech; which was long before Absolom's
Rebellion, 2 Samuel 15. upon Occasion whereof the 3d. Psalm was penned, as
appears by the Inscription; A Psalm of David, when he fled from Absalom his
Son. And the 90th. Psalm, if Moses was the Author, challenges Precedence in
Point of Time to all the Other; for he was above 400 Years before David, Asaph,
and other Holy Penmen of the Psalms.

For Chapters, there is a strange Alstedij Thesaur. Chronol.
Transposition of them in Jeremiah; The 26th, and 27th. are in Order of Time
before the 25th. The 35th, and 36th. before the 32d, 33d, 34th. The 45th, and
46th. before the 37th, 38th, 39th, 40th, 42d, 43d, 44th. So the 29th. of
Ezekiel is prior to the 26th, 27th, 28th. And the 31st. to the End of the Book
is before the 30.

Lastly, For Books, Hosea is before Alsted. ubi supra.
Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezechiel and Daniel; so is Jonah before Hosea, Joel, Amos
and Obadiah, though placed after them. So Ibid.
Luke wrote before Mark, and John wrote the Gospel 6 Years after the
Revelation. And Annot. on the Title of the Epist. to the Romans.
Hammond tells us, it is commonly acknowledged, that the 1st. and 2d. to the
These. were written before the 1st. and 2d. to the Corinthians. And Alstedius
says, that Peter wrote his First Epistle, and Jude his, before Paul wrote to
the Galatians, Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, the Second to Timothy,
Philemon and the Hebrews.

Now as this Transposition is no Argument against their Divine Authority, or
the least Diminution of the Truths in them contained; so it shows the
Probability of a Trajection in Mat. 26.30. and the more especially, if we
consider these two Things;

1. That Writers in general tell us, from Paulus Burgensis (of whom before, p.
78.) that the Jews used a Passover-Hymn.

2. That Luke, who mentions this Passage, I will not drink of the Fruit of the
Vine, etc. places it immediately after the Paschal-Cup, Chap. 22.18. which
Matthew and Mark put just after the Lord's Supper. So that if we would
reconcile the Evangelists, and do believe there was a Passover Hymn in Use
among the Jews, and that Christ kept the Passover according to their Custom and
Usage, we must admit of a Trajection in Mat. 26.29. and Mark 14.25. and
consequently in Mat. 26.30. and Mark 14.26.

And it is no more groundless, all these things well considered, for the
Ohjecters to appropriate this Hymn to the Passover, though it is not placed
immediately after it by Matthew and Mark; than to say, such a Word, Verse,
Psalm, Chapter, or Book of Holy Scripture, does Peculiarly belong to such a
Person, Thing, Fact or Time; because the Natural Order is Tra^ected or
Transposed. We have two remarkable ^nstances further to clear this; in Psalm.
78, 46, ^7, 48. the Plague of Hail and Thunder is set after that of the
Caterpillar and Locust; when in Exodus 9. and 10 Chapters, it is set before it:
And ^n Amos 2.9, 10. the Bringing of the Children of ^srael up from the Land of
Egypt, is placed after ^he Destruction of the Amorite, when it was long before;
compare Exodus 12.35, 51. with Numb. ^1.24. It Is Hierom's Observation, upon Amos
2. that In reciting the Praises of God, the Order of Hi^^ory is not kept, but
it often falls out, that things first ^^me, are mentioned last, and the last,
first.

Sect. 3. Now if any shall Object, that to admit of these Trajections, may be
of dangerous Consequence to Religion, because the Enemies of the Holy
Scriptures may improve them against Christ and Christianity.

I Answer, Trajections are usual in all other Writings, and if the Style of the
Holy Scriptures be an Objection against them in the Minds of any upon that
Account, by the same Rule they may reject all other Writings in the World;
because they have their Trajections, as well as the Holy Scriptures.

But some will be ready to say; If the Holy Scriptures are full of Trajections,
and other sort of Figures how shall we who are Illiterate Persons know them?
and will not this tend to a Confining o^ the Interpretation of the Holy
Scriptures to Learned Men only, and so to an Enslaving of us to their Dictates
and Authority? I Reply, Humane Learning is singularly useful in Translations,
and in giving the Grammatical, Historical, Topographical an^ Chronological
Explications of the Holy Scriptures; bu^ it is Divine Learning alone that
instructs to the Kingdom of God, and makes a Man wise to Salvation For it is the
Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation tha^ leads into the Saving Knowledge of Christ,
and the Spiritual Understanding of the Mysteries of the Gospel. And therefore
if a Man or Woman be ignorant of Humane Learning, mere Strangers t^ Arts and
Languages; yet if they have Divine Learning, are taught and instructed by the
Holy Spirit and yield Obedience thereunto, they come to kno^ the Mind of the
Lord in the Holy Scriptures, an^ to be sensible Witnesses of the same; while
other with all their Humane Literature, and Skill i^ Originals, not regarding
the Inward Revelatio^ of the Spirit of God upon their Minds, but d^pending
upon, and trusting to their Natural an^ Acquired Abilities, which cannot
possibly unfol^ the Mysteries of the Gospel spiritually unto them are in the
dark about the Things of God, and wholly void of all Spiritual Sense and
Understanding of them. These know more indeed of the Outward ^etter, which is
but as the Cabinet to the Jewel; at the other, coming to the Spirit and Life,
are ^ruly made Possessors of the Jewel it self. The Holy ^criptures with
respect to all saving Spiritual Under^tanding thereof, are as a Sealed Book,
till the Lion ^f the Tribe of Judah breaks off the Seals, and o^ens the Sacred
and Spiritual Contents to the Soul. And hence it is, that so many Learned
Doctors and Rabbis have Ears, and hear not; Eyes, and ^e not; and
Understandings, and perceive not; because they consult with Flesh and Blood,
with their own Carnal Wisdom and Reasonings, and ^eject the Counsel of God,
which he gives in by ^he Spirit of his Son, to direct and guide us ^to all
Truth. But they that wait upon the lord in the true Poverty and Humility of
their ^wn Spirits, and do purely resolve their Faith ^to the Glorious Power of
God, without any Mixture of the Wisdom of Man, these have the ^yes of their
Minds opened by the Great and ^ble Illuminator, Christ Jesus, to see the Works
^f the Lord, and his Wonders in the Depths of ^oly Scripture, while the mere
Letter-Wise cannot, ^ith all their Worldly Wisdom, discern them; ^or the Things
of God (says the Apostle) knows no ^an, but the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.11.
No Man can ^er come Spiritually to know the things of God, ^at is, the
Mysteries of the Gospel, but by the Imme^ate Revelation of the Spirit of God.
He has re^^aled them to us by his Spirit, v. 10. Now as they were ^^rst
revealed unto the Apostles by the Spirit, so ^^st they again be revealed unto
us, (though we have ^^em in their Words already,) by the same Spirit, or ^^ere is
no possibility of Knowing and Understanding (...) them Spiritually.

Sect. 4. R. A. 3. Much less is there any Reason to imagine, that it was
peculiar to the Jewish Passover, as a part of it, and so of the sam^ Mutable
Nature with it: Singing to the Praise o^ God being, as, I conceive, has been
sufficientl^ proved, a Moral Duty; and therefore of Un^versal and Perpetual
Obligation, and so fit t^ be used upon that, or any other Joyful Occasion.
Essay, p. 22.

Reply 3. He has not sufficiently proved Singin^ to the Praise of God to be a
Moral Duty, as I have shown in my first Chapter; where his Notion o^ the Moral
Duties of Religion, as being Origina^ly Written in the Heart of Man by Nature,
an^ still in a great Measure to be discerned by ser^ous Attention and
Consideration, without an^ Special Revelation, and his Five Considerations t^
prove the Morality of Singing, according to the aforesaid Notion, are Examined
and Disproved and therefore the Singing he contends for, is n^ of Universal and
Perpetual Obligation.

R. A. 4. There is the greatest Reason to conclude, that our Lord Sang this
Hymn with h^ Disciples, at least especially upon the Occasion of his own
Supper, and the Commemoration ^ his Sufferings, and redeeming Love therein; for
as much as it was immediately joined thereto, ^ the Evangelists plainly show.
Essay, p. 23.

Reply 4. This Answer is coincident with h^ Second, in my Reply whereunto I
have shew^ the frequent use of Trajections in the Holy Scri^tures, that
Immediety of placing a Word or Sentence does not always prove Immediety of Tim^
Concord or Relation, and that there is a greate^ Probability that this Hymn
appertained to the Pass^ver, than to the Lord's Supper.

R. A. Nor is there any Force against this Conclusion, in that Objection which
some make; That had this Hymn belonged to the Lord's Supper, doubtless the
Apostle would have mentioned it, when he 1 Cor. 11.23, etc.
sets down the Institution of this Ordinance, as he had received it from the
Lord.

For to this I reply, That were there any Force in this Objection, we might
also thence conclude, that Giving of Thanks before the Cup, does not belong to
it. Of which, though it be plainly expressed by the Mat. 26.27. Mark 14.23.
Evangelists, yet the Apostle makes no Mention: His Design being, as I
conceive, not so much to give an Account of all things pertaining to the Lord's
Supper, as to correct those Gross Abuses, which were crept into that Church, in
the Use of this Holy Ordinance. Essay, p. 23, 24.

Rejoinder. The Force of the Objection is rather strengthened than weakened by
his Reply. For though the Apostle does not immediately mention in so many Words,
that the Lord Jesus Gave Thanks before the Cup, as Matthew and Mark do; yet
they being expressed before he Brake Bread, and the Cup said to be taken after
the same manner, his giving of Thanks before the Cup is necessarily to be
understood; and so necessarily too, that without it we shall greatly wrong the
Apostle's Words. For first he tells us, The Lord Jesus, the same night in which
he was betrayed, took bread; and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and
said, Take, Eat, this is my Body which is broken for you; this do in
remembrance of me. And then adds immediately, After the same manner also the
Cup. For the Words [He took] are a Supplement. So that this is the plain
Meaning of the Apostle, That as the Lord Jesus took Bread and gave Thanks, so
he also took the Cup and gave Thanks.

Sect. 5. But (says R. A.) does he any mo^ expressly tell us, that when he had
taken it, he ga^ Thanks, than he tells us after they had drank it, The Sung an
Hymn? Br. Vindication, p. 28.

I Answer, Our Lord's Giving of Thanks is e^press'd before He brake the Bread,
1 Cor. 11.2^ and as much intimated before He gave the Cu^ v. 25. as though it
were actually expressed there; f^ this Adverb [(...), Hosautos,] after the sa^
manner, cannot be restrained to the taking of t^ Cup only, as though the Apostle
intended no mo^ by it, but that, and referred us to Matthew an^ Mark for an
Account of Christ's Giving of Than^ after he had taken it; but also comprehen^
his Giving of Thanks. And therefore the Case, as R. ^. puts it, is not at all
Parallel; for Giving of Than^ before the Cup is manifestly included in the
Synta^ of the Apostle's Words; but there is not the lea^ imaginable Intimation
of Singing an Hymn.

And as to the Supplement, [ (...),
Elab^ He took,] which our Translators have used; and R. A. thinks is only the
Verb that must be here supplied, Appendix, ^ 68, 69. I think not only Ela^ is
to be understood, but (...),
K^ eucharistesas also, being both expressed in v. 23, 24. And then the Sense
wi^ neither be incomplete, nor the Apostle mad^ to speak contrary to the
Evangelists, Mat. 26*27. and Mark 14.23. but the Words will b^ fully expressive
of his Meaning, and exactly Ha^monize with them; viz. After the same manner
als^ he took the Cup, and gave Thanks. And this is undoubtedly the Importance
of the Adverb, [Hosautos] not only in this Place, but also i^ Luke 22.20. And
for the making of things ye^ more plain, so that no Room may be left for a^
Evasion; I observe in all other Places of the N. Testament, where we meet with
this Word [Hosautos], i^ necessarily imports the supplying of what went before,
to make the Sense complete. Thus it is said of the Householder, that He went out
about the sixth and ninth hour, and did [Hosautos] likewise, Mat. 20.5. that
is, as he had done before, viz. He saw others standing idle in the
Marketplace, and said unto them, Go ye also into the Vineyard, and whatsoever
is right, I will give you, v. 3, 4. So we read in the Parable of A certain man,
who had two Sons; that he came to the first, and said, Son, go work to day in
my Vineyard: And he came to the Second, and said [Hosautos] likewise, Mat.
21.28, 30. and what was it that he said likewise? why, he said, Son, go work to
day in my Vineyard. See also Mat. 25.17. Mark 12.21. and 14.31. where the Word
is also used, and necessarily requires the Supplement of something Antecedent
to perfect the Sense. From what has been said, it is very Evident, that the Case
of Singing an Hymn, and Christ's giving Thanks before the Cup, is not the same;
for here is as much Proof as can be desired, that Christ Gave thanks before the
Cup; but the Singing of an Hymn is totally omitted, both in Terms and
Implication. And if after all this, R. A. shall yet insist upon it, as he does
in his Appendix, p. 69. That, here is no more express mention of Christ's
Blessing the Cup, before his giving it to his Disciples, than there is of their
Singing an Hymn after they had drank it. He will not, I hope, deny, the express
mention of Blessing the Cup, 1 Cor. 10.16. The Cup of Blessing which we bless,
whether we take those Words Literally or Allegorically. Wherefore the Objection
stands still firm and unshaken, viz. That had this Hymn belonged to the
Lord's Supper, doubtless the Apostle would have mentioned it: Notwithstanding
R. A's. Endeavors to the Contrary.

And this will yet further appear, if we consider the Apology R. A. makes for
the Apostle's real Omission of the Hymn, and pretended Leaving out of Christ's
Giving thanks before the Cup; telling us, the Apostle's Design being, as he
conceives, not so much to give an Account of all things pertaining to the
Lord's Supper, as to correct those gross Abuses which were crept into that
Church, in the Use of this Holy Ordinance. For his Words manifestly imply,
however intended by him, that it was the Apostle's Design to give an Account of
all things pertaining to the Lord's Supper, though not so much as to correct
those gross Abuses. So that under Pretense of excusing the Apostle's Omission,
he has, though unwittingly, both confirmed and reinforced the Objection. For the
Words [not so much] respect more, the Degree or Manner, than the Substance or
Matter of the Account given by the Apostle; who acquaints us with all things
appertaining to the Supper, though not in so large a Manner as he delivers
himself about those gross Abuses, which were crept into the Church at Corinth.

Thus, to retort his own Words, Essay, p. 24. upon himself, with this necessary
Variation; we have sufficient Reason to conclude, that our Lord neither Sang
this Hymn with his Disciples, nor Sang it especially, much less only, upon the
Occasion of his own Supper; and consequently, that we have here no certain
Instance of his Singing Praise to his Father, as our Pattern.


